
Modes of Explanation

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

Modes of Explanation
Affordances for Action and Prediction
Edited by
Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber

MODES OF EXPLANATION
Copyright © Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber, 2014.
All rights reserved.
First published in 2014 by
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN®
in the United States— a division of St. Martin’s Press LLC,
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010.
Where this book is distributed in the UK, Europe and the rest of the world, 
this is by Palgrave Macmillan, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited,  
registered in England, company number 785998, of Houndmills,  
Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS.
Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies 
and has companies and representatives throughout the world.
Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States,  
the United Kingdom, Europe and other countries.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
  Modes of explanation : affordances for action and prediction / edited by 
Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber.
   pages cm
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
   1. Explanation. I. Lissack, Michael. 
BD237.M63 2014
121.6—dc23 
2014026012
A catalogue record of the book is available from the British Library.
Design by Newgen Knowledge Works (P) Ltd., Chennai, India.
First edition: December 2014
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
 
 
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 2014 978-1-137-40645-3
ISBN 978-1-349-48798-1                 ISBN 978-1-137-40386-5 (eBook) 
DOI 10.1057/9781137403865

Michael Lissack dedicates this book in loving memory of  
his father Kenneth who wanted an explanation of why  
Michael was working on a book about explanations.
Abraham Graber dedicates this book to  
the light of his life, Jessica Schwartz.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

Contents
List of Figures 
ix
Preface 
xiii
Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
Acknowledgments 
xvii
Context
1 Introduction: Thoughts on Explanation 
3
Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
2 A Place in History 
17
Alicia Juarrero
3 The Context of Our Query 
25
Michael Lissack
Case Study
4 Case Study: Creationism 
59
Zack Kopplin
Examining the Case
5 Scientific Realism on Historical Science and Creationism 
75
Abraham Graber
6 A Pragmatic Constructivist Take on the Case 
93
Michael Lissack
Dialogue
7 Robustness and Explanation 
109
William Wimsatt
8  A Mode of “Epi-Thinking” Leads to the Exploration of  
Vagueness and Finality 
115
S. N. Salthe

viii  
M  Contents
9 
Complexity, Ockham’s Razor, and Truth 
121
Kevin T. Kelly and Konstantin Genin
10 Getting a Grip 
133
Nancy J. Nersessian
11 
Modes of Explanation: Complex Phenomena 
143
Sandra Mitchell
12 Narrative as a Mode of Explanation: Evolution and Emergence 
151
Rukmini Bhaya Nair
13 Economic Explanations 
161
Paul Thagard
14 
Narratives and Models in Complex Systems 
171
Timothy F. H. Allen, Edmond Ramly, Samantha Paulsen,  
Gregori Kanatzidis, and Nathan Miller
15 
Evaluating Explanations through Their Conceptual Structures 
197
Steven Wallis
16 Investigating the Lay and Scientific Norms for Using “Explanation” 
203
Jonathan Waskan, Ian Harmon, Andrew Higgins, and Joseph Spino
Conclusion 
215
Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
Afterword 1: The Scientific Attitude Toward Explanation 
229
Lee McIntyre
Afterword 2: Explanation Revisited 
233
Jan Faye
Afterword 3: Is The World Completely Intelligible? A Very Short Course 
241
Peter Achinstein
Afterword 4: Explanation and Pluralism 
249
Beckett Sterner
Reprise 
257
Michael Lissack
References 
263
Suggestions for Further Reading 
285
Notes on Contributors 
289
Index 
295
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figures
I.1 
 Science I and Science 2 
8
I.2 
 Differences between Science 1 and Science 2 
10
1.3  Perpendicular planes 
13
I.4 
 Plane-crossed ellipsoid 
14
I.5 
 Question-generation model 
14
I.6 
 Question-generation model 
15
6.1  The Rosen modeling relation 
100
14.1  The level scheme of Zellmer et al. (2006) in terms of the  
new edition of Allen and Hoekstra’s Toward a Unified  
Ecology (2015) 
178
14.2  Levels in Zellmer et al. (2006) seen as a set of cyclical  
processes 
179
14.3  The cycles applied to adaptive management, which works  
because the dynamics of this figure form a figure of eight,  
iterating from one side to the other 
180
14.4  The cycles of Zellmer et al. (2006) are applied here to plant  
chemical warfare, allelopathy. The wrinkle in time that  
evolution embodies means that you cannot show allelopathy  
until it stops working 
181
14.5  Models, questions, and experiments are not simply different,  
they are different as logical types. The same applies to the  
narrative, theory, hypothesis relationship. It is hard to cross  
levels, and that has hidden the commonality heretofore and  
led to some muddled use of the terminology. Local narratives  
build metanarratives (Zellmer et al., 2006) 
183
14.6  Rosen (1991) modeling relation 
184
14.7  A two-by-two lattice that spells out many-to-one and  
one-to-many relationships in combination 
185
14.8  By relating the cells of Figure 14.7, we achieve a new matrix  
in which the margins of the derived lattice are changes  
between narrative and model and vice versa 
186

x  
M  Figures
14.9  Showing how the derived matrix of Figure 14.8 maps onto  
the cycles of the Zellmer cycles. The diagonals of the matrix  
map onto the two cycles, one in the observer realm and a  
second in the realm of the other. Change on the two sides is  
different. In the observer’s realm, experiments give results  
separately from the results generating a new experiment. But  
on the side of the other updates are of realizations being  
refined, and undefinable essences being updated 
187
14.10 
 The matrices of Figure 14.8 inform us as to how to label the  
arrows in the Zellmer scheme. Figure 14.10a labels the whole  
loop on both sides. The loop of the observer has square arrows  
to show that the updates are discrete. Figure 14.10b has a  
slightly different construction, in that the loops are broken  
into upward and downward segments. There are echoes of the  
matrices in Figure 14.8 in the labels on Figures 14.10c–14.10g.  
All appear to refine the notion of a general condition leading  
to specifics, which then encourage new generalities 
189
14.11 
 Multiple stakeholders addressing a failing fishery. The loops  
on the right refer to the models of each respective player. They  
can be united with a narrative that will subsume the  
contradictions (after McCormick et al.) 
193
14.12  The essences invoked by the players are seen as the white  
circles on the left. They have a shared partial essence in the  
black triangle. Conversation and mutual respect among players  
cause the essences employed to come to overlap more. The  
dotted lines show the shifts of each essence to that of the  
agreed-upon commensurate essence. Through the development  
of the compelling narrative, all the stakeholders may be able  
to buy in. Under that narrative, all will enjoy a commensurate  
experience and so be able to contribute to the wisdom of  
the crowd 
194
14.13  Four accounts of multiple observers addressing the same  
situation. We hesitate to reify “same situation,” so think of it as  
a dummy variable, as in calculus. Figure 14.13a is simply the 
sum of the observations. Figure 14.13b is what one observer sees. 
Figure 14.13c is what everyone sees. Figure 14.13d is the most  
profound and is the culture of the group. Culture is the shared  
set of predilections as to what one might see. It will be not only  
what anyone saw, but is what anyone could see, because of  
the collective filter that all members bring 
195
16.1  Mean “constitutes an explanation” ratings among laypeople  
by condition 
206
16.2  Percentage of lay participants (2a) and scientists (2b)  
remembering that the materials described in the article  
constitute an explanation 
207

Figures  M  xi
16.3  Percentage of lay participants under intelligible and never  
intelligible conditions remembering (3a) that Dr. Brown’s  
materials constitute an explanation and Dr. Brown understands  
why-possibly and (3b) that the conditions described by the  
materials are the explanation and Dr. Brown understands  
why-possibly 
209
16.4  Percentage of scientists under intelligible and never intelligible  
conditions remembering (4a) that Dr. Brown’s materials  
constitute an explanation and Dr. Brown understands why- 
possibly and (4b) that the conditions described by the materials  
are the explanation and Dr. Brown understands why-possibly 
210
16.5  Percentage of lay participants under crucial test pass and  
crucial test fail conditions remembering (5a) that Dr. Brown’s  
materials constitute an explanation and are accurate and (5b)  
that the conditions described by the materials are the  
explanation and the materials are accurate 
211
16.6  Percentage of scientists under crucial test pass and crucial  
test fail conditions remembering (6a) that Dr. Brown’s  
materials constitute an explanation and are accurate and (6b)  
that the conditions described by the materials are the  
explanation and the materials are accurate 
212
C.1  What Science 2 deals with that Science 1 cannot 
224
C.2  The questioning tool 
 
226
R.1  Explanation as content 
259
R.2  Explanation as understanding 
259
R.3  The questioning process underlying understanding 
259

This page intentionally left blank

Preface
Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
I
n May 2013, a motley collection of academics, scientists, and consultants 
assembled in Paris to discuss what it means to “explain”—what are the 
various “modes of explanation.” This text attempts to capture and expand 
on the vigorous discussion that took place. Our hope is that it will help both 
practitioners and philosophers alike to develop new perspectives on what the 
very idea of an “explanation” can mean for them and their work.
We choose the plural—perspectives—intentionally. Research on the idea of 
an “explanation” is not conducted within a fixed field with proven theorems 
and accepted truths. Rather, such research is conducted by a community of 
individuals with overlapping interests and a nagging feeling that some deeper 
patterns underlie those interests. As the reader will see, participants in the 
workshop have very different views concerning how, and in some cases whether, 
context, contingency, and circumstance should be applied to an understand-
ing of what constitutes an explanation, never mind a “good” explanation. This 
book will not provide definitive answers. Instead, it will raise many questions, 
the asking of which may be more valuable than reading any how-to book or 
monograph that purports to offer the very answers we omit.
In editing this book, we have tried to maintain the structure, content, and 
tone of the conversation that took place in Paris. The presentations and debates 
were taped and transcribed. Since the initial presentation, each of the speak-
ers has had the opportunity to revise and extend his or her remarks. Some 
of the authors chose to contribute portions of subsequent presentations, espe-
cially those geared to a more general rather than a philosophical audience. To 
complement these, in a handful of cases, we have added particularly relevant 
presentations or writings by individuals who could not join us in Paris.
Our approach to gathering the materials for this book and organizing the 
workshop was to seek out diversity and encourage debate. A time-tested prin-
ciple from cybernetics, one of the precursors of complexity research, made us 
confident that diversity was a necessity. It is believed in most cases that simple 
perception is “good enough.” Nevertheless, simple perceptions fail adequately 
to capture the import of context or situation. They are poor at reflecting more 

xiv  
M  Preface
than single-order effects (where A leads to B). By relying on common sense, we 
are in effect relying on the assumption that simple perceptions are adequate for 
the task or judgment at hand. But are they?
Jay Forrester has noted: “While most people understand first-order effects, 
few deal well with second- and third-order effects. Unfortunately, virtually 
everything interesting lies in fourth-order effects and beyond” (Stern and 
Deimler, 2006).
When simple perceptions are inadequate, then the need for tools that enable 
better access to the “what, who, and how much” that one needs to know 
becomes painfully obvious. Expanding on common sense—either in the form 
of developing better tools for simple perceptions, better methods for simplify-
ing complex perceptions, or better approaches for making judgments based on 
these simple perceptions—just will not help in that portion of the world where 
“success” lies in developing an understanding of the boundaries, constraints, 
and possibilities inherent in the interactions of large numbers of autonomous 
and semiautonomous agents.
W. Ross Ashby’s “law of requisite variety” states that a representation or 
regulator of a system must possess as much variety as the system that it aims to 
represent or regulate (Ashby, 1956). The system that we hope to portray—the 
set of practitioners and scholars working at the juncture of philosophical erudi-
tion and pragmatic application—contains a great deal of variety. Basic defini-
tions, objectives, standards of evidence, and means of discourse remain hotly 
contested. Though the diversity of opinion cannot be fully captured in a single 
book, we felt it necessary to give the reader a sense of the variety that lies at the 
intersection of what we will come to refer to as the two Sciences. Thus, the text 
you are about to encounter is diverse, but in our view properly so. The diversity 
ranges from style and form to philosophy and substance. Some chapters are but 
a rewrite of a snippet of a conversation that took place at the workshop. Other 
chapters consist of both original text and selected excerpts of additional writ-
ings by the author. Whereas the authors of the shorter pieces had a specific, 
targeted perspective to share, the authors of the longer pieces had so much to 
say that the text herein is but an introduction to their point of view. The text 
reflects the variety that one experiences when attending a conference.
Explaining can be hard work. It can involve strategy and drudgery, fame 
and fear of exposure. Much of it is less than glamorous. Those who explain 
things have to deal with people, and people are much more difficult to under-
stand and deal with than machines. Sometimes the explanations offered will 
succeed and sometimes even the same explanation will also fail.
Before the interdependent, cell-phoned, Internet-linked, networked world, 
life was simpler for the explainer. An offered explanation could not be chal-
lenged with merely the flick of a wrist and the clicking of a few keys. Change 
was slower. We not only had a simpler system to deal with, but also more time 
to make decisions, more time to realize whether those decisions were correct 
or not, and still more time to set matters right if they were wrong. In a simpler 
world, the gap between what theory prescribed and what we experienced was 
less apparent, and far less important. The world has changed, however. In an 

Preface  M  xv
interconnected world, actions do not only have immediate consequences. What 
the economists call second- (and even third-) order effects take on new promi-
nence. The effects of one action lead to actions by others, which in turn lead to 
still other actions by perhaps yet others, and so on. Little things can snowball 
into big things.
As one of us wrote more than a decade ago:
“A little boy survives the sinking of a boat and the world seems to believe it is in 
the midst of a global morality play. An arrogant executive writes emails about 
‘burying’ the competition and an entire industry faces redefinition. A young 
woman delivers a pizza to a big boss (in fact, the biggest boss) and the govern-
ment of the world’s largest economy grinds to a halt for over a year.” (Lissack, 
1999)
It is the need to anticipate and deal with such chains of actions, reactions, 
and sometimes escalating actions that characterizes the “new economy.” 
Interconnections are the key puzzle here, and those interconnections need to 
be taken into account when proffering an explanation. The connections, the 
interweavings, and the multiplicity of relationships and interrelationships are 
the environment of the twenty-first century.
To explain well requires developing a talent for enabling coherence around 
you. Notice that we said enabling—not creating, not demanding, but enabling. 
Coherence is about acting in a manner consistent with who you are. Identity 
and action need to be consistent and not in conflict. Coherence cannot be 
summoned on the spot. It cannot be created overnight. However, when coher-
ence is present, amazing things can happen. Coherence is the glue that holds 
the organized entities (be they ant colonies or cities) together in their eco-
systems and renders them more ecologically fit for survival to the next gen-
eration. Coherence, from the ecosystem perspective, is a vital contributor to 
sustainability.
So what does coherence mean for explanation? Coherence is the key to find-
ing simplicity in the complex world. In the non-sentient world of what we will 
call Science 1, coherence consists of congruent agreement. However, such a 
definition fails to capture coherence in the sentient world of people (part of 
the “anticipatory” sciences that we call Science 2). The stories we tell shape 
the language we use. Together, the stories and the language affect the way 
we interpret context. The context helps to shape the way we act. This in turn 
affects the stories we tell, and so the interweaving continues, day in and day 
out. When you act from coherence, you do not need to rationalize, justify, 
elaborate, threaten, pontificate, or filibuster—you just act. As is often claimed 
regarding the successful athlete “in the zone,” actions that are rooted in coher-
ence happen naturally. Coherence builds on itself. It results from people feeling 
that the actions required of them are consistent with their own sense of purpose 
and identity and that of the organization of which they are a part. We know 
coherence when we have acted coherently. It is not for others to judge; they can 
only ask us questions about it. The coherence comes in the acting.

xvi  
M  Preface
Our goal for this book is to provide a coherent platform on which expla-
nation—from the many perspectives of both Sciences—can be discussed. We 
expect to be judged by the discussions that ensue.
Naples, Florida and Iowa City, Iowa
May 2014

Acknowledgments
W
ith profound thanks to Alicia Juarrero, Sam Duplessis, Michael 
Stueland, Stuart Umpleby, Beckett Sterner, Merril Bernstein, Carol 
Lissack, and Sally Osborn who each spent too many hours reading 
and rereading the text. And to Zeus Lissack who put up with the computer get-
ting more attention at times than he did.
The quest for certainty blocks the search for meaning.
Eric Fromm (1947)

Context

CHAPTER 1
Introduction: Thoughts on Explanation
Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
T
his is a book about explanation. Its origins lie in the all too frequent 
observation that our way of thinking often does not match the world. 
Such mismatches give rise to ambiguity and uncertainty. The ambi-
guity, in turn, acts as both a constraint on possible actions (including the 
action of reliable prediction) and the desire to “explain” what is going on. 
Explanation is the name for the process we use to answer the questions raised 
by observed ambiguities. Explanation is also the name for the product of such 
processes. This process/product divergence is merely a hint of the many con-
flicting approaches to be found in the contemporary understanding of expla-
nation. This book is the first in decades to attempt to bring these conflicting 
approaches together and to offer a compelling narrative to explore how those 
conflicts can converge.
Such convergence is important because explanation is important. Often we 
work with an idiosyncratic conception of explanation—a conception that may 
not match those of our neighbors. In this dissonance lies both potential gain 
and potential trauma. The lack of an explanation often leads to either creative 
inquiry or troubling confrontations between holders of differing beliefs. Such 
occurrences may be found even when some believe that an explanation has 
been forthcoming—an “explanation” that others find “explains nothing.”
Explanations are central to our way of navigating the world. Some explana-
tions appear in the everyday life of the average person. Thus, the best explana-
tion of the fact that there is dog food all over the kitchen floor is that, while 
we were away at work, Fido got into the food. Other explanations are more 
rarified. For example, one might explain the blueness of the sky in terms of 
the comparatively long wavelength of blue light and the comparative predilec-
tion of longer wavelengths to disperse when passing through the atmosphere. 
There are important similarities and differences between these two sketches of 
explanation.

4  
M  Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
Contemporary philosophy is characterized by a fascination with explana-
tion. The philosophical literature on explanation is rapidly expanding; the 
philosophical literature that attempts to use explanations is vast. This fasci-
nation with explanation appears to correspond with the contemporary trend 
toward naturalized philosophy. More and more, philosophers are coming to 
take their cues from the sciences. Thus, philosophers are increasingly expend-
ing energy on studying the methods and results of the sciences. Explanation 
appears to be central to the practice of actual scientists; a brief glance at 
scientific practice suggests that scientists are in the business of offering 
explanations.
This focus on scientific practice, however, overlooks an important set of 
practitioners who also rely heavily on explanation. Explanation is important 
for managers, consultants, entrepreneurs, investors, and so on. The parallels 
between the work of these practitioners and the work of scientists are notable. 
Just as scientists construct explanations to make sense of observed phenom-
ena, practitioners create explanations to make sense of the world around them. 
Furthermore, just as scientists use accepted explanations to make the world 
respond as they want it to, practitioners rely on explanation to navigate the 
complicated social, financial, and political world that they inhabit. In each 
case, explanations allow humans to manipulate the world successfully. Put 
another way, explanations offer affordances (Gibson, 1977). Some of these may 
be affordances for action; others are affordances for prediction.
There are, however, also important differences between the ways in which 
scientists and practitioners construct and use explanations. The scientist aims 
to use established explanations as a starting point for the production of fur-
ther, true explanations. In practice, the scientist makes use of explanations 
as the basis on which to make predictions. Successful predictions, in turn, 
help to generate the theories that then become the basis for further expla-
nations. The practitioner’s aims are more pragmatic. The practitioner relies 
on explanations insofar as they are useful; that is, truth is incidental to the 
practitioner’s aims. Explanations have value if they lead to affordances for 
action. Explanations have little value if they do not create an affordance but 
rather merely offer more description. For the scientific realist, an explanation 
is good if it is accurate. Pragmatic success is, at best, a secondary desideratum. 
Priorities are reversed for the practitioner: for the practitioner, an explanation 
is good if reliance on the explanation leads to pragmatic success. Truth is, at 
best, a secondary goal.
The distinction is perhaps best illustrated by considering two disciplines, 
each of which is interested in offering explanations: physics and economics. 
Physics offers reductive explanations in terms of the properties of the constitu-
ents and sub-constituents of matter. For the past century, Western thinking has 
been guided by the physics paradigm: the world is organized around discrete 
objects that aggregate and have simple relationships. Everything is explainable 
through rules, laws, and algorithms. The observer is not a part of the observa-
tion but is external to the closed systems under consideration.

Introduction  M  5
Economics carries the mark of the last century of Western thought and so 
is modeled on the physics paradigm. Physics has been strikingly successful; 
economics, less so. There are at least two fundamental differences between 
the object of study of physics and that of economics. While physics studies the 
interactions of mindless particles, economics studies the interactions of auton-
omous and semiautonomous agents. Furthermore, while in the study of physics 
the physicist stands outside of the closed system being studied, the same cannot 
be said of the economist.
Despite the successes of the frame of thinking that characterized physics, 
it has a serious deficiency: How can it be that the actions and behaviors of 
reflexive, anticipatory creatures are best described by rules for nonthinking, 
non-reflexive, non-anticipatory objects? How can it be that context is deemed 
not to matter? And what about complexity or those relationships that cannot 
be described by the simple? The physics-based frame has no answer and instead 
discards these issues with the magic words ceteris paribus (“all other things 
being equal”). Ceteris paribus clauses need not be problematic for the physicist, 
for physics studies closed systems. However, we do not live in a closed system; 
thus, the need arises for some other frame of thought to enable our tools for 
understanding to be adequate for the world around us.
The philosophical literature suggests that explanation and understand-
ing, while intertwined, are also different. Ricoeur’s (1973, 1974) hermeneu-
tical method, for example, unfolds through the dialectic of understanding, 
explanation, and comprehension. Understanding seems to be better thought 
of as the acceptance of a structure into which the target understanding can 
be “comfortably placed.” Another way of saying this is that understanding 
involves locating the target into a context in which it seems to be coher-
ent. While contexts are often quite large, the frames we use when seeking 
to explain need not be. If the mode of our explanation is to place the target 
into a pre-given structure, then both context and frame will be as large or 
small as the structure itself. If, by contrast, the mode of our explanation is 
to detail a mechanism for “how” something happens or the conditions that 
“allow” for action to occur, then the context will be large but the frame rather 
small. This contrast between frame and context reflects the notion that each 
explanation we encounter contributes to the larger environment that in the 
aggregate makes up our cognitive understanding. This contrast also sheds 
some light on the role that recursive inquiry among description, explanation, 
and understanding can have in constituting and revising our cognitive envi-
rons (cf. Runciman, 1983).
Forms of explanation are themselves context dependent. Social systems dif-
fer from physical systems in that the use of theories changes the behavior of 
social systems. As participants in these systems act, they do so on the basis 
of reflexive consideration of context, goals, and affordances drawing on their 
own mental models (which are themselves the product of prior contexts and 
current attention) in anticipation of possible outcomes. These recursive reflex-
ive considerations (or as Piaget (1929) would have called it, learning through 

6  
M  Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
actions) have no parallel among the physical sciences. The additional consider-
ations give rise to questions of objectivity, discovery, and the basis for scientific 
explanation.
The basis for social sciences and design (pragmatic assumptions) is differ-
ent from the “hard” sciences. There is a need to deal with ideas and commu-
nication in social systems. Thus, the philosophy of science needs expansion to 
include paths to the potential logics of the social sciences. Example questions 
might include asking “What is the basic unit (individual, group, set, dynamic, 
environment, etc.)?” Sciences of the sentient will require different languages 
and different frameworks of thinking than are commonly used in the hard 
sciences of non-sentient beings. Meta-level thinking is an opportunity that 
can create the need for new strategies of simplification so as to meet requisite 
variety.
Objectivity and a goal of reliable predictivity are the hallmarks of what we 
shall label Science 1. These are the hard sciences as traditionally taught and as 
used as references by philosophers of science. Physics is the exemplar of Science 
1. In the Science 1 world, we label and categorize via deduction, probabilistic 
inference, and induction. Science 1 excludes context dependence; thus, when it 
is forced to deal with the possibility instead asserts ceteris paribus.
Discovery and attunement to context are the hallmarks of what we shall 
refer to as Science 2. In the Science 2 world, we instead seek to identify rela-
tionships, affordances, and potential actions. We ask questions rather than 
seek to label or categorize. Science 2 explicitly makes room for the context 
dependencies that Science 1 has excluded. These can be characterized as emer-
gence, volition, reflexive anticipation, heterogeneity, and design, among oth-
ers. The philosophical sources necessary to understand the hermeneutics of 
social experience can be found in the field known as systems sciences, with 
a focus on the underlying models, feedback loops, reflection, and anticipa-
tion that goes by the label of systems thinking. In the social science modeling 
embraced by systems science, apparent inconsistencies raised by the inclusion 
of the observer are replaced by a need to pay close attention to processes and 
to multiple adjacent possibles. Once participants are admitted as part of the 
process being modeled and their decision-making and design abilities are taken 
into account, then the multiple possibilities to which they give rise must also 
be taken into account and not seen as contradictory. The broad applicability 
of context dependence and observer questions throughout the anticipatory sci-
ences demands the exploration of both logical foundations and narrative appli-
cation. The possibility for implementation or “action” lies in the reconciliation 
of experience and models in the “anticipatory” science.
The inability of Science 1 models to capture the essence of Science 2 events 
adequately has been well documented. For example, consider social science 
domains where reflexivity and reflexive anticipation are characteristic traits of 
actors. Actors can become reflexive by learning and by modifying their cogni-
tive repertoire. More advanced forms of reflexive anticipation at the actor’s 
level occur when actor A possesses an image of actor B’s image of A, actor B 
an image of actor A’s image of B, and so on (the explicit basis of interaction in 

Introduction  M  7
Gordon Pask’s (1976) Conversation Theory). Learning and the acceptance of 
error as part of context add to the recursive reflexive loop. For example, the 
dual function of DNA in a cell as a machine for maintaining and reproducing 
an organism and as a code for reproducing an organism makes it highly self-
reflexive. Likewise, the neural networks in the brain are also self-organized in 
a reflexive manner. A challenge arises whenever a researcher becomes part of 
the domain of investigation itself. The act of observing systems poses a series of 
challenges in terms of interactions, consensus-building, and results.
Concurrent but Orthogonal—How the Domains of  
Science 1 and Science 2 Entwine
If we start from a puzzling action, the story we tell places that action in a tem-
poral continuum, relating it to previous actions and events that led up to it; and 
it places the action also in relation to a future scenario or set of possible futures. 
The original action was puzzling in part because we didn’t have its temporal con-
text . . .  we illuminate the unfamiliar by relating it to the familiar . . .  Causality, 
however, with which the early covering-law theorists tried to link the elements of 
a narrative, is totally out of place here. A perceived situation, an emotional reac-
tion, taking on a goal and initiating a plan for reaching it, these do not cause the 
action but serve to motivate it . . .  the causal account leaves out a conscious agent 
whose relation to the antecedent situation is at least a subjective and practical, 
if not a deliberative, one . . .  Common-sense discourse about human behavior is 
thus seen as a kind of aspiring but deficient explanatory endeavor, trying hard 
but failing to do what real science is now presumably able—or soon will be 
able—to do, namely to explain, predict, and control human behavior . . .  One 
thing that seems not to be considered is that the context of everyday interac-
tion might have other motivations than the search for laws, causal explanations, 
prediction, and control that we associate with the ideas of natural and biological 
science. (Carr, 2008)
Human behavior—indeed, any behavior that occurs in the domain of Science 
2—is contingent and context dependent. Change the context or the cogni-
tive environs and the behavior is likely to change. The domain of Science 1 is 
quite different. In the hard sciences, contingency is an enemy of prediction and 
control. The contingent is thus to be eliminated if possible and controlled for 
(ceteris paribus) if not.
Given this role for contingency, the rough-and-ready distinction between 
Science 1 and Science 2 is epistemic; it may or may not have an ontological cor-
relate. At some point, the epistemic tools of the physicist cease to be helpful. 
The world can no longer be treated as constituted by discrete closed systems, 
describable solely in terms of simple relationships. This rough-and-ready dis-
tinction can be illustrated through the use of a continuum—a Mobius strip 
(Figure I.1).
In our continuum (pictured as a one-sided loop), the world as we encounter 
it in the raw is undifferentiated, and it is we who do the differentiations who 
allow for cognition. Along the simple and ordered side of the surface lies the 

8  
M  Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
world as we label and categorize it. Along the complex and attuned side of the 
surface lies the world as we act in it.
These two sides of the surface have strikingly different characteristics despite 
being part of a continuous surface. The simple and ordered side on the right 
(Science 1) corresponds roughly to our traditional way of thinking. It excludes 
context dependence. It is the world of reliable predictions, truth claims, and 
invariants. The complex and attuned side on the left (Science 2) corresponds to 
a more relationship way of thinking. It explicitly includes context dependence. 
This is the world of affordances, anticipations, and actions. It is devoid of truth 
claims in favor of abductive hypotheses.
The very notion of what counts as an explanation seems to differ between 
these two worlds. Adherents of both worldviews in general agree that a descrip-
tion of a mechanism in response to a “how?” question constitutes an explana-
tion. The disagreements arise over the kinds of answers offered in response to 
a “why?” question, those that tend to arise when an expectation is not met. 
While the Science 1 worldview inquires “why” as a means of revealing “truth” 
and will keep asking until this criterion is met (an optimization strategy), the 
Science 2 worldview inquires “why” as a foundation for further action (or non-
action) and will stop asking when a satisfactory narrative has been offered (a 
satisficing strategy). The discussion that follows will attempt to outline the 
basis for these orthogonal divergences.
Traditionally, Science 1 is concerned with regularities. Thus, observations 
of individual events or occurrences are important only to the extent that the 
occurrence of such an individual event is the basis for the falsification of a 
claim about regularities. Within the Science 1 context, the answers to ques-
tions of “why” concern the placement of regularities (observed or conjectured) 
within an overall schema of regularities. The relevant questions seem to be 
those of order and of fit. Both further descriptions of regularities within an 
ordered regime (functional explanation) and measurements of adherence to a 
“pure” (noncontingency messed-with) regularity are both offered and accepted 
as “explanatory.” The “how?” question implied by the “why?” questions is “How 
Figure I.1 Science I and Science 2.
 

Introduction  M  9
does this fit within the established order?” where the answer is a mechanism for 
how fit happens.
Some of the unarticulated assumptions in the Science 1 worldview are the 
pre-givenness of an established order, the idea that there “should” be fidelity to 
that order, that the correct granularity for inquiry is at the level of regularities, 
and that regularities can be referred to adequately by labels and models. Given 
these assumptions, it is reasonable to eliminate contingency with a further 
claim of ceteris paribus, to treat “fit” as measurable, to rely on noun forms, and 
to posit “truth” as a justificatory variable. While each of these “reasonable” 
approximations can be discarded in the pursuit of “better explanation,” our 
human cognitive limits and our reliance on the “least action principle” enable 
us to simplify “why” explanations in the Science 1 world as category member-
ship questions, and allows a pragmatic scientific realism to guide the articula-
tions of the abbreviated worldview that results.
In the Science 2 world, the focus is on individual actions and occurrences, 
whereas the regularities of Science 1 are part of the context in which these indi-
vidual events occur. In Science 2, the “why?” questions tend to demand answers 
in the form of narrative—here are the constraints/affordances that given this 
particular context allowed or prevented a particular action. Once again, the 
“least action principle” combined with human cognitive limits means that 
while a particular context includes an infinitude of variables, the observer/
actor is limited in what is attended to and processed. The regularities that are 
the granular focus of Science 1 frequently are treated as “assumed” in the atten-
tion/cognition processing of Science 2. The granular focus of Science 2 is on 
individual actions and events and the regularities are part of the context.
Some of the unarticulated assumptions in the Science 2 worldview are the 
contingency and context dependence of any observed or assumed order, the 
idea that “fidelity” to any particular order only has relevance as part of an 
observation/expectation/further action feedback loop, that the correct granu-
larity for inquiry is at the level of individuality, and that regularities can be 
referred to only contingently by labels and models. Given these assumptions, 
it is never reasonable to eliminate contingency with a further claim of ceteris 
paribus (for in that claim one might eliminate the explanatory variables them-
selves), to treat measurement of deviance from expectations as a further con-
tingent variable in the feedback loop, to rely on verb forms, or to posit actions 
as a justificatory variable. While each of these “reasonable” approximations 
can be discarded in the pursuit of “better explanation,” our human cognitive 
limits and our reliance on the “least action principle” allow us to simplify 
“why” explanations in the Science 2 world as narratives about affordances and 
constraints, and allow a pragmatic constructivism to guide the articulations of 
the abbreviated worldview that results.
The differences between Science 1 and Science 2 echo as we seek to answer: 
“What do we mean by explanations and how are we comfortable with them?” 
The two perspectives ask different questions that might affect what we believe 
or do not believe about explanations. Are we looking at the right things? Are 

10  
M  Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
we self-aware of our beliefs? Do we have the right words? Do we know the 
limitations of what we are talking about? The two perspectives also offer differ-
ent typologies of kinds of explanations. In both perspectives, there are “how” 
explanations or mechanisms. In both, there are “why” explanations, although 
in Science 1 “why” is with reference to a pre-given structure, while in Science 
2 “why” refers to a sense of purpose. Then there are contingent explanations, 
which only happened because some context enabled them to happen, so when 
you offer an explanation you say: “Here was the context.” There are but-for 
explanations—something else should have happened, but it did not, and this 
filled the gap. Finally, there are two more explanatory types that, as Sandy 
Mitchell (this volume) puts it, are not an explanation but nonetheless happen 
all the time: coercive explanations—“Because my mother said so” or some more 
powerful force—and “explain away” explanations, where you explain the con-
tingencies as a result of whose occurrence the expected observation/action did 
not happen, or so we claim.
In Science 1 terms, explanations either describe a mechanism or suggest that 
things belong to a category. The mechanism tells us the how, and the better we 
can get in describing the mechanism, the better we think the explanation is. 
Category membership in a way asserts a “why”—“This happened because she 
was nice.” Science 1 explanations are seldom satisfactory to either the explainer 
or the recipient unless the explanation is causal. (There is more on causal expla-
nations in later chapters.) By contrast, Science 2 explanations are seldom general 
enough to assert causality in any kind of a reliably predictive way. Science 2 has 
more room for the notion that “how” and “why” can collide with each other, 
and that when they do sometimes you do not know what is going on. Science 2 
explanations of the “explain away” varieties do make causal claims, but they are 
claims about what might have/should have/would have/could have happened 
had some set of contingencies not been present. The resulting explanation is 
more of a descriptive narrative of those very contingencies along with the asser-
tion of some more general (Hempel’s covering law? Woodward’s general rule 
regarding interventions?) structure or mechanism that, had ceteris paribus held, 
would have cohered to the explainer’s perspective of how the world works.
Figure I.2 Differences between Science 1 and Science 2.
 

Introduction  M  11
While Science 1 explanations allow for and are structured around predic-
tions, Science 2 explanations suffer from the contingencies accompanying 
explicit rejection of ceteris paribus. As such, these explanations by definition 
allow for a series of possible errors that are seldom found or asserted in the 
Science 1 world. These errors include the possibility of the wrong model being 
used, the wrong contingencies happening or failing to happen, overlooked con-
text, inadequate metaphor, inappropriate synecdoche, misdirected awareness or 
attention, intervening volition or coercion, and incommensurable worldviews.
Despite these differences, we must remember that Science 1 and Science 2 
are on the same surface and part of the same continuum (that Mobius strip in 
Figure I.1). As such, our mission is trying to make sense of this giant muddle, 
define what we mean, suggest where it might work and where it might not, and 
then try to explore what it is that we are talking about.
Worldviews
Some of our contributors have suggested that the muddle of explanation and its 
“meaning” that we describe above can be clarified when approached from the 
perspective of scientific realism; still others suggested that the answer can be 
found in the perspective known as pragmatic constructivism. The philosophy 
of science literature often portrays these perspectives in opposition; much like 
the worlds of Science 1 and Science 2. It can be very tempting to attempt an 
overlay and then to suggest that Science 1 can be mapped to scientific realism 
and Science 2 to pragmatic constructivism. However, as the collection of chap-
ters in this book will reveal, such a mapping is far too simple and overlooks the 
very nuances that make the question of explanation of interest.
Exploration requires perspective and the philosophy of science offers two 
perspectives that seem to be helpful. Scientific realism is often modeled as 
taking Newtonian physics to be the paradigm instance of science: other sci-
ences are understood via assimilation to the Newtonian model; explanations 
are understood to be reductionist and law driven. While the scientific realism 
practiced by scientists and philosophers is much more nuanced, what it shares 
with the “common-sense” version is an underlying belief in the independent 
existence of reality and of the fundamental importance of truth. The takeaway 
of importance here is that scientific realism makes truth claims, judges those 
claims for coherence against a pre-given world, and affords as “real” entities 
whose existence cannot be observed and can only be inferred.
The pragmatic constructivism approach begins by asking what actions are 
being contemplated and how judgments regarding those actions can be arrived 
at. The key to these observations lies in the recognition of the ontological 
difference between natural entities and those that are the product of human 
construction—while the “natural” entities can be referred to as “pre-given” 
and thus “described” (functional explanation), human constructions are always 
changing and requisite explanations demand mechanisms and explication of 
relationships. This form of constructivism is less concerned with the idea that 
man “constructs” reality and more with the notion that “what matters” is the 

12  
M  Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
representation of a supposed reality with which we opt to deal at a given time. 
Truth is thus irrelevant and “reality” is observer dependent.
Without taking a stance on the issue, this volume considers questions such 
as: Is the philosopher’s focus on scientific explanation myopic? Are important 
philosophical issues being overlooked by ignoring the use to which practitio-
ners put explanations? Explanation as the focus of inquiry provides a fertile 
arena for the exploration of these questions. And, at least with respect to the 
domain of explanation, this book offers a compelling narrative on how the two 
worldviews can be reconciled.
The narrative takes the form of an enacted hermeneutic circle. Because we 
were holding a conference, those in attendance had the luxury of engaging in 
dialogue, questioning authors of text on both content and intent, inquiring as 
to the underlying context that gave rise to each of the intended and inferred 
meanings, and engaging in recursive reflexive conversation. This is not to sug-
gest that stable eigen values were reached regarding any of the myriad of topics 
so discussed, but rather highlights the processes and routines in which the 
participants engaged. In presenting this book, we aim similarly to engage both 
authors and readers in a hermeneutic cycle. Our concept is to do so in as prag-
matic a way as possible given that you the reader cannot (without significant 
effort) directly engage with the authors themselves. Our pragmatic hermeneu-
tics herein consists of presenting a multitude of authors speaking in their own 
voice and then giving the reader the opportunity to engage and reflect. As edi-
tors, we have restricted our voices to defined chapters, interjections before and 
after the chapters of others, and the conclusion.
To keep our task within the definition of the scientific enterprise as sug-
gested by Nagel (1979)—the distinctive aim of the scientific enterprise as being 
theories that offer systematic and responsibly supported explanations—our 
hermeneutics is similar to that advocated by Gadamer:
“Gadamer’s philosophical hermeneutics is that all understanding involves not 
only interpretation, but also application. Against an older tradition that divided 
up hermeneutics into subtilitas intelligendi (understanding), subtilitas expli-
candi (interpretation), and subtilitas applicandi (application), a primary thesis 
of Truth and Method is that these are not three independent activities to be 
relegated to different sub-disciplines, but rather they are internally related. They 
are all moments of the single process of understanding.” (Bernstein, 1982)
“The best definition for hermeneutics is: to let what is alienated by the character 
of the written word or by the character of being distantiated by cultural or histori-
cal distances speak again . . .  the movement of understanding is constantly from 
the whole to the part and back to the whole. Our task is to expand the unity of the 
understood meaning centrifugally . . .  Let us think of this structure in a dynamic 
way; the effective unity of the anticipated meaning comes out as the comprehen-
sion is enlarged and renovated by concentric circles. The perfect coherence of the 
global and final meaning is the criterion for the understanding. When coherence 
is wanting, we say that understanding is deficient. The harmony of all the details 
with the whole is the criterion of correct understanding. The failure to achieve 
this harmony means that understanding has failed.” (Gadamer)

Introduction  M  13
Approximately half of the authors in this volume hold one belief or the other 
with respect to scientific realism and some form of pragmatic constructivism. 
The interchange between these two worldviews formed the heart of the inter-
esting dialogue during our event: Modes of Explanation. Both perspectives 
have a concern for explanation by means of category membership. Still other 
kinds of explanation raise concerns for one perspective and not the other. For 
example, functional explanations are not explanatory from the perspective of 
pragmatic constructivism, because a functional explanation fails to create any 
kind of first-order affordance for action (descriptions may provide background 
information, and thus create a second-order affordance, but fail to create an 
enablement or a constraint on action in and of themselves). By contrast, the 
two kinds of context-dependent explanations that play critical roles in prag-
matic constructivism—explanations that point to aspects of the context that 
enabled such-and-such and explanations that point to aspects of the context 
such that, were these contexts absent, this-and-that would have come about—
are similarly not considered to be explanatory from the perspective of the scien-
tific realist, for each kind of “explanation” points to contingent features of the 
world as opposed to bottoming out in robust, exceptionless laws.
Rich (2011), in his farewell column in the New York Times, noted that the 
pressures of writing for a readership “can push you to have stronger opinions 
than you actually have, or contrived opinions about subjects you may not care 
deeply about, or to run roughshod over nuance to reach an unambiguous con-
clusion.” We believe that unambiguous conclusions about the nature of expla-
nations are a mistake and thus have undertaken to find a way to preserve the 
very ambiguity that gives nuance its due.
To accomplish this, a concept that we believe helps to reconcile the Science 1 
and Science 2 perspectives is the notion of concurrent but orthogonal. Science 
1 and Science 2 are indeed different, but they are not oppositional. They are 
also not “super-positional,” where one would claim a status of truth only in the 
light of a revealed contingency. Concurrent but orthogonal suggests a simulta-
neity that is perpendicular, much like the planes in Figure I.3.
Figure 1.3 Perpendicular planes.

14  
M  Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
Of course, these planes are not existing in their own space, but have a con-
text—thus the shape we suggest looks more like the plane-crossed ellipsoid in 
Figure I.4.
Initially we conjecture that the intersecting planes can be thought of as 
the two Sciences (1 and 2) and the two philosophies of science (scientific 
realism and pragmatic constructivism). This conception helped us shape the 
conference, the workshops, and this book. Yet the exercise of organizing, 
gathering, speaking, listening, transcribing, questioning, editing, and writ-
ing has led to a revision in this conception. We now are suggesting that the 
two planes are those of ontology—represented by the Mobius strip of the two 
Sciences —and epistemology—represented by a model of question genera-
tion that we will further discuss in chapter 5 and beyond. This question-
generation model represents a guide to the pragmatic hermeneutic process 
(see Figures I.5 and I.6).
Figure I.5 Question-generation model.
Figure I.4 Plane-crossed ellipsoid.
 
 
 
 
 

Introduction  M  15
This question-generation model allows the simple mappings of scientific 
realism and Science 1 and pragmatic constructivism and Science 2 to be 
avoided. What it does instead is to demand that framing issues be reexamined 
and not merely assumed. It is designed to help avoid the errors described by 
Kahneman (2011): “We are ruined by our own biases. When making decisions, 
we see what we want, ignore probabilities, and minimize risks that uproot our 
hopes.” By making assumptions (and in so doing restricting ourselves to a set of 
labels and a model), we predetermine what might be learned, which will limit 
the options that appear to be open to us. As Kahneman says: “We often fail to 
allow for the possibility that evidence that should be critical to our judgment is 
missing. What we see is all there is.” Gould’s (2011) take is: “We therefore fail 
to note important items in plain sight, while we misread other facts by forc-
ing them into preset mental channels, even when we retain a buried memory 
of actual events.” Further, Piattelli-Palmarini (1994) notes: “we take up only 
those actions and solutions that have an immediate effect on the situation, and 
always as they have been framed for us.”
Concurrent but orthogonal is a very different way of thought. It calls for 
mapping the flow of ideas on the ellipsoid shown in Figure I.3. Given that 
frame, the world can look very different. The following quotes help to frame 
the idea. Dewey speaks of new thoughts and new perceptions, as does Gadamer. 
Gould tells us that the framing takes place in stories, and Rorty reminds us of 
our goal: coping with the reality in which we find ourselves.
No matter how ardently the artist might desire it, he cannot divest himself, 
in his new perception, of meanings funded from his past intercourse with his 
surroundings, nor can he free himself from the influence they exert upon the 
substance and manner of his present being. If he could and did there would be 
nothing left in the way of an object for him to see. (Dewey, 1934)
Figure I.6 Question-generation model.

16  
M  Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
The truth of experience always implies an orientation toward new experiences. 
That is why a person who is called experienced has become so not only through 
experiences but is also open to new experiences. The consummation of his expe-
rience, the perfection that we call “being experienced” does not consist in the 
fact that someone already knows everything better than anyone else. Rather 
the experienced person proves to be, on the contrary, someone who is radically 
undogmatic; who, because of the many experiences he has had, and the knowl-
edge he has drawn from them, is particularly well equipped to have new experi-
ences and to learn from them. (Gadamer, Truth and Method)
[S]ince we cannot observe everything in the blooming and buzzing confusion of 
the world’s surrounding richness, the organizing power of canonical stories leads 
us to ignore important facts readily within our potential sight, and to twist or 
misread the information that we do manage to record. Canonical stories predict-
ably “drive” facts into definite and distorted pathways that validate the outlines 
and necessary components of these archetypal tales. (Gould, 2011)
Knowledge is not a matter of getting reality right . . .  but rather a matter of 
acquiring habits of action for coping with reality. (Rorty, 1991)

CHAPTER 2
A Place in History
Alicia Juarrero
I
n “From modern roots to post-modern rhizomes” (Juarrero, 1993), I explored 
the alleged transition from mythology to philosophy. Supposedly, what 
changed with the appearance of pre-Socratic philosophy in the sixth cen-
tury BC was the logic of explanation deployed to account for natural phenom-
ena. Despite philosophy’s claim to have established a different explanatory logic, 
I argued in that work that there is nevertheless a unifying thread that did not 
change from mythology to philosophy: the belief that explanation really explains 
only when it grounds that which is being explained in a non-phenomenal or 
non-sensory—call it divine—origin, a source that is also universal, atemporal, 
and acontextual. The Greek miracle, I claimed, was in fact therefore a “miracle 
manqué.”
The logic of explanation of mythological and religious narratives is charac-
teristically the following: explaining something consists in stating its lineage 
or otherwise tracing its history or trajectory back to its beginning. For a mind-
set embedded in a mythological culture, doing this provides an explanation 
because chronological retracing corresponds to tracking the phenomenon to 
its ontological ground. Herodotus slights the Egyptians by saying, “They did 
not know until recently the origins of things.” A paradigmatic example of this 
explanatory logic appears in ancient Greek references to the Ages of Man as 
golden, silver, and bronze, the underlying assumption being that the further 
back one goes in time the closer mankind is to the golden; that is, the divine. 
The same pattern reoccurs in Genesis’s “begats.” Genealogy therefore consti-
tutes the first “logic of explanation,” its supposition being that original or foun-
dational is either itself divine or warranted by the divine.
Four distinct types of genealogical explanation based on temporal regression 
can be identified. These include (1) the establishment of the authority of the 
mythological hero; (2) the legitimacy or authority of any city, such as Athens; 
(3) the view that cosmology is just theogony; and (4) calling into question the 
authority of the narrator or the storyteller.

18  
M  Alicia Juarrero
Consider first a mythological hero’s authority. In the case of the Greeks, 
a hero’s authority is clearly due to his pedigree. The Iliad refers to elders as 
the source of law and reason because they are closer to the Golden Age, when 
things were right and gods and men mingled freely. Ajax claims that the behav-
ior of the Achaians is justified because it is “we who can show of all the longest 
lineage” (Iliad 2:558.40). To qualify as a mythological hero, pedigree is there-
fore all important. In particular, descent from a god provides the sine qua non 
for the role. Even the lethality of the hero’s weapons is directly related to their 
divine origin; just consider the provenance of Achilles’ shield or Polyphemus’ 
stake. The same is true for a city’s legitimacy or authority. For example, what 
makes Athens unique is that it was founded by Athena; Argos was founded by 
Hera; Limnos by Hephaestos; and so on. In each case, the founder is divine.
The principle also holds true of a contemporary leader or a political figure 
in authority. There is a certain pattern that repeats in the narratives concerning 
a city’s founding, a pattern Malinowski calls a “charter myth” (Malinowski, 
1955). These stories commonly describe a quasi-divine hero who overthrows 
a monster that has been plaguing the hapless residents of an area. Once vic-
torious, the savior founds or reestablishes a city, which now owes its tempo-
ral significance to its having been founded by that redeemer in that manner. 
Perseus (who founds Mycenae) slays the Gorgon; Theseus rids Attica of the 
brigands Peripheter, Sciron, Cercyon, Anteus, and the rest, not to mention the 
Minotaur; and so on. Such a logic of explanation collapses genealogical expla-
nation into evaluative justification by blending the role of that which has value 
with its origin. So the temporal authority of either a hero or a city derives from 
its founder’s supernatural feats and the ultimately divine lineage of both.
Once more, explanation as genealogy reappears in tales about cosmology. 
Hesiod’s Theogony, for example, is for the most part genealogy. In reply to the 
request, “Tell me how first gods, earth, rivers, the boundless sea . . .  the shin-
ing stars and the wide heavens above came into being” (Th 107–110), Hesiod 
replies that first Chaos came to be, then Gaia, then Uranus, the Titans, and so 
on, until Zeus kills his father Cronos (he of the offspring-eating habits) and, in 
doing so, establishes a cosmos, an ordered universe. Order emerges out of chaos 
only through and thanks to a certain type of lineage. Similarly, for Christians 
it is not until Jesus (who can trace his lineage to David) supersedes Yahweh’s 
prescriptions that the Good News can be proclaimed. The authoritativeness of 
the transformation is due to the divinity of the founder, whether Zeus or Jesus, 
and his overthrow of the now superseded order. The undeniable implication 
is that had the revolutionary not been divine, the cosmos or teachings would 
not have been lawful. The same story reappears about Prometheus, the divine 
source of fire, reason, cognition, mind, medicine, numbers, and foresight. One 
could even say the same about Orestes’ establishment of the rule of law at the 
end of the Eumenides, the last play in the Oresteian trilogy.
Finally, the authority of the teller of myths is itself established genealogi-
cally: a story has meaning or significance only because the storyteller received 
it from a god. The authoritativeness of the story implies divine revelation to the 
storyteller. Here too, genealogical explanation collapses into justification: the 

A Place in History  M  19
fact that the story originates in a divine source is what confers authority (not 
only power) on both the story and the storyteller. The identity between revela-
tion and justification is also retained in the Abrahamic religions: the reason 
why the Old and New Testaments, or the Koran, are held to be authoritative is 
because they are said to be the products of divine revelation. This latter situa-
tion is remarkable because we know that in the case of mythology (significantly 
in Hesiod and Homer), epic storytellers would change the story slightly with 
each retelling to communicate better with their audience. The epic bard of old 
was aware that in a participatory universe the audience needs to identify with 
the story in order to render it meaningful or applicable to the present day. This 
participatory aspect of storytelling is discarded with the rise of philosophy, an 
indication that philosophy loses all awareness or appreciation of the impor-
tance of context. How and why does this loss of appreciation of context, time, 
and natural emergence happen?
Thales, the pre-Socratic who is often depicted as the first philosopher, 
claimed that water is the fundamental metaphysical constituent. In doing so, he 
rejects the assumption that the origin in which phenomenal reality is grounded 
must itself be divine (water is as common an element as one can find). In 
determining that water is the basic constituent of reality, Thales also rejects 
any supposition that this scientific knowledge is acquired through revelation. 
Instead, he privileges reason as the logical source of the conclusion that water 
is the fundamental building block of reality. Nevertheless, Thales follows the 
tradition of viewing chronological primacy as ontologically foundational. The 
reason water continues to serve as an alleged explanation of natural phenom-
ena is because all other phenomena are considered derivative from it through 
various transformations such as evaporation, freezing, and so on. To explain 
something is still to trace it temporally to its origin.
There is a qualitative change with the appearance of Anaximander, a pre-
Socratic philosopher who follows Thales. Anaximander’s thesis is that the 
fundamental constituent of reality cannot be water because it is too determi-
nate or specific a “stuff.” The origin, ground, and source of all reality must 
be instead something undifferentiated, itself possessed of no characteristics or 
determinate properties. Anaximander calls this source the apeiron, the bound-
less. All of phenomenal reality, he claims, originates in the apeiron, made spe-
cific and determinate thanks to processes such as condensation or rarefication. 
The apeiron is eternal and therefore inquiries into its origin would constitute 
a category mistake, but its role is still to serve as the first (diffuse, amorphous) 
state of (subsequently more determinate, specified) matter. To that extent, 
Anaximander’s logic of explanation remains genealogical, the tracking back 
of everything that we now see to its origins. More importantly, the fact that 
the apeiron has no properties and is undifferentiated makes it abstract and 
therefore more akin to a logical principle, an arche, than was Thales’ water. 
The apeiron nevertheless continues to function as a temporal beginning, since 
Anaximander explicitly states that one can track the progressive results of rare-
fication and condensation on this non-determinate stuff. In Anaximander’s 
apeiron, I submit, we find the laying down of a philosophical approach that will 

20  
M  Alicia Juarrero
characterize the subsequent history of Western philosophy: a dismissal of the 
local, the contextual, the sensible, and the here and now. The only parallel with 
religion is the transition from local, animistic gods identified with specific 
trees, mountains, or locales to the abstract and universal Abrahamic God (who 
can only be defined through negation, by what it is not). Insofar as explana-
tion consists in a tracing back to the primordial ground, however, explanation 
remains genetic.
The philosophical emphasis on abstraction and acontextuality that begins 
with Anaximander will culminate in the foundationalist metaphysics of modern 
science, but it reaches an early apex with Socrates and Plato. In the Symposium, 
the dialogue in which Socrates asks interlocutors “What is Love?,” Socrates, the 
last speaker, dismisses the previous thinkers by objecting that those before him 
had merely described the origin of love—where it came from—but had failed to 
provide its definition. Earlier speakers before Socrates had characterized love’s 
lineage in various ways—as the “oldest of the gods”; by noting its parents or 
offspring (love’s parents being such and thus, or love having no parents, or love 
being the parent of everything else); and so on. Socrates’ central objection is 
precisely that this is not the proper way to offer explanations, that the logic of 
explanation is not given by tracing the subject’s lineage but rather by articulat-
ing its (essential) definition. And as is well known, the Platonic tradition con-
cerning definition is that to explain something is to provide a description that 
“reflects” the Platonic form in which the essence of that which is being defined 
“partakes.”
According to Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and, in fact, according to philoso-
phers until the middle of the twentieth century (Quine, 1970b), a constitutive 
definition must identify the metaphysical ground or essence of whatever is being 
defined, and this it must do by identifying its substance. Lurking behind the 
push for foundational definitions is the assumption that true and proper defi-
nitions connect the phenomenal thing under investigation with the Real (by 
which is meant a non-sensible—capital R—Reality). A substance, foundation-
alist metaphysics follows directly from such an approach: proper definitions 
must exclude inessential and secondary sensory traits, or those that refer to the 
merely contextual or local. To explain natural phenomena, definitions must 
tap into the eternal, universal, or unchanging ground; following the tradition 
established by Anaximander, the logic of all proper explanation must trace that 
natural phenomenon (now logically, if not temporally) to Reality, which itself 
is not available to the senses even though it is the source of all that exists in 
the phenomenal realm. One can call this “the myth of the (tap) root,” a philo-
sophical approach that can still be seen in the widespread assumption even 
today that everything will ultimately be explicable in terms of the workings of 
subatomic particles, none of which is available to the senses, and some of which 
are only inferable by their trajectories in the Hadron Collider, for example.
That assumption common to much of basic physical science thus continues 
to reflect the belief that phenomenal reality must somehow be derived from 
or originate in something that is neither changing, nor contextual, nor local, 
nor particular. Proper explanation, therefore, must spell out a derivation of 

A Place in History  M  21
that which is being explained from this nonnatural ground, its metaphysical 
tap root, which penetrates deep into ontological ground. The lesson that phi-
losophy and science both take from this metaphor is that their task is either 
to discover or to articulate the one correct method, be it scientific method, 
Cartesian innate ideas, the sensory data of the empiricists, or in ethics the 
categorical imperative or the principle of utility. In modern times, the myth of 
the tap root emerges strongly in Galileo’s claim that the book of nature is writ-
ten in the language of mathematics; understanding this abstract, universal, a 
contextual language is the key that will allow us to tap into truth, which itself 
is also absolute, unchanging, and eternal.
Umberto Eco’s The Search for the Perfect Language and most of Richard 
Rorty’s work in the 1970s were among the earliest to criticize the possibility 
of a final language, but despite these critics, later elaborated by postmodern-
ists and deconstructionists among others, philosophical and scientific practice 
continues to believe in the possibility of a theory of everything, an explanation 
that must accordingly be structured as a derivation. Even in today’s theories 
of management and business, for instance, we find pronouncements referring 
to the total quality management technique that when properly implemented 
will provide all of management’s answers because it is the method that in fact 
contains the truth and the most efficient way of dealing with organizational 
issues.
There is one exception to this philosophical approach, which goes back as 
far back as Aristotle. Aside from his views concerning the four causes, Aristotle 
warned that there is more than one type of knowledge. Some phenomena can 
be uncovered through deductive means and are tractable in terms of universal 
and contextless absolute laws from which we can deduce and predict future 
events. That is the kind of knowledge that Aristotle calls episteme and it is in 
fact acquired through deductive inference. However, Aristotle also warns that 
there are other phenomena, especially in domains having to do with human 
beings—like law and medicine—where the textural, the local, the particular 
cannot be ignored. One cannot dismiss time and the role of context in health 
or legal culpability—or ethics, he holds—and therefore in our understanding 
of these.
For these kinds of subjects, we require a kind of knowledge or appreciation 
of the contextual called phronesis, practical wisdom. Although not amenable to 
deductive inference, phronesis is an equally valid and legitimate type of under-
standing that is tailored pros ton kairon, as the occasion requires. It is learned 
through apprenticeship and habituation, not logical techniques. Aristotle 
emphatically counsels not to try to provide explanations that are more rigorous 
than the subject matter warrants; the proper logic of explanation, he cautions, 
must be suitable to what is being explained. That warning and twofold logic of 
explanation were lost in the 1600s with the spectacular success of mechanis-
tic science. Because Newton’s universal gravitational equation and his laws of 
motion appeared to explain almost everything, including change, the assump-
tion that there was only one kind of explanation, the deductive-nomological 
(DN) logic of explanation, became enshrined in episteme, as the only valid 

22  
M  Alicia Juarrero
schema. As a result, the idea of an explanatory logic that takes time and context 
is lost in both philosophy and science.
The approach gets set in stone after Hume. Relying exclusively on pure sense 
data as the (sole alleged) tap root for obtaining truth immediately encounters 
the obstacle that neither the efficaciousness of a cause nor its necessity can be 
directly perceived. All that one can sense is Event A regularly followed by Event 
B. In our minds, those two become associated and A is identified as the cause of 
B. By barring causation from the realm of perception, Hume reduces causation 
to lawful regularities. In doing so, he, and especially his disciple Kant, removes 
causal power from the realm of ontology and relegates it to the domain of 
epistemology. Causality thus becomes identified with necessary and sufficient 
conditions that, once captured in a law of nature, yield an explanatory logic 
framed as a syllogistic argument with the law as the major premise and initial 
conditions as the minor premise. When combined with the belief that nature 
is both deterministic and linear, explanation and predictive conclusion become 
synonymous.
However, explanation as derivation turns explanation into prediction—and 
its corresponding retrodiction. Once again, the ability to look back into the 
past and see where it all came from is offered as an essential component of 
scientific explanation. DN explanation is thus enshrined as the necessary for-
mat for scientific explanation, as are strict determinism and linearity as neces-
sary characteristics of reality. This understanding of explanation as derivation 
is articulated most clearly in 1948 by Carl Hempel and Paul Oppenheim in 
their classic article “Studies in the logic of explanation,” in which they claimed 
that explanation consists in argumentation and, in particular, in derivation. I 
strongly recommend Salmon’s (1989) locus classicus Four Decades of Scientific 
Explanation, in which he describes the impact of this article as well as the objec-
tions that the DN model encountered during the following 40 or so years.
In contrast to mere generalizations and correlations, lawful regularity sup-
ports counterfactuals. Natural laws can account for what would have happened 
if something were not the case. Among the uncritically held assumptions 
implied in the understanding of explanation as inference, or explanation as 
derivation, is that no explanation can allow ceteris paribus clauses. If the lawful 
regularity in the major premise must be universal, and the entailment strict, 
this precludes any modifying clauses in the major premise to the effect that 
“This is so (only) all things being equal.” So all particularities, all contextual 
nuances, are removed and dismissed from the logic of explanation as irrelevant. 
Since, as we just noted, deduction allows retrodiction as well as prediction, the 
arrow of time and multiple realizability are also removed from metaphysics as 
strict one-to-one determinism is assumed: given A, B (and only B) inexorably 
and necessarily follows. There are therefore no probabilistic or statistical laws. 
In later years, Hempel modified this original view to try to make room for a 
deductive statistical model of explanation, but in the end he concluded that 
statistical reasoning is only used when the details of the law are not known. 
There is no objective possibility of either indeterminism or a probabilistic of 
a stochastic nature. Statistical explanations are thus merely stopgap measures, 

A Place in History  M  23
quasi-explanations that reflect our ignorance and do not capture reality. And 
in none of these authors is there even a hint of mereological goings-on: any 
relationship between parts and wholes and wholes and parts is strictly one way, 
bottom up, with the resulting whole being nothing more than an aggregate that 
can be reduced to the sum of its components. Qualitatively novel properties 
at the macroscopic level are merely epiphenomena and are easily ignored. So, 
assuming a DN explanatory schema and the strict mechanism and determinism 
it implies, there remains no possible way of acknowledging a qualitatively novel 
wholeness or coherence or cohesiveness that arises from the interactions among 
erstwhile independent but now interrelated and connected parts. According to 
the received view of explanation, strong mereological relations are impossible. 
As a result, radical or strong emergence cannot occur.
One can say that what all these Science 1.0 approaches to explanation share 
is the dismissal of what might be called adventitious roots, the dismissal of the 
indeterminate, the particular, the contextual, the temporal, and the unique, 
and therefore the dismissal of anything having to do with praxis or cultures, or 
traditions, or history. Although the form of explanation changes from mythol-
ogy to science, from an explicit genealogy of the hero and the city, and of 
the authority of the storyteller, to that of scientific and philosophical logic, 
nonetheless the notion that the temporal, the sensory, and the phenomenal 
are to be explained by derivation from the eternal, unchanging, universal, and 
non-phenomenal continues by and large unabated from the era of mythology 
to today. It is not until complexity theory and our understanding of sensitiv-
ity to initial conditions and nonlinearity, and the recent capability to model, 
visualize, and simulate nonlinear dynamical phenomena on computers, that 
philosophy and science have begun to break away from explanations that are 
required to trace the natural phenomena under investigation to their origin in 
what I have called the divine. The hope of a logic of explanation able to handle 
particularity (Bechtel and Abrahamsen, 2011, p. 281)—and contextuality, and 
wholeness, and emergence, and individuation, and the finality of anticipatori-
ness, and on and on—is therefore rekindled.

CHAPTER 3
The Context of Our Query
Michael Lissack
T
his chapter is intended to serve the function of a literature review: 
locating the present work within the context and structures of existing 
research and literature. However (and this is an important caveat), our 
belief is that the traditional format of a literature survey (author a said x, author 
b said y, arranged either chronologically or by topic) seldom lends itself directly 
to an explanatory task—and the aim of this book is to better explain explana-
tion. Thus, we have taken a different approach. You will find that this chapter 
is mostly quotations—quotations that have been selected and arranged to pro-
vide contextual background. The text below draws from the vast literature on 
explanation, but is organized so as to lay out more effectively the expository 
framework on which the following chapters rely. The structure of the chapter 
is that of an embedded hermeneutic circle, where the dialogue is among the 
quoted authors and the interpretation is left to the reader.
“Explain”
1. make (an idea, situation, or problem) clear to someone by describing it in 
more detail or revealing relevant facts or ideas;
2. account for (an action or event) by giving a reason as excuse or justifi-
cation;
3. justify, give a justification for, give an excuse for, vindicate, legitimize.
4. be the cause of or motivating factor for;
5. minimize the significance of an embarrassing fact or action by giving an 
excuse or justification (as defined by a Google search, February 2014).
To explain (explicate, explicare) is to strip reality of the appearances covering it 
like a veil, in order to see the bare reality itself. (Duhem, 1906/1954)
To explain is to “remove puzzlement” (Wilkes, 1989) and “increase intelligibil-
ity” (Boden, 1962)—to describe one thing in terms of something else.

26  
M  Michael Lissack
According to Salmon’s classic discussion, conceptions of explanation can be 
divided into epistemic, modal and ontic approaches (1984). The view that all 
scientific explanations are arguments, either deductive or inductive, is identified 
as the inferential version of the epistemic conception; the doctrine that all expla-
nations are deductive arguments represents the modal conception. The causal 
conception of scientific explanation is a version of the ontic conception (Salmon, 
1984). These conceptions disagree on what explanations are aiming to do. An 
epistemic approach links explanations with states of knowledge. On this view, 
an explanation of E must be an argument that would have correctly predicted E 
in advance. (Pincock, 2013)
A satisfactory conception of scientific understanding should reflect the actual 
(contemporary and historical) practice of science. It should therefore allow for 
variation in standards of understanding. This variation can be accommodated 
in a natural way if it is acknowledged that scientific understanding is pragmatic 
and context-dependent . . .  A look at scientific practice teaches us that the various 
intelligibility standards endorsed by philosophers (causality, visualisability, etc.) 
have indeed played a role at various times and in various situations. They are 
therefore certainly relevant to the analysis of scientific understanding. However, 
they do not have the status of exclusiveness and immutability that is sometimes 
ascribed to them: their importance and content depend on the context and are 
subject to change or development. (de Regt and Dieks, 2003)
While Hempel (1965) told us that “there is no sufficiently clear generally 
accepted understanding as to what counts as a scientific explanation,” in a 
book about explanation something would be very amiss if we were to fail to 
acknowledge the “lay” definition of explanations and their use. To the nonphi-
losopher, an explanation is what is offered in response to questions of “How?” 
or “Why?” and such an explanation counts as “explaining” if the questioner 
feels sufficiently satisfied with the answer so as to stop asking. As children 
we often inquire as to the how or the why and in doing so we seek to better 
understand mechanisms (how), purpose (why), and structure (frozen hows that 
result in a pre-given framework and thus explain why by expressing how some-
thing fits into the framework). As adults we are more prone to accept category 
membership or labels in response to “Why?” than is the child. It is generally 
assumed that this is because we have a greater awareness (acceptance?) of pre-
given structure. When the question of how or why can be answered with an 
“explanation” consisting of an assertion of category membership, the how has 
been converted into “members of this category do x” and the why into “why x is 
a member of this category.” Since the lay definition of explanation includes the 
requirement that the questioner be satisfied enough to stop asking, explana-
tions based on structure and category membership consist of an ever-expanding 
web that begins with the structures we accept as pre-given when we are chil-
dren and then is ever built on (and perhaps revised) as we age.
Carnap seemed to have this in mind when defining what he called 
explication:
According to these considerations, the task of explication may be characterized 
as follows. If a concept is given as explicandum, the task consists in finding 

The Context of Our Query  M  27
another concept as its explicatum which fulfils the following requirements to a 
sufficient degree.
1. The explicatum is to be similar to the explicandum in such a way that, in most 
cases in which the explicandum has so far been used, the explicatum can be 
used; however, close similarity is not required, and considerable differences are 
permitted.
2. The characterization of the explicatum, that is, the rules of its use (for instance, 
in the form of a definition), is to be given in an exact form, so as to introduce the 
explicatum into a well-connected system of scientific concepts.
3. The explicatum is to be a fruitful concept, that is, useful for the formulation of 
many universal statements (empirical laws in the case of a nonlogical concept, 
logical theorems in the case of a logical concept).
4. The explicatum should be as simple as possible; this means as simple as the more 
important requirements (1), (2), (3) permit. (Carnap, 1950)
In the context of explanation, Carnap’s “explication” can be viewed as explain-
ing by analogy—if providing the similar concept that has been explicated 
allows the questioner to be satisfied, then explication by analogy counts as 
an explanation. Carnap’s #2 states the role of being connected “into a well-
connected system.” Such a system can be regarded as the “structure” into which 
a concept must “fit.” Analogy here functions in the role of label or category 
membership outlined above.
Explanations happen as data is perceived, confronted, absorbed, and ulti-
mately reacted to. In previous centuries, data primarily took the form of 
empirical observation, historical records, and abstract philosophical or reli-
gious thought. Context itself is data (cf. Suchman (1987) on situated action 
and Svoboda and Passmore (2011) on modeling in biology). The very concept 
of millions of pieces of micro data available to be sliced, diced, and rearranged 
in infinite patterns on a computer screen was far beyond the imaginings of 
the most diligent philosopher or scientist. However, data and our access to it 
change our philosophical stance toward the world itself. Important too is the 
observation that we often interpret technical terms and jargon based on what 
we last read or encountered, and in so doing seemingly ignore the expressed 
intent of the speaker/author that we are now encountering and sometimes even 
our own implicit understanding of what those terms mean (Alicia Juarrero, 
2014, personal correspondence). When we do this, we conflate new data, prior 
data, and background assumptions into something very transitive that we pro-
cess as the basis of our understanding. When we do this without self-reflection, 
it is often at our own peril.
One of the tasks of philosophy is to provide a framework on which the self-
reflection called for above can be constituted. Empiricism was a reliance on 
direct observation and usually done on a “human” scale (empiricists have issues 
with such tools as electron microscopes that display data on a human scale that 
has been itself recomposed from non-directly observable instrument readings). 
The naturalist will further restrict that which “counts” to items from “Nature.” 
But realists have no such limitation and will include in the “world” unseen and 

28  
M  Michael Lissack
unobservable items, the existence of which seems to “explain” patterns that are 
themselves observable. Thus, the question of what “counts” as “existing”—that 
which has been granted the ontic status of being—is both a key differentiator 
among philosophical approaches to the world and, in light of the seemingly 
endless increases in the variety and depths of “data” available to us, an ever-
changing challenge to how we view the makeup of the world itself.
Facts are precisely what we do not have, only interpretations. (Nietzsche, 1967)
Everything we aim at is a reconstruction that links our knowledge of the world 
with experience. (Quine, 1985)
According to one large family of views, scientific explanations essentially 
subsume a phenomenon (or its description) under a general representation . . .  
Authors disagree about the precise form that these representations should take: 
For Carl Hempel, they are generalizations in first order logic; for Philip Kitcher 
they are argument schemas; for Bechtel and Abrahamsen they are mental models; 
for Churchland, they are prototype vectors; for Machamer, Darden and Craver, 
they are mechanism schemas. (Craver, 2014)
The postmodern view, inspired by Derrida, Paul De Man, J. Hillis Miller, and 
brought forward by Stanley Fish and Richard Rorty, implies that there can be 
an infinite number of equally correct readings of a given text. Words as such do 
not possess any meaning, it is the reader who endows them with one. (de Sanctis, 
2012)
In the quest for an explanation, one of the possible items we may seek to explain 
is how we decide to afford (ascribe) ontic status to some pattern that we per-
ceive to be evident in the data we have encountered. This is often a background 
question for the person (team, scientist, investigator) who has made the ontic 
ascription (attribution, decision), but it becomes a central “how” or “why” to 
those who seek to better understand the consequences of the status. These 
questions become ever more prominent when one attempts to assert some 
causal attributes to the item. The issue becomes ever more pronounced when 
one realizes that we often get things wrong. According to Gilovich (1991), most 
of our fellow human beings:
“(1) See what they want or expect to see.
(2) Misperceive random data.
(3) Over-generalize from incomplete data.
(4) Love a “good” story.
(5) Accept what is plausible rather than what is real.
(6) Are strongly influenced by authority, the printed word, or what others 
around them think.”
This raises serious issues both for the “realist” (in that both the questioner and 
the explainer may be making these categorical errors) and for the “postmodern-
ist” (in that the very interpretations brought to the question and the explana-
tion may be based on error).

The Context of Our Query  M  29
The skepticist Shermer (2011) posits a form of realism (which he calls belief-
dependent realism) structured against these very errors:
We form our beliefs for a variety of subjective, emotional and psychological rea-
sons in the context of environments created by family, friends, colleagues, cul-
ture and society at large. After forming our beliefs, we then defend, justify and 
rationalize them with a host of intellectual reasons, cogent arguments and ratio-
nal explanations. Beliefs come first; explanations for beliefs follow . . .  Reality 
exists independent of human minds, but our understanding of it depends on the 
beliefs we hold at any given time. Once we form beliefs and make commitments 
to them, we maintain and reinforce them through a number of powerful cogni-
tive biases that distort our percepts to fit belief concepts. Among them are:

M Anchoring Bias. Relying too heavily on one reference anchor or piece of 
information when making decisions.

M Authority Bias. Valuing the opinions of an authority, especially in the 
evaluation of something we know little about.

M Belief Bias. Evaluating the strength of an argument based on the believ-
ability of its conclusion.

M Confirmation Bias. Seeking and finding confirming evidence in support 
of already existing beliefs and ignoring or reinterpreting disconfirming 
evidence.
On top of all these biases, there is the in-group bias, in which we place more 
value on the beliefs of those whom we perceive to be fellow members of our group 
and less on the beliefs of those from different groups.
Thus, if “to explain” means to order the object of the explanation in a coher-
ent way, until the achieved order satisfies the cognitive interests of the person 
seeking the explanation, then the very questions we ask and the background 
assumptions we make are integral in affording a proffered “explanation” the 
very status of being explanatory.
An explanation is a manifestation of order; one expects an explanation only in 
the context of order. An explanation is usually needed when some facts appear 
random and disconnected; one wishes then to disclose their order and relate the 
facts in question to other cases that share the same order. One explains by indi-
cating the principle that prevails over the explanandum. Explanations address 
the individual case by means of a general principle (a rule, a law or a theory) 
and regard the individual as an instance of the general. Explanation demands a 
certain level of abstraction, it always ignores some features or aspects of the indi-
vidual object . . .  Explanations express choices between possibilities, perspectives 
and purposes; one may choose the theory and define the relevant context within 
which one wishes to explain a given fact. (Lorand, 2001)
To approach these questions we are taking our guidance from Weber et al. (2011), 
who called for a “pragmatic approach to scientific explanation.” They suggest 
that such a pragmatic approach is centered around context-dependent claims and 

30  
M  Michael Lissack
then taking “into account the epistemic interests (i.e. the reason scientists have 
for asking specific explanation-seeking questions) when trying to make context-
dependent normative or descriptive claims about explanations. These epistemic 
interests have to be taken into account because they influence the type of expla-
nation that is appropriate in a given context and also influence which proper-
ties of an explanation (e.g. depth, deductivity) are important and which not in 
the given context.” What this means in practice is that there is a need to take a 
careful look at context, epistemic interests, and philosophical worldview when 
attempting to make claims about the nature of explanation itself. Our aim for 
this chapter is to do just that.
Context Dependence and Epistemic Interests
Historically, it was the anti-positivists such as Droysen, Dilthey, Simmel, 
Weber, Windelband, and Rickert who “reject[ed] the methodological monism 
of positivism and refuse[d] to view the pattern set by the exact natural sci-
ences as the sole and supreme ideal for a rational understanding of reality. 
Many of them emphasize[d] a contrast between those sciences which, like 
physics or chemistry or physiology, aim at generalizations about reproduc-
ible and predictable phenomena, and those which, like history, want to grasp 
the individual and unique features of their objects. Windelband coined the 
label ‘nomothetic’ for sciences which search for laws, and ‘ideographic’ for the 
descriptive study of individuality. Droysen coined for it the names explanation 
and understanding. The aim of the natural sciences, he said, is to explain; the 
aim of history is to understand the phenomena which fall within its domain” 
(von Wright, 2004).
More contemporaneously, “Scriven challenged the standard distinction 
between explanation and description. He argued that it is often appropriate 
to provide a descriptive statement in response to a question and that the right 
description is what counts as the explanation. And what counts as the ‘right 
description’ is to be counted as what ‘fills in a particular gap in the under-
standing of the person or people to whom the explanation is directed.’ Scriven 
argued that explanation is not a matter of something more than description 
but a matter of the context in which that description is placed” (Bunzl, 1993). 
Scriven’s argument helps place context dependence front and center.
Kagan (2009) refers to three cultures: the natural sciences, the social sci-
ences, and the humanities. In so doing, he and many others suggest that the 
methodologies, interests, ontologies, epistemologies, and so on differ among 
them. In contrast, Salmon (1984) at his most optimistic hoped for an under-
lying unity: “It is my hope that the causal theory of scientific explanation . . . 
is reasonably adequate for the characterization of explanation in most sci-
entific contexts in the physical, biological, and social sciences as long as we 
do not become involved in quantum mechanics.” Context dependence poses 
challenges if explanation is to meet Rescher’s (1970) standard: “To explain a 
fact scientifically is . . .  to adduce reasons to show why this fact obtains rather 
than some other amongst its possible alternatives. This requires going beyond 
 

The Context of Our Query  M  31
establishing that the fact is actually the case to showing that (in some sense) it 
had to be the case.”
Most hard scientists would suggest that the divergence among the domains 
is “real,” and thus that the techniques used to demonstrate “cause” and to 
“explain” are likely also different. Hawking and Mlodinow (2011) argue that 
because no one model is adequate to explain reality, “one cannot be said to be 
more real than the other.” When these models are coupled to theories, they 
form entire worldviews (Shermer, 2011). Kellert (2009) claims: “Disciplines 
can be identified and distinguished by their objects of study (domains, phe-
nomena), by their cognitive tools (theories, techniques), or by their social struc-
ture (turf, journals).” And Reutlinger (2013) comments: “It is a majority view 
in philosophy of biology that (fundamental) physics states universal and excep-
tionless laws, while the biological sciences rely on nonuniversal and physically 
contingent generalizations.” In so asserting, these authors raise serious issues 
for the social sciences:
Explanation belongs to the tasks of the social sciences. What is more contro-
versial, however, are the features and characteristics of explanations in social 
contexts . . .  providing a complete explanation of a complex phenomenon is not 
always (and often not) possible and that incomplete recursive decompositions 
have to be accommodated in the toolkit of the social scientist. If the epistemic 
sense of explanation is to succeed in increasing understanding of the world, 
rather than merely making up interesting stories about it, the stories had better 
be describing the mechanisms in the world. (Russo, 2009)
When social perceivers offer behavior explanations, they rely (a) on a network of 
concepts that filter, classify, and organize perceptual input and existing knowl-
edge and (b) on a number of subsequent processes, such as inference and simula-
tion that deliver an explanatory proposition. (Malle, 2004)
An explanation is a manifestation of order; one expects an explanation only in the 
context of order. An explanation is usually needed when some facts appear ran-
dom and disconnected; one wishes then to disclose their order and relate the facts 
in question to other cases that share the same order. One explains by indicating 
the principle that prevails over the explanandum. (Hon and Rakover, 2001)
The task of explanation is about “explaining” to another person, but the way in 
which this task is accomplished involves the systemization of first-person per-
spectives and the identification of ecological invariants—“objects” in the sense 
of obdurate relational patterns. Put somewhat differently, the task of explanation 
is not to subsume the particular as a case of some abstract theoretical concept. 
Quite the opposite, it is to identify the concrete. (Levi Martin, 2011)
When we understand a phenomenon, we assimilate it to a prototype and 
thereby generate novel features of the phenomenon from a few input features. 
The prototype stores a wealth of theoretical information about a phenomenon. 
Understanding, accordingly, is a matter of recognizing that a given phenomenon 
fits a more general prototype. Scientific explanation involves the construction of 
prototypes . . .  that can be so applied. (Craver, 2014)
So much that has been written on methods of explanation assumes that causa-
tion is a matter of regularities in relationships between events, and that without 

32  
M  Michael Lissack
models of regularities we are left with allegedly inferior, ‘ad hoc’ narratives. But 
social science has been singularly unsuccessful in discovering law-like regulari-
ties. One of the main achievements of recent realist philosophy has been to show 
that this is an inevitable consequence of an erroneous view of causation. Realism 
replaces the regularity model with one in which objects and social relations have 
causal powers which may or may not produce regularities, and which can be 
explained independently of them. (Sayer, 1992)
To the extent that social science and environmental science explanations seek 
to “explain” a particular event, is not that “particularity” in opposition to the 
logic of explanation itself? Or does the difference in domains justify the differ-
ential emphasis on generality versus particularity? Scriven (1962) retorts: “the 
request for an explanation presupposes that something is understood, and a 
complete answer is one that relates the object of inquiry to the realm of under-
standing in some comprehensible and appropriate way.” Miller (1988) claims: 
“An explanation is an adequate description of underlying causes helping to 
bring about the phenomenon to be explained.”
Adequate description seems to be the controversial standard. While what is 
adequate in physics and similar ‘hard sciences’ can be judged on the basis of 
predictions (their success and reliability), no such test is readily available in 
other domains where the ‘goal’ of the explanation is not to improve reliable 
prediction but something else. Events involving the activities of humans singly 
or in groups have a peculiar uniqueness and irrepeatability which makes them 
inaccessible to causal explanation because the latter, with its reliance upon 
uniformities, presupposes repeatability of the phenomena under consideration. 
(Hempel, 1948)
One of the reasons why pattern-based explanation is of interest is that it relates 
very strongly to our ability to be creative. In attempting to understand why some-
thing has happened that we had no reason to expect would happen, we can often 
stumble upon new ideas . . .  First, we find ourselves wondering why something 
has occurred. We look for a set of beliefs or rules that would explain this event. 
But, it often happens that we don’t have such rules . . .  One of the most impor-
tant things to understand about explanation is that people know quite readily 
if an explanation that has been supplied to them is sensible or not. To do this, 
we must have some idea of what we were looking for. In other words, accepting 
an explanation as an explanation depends heavily upon the goals one had in the 
first place. A proposed explanation is an explanation if it relates to one’s implicit 
goals. (Schank, 1986)
When borrowing occurs across disciplines, it can be exciting, but it can also 
be error prone. As Barondes (1995) says: “Hazards exist in integrating theo-
ries of one discipline into another”: [the] ”invitation of scorn for imbedding 
meaningless comparisons”; “application of scientific labels may substitute for 
a considered analysis”; “misleading labels frame the inquiry in a manner that 
biases the conclusions and deceives scholars into disregarding certain lines of 
thought”; “such terminology facilitates lexical legerdemain, obfuscating logical 
leaps”; and the practice “engenders in the reader a false sense of understanding 

The Context of Our Query  M  33
the scientific area.” These errors can affect almost any area of cross-scientific 
endeavor, but explanation itself seems especially vulnerable.
There is little consensus among specialists on how explanation in a scientific 
context should be characterized, and three main approaches appear to be alive 
today: the formal-logical view, the ontological view, and the pragmatic view . . .  
The formal-logical approach considers scientific explanation as something quite 
distinct and very different from ordinary explanation. It holds that every sci-
entific explanation should have certain objective features by which it can be 
completely characterized and understood . . .  The ontological view considers a 
scientific explanation to be something that involves causal mechanisms or other 
factual structures. The idea is that facts and events explain things. In particular, 
causes explain their effects . . .  The pragmatic view sees scientific explanations to 
be basically similar to explanations in everyday life. It regards every explanation 
as an appropriate answer to an explanation-seeking question, emphasizing that 
the context of the discourse, including the explainer’s interest and background 
knowledge, determines the appropriate answer. (Faye, 2004)
Note that Faye argues that pragmatists like the everyday layperson believe that 
explanations are accepted as such when there is an observable lineage between 
the interests of the person asking for the explanation and the content of the 
explanation offered. Pragmatic explanations have an explicit context depen-
dence that seems to be in remission in the formal-logical model (i.e., present 
only in the determinations of truth and/or reliable predictivity) and only tac-
itly acknowledged in the “ontological” or “causal” model. As Salmon (1984) 
says, “Underlying causal mechanisms hold the key to our understanding of the 
world,” because “causal processes, causal interactions, and causal laws provide 
the mechanisms by which the world works; to understand why certain things 
happen, we need to see how they are produced by these mechanisms.” The rela-
tion between this latter point and context dependence is emphasized by van 
Fraassen (1980), citing Hanson, when he notes: “In other words, the salient 
feature picked out as ‘the cause’ in that complex process, is salient to a given 
person because of his orientation, his interests, and various other peculiarities 
in the way he approaches or comes to know the problem-contextual factors.”
Very broadly speaking, to explain something to a person is to make it plain and 
intelligible to him, to make him understand it. Thus construed, the word ‘expla-
nation’ and its cognates are pragmatic terms: their use requires reference to the 
persons involved in the process of explaining . . .  Explanation in this pragmatic 
sense is thus a relative notion: something can be significantly said to constitute 
an explanation in this sense only for this or that individual. (Hempel, 1965)
In this view, explanation is in some sense “reduction to the familiar.” It is what 
is strange or surprising that we do not understand; a good explanation gives 
us understanding by making the phenomenon familiar, presumably by relating 
it to other things that are already familiar (cf. Friedman, 1974). The penulti-
mate pragmatist on the topic of explanation, Van Fraassen (1980), claims: “A 

34  
M  Michael Lissack
scientific explanation reflects a certain understanding of the context, includ-
ing the questioner’s interest, and encapsulates many everyday presumptions 
that form our background knowledge.” This context dependence is reflective 
of the idea that an explanation is “what Austin calls an illocutionary act. Like 
warning and promising, it is typically performed by uttering words in certain 
contexts with appropriate intentions” (Achinstein, 1983). Faye (2004) sum-
marizes this: “An important requirement of an explanation is that the response 
to an explanation-seeking question is relevant. An answer that is considered 
irrelevant does not function as an explanation.”
Science 1 and Science 2
The framework presented above gives rise to the importance of a particular 
kind of context dependence or epistemic interest: the difference between what 
we identified in the Introduction as the worlds of Science 1 and Science 2.
Contrast “[t]he objects of historical study are fundamentally different from 
those, for example, of the natural sciences, because they are the actions of 
beings like ourselves” (Dray, 1957) and “the sciences which have an interest in 
specific events and their explanation may, in contradistinction to the general-
izing sciences, be called the historical sciences” (Popper, 1974) with Glennan 
(2013):
While some philosophers of history have argued that explanations in human 
history are of a fundamentally different kind than explanations in the natural 
sciences, I shall argue that this is not the case. Human beings are part of nature, 
human history is part of natural history, and human historical explanation is a 
species of natural historical explanation.
At a minimum, the role of context differs among intellectual domains. The 
hard sciences (in the introduction referred to as Science 1) most often seek 
to eliminate the influence of context in an effort to discover and replicate 
“objective truth” and to increase the reliability of predictions (ceteris paribus, 
cf. Kelly, 1996). By contrast, most of the “human-oriented” sciences (in the 
Introduction referred to as Science 2) place context front and center. The com-
plexity of the world is then dealt with via assumptions and simplifications (the 
very ceteris paribus clauses that the Science 1 practice proclaims).
One sort of explanation is in terms of antecedent conditions and causal laws; and 
goal-directed processes, among other things, can in principle be explained in this 
way. Explanations of this type are not distinctive of the life sciences, they are 
found in all branches of inquiry, and there is nothing teleological about them. A 
second sort of explanation is characteristic of biology and other sciences that deal 
with purposive behavior. These explanations do not account for a phenomenon in 
terms of antecedent conditions and the mechanisms that produce it. On the con-
trary, they account, or seem to account, for the occurrence of a process or of some 
other item in terms of certain effects these things have on the system of which 
they are members, or upon some other components of the system. (Nagel, 1979)
 

The Context of Our Query  M  35
Nomological thinking distinguishes between description, explanation, and valu-
ation. In nomological thinking, “to describe” means to take the preliminary 
steps for ordering the object in order to explain it. The description classifies 
and enumerates the relevant features of the object that are, obviously, different 
in each case. What is described is what will later be explained. The description 
is the first step toward the explanation. “To explain,” means to order the object 
in a coherent way, until the achieved order satisfies the cognitive interests of the 
researcher. An explanation is said to be adequate or sufficient insofar as it meets 
the requirements of the knower. Each historical stage understands “explanation” 
according to its own practical or theoretical needs. Consequently, each historical 
stage believes that it provides explanations for previously unexplained phenom-
ena. Here we have a description and its explanation. Description and explanation 
are answers to different questions, and different answers to the same question.” 
(Hon and Rakover, 2001)
“It has long been debated whether the social sciences should be regarded as legiti-
mately autonomous from the natural sciences, and whether there is, therefore, a 
fundamental demarcation between the two. Many philosophers and social scien-
tists alike have felt that the social sciences deal with a subject matter so disparate 
from that of the natural sciences, that fruitful inquiry requires a kind of method-
ological independence. In particular, it has often been claimed that the methods 
of explanation available to the social sciences are, and should be, radically unlike 
those pursued in the natural sciences, where the use of nomological explanation 
is widely employed.” (Hon and Rakover, 2001)
The above argument is that explanations of individual changes are not explana-
tions but something else, or are not science but something else. Danto (1985) 
has argued that “what we want to explain is always a change of some sort. When 
a change occurs, we have one situation before and another situation after, and 
the explanation is what connects these two situations . . .  Indeed, this model of 
explanation does not only reflect complex historical-intentional explanations, 
but causal explanations fit it as well.” Danto in essence is rejecting the idea that 
social science needs to reject the nomological. Indeed, if nomological explana-
tion were to be rejected by the social scientists, what would be left? Explanation 
would be reduced to category attributions and such attributions themselves are 
the mapping of a model (no matter how well or poorly defined) to both the 
target situation and the category label. It is the mapping that would “explain” 
and it is the mapping that raises “issues.”
Though the provisionality and contingency of all models are well known, 
popular culture persists in utilizing them as if they were more than they are. In 
effect, category attributions are given a power that they do not deserve. If we 
need a way of reducing the world enough that we can cope with it and act in 
it, then the use of labels helps people to have an actionable view of the world. 
Labels play a very valuable role in limiting complexity. Instead of discussing 
multiplicity (embodied by compressions), the simplicity of a crude model and 
a few labels (in the form of representations) are often preferred. A stasis to the 
world is assumed that seldom exists. Such a stasis assumes that affordances are 
predictable, context is controllable, and emergence is nonexistent. The world 

36  
M  Michael Lissack
of practicing managers does not match these oversimplifications, however. 
Prediction, at best, is only possible in the short term. Boundaries are always 
shifting. The environment is rarely predictable (in the long term at least). 
Identities are unclear. The trade-off between outcome and process does not 
favor one over the other. In the world in which we live, emergence is pervasive, 
context is seldom controllable, ecologies are emergent, and few affordances 
are predictable. Situation and context play key roles. In the complex world of 
organization, continuity is but a fragile, temporary, and illusionary notion; the 
assumption of predictability does not hold.
Glennan (2013) wants us to believe that the hard sciences have made this 
shift:
“In the 50 years since the publication of Kuhn’s Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 
[the] image of science has been extensively revised and has reached a point in 
which many of the features that supposedly distinguished the natural sciences 
from the social sciences (including historiography) have vanished. While it is 
difficult to summarize all of the features of this revised view of the nature of 
science, two important developments are (1) that philosophers of science have 
come increasingly to understand science as a search for mechanisms as opposed 
to laws of nature and (2) that scientists typically explain natural phenomena by 
providing idealized models of those mechanisms that cause these phenomena as 
opposed to complete theoretical descriptions that invoke laws of nature. This 
shift is important because much of the supposed distinction between explana-
tions of natural phenomena and of human action depends upon the claim that 
natural phenomena, but not human actions, are law-governed.”
We are not so sure.
When the methods of Science 1 are used by practitioners of Science 2, 
all too often a false sense of certainty is declared that fails to match the 
underlying circumstances or context. In explanation terms, the mistake 
can be described as one of ascribing a label (attributing cause to category or 
structure) when identity is undetermined, uncertain, and undefined (which 
instead suggests a need instead to identify mechanism or hypothetical func-
tion). Only if one has well-earned confidence in one’s descriptors does it 
make sense to use them to analyze a situation. Metaphors and analogies may 
be fascinating and tantalizing, but they are very uncertain and questionable. 
If one wants to “model” a situation one needs to be sure of the definitions, 
identities, and terms of use one is employing. No such epistemic care is nor-
mal in the everyday worlds of business, government, or normal life. Labels are 
all too quickly assumed to be accurate depictions of reality. As Kuhn (1962) 
put it: “You don’t see something until you have the right metaphor [model] 
to let you perceive it.”
The world is comprehensible, immediately endowed with meaning, because from 
the very beginning, the body has been exposed to its regularities. Having thereby 
acquired a system of dispositions that are coherent with these regularities, the 
body finds itself predisposed and ready to anticipate them practically through 

The Context of Our Query  M  37
behavior that activates a type of knowledge through the body, which ensures 
practical knowledge of the world.” (Bourdieu, 1997/2000)
Note, too, that causality in the social and environmental sciences is usually of 
the multiple causes acting together in light of the occurrence or nonoccurrence 
of contingencies. As the Chicago Social Brain Network (2011) puts it: “The 
philosophy of science also looks different when dealing with simple causality 
(one-to-one relations) than with complex causality. Affirmation of the conse-
quent, a logical error in which a given cause for an effect is inferred based on 
the observation of the effect, does not lead to scientific error when there is but 
a single cause for the observed effect.”
By making assumptions (and in so doing restricting ourselves to a set of 
labels and a model), we predetermine what might be learned, which will limit 
the options that appear to be open to us. This is because by adopting a par-
ticular perspective, and therefore making assumptions consistent with that 
perspective, we limit what we can “see.” The perspective acts as a lens that 
only allows particular features to come into focus—all other features are lost 
or assumed not to be relevant. Furthermore, in communicating with others, 
by making use of a particular viewpoint, we limit our and their ability to 
“see” what is relevant. The problem with ascribing a label, and using it as our 
method of explanation, is that once we have ascribed it, once we have said that 
this belongs to Label X, then the explanation is done. The assertion is that the 
representation holds. Implicitly, it is further asserted that the complexity and 
degrees of freedom found in compressions are unnecessary. “I am a nice person. 
Nice persons do X. I must do X.” There is no room in this equation for context. 
The representation is assumed to govern.
Another way to say this is that models are partial truths; they partially 
reflect some aspects of reality. Explanations, be they mechanistic, functional, 
or structural, evoke models. Good models have well-defined relationships to 
reality so that we know how and when to use them. This means that we rec-
ognize which aspects of the model are related to which aspects of reality. This 
is not a piece-by-piece correspondence but a behavior-by-behavior correspon-
dence. Our use of models is clearly not only a property of the model, but also 
a property of our (incomplete) understanding of the relationship between the 
model and reality.
Simplifying idealizations are, of course, an essential part of science. The com-
plexities of the world must be tamed by models that omit or simplify many fea-
tures of the real systems they represent, partly just to make the models tractable 
enough to work with, but also to enable them to uncover the deeper patterns 
of similarity that underlie the diversity of particular cases . . .  Richard Levins 
(1966) argued that, given the practical constraints to which both observation 
and computation are subject, the idealized models that scientists use must make 
trade-offs among three desirable features: precision, generality, and realism. 
(Barker and Odling-Smee, 2014)
An oversimplified model may act as a starting point in a series of models of 
increasing complexity and realism. (Wimsatt, 2007)

38  
M  Michael Lissack
A story is a narrative told around the formalism of the model. It is neither a 
deductive consequence of the model nor of the underlying theory. It is, however, 
inspired by the underlying theory (if there is one). This is because the story takes 
advantage of the vocabulary of the theory (such as ‘gluon’) and refers to some 
of its features (such as its complicated vacuum structure). Using more general 
terms, the story fits the model in a larger framework (a ‘world picture’) in a non-
deductive way. A story is, therefore, an integral part of a model; it complements 
the formalism. To put it in a slogan: a model is an (interpreted) formalism plus 
a story. (Hartman, 1999)
We use narrative to rise above the local constraints of models. A narrative is not 
about the reality of a situation. Rather, the point of a story is to lay out in the 
open what the narrator suggests is important. Narratives are not about being 
objective, but are instead displays of subjectivity . . .  Powerful narratives, like 
great pieces of music, feel as if they were inevitable when they are over, and we 
seem to agree on that. But note, even in a compelling story, the next line cannot 
be predicted. It is that feeling of inevitability that endows the great story with 
its ability to generate commensurate experience amongst independent listeners. 
(Zellmer, Allen, and Kesseboehmer, 2007)
When one explains an action, one does not explain a type; one explains someone’s 
doing some particular thing, acting in some particular way on some particular 
occasion. To explain such a thing is to explain its features, that is, to say why it 
had these features (perhaps instead of those ones), why it was as it was, why he 
acted as he did (again, perhaps instead of some other way). (Schueler, 2009)
Because science as we have defined it in the Western world (Science 1) is sup-
posed to leave out notions of self and of other, its use of models is generally 
accepted as “objective” and the standard to which other “professions” should 
aspire. However, by definition, Science 2 includes people and thus includes self 
and other—which in turn raises questions about the “objective,” the “truth,” 
and the status of context, especially context as it may be revealed in our narra-
tives and explanations. As White (1980) notes: “The very distinction between 
real and imaginary events that is basic to modern discussions of both history 
and fiction presupposes a notion of reality in which ‘the true’ is identified 
with ‘the real’ only insofar as it can be shown to possess the character of nar-
rativity.” Such narrativity is thus a critical background assumption (at least for 
Westerners). Searle (1978) argues that our understanding of meaning happens 
“against a set of background assumptions about the context in which the sen-
tence could be appropriately uttered.” He claims (correctly in our view) that a 
vast background of assumptions, practices, habits, institutions, and traditions 
determines the literal meaning of sentences (cf. Persson and Ylikoski, 2007). 
The “word in language is half someone else’s” (Bakhtin, 1981).
If the organism carries a ‘small-scale model’ of external reality and of its own 
possible actions within its head, it is able to try out various alternatives, conclude 
which is the best of them, react to future situations before they arise, utilize the 
knowledge of past events in dealing with the present and future, and in every way 
to react in a much fuller, safer, and more competent manner to the emergencies 
which face it. (Craik, 1943)

The Context of Our Query  M  39
If the purpose of scientific explanation is to understand the meaning of the 
explanandum, we have to clarify just what the vehicle is through which the 
meaning of whatever it is that is to be understood can be understood. On this 
crucial question I follow Mary Hesse . . . : ultimately we have to rely on the vehi-
cle of metaphor. That is, if by means of a chain of metaphors, something can be 
connected with the reality of everyday life through a kind of structural similarity 
possessed by each link of the chain, then its meaning is understandable. On this 
view, then, scientific explanation can be defined as metaphorical redescription 
of the explanandum in terms of an ontology, whose properties (as the source of 
causal power) and behaviors (that display regularities and obey laws) are assumed 
to be understandable through a chain of historically developed metaphors in sci-
ence. (Cornwell, 2004)
Worlds are multilayered with many levels of interacting structures ongoing simul-
taneously. Phenomena are physical or social events, or episodes, that take place 
in the world, apprehended by some or all, and which are more clearly explained 
or understood when placed in appropriate contexts that brings them into sharp 
relief. Physical phenomena can exist without human apprehension but they only 
become meaningful events, in the sense of influencing action, when noticed or 
observed by a group of people, however small . . .  Phenomena are therefore events 
that unfold and recur in the flow of time and are only meaningful when under-
stood in context; they are processes and not essences. (Cupchik, 2001)
This context dependence raises significant issues regarding both ontology and 
epistemology—issues that many theorists believe bring realism and construc-
tivism into conflict. We will suggest throughout this volume that the notion of 
conflict is less than helpful and that the notion of orthogonality works better. 
Others (calling themselves “new realists”) have begun to explore the implica-
tions of similar thoughts:
A New Realism is manifesting itself, contending that postmodernists’ mistake 
was to confuse ontology with epistemology, what there is with what we know 
about what there is. The philosophical landscape is now polarized between the 
(mostly analytic) view according to which only natural science can tell us what 
really exists and another (mostly Continental) view according to which only an 
anti-naturalistic stance can do justice to socio-political phenomena. (de Caro 
and Ferraris, 2013)
Rosen (1985) argued that complexity was revealed by items, events, and situ-
ations that could not be represented except by more than one model. (And the 
presence of more than one model is a compression not a representation.) To 
simplify such complex items was to ignore many of their traits. Yet, the ignored 
traits may be the very ones that matter in the context at hand. Former Supreme 
Court Justice David Souter made a similar point in a 2010 speech at Harvard:
The explicit terms of the Constitution . . .  can create a conflict of approved val-
ues, and the explicit terms of the Constitution do not resolve that conflict when it 
arises. A choice may have to be made, not because language is vague but because 
the Constitution embodies the desire of the American people, like most people, 

40  
M  Michael Lissack
to have things both ways. We want order and security, and we want liberty. And 
we want not only liberty but equality as well. These paired desires of ours can 
clash, and when they do a court is forced to choose between them, between one 
constitutional good and another one.
In Science 2, the general notion is that instead of a single objective account, we 
must learn to become comfortable with multiple, partial, subjective, and even 
conflicting accounts. Single accounts, ascribed labels, adherence to categories 
and to coding, are all in accordance with the acceptance of context as being 
pre-given and unchangeable. This is the perceived world of Science 1. Science 
2 suggests that there is an alternative: we can work to alter the context, to 
shape it, to help influence what affordances it presents and what narratives it 
affords.
Worldviews
Whether scientific explanation is causal, unificatory, nomological, statistical, 
deductive, inductive, or any combination of them, a question may still remain 
about how and whether scientific explanations really answer our explanatory 
questions, really convey the sort of understanding that satisfies inquiry . . .  When 
we want to know why something has happened, we already know that it has, 
and we may even know that events like it always happen under the conditions 
in which it happened. We want some deeper insight than how it came to hap-
pen . . .  These deeper explanatory demands seek an account of things which show 
them, and nature in general, to be ‘intelligible,’ to make sense, to add up to 
something, instead of just revealing a pattern of one damned thing after another. 
(Rosenberg, 2013)
Commonsense explanations of actions, in terms of the agent’s reasons, hopes, 
desires and the like, are on their face frequently teleological in form. They spec-
ify the goals, purposes or points of the things we do. In this they seem sharply 
different from other sorts of commonsense explanations of events, as well as from 
the sorts of explanations found in sciences such as physics and chemistry, all of 
which are causal, and of course not teleological. But actions are often simply 
constituted by events involving the agent of the action. (Schueler, 2009)
In seeking to “explain,” not only are there differences in domain, but there are 
differences in “worldviews” too. A primary distinction can be traced to views on 
what context is and how it should be harnessed. “The first, called here Realism, 
believes that contexts exist, ontologically, and that, if properly instrumented 
and programmed, [we] can correctly recognize and adapt to them. The second, 
called here Constructivism, believes that contexts are human creations, mental 
and social” (Oulasvirta, Tamminen, and Höök, 2005) and that the objective 
is to manage the resources that “affect, embody, or instantiate” such contexts. 
These views are quite disparate with regard to the role of agency. Realists 
restrict humans to the recognition of context and the adaptation of behavior in 
light of that recognition. Constructivists, by contrast, afford humans a greater 
agency in that contexts are created, changed, embodied, and chosen by human 
 

The Context of Our Query  M  41
actors. One professed goal of postmodernism and especially its deconstruction-
ist form was to make transparent these differences regarding human agency. To 
the extent that the context dependence of explanation is related to the implicit 
goals of the one seeking the explanation, such agency questions can be very 
important. To the extent, by contrast, that the explanatory goals concern pre-
given structure (ceteris paribus), then agency questions tend to lie dormant.
It is worth emphasizing that almost all scientists are scientific “realists”; they 
believe that they are completely objective or nearly so and that their facts are 
real. (Orzack, 2012)
Realism
Realism holds that there are properties that can be applied to many things, rather 
than denoting a single specific individual. According to realists, these proper-
ties, so called universals, really exist. Naïve Realism, particularly, believes that 
objects and universals are as we perceive them, independently of our observa-
tion. It is naïve in the sense that scientific descriptions and models (here: of 
contexts) are taken at face value. Its ontological and epistemological assumptions 
and knowledge interest have their roots in positivistic philosophies, which pro-
vide a basis for natural sciences (e.g. naïve realism of perception). (Oulasvirta, 
Tamminen, and Höök, 2005)
Important aspects of realism can be outlined as follows:
Ontological. Context is real, it is structured, and the structure can be 

M
modeled by a learner. Contexts share properties (or universals) that exist 
independent of human interpretation.
Epistemological. We can perceive context universals.

M
Pragmatic. If correctly recognized, we can adapt our behavior to the 

M
requirements of the context.
In general, realism has zero tolerance for multiple simultaneous interpretations 
of context as it tries to attain the “truth.” There is no room for epistemological 
pluralism in this culture of thought.
Realism has never been comfortable with ideas. It could not be otherwise: real-
ism is premised on the idea that ideas have no autonomous existence, can exist 
only in things. So when it needs to debate ideas, as here, realism is driven to 
invent situations—walks in the countryside, conversations—in which characters 
give voice to contending ideas and thereby in a certain sense embody them. The 
notion of embodying turns out to be pivotal. (Coetzee, 2004)
Realism reflects a platonic conception: “reality is pre-categorized and the 
conceptual categories of our mental and linguistic representation reflect this 
pre-categorization. The world is prefabricated and pre -sorted in terms of cat-
egories and types. The mind adapts to this pre-structured world through its 

42  
M  Michael Lissack
representations. The world is pre-structured into truth-like entities (facts), 
and truth consists of language or thought that mirror a pre-categorized world” 
(Viale, 2013).
The very minimum that realism can be held to involve is that statements in a 
given class (the so called disputed statements) relate to some reality that exists 
independently of our knowledge of it, in such a way that this reality renders each 
statement in the class determinately true or false, again independently of whether 
we know, or are even able to discover, its truth-value. (Dummett, 1982)
Scientific realists hold that scientific theories are about entities that exist inde-
pendently of these theories and that these entities include both the observable 
and unobservable. Scientific theories in scientific realism are accordingly con-
sidered as being either true or false depending on the nature of these entities 
and the relations between them. The realists’ favorite theory of truth is the cor-
respondence theory which defines the concept of truth in terms of the claims (or 
propositions) about reality and the state of affairs (or facts) of which these claims 
(or propositions) are about. These views are often accompanied with the axiolog-
ical prescription that science should aim at truthful knowledge about the world. 
Though they value truth, scientific realists commonly advocate some form of 
fallibilism which grants that all scientific knowledge is more or less partial and 
fallible, since we do not usually have direct epistemic access to the objects stud-
ied in different sciences. (Kaidesoja, 2013)
Sayer (1992) claims the following:
1. The world exists independently of our knowledge of it.
2. Our knowledge of that world is fallible and theory-laden . . .  Concepts 
of truth and falsity fail to provide a coherent view of the relationship 
between knowledge and its object. Nevertheless knowledge is not immune 
to empirical check, and its effectiveness in informing and explaining suc-
cessful material practice is not mere accident.
3. Knowledge develops neither wholly continuously, as the steady accumu-
lation of facts within a stable conceptual framework, nor wholly discon-
tinuously, through simultaneous and universal changes in concepts.
4. There is necessity in the world; objects—whether natural or social—
necessarily have particular causal powers or ways of acting and particular 
susceptibilities.
5. The world is differentiated and stratified, consisting not only of events, 
but objects, including structures, which have powers and liabilities capa-
ble of generating events . . .  These structures may be present even where, 
as in the social world and much of the natural world, they do not gener-
ate regular patterns of events.
6. Social phenomena such as actions, texts and institutions are concept-
dependent. We therefore have not only to explain their production and 
material effects but to understand, read or interpret what they mean.
7. Science or the production of any other kind of knowledge is a social 
practice . . .  For better or worse (not just worse) the conditions and 

The Context of Our Query  M  43
social relations of the production of knowledge influence its content. 
Knowledge is also largely—though not exclusively—linguistic, and the 
nature of language and the way we communicate are not incidental to 
what is known and communicated . . .  Awareness of these relationships is 
vital in evaluating knowledge.
8. Social science must be critical of its object. In order to be able to explain 
and understand social phenomena we have to evaluate them critically.
Scientific realism regards theoretical terms as attempts to refer to pre-existing, 
previously unobserved, and perhaps in principle unobservable things and prop-
erties. A successful theory should be true and informative: its existential claims 
should match entities existing in reality, and its universal or probabilistic laws 
should give a correct description of the regularities in the behavior of these enti-
ties. (Wimsatt, 2007)
The basic idea, the basic intuition, behind realism is that there exists a reality 
that is totally independent of our representations of it and that has enormous 
consequences, because, among other consequences, it lends support to the idea 
of some sort of correspondent conception of truth: If there’s a reality out there, 
then our representations of it are, at least in some respects, answerable to that 
reality and they will be true or false depending on whether or not they succeed 
in meeting that requirement.” . . .  “It turns out we’re never directly aware of the 
real world and perception. We’re always aware only of our own experiences and 
we’re then often running with traditional epistemology . . .  You can’t send men to 
the moon and back and wonder if it’s really possible to make secure predictions 
about the future based on inductive reasoning.” (Searle, 2012)
Salmon declared that “underlying causal mechanisms hold the key to our 
understanding of the world” (Salmon 1984, p. 260). This is because “causal 
processes, causal interactions, and causal laws provide the mechanisms by 
which the world works; to understand why certain things happen, we need to 
see how they are produced by these mechanisms” (ibid., 132).
[W]hat is distinctive about mechanistic explanations is their appeal to the com-
ponents of a system and their causal interactions. According to this account, to 
explain a phenomenon is to give an account of how a causal mechanism, a hier-
archical system composed of component parts and their properties, gives rise to, 
sustains, or produces the phenomenon. Each component is able to perform (caus-
ally) some operation and interact (causally) with other parts of the mechanism 
so that the coordinated operation of the parts is what constitutes the systemic 
activity of the mechanism. (Persson and Ylikoski, 2007)
Philosophers attack a realism that is ‘global’ and metaphysical. Most scientists 
use and would defend a more modest (or ‘local’) realism, and would do so on heu-
ristic rather than on metaphysical grounds. By local realism, I mean something 
like the following: on certain grounds (usually, for example that the existence 
of an entity or property is known, derivable or detectable through a variety of 
independent means . . . ), scientists would argue that an entity or property is real, 
and they cannot imagine plausible or possible theoretical changes which could 
undercut this conclusion. Furthermore, they might argue that their experimental 

44  
M  Michael Lissack
and problem-solving approaches require them to presuppose the existence of that 
entity, property or phenomenon. (Wimsatt, 2007)
Constructivism
An alternative to Realism is Constructivism. Constructivism recognizes that all 
our knowledge is ‘constructed’, it does not reflect any external ‘transcendent’ 
realities, but is contingent on convention, human perception, and social experi-
ence. It gives credit to different kinds of actors as active constructors of contexts, 
not just passive reactive agents to environmental aspects and new technologies. 
In fact, it provides a standpoint from which multiple interpretations and under-
standings of contexts are legitimized and from which these understandings can 
be imported into the design process. In addition, it values the member’s point 
of view to the concrete use situations without this being as problematic to the 
epistemic-ontologic configuration as it is for the realists. (Oulasvirta, Tamminen, 
and Höök, 2005)
Important aspects of constructivism are as follows:
Ontological. Contexts are constructed socially, in interaction with other 

M
agents in the world, and psychologically, in making sense of sense data.
Epistemological. Interpretation of context is always constituted within a 

M
frame of reference.
Pragmatic. Instead of labeling contexts, people themselves can create and 

M
maintain contexts in their action.
Constructivists place a heavy emphasis on human agency and all that it implies:
Actions of objects have causes, whereas actions of humans have reasons. Invisible 
forces that operate on humans but that appear to operate independent of human 
agency have been the subject of religious speculations for centuries. These invis-
ible forces include
Internal neural and biological forces (such as homeostatic processes and auto-

M
nomic activity) that exert regulatory forces that are largely hidden from conscious 
experience or control
Strong emotions that seem to arise apart from conscious human intention (such 

M
as rage, fear, and empathy)
Phenomena such as dreams or hallucinations that seemingly operate independent 

M
from the human will
Motivations, biases, inclinations, and predilections (such as anthropomorphism, 

M
ambiguity avoidance, and preference for simple explanations) whose presence is 
so universal that, like language, the capacities for their development or expression 
may have an evolutionary basis
Individual beliefs (such as the belief that there is a reality outside our head and 

M
we are not dreaming
The belief in human freedom

M
The belief in values (such as equality, and so on), attitudes, preferences, goals, or 

M
intentions
 

The Context of Our Query  M  45
Aggregated beliefs that result in social norms, values, religion, culture, and social 

M
movements or codified forces such as decrees, rules, alliances, and laws. (Chicago 
Social Brain Network, 2011)
In “An Introduction to Radical Constructivism,” von Glasersfeld (1984) argues 
that this approach is radical because it “develops a theory of knowledge in 
which knowledge does not reflect an ‘objective’ ontological reality, but exclu-
sively an ordering and organization of a world constituted by our experience. 
The radical constructivist has relinquished ‘metaphysical realism’ once and for 
all and finds himself in full agreement with Piaget, who says, ‘Intelligence 
organizes the world by organizing itself.’” von Glasersfeld writes that the “expe-
riencing consciousness creates structure in the flow of its experience; and this 
structure is what conscious cognitive organisms experience as ‘reality’—and 
since this reality is created almost entirely without the experiencer’s awareness 
of his or her creative activity, it comes to appear as given by an independently 
‘existing’ world.”
While radical constructivism (and related positions such as second-order 
cybernetics) highlighted the role of agency, a more pragmatic constructivism 
was developed out of that same tradition. This “pragmatic constructivism” sug-
gests that the material world can be treated as if it were as “real” as the realists 
claim it to be—for the material world provides the “structure” and founda-
tion for the constructivist world of sentient beings. For example, Bechtel and 
Abrahamsen (2005) insist that explanation is “essentially a cognitive activity.”
The function of the story is to find an intentional state that mitigates or at least 
makes comprehensible a deviation from a canonical cultural pattern. (Bruner, 
1990)
Narrative, then, provides scaffolding for formulating reasons about why, in the 
face of more or less entrenched expectations to the contrary, people engage in (or 
fail to engage in) particular courses of action. (Herman, 2013)
This kind of constructivism distinguishes the “cognizing” parts of the world 
from everything else—and then grants significant agency to the cognizers. A 
system is cognitive to the extent that
1. It can adapt its behavior to changing environments.
2. It can process information from its environment.
3. It can selectively and purposefully attend to its environment.
4. It can create internal representations of its environment.
5. It can modify its environment through the creation of artefacts.
6. It can be aware of itself as cognitive agent (i.e., it is self-reflexive).
7. It can have conscious experiences of itself and the world. (Adapted from 
Theiner and O’Connor, 2010; Kaidesoja, 2013)
We are but whirlpools in a river of ever-flowing water . . .  We are not stuff that 
abides, but patterns that perpetuate themselves: these patterns clearly exist, at 

46  
M  Michael Lissack
any given moment, in a form we recognize as body, but each individual is more 
like a temporary eddy in that living, surging river. (Wiener, 1950)
Bruner (1990) emphasized that “the central concept of a human psychology 
is meaning and the processes and transactions involved in the construction of 
meanings.” Some animals can be surprised, perhaps confused, but humans can 
actively manage their surprise or confusion by seeking clarifying information, 
reasoning about the facts at hand, recalling similar pasts, and simulating pos-
sible futures. This ability to detect gaps in one’s understanding and to reinstate 
understanding by constructing explanations is obviously a powerful tool for 
succeeding in novel environments and for manipulating environments in line 
with one’s own purposes (Craik, 1943; Gopnik, 2000).
People are, in essence, theory creators. These theories may not be very elaborate 
or especially scientific. People create theories about how certain events will 
turn out, and if they are wrong, they attempt to modify those theories by incor-
porating the new data into the old theory. Of course, people are not all that 
logical, so they easily forget old data, or conveniently rework the evidence to 
fit the theory. They are by no means perfect theory-makers . . .  Either a predic-
tion explanation is needed, an intent explanation is needed, or a pattern-based 
explanation is needed. An explanation is considered to be, in common par-
lance, a set of words that one person can say to another that make something 
that is incomprehensible in some way into something that is comprehensible. 
(Schank, 1986)
Explanation may be understood as the distinctive phenomenological mark of 
the operation of a special representational system, which I call the ‘theory for-
mation system.’ This system was designed by evolution to construct what I 
call ‘causal maps.’ Causal maps are abstract, coherent, defeasible representa-
tions of the causal structure of the world around us. Moreover, the distinctive 
phenomenology of the theory formation system impels us to action as well as to 
knowledge; it reflects a sort of theory formation drive . . .  My hypothesis is that 
explanation is to theory formation as orgasm is to reproduction—the phenom-
enological mark of the fulfillment of an evolutionarily determined drive. From 
our phenomenological point of view, it may seem to us that we construct and 
use theories to achieve explanation or that we have sex to achieve orgasm. From 
an evolutionary point of view, however, the relation is reversed, we experience 
orgasms and explanations to ensure that we make babies and theories. (Gopnik, 
2000)
We hypothesize that, in everyday use, an explanation provides a conceptual 
framework for a phenomenon (e.g., fact, law, theory) that leads to a feeling of 
understanding in the reader or hearer. The explanatory conceptual framework 
goes beyond the original phenomenon, integrates diverse aspects of the world, 
and shows how the original phenomenon follows from the framework. (Brewer, 
Chinn, and Samarapungavan, 1998)
Explanatory understanding consists in the activation of a particular prototype 
vector in a well-trained network. It consists in the apprehension of the prob-
lematic case as an instance of a general type, a type for which the creature has a 
detailed and well-informed representation. (Churchland, 1989)

The Context of Our Query  M  47
Explanation is a social relationship between people in which some phenomenon 
is explained to some persons so that they understand it (cf. Lundberg 1939: 51; 
Hilton 1990: 65; Bunge 1959: 287, 289, 298–302).
[A]n explanation is triggered by a comparison between a certain state of affairs 
(probably an unusual one) and another state of affairs (probably the normal one). 
A range of things that occur in one state but not in another (probably including 
‘abnormal conditions’) is generated, and standards of relevance, truth, informa-
tiveness and clarity are invoked to choose among them. The choice is made and 
the item is chosen as the explanation. (Antaki, 1994)
To explain an event is to provide the best possible grounds we could have had for 
making predictions concerning it. An explanation does not show that the event 
was to be expected; it shows what sorts of expectations would have been reason-
able and under what circumstances it was to be expected. (Salmon, 1971)
Finding Orthogonality
It seems that realists view ‘context’ simply as a new buzz-word for ‘environ-
ment’—something that can be dealt with using the old, natural sciences based, 
concepts, methods, and techniques. Constructivists believe that context entails 
more than just a location or task. Context is all about situational sense-making, 
both by humans and interactive systems. Thus, context could be viewed as a 
sum of situational actions and resources (plans, emotions, technologies, other 
people) about how different resources integrate to the fabrics of given interac-
tions between actors. Contexts emerge from actions; they are emergent properties 
(achievements) negotiated in reciprocal relationships between actors (inter- sub-
jectivities and -objectivities) in complex interactions. (Oulasvirta, Tamminen, 
and Höök, 2005)
This is very similar to the views of context as expressed in domains such as 
cognitive science, architecture, and “design.” In all three of these domains, the 
approach to context is based on heuristics—with an emphasis on what works. 
Such a heuristic approach can be found in Viale’s (2013) methodological crite-
ria for the social sciences:
1. Statistical relevance relations can act as indicators of possible causal rela-
tions, but they cannot exhaust the need for explanation;
2. The relation between social factors and action can only be statistically 
relevant and therefore, even if it can meet the requisite for predictive 
adequacy, it can never constitute a genuine scientific explanation;
3. To attain a real explanation one must use a deductive-hypothetical method 
to identify the causal chain linking the social factor to the action;
4. In this causal chain the crucial link between the social factor and the 
action is the mental event, whose justification occurs using the inductive 
argument of analogy;
5. In order to construct a chain of causally linked events one of the most 
important prescriptive principles is typological specificity when selecting 

48  
M  Michael Lissack
facts, otherwise counterfactual and subjunctive conditionals are not 
applicable.
Notice Viale’s use of such words as “possible” and “selecting” and the role of 
the “mental event.” His methodology affords the scientific realist perspective 
to the background and the “context,” while at the same time asserting a prag-
matic constructivist perspective to the idea of human agency and the need for 
“selecting facts.” This may be true for any organism capable of sentience or 
reflective anticipation. According to Emmeche et al. (2000), there are various 
possible interpretations of reflexive upward and downward causation. In their 
view, the only noncontradictory versions of the concept are those interpreting 
downward causation in terms of “formal” causation, such that the whole exerts 
a constraining action on its own constituents, by selecting specific behaviors 
among a set of possible ones (cf. Mossio, Bich, and Moreno, 2013).
In biological systems, the constituents of the organization are the constraints 
themselves, which realize collective self-maintenance. Under the constitutive 
interpretation of the relation between the whole and its constituents, the orga-
nization as such does not possess emergent and distinctive causal powers with 
respect to the network of constraints which, in turn, exerts causal powers on 
surroundings which are not themselves constituents of the network (although 
they usually are within the spatial borders of the system). The physical processes 
on which the network exerts (constraining) causal powers can, in some cases, 
become members of the network itself, when they enter into configurations 
which act as constraints. Nonetheless, the network would exert causal powers on 
them as long as they are part of its surroundings, and it would cease acting caus-
ally on them as soon as they would start playing the role of constraints. (Mossio, 
Bich, and Moreno, 2013)
The mechanistic view of scientific realism provides a linkage to the very con-
text dependence that is the hallmark of constructivism.
The fact that generalizations are mechanistically explicable helps to explain their 
ceteris paribus and exception-ridden character. Mechanistically explicable gen-
eralizations only hold true in the right context. Given violations of certain back-
ground or boundary conditions, the mechanism will break and the regularity the 
generalization describes will fail. (Glennan, 2013)
This contingency and context dependedness also hint of a relationship to the 
domains of Science 1 and Science 2:
It is a majority view in philosophy of biology that (fundamental) physics states 
universal and exceptionless laws, while the biological sciences rely on nonuniver-
sal and physically contingent generalizations. (Muller-Strahl, 2013)
It has been argued that positivist and constructivist ontologies are irreconcil-
able. According to Lincoln and Guba . . . , positivism’s ‘naive realism’ holds that 
reality is both ‘real and apprehendable,’ whereas constructivism maintains that 

The Context of Our Query  M  49
meaning is generated by individuals and groups. This analysis implies that 
the quantitative and qualitative methodologies associated with positivism and 
constructivism, respectively, are also incommensurable . . .  The first step is to 
acknowledge a social world (or worlds) that is reflected in the natural attitude of 
daily life and exists prior to and independent of either positivist or constructiv-
ist analysis; hence realism. Phenomena are understood as processes which cut 
across the physical, social, and personal (self) worlds. Qualitative and quanti-
tative researchers examine these phenomena, offering rich descriptive accounts 
or precise analyses of functional relations, respectively . . .  Qualitative methods 
offer an in-depth account of underlying processes and can help frame hypotheses 
that test specific functional relationships, while empirical findings related to 
processes can suggest areas which might benefit from detailed descriptive exami-
nation. (Cupchik, 2001)
[I]t is easy to take a model out of context, in which case the model may lose some 
or all of its validity. A change in context could involve a change in modelling 
purpose as well as the situation and sometimes that is more difficult to recognize 
from, say, its description in an academic paper. In this case there is a danger of 
the modelling being wrongly applied to this different purpose—a tendency that is 
particularly observed in the social sciences . . .  Sometimes when a model is being 
used as an analogy . . .  (albeit in formal or computational form) this vulnerability 
to context change is masked, due to the context -sensitive manner in which people 
apply analogies, adapting meaning and reference almost automatically to any new 
context in which it is applied. However if more is required of a model than being 
an analogy (for example predicting possible outcomes) then this looser way of 
using models can lead to unreliable conclusions. (Edmonds, 2013)
Hon (2001) argues that “the logical, subsumption scheme of explanation is 
epistemological, explanations that are based on causal structures and unify-
ing schemes are ontological and those that are explicitly interest and context-
dependent may be regarded as pragmatic.” Such a pragmatic view of explanation 
is reflective not of the contemporary pragmatists of today but of the earlier 
pragmatists. Bauerlein (1997) notes: “[e]ven though early pragmatists talked 
of mind, cognition, thinking, inference, and perception all the time, rarely in 
new pragmatic writing does one find more than a casual reference to them.” He 
quotes Richard Rorty himself as stating “that we new pragmatists talk about 
language instead of experience or mind or consciousness as the old pragmatists 
did.”
The earlier pragmatists on which Bauerlein prefers to rely bring forth some 
contemporary concepts:
Up to about 1850 almost everyone believed that sciences expressed truths that 
were exact copies of a definite code of non-human realities. But the enormously 
rapid multiplication of theories in these latter days has well-nigh upset the notion 
of anyone of them being a more literally objective kind of thing than another . . .  
We hear scientific laws now treated as so much ‘conceptual shorthand’, true so 
far as they are useful, but no farther. Our mind has become tolerant of sym-
bol instead of reproduction, of approximation instead of exactness, of plasticity 
instead of rigor. (James, 1909)

50  
M  Michael Lissack
There is something both ridiculous and disconcerting in the way in which men 
have let themselves be imposed upon, so as to infer that scientific ways of think-
ing of objects give the inner reality of things, and that they put a mark of spuri-
ousness upon all other ways of thinking of them, and of perceiving and enjoying 
them. It is ludicrous because these scientific conceptions, like other instruments, 
are hand-made by man in pursuit of realization of a certain interest—that of the 
maximum convertibility of every object of thought into any and every other. 
Dewey (1929/1960)
To “agree” in the widest sense with a reality can only mean to be guided either 
straight up to it or into its surroundings or to be put into such working touch 
with it as to handle either it or something connected with it better than if we 
disagreed . . .  To copy reality is, indeed, one very important way of agreeing with 
it, but it is far from being essential. The essential thing is the process of being 
guided. Any idea that helps us to deal, whether practically or intellectually, with 
either the reality or its belongings, that doesn’t entangle our progress in frustra-
tions, that fits, in fact, and adapts our life to the reality’s whole setting, will agree 
sufficiently to meet the requirement. It will hold true to that reality. (James, 
1907)
In this kind of pragmatics, the possibilities for orthogonality rather than 
opposition begin to emerge. van Fraassen (1980) defines pragmatic reasons as 
“specifically human concerns, a function of our interests and pleasures”; they 
are contextual factors that are “brought to the situation by the scientist from 
his own social, personal, and cultural situation.” He extends this notion to 
include a context dependence for salience: “A scientific explanation reflects a 
certain understanding of the context, including the questioner’s interest, and 
encapsulates many everyday presumptions that form our background knowl-
edge.” And he quotes Russell Hanson with approval: “In other words, the 
salient feature picked out as ‘the cause’ in that complex process, is salient to a 
given person because of his orientation, his interests, and various other pecu-
liarities in the way he approaches or comes to know the problem-contextual 
factors.”
Understanding the phenomena is not simply a matter of reducing the ‘fundamen-
tal incomprehensibilities’ but of seeing connections, common patterns, in what 
initially appeared to be different situations. Science advances our understanding 
of nature by showing us how to derive descriptions of many phenomena, using 
the same patterns of derivation again and again, and, in demonstrating this, it 
teaches us how to reduce the number of types of facts we have to accept as ulti-
mate (or brute). (Kitcher, 1989)
Pragmatism offers an empirically naturalistic and moderately realistic philoso-
phy of science. Pragmatism’s expansive concept of interactive evidence harmoni-
ously complements a naturalism wary of the transcendent. Philosophy of science 
should embrace pragmatism’s view that the proper object of scientific knowledge 
is the technologically created natural object in human experience. Pragmatism 
offers the most realistic interpretation of the growth of scientific knowledge that 
is consistent with both actual scientific practice and experimentally confirmed 
results. (Shook, 2003)

The Context of Our Query  M  51
This pragmatic approach to context, contingency, and context dependence is 
reflected in positions such as that of Graham (1983), who contrasts historical 
explanation with what he calls “theoretical explanation.” According to Graham, 
theoretical scientists are, in contrast to historians, concerned with disclosing 
general patterns or with finding out and explaining how things regularly work. 
Tucker (2004) adopts a similar position. One of his main theses is that what 
historians explain is token evidence (e.g., particular documents or fossils) and 
token events (i.e., events that are “unique and unrepeatable”; Sober, 1988), like 
the rise of Rome or the assassination of Kennedy. Contrary to the historical 
sciences, says Tucker (2013), the “theoretical sciences” are not concerned with 
token evidence and events, but rather with theoretical types of replicated evi-
dence and repeated events. What makes these ideas “pragmatic” is that they are 
explicit in articulating the differences between generalities (explanations that 
apply regardless of contingencies or ceteris paribus) and the individual, specific, 
contingent event.
Salmon (1984) had a similar thought:
To offer an explanation . . .  is to assemble a total set of relevant conditions for the 
event to be explained, and to cite the probability of that event in the presence 
of these conditions. This view of explanation, unlike the standard account of 
deductive and inductive explanation, does not see an explanation as an argument 
showing that the event has to be expected on the basis of the explanatory facts. 
The explanation is, rather, a presentation of the conditions relevant to the occur-
rence of the event, and a statement of the degree of probability of the event, given 
these conditions. That degree of probability may be high, middling, or low, but 
whatever its size, it is an index of the degree to which we would have been justi-
fied in expecting it . . .  To give scientific explanations is to show how events and 
statistical regularities fit into the causal network of the world.
Notice Salmon’s emphasis on “conditions” and “fit”—context dependence—
over the more realist notion of “explanatory facts.” Other examples abound if 
one chooses to go looking for them:
“Default realism”, the second preferred solution, which may appear nominalist, 
rejects any universal and objective class of objects and proposes a world made of 
individual, different objects—that is, every cat or iron atom differs from every 
other. They are identified as unities both according to innate beliefs and prin-
ciples . . .  and by pragmatic feedback or cultural and scientific models. Moreover, 
they are only recognized as members of a particular class by subjective men-
tal overlapping of the singular example with our default concept or prototype. 
(Viale, 2013)
Explanation in clinical medicine is based on the pivotal concept of a complex 
mechanistic base—at most a causal concept—the meaning of which is to unify 
a collection of separate mechanisms by stable (and not perspective) mechanism-
 for-mechanism interrelations. A base, once fixed, on the one hand explains what 
actually happens, and on the other hand, by referring to clinical properties, 
how symptoms possibly may emerge; thus, a base unifies a mechanistic with 

52  
M  Michael Lissack
a function -analytical explanatory account. The notion of a patho-mechanism 
comes in when alternative explanations for organismic states are already avail-
able for choosing one as the standard and the other ones as deviating cases. 
Thus, alternative explanations refer to one and the same complex explanatory 
base and are therefore entitled to be differentiated (e.g., when performing differ-
ential diagnosis) and compared—and the clinical explananda of the explanations 
similarly refer to this base. (Muller-Strahl, 2014 )
[T]he applicability of realism to a unit of science is a matter that has to be 
decided locally, case by case; the information needed for such decisions has to be 
acquired from local sources, by way of detailed empirical investigation of such 
units; the identification of the proper unit of science and the proper content of 
realism is a locally interactive and empirical matter; any claims about science 
more broadly should be based on local philosophical inquiries, in a bottom-up 
manner. (Miiki, 2005)
Schank (1982) notes that “when our expectations are found to be in error we 
must attempt to explain why. Failures lead to attempts to explain failures. We 
want to avoid making the same mistake twice. How? By understanding what 
principles underlie the expectations that we had in the first place. We must 
understand them so we can fix them.” One objective of this chapter has been 
to highlight when the seeming opposition of both Science 1/Science 2 and 
realism/constructivism has been “in error” and to begin instead to provide a 
contextual framework in which these domains and perspectives are concurrent 
but orthogonal. Both the domains and perspectives seem to be speaking about 
related things but not the same things—related things bound up in a concep-
tual network (cf. Georgiev, Nagai, and Taura, 2010).
Since scientific explanation is relative to our descriptions of reality, it is perfectly 
appropriate to contend that we ought to pursue the regularities that arise out of 
these ontological dependencies at many different levels of explanation, based on 
alternative accounts of the phenomena in question, and our diverse explanatory 
interests. There is more than one way to conduct nomological inquiry. So we see 
how even a naturalist may support a wide range of descriptions of the same phe-
nomena, given our diverse interests and explanatory goals. (Kaidesoja, 2013)
Context-dependency does not stop it being science but, acknowledged and dealt 
with, it may open up new approaches allowing us to push the envelope of scien-
tific knowledge a little further. (Busch, 2010)
Attempts by Persson, Ylikoski, Steel, Mitchell, Reiss, and others to modify 
Woodward’s (2003) model of causal explanation implicitly reflect such orthog-
onality. Woodward claims: “One restriction in this claim is explicitly a real-
ist one: namely that the manipulations be of an ‘invariant’ (non-contingent, 
non-context-dependent) model of the action, event or situation.” Steel (2014) 
proposes to broaden this view by “suggest[ing] that the concept of a ‘ceteris 
paribus model’ is helpful for understanding how, from a manipulationist per-
spective, a causal model could be deemed explanatory despite failing to be 
invariant.”

The Context of Our Query  M  53
A ceteris paribus model may fail to be invariant yet be useful for guiding condi-
tional plans. Doing this involves two things: (1) the associated unless clause lists 
the most likely contextual factors with which the intervention can interact and 
thereby disrupt the generalization and (2) the generalization, or model, indi-
cates some format that could potentially incorporate those factors and exam-
ine their effects. Consider a first step in a conditional plan that generates an 
‘unpleasant surprise,’ that is, a result that was contrary from what was expected 
and hoped for, and suppose that this has happened because the intervention 
unexpectedly altered some contextual factor. If (1) obtains, then it is likely that 
this contextual factor is included in the purview of the associated unless clause, 
and if (2) obtains, the causal generalization or model upon which the original 
action was premised suggest a means for explicitly including this omitted con-
textual factor into the analysis. In this case, a model may fail to be invariant 
with respect to a particular intervention, but may include resources for using 
the information inherent in the ‘unpleasant surprise’ to make a model that is 
invariant with respect to some further set of interventions or at least more nearly 
so. (Steel, 2014)
What Woodward’s causal explanation model wants to stress—invariant inter-
vention—is perhaps impossible in the Science 2 world. If so, then the realist 
interpretation of Woodward needs modification—not only in the ceteris pari-
bus manner described above, but in a more blatantly constructivist manner as 
well.
People are self-interpreting beings who can learn from and change their interpre-
tations so that they can act and respond in novel ways, thereby producing novel 
stimuli for subsequent actions. In other words, their causal powers and liabili-
ties are considerably more diverse and changeable (even volatile) than those of 
non-human objects. While they are influenced by material circumstances, their 
actions do not stand in fixed relations to them, precisely because they are medi-
ated by the ways of seeing available to them, and these can vary enormously . . .  
On the other hand, being the subject as well as the object of this problematic 
relationship, we do at least have the advantage of an internal access to it, albeit a 
fallible one, of course. (Sayer, 1992)
Searle (2012) notes: “There’s a fallacy of ambiguity in ‘aware of’. ‘Aware of’ has 
two senses. In the intentionalistic sense the thing you’re aware of is not iden-
tical with the awareness. In the constitutive or identity-sense, the thing that 
you’re aware of is the awareness, itself—is the sensation itself when you push 
your hand against the table.” This same ambiguity exists with regard to expla-
nation. As a noun, explanation is a representational artifact meant to stand for 
a causal mechanism, a narrative, or perhaps a pre-given structure or function. 
As a component of an understanding, explanations may also represent affor-
dances, constraints, unexpected exigencies, or absent contingencies. But, as in 
the verb to explain, explanation takes on a sense of human agency. There is the 
one requesting the explanation, the explainer, and the very content of what is 
offered. Unspoken of but equally vital is the background information available 
and attended to by both agents.

54  
M  Michael Lissack
The goal of explanation is understanding. Peirce (1908) tells us that good 
explanation is a “series of mental performances between the notice of the won-
derful phenomenon and the acceptance of the hypothesis, during which the 
usually docile understanding seems to hold the bit between its teeth and to 
have us at its mercy, the search for pertinent circumstances and the laying 
hold of them, sometimes without our cognizance, the scrutiny of them, the 
dark laboring, the bursting out of the startling conjecture, the remarking of 
its smooth fitting to the anomaly, as it is turned back and forth like a key in 
a lock.”
An explanatory account may suggest, perhaps quite vividly and persuasively, the 
general outline of what, it is hoped, can eventually be supplemented so as to yield 
a more closely reasoned argument based on explanatory hypotheses which are 
indicated more fully. (Hempel, 1965)
Whatever else one thinks of an explanation, it must be such that it establishes 
some causal-nomological connection between the explanandum and the explan-
ans. The details of this connection—and hence the explanatory story that they 
tell—will be specified relative to the available background knowledge. So, to 
say that a certain hypothesis H is the best explanation of the evidence is to say, 
at least in part, that the causal-nomological story that H tells tallies best with 
background knowledge. This knowledge must contain all relevant information 
about, say, the types of causes that, typically, bring about certain effects, or the 
laws that govern certain phenomena etc. (Psillos, 2002)
In general, we can distinguish three types of explanation at this level. The first 
kind of explanation is made for the sake of others, to tell them what you already 
know. Since such explanations are almost always present in the mind of the 
explainer before the explanation is given, these are canned explanations. That 
is, they exist in full form in the mind of the explainer, ready to go when needed. 
The second kind of explanation is what I call explaining-away explanation. Its 
intent is to cause an understanding system to not have to change as a result 
of understanding a new input. The third kind we call additive explanations. 
An explanation is additive when it is the case that after the explanation is fin-
ished, the explainer now knows something that he didn’t know before. (Schank, 
1986)
Markus Gabriel pointed at this at an inaugural conference on the new realism 
in 2012:
[T]he world has a complicated structure and part of the complication is that 
there are many domains . . .  this complicated structure is often the object of both 
our cognitive and practical activities . . .  huge chunks of the world’s complicated 
structure consist of absolute facts, an absolute fact being something which is 
true of something anyway . . .  one of those absolute facts might be that some 
human discourse is internally structured in such a manner that local conceptual 
relativity is the best diagnosis of this region of the structure . . .  There are various 
domains of discourse and there are absolute facts about what makes a domain of 
discourse . . .  If I use a door as an access to my bedroom, the fact that I access my 
bedroom through the door does not usually lead to me confusing my bedroom 

The Context of Our Query  M  55
with my entering it . . .  We would always have to ask ourselves, “Well, in which 
context do I find myself?”
Craver (2007) notes that “Scientific explanations are constructed and com-
municated by limited cognitive agents with particular pragmatic orientations.” 
These limited agents (presumably the same ones of whom Wimsatt writes 
[2007]) are unlikely to draw the fine distinction that Hempel does above. 
To these agents, once an explanation “satisfies” the question being asked, it 
will assume the role of background information and from that point forward 
“inform” the context for the agent’s subsequent actions, decisions, and per-
ceptions. The definitions, limitations, constraints, and opportunities afforded 
by these “accepted” explanations will differ across domains and may differ in 
both ontic conception and epistemic process. For the hard sciences of Science 
1, the affordances will be about prediction and the ontic qualities will address 
revealed “truth.” For the special sciences of Science 2, reflexive anticipation 
and volition will suggest that the affordances are about attunement to environ-
ment and context, and that the ontic questions of truth are satisfied at least 
contingently by epistemic processes that involve positing “as if.” For the practi-
tioners and observers of both Sciences (1 and 2), the methods of discovery and 
of developing the explanations so proffered will by necessity be epistemic in 
nature, context dependent, and to some unknown degree contingent. It is these 
“realities” that then demand the pragmatics of which Craver speaks and which 
Hempel has reluctantly acknowledged.
Dealing with these pragmatics then becomes the focus for the next section 
of our text.

Case Study
All disciplines that have important empirical elements are connected to a shared 
family of problems about evidence and inference. Apart from its theoretical 
interest (as a contribution to human understanding) evidence is of great practical 
importance in many spheres of practical decision-making and risk management. 
In particular, multi-disciplinary study of evidence focuses attention on such 
questions as: (i) What features of evidence are common across disciplines and 
what features are special? (ii) What concepts, methods and insights developed in 
one discipline are transferable to others? (iii) What concepts are not transferable? 
Why? (iv) Can we develop general concepts, methods and insights that apply to 
evidence in all or nearly all contexts? (Twining, 2003)

CHAPTER 4
Case Study: Creationism
Zack Kopplin
T
he creationism versus evolution debate that echoes throughout many 
of the United States is perhaps an ideal case study to explore what the 
varying conceptions of explanation might mean in practice. In the 
material that follows, Zack Kopplin, a pro-science anti-creationist activist in 
his early 20s, provides a rather personal look at what this debate means to 
him and to his peers. When reading Kopplin’s account we urge the reader to 
remember that this issue has two sides and that both believe that proper “expla-
nation” is on their side.
What is it about this issue that powers the creationists to afford their account 
the “explanatory power” of a Science 1 explanation and to make use of Science 
1 versus Science 2 arguments to attempt to defeat the explanatory power of 
evolutionary theory?
Is this issue any different from other cases we could have used to similar 
effect? When journalists and economists are asked “What were the origins 
of the 2008–13 home mortgage financial crisis?” an eerily parallel dichotomy 
emerges. The supposed Science 1 set of “facts”—loose credit standards, an 
overwhelmingly shared belief in the inexorable rise of housing prices, and a 
securitization system that blocked liquidity and flexibility when problems 
arose—are challenged by a Science 2 set of evidence—greed of American bank-
ers, corruption on the part of regulators, politics of the subprime market, and 
the religious dogma that “home ownership is a critical part of an American 
identity.” There are many who claim that the key to preventing a repeat of the 
trauma lies in dealing with the “evidence” and that the “facts” be damned.
Or, to take a more recent case, what “explains” how to view the Edward 
Snowden mess? Is he a traitor who “stole” information he had no right to access, 
much less distribute? A fraud who violated his contract and the oath he swore 
to uphold? A Russian spy? Or a man of unbridled principle who exposed a grave 
offense being committed against all of humanity? A man who could ignore the 

60  
M  Zack Kopplin
rule of law because he was answering to a “higher truth”? An uneducated man 
ignorant of his proper place in the world and more ignorant of the context of 
the intelligence system he was exposing?
A heretic? A hero?
Our text will at time touch on all three of these cases, but to begin let’s hear 
from Zack.
* * *
Zack Kopplin
I’m here to tell you all about our fight for science in Louisiana and in the 
United States.
My state, Louisiana, has a creationism law, the misnamed and misguided 
Louisiana Science Education Act, and it’s a pretty clever piece of legislation. 
It never once actually mentions creationism or intelligent design or any non-
science to dodge court rulings from the US Supreme Court and other courts, 
like the Edwards vs. Aguillard trial or Dover vs. Kitzmiller, which invalidated 
creationism and intelligent design in the United States. Instead, what it does is 
it allows supplemental materials to be brought into public school science classes 
to, quote, “critique” evolution because it’s controversial.
Evolution, climate change, cloning—these are all controversial to Louisiana 
politicians. And so it sounds pretty reasonable. The defenders of this law all 
say this is about critical thinking, academic freedom. Again, this all sounds 
reasonable.
The problem is you don’t actually need more critical thinking. You don’t 
need to legislate critical thinking into science classes. That’s the nature of sci-
ence by itself. That’s the nature of the scientific method, and you only need a 
law if you want to sneak something that’s not actually science into these classes, 
because a good teacher can supplement evolution with good materials if they 
want to. They don’t need a law to allow them to do this. You only need a law 
when you want to sneak in “The Earth is 6,000 years old, humans lived with 
dinosaurs,” stuff like that. It becomes even more clear what this law is for when 
you listen to the backers of the law when they get off-message.
Senator Ben Nevers in Louisiana, who sponsored this law, said that it was 
created by the Louisiana Family Forum. That’s a local religious rights group 
that drafted and promoted this law, and he said they wanted it so that evolution 
and Darwinism would be taught alongside creationism.
More recently, Governor Jindal was asked by NBC News about creationism 
in our public schools and said: “We have what’s called the Science Education 
Act that says if a teacher wants to supplement those materials”—he’s talking 
about evolution—“if the state school board’s okay with that, they can supple-
ment those materials. I’ve got no problem if a local school board says, ‘We want 
to teach our kids about creationism, that some people have these beliefs as well. 
Let’s teach them about intelligent design.’” He told national TV that this was 
 

Case Study  M  61
about creationism, so it really doesn’t get any more clear what this law’s about 
when you listen to the sponsor of this law and the governor who signed it.
Despite all this talk about promoting critical thinking, promoting academic 
freedom, it becomes quite clear that this is really just about sneaking religion 
into the public school science class.
To make it clear that this is wrong, creationism is not science, because sci-
ence is simply an explanation for the natural world. We can test this explana-
tion. We can repeat these tests. There are specific conditions that would prove 
our explanation false—if we got them we’d have to go back to the drawing 
board. If we found rabbits in the wrong rock layers, we’d have to find a new 
explanation for that. That’s a pretty common given for a potential failure of 
evolution if it happened, but we have to have all these conditions for something 
to be science.
You can’t test creationism. If you can’t test it you can’t repeat the tests, and 
there’s really nothing you can do to make creationism falsifiable. Take the 
order in which things were created. The sun came on the third day, say the 
creationists. That’s already false in the way we know things, but even if that 
still stands it’s not falsifiable. It’s a supernatural explanation, and it doesn’t fit 
into the explanation for the natural world and it doesn’t belong in science class. 
Things are as simple as that.
This isn’t actually a debate over science, and it’s not one we should waste our 
time exposing students to. And if we don’t teach our kids evolution, if we don’t 
teach them science, if we don’t teach them the scientific method, that’s really 
going to harm them, because this is fundamentally what this is about. If we 
teach our kids that evolution and creationism are equally valid, we’re going to 
confuse them in their chemistry class, their geology class, because if suddenly 
you can throw out the scientific method for one thing, why does the scientific 
method apply to any science? Of course, there’ll be some kids who make it 
through this quite well, and be great chemists even though they may not under-
stand biology. Others will fail, and that’s where the real threat lies.
When I was in high school I launched a campaign to repeal this bad law, 
the Louisiana Science Education Act. At the time it passed, there were only 
three legislators in the entire state who had voted against it, which leaves us 
with a bit of a challenge, but for me the larger challenge actually was myself—I 
was extremely shy. I couldn’t even send an email to a stranger, much less call 
them.
Beyond this, for my entire life my dad had been involved with the top levels 
of Louisiana politics. He was the chief of staff for two different governors from 
two different parties, and when I was 13, when Hurricane Katrina happened, 
my dad was all over the national news because he stood up to the president. 
I don’t know if any of you remember President George Bush’s words about 
Katrina. He said he’d be there as long as it took, stay as long as it took, no 
matter what. Despite this, he didn’t want to pay for any wind damage during 
a hurricane, and so my dad stood up to him in Congress and said: “When the 
President said he would do what it takes and stay as long as it takes, he didn’t 

62  
M  Zack Kopplin
say ‘except if due to wind damage’.” His face was all over national TV for a 
month for having called out the president on something ridiculous.
The next year my dad actually ran for Congress to be in that body so we 
wouldn’t be fighting as much stupidity there, and I just hated that. I couldn’t 
stand it, because I was shy, and when my dad ran for Congress, when my dad 
was on the news, it sacrificed my anonymity, and it was horrifying to me.
At the time, I didn’t understand public service. I didn’t understand what it 
meant to stand up and speak out for what was right, and that was something 
over the next few years I’d have to overcome, and that really is thanks to this 
law, because I leapt without thinking. It was a simple calculation. The Louisiana 
Science Education Act is wrong. Creationism is not science. It doesn’t belong in 
our classes. Without really understanding what it would mean to take on this 
law, I took it on and through that I grew up.
The first step for me was to find a mentor, and through sheer luck one of 
the foremost experts in the world on creationism happened to live down the 
road, about 25 minutes from me. Dr. Barbara Forest was an expert witness at 
the Kitzmiller vs. Dover trial in Pennsylvania, which invalidated intelligent 
design in the United States, and she was instrumental in exposing that intel-
ligent design was basically creationism dressed up to make it look scientific—it 
was really the exact same thing created by the exact same people with the exact 
same purpose.
Luckily for me, I managed to send her an email, and once I did that we set 
up a meeting. The next step after that was to find a sponsor for a repeal bill, 
although the bad news was that, as I said, there were only three votes against 
this law when it first passed. The good news was that we had a pretty good idea 
of who we needed to go to in order to fight the law.
I started out by emailing Senator Karen Clark Peterson. When I got into a 
meeting with her I started explaining, “This law’s bad. This is why we need to 
fight it.” She cut me off and said, “You don’t need to tell me. When do we get 
started?”
We began this effort in November 2010, and we’ve been going ever since. 
We’ve built a pretty incredible coalition. At this point, 78 Nobel laureate scien-
tists have joined us asking the Louisiana legislature to stop teaching creation-
ism in the classroom. That’s about 40 percent of living Nobel laureates.
Now, that didn’t really matter to the Louisiana legislature. One of the state 
senators was a bit irritated that she had to hear from what she described as 
“people with little letters behind their name.” She didn’t want to hear from 
Nobel laureates as they don’t matter to her. Her own two little letters, JD, were 
the only ones that were important to her.
The creationists like to make lists of scientists who doubt evolution; they’ve 
got about 800 names. So I supplied my own list, which includes, for example, 
the American Association for the Advancement of Science, with ten million 
members. That list dwarfs any the creationists can put together. Another sim-
ilar list is the Project Steve list created by the National Center for Science 
Education, which is a list only of scientists named Steve or some variation of it 
who endorse the teaching of evolution. Even though Steve is a mere 1 percent 

Case Study  M  63
of the names in the world, if you can make a longer list of scientists named 
Steve than the creationists can draw up of mathematicians and mechanical 
engineers, then it really shows how this is not an issue.
On our list we have the full New Orleans City Council. Some of the coun-
cil members made some choice statements about how the Louisiana Science 
Education Act was backwater. We have thousands of clergy members. Even so, 
none of this has really mattered to Louisiana’s legislators.
We’ve come back for three attempts. The first one we lost five to one in the 
Senate Education Committee. The first year we had the Nobel laureates, but as 
I said, they’re just people with little letters behind their names.
We improved the second time, only losing two to one. Four legislators were 
unwilling to show up and vote against us. That year we tried to explain to a leg-
islator how evolution worked, saying that there’s a wonderful experiment done 
by Richard Lenski over about 20 years where he froze Escherichia coli after dif-
ferent mutations, and you could watch them change. The legislator cut off the 
science teacher explaining it and said, “Does it ever turn into a person?” When 
the teacher replied, “Well, we’re talking about evolution,” the legislator said, 
“Exactly, like E. coli to people.” That was his understanding of the science, and 
that’s what we’re working with here.
This year we lost three to two. We pulled in one more vote than we’ve ever 
gotten before, and we’re making slow progress. The thing is, it’s become clear 
that we will eventually win this. Louisiana’s legislators are very tired of it. They 
know we’re right, and they’re slowly coming over to our side.
And this year we had a new exciting development: the idea that we should 
keep this law because of faith healing. A legislator explained to us that he went 
to a foreign country and he had a wonderful experience where he was taken to 
see a doctor who practiced in a circle in the dust, semi-clothed, shaking some 
bones, and the legislator would be very hesitant to declare this pseudoscience 
and take it out of a classroom because he had a very good experience with it. 
That’s where we are right now.
The good news is that, despite our struggles in the Louisiana legislature, 
we’ve been much more successful helping to protect evolution elsewhere in the 
state. We’ve protected our biology books. That hearing was fascinating. Our 
state Board of Education approved biology books, but the creationists wanted 
them thrown out because evolution caused Columbine, and if we taught evolu-
tion in our biology books we would be facing a similar massacre in Louisiana. 
The good news is that we won that. Our state Board of Education was sane and 
approved good science textbooks.
We’ve mentioned our legislature a few times. The bad news is that they’re 
not as sane, and so we’ve had a bill for the last three years to overturn the state 
Board of Education’s decision about the biology books and to throw all our 
textbooks out. We’re hoping we’ll manage to stop that for the third year in a 
row.
This was all the first step, but it’s a much larger campaign than just Louisiana, 
because everyone keeps asking us why we’re fighting this fight in Louisiana, 
where we’re basically fighting against the forces of ignorance. It’s completely 

64  
M  Zack Kopplin
backwards, they say, and we haven’t won, so why do we keep fighting? It’s really 
because this is a globalized world, and we’re facing global issues. Our climate 
is changing. We’ve discovered superbugs that are resistant to our antibiotics, 
and if we don’t understand evolution we’re going to have real trouble dealing 
with those. The recent meteorite that exploded over Russia is also a sobering 
reminder of the fact that we could face an asteroid in the next 30 or 40 years 
that could cause some serious harm. While some of these may sound like sci-
ence fiction, they’re all real problems and we’re going to have to deal with 
them.
Louisiana’s model has been adopted around the entire United States. There’s 
a law that passed in Tennessee based on the Louisiana law and similar bills are 
being introduced in 10 to 15 states every year. And even without these laws, 
teachers in America aren’t teaching science. According to a recent poll, 60 per-
cent of biology teachers say that they don’t teach evolution well enough or even 
at all, because either they aren’t sufficiently educated on the subject or they’re 
afraid to teach it. Another 13 percent of teachers around the country say that 
they blatantly teach creationism in their classroom, whether or not they have 
the loophole law, even if they are blatantly violating court rulings to do that.
Also according to polls, 46 percent of Americans think that the Earth was 
formed in the last 10,000 years. Roughly 38 percent say that climate change is 
a complete hoax and that the climate is not changing. So there’s a real problem 
nationwide, and on top of that there’s also a real problem with science funding. 
America has just cut $50 billion from our science funding over the next five 
years, and this in a decade in which it has remained largely stagnant. We’re not 
doing anything new with science, so we’ve just cut the funding, and that’s a 
really scary thought if we’re going to confront climate change, if we’re going to 
do something about those superbugs, if we want to develop more antibiotics.
Rather than getting into all the specific policy debates on that, because I 
know it’s a lot more complex than I’ve indicated, we have to have students who 
do understand evolution and who are given the funding to do research on it in 
the future. It’s a much larger problem than just Louisiana, and that’s why we’re 
fighting for this, because we need to make it a real issue across the country and 
around the world.
It isn’t only America that’s involved. US creationists have been to Turkey 
to undermine evolution there and have even attacked biology books teaching 
evolution in South Korea. So this is really an issue worldwide, and it needs to 
change. We need to be teaching good science. We need to be funding science, 
and that’s where the new movement I’m working on right now comes in. At the 
university I attend, US President John F. Kennedy stated that we would go to 
the moon within a decade not because it was easy, but because it was hard, and 
it was a fight we had to undertake. He set up a specific challenge, and we made 
a change. In honor of those famous words, I want to see a second giant leap and 
I want to see that happen now. That’s what I’m fighting for now, so more sci-
ence funding and teaching our kids science, because supernatural explanations 
don’t actually fit in science classes.

Case Study  M  65
I’d love to have a dialog with all of you right now about what you’re doing 
with creationism.
Man1: I’d like to applaud your advocacy work. Obviously your parents and your 
mentors have been very instrumental. I’d like to broaden it a little in terms of 
thinking of what this is emblematic about, because clearly here’s an example of 
competing modes of explanation, which is very coercive, nonrational, super-
stitious, and about how that takes hold and root. This isn’t just in the States, 
it’s elsewhere, too. How do you deal with competing explanatory models in a 
political way, which you’re obviously doing? Because an element of this is how 
you begin to deal with the issue of people’s—to be blunt—ignorance.
Zack Kopplin: This gets down to the core of the struggle we have, where cre-
ationism in America is taken on in the courts, because the simplest way to 
overcome the ignorance is just to provide the evidence, to explain it. In a 
court case, you can bring in the best scientists in the world and have them 
teach the judge if he or she doesn’t understand evolution. And so that’s the 
easiest way, if you have the time, you have the ability, and you’re given the 
freedom to really teach. The problem is with people like the legislator who 
doesn’t understand that evolution doesn’t say that E. coli turned into humans 
in 20 years. We can try to teach him, but he actually specifically told us that 
he went on Wikipedia and Googled “creationism” and “intelligent design,” 
and that’s where his resources are coming from. He also told us he skipped 
evolution in high school and it didn’t matter. We’re never going to teach this 
guy, so the best thing we can do is hope that we can bring in the appropri-
ate authorities, the best scientists, the ones who created his medicine, and 
whatever else we can to help him understand the nuances. Another thing 
we’ve done is embarrass him a little, because we put his ridiculous statements 
about E. coli online. Now about 350,000 people have seen this, and many of 
them called him and told him what they thought. If you look at his Twitter 
feed, his phone records, his emails, they’re filled with probably thousands of 
people who’ve tried to explain evolution to him. So we made some progress. 
He said that he learned his lesson this year, and he was more cautious about 
being insulting toward the science. Having said that, he didn’t vote for us, 
and that may now be on a more personal animosity level because we embar-
rassed him. But the fundamental problem is that even though the more we 
can teach someone about the issues and the better we can do that, the better 
they’ll learn, we’re never going to be able to teach the generation who didn’t 
get taught evolution in their classes. The best we can do is try to keep it in as 
many classes as we can right now and make sure we don’t have any more state 
legislators who think that E. coli turned into humans, because he may be a 
lost cause, but the future generation is not.
Woman1: This points to another issue, which is that it’s not just teaching about 
evolution, it’s teaching about the nature of science. So what is science? What 
is scientific practice? These are much more philosophical issues about the 
nature of science. One thing I wanted to point out that I think is perhaps 
going to get at some of these issues in a different way is that the next genera-
tion of standards has just come out in the United States for K through 12 
education. These are based on two premises: one, that students should learn 
about practice and learn in the way of practice, so they’ll try to come as close 

66  
M  Zack Kopplin
as possible to doing actual science; and two, that they should learn about the 
nature of science. So yes, of course evolution is a theory, but no science is a 
fact really.
Zack Kopplin: I’ve also done some work on school vouchers, where it’s much 
more blatant that creationism is being taught with public money, so I own 
some creationist textbooks, which go through their own version of the scien-
tific method. It’s very different from the one you learned in a public school, 
as the creationism books put the law on top and then a theory and then a 
hypothesis or a theory. And theories turn into laws, which is really fascinating 
when you know that in the real scientific method theories are just an explana-
tion built on laws. So there’s a completely warped understanding of what a 
scientific theory actually is in these circles that want creationism taught in 
the classroom. Every year in the legislature we explain what a theory is and 
how it works and how it’s different, because we always hear “Well, it’s just a 
theory.” Of course it is. A theory is probably the strongest thing we have in 
science. But again, you can only teach so much when they’re not willing to 
learn, and that’s our fundamental problem.
Man2: I wanted to go back to the question about how you deal with these issues. 
You mentioned pragmatic examples like superbugs and global warming, and 
the point I want to make is that scientists often take science as a pragmatic 
phenomenon, and using science we can reveal degrees of freedom that allow 
us to be in our context in more sophisticated ways. Believing that and work-
ing that way does not necessitate a metaphysical assumption about science, 
and one of the problems with the political argument in science versus religion 
is that religion is inherently metaphysical, and it’s an isolating metaphysics in 
that its foundational belief is that it is right and everything else is absolutely 
wrong. So attacking it with a metaphysical view of science—“We’re absolutely 
right and you’re absolutely wrong”—can be nothing but antagonistic. Perhaps 
the way to deal with this is through the pragmatic approach, showing the 
degrees of freedom we can reveal with science that we cannot reveal with reli-
gion. I don’t know that that would necessarily persuade the religious types, 
but it may be a way to present science to culture that is not as antagonistic to 
any metaphysical religious beliefs.
Zack Kopplin: That’s what we try to do. The fascinating thing to understand, 
though, is that the main creationist group is the Discovery Institute. That’s 
an intelligent design/creationism think tank based in Seattle, Washington, 
and about 20 to 25 years ago they created intelligent design after losing in 
court with creationism. They wrote an internal document called the Wedge 
Document that accidentally got revealed, and Dr. Forth, my mentor, got hold 
of it and wrote a book about it. In it, they revealed that their goal with intel-
ligent design is basically to defeat materialism in science and to make sci-
ence supernatural. It may seem to be about evolution, but intelligent design 
attacking evolution is their wedge to changing all of science into something 
supernatural. So right now they’re on separate planes, and the creationists 
don’t actually like that.
Man3: I’m going to touch on an area which is decidedly problematic. One of the 
interesting things in the last two years in terms of political movements is the 
way the antiabortion groups in Canada changed their language, brilliantly in 
fact, because they’ve co-opted the positive language of the pro-choice, and 
essentially they’ve redefined what pro-choice means. I’m not putting myself 

Case Study  M  67
out as a supporter of either side; it’s clearly a contentious issue and a funda-
mental moral issue. But, for instance, now the embryo is the unborn child, 
so basically when you abort you’re aborting a child. It may be unborn, but it’s 
an unborn child. Also they make such statements as “Scientists have proven 
that life begins at conception.” It’s not clear that it’s been proven as a fact, 
and if life doesn’t begin at conception there’s nothing to argue about in terms 
of aborting a dead fetus. But it’s interesting, because in a sense the antiabor-
tionists run like the creationists. They’ve perverted and co-opted science and 
rational argument to their own ends. In a sense, you could argue that there is 
fundamentally a moral argument rather than a scientific argument, but they 
have co-opted both the science and a lot of the central terms. So again, they 
are pro-choice for the rights of the child, and since the child exists from con-
ception they are supporting choice, but they have this lovely story that they 
tell high school kids about having a right to control your body. What happens 
if you’re flailing your arms around and you hit something? Have you a right to 
hit somebody? Well, no. So do you have a right to do anything to the unborn 
child or are there limits? Of course, there are limits, just as much as there are 
limits to what you can do as a human being with your own body, and you’ve 
now got another body which is associated with yours. While this is really 
quite frightening if you’re pro-choice, if you’re antiabortion then this sort of 
rhetoric is sort of acceptable. But it’s a quite brilliant changing of the whole 
conversation, and therefore it becomes in many ways much more difficult to 
argue against, because instead of being framed in one way it’s being reframed. 
I’m not suggesting you frame the argument in terms of anti-creationism in 
an irrational fashion, but ironically, they’re using their rhetoric of science to 
validate something which invalidates science as not true.
Zack Kopplin: Yes, and the creationists are brilliant at reframing the debate. 
The thing is, they have to be now, because they’ve lost so many times in 
court with everything that’s easy for them that they’ve had to get really, really 
good at sneaking it in. So this is no longer even about creationism or intel-
ligent design, it’s about academic freedom to teach the controversy, to teach 
all the science, to teach the legitimate criticisms of evolution. And there are 
no legitimate criticisms of Darwinism on a basic level. Sure, there’s contro-
versy over cutting-edge science—there always is—but that doesn’t belong in 
a high school science class. The other key part about that is that it’s actually 
not a threat to evolution as a whole theory. I mean, punctuated equilibrium 
versus any other type of evolution, which could be a controversy you talk 
about in high school, but again, it’s nothing that actually threatens the theory 
as a whole. So all this talk about teaching the flaws of Darwinism is always 
just a backdoor entry for creationism. Another thing that gets brought up a 
lot is that it’s about equal time, putting both sides of an issue, and fairness. 
Everyone likes fairness, right? This is the democracy of science. The problem 
is that science isn’t a democracy. It’s the facts.
Woman2: I live in South Africa, and knowing that these things happen in the 
States is good to hear, because we always think that we are like backward peo-
ple at the end of the world. But what’s interesting for me is that in Africa it’s 
easy. You know what is science and you know what is not science, and there’s a 
clear distinction between indigenous knowledge or community-based knowl-
edge and scientific knowledge. In a sense these two oppose each other very 
clearly, and there’s no claim from the one toward the other. But what seems 

68  
M  Zack Kopplin
to be your argument and what makes it different is the sense that there are 
people trying to sell a different kind of knowledge as being science and try-
ing to institutionalize that knowledge or that base or frame as science, which 
shifts and mingles the distinctions a little more, which makes it more dif-
ficult to define what’s really the point. So in Africa it’s easy to decide “Okay, 
that’s science and that’s not,” and even now in scientific courses in medicine, 
for example, people are bringing in sangomas, who are traditional voodoo 
medicine doctors, and medical students do a course on voodoo medicine in 
a sense, but there’s no contradiction in terms of what is science, so it’s about 
trying to see what the influence is and how we can reach people differently. I 
think yours is a discussion between how is one being framed as the other and 
how these things coalesce, which is quite an interesting discussion in terms of 
the status of knowledge.
Zack Kopplin: Yes, and the other fascinating point is I mentioned that cre-
ationist textbooks have different structures for science, and they talk about 
the science the scientists don’t know about, and they create new things every 
year. They have a new historical legal method of evolution, and I’ve been try-
ing to figure out what this is. What do they mean by “historical science”? I’ve 
learned over the years that they make a distinction between science you see 
with your own eyes and science you can understand through reason. So if we 
see different fossils that change over time, we can infer that they’ve changed, 
but the creationists don’t take that as valid and call that historical. I’m now 
curious what the legal part of it is, because I don’t know.
Man4: I teach in Wisconsin, which is up north, so there aren’t so many overt 
wackos. And what I do is to identify that I have doubt in science. That is to 
say, all assumptions are false. You can get away with some but not others, and 
so science is not about truth. It’s about what lies can you get away with. So at 
that point they’re sympathetic, right? But then I say, “My objection to creation 
science is not that it’s bad science.” I mean, it is bad science, it’s the worst sci-
ence you can get, but my problem with it is that in order to investigate the 
infinite wisdom of the creator, you have to have an intellectual mind-set that 
involves something that encompasses the intellectual greatness and infinity 
of it. They worked that one out in the sixth century, it’s called mocking God. 
So I tell these people they’re heretics, and at that point the more intelligent of 
them are scared stiff. They don’t want to be heretics.
Zack Kopplin: I think we’re aiming more at the religious belief in creationism, 
so taking out the ones who are just making hefty six-figure salaries from 
advocating creationism, because there are some of those. There are people 
who fundamentally have a framework constructed on it, and their book is 
metaphysical versus naturalistic in their minds. If you take it that everything 
in this metaphysic has to be literal and the Earth is 6,000 years old and you 
construct everything on it, they’re perfectly logical on that. If you threaten 
that, you threaten the entire book.
Man5: I wanted to pull out the differences that you see in working with politi-
cians or with people in Louisiana when the arguments come from a scientific 
mode versus a religious mode, because I feel like a lot of academics when they 
think of science versus religion pick the most extreme version of Christian 
religion to argue against, and miss that there’s a whole breadth of (1) non-
Christian religions and (2) Christian denominations that in fact support sci-
ence, as you find many of the ministers do in Louisiana that you’re working 

Case Study  M  69
with. So there are actually a lot of different ways for science and religion to 
interact. How do the politicians or the people in the state respond differ-
ently if you argue with them or try to explain science versus trying to explain 
how science and religion are not necessarily opposed or need to be mutually 
exclusive?
Zack Kopplin: Well, there are two things. The first is interacting with the 
politicians. It’s really just a reminder to them that science and religion aren’t 
necessarily in conflict. By voting for science that doesn’t mean you’re voting 
against religion, and we have to do that every year. They all know that, I 
think. The creationists often push a narrative of science versus religion, but 
we’re arguing on two levels here, one of which is just evolution or creationism. 
The bottom level is who has the more powerful lobbying interests. That’s what 
it comes down to in many ways, which is the fundamental problem, because 
the most powerful lobbying organization in the state is the Louisiana Family 
Forum, our local religious right, antiabortion, antigay rights, antievolution 
group. They really can make or break someone’s primary race, especially in 
rural parts of the state. They can bring out 1,000 votes and enough money, 
and you’ll lose to someone who runs to the right of you in the race. We do 
what we can with them. We try and show them the science. We try and help 
them to understand that there’s not a conflict between science and religion. 
We give them the tools to change their minds and just have to hope they’ll see 
the evidence. But the rest understand that this isn’t a vote against religion. 
They’re not going to upset the majority of their constituents, because they’re 
not attacking their religion. What they’re going to do is upset the powerful 
interests in the state, and so instead they’ll prefer to sit out or if they’re forced 
to take a vote they’ll take it against us.
* * *
Excerpts From an article about Zack and Creationism by  
Michael Hiltzik (2014) of the LA Times
In a sane world, the ringing denunciation of intelligent design and creation-
ist “science” delivered by a federal judge in 2005 would have eradicated these 
concepts from the schoolroom. District Judge John E. Jones III of Harrisburg, 
PA, ruled then that “intelligent design” is not science, “cannot uncouple itself 
from its creationist, and thus religious, antecedents,” and therefore is unconsti-
tutional as a subject to be taught in a public school.
Zack Kopplin reports, the biology workbook assigned to students in the 
schools operated by Responsive Education Solutions is shot through with cre-
ationist propaganda. Among its assertions: “Evolution—which is, after all, an 
unproved theory—has been treated as fact. It has reached the level of dogma, 
widely accepted, but unproven and changing school of thought that is treated 
as though it were fact.”
In a reply, Responsive Education Chief Executive Chuck Cook maintained 
that “the curriculum was simply providing examples of competing theories on 
the origin of life.” Jones took the measure of this “we’re only teaching both 
sides” attack on evolution. In the case before him, a disclaimer read to school 

70  
M  Zack Kopplin
pupils in Dover, PA, at the outset of their study of evolution, “while encour-
aging students to keep an open mind and explore alternatives to evolution . . . 
offers no scientific alternative; instead, the only alternative offered is an inher-
ently religious one.”
Same here: The choice offered the schools’ students is between evolution, 
which is chock full of uncertainties according to the text, or the supernatural.
* * *
David MacMillan (2014) Writing in the Huffington Post
I grew up steeped in creationism. I was homeschooled with creationist cur-
riculum, my family took us to creationist conferences, and I was deeply proud 
that I knew the real story about evolution and the age of the earth. I was taught 
there was absolutely no way the universe could be explained without creation-
ism. Evolution was a fairy tale based on faith; creation was good science. I 
was taught that Christianity wasn’t consistent without creationism . . .  that all 
“Bible-believing Christians” rejected evolution and long ages in favor of a six-
day creation and a global flood.
Creationism isn’t just one belief; it’s a system of beliefs and theories that all 
support each other. We believed that unless we could maintain confidence in 
special creation, a young planet, a global flood, and the Tower of Babel, we’d 
be left without any basis for maintaining our faith.
This false dichotomy makes creationism strong. As long as people think 
the foundation of their religious faith depends on denial of science, it takes 
incredible energy to make them question the simple explanations given by the 
creationist movement. Ken Ham (founder of the Creation Museum) claims cre-
ation science keeps people from abandoning Christianity, but it usually works 
in the opposite direction.
* * *
Zack Kopplin (2014) Writing in Slate
Evolution is not a scientific controversy, and there are no competing scientific 
theories. All of the evidence supports evolution, and the overwhelming major-
ity of scientists accept the evidence for it.
In 1987, the Supreme Court ruled in Edwards v. Aguillard that teaching cre-
ationism is unconstitutional. In the 2005 Kitzmiller v. Dover case, Judge John 
Jones III ruled in federal district court that intelligent design is still creation-
ism and equally unconstitutional.
To get around court rulings, Responsive Ed and other creationists resort 
to rhetoric about teaching “all sides” of “competing theories” and claiming 
that this approach promotes “critical thinking.” Students also learn about “dis-
cernment,” which is defined as “understanding the deeper reasons why things 
happen.”
 
 
 
 

Case Study  M  71
Responsive Ed was founded by Donald Howard, who had also founded 
American Council on Education (ACE). Raymond Moore, one of Responsive 
Ed’s earliest principals (at that time Responsive Ed was known as Eagle Charter 
Schools), explained that while Responsive Ed “took the Christian vernacular 
out” of ACE curriculum, they still “put in character traits that reflect our val-
ues.” He also noted that “almost everyone in the management has been in the 
ministry.”
Howard expressed this same sentiment about his charter schools in 
an interview with the Wall Street Journal in 1998, saying, “Take the Ten 
Commandments—you can rework those as ‘success principles’ by rewording 
them. We will call it truth, we will call it principles, we will call it values. We 
will not call it religion.”
* * *
Peirce, in his lecture “First Rule of Logic” (1899), questioned what we thought 
we knew. “Do not block the way of inquiry,” he said, putting forth four offenses 
that we commit when we reason:
1. We make an absolute assertion that we’re right.
2. We believe that something isn’t knowable, because we don’t have the 
techniques or technologies to figure it out.
3. We insist that some element of science is utterly inexplicable and 
unknowable.
4. We believe that some law or truth is in its final and perfect state.

Examining the Case
Although many details remain to be worked out, it is already evident that all the 
phenomena of the history of life can be explained by purely naturalistic or, in a 
proper sense of the sometimes abused word, materialistic factors. They are read-
ily explicable on the basis of differential reproduction in populations (the main 
factor in the modem conception of natural selection) and of the mainly random 
interplay of the known processes of heredity . . .  Man is the result of a purposeless 
and natural process that did not have him in mind. (Simpson, 1967)
If our universe came about by some strange fluke and there is nothing outside of 
it, no purposeful Creator beyond its time and space to value it or give it mean-
ing, then it must remain without meaning. The universe can’t generate its own 
meaning or value any more than a rare rock sitting on an uninhabited planet can 
ever be valuable sitting there all by itself. (Heeren, 1995)
A mechanical chain of events determines everything. Morality and religion may 
be temporarily useful but are ultimately irrelevant . . . On the other hand, if the 
universe is created, then there must be reality beyond the confines of the universe. 
The creator is that ultimate reality and wields authority over all else. The creator 
is the source of life and establishes its meaning and purpose. (Ross, 2005)
As the quotes above suggest, the very ideas behind creationism and evolution as 
Ross says “determine everything.” Is there meaning? Is there purpose? Is there 
only mechanism? Both scientific realism and pragmatic constructivism offer 
perspectives which we examine next.

CHAPTER 5
Scientific Realism on Historical Science 
and Creationism
Abraham Graber
T
he goal of this chapter is first to consider how a scientific realist might 
view the debate over the veracity of evolutionary theory, and second 
how that scientific realist would deal with the claim that creationism 
is or is not “science.” Before proceeding it is, however, important to note that 
the views that fall under the realist umbrella are many and varied. There is no 
single realist position. One cannot speak with the Voice of Realism. Be that as 
it may, I expect that the vast majority of realists would be willing to endorse 
most of what follows.
The realist is committed to thinking that our best scientific theories are 
approximately true. There is, however, nothing about realism that requires 
commitment to the approximate truth of any particular scientific theory. A sci-
entific realist might think, for example, that quantum mechanics is false while 
thinking that special relativity is true. Consequently, there is nothing about 
realism that commits one to the acceptance of evolutionary theory. While 
Kopplin is surely correct that a neo-Darwinian theory of evolution has no plau-
sible competitors, it is less clear that evolutionary theory is as unproblematic as 
Kopplin suggests (Nelson and Wells, 2003; de Queiroz, 2005; Pullen, 2005; 
Wells, 2006; Behe, 2006; Fuller, 2007; Taylor and Ferran, 2010; McGhee, 
2011; Meyer, 2013). Denial of the neo-Darwinian theory of evolution remains 
open to the realist.
That said, in many ways neo-Darwinian evolutionary theory is one of con-
temporary science’s great successes. The theory appears to explain a wide array 
of phenomena, from the location of fossils in geographic strata to the existence 
of antibiotic-resistant bacteria. If any theory is to be counted among contem-
porary science’s best, neo-Darwinian theory is a frontrunner.
Nevertheless, Kopplin overstates his point. For him, “creationism is not 
science”; rather, it is “a supernatural explanation . . .  [that] doesn’t fit into 

76  
M  Abraham Graber
the explanation for the natural world.” Kopplin may be right that creation-
ism proffers a supernatural explanation; however, he is wrong to suggest that 
supernatural explanations are inherently unscientific. In the process of theory 
construction, no (logically consistent) hypotheses are, in principle, off the table. 
Theories are not ruled out because their content is, in some predetermined way, 
unscientific. Rather, theories are ruled out because they fail to comport with 
the evidence. There is, in principle, nothing unscientific about metaphysical or 
supernatural explanations. We can easily imagine a world in which all of the 
best evidence points to the existence of a designer. The scientific question is: 
Is this such a world?
For many hundreds of years creationism was among our best scientific theo-
ries. Prior to Darwin’s theory of evolution, humans faced an amazing array 
of flora and fauna, each perfectly suited for its ecological niche. Evidence of 
design was ubiquitous. In light of such evidence, creationism was a well-con-
firmed theory. Prior to Darwin, there was no way to account for the evidence 
of design without positing the existence of a designer.
In the time since Darwin, things have changed. In virtue of its superior 
explanatory scope, predictive power, and simplicity, neo-Darwinian evolution-
ary theory is a better theory than creationism. The trouble with creationism 
is not the content of the view. It is not correct to say that creationism is not 
a scientific theory; creationism is a contender for the best explanation of the 
appearance of design. The trouble with creationism is that it has lost the com-
petition. Just as the introduction of better-confirmed theories led us to aban-
don the caloric theory of heat and the phlogiston theory of combustion, the 
introduction of neo-Darwinian theory has, rightly, led to the scientific com-
munity abandoning creationism.
This response to creationism is, however, perhaps a bit quick. It is impor-
tant to give one’s intellectual opponents their due. Only the ignorant think 
that, if Escherichia coli evolve, E. coli eventually turn into humans. However, 
if we are after the truth, we should engage with the most nuanced defense 
of creationism. Ignorant legislators are not creationism’s foremost defenders. 
As Kopplin notes, more thoughtful defenders of creationism like to distin-
guish between historical science and observational science. This is precisely the 
approach that Ken Ham took in his February 2014, highly publicized debate 
with Bill Nye.
The distinction is about the appropriate source of scientific evidence. 
Observational science is science that relies on direct observation for evidence. 
For Ham, the primary criterion that demarcates direct from indirect observa-
tion appears to be temporal. One can only directly observe a phenomenon if it 
temporally co-occurs with the act of observation. Historical science is science 
that relies on indirect observation. An observation is indirect if a phenomenon 
and an observation do not temporally co-occur. Thus, geology is a historical 
science. Much of the evidence on which geologists rely is not observed co-
occurrent with the event in question. Mountains may be evidence of tectonic 
drift; however, our observation of the mountains occurs hundreds of millions 
of years after the tectonic event responsible for their creation. By contrast, 

Scientific Realism  M  77
aspects of ecology are observational science. One can, for example, observe the 
real-time migration of Canadian geese.
Ham holds that only direct observation provides evidence. Observational 
science provides justification for beliefs about the natural world. Historical sci-
ence does not. Furthermore, evolutionary biology by and large relies on indirect 
observation. Our reasons for thinking that evolution causes the appearance of 
design are largely based on indirect observation, such as the examination of 
fossil records or the observation of homologous structures. If Ham is correct 
that only observational science provides evidence about the natural world, he is 
also correct that we have very little reason to accept evolutionary theory.
It is worth noting that Ham is not the only one who finds historical sci-
ence suspect. Henry Gee, an editor of Nature, is quoted as saying, “[Historical 
hypotheses] can never be tested by experiment, and so they are unscientific . . . 
No science can ever be historical” (Gee, 1999). Furthermore, there is some 
philosophical debate over the epistemological status of historical science (cf. 
Franklin et al., 2002; Koslowski, 2006; De Cruz and De Smedt, 2013). Even 
Kopplin himself expresses sentiments that are prima facie incompatible with 
the view that historical science provides justification for belief. He appears to 
hold: “If you can’t test it you can’t repeat the tests [so creationism is not sci-
ence].” While the demand for reproducibility of tests meshes well with sciences 
that are largely driven by experiment, it is less clear how one could repeat the 
tests of historical sciences. Must one rediscover the same fossils?
While worries about the epistemic status of historical sciences are more 
widespread than Kopplin suggests, it is unlikely that these concerns are con-
genial to creationism. Ham’s distinction between historical and observa-
tional science is reminiscent of the empiricist philosophy of science of the 
early 1900s. One of the many lessons we learned from positivism is that it is 
notoriously difficult to distinguish between direct and indirect observation. 
Ham’s attempted distinction between historical and observational science is 
particularly vulnerable to Sorites objections. One might reasonably wonder 
what counts as a phenomenon and an observation co-occurring. Information 
transfer is not instantaneous. Surely the nanoseconds it takes for light to travel 
the distance from my computer screen to my eye does not make my observa-
tion of my screen indirect. However, if the difference between direct and indi-
rect observation is temporal, one must somehow specify a minimal interval 
between an event and an observation such that, if any longer interval of time 
passes, the event was not directly observed. There are good reasons to be skep-
tical that any principled distinction can be drawn between direct and indirect 
observation (whether temporal or otherwise). Consequently, there are good 
reasons to be skeptical that one can distinguish between historical science and 
observational science.
For the time being, however, set aside philosophical objections to Ham’s 
distinction between observational and historical science. Further, for the sake 
of argument, grant Ham’s claim that observational science, but not historical 
science, provides justification for our beliefs about the natural world. One can 
only maintain that historical science is not a source of evidence about the world 

78  
M  Abraham Graber
if one is willing to hold that inference to the best explanation is not a source 
of evidence.
Inference to the best explanation is frequently categorized alongside induc-
tion and deduction as one of the three primary methods of inference. Suppose 
we have some set of evidence, {E1, E2, . . . , En}. Further suppose we have some 
set of theories, each offering to explain this set of evidence, {T1, T2, . . . , Tn}. 
Further suppose that some theory, Tm, best explains the evidence. Inference 
to the best explanation allows us to infer the (approximate) truth of Tm. In 
Devitt’s words:
“The basic argument for the unobservable entities is simple. By supposing they 
exist, we can give good explanations of the behavior and characteristics of 
observed entities, behavior and characteristics which would otherwise remain 
completely inexplicable. Furthermore, such a supposition leads to predictions 
about observables which are well-confirmed; the supposition is ‘observationally 
successful’. Abduction thus takes us from hypotheses about the observed world 
to hypotheses about the unobservable one.” (Devitt, 1991)
An example may help illustrate. Imagine that Sally and her two officemates, 
Jane and Robert, are working late one night. Sally accidentally leaves her keys 
in the office when she briefly steps out to get a fresh cup of coffee. When she 
returns, the office door is closed and locked. A handful of explanations are 
available. It may be that a serial killer has killed both Jane and Robert and 
locked himself in the room. Alternatively, it may be that Robert stepped out to 
use the bathroom and Jane left for home, locking the door behind her. Suppose 
Robert shows up and reports that he was in the restroom. After he unlocks 
the door, Sally discovers that Jane’s bicycle and bag are both gone. The best 
explanation appears to be that Robert went to the bathroom and Jane left for 
home, locking the office door behind her. In virtue of this theory offering the 
best explanation, it appears that we have good reason to think that the theory 
is true even though Sally was unable to observe Jane’s departure.
Historical science relies heavily on inference to the best explanation:
“Historical scientists proceed in roughly the following way: Observe and 
describe puzzling traces of long-past events. Postulate a common cause of those 
traces. The common cause is usually some token event or process that occurred 
long ago. Test this hypothesis about the distant past against rival hypotheses by 
searching for a ‘smoking gun,’ or a present trace that, together with the other 
traces observed so far, is better explained by one of the rival hypotheses than by 
the other.” (Cleland, 2002)
In order to consistently hold that historical science is not a source of evidence 
about the world, one must further hold that inference to the best explanation 
is not a legitimate form of inference.
The debate over the evidential status of inference to the best explanation 
is well worn (Bex, 2012; Bex and Walton, 2010). While there is little agree-
ment on the reliability of inference to the best explanation, there is widespread 

Scientific Realism  M  79
agreement that the scientific realist is committed to the view that inference to 
the best explanation is a legitimate form of inference. The realist is commit-
ted to the view that the methods of science provide justification for our beliefs 
about the world. Inference to the best explanation is an important method of 
theory confirmation (Lipton, 2004; Henderson and Horgan, 2011). Thus, the 
realist is committed to the view that inference to the best explanation is a guide 
to truth.
The upshot is that Ham’s rejection of neo-Darwinian evolutionary theory 
on the grounds that it is historical science forces him to accept some version 
of scientific antirealism. There is no obvious lesson to take here with regard to 
the political issues with which Kopplin is most concerned. Scientific antireal-
ism is a viable philosophical position. One’s stance with regard to the realism/
antirealism debate has little to do with what one thinks ought to be taught in 
high school classrooms.
There is, however, an important lesson to be learned about a particular 
attempt to defend the creationist view. The classic strategy for defending cre-
ationism is to embrace a “G-d of the gaps” style of argumentation. In short, 
the strategy is to show that there are phenomena that a neo-Darwinian theory 
of evolution cannot explain but that creationism can. If creationism offers the 
better explanation, we have good reason to accept the theory. Ham appears 
to be employing such a tactic when he argues that neo-Darwinian theory is 
illegitimate in virtue of being historical science. In short, he claims that his-
torical science cannot provide successful explanations and that evolutionary 
theory is a historical science. The upshot is that evolutionary theory does not 
provide successful explanations. A fortiori, if creationism explains anything at 
all, it offers better explanations than neo-Darwinian theory and is thereby the 
preferred scientific theory.
The problem for Ham is that his argumentative strategy forces him to accept 
scientific antirealism. Consequently, he is forced either to deny that scientific 
theories are a guide to the world or to accept some version of constructivism 
whereby truth is a human construction. Either consequence is antithetical to 
the creationist’s primary goal. If scientific theories are not a guide to truth, then 
demonstrating that creationism is the best scientific theory is a pyrrhic victory. 
Creationism fails to give us any reason to embrace theism. Alternatively, if 
truth is a human construct then “[G-d is] a product of the human imagination, 
real only in the minds of those who believe” (Johnson, 1995). Either way, the 
creationist loses.
But Is It Science?
We are now better positioned to answer the question: “Is creationism science?” 
Earlier I suggested that the distinction between science and nonscience (or 
pseudoscience) should be understood not in terms of the content of the hypoth-
eses, but in terms of the evidential standards applied to these hypotheses. (It is 
important to note that there is a vociferous debate over how best to distinguish 
between science and pseudoscience, also known as the “demarcation problem.” 

80  
M  Abraham Graber
While there are no uncontroversial views regarding this question, I hope every-
thing I say in what follows is relatively noncontentious. The approach I take 
toward the demarcation problem is almost vacuous: the distinction between 
science and pseudoscience is that science relies on the methods of the sciences 
whereas pseudoscience does not. Until one attempts to provide an account of 
the “methods of the sciences,” this approach to the demarcation problem is 
largely uninformative—though hopefully just informative enough to serve my 
ends.) As it stands, the vast preponderance of scientific evidence suggests that 
neo-Darwinian theory is the best available theory. Consequently, continued 
belief in creationism is scientifically untenable. Understood in this context, 
Ham’s attempted dismissal of historical science is an inspired move. If only 
observational science gets to count as genuine science, then there is little rea-
son to prefer neo-Darwinian theory to creationism. If Ham can successfully 
denigrate historical science, he can (at least somewhat) plausibly claim that 
creationism continues to be a viable scientific hypothesis.
While there is a certain brilliance in Ham’s strategy, as before, it nets him the 
wrong results. He aims to show that creationism is a viable scientific hypothesis 
using a priori philosophical argumentation. If the distinction between science 
and nonscience is determined by the evidential considerations that one brings 
to bear on hypotheses, Ham cannot successfully argue that creationism is a 
viable scientific hypothesis by changing the evidential standards of science. 
By taking this approach, he dooms his version of creationism to the domain of 
nonscience.
At the heart of this objection to a certain version of creationism is the view 
that inference to the best explanation plays a fundamental role in scientific 
theory selection. If there were significant debate regarding the role of infer-
ence to the best explanation in theory selection, Ham might be able to dismiss 
historical science without demoting his defense of creationism to pseudosci-
ence. Importantly, there is no such debate. Realists think that inference to the 
best explanation is a guide to (theory-independent) truth. Antirealists deny 
this claim. Both, however, hold that inference to the best explanation plays an 
important role in the scientific process. One’s stance on the reliability of infer-
ence to the best explanation will determine one’s stance regarding the realism/
antirealism debate; it will not change one’s view about what constitutes the 
practice of science.
Scientific Realism’s Semantic Commitment
While I have thus far said much about how a realist might think about creation-
ism, I have said very little about realism. It is time to remedy the situation.
“Realism” is a domain-neutral term. Thus, one can be a realist about nearly 
anything: mental states, morality, corporations, tables and chairs, gender, race, 
science, and so on. In each instance, the moniker “realist” denotes commit-
ment to the ontologically robust nature of members of the category in question. 
Unsurprisingly, realism about some domains has garnered very little philo-
sophical interest. Very few philosophers are interested in realism regarding, for 
 

Scientific Realism  M  81
instance, ants or Jedi knights. Other varieties of realism remain the focus of 
intense philosophical debate. Realism about the theoretical entities of science 
falls among the latter.
Regardless of domain, realism is notoriously difficult to characterize and sci-
entific realism is no exception. The following characterization is not intended 
to provide jointly necessary and sufficient conditions for scientific realism. 
Rather, the aim is to capture the paradigm commitments of the scientific real-
ist. There may remain views that, according to the following classification 
scheme, occupy an uncomfortable middle ground between scientific realism 
and scientific antirealism. In such instances, classification must precede on a 
case-by-case basis.
The realist is committed to the view that scientific claims are descriptions. 
Consider the following sentence: Electrons have negative charge. Its surface 
grammar is identical to the surface grammar of sentences with more familiar 
content, such as Most 2014 cars have airbags. In both instances, a property is 
predicated of a subject. In the first instance, the property of having negative 
charge is predicated of electrons. In the second instance, the property of having 
airbags is predicated of most 2014 cars. The sentence about airbags is clearly a 
description. It tells us about a way the world is. It is true if the world is a cer-
tain way and false otherwise. If the observed similarity in surface grammar is 
indicative of similarity in conceptual structure, then we should also think that 
the sentence Electrons have negative charge is a description of the world. Thus, 
we should think that the sentence Electrons have negative charge is true if the 
world is a certain way and false otherwise. Call this view about the semantic 
content of scientific claims descriptivism.
Descriptivism contrasts with a view frequently labeled instrumentalism. 
Contra the descriptivist, the instrumentalist does not think that scientific 
claims should be understood as descriptions. Rather, the instrumentalist notices 
that an aim of science is the provision of affordances for action. If one’s aims 
are pragmatic in nature, then truth and falsity may be beside the point. Thus, 
the instrumentalist denies that scientific claims are in the business of describ-
ing the world. Instead, scientific claims serve to give us enough purchase on 
a phenomenon to allow for its successful manipulation. The instrumentalist, 
unlike the descriptivist, thinks that scientific claims are neither true nor false.
It is important to specify the scope of the instrumentalist’s claim. Given 
the possible range of sentences that might express a scientific claim, it is 
deeply implausible to be an instrumentalist about scientific claims simpliciter. 
Consider the following sentence: Canadian geese are a migratory bird. Expressed 
in the right context, this looks like a quintessential scientific claim. It is dif-
ficult to see how one could maintain that the sentence Most 2014 cars have air-
bags is descriptive while being an instrumentalist about the sentence Canadian 
geese are a migratory bird. In order to be a descriptivist about one sentence but 
an instrumentalist about the other, one must draw a principled distinction 
between the two, but it is difficult to see how one could do this.
Generally speaking, the instrumentalist holds that sentences that appear 
to make claims about theoretical entities lack a truth-value. As a rough gloss, a 

82  
M  Abraham Graber
theoretical entity is any entity that cannot be directly observed. Thus, electrons 
and negative charge are both theoretical entities while Canadian geese, migra-
tory, and airbags are not. It is prima facie plausible to think that one can observe 
Canadian geese, migration patterns, and airbags in a sense that one cannot 
observe electrons or negative charge. Much of the plausibility of instrumental-
ism rests on this notion of something being directly observable. This is not the 
place to explore the plausibility of distinguishing between those entities that 
are, and those entities that are not, directly observable. It will have to suffice 
to note that this distinction is widely considered to be difficult, if not impos-
sible, to draw.
Contemporary creationists aim to show that “every bit of the Biblical story 
of creation given in the early chapters of Genesis is supported fully by the best 
of modern science” (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Creationism). If suc-
cessful in this project, the creationist will have provided a scientific vindication 
of creationism. Importantly, a scientific vindication of creationism can only 
count in favor of theism if one accepts the realist’s semantic commitments. If 
one is an instrumentalist, the scientific vindication of creationism tells us noth-
ing about the nature of the world.
Scientific Realism’s Ontological Commitments
Like all versions of realism, scientific realism is at heart a thesis about the sort 
of things that populate our universe. The realist’s semantic commitments set 
the foundation for her ontological view. Consider, again, the sentence Electrons 
have negative charge. The sentence contains two theoretical terms: “electron” 
and “negative charge.” A realist will likely defend the thesis that “electron” 
refers to an ontological robust entity and that “negative charge” refers to an 
ontologically robust property. However, suppose that the sentence Electrons 
have negative charge is not a description. This sentence will only fail to be a 
description if at least one of the two theoretical terms is not in the business 
of referring. If “electron” has no semantic content but is, instead, merely a 
useful syntactic placeholder, then it makes no sense to ask about the nature 
of electrons. This would be analogous to asking about the nature of a syntac-
tic placeholder that I artificially introduced into this chapter to drive up the 
word count: zzzYYYzzz. Were you to ask your friend “What kind of a thing 
is zzzYYYzzz?” she would give you a funny look. “zzzYYYzzz” is not in the 
business of referring; wondering what a zzzYYYzzz is like betrays a important 
conceptual confusion. The same goes for the theoretical terms of science. If 
scientific claims are not descriptions, it makes no sense to ask about the nature 
of scientific entities. If descriptivism is false, wondering about the ontological 
status of scientific entities betrays a conceptual confusion about the role of 
scientific terms. By hypothesis, there are no such things.
Once the realist has accepted a descriptivist account of scientific language, 
she is free to think that scientific theories accurately describe the world. The 
scientific realist is committed to the approximate truth of (some) scientific theo-
ries. The realist is, of course, not committed to the truth of all contemporary 
 

Scientific Realism  M  83
theories. It is deeply implausible to suppose that all of our contemporary theo-
ries are accurate. Rather, the scientific realist is only committed to the truth 
of our best scientific theories. Furthermore, the realist is not committed to the 
truth, simpliciter, of any scientific theory. It is implausible to suppose that any 
contemporary theory is entirely true. The realist is only committed to think-
ing that some of our best scientific theories get things mostly right. Thus, the 
scientific realist is committed to the approximate truth of some of our best 
theories.
Commitment to the truth of scientific theories is not, however, all there is 
to the realist’s ontological commitments. We can ask the following question: 
What is the ontological status of the theoretical entities of science? This ques-
tion can be helpfully rephrased: In virtue of what are sentences containing 
terms that refer to theoretical entities (in nonopaque contexts) true? Broadly 
speaking, philosophers who answer this question fall into two camps: con-
structivist and realist. How one answers this question will determine what one 
thinks about the ontological status of the theoretical entities of the sciences: are 
they ontologically robust or merely human constructs?
The constructivist holds that (some) sentences containing theoretical terms 
are true in virtue of human mental states. Consider, by way of example, a very 
coarse-grained description of Kuhnian constructivism: the sentence Electrons 
have negative charge is made true by the scientific community’s acceptance of 
a certain paradigm. Were the contemporary scientific community to accept 
some other paradigm, it would be false that Electrons have negative charge. 
Furthermore, when the scientific community in fact accepted a different para-
digm, for instance during the heyday of Newtonian mechanics, it was false 
that Electrons have negative charge. On the constructivist view, truths about 
theoretical entities are mind dependent.
Contra the constructivist, the realist holds that (some) truths about theo-
retical entities are mind independent. It is, however, no easy task to offer a satis-
factory definition of “mind independent.” Consider the following formulation: 
Sentences containing theoretical terms are not made true in virtue of anyone’s men-
tal states. Problematically, this definition of “mind independence” prevents one 
from being a realist about any science that studies the mind. Claims made by 
psychologists, cognitive scientists, and perhaps neuroscientists are made true 
by mental states. Even if one is skeptical of the maturity of these disciplines, 
one wants to leave open the possibility in principle that someday the claims of 
the mind sciences will be treated realistically. Some other way of understanding 
mind independence is required.
In light of the preceding considerations, one may be tempted to move away 
from understanding realism in terms of mind independence and instead take 
the realist to be committed to the theory independence of truths about theo-
retical entities. We can understand theory independence as the claim that sen-
tences containing theoretical terms are not made true in virtue of anyone’s attitudes 
toward some theory or set of theories. This formulation of the realist’s ontological 
commitments nicely counts out versions of constructivism without ruling out, 
a priori, the possibility of realism about psychology and cognitive science. It 

84  
M  Abraham Graber
is, however, ambiguous. We must take care in how we understand the phrase 
“in virtue of.”
Consider the following claim: Prior to the 2008 housing bubble crash, many 
Americans accepted unsustainable mortgages. There is an important sense in 
which this claim is true in virtue of Americans’ acceptance of a theory. For 
many years, it was widely accepted that the value of real estate would always 
increase. It is in virtue of acceptance of this theory of real estate prices that 
many Americans accepted unsustainable mortgages. Had they not accepted 
this theory of real estate prices, they would not have accepted unsustainable 
mortgages. Americans’ acceptance of a certain theory of real estate prices was 
causally responsible for their willingness to accept unsustainable mortgage 
prices.
There is, however, another sense of “in virtue of”—the constitutive sense. 
By way of illustration, consider again the above claim about the 2008 housing 
bubble crash. It may be that acceptance of a certain theory of real estate prices 
was causally responsible for Americans accepting unsustainable mortgages; 
however, Americans’ acceptance of a certain theory of real estate prices is not 
constitutive of their accepting unsustainable mortgage prices.
The social sciences study human societies. It is a banal truth that the theo-
ries people accept influence the way in which they behave. If we understand 
the “in virtue of” clause of theory independence in the causal sense, realism 
about the social sciences is untenable. If, however, we understand the “in vir-
tue of” clause in the constitutive sense, we can be realists about psychology, 
cognitive science, sociology, anthropology, and the rest of the social sciences. 
Thus, the scientific realist is committed to the following thesis: sentences 
containing theoretical terms are not made true in virtue of anyone’s attitudes 
toward some theory or set of theories, where “in virtue” is read in the constitu-
tive sense.
Given that the creationist’s project is to provide a scientific vindication of 
the biblical account of creation, the creationist would do well to accept the 
realist’s ontological commitments. G-d is a theoretical entity par excellence. 
In the creationist’s story, G-d does nearly all of the explanatory work. Were 
the creationist to reject the realist’s ontological commitments, the creation-
ist would have to accept that truths about theoretical entities are a human 
construct. Consequently, truths about G-d would be human constructs. This 
neatly inverts the theist’s order of explanation. Rather than G-d being our 
creator, we become the creator of G-d. This result is unpalatable to any com-
mitted theist.
Scientific Realism’s Epistemological Commitments
The realist’s commitment to the approximate truth of our best theories does 
not come by itself. Imagine a philosopher who simultaneously believed (1) that 
the standard model is approximately true and (2) that the methods of particle phys-
ics do not provide good justification for belief. While coherent, such a position is 
 

Scientific Realism  M  85
surely irrational. One might ask such a philosopher: “If the methods of particle 
physics do not provide justification, what reason could you possibly have for 
thinking that the standard model is approximately true?” It is difficult to imag-
ine a satisfactory response.
In addition to her semantic and ontological commitments, the scientific 
realist has epistemological commitments. In virtue of her commitment to 
the approximate truth of our best scientific theories, the realist is further 
committed to the truth conduciveness of scientific methods. If one wants 
to hold, for instance, that the standard model is approximately true, one must 
think that (at least some of) the methods of particle physics are justification 
conferring.
In addition to their above commitments, realists tend to endorse a broad-
strokes picture of the scientific project. By the light of the standard realist 
view, scientific progress should be understood as the increasingly accurate 
approximation of reality by theory. Theory informs method and method, 
in turn, informs theory. As our scientific theories improve, our methods for 
investigating the external world improve alongside them. And as our meth-
ods for investigating the external world improve, we find out more about the 
universe we inhabit and our theories become increasingly accurate (Boyd, 
1983).
The realist’s picture of scientific progress neatly accounts for the increasing 
pragmatic success of the sciences. The ways in which scientific discoveries have 
improved our lives are myriad. For many in the developed world it is likely 
difficult to imagine what life was like a mere 100 years ago. Any phenomenon 
this striking demands explanation. Realists are apt to argue that the increasing 
pragmatic success of science can only be explained by the picture of scientific 
theories increasingly approximating truth. As our theories get closer and closer 
to the truth, we increasingly understand the nature of the world we inhabit. 
In turn, this understanding offers affordances for action. The more we know 
about the world, the better we are at manipulating our environment toward our 
own ends (Boyd 1983).
Thus far, I have argued that the creationist is committed to accepting the 
central claims of scientific realism. While this is plausibly the case with regard 
to the realist’s semantic and ontological commitments, the case is more compli-
cated when it comes to the realist’s epistemological commitments. Our previous 
discussion of Ham’s distinction between historical science and observational 
science is a particular case of a more general problem for creationism.
Keep in mind that the creationist’s aim is to demonstrate that creation-
ism is the best explanation of the appearance of design. If the creationist can 
achieve this goal then, because G-d is a theoretical entity in the creationist’s 
explanatory scheme, the creationist will have given us good reason to believe 
that G-d is real. This line of reasoning presumes that the practice of science 
provides evidence about the nature of the world. Establishing that creationism 
is the best scientific account of the appearance of design is only a feat worthy 
of mention if the methods of science are a reliable way to find out about the 

86  
M  Abraham Graber
nature of our universe. This suggests that the creationist’s project presupposes 
the realist’s epistemological commitment. The project only makes sense if the 
creationist shares the realist’s view of the epistemological merits of the methods 
of science.
The problem is that the creationist must also deny the realist’s epistemologi-
cal commitment. By the light of scientific standards for theory assessment, cre-
ationism is not a viable scientific hypothesis. If the creationist agrees with the 
realist about the epistemic status of the methods of science, she must admit that 
neo-Darwinian evolutionary theory is the best explanation of the appearance 
of design. In this way, the creationist wants to have her cake and eat it too. The 
creationist must simultaneously accept and deny the evidential weight that the 
realist places on scientific inquiry.
Naive Objections to Realism
In casual conversation with other academics, I have often been surprised by 
the incredulity directed toward scientific realism. To my surprise (and disap-
pointment), I often find that the degree of vociferousness with which oth-
ers rail against scientific realism is often matched by the irrelevance of their 
objections. In this section, I want briefly to introduce and diffuse a handful 
of the most prevalent and least convincing objections I have heard against sci-
entific realism, as well as to comment thereon with regard to creationism and 
evolution.
Realism Is False Because Science Is a Human Construction
I have frequently heard realism rejected out of hand because “science is a human 
construction.” The argument appears to have the following structure:
1. If science is a human construction, then science is not theory independent.
2. If science is not theory independent, then scientific realism is false.
3. If science is a human construction, then scientific realism is false. (From 1 
and 2.)
4. Science is a human construction.
5. Therefore, scientific realism is false.
As written, the first premise is ambiguous. We can understand “science” 
in at least two distinct ways. We might take “science” to refer to the practice 
of science. This is the sort of activity chemists undertake in the lab, physicists 
do with a particle accelerator, and botanists engage in while in the field. The 
practice of science includes collecting and analyzing data, theory construction 
and selection, and so on.
Alternatively, we might take “science” to refer to the institution of science. 
The institution of science includes the practice of science as well as all of the 
bureaucracy that surrounds it, such things as the National Institutes of Health 
(NIH) and the National Science Foundation (NSF), university administrations, 
 
 

Scientific Realism  M  87
peer-reviewed journals, and so on. We can now distinguish between two ways 
of understanding the first premise:
1a. If the practice of science is a human construction, then the practice of science 
is not theory independent.
1b. If the institution of science is a human construction, then the institution of 
science is not theory independent.
(1a) and (1b) are also ambiguous. As previously noted, we can understand 
theory independence in two distinct ways. Something might be causally theory 
independent or it may be constitutively theory independent. If we understand 
(1a) and (1b) as making a claim about causal theory independence, (1a) and (1b) 
are clearly true. All human activities and institutions are shaped by people’s 
theoretical commitments.
If, however, we understand (1a) and (1b) to be making a claim about con-
stitutive theory independence, they are either false or question begging. While 
the practice and institution of science are clearly shaped by people’s theoreti-
cal commitments, it is implausible to think that truths about either are con-
stituted by theoretical commitments. Facts about human behavior, not facts 
about human theoretical commitments, make claims about science—practice or 
institution—true.
Nonetheless, one may be drawn toward a view about the practice of science 
and the institution of science whereby both are constitutively theory depen-
dent. If one accepts this kind of view, then one will be willing to endorse the 
constitutive reading of (1a) and (1b). One cannot, however, ground an objec-
tion to scientific realism in the constitutive reading of either (1a) or (1b). Such 
a reading demands a robust form of constructivism about the external world, 
a metaphysical commitment that any scientific realist would reject. Thus, any 
objection based on a constitutive reading of (1a) or (1b) begs the questions 
against scientific realism.
What does all this imply for creationism? Let us turn to Johnson (1992):
“The empirical evidence in itself is inadequate to prove the necessary creative 
power of natural selection without a decisive boost from the philosophical 
assumption that only unintelligent and purposeless processes operated in nature 
before the evolution of intelligence.”
“It looks to me as if Darwinians are like someone who, having observed that tug-
boats sometimes maneuver ocean liners in tight places by directing high-pressure 
streams of water at them, concludes that he has discovered the method by which 
the liners cross the Atlantic.” (Van Inwagen, 1994)
Realism is False Because Scientific Claims Are Incomplete Descriptions
This argument is a broader form of the creationist’s arguments that evolution 
is false because it cannot answer all of the questions concerning the diversity of 
life forms on the planet. The argument attempts to make heavy weather of the 

88  
M  Abraham Graber
fact that language fails to capture the full complexity of the world. The argu-
ment appears to have the following form:
1. Scientific claims fail to completely capture contextual factors.
2. If scientific claims fail to completely capture contextual factors, then scien-
tific claims fail to express the full truth.
3. If scientific claims fail to express the full truth, then realism is false.
4. If scientific claims fail to completely capture contextual factors, then realism 
is false. (From 2 and 3.)
5. Therefore, realism is false. (From 1 and 4.)
The first premise is clearly true. Language abstracts away from particulars. 
If I say That electron has negative charge, my description of an electron leaves 
out a plethora of detail, contextual or otherwise.
The second premise is more problematic. It is not obvious what is meant by 
“the full truth.” With regard to individual propositions, truth appears to be a 
binary notion. A proposition is either true or false. This makes it difficult to 
know what to make of the notion of the “full truth.” The most charitable inter-
pretation understands the “full truth” as the complete set of true propositions 
describing some subject. Thus, the full truth about a particular electron must 
include a description of every property of the electron, relational or otherwise. 
Understood this way, the second premise is clearly true. If scientific claims fail 
to completely capture contextual factors, then it must be the case that scientific 
claims do not provide maximally complete descriptions of subjects; that is, 
scientific claims fail to express the full truth.
Problems arise when we consider premise (3). Why would the fact that scien-
tific claims fail to express the full truth entail the falsity of realism? One might 
be tempted to endorse something like the following conditional: If a proposi-
tion fails to capture the full truth, that proposition is false. This conditional, 
in conjunction with (2), would entail the falsity of realism. The conditional is, 
however, obviously false. Were it true, every written and spoken sentence, the 
conditional under consideration included, would be false. No written or spo-
ken sentence captures the full description of any subject.
One might be tempted to understand (3) in another way. The thought might 
be that scientific claims fail to capture the full truth because the set of widely 
accepted scientific claims includes false propositions. It is, however, unclear 
how one might move from this observation to an objection to realism. The 
realist is perfectly willing to admit that a large portion of our contemporary 
understanding of the world is inaccurate. The realist is not committed to the 
wholesale truth of our best scientific theories. Much more modestly, the real-
ist is only committed to the approximate truth of our best scientific theories. 
Noting that even our best scientific theories fail to successfully capture the way 
the world really is, does not constitute an objection to realism.
Returning to creationism, Johnson notes that Darwinism cannot explain 
many things. Thus, he argues that evolution can be accepted as a method or as 
a description of a method that G-d employs to do his work. If this argument 

Scientific Realism  M  89
were accepted, then science classrooms should indeed be presenting evolution 
as perhaps a tool of G-d.
Realism Is False Because All Natural Laws Are Context Sensitive
I have heard opponents of realism employ the following argument:
1. All natural laws are context sensitive.
2. If realism is true, then there are natural laws that are not context sensitive.
3. Therefore, realism is false.
Again, the argument rests on a subtle ambiguity. Consider the first prem-
ise. We might understand the claim that “natural laws are context sensitive” 
in two ways. The first is very plausible. The context sensitivity of laws may 
merely be a way of noting that, when describing the natural world, one must 
take into account more than a single law. By way of contrast, consider how 
we are first taught physics. In high school physics classes, we are asked to cal-
culate, for instance, the velocity of a ball as it rolls down a frictionless ramp. 
When doing such a calculation, we leave out important factors that would 
influence any actual ball rolling down any actual ramp. If the claim that “all 
natural laws are context sensitive” merely points out that the phenomena we 
encounter in our day-to-day lives cannot be neatly described by any single 
natural law, or even any sizable set of laws and law-like statements, it is largely 
uncontroversial.
There is, however, a significantly less plausible interpretation of the claim. 
On this interpretation, to say, “all natural laws are context sensitive” would be 
to deny, for example, that it is always the case that, in a closed system, energy 
is conserved. While, generally, in closed systems energy is conserved, there will 
some cases where the law fails to hold. If this is how (1) is to be understood, it 
is a deeply implausible claim. As before, even if one is tempted to accept this 
interpretation of (1), any argument based on this understanding of (1) immedi-
ately begs the question against the scientific realist. Various theories in physics 
count among our best scientific theories. Furthermore, these theories are com-
mitted to the existence of exceptionless laws. Consequently, even if one accepts 
this second interpretation of (1), it cannot serve as a premise in an argument 
against scientific realism.
Just like (1), (2) is doubly ambiguous. If we understand “all natural laws are 
context sensitive” in the second sense, then (2) is true. The realist is committed 
to the view that, for instance, the laws of thermodynamics are exceptionless. 
However, if we understand “all natural laws are context sensitive” in this way, 
then (1) is either false or question begging.
For the above argument to pose a threat to realism, we must understand 
the claim that “all natural laws are context sensitive” in the first way. That is, 
we must understand it as a claim about the lack of explanatory power of any 
individual law treated in isolation. When understood in this way, is it the case 
that If realism is true, then there are natural laws that are not context sensitive? 

90  
M  Abraham Graber
The answer is clearly “no.” The realist is not committed to the implausible view 
that the world is anything like the simplified physics problems presented to 
high school students.
This argument does not play well for the creationists. Evolution, if it is any-
thing, is indeed context sensitive, while by contrast, the same cannot be said 
for an omniscient and all-powerful creator. The creationist may respond by 
pointing out that that same omniscience and all-powerfulness must therefore 
explain everything, but such a tautology cannot be considered to be a success-
ful argument that creationism is thus a science.
Realism Is False Because Knowledge Requires a Knower
The final naive objection I want to consider is based on the banal observation 
that knowledge requires a knower. (One can also formulate a version of the argu-
ment based on the equally trivial remark that observation requires an observer.) 
The argument can be formulated as follows:
1. If knowledge requires a knower, then there is no mind-independent knowledge.
2. If there is no mind-independent knowledge, then realism is false.
3. If knowledge requires a knower, then realism is false. (From 1 and 2.)
4. Knowledge requires a knower.
5. Therefore, realism is false. (From 3 and 4.)
Consider (1). The received view of knowledge is that knowledge is a jus-
tified belief (plus some anti-Gettier condition). Even those who reject the 
received view of knowledge accept that knowledge is a mental state (see, e.g., 
Williamson). On any of the current accounts of knowledge, a certain kind of 
mental state is partially constitutive of knowledge. The consequent of (1) is a 
tautology. Any conditional with a true consequent is true; thus, (1) is true.
As before, the problem with the argument lies with premise (2). The first 
thing to note is that, as we have defined realism, (2) is false. On the defini-
tion of realism I have proposed, realism is characterized by a commitment 
to theory independence, not mind independence, so (2) lacks even prima facie 
plausibility.
More importantly, (2) is based on a striking misunderstanding of realism. 
Realism is not a claim about the theory independence of knowledge (or obser-
vation); it is a claim about the theory independence of truth. On the realist’s 
picture, truth is not a human construct. Thus, on the realist’s picture, there is 
no obvious connection between claims about mental states and claims about 
the nature of truth. The only way one might find (2) plausible is if one has 
illicitly slipped in constructivist assumptions. If truth is a human construct, 
then there may be an important entailment between the mind dependence of 
knowledge and the mind dependence of truth. However, if the plausibility of 
(2) rests on tacit constructivist assumptions, the argument assumes precisely 
what it is supposed to show.
 

Scientific Realism  M  91
So Is Creationism Science?
Monod (1971), speaking of the events that have been identified as the sources 
of mutations, says:
“We call these events accidental; we say that they are random occurrences. And 
since they constitute the only possible source of modifications in the genetic 
text, itself the sole repository of the organism’s hereditary structure, it necessar-
ily follows that chance alone is at the source of every innovation, of all creation 
in the biosphere. Pure chance, absolutely free but blind, at the very root of the 
stupendous edifice of evolution: this central concept of modern biology . . .  is 
today the sole conceivable hypothesis, the only one that squares with observed 
and tested fact.”
Suppose that every mutation that has ever occurred is, as Monod says, due to 
chance. Suppose, in fact, that every individual event of any kind that is a part 
of the causal history of the biosphere is due to chance. It does not follow that 
every aspect of the biosphere is due to chance. And if none of these individual 
events has a purpose, it does not follow that the biosphere has no purpose. 
To make either inference is to commit the fallacy of composition. Now, this 
reasoning shows at most that the thesis that some features of the biosphere are 
not due to chance (and likewise the stronger thesis that they have a purpose) is 
logically consistent with neo-Darwinism. It could still be that the conditional 
probability of the thesis that there are features of the biosphere that are not 
due to chance is very low, even negligible, on the neo-Darwinian hypothesis. 
However, the reasoning does show that if someone wants to construct an argu-
ment for the conclusion that neo-Darwinism is in any sense incompatible with 
the thesis that some features of the biosphere are not products of chance, he or 
she will have to employ some premise in addition to “Darwinism implies that 
all events of evolutionary significance are due to chance” (Johnson, 1992).
Creationism is the claim that “some features of the biosphere are not prod-
ucts of chance.” This claim may be compatible with evolution, but compatibil-
ity with science is not the same as being science.
Realism offers no obvious answer to the question “Is creationism science?” 
However, the preceding discussion suggests that, whether or not we decide to 
call creationism “science,” the view is in serious trouble. If creationism is a 
scientific hypothesis, treated no differently than other scientific hypotheses, 
we have good reason to believe that neo-Darwinian theory provides the better 
explanation. If we treat creationism as a scientific hypothesis, then we have 
good reason to abandon it in favor of neo-Darwinian theory. Alternatively, we 
might deny that creationism is a scientific hypothesis. It should not be judged 
by the epistemic standards of science. If the creationist takes this stance, it is 
clear: creationism is not science.
There is a third option the creationist might take, nevertheless. The cre-
ationist might argue that creationism is a scientific hypothesis; however, she 
might deny that it ought to be treated the same as other scientific hypotheses. 

92  
M  Abraham Graber
This appears to be the strategy that Ham endorses when he attempts to bifur-
cate science into legitimate observational science and illegitimate historical sci-
ence. By making this move, the creationist abandons scientific methods for 
theory evaluation while simultaneously attempting to claim that creationism 
is a well-confirmed scientific theory. On this route, creationism is surely a 
pseudoscience.

CHAPTER 6
A Pragmatic Constructivist  
Take on the Case
Michael Lissack
The dating of Bishop Ussher just doesn’t comport with anything that is found 
in science and you can’t just totally deny the geological formations that are out 
there . . .  Anyone who is in the oil business knows he’s drilling down, 2 miles, 3 
miles underground, you’re coming into all these layers that were laid down by 
the dinosaurs,” said Robertson. “And we have skeletons of dinosaurs that go back 
like 65 million years. And to say that it all came around 6 thousand years ago is 
nonsense. I think it’s time we come off of that stuff and say this isn’t possible. 
(Robertson, 2012)
Attempts to persuade people of both evolutionary scientific views and larger 
materialistic evolutionary beliefs, not just by the force of the evidence, but by 
rhetoric and emotion, and especially by leaving out important contrary argu-
ments and evidence. (Luskin, 2014)
Promote critical thinking skills, logical analysis, and open and objective discus-
sion of scientific theories being studied including, but not limited to, evolution, 
the origins of life, global warming, and human cloning. (Introduction to the 
Louisiana Science Education Act of 2008)
W
ith all due respect to the previous chapter, on its face it seems that 
the scientific realists have it easy in attempting to “explain” the cre-
ationist/evolutionist debate: evolution as we understand it is a prod-
uct of science. But, as the quotes above reveal, science alone does not tell the 
whole story. Emotions (Luskin), nonsense (Robertson), and critical thinking 
(the Louisiana law) are all intertwined with context—both of the material kind 
and of the “ideas in one’s head” kind.
To quote van Fraassen (1980): “Science aims to give us, in its theories, a lit-
erally true story of what the world is like; and acceptance of a scientific theory 
involves the belief that it is true. This is the correct statement of scientific real-
ism.” By contrast, creationism as we understand it is a product of thousands of 

94  
M  Michael Lissack
years of religious belief and is not science. In the battle between science and not 
science, science wins. Now, if it were only that simple.
Explanations function in a context of assumptions and goals—both of 
which have some dependence on the questioner’s belief system. As Cupchik 
(2001) puts it:
Explanation is an answer to an explanation-seeking question in a context in 
which some person lacks some information about a certain fact (or phenom-
enon). Humans have epistemic interests in understanding things according to 
their nature, and explanations are what give us understanding of the questions 
which are raised as a consequence of these epistemic interests. The response to 
such questions is an explanation. Whenever we possess an explanation, we also 
have an understanding of the question which has been answered by the explana-
tion. But our background assumptions determine what the relevant answer to 
our questions is. Explanations take part in a bigger system of beliefs.
Kelly (1955/1991), the original clinical constructivist, observed that “a 
person’s processes are psychologically channelized by the way in which he [or 
she] anticipates events. Cognition is the bringing forth of a world; the mean-
ing of something is no longer understood as resulting from a correspondence 
between an object and a symbol but as the emergence of stable impressions and 
patterns—invariants. These develop in the course of time. A regular pattern 
must have appeared first before we can take it to be a feature of a world that we 
consider independent from us.” Much of the force in the creationism/evolution 
debate lies in concerns for how our children and their minds construct the pat-
terns underlying the processes by which events are anticipated and how on that 
anticipation decisions are made. The unspoken assertion here is that the initial 
formulation of these constructs is critical to how we cognize the patterns we 
ultimately “see” or “recognize.”
“It is not that first context is determined, and then relevance is assessed . . .  It is 
relevance which is treated as given, and context which is treated as a variable . . .  
context is the result of the interpretative process. That is to say that not all pieces 
of information that are manifest to an individual at the time when he processes 
an utterance are equally accessible, some assumptions are more manifest than 
others. As the quest for optimal relevance only selects a small portion of all the 
assumptions manifest to a hearer, it follows that given the very unlikely situation 
in which two addressees of the same utterance would have two identical cognitive 
environments in terms of the assumptions that are manifest to them, they might 
still differ with respect to the degree of manifestness (or accessibility) to which 
these assumptions are activated in their cognitive environment.” As a result, the 
same utterance could lead to a different interpretation for these two individuals 
simply because different assumptions will be selected first depending on their 
degree of manifestness. The organization of the individual’s encyclopedic mem-
ory, and the mental activity in which he is engaged, limit the class of potential 
contexts from which an actual context can be chosen at any given time . . .  people 
are nearly-incorrigible ‘‘cognitive optimists.” They take for granted that their 
spontaneous cognitive processes are highly reliable, and that the output of these 

A Pragmatic Constructivist Take on the Case  M  95
processes does not need re-checking. (Sperber and Wilson, 1995 as summarized 
in Maillat, 2013)
The process of learning is, at root, a process of building new mental models and 
we tend to build them out of stuff we already know, integrating new information 
with previous life lessons. (Rosen, 2012)
The seldom spoken fear seemingly held by both sides in the debate is that 
the first concepts absorbed by our schoolchildren will then dominate their 
entire pattern of thought. To paraphrase Hong (2013), one does not dis-rec-
ognize an acquaintance simply because the latter has shaved off a trademark 
goatee beard. It takes a skillful plastic surgeon to render a familiar face beyond 
recognition, and it takes a barrage of overwhelming evidence to discredit a 
well-accepted theory, formulation, preconception of the world, and so on. For 
most of the past 3,000 years, such theories, formulations, and preconceptions 
were supplied by religious beliefs. The prominence of “science” is perhaps only 
100 years old. And not only do religious institutions feel threatened by the new 
prominence of science, so too do the hundreds of millions who have formed a 
significant portion of their self-identity through the initial processing of reli-
gious belief.
The realist may choose to disregard the importance of the self-identity and 
related cognitive and psychological functions of the protagonists. The prag-
matic constructivist has no such luxury. Pragmatic constructivists are all too 
aware that both the realists and the religionists have a tendency to proclaim 
access to a revealed pre-given truth and a striking ignorance of the notion of “as-
if.” (Whether of the Vaihinger variety or some other.) This chapter will expand 
on the question-generation model introduced in the Introduction, and make use 
of the terms fundierung, model, and affordance in synecdoche in an effort to 
explain a pragmatic constructivist view of the creationism/evolution debate.
In a dialogue between Varela and Poerksen (2006), Poerksen remarks: 
“Perhaps two aphorisms by Heinz von Foerster could contribute to further clari-
fication. He epitomizes the central idea of realism with the words: ‘The world 
is the cause, experience the consequence.’ The fundamental principle of con-
structivism is, however: ‘Experience is the cause, the world the consequence.’” 
In the current case, this would translate into a debate over truth, the bible, and 
the concept of “meaning” or “purpose in life.” To the realist, these questions 
have answers—the scientific realist asserts that science provides the answers, the 
theistic realist that the answers come from God. To the constructivist, however, 
these questions have no answers and instead are revelatory about the self-identi-
fication of the questioners. The scientist will ask and answer in one way reflec-
tive of the cognitive environment that has constructively constituted his or her 
identity. The practicing theist will ask and answer the very same questions from 
the perspective of a very different cognitive environment—the environment that 
has produced his or her identity. As Varela (2004) comments:
You are working with a concept of truth that is based on correspondence: truth 
is the correspondence between theory and reality. Such a position will inevitably 

96  
M  Michael Lissack
make you a realist. Let me just point out that there are many ways of speaking 
about truth. My own concept of truth, which is inspired by phenomenology and 
the philosophy of pragmatism, is best understood as a theory of coherence: what 
counts is the consistency of theories, the coherence of viewpoints. Truth is, the 
motto of pragmatism proclaims, what works.
Where the realist sees a debate about truth (or rather where each realist side 
of the debate proclaims its truth in light of the other side’s falsehoods), the 
pragmatic constructivist sees a clash of fundierung—of the very backgrounds, 
environments, assumptions, and attended-to affordances that provide to each 
side its sense of meaning and of identity. Fundierung is the ultimate expression 
of context dependence. Rota put it this way:
All whats ‘are’ by the grace of some Fundierung relation whose context-depen-
dence cannot be shoved under the rug. Viewing, in manifold modes, is a func-
tion; seeing is the facticity that founds viewing . . .  Western philosophy since 
the Greeks has been haunted by a reductionist anxiety, steadfastly refusing to 
draw the consequences of taking Fundierung seriously. The history of Western 
philosophy is riddled with attempts, some of them extremely clever, to reduce 
Fundierung relations to ‘something else’ that will satisfy our cravings for certi-
fication of existence. We find it inadmissible that ‘unreal’ functions should turn 
out to matter, rather than ‘real’ objects or neurons in people’s brains.
Fundierung is the invisibility we afford the pen as the instrument when we 
are focused on accomplishing the writing. We look past the “foundation” (fund-
ierung) that affords the very activity we seek to accomplish. The danger lies 
in our reaction at those times when we are forced to overcome the fundierung 
relation and look explicitly at the medium of which we are making use (as when 
the pen runs out of ink). The success of the iPhone is due to fundierung (we can 
ignore the phone while making use of the apps) and the opposite (the very need 
to be aware of our interactions with the phone) describes much of Microsoft’s 
problems in the marketplace. (BlackBerrys by this analysis found themselves 
in the middle, often with apps that afforded fundierung and yet demanding 
enough of attention to be recognized as “using a BlackBerry.”)
Tools are further striking examples of Fundierung relations. Pencil, paper, and 
ink are tools I use in writing. They are normally taken as material objects. But 
this is a mistake, one of many we are forced to make in our everyday dealings. 
Pen, paper, and ink are functions in Fundierung relations. The pen with which 
I write I ordinarily take to be a material object. Strictly speaking, the pen is nei-
ther material nor object: it is a function that lets me write. I recognize this object 
as a pen only by virtue of my familiarity with its writing functions. The factici-
ties “ink,” “plastic,” “small metal ball,” etc., of which the pen is “made” (as we 
ordinarily but imprecisely say) let this odd-shaped object function as a pen. Like 
all facticities, they are indispensable in a pen’s function; this indispensability of 
facticities leads to the mistaken “identification” of facticities with the function 
of pens. The absurdity of this reduction can be realized by eidetic variations: no 
amount of staring at this object as an assemblage of plastic, metal, and ink will 

A Pragmatic Constructivist Take on the Case  M  97
reveal that the object we are staring at “is” a pen, unless my previous familiar-
ity lets me view the pen through the facticities upon which it is founded. (Rota, 
1989)
Fundierung underlies both explanations and interpretations. As Cupchik 
(2001) notes:
Interpretation . . .  issues an answer to a question about explanation of mean-
ing or about representation of a phenomenon whose comprehension falls out-
side somebody’s background knowledge. Whenever we interpret something it is 
because we can’t explain it since we don’t understand it. The answer transforms 
a phenomenon, now understood in terms of some theory, from being somehow 
unfamiliar to something less unknown. The phenomena, or rather beliefs about 
the phenomena, are thereby included among that person’s background assump-
tions and connected to his or her background knowledge. Phenomena become 
intelligible and meaningful because by attributing identity and tentative expla-
nation to them, an interpretation brings them in connection with our theories 
or belief systems. Interpreting is a process which creates provisional explana-
tions, and these explanations provide us with understanding. Thus, the aim 
of interpretation is to reach a proper understanding of a phenomenon regard-
less of whether the proposed hypothesis is concerned with traditional meaning, 
function, intention or causation. In the end an interpretation is a hypothesis 
which is presented against a background of accepted conventions and ontologi-
cal assumptions.
The pragmatic constructivist recognizes that in the case of the evolution/
creationism debate, the relevant fundierung, the “bigger system of beliefs” that 
seems to shape the background assumptions of each side, is that of the role 
of “meaning” in creation itself. Where the scientific realist wants to explore 
“truth,” the constructivist instead is asking for coherence—for “fit.” As von 
Glasersfeld (1995) put it, “Unlike the notion of truth which would require a 
match, i.e., shared points and features of the picture and what it is intended to 
represent, the notion of viability (which refers to actions and ways of thinking) 
merely requires fit. This is a relation characterized by the absence of shared 
points, because they would be points of friction or collision.” To those who are 
serious about creationism, the notion of fit and coherence center around the 
role of meaning—why we are here. Austin (2014) claims:
The simple fact is that it is not a debate—it is two debates, only one of which 
has anything to do with science. The first debate is purely philosophical: ‘Did 
something or someone create all of the stuff in the universe for a purpose?’ 
One position, which we can call ‘Creationism,’ holds that the existence of stuff 
implies both a creator and a purpose . . .  Opposed to the philosophical position 
of Creationism is a philosophy that we might call ‘Accidentalism,’ or a belief that 
matter in the universe, and life on earth, emerged without any external influenc-
ers . . .  ‘Creationism vs Accidentalism’ is not a scientific debate, since it makes no 
testable assertions and generates no falsifiable hypotheses. It is a philosophical 
debate about the cosmic master narrative.

98  
M  Michael Lissack
The standard theory of natural selection and survival of the fittest cannot 
explain the initial arrival of the fit. Religionists attribute such an arrival to 
God; science attributes it to chance. It is this attribution that gives rise to many 
of the tensions underlying this debate. Consider the implications of a fairly 
standard creationist belief: “If man comes from random causes, life has no pur-
pose or meaning” (Morris, 1974). The “fit” here is the belief that accidentalism 
gives rise to a lack of meaning. It could of course be argued that that very initial 
“lack of meaning” is the “gap” or “niche” to be filled by the concept of God.
Is God a truth or a concept invented by humans? If a truth (as might be 
asserted by a theistic realist), then the denial of meaning implied by accidental-
ism means that the true God is somehow limited (by allowing for a creation 
without meaning), which to many would be a heresy. In other words, God 
allowed an accident and then made the most of it and acted in the absence of 
omniscience. If instead God is a concept invented by humans (as the strict con-
structivist would claim), then there is plenty of room for accidentalism, as the 
initial condition with meaning and mechanism were both added later. Thus, 
it seems that accidentalism implies either constructivism or heresy—both of 
which trouble the “omniscient God is truth” religionists, but should be of no 
concern to the “who are we to attempt to understand God” religionists.
Austin (2014) continues:
The second debate . . .  involves the mechanism through which life on earth has 
developed. There are really only two possibilities for this mechanism. One of 
them is evolution by natural selection. The other one is ‘Magic.’ Unlike ‘Creation,’ 
Evolution does not pretend to be a master narrative. It tells us nothing about the 
ultimate nature of reality or about the great designs of forces beyond our com-
prehension. It is a specific mechanism that produces changes in populations of 
organisms over long periods of time. We can watch it happen in a petri dish, 
and, whether we are talking about dinosaurs or microbes, the mechanism works 
the same. The specific mechanism of natural selection works equally well as part 
of either one of the cosmic master narratives. It could be part of the plan of an 
intelligent Creator, Or it could be one of the lucky breaks that go into the cosmic 
theory of Accidentalism. It is not necessary to decide which cosmic narrative to 
subscribe to before learning how the mechanism works.
Even Pat Robertson can find a way to accept the “evolution as a mechanism” 
claims:
If you fight revealed science you’re going to lose your children, and I believe 
in telling them the way it was . . .  I don’t believe in so-called evolution as non-
theistic. I believe that God started it all and he’s in charge of all of it. The fact 
that you have progressive evolution under his control. That doesn’t hurt my faith 
at all.
What the creationists often point out and the “science activists” often omit 
is that the discoveries of natural selection and survival of the fittest are them-
selves insufficient actually to explain all that “evolution” is somehow credited 

A Pragmatic Constructivist Take on the Case  M  99
with explaining. Morris (2010) states: “The question quite simply is whether 
the theory is complete. At heart are the questions as to what life is itself and the 
nature of the organizational principles that might underpin it.” And Macklem’s 
(2008) view is that “[u]nderstanding life requires knowledge of how the design 
of living creatures and emergent phenomena, appearing spontaneously in self-
ordered, reproducing, interacting, energy-consuming, nonlinear, dynamic 
ensembles makes us what we are. I believe this will be the next biological revo-
lution.” Without active acknowledgment of the “gaps” or limitations in the cur-
rent state of evolutionary theory, any assertion that the explanation is complete 
is itself a proclamation of a sort of “magic.” Evolution as mechanism answers 
many questions, but equally it leaves many questions yet unexplored:
What we do not understand is how organisms assemble as exceedingly complex 
functional entities nor why they repeatedly navigate to convergent solutions. 
(Morris, 2010)
Though the ecological environment selects, it does not select on its own. 
Accidents and their consequences, differential success and failure, result from 
the combination of the ecological environment an agent faces and the social fea-
tures that enhance some opportunities and suppress others and that exacerbate 
some dangers and lessen others. Individuals do not face the ecological filters on 
their environment alone, but with others, and with the technology, information 
and misinformation that their social world provides. (Sterelny, 2007)
When the “evolution versus magic” mechanism is debated, the construc-
tivist (again not concerned with truth claims) will recognize that the debate 
is about what it means to have a cognitive model and what the use of such 
models implies. Here it can help to use a specific meaning of model derived 
from Robert Rosen’s modeling relation (Figure 6.1). This provides us with a 
methodology for studying one system in terms of another system (the subject 
and the “model”).
The two systems are related via the encoding and decoding arrows. Encoding 
is the process of measurement: it is the assignment of a formal label (such as a 
number) to a natural phenomenon. Decoding is prediction: it is taking what we 
generate via the inferential machinery of the formal system into representations 
of expected phenomena. Additionally, the arrows for inference and causality 
represent the entailment structures of their respective systems.
The modeling relation provides us with a way of ascertaining congruence 
between the natural system, N, and the formal system or model, F. What deter-
mines successful congruence is that the diagram, as a whole, commutes; that is, 
the numbered arrows meet the condition: (1) = (2) + (3) + (4). This means that 
our measurements (2), when run through the inferential machinery (3) of our 
model, will generate predictions (4), which will agree (when verified) with the 
actual phenomenon (1) occurring in N. It bears mentioning that any encoding 
from N to F is an abstraction and if the modeling relation holds, then F is a 
model of N. If all four conditions of the modeling relation do not hold, then F 
is merely a description of N under a specific condition.

100  
M  Michael Lissack
The importance of this distinction between model and description is that it 
goes to the very heart of Zack Kopplin’s argument. “Science” is about models 
and their use. Description has its place, but teaching schoolchildren representa-
tions and descriptions is not teaching them science and the scientific method. 
Traditional definitions of the scientific method tend define it as “a method of 
procedure that has characterized natural science since the 17th century, con-
sisting in systematic observation, measurement, and experiment, and the for-
mulation, testing, and modification of hypotheses” (as retrieved from Google 
in May 2014). Or take the Union of Concerned Scientists’ (2007) definition:
A scientific hypothesis must be testable and falsifiable. That is to say, a hypoth-
esis must make predictions that can be compared to the real world and deter-
mined to be either true or false, and there must be some imaginable evidence that 
could disprove it. If an idea makes no predictions, makes predictions that cannot 
be unambiguously interpreted as either success or failure, or makes predictions 
that cannot be checked out even in principle, then it is not science.
The scientific method and related definitions of “science” are science as 
a model, where, as in the Rosen definition, the model can be used to make 
predictions, and there exists a mapping between the model and the “observed 
natural system.”
Faye (2006) conceptualizes realism as follows:
The realist seeks the ontological commitments of our best scientific theories. The 
view that the physical world consists of a natural, pre-given and pre-descriptive 
set of laws, entities, properties, and relations is usually called scientific realism. 
And, according to the realist, the aim of science is to give a literal and objective 
description of such a world, and its present success can be seen as a token of the 
Figure 6.1 The Rosen modeling relation.
 

A Pragmatic Constructivist Take on the Case  M  101
performance of these efforts. He holds that science eventually secures more and 
more knowledge about the world as it is in itself, and hence knowledge about 
a world of invisible things and properties. Likewise, the realist position is very 
often identified with the thesis that the theories that at the present time are 
considered the best are closer to the truth than earlier ones, and that the central 
terms of our best current theories are genuinely referential.
Where realists and constructivists differ is not on the role of models (as 
defined above), but on the role of representations and descriptions, including 
those that may be derived from models and their use. The constructivist will 
assert that a representation/description is a human construct and is thus one 
step removed from that which might be called “real.” Thus, the constructiv-
ist may share the creationists’ apprehension about evolutionary theory being 
proclaimed as a representation of “the mechanism” or “truth.” The realist, by 
contrast, sees no basis for such an apprehension. As Neubert (2008) says:
We cannot know what the real really is without incorporating and assimilating 
it into our symbolic and imaginative constructions of reality. The intrusions of 
the real that we encounter in our lives expose the inherent gaps and fissures in 
the texture of our realities. Insofar they are as much expressions of our cultural 
resources as are our constructions of reality. What can (and cannot) enter our 
experience and observation as a real event may therefore differ quite consider-
ably from culture to culture, from person to person, and even from situation to 
situation.” In other words, “the real is but a construct that we devise in order to 
remind us that there is a world independent of our constructions, a world that is 
never totally absorbed by our observer perspectives, however sophisticated and 
refined these may be.
“[T]he epistemology of pragmatist constructivism is subjectivist. Knowledge 
is viewed as malleable, and experience is open to multiple interpretations. 
Knowing, in pragmatist constructivism, is individually, culturally, and socially 
framed. There is no fixed reality waiting to be discovered by diligent analy-
sis . . .  The only independent reality is beyond the reach of our knowledge and 
language.” A known world is partly constructed by the imposition of concepts. 
These concepts differ from (linguistic, social, scientific, etc.) group to group, 
and hence the worlds of groups differ. Each such world exists only relative to an 
imposition of concepts. (Devitt, 1997)
The contrast between what is triggered by a constructivist hearing the words 
“this is science” and the realist hearing those same words is best captured by the 
Gibsonian concept of an “affordance.” This is “an action possibility available 
in the environment to an individual, independent of the individual’s ability to 
perceive this possibility” (McGrenere and Ho, 2000). Gibson (1977, 1979) first 
used the term to refer to actionable properties between world and actor (a person 
or an animal). To Gibson, affordances are relationships. They exist naturally; 
they do not have to be visible, known, or desirable. “Affordances provided by 
the environment are what it offers, what it provides, what it furnishes and what 
it invites” (Gibson, 1979). A chair can also afford holding things and therefore 
affords being used as a “table,” or it can afford being used as a step stool, or 

102  
M  Michael Lissack
as decoration as an art object (among many other possibilities). Affordances 
extend across users and vary with them. Affordances occur when self and other, 
perceiver and perceived, objects and persons meet in actionable combinations. 
They invite participation, action, and response. When circumstance invites a 
reaction, context demands a response, or the situation offers an opportunity, 
something is afforded. In affordance, perception, information, and activity are 
related in a manner that seems to beg for action. Affordances are about oppor-
tunities, dangers, and possibilities that call organism, consciousness, and envi-
ronment to activity and sense-making.
To say that we are teaching “science” will afford lessons about methodology 
to some and will be about “truth” to others. To teach evolution without men-
tioning its “holes” (e.g., the accidentalism vs. creator argument) and its incom-
pleteness may be seen as a consequence of teaching what we know as “good 
theory” to some, and the affordance of a status of “truth” to incompleteness by 
others. To create an atmosphere where the scientific method and the virtues of 
falsifiable experimentation are afforded, the status of “good” can be seen as a 
valued teaching tool by some and as a threat to a proclaimed virtue of accept-
ing the declarations of “authority” by others. (And, of course, some of those 
holding the first point of view will welcome the second interpretation as well.)
Affordances are not just labels; that is, the product of a subject’s naming 
something. Nor are affordances retrospective; that is, a quality of reality iden-
tified after the fact. Affordances are prospective—context invites action, envi-
ronment points to activity. In affordances, world, situation, and location point 
to action, shout for response, and offer opportunities for attainment. And the 
affordance question in the creationism/evolution debate is about what the label 
of “science” and boundaries of what does and does not get taught imply for the 
future cognition and behavior of the students being taught.
Labels and boundaries abound in that debate. They are themselves represen-
tative of another item from our pragmatic constructivist perspective: the part 
of speech known as synecdoche. A synecdoche is the use of a part to stand for 
a whole; for instance, when one refers to a car as “wheels” or implicitly embod-
ies an organization by the interactions with its representative. Synecdoche has 
become a communication tool of which most of us lack any awareness. We use 
metaphors as synecdoche (relying on the mapping we make of similarities and 
ignoring the more complex arena of dissimilarity and context dependence). 
Brands are perhaps our paradigmatic synecdoche, as is the media’s love of the 
sound bite and the Internet’s love of the keyword or the Twitter handle. To 
make use of a belief in the “bell curve” or a “Gaussian distribution” in decision 
making is synecdoche; so too is labeling of politicians by a singular position 
they hold; so too was the simplistic belief prior to the housing crisis in always-
rising housing prices. To be enthralled or appalled by what is taught in the 
name of “science” is also synecdoche. Synecdoche is the hammer to the com-
municator’s love of nails.
Consider Nagel’s (1961) view:
Scientific thought takes its ultimate point of departure from problems suggested 
by observing things and events encountered in common experience; it aims to 

A Pragmatic Constructivist Take on the Case  M  103
understand these observable things by discovering some systematic order in 
them; and its final test for the laws that serve as instruments of explanation and 
prediction is their concordance with such observations.
Or Hong’s (2013):
By treating a given set of scientific facts as a particular pattern, constructing a 
theory is tantamount to finding a template that best fits the pattern. In brief, 
humans’ creative process is far more erratic than step-by-step logical descriptions 
engendered in mathematical equations or digital computer algorithm. In com-
puter science jargon, humans’ creative process is largely a parallel process rather 
than a pure sequential process . . .  Natural phenomena are reality out there wait-
ing to be comprehended, whereas a scientific theory is humans’ mental construct 
that explicitly describes the repeating pattern, which agrees with most, if not all, 
past observations and which predicts closely the repetitions after the invention of 
the theory or the repetitions not known at the time of its inception.
The last sentence of this statement from the Union of Concerned Scientists 
(2007) is highly revelatory of the entire debate over creationism:
We are . . .  troubled by the misleading interpretations of scientific principles being 
used to discredit and misrepresent the science of evolution . . .  a science class-
room is not a place where all ideas are given equal weight. Science is a process in 
which ideas are ultimately accepted or discarded based on rigorous observation 
and testing . . .  If non-scientific beliefs are accepted as science, we are concerned 
that the public’s understanding of science will be further eroded, the integrity of 
science will be diminished, and the potential implications for society will be pro-
found. The ability to distinguish between claims based on evidence and analysis 
of the natural world and those based on belief may be lost, leading our future 
decision makers to make choices based on unsubstantiated information.
The stated concern is about what kind of methods future decision mak-
ers will employ; the unstated concern is about the assumptions, fundierung, 
models, and affordances that will provide the context for those decisions and 
methods. And the concern gets a label—the error of synecdoche—namely, the 
power of “science.”
Scientific principles are generalizations of known facts about natural phenomena 
in such a way that we can invoke them to explain a large body of facts and we 
can invoke them to make predictions about yet-to-be-found facts. In short, the 
power of a scientific theory is its explanatory and predictive power. (Union of 
Concerned Scientists, 2007)
We do not teach magic in our schools. (Austin, 2014)
What we say about the existence of reality, and the possibility of having knowl-
edge of and putting forward true descriptions of reality, inevitably has conse-
quences for what we may say about the existence of persons, and the knowledge 
and descriptions of persons about themselves. In particular, they fail to see that 
we cannot raise any doubts or questions about the independent existence of real-
ity, or about the possibility that reality exists as something about which we may 

104  
M  Michael Lissack
have objective knowledge, and of which we may put forward true descriptions, 
without at the same time doubting or questioning our own objective existence 
and the truth of any cognition and description of ourselves (Praetorius, 2003).
Rorty (1979) has stated that we should “see knowledge as a matter of conversa-
tion and of social practice rather than as an attempt to mirror nature” (p. 171). 
To the constructivist, knowledge does not necessarily reflect or map exactly the 
external reality, but consists of a set of workable hypotheses, or “templates,” con-
stantly being put to the test in interactions with other people’s constructions of 
the “same” situation. Not only are such construct systems complex and intricate, 
but it seems certain that no two people would ever have exactly the same cogni-
tive structures (Candy, 1991).
Pragmatic constructivism is defined by Nørreklit (2010) as follows:
Pragmatic constructivism is based on the thesis that four dimensions of reality 
must be integrated in the actor-world relation if the construct is to be successful 
as a basis for undertaking actions. These four dimensions are facts, possibilities, 
values and communication . . .  Facts are necessary as a basis of action. Facts alone 
are insufficient. If there are no possibilities there can be no action. If one has no 
possibilities then one is dead. The possibilities must be grounded in the facts. 
Otherwise they are fictional. Further, possibilities create room for choice, but 
they only function if there is a reason to choose and prefer one possibility to the 
other i.e. if the actor has values and the values lie within the range of one’s possi-
bilities. Finally, the integration of facts, possibilities and value must be expressed 
in communication in order to enable action in a social setting. If the integration 
of facts, possibilities, value and communication dissolves, then the ability to act 
intentionally breaks down because the distinction between true and false in the 
pragmatic sense, i.e. between successful and unsuccessful action, breaks down . . .  
Pragmatic constructivism therefore implies that a continuous major task is to 
extract, from the phenomena they wish to represent, the facts which have to be 
considered during the process of their accounting for it. Facts will include not 
only objects but also actions and events which the accountant deems relevant.
The pragmatic constructivist rejects the two tenets of creationism (non-
accidentalism as origin, and magic as method), while at the same time having 
empathy for the clash in worldviews, notions of agency, authority, and control, 
and the psychology of self-identity and meaning that present themselves just 
below the surface of the creationism/evolution debate. As Zach Kopplin’s text 
makes clear, the debate is about what items are “worthy” of the synecdoche 
label “science.” To Kopplin and his intellectual allies, to yield on questions of 
what is science is to risk the admission of “belief” into both scientific prac-
tice and into the predictions and decisions that emanate therefrom. Yet, the 
pragmatic constructivist would note, such “belief” is always present, for the 
practice of science itself is an inductive exercise that treats the not-yet-falsified 
expressions of pattern codified by human cognition into models and labels (and 
on which affordances rely and fundierung is experienced) as “fact.” The “real-
ist” accepts that factual ascription. The pragmatic constructivist is not so sure. 
After all, it was Einstein (1934/1954) who unabashedly declared, “To him who 

A Pragmatic Constructivist Take on the Case  M  105
is a discoverer in this field, the products of his imagination appear so necessary 
and natural that he regards them, and would like to have them regarded by 
others, not as creations of thought but as given realities.”
Realists believe that science aims to tell us about reality, not about our experi-
ences; that its knowledge claims are evaluated by reference to the world, not by 
reference to personal, social, or national utility or viability; that scientific meth-
odology is normative, and consequently distinctions can be made between good 
and bad science; that science is objective in the sense of being different from 
personal, inner experience; that science tries to identify and minimize the impact 
of non-cognitive interests (political, religious, gender, class) in its development; 
that decision-making in science has a central cognitive element and is not reduc-
ible to mere sociological considerations. (Matthews, 2000)
Constructivists’ emphasis on the co-constitution of the actors also entails a 
reflexive reworking of the relationship between the subject and object of enquiry; 
given that, unlike with regard to the natural world, the distinction between sub-
ject and object becomes hard to uphold in the wake of the realization that both 
make the social world. This accounts for the constructivist tabling of constitutiv-
ity, alongside causality, as a driving logic of enquiry. (Epstein, 2013)
Admitting that science is humans’ mental construct allowed us to adopt a 
more modest view about science. We mortals merely attempted to comprehend 
Nature’s almighty by finding some recognizable patterns. This attitude, along 
with Popper’s philosophy, guided us to seek a modest understanding of Nature. 
We no longer looked for the ultimate truth. Rather, we merely tried to approach 
the ultimate truth asymptotically, just like the proverbial Achilles. Knowing that 
we will never actually get there, we must constantly renew and refresh our under-
standing and making scientific pursuits a never-ending endeavor. (Hong, 2013)
We leave this section hoping that you the reader can find at least some mod-
est agreement with Hong as a midpoint between Matthews and Epstein. The 
conference participants whose contributions follow are each of one of these 
three viewpoints. Comparing and contrasting them brought this author to the 
Hong perspective. Where will the process take you?

Dialogue
As has rightly been said, genuine dialogue requires not only talking but a great 
deal of listening, in fact the “great art of deep listening.” Before talking, one 
needs first of all to cultivate listening, to be open to new voices, new learning 
experiences, and then allow the experiences to settle, to be sedimented in ways 
that can be deeply transformative. (Dallmyr, 2013)
The activity of representation is successful only if the recipients are able to receive 
that information through their ‘viewing’ of the representation. (van Fraassen, 
2008)
“It is not the model that is doing the representing; it is the scientist using the 
model who is doing the representing. (Giere, 2006)
Truth grafts itself on previous truth, modifying it in the process, just as idiom 
grafts itself on previous idiom, and law on previous law. Given previous law and 
a novel case, and the judge will twist them into fresh law. Previous idiom; new 
slang or metaphor or oddity that hits the public taste;—and presto, a new idiom 
is made. Previous truth; fresh facts:—and our mind finds a new truth. . . .  In this 
way, theories become instruments rather than answers to enigmas upon which we 
can rely. We must not lie back and relax on them, but rather move forwards, and, 
on occasions, with their help, rethink their very nature. (James, 1907)

CHAPTER 7
Robustness and Explanation
William Wimsatt
R
obustness and explanation are multiply linked. Robustness is cru-
cially connected, as physicist Richard Feynman said, “to fundamen-
tal aspects of physical nature.” In his book The Character of Physical 
Law (1967), Feynman argued that the fundamental principles of nature are 
remarkable because they are derivable in multiple ways using multiple different 
assumptions. So in some sense they are almost unavoidable. This he related to 
a “Babylonian” architecture of theory, in which various elements of theory are 
multiply connected, redundant, and thus more reliable. For this reason, funda-
mental physical laws do not depend on any particular assumptions; a fact that 
he illustrated with two different independent derivations of the inverse-square 
law of gravitational attraction. The great conservation laws in physics have this 
character, and much of the progress in nineteenth-century physics progressed 
through the discovery of the interconvertibility of different forms of energy. 
The conservation laws are, for this reason, deeply anchored in the explanatory 
frameworks that we would use even for deciding what is a reasonable explana-
tion and what is not.
However, this applies not only to the fundamental laws of physics, but also 
at the nitty-gritty level of ordinary explanations. Ordinary objects are robust 
(Wimsatt 2007: Chapter 4). If I am standing behind a podium when I lecture, 
I can use it to illustrate the point. I smack it on the side and you hear it. I feel 
it with my hand. It is impenetrable. I put my computer on it, so it bears weight. 
Visually, you cannot see the lower part of my body if I am behind the podium, 
so it is visually opaque. Thus, I can detect the podium in multiple different 
ordinary ways. I could go further with chemical analyses, and the other means 
of detection and analysis of modern science, but you get the point. So, robust-
ness is fundamentally connected with the objects that we see in the world. 
Furthermore, the objects that are detectable in that multiplicity of different 
ways also are things that are connected to other things through those modes of 

110  
M  William Wimsatt
detection, each mode of detection relying on a different set of an entity’s prop-
erties. Thus, objects are central things from which to move out in organizing 
explanatory schemes—they are going to be important to use. In terms of con-
nectivity, they give a big bang for a buck. A fundamental explanatory principle 
is therefore: Aim to explain that which is less robust in terms of that which is 
more robust.
That applies not only to objects on different scales, but also to the levels of 
organization themselves (Wimsatt 2007: Chapter 10). Levels of organization 
are composed of robust objects that are richly connected to one another, and 
thus play a role in their causal interactions and explanations of their behavior. 
They are usually of roughly the same size and interact on similar timescales. 
(An elementary particle can exist for 10−9 seconds, but any macroscopic object 
that did so would be conceived of as an explosive illusion.) They hang together 
more strongly than objects at that level do with objects at other levels, which 
they may compose or be composed of. You get a bigger bang for a buck out of 
using the order found among those objects in explaining phenomena of that 
level than from appealing to other levels, though there are well-defined cir-
cumstances when it is appropriate to do so (Wimsatt 2007: Chapter 11). Levels 
of organization are the joints of nature, as it were, and in giving explanations 
we should cut nature at its joints. Theories will be simplest and most power-
ful if we respect these joints in theorizing and explaining. They are where the 
regularities are to be found, and objects at those levels will tend to engage in 
processes interacting at roughly the same timescale.
If levels of organization did not exist, our evolution could not have happened. 
Evolution requires that there be stabilities in nature that one can utilize in con-
structing adaptations that respond to these regularities and in building species 
that can evolve and utilize these regularities, what one might call unique stable 
building blocks. Furthermore, it applies all the way up: stable systems made 
out of building blocks, stable supersystems made out of subsystems, and so on. 
There are multiple connections between robustness in not only what exists but 
also in how we ought to structure our explanations. I reiterate: We should try 
to explain things that are not robust in terms of things that are robust.
The Relationship Between Robustness and Function
Consider any adaptive system or machine. The machine has differentiated 
parts and its performance will depend in different ways on what those parts 
do, which means for most interesting machines that there are parts that do 
not cause much damage if they break. You can just about use it without them; 
maybe you are not able to do everything you could before, but you can get 
by. In contrast, breaking some other parts will mean that you are dead in the 
water, you just cannot do anything. So some parts have more downstream 
consequences in the operation of that machine than anything else. In fact, 
that turns out to be an extremely general principle of organization. It applies 
for artifacts. It applies for organisms. It even applies for ecosystems: so-called 
keystone species are those that if you lose them many other things collapse. 
 

Robustness and Explanation  M  111
Indeed, it can arguably be said that the principle applies to any functionally 
organized system, any roughly adaptive system, any system that is a product of 
a selection process that differentiates it in order to accomplish a complicated 
function. It will have different kinds of parts and they will have differential 
impact. Suppose you ask whether there are any ways of making changes deep in 
the functional architecture. That is just what sometimes happens: a scientific 
revolution changes the basic principles and that forces you to make changes all 
the way up. However, because of the multiple connectedness of the fundamen-
tal principles of nature, all hell breaks loose if you change them, so when we do 
make changes, we try not to change things too much.
For example, the relation of Newtonian mechanics to special relativity 
involves Lorentz transformations. You may say that classical kinetic energy 
is not quite what we thought it was, but it is very interesting to see how it 
changes. Relativistic kinetic energy is obtained from classical kinetic energy 
in this way. First of all, in relativistic kinetic energy there is a rest mass term, 
but it is only released as energy under mass energy conversion, which requires 
a very highly energetic reaction like atomic fission or fusion. Bridges, locomo-
tives, or airplanes can be built without worrying about that term. Then there 
are terms in ascending powers of the speed of the system divided by the speed 
of light, v/c. If the speed of the system, v, is small relative to the speed of light, 
c, then the terms in higher powers, (v/c)2, (v/c)3, and so on, are all negligible. 
If you are building bridges or locomotives or airplanes, you simply throw away 
the rest mass term and ignore the higher-order term that happens as you move 
closer to the speed of light, and Newtonian kinetic energy works just fine. This 
is a sketch of a really fundamental transformation at the bottom-most level, but 
it works, because it preserves all of the existing Newtonian applications and the 
Newtonian way of calculating kinetic energy. In that way, classical Newtonian 
mechanics is going to have to be preserved in some way in any future scientific 
revolution because it is itself robust. The changes are all in new areas that had 
not been explored before: at very high energies and at very high velocities.
What role would those basic principles play in functional architectures? The 
argument is that any transformation replacing those basic principles, whatever 
other things it may be able to do, had better be able to preserve the functional 
architectures. That works for deep modifications in genetic programs too: you 
can get away with a deep modification in a genetic program as long as you 
preserve the most important functions of what you are replacing. That is how 
the personal computer was able to replace the IBM Selectric typewriter. The 
Apple II could not do that: even though you could do spreadsheets with it and 
that was effectively the killer app that made the personal computer, the Apple 
II had a 40-character line. Not until the IBM PC with an 80-character line and 
a daisywheel printer that could produce letters on stationery and thus penetrate 
much more deeply was there a true replacement for the office typewriter. After 
that, the PC could be expanded to give you email access and Internet access 
and all of a sudden it could take on a bunch of other functions, which meant 
that the computer became much more deeply entrenched than the typewriter, 
with many downstream consequences. The IBM PC was thus able to substitute 

112  
M  William Wimsatt
for something that was absolutely central to the business community by meet-
ing the sort of functional constraints that are involved.
Entrenchment can also have a social dimension. We had a director of infor-
mation technologies at Chicago when Apple was at a low point and he wanted 
to switch everybody over to Windows machines. That was all well and good in 
the business schools and some other departments, but it turned out that in both 
the social sciences and humanities divisions there were many secretaries who 
had learned on the much more user-friendly Macs and they threatened to resign 
en masse if the director stopped supporting Apple. He had to back down. The 
Mac was robust because it was much easier to learn than MS-DOS, and so it 
was entrenched. This is important: we really need to know in complex systems 
which changes we can get away with making and which we cannot. It is not 
always possible to get away with making deep changes because there may not 
be an accessible alternative.
There is another way in which function relates to robustness. Organisms are 
designed for reliability, so that even with the genetic variations they undergo, 
or the environmental variations they must endure and exploit, they still work. 
In general, the more important the function, the more securely it is backed 
by redundant processes or alternative ways of achieving it. This is perhaps the 
most obvious connection between robustness and organic design; organisms 
are generally much better at this than human engineers.
Good and Bad Explanations
A good explanation ought to be something that is not too sensitive to detail and 
is potentially generalizable. You do not need to get a general law out of it, but 
it should apply to at least some range of other situations that are sufficiently 
like it. There are regularities in nature that are what I call sloppy, gappy gen-
eralizations. These are endemic in the compositional sciences, where we are 
trying to understand upper-level behavior in terms of the parts of which the 
system is composed. It is generally the case that you do not get an exact match 
between the regularities at a lower level and those at the upper level when you 
try to bring them into register. The match generally only works for a limited 
range of conditions as specified at the lower level. For instance, the Brownian 
motion affecting small but visible particles is produced by local imbalances in 
the lower-level collisions, where they do not quite average out, as they would 
for larger particles. In addition, Brownian motion shows scale dependence. An 
insectivorous songbird will see a more jagged Brownian motion than we would 
because it is seeing things at a flicker fusion of 70 frames a second, rather than 
at the human rate of about 24. That bird is able to track shorter zigzags in 
the motion resulting from the local imbalance of bacteria-sized particles with 
molecular collisions. A butterfly takes an apparently random flight path to 
make it harder for a bird to catch; and the bird evolves the ability to sample the 
butterfly’s location more frequently so as to increase its chance of catching it.
There are many kinds of bad explanations. If you have to meet a number of 
constraints to make a good explanation—and here I have ignored many, many 
 

Robustness and Explanation  M  113
dimensions in that regard—the corollary is that there are going to be many ways 
to fail. So, for example, if you insist on giving an explanation in terms of the 
second derivative of a function and you are talking to a high school algebra class, 
that is a bad explanation for that context, because you are presupposing calculus, 
which they cannot yet understand. You are violating an entrenchment constraint 
by not providing information that is a precondition to understanding your expla-
nation, so it is the wrong explanation for that audience. Here is another problem: 
if they disagree with some of your background presumptions, you may not be able 
to get started. This is treating explanation in a different way than I was before; I 
am exploring the issue of what is explanatory to a given audience, what is likely 
to convince them. Thus, as Tversky and Kahneman (1974) showed, salience is 
important to an explanation. For instance, people are far more worried about an 
airplane trip than a car trip, even though the casualty rate for car mileage is more 
than 100 times as high as for air mileage. On the other hand, car crashes happen 
every day and almost everyone knows someone who has been seriously injured 
in a vehicle accident, whereas it is far less common to know someone who has 
been killed or seriously injured in a plane crash. So salience—how juicy a story 
is, and plane crashes and large disasters are very salient—is remarkably effective 
in convincing someone that there is a threat to be avoided.
Better Communication
It is important to recognize the need to take multiple perspectives on a prob-
lem, because we do not have any perspectives that cover all of the waterfront. 
However, the problem is not just taking multiple perspectives; the problem is 
realizing that each perspective will contain its own true or revealing facts and 
biases. How do you get all of the perspectives together to neutralize the biases? 
You can do that if you have a number of people from a number of different 
perspectives and you get them to sit down together and work on a problem, 
although that does not always work if they are too different in perspective.
This is often a problem in communication between people in the humanities 
and those in the sciences: too many aspects of their worldview are too different. 
That should not be the case, though. One of the great benefits of a liberal edu-
cation is that it traditionally has included both the humanities and the sciences, 
and Europeans have often admired the greater breadth of American postsec-
ondary education. Of course, now we have watered down science for those in 
the humanities and sometimes, unfortunately, watered down the humanities 
for scientists and professionals, so we may be giving away our advantage. From 
what I understand, businesses are more interested in hiring people who have 
the capability to acquire professional training but the judgment that comes 
from a broader exposure to literature and the humanities. At the same time, if 
you put off acquiring any professional competence or any math or science until 
college, it is already too late. You are not dead in the water, but you have a very 
hard row to hoe because you have to learn how to see things through the other 
lens. That is the benefit of taking multiple perspectives and a robust approach 
to explanation.

CHAPTER 8
A Mode of “Epi-Thinking” Leads to the 
Exploration of Vagueness and Finality
S. N. Salthe
I 
have recently been working with a form of one of Hempel’s (1962) two 
modes of explanation: the subsumption of phenomena under a covering 
law model. The form in question is the subsumption—or equivalently, 
specification—hierarchy (Salthe, 2012), thus, for example:
{class of more general universals {{{nested subclasses of more definite particulars}}}}
The form here is that of a tree, branching into particulars in the subclasses to 
the right. However, many examples, as in the subsumption process, need fol-
low only one branch. So we can explain, for instance, heat energy production 
during effective work as resulting from the rule of the second law of thermody-
namics (on the assumption that we are in an isolated universe). The procedure 
in this usage is to move logically from a particular in need of explanation to a 
more general phenomenon. In this example:
{heat energy production m{utilization of free energy m{work}}} on the template:
{physical world {material/chemical world {biological world}}}
where
{more generally present in the universe {more particular phenomena}}
Using Boolean subsetting logic (Ellerman, 2009), the biological world is here 
viewed as a particular kind of chemical world, which is in turn taken to be one 
kind of physical world. Work is a particular mediation of chemical transac-
tions, which are one pathway to heat energy production. Then, reading the 
other way, we can postulate causal connections, because the chemical world 

116  
M  S. N. Salthe
depends on physical actions, while the biological world depends on chemical 
interactions. It is this “going the other way” with which I will be concerned in 
this chapter.
Nothing can come from, or evolve out of, a generalization. Thinking of how 
a general explanation—here, the second law—could have an effect as a causal 
power, we need to alter our perspective on it so that we can move in the oppo-
site direction from explanation, following in this way an unfolding of some 
effects of that law.
In the example above, the second law needs an embodiment that would 
be operative causally anywhere. I venture: energy gradients are all intrinsically 
unstable, and tend to dissipate. This can be advanced as a statement characteriz-
ing the physical world generally. That world in our time happens to be far from 
thermodynamic equilibrium and replete with energy gradients. In the physi-
cal world, energy dissipation is carried out as a dispersion of heat energy; that 
is, a spreading or broad contagion of microscopic motion. At bottom, energy 
that binds masses together becomes released in a form that spreads away from 
a source where it was bound, some of it then agitating other energy gradients, 
disrupting some of them as well, releasing more “freed” energy, and so on as the 
original energetic force weakens and radiates into space (Annila, 2010).
Energy dissipating from a gradient can become causative if it is once again 
concentrated in some way. Photosynthesis is a good example where chemical 
reactions can be fostered by solar photons, resulting in a buildup of glucose, 
which can serve as substrate for the energy source used in chemical reactions 
in biological systems (Haynie, 2000). Such reactions will be involved in vari-
ous forms of work by living systems, from cell division to muscle contraction. 
Thus, we have:
{energy gradient dissipation {energy flow harvesting {biological work}}}
On the causal template of:
{global second law m{local energy flows k{biological activities}}}
We now have the second law represented as in a causative, rather than an 
explanatory role. This requires some further background. An energy gradient 
could itself be causative only within a thermodynamically isolated system. It 
can indeed be viewed as causative in our world as understood in the cosmologi-
cal model of the Big Bang. In any version of the Bang, it will have produced a 
far-from-equilibrium universe. Even without a Bang, our universe is manifestly 
far from thermodynamic equilibrium, and a not unreasonable assumption is 
that it (or our portion of it) is an isolated system. The second law in such a 
system “calls for” global (universal) thermodynamic equilibration, which must 
involve matter dispersion. We may note that in this view, energy gradient dis-
sipation preexists energy flow utilization.
It has recently been urged from observations on physical systems that this 
law further calls for the most rapid dissipation of energy gradients possible 

A Mode of “Epi-Thinking”  M  117
under local constraints—the global maximum entropy production principle 
and the local maximum energy dispersion principle (e.g., Annila and Salthe, 
2010; Kleidon, 2010). In this view, all energy gradients would explode if it were 
not for various constraints holding them together, like gravitation, chemical 
bonding, and the “strong force.” Now we have as an emended causative state-
ment of the second law: energy gradients are all intrinsically unstable, and tend 
to dissipate as quickly as possible given local constraints.
The second law does not specify what routes among the many possible in a 
natural setting energy dissipation will follow, because the choice of one path 
can alter the possibilities available for further flows, given that they will always 
follow the momentarily open fastest routes (Annila and Salthe, 2012). In that 
sense, possible flow paths cannot generally be known in advance. As a collec-
tion, flow pathways could be characterized as being vague before the flows 
occur. An image of this process would be rainwater trickling down a bare hill-
side, with some channels disrupting or capturing others, all of them dissipating 
gravitational potential energy as they go.
This vagueness of possibilities aligns naturally with the kind of cause that 
the second law institutes in nature. It is a final cause (Matsuno and Salthe, 
2000; Salthe, 2006, 2010b); indeed, it is the most generally applicable finality 
of any. It requires that energy gradients dissipate as quickly as possible, but 
provides no specifications other than urgency. The finality here becomes clear 
when we understand that the universe is far from thermodynamic equilibrium, 
and thus “calls for” entropy production everywhere.
Vagueness has been considered a problem in analytical philosophy and 
legal discourses (e.g., Keefe, 2000; Keefe and Smith, 1999), but here I will 
model it as a plenitude of possibilities, or pluripotentiality (Salthe, 1993). 
Vagueness, as equivocation, could be created by a deliberate blurring of 
choice; or it could result as ambiguity, when an image of some thing or situ-
ation is for practical reasons impossible to obtain or describe; or it could be 
because some object itself is intrinsically vague, as were the opportunities for 
water flow as that flow began to take place in the example given above. An 
uncanny example of this kind of vagueness would be the actual value of any 
real number. Other, more interesting examples of this particular mode of 
vagueness are the following:
1. Possible choices, constituting a Shannon-type informational entropy, 
form a definite array of possibilities, as in a die when the possibilities are 
taken all together while the die is in transit. Here, the possibilities and 
outcome are considerably more definite than those on the hillside men-
tioned above.
2. Inferences from possibilities become clearer as a process of inquiry or 
construction develops, as in a Bayesian process of revelation, where a 
prior estimate leads to a succession of posterior refinements. Here, no 
definite actuality may be uncovered, but may become increasingly mani-
fest as further experiences or computations proceed, narrowing the vari-
ety of possibilities and diminishing the vagueness. In neurobiology, for 

118  
M  S. N. Salthe
example, this would be a process of “coarse to fine” construction of a 
message (Peyran et al., 2010).
3. Possibilities are all in principle definable or realizable, and there may be a 
multitude of them, many of which may be realized together. Along with 
water trickling down the hillside, this is the situation in an as yet unde-
veloped embryo, which can be characterized as being vaguely embodied 
because we know the definitive forms to be attained by way of the devel-
opmental process. Hence, we can understand embryonic anlage as being 
vague precursors of the known forms that will gradually be revealed as 
the embryo develops (Salthe, 2012). In this particular case, the search 
through possibilities is guided by informational constraints held, but 
also generated, internally. On the hillside, constraints are generated 
spontaneously as the process unfolds.
In all of these examples there can be said to be an actual intrinsically vague initial 
situation, which may be clarified by activities appropriate to each case. In (1) the 
search dynamics have no guidance, and all possibilities have the same likelihood 
and require the same energetic cost. This process cannot fail to accomplish its 
crisp goal, which is simply to reveal one of several numbers, which defines its 
final cause. This finality beckons the gambler, but is of little interest here.
In (2), finality is realized during a process of construction, continuing until 
a satisfaction of sufficiency is attained. This may be a computational inquiry 
of posterior probability built on what was learned before, by way of a series of 
conditional probabilities. Or it may be a process of concrete construction, given 
what has already been achieved, of more refined becoming. Vaguer possibili-
ties are gradually exchanged for a better degree of realization. The goal here is 
emergence or clarification.
In (3), finality is realized in the quest for becoming, and development is 
subject to individuation in all the tracks followed. Thus, many histories accu-
mulate in parallel. On the hillside, the multiple flowing will be realizing the 
finality of entropy production, while in an embryo that finality is harnessed 
to a more immediate one—the attainment of maturity, here accompanied by a 
slowing of the rate of intrinsic energy flows as it becomes achieved. In biology, 
the ulterior goal is the burst of strenuous activities involved in reproduction.
Finalities can be parsed as follows:
{natural tendencies {functions {purposes}}} or
{teleomaty {teleonomy {teleology}}} (Salthe, 2008)
The second law is a teleomatic principle. The functions of living things are also 
end directed (toward survival and reproduction), as, of course, are the many 
statable purposes of human beings. Our view of the Big Bang can be repre-
sented in a subsumption hierarchy thus:
{physical world m{material world m{biological world m{sociocultural world}}}} 
(Salthe, 2010a)

A Mode of “Epi-Thinking”  M  119
Stated this way, there is no obvious suggestion of finality. Here one realm is 
merely shown emerging from a previously established one. However, following 
suggestive statements by Peirce (1935), we may use this format to imagine a 
more finalistic formulation, thus:
{universal mind m{physico-chemical world m{{ cognition }}}} (Salthe, 2000; 
note also Vrana and Wheeler, 1992)
The realm of universal mind would have been during the “dark ages” of the 
“matter–radiation soup” early in the Big Bang. This situation would have been 
vague in the sense that all possible forms and configurations compatible with 
physical constraints would momentarily appear anywhere and evaporate, min-
gling, changing, uniting, dividing, constantly replacing each other locally in 
the way that thoughts seem to replace each other in the idle mind, some of 
these being likely as well to prefigure future emergences in higher integrative 
levels as yet unrealized.
In this perspective, all possibilities are present at first as fleeting configura-
tions of basic particles. The macroscopic configuration that finally did occur 
would have occasionally been prefigured in its particulate aspects. In order to 
give history its due, we must allow that other particulate configurations might 
have appeared today instead, and since only one macrostate is possible given 
any microstate, other microstates will have gradually dropped out as a result of 
events at higher levels, via top-down influence. This means that history as we 
know it discards possible microstates as it accumulates. However, any macro-
state might be compatible with many possible microstates, and so we cannot in 
principle know which microstate was finally being selected during macroscopic 
history. Top-down influence is restrictive, but not determinative.
My general point here is that conceptual formats can lead our inquiries in 
certain directions if we are open to the possibilities they present. The finalistic 
drive in the above universal scene will have been the tendency toward more 
definite embodiments of material and living systems at increasingly larger 
scales—an evolutionary tendency, therefore a developmental process (Salthe, 
1993). The role of the second law in this will have had to do with the fact that 
not all energy gradients dissipate rapidly spontaneously, as by mass wasting or 
diffusion. The steeper of such gradients, however, may be susceptible to the 
actions of dissipative structures, and even very refractory ones can yield to the 
activities of living systems (Salthe, 2010b). That is, the origin of life and the 
evolutionary tendency of biology on Earth toward larger and more complex 
forms (e.g., Maynard Smith and Szathmary, 2005) can be viewed as elicited by 
the second law acting as a final cause so as to produce a plenitude of ever more 
effective dissipative structures.
To summarize, explanation by way of subsumption under a covering law 
opened up the possibility of a causal explanation by reversing the process. In 
the particular case examined, the causality could be seen to be finalistic. This 
could easily be mapped to developmental processes more generally, whereby 
initially vague conditions will unfold into ever more definite embodiment.

CHAPTER 9
Complexity, Ockham’s Razor, and Truth
Kevin T. Kelly and Konstantin Genin
Introduction: The Simplicity Puzzle
Ockham’s razor says: “Choose the simplest theory compatible with the data.” 
Without Ockham’s razor, theoretical science cannot get very far, since there are 
always ever more complicated explanations compatible with current evidence. 
Scientific lore pretends that reality is simple—but gravitation works by a qua-
dratic, rather than a linear, law; and what about the shocking failure of parity 
conservation in particle physics? Ockham speaks so strongly in its favor that 
demonstrating its falsity resulted in a Nobel Prize in physics (Lee and Yang 
1957). So why trust Ockham?
It is tempting, but philosophically disastrous, to conceive of scientific 
method as a kind of guaranteed indicator of the truth. That wishful view would 
require that Ockham’s razor works something like a magical compass guaranteed 
to point at the truth, whatever the truth might be. But Ockham’s razor cannot 
really work like a compass, because its needle is forever stuck at the same read-
ing—simplicity. Imagine the surprise of the captain of a sailing ship, secure in 
the completion of a long, prosperous voyage, who suddenly discovers that the 
compass needle was frozen the entire time. How did that work? It is very hard 
to explain without some strange, providential story—for instance, that God 
ensures that the truth is simple, as Gottfried Leibniz and other early scientific 
luminaries proposed. Yet who can miss the irony of invoking an undetectable 
Providence in defense of the principle that science should get along with the 
bare minimum of ontological assumptions?
It would be better to give up on unverifiable, metaphysical connections 
between simplicity and truth, and to seek, instead, an a priori, methodological 
justification. One familiar methodological approach is to substitute some ersatz 
goal for the putative goal of finding the truth. For example, it is a familiar story 
in machine learning that simple theories can yield more accurate predictions 
than complex theories. The idea is that empirical estimates based on more 

122  
M  Kevin T. Kelly and Konstantin Genin
complex models can have a greater expected distance from the truth because 
you are fitting many parameters with a small sample, so the statistical shake 
in the resulting predictions is higher because each parameter is estimated with 
a tiny sample. The added statistical shake impairs the predictive accuracy of a 
complex model—even if the complex model is true. So the over-fitting argu-
ment for Ockham’s razor is not about finding true theories; it is, at best, an 
instrumental account of how to minimize statistical spread in empirical esti-
mates by using a theory that you may even know a priori to be false. In the 
philosophy of science, one substitutes ersatz methodological virtues for truth. 
Simpler theories are more testable (Glymour 1980), more unified and explana-
tory (Kitcher 1993; Friedman 1986), more symmetrical (Malament 1977), and 
more bold (Popper 1959). In a similar spirit, information theorists (Rissanen 
1978) say that simple theories compress the data better. We are not opposed to 
any of that, so far as it goes, but it does not go far enough. Ockham’s razor is 
usually regarded as a (or even as the) fundamental principle of scientific infer-
ence (Harman and Kulkarni 2012). Inference implies belief in what is inferred 
and to believe a theory is to believe that it is true. So, unless one can, in turn, 
connect the ersatz virtues with truth, presuming that the ersatz virtues point to 
the truth is tantamount to wishful thinking, the undeniable epistemic sin of pre-
suming that reality is the way one wishes it were. To methodologically justify 
Ockham’s razor as a principle of inference, one must methodologically connect 
Ockham’s systematic bias toward simplicity with finding the true theory.
So let us turn, resolutely, to methodological justifications of Ockham’s razor 
that are clearly truth directed. For example, Bayesians argue that if you start 
out with a simplicity bias over alternative theories, and you continually update 
by Bayesian conditioning, then your degree of belief in the true theory will 
converge to 1 in the limit. Here is what that amounts to. Transport yourself in 
imagination to a more bucolic place and time, when a common entertainment 
was to shoot rusty cans off fence railings. Suppose that the cans are arranged 
in ascending order of complexity (e.g., the labels get fancier). Suppose that one 
of the cans is nailed to the fence rail. That is the true theory. Now shoot down 
the cans, one after another, in order of increasing complexity, until you shoot 
the nailed can and it does not fall down (Earman 1992). Ockham’s razor finds 
the truth in that rote sort of way. When the nailed can is hit, it is, indeed, the 
simplest can remaining on the fence. But that is as vacuous a truism as saying 
that the thing you seek is always in the last place you look! It hardly follows 
that the things you look for are always avoiding you; neither does it follow that 
simplicity can smell the truth. An alternative way to converge to the truth is to 
start out with a very complex theory and then to drop it when the anticipated 
complexity does not emerge after some long period of time. Historically, that 
has happened many times. For example, classical electrodynamics implies that 
the absolute velocity of the Earth through space has a causal role in the genera-
tion of electrical currents (Staley 2009). Repeated failure to detect any such 
effect contributed to the rejection of classical electrodynamics. The problem 
is not to show that Ockham’s razor is sufficient for finding the truth. The dif-
ficulty is to show that it is necessary for finding the truth, or that it is, at least, 

Complexity, Ockham’s Razor, and Truth  M  123
better than alternative methods like the one just described. And that is very 
hard to do without begging the question with a material assumption that the 
truth is simple or probably simple.
The Middle Way
Here is the crux of the puzzle surrounding Ockham’s razor. If you demand 
truth in the short run, you need to posit a correlation between simplicity and 
truth, and then you can’t explain how it works without begging the question 
with a metaphysical story that explains the short-run correlation. At the other 
extreme, long-run, methodological convergence is too weak, because lots of 
different biases would get you to the truth in the long run. One conception of 
success is too strong to be feasible without magic or question-begging assump-
tions; the other conception of success is so weak that it does not rule out any 
conclusions in the short run, however complex. The obvious, Goldilocks moral 
is to seek an intermediate success concept. Here is an ancient hint, from the 
Katha Upanishad, circa 600 bc:
Living in the midst of ignorance, and considering themselves intelligent and 
enlightened, the senseless people go round and round, following crooked courses 
just like the blind led by the blind.
The evident suggestion is that a more direct course to the truth would be better. 
Granted that one cannot go straight to the truth, one should, at least, pursue 
the truth as directly as possible.1 The ancients even helpfully suggest two precise 
measures of indirectness of approach to the truth: reversals of opinion and cycles 
of opinion.2 Alas, nobody discussing the simplicity puzzle for the past two and 
a half millennia has heeded the hint. Until now, that is. In accordance with the 
ancient hint, we will explain, without any appeals to Providence, how a fixed 
bias (i.e., a broken compass) can keep you on the straightest possible path to 
your goal.
Asking for Directions
Suppose that you become lost in a small town on a road trip, returning from 
Niagara Falls. You stop to ask a local resident for directions to your home town 
to the south. But before you can even say where you are headed, he responds: 
“Turn around. The freeway ramp is on the left.”
The advice is useful, even though the local resident didn’t know which city 
you were headed to. In rural Pennsylvania, the freeways run through the main 
valley system, and otherwise the rural routes twist and meander through the 
hills and mountains. The freeway is not straight by any means, since it follows 
the valley floor. But whichever city you are headed to, the freeway is the best 
route. That remains true, even if you have to backtrack to get on to it, which 
is very often the case.
Suppose that you disregard the resident’s advice. To up the ante, suppose 
that your hunch was right, in the sense that you headed south when the nearest 

124  
M  Kevin T. Kelly and Konstantin Genin
freeway entrance ramp was to the north. Sticking to your guns, you would 
end up on one of the small, circuitous mountain routes, and things would get 
worse and worse. Figuring that out, you would do a U-turn and head back 
to the freeway entrance ramp, just as the resident originally advised. So, at 
the minimum, you would have added one U-turn to all of the other twists 
and turns in the freeway system. You would have done worse by ignoring the 
resident’s advice even though you violated it by heading directly toward your 
goal. Therefore, fixed advice can help you reach a hidden goal, unknown to 
the adviser. Moreover, violating that advice can result in doing worse, even 
if you guessed right about the direction of your ultimate goal. No magic is 
required. It remains only to transfer that moral to the vexed problem of justi-
fying Ockham’s razor.
Asking Ockham for Directions
Think about reversals of prior opinion as epistemic U-turns. A reversal of opin-
ion is defined as choosing a theory T and then choosing a theory T’ that con-
tradicts T after more information has been received. Reversals of opinion are 
unpleasant and wreck one’s scientific reputation, but there is a deeper, episte-
mological reason to minimize them. Since inductive methods cannot approach 
the truth directly, the most reliable inductive methods are the ones that find 
the truth most directly, so methods that reverse their opinions needlessly are 
less reliable than those that are guaranteed to keep one on the straightest pos-
sible path to the truth.
Let us see how that idea applies to a standard theory choice problem—curve 
fitting. Assume that the truth is some polynomial law Y = f(X) = 
a X
i
i
n
i

¤
0
Suppose that the question is what the polynomial degree of the true relation 
is, where the degree of f is the greatest i such that ai is nonzero. The data are 
increasingly precise open rectangles in the plane, through which the graph 
of f passes. The answers to the question concerning polynomial degree are 
epistemically nested, in the following way. Think of inquiry as an endless game 
between nature and the scientist. Nature wins the game if, in the limit, she 
presents ever more, ever tighter open rectangles for some polynomial relation 
f on which the scientist does not converge to the true degree of f. The scientist 
wins if she converges to the true degree of f, or if nature fails to present ever 
more data true of some polynomial. Nature can start by presenting more and 
more data for some degree zero curve (i.e., a flat line). If nature continues to do 
so and the scientist never converges to the answer “degree 0,” then the scientist 
loses. So the scientist has to plump for “degree 0” sooner or later. By then, at 
most finitely many open rectangles have been presented. Since the rectangles 
are all open, it remains possible to tilt the line a little to obtain a curve of degree 
1 that is compatible with the rectangles presented already. Now nature can con-
tinue presenting more rectangles for the tilted line until, on pain of losing the 
game, the scientist plumps for the conclusion “degree 1.” At that point, nature 
can inflect the tilted line slightly into a parabola that still fits all the open rect-
angles presented so far, and so on. So nature has a winning strategy to force an 

Complexity, Ockham’s Razor, and Truth  M  125
arbitrary, convergent scientist to reverse opinion from degree 0 to degree 1 to 
degree 2, and so on, to any degree n she pleases.
Here is the analogy to the freeway example. The freeway to the truth is 
the sequence of theories “degree 0,” “degree 1,” . . . , “degree n” through which 
nature can force an arbitrary, convergent method. Since nature has a winning 
strategy to do so, no method can guarantee better worst-case performance than 
that, just as no route home can be better than the freeway. So the freeway to the 
truth is the sequence “degree 0,” “degree 1,” . . . , “degree n,” . . .  Think of each 
stage along the freeway to the truth as an exit to a possible destination city.
Now consider an Ockham violator. Suppose that she even gets lucky, and 
jumps immediately to degree 3, which happens to be true. Then, the antici-
pated cubic effects (two inflection points in the graph of f ) do not come in. 
Time passes. They still do not come in. She realizes that if they never come 
in, she is going to lose the truth-finding game (think of the driver, meandering 
through the Pennsylvania mountains). So, eventually, she has to reverse her 
opinion from degree 3 to degree 0. Now, nature still has a winning strategy to 
force the scientist back up through degrees 1, 2, and 3, so her overall path to 
the truth is (3, 0, 1, 2, 3) rather than the optimal, Ockham path (0, 1, 2, 3). 
Her reward for getting lucky at hitting on the complex truth a priori is just an 
extra reversal of opinion compared to the Ockham method. Note that (3, 0, 1, 
2, 3) is also a cycle of opinion, whereas (0, 1, 2, 3) has no cycle, so the violator 
does worse in both senses mentioned by the ancients in the Katha Upanishad!3
That is really the crux for any attempt to provide a noncircular, non-meta-
physical justification of Ockham’s razor. It is easy to see that you do worse at 
finding the truth in simple worlds if you assume that the truth is complex. But 
if you also do better in complex worlds by inferring a complex theory, then the 
argument for simplicity requires a circular or question-begging assumption that 
the truth is simple, which prompts metaphysical speculations. To break out of 
the circle, it is necessary to show something apparently paradoxical—that pre-
suming a complex theory makes your truth-finding performance worse, even in 
worlds in which the complex theory is true. But it really is no more paradoxical 
than driving north to get on to a south-bound interstate.
To examine the same idea from a slightly different angle, consider the worst-
case reversal bounds for Ockham and for the violator. In general, over degree n, 
Ockham reverses opinion at most n times, but the violator reverses her opinion 
at least n + 1 times.4 So Ockham dominates the violator in terms of worst-case 
reversal bounds over answers to the question. Therefore, Ockham’s razor is, in a 
sense, necessary for optimal worst-case reversal performance in the polynomial 
degree problem. It is also sufficient: every convergent method for the polyno-
mial degree problem that never rules out the simplest possibility compatible 
with information is both reversal efficient, in terms of worst-case bounds over 
answers. It is not hard to see that the result extends to any problem in which 
the alternative theories are totally ordered by simplicity as T1, T2, T3, . . .  Call 
back-and-forth results of that kind Ockham efficiency theorems.
The preceding argument can be generalized. First, the above Ockham effi-
ciency theorem holds only in the fairly simple setting of the polynomial degree 

126  
M  Kevin T. Kelly and Konstantin Genin
problem, in which answers are sequentially ordered by simplicity in an obvious 
way. One can extend the argument to a very general class of theory choice prob-
lems. A theory choice problem involves three components: (1) a set of possible 
worlds, or ways the world could be; (2) the possible information that would be 
received, eventually, in each world; and (3) the question, or the range of pos-
sible theories among which one is choosing. Simplicity reflects iterations of the 
traditional problem of induction that one faces in such a problem. You face the 
problem of induction from one answer to another in a theory choice problem 
if, regardless of how the first answer is true, you would never receive informa-
tion ruling out the second answer. The problem of induction from one answer 
to another defines an order on answers, and you face an iterated problem of 
induction along paths in that order.5 The polynomial degree problem has just 
one such path “degree 0,” “degree 1,” . . . , “degree n,” . . . , but that is a very 
special case. In general, simplicity orders, like freeway systems, can branch. For 
example, suppose that the question is not merely to find the polynomial degree 
of f, but the form of f, which is defined as the set of all i such that ai is nonzero 
in the normal form polynomial expression of f.
Second, scientists don’t usually plump for a unique theory at every stage 
of inquiry. They typically suspend judgment for a while by disjoining all 
answers compatible with experience until a sufficiently long run of simple data 
confirms the simplest answer. So Ockham’s razor should be stated generally 
enough to deal with disjunctive beliefs over branching simplicity orders. That 
suggests some alternative formulations of Ockham’s razor. Ockham’s greedy 
razor requires only that one’s disjunctive belief state includes some simplest 
theory compatible with current information. Thus, a greedy search for such 
an answer in the space of possible answers suffices. Ockham’s horizontal razor 
requires, more ambitiously, that one’s disjunctive belief state include every sim-
plest theory compatible with current information. Ockham’s horizontal razor 
entails the greedy version, but still allows for simplicity gaps, where a gap in a 
disjunctive belief state is an answer compatible with current information that 
is excluded from the belief state even though it is simpler than some answer 
included in the belief state. Ockham’s vertical razor is just Ockham’s greedy 
razor, along with the requirement that one’s belief state is gap free (i.e., closed 
downward in the simplicity order restricted to answers compatible with current 
information). Ockham’s horizontal and vertical razors both entail Ockham’s 
greedy razor, but neither entails the other: the vertical razor pertains to chains 
in the simplicity order and the horizontal razor pertains to anti-chains—hence 
the names.
A more refined system of Ockham efficiency theorems emerges in the gen-
eralized setting. Ockham’s horizontal razor is mandated by reversal efficiency, 
but not by cycle efficiency. For suppose that the simplicity order has just two 
paths, A < B < D and A < C < D (it looks like a diamond with A at the bottom 
and D at the top). Suppose that current information rules out A, but none of 
the remaining possibilities. Finally, suppose that you violate the horizontal 
version of Ockham’s razor by inferring B rather than B or C. Nature can now 
force you to plump for C and then for D, so you produce the sequence (B, C, D) 
 

Complexity, Ockham’s Razor, and Truth  M  127
instead of the Ockham sequence (B or C, C, D), which has one fewer reversal, 
because B or C is not contradicted by C. Horizontal Ockham methods never 
commit more reversals in a given node of the simplicity order than the height 
of the node in the order, whereas violators commit at least one more reversal. 
Horizontal Ockham’s razor is not enforced by cycle efficiency, since the extra 
reversal (B, C, D) does not constitute a cycle.
In contrast, Ockham’s vertical razor is mandated by cycle efficiency, but 
not by reversal efficiency, so the ancient authors of the Katha Upanishad were 
right to mention both! For suppose that there is a simplicity gap in one’s belief 
state—for example, “degree 2 or degree 4.” Then, since “degree 2” is com-
patible with current information, nature has available the strategy to present 
information from some polynomial f of degree 3 until the convergent scientist 
plumps for “degree 3,” on pain of never converging to the truth. Then nature is 
free to force the scientist to plump for “degree 4.” The pattern (2 or 4, 3, 4) is 
a disjunctive cycle, in the sense that 2 or 4 is accepted, reversed to 3, and then 
entailed by 4. Methods that satisfy the stronger, vertical version of Ockham’s 
razor never perform disjunctive cycles. On the other hand, minimization of 
reversals does not enforce Ockham’s vertical razor. Ockham methods can be 
forced along the path (2, 3, 4), but the gappy method’s worst-case performance 
is (2 or 4, 2, 3, 4), which still has only 2 reversals (since 4 does not contradict 
2 or 4).
Thus, we have the following, interesting extension of the Ockham efficiency 
theorem to the general setting of disjunctive answers and branching simplicity: 
assuming that the methods under consideration converge to the true answer to 
the problem at all, cycle efficiency is equivalent to Ockham’s vertical razor and 
reversal efficiency is equivalent to Ockham’s horizontal razor. So efficiency in 
both senses is equivalent to the very plausible conjunction of Ockham’s vertical 
razor and Ockham’s horizontal razor.
When Close Is Not Good Enough
In spite of all that has been said, it remains tempting to conclude, with the 
machine learning community, that complex effects do not really matter, if they 
are small. Who cares, for example, about missing tiny terms in a polynomial 
law? After all, it is routine in physics to expand a function in a Taylor series 
and to truncate all but the first few terms. We concede the point, if one merely 
wishes to predict what a passive observer would see. We also concede the point 
when one wishes to predict the results of an action or policy from experimen-
tal data, which are sampled from the modified world that the policy would 
produce. However, we disagree resolutely if one wishes to infer the effects of 
a policy or action from nonexperimental data, as, for example, when a cor-
poration hires a machine learning firm to mine customer data as a guide to 
designing new retail displays. Then, the planned policy may perturb the system 
under study, invalidating the usual machine learning claims about predictive 
accuracy from samples drawn from the non-perturbed system. Evidently, the 
causal truth can matter, even in (or especially in) the most mundane of contexts. 

128  
M  Kevin T. Kelly and Konstantin Genin
For example, there is a statistical link (correlation) between ashtray frequency 
and lung cancer. One can estimate that link very accurately using standard 
statistical and machine learning techniques. Yet taking away the ashtrays does 
not cure lung cancer—instead, it destroys the link. That is why the causal truth 
matters for policy. The familiar moral: correlation between X and Y tells one 
nothing about the nature of the causal relationship between X and Y, which 
could be that X causes Y, that Y causes X, or that there is a confounding cause 
of both X and Y, as in this example.
It is, therefore, a potentially revolutionary discovery that causal orientation 
can be inferred from patterns of correlation in nonexperimental data over three 
or more variables (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 1993; Pearl 2009). Here is 
the basic idea. Consider a faucet Z governed by two handles X and Y (e.g., 
hot and cold) and suppose that is the complete causal story. Then the setting 
of handle X tells you nothing about the setting of handle Y—neither handle 
is causally connected to the other. But given the flow Z out of the faucet, the 
setting of handle X provides a great deal of information about the setting of 
handle Y. The moral: joint causes X, Y of a common effect Z are statistically 
independent, but become statistically dependent, given the common effect. 
Next, suppose that we have a single handle Z that governs two faucets X, Y. 
That is the dual or opposite situation in which we have a common cause of 
two effects. Then information about the flow from X provides information 
about flow from the other faucet Y, because the flow from one faucet provides 
information about the setting of the handle Z, which governs both faucets. But 
given the setting of the handle, the flow from one faucet provides no further 
information about the flow from the other. Notice that the conditional and 
unconditional dependencies are exactly opposite in the common effect case. 
It remains for us to consider causal chains. Suppose that there is one handle 
X that governs a faucet Z that pours into a funnel Y. Then the setting of the 
handle X provides information about the flow out of the funnel Y, because X 
provides information about the flow into the funnel Z. But given the flow out 
of the faucet Z, the setting of the handle X provides no extra information about 
the flow from the funnel Y. That is the same dependency profile that is associ-
ated with the common cause. By symmetry, the result is the same if we swap X 
for Y. So the common effect pattern of conditional and nonconditional depen-
dencies differs empirically from the other three cases. Recognizing the common 
effect pattern in the data can potentially yield genuine causal knowledge from 
cheap, abundant, moral, nonexperimental data, as long as one examines at least 
three variables.
Of course, all of that depends on the variables in question providing a com-
plete causal description of the situation, a condition that, itself, requires some 
heavy lifting from Ockham. It also assumes that causal paths do not cancel 
perfectly—no inductive method can win against a perfect illusion. But even 
given those assumptions, dependence is an effect—it is verifiable from data, 
but not refutable (because the dependence could be arbitrarily small), so the 
above logic concerning the problem of induction, simplicity, Ockham’s razor, 
and reversals of opinion applies. It can be shown (Kelly and Mayo-Wilson 

Complexity, Ockham’s Razor, and Truth  M  129
2010) that inferring causal directionality from nonexperimental data is subject 
to the kind of forcible reversals of opinion that were discussed above, in con-
nection with the polynomial degree problem. No matter how strong a given 
causal connection happens to be, you can never really guard against discover-
ing new, arbitrarily small effects that cause you to flip the orientation of the 
connection in question any finite number of times, given that you can converge 
to the true orientation of the cause at all. Skepticism is one response to our 
argument, but it is a luxury—sometimes, one must make a policy decision and 
experimental data will not be forthcoming. The right response is that unavoid-
able reversals of opinion are justified because they are unavoidable and avoid-
able reversals are not justified because they are avoidable. The best possible 
methods for causal discovery from nonexperimental data are, therefore, those 
that minimize causal reversals. And which methods are those? The Ockham 
efficiency theorem says: the Ockham ones.
Our analysis raises some real machine learning issues for causal discovery 
algorithms. There are myriad causal theories, and the simplicity order over 
such theories branches massively. Ockham’s horizontal razor is prohibitive to 
implement in that setting. However, the Ockham efficiency theorems have 
some flexibility in application, because efficiency is relative to the underlying 
simplicity concept, which can be understood more or less coarsely. It turns 
out that the simplicity order over causal theories is ranked by the total number 
of individual causal connections, in the sense that each step along a path in 
the order amounts to the addition of one more causal connection between 
variables (Chickering and Meek 2002). If one thinks of simplicity degrees as 
levels in that ranking (i.e., as the total number of causal connections), then 
Ockham’s horizontal razor allows one to return the disjunction of the theories 
of least rank that are consistent with the data, rather than all theories that are 
minimal in the order (which could include many more). Moreover, that strat-
egy is optimal in terms of worst-case reversals over each rank level (efficiency 
is relative to what one takes simplicity to be). Finally, there is an attractive 
trade-off. The rank version of horizontal Ockham’s razor licenses one to say 
more and is also easier to compute. But the underlying efficiency argument is 
correspondingly weaker, because the worst-case bounds are taken with respect 
to a coarser coarse-graining of possibilities. So it is, after all, a judgment call 
whether to go for the stronger justification and a weaker output that is harder 
to compute, or for a weaker justification for a stronger output that is easier to 
compute.
Some causal search algorithms implement only a greedy version of Ockham’s 
razor, in the sense that they find a minimal theory compatible with the data 
and stop (Chickering and Meek 2002). The greedy strategy is optimal with 
respect to cycles, as long as one does not leave simplicity gaps, which greedy 
strategies never do, because they never produce vertical disjunctions. Of course, 
such strategies are not reversal optimal, either with respect to the order on 
theories or with respect to the ranking by number of causal connections, since 
that requires that the method occasionally produce horizontal disjunctions of 
causal theories.

130  
M  Kevin T. Kelly and Konstantin Genin
The literature on causal inference from nonexperimental data is just the 
tip of the iceberg concerning the relationship between accurate counterfactual 
predictions and theoretical truth. It is more the rule, rather than the excep-
tion, that scientific theories are intended causally and are meant to apply in 
novel situations. When nonexperimental data are relied on to infer theories 
that govern unobserved situations, the problem of induction arises, and novel 
policies can have disastrous consequences if one gets the theory wrong. For 
example, on Ptolemy’s earth-centered planetary theory, space travel was incon-
ceivable: space ships would bounce off the crystalline sphere that governs the 
moon and we would have no idea how much fuel it would take to get to any 
other planet, since the stationary Earth provides no baseline for measuring 
the distances.6 On Copernicus’s sun-centered view, the crystalline spheres no 
longer make sense (we would be embedded in such a sphere ourselves) and we 
know the distances to all the planets, so interplanetary travel becomes a feasible 
policy goal. Yet all that separated the two theories, prior to the invention of 
the telescope, was Ockham’s razor—Copernicus’s theory saves five epicycles 
posited by Ptolemy’s theory to account for the apparent retrograde motion of 
the planets against the fixed stars. The motivation for applying Ockham’s razor 
cannot have been to find the truth in the short run. There is this justification, 
however. It is the unique strategy that keeps us from going round and round 
and following needlessly crooked paths to the truth.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by John Templeton Foundation grant 24145. We are 
indebted to Hanti Lin and to Oliver Schulte for recent discussions concerning 
simplicity, cycles, and reversals of opinion.
Notes
1. The topic of minimizing mind-changes prior to convergence has been investigated 
extensively in the area of formal learning theory (cf. Jain et al. 1999). The con-
nection between learning performance and Ockham’s razor has been developed by 
Schulte (1999) and Kelly (2002, 2007a, b, 2008, 2010) and Kelly and Glymour 
(2004). Kelly’s earlier approach was to derive Ockham’s razor from retraction min-
imization, where a retraction occurs whenever one no longer affirms what one used 
to affirm. Retractions are more complicated to analyze and the derived version of 
Ockham’s razor is not as plausible. This chapter substitutes reversals and cycles for 
retractions, with smoother and more plausible results.
2. In computational learning theory, crookedness is measured in terms of mind-
changes (Jain et al. 1999) and cycles are called U-shaped learning (Carlucci et al. 
2007).
3. As long as we are channeling ancient, eastern wisdom, we may as well give some air 
time to ancient, Western wisdom. Plato, in his dialogue The Meno, distinguished 
knowledge from mere, true belief in terms of the stability of the former, in the 
sense that one would not give it up in the face of true information. Note that the 
sequence (3, 0) is unstable in that sense, whereas the sequence (0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , n) is 
stable, in Plato’s sense.
 
 
 
 
 

Complexity, Ockham’s Razor, and Truth  M  131
4. Counting reversals is a bit crude, since the simplicity order may have infinite 
descending chains or other peculiarities that make the worst-case reversal count 
infinite. More generally, say that a reversal sequence is a finite sequence of answers 
or disjunctions of answers such that each successive entry contradicts its predeces-
sor. Then say that one method is as good as another, in terms of worst-case reversals 
over answer A, if for every reversal sequence performed by the first method, given 
that A is true, the second method generates a reversal sequence whose successive 
entries entail those in the first method’s sequence. The first method is better, in 
terms of worst-case reversals over A, if it is as good as the second (in the sense 
just defined) and the second is not as good as it (in that sense). Then the ascend-
ing reversal sequences of the Ockham method are all duplicated by the violator 
(due to nature’s winning strategy to force all convergent methods to produce all 
such sequences), but the violator’s reversal sequence (3, 1) is never matched by the 
Ockham method.
5. This is just a simplified, informal gloss, and there remains a great deal to be said. 
For example, the order is a preorder in general, but is a partial order if the theories 
are locally closed (in the topological sense) with respect to the topology induced by 
possible information states. When answers are not locally closed, we recommend 
shifting the question until they are. That is the beginning of a normative theory of 
how to pose scientific questions.
6. This discussion of the Copernican revolution follows Kuhn (1957).

CHAPTER 10
Getting a Grip
Nancy J. Nersessian
I
’ve studied the practices of scientists, both through historical research and, 
for the last 12 years, by studying research laboratories in the bioengineer-
ing sciences. I want to explore what the practices of scientists engaged in 
biosystem simulation modeling can tell us about explanation, understanding, 
and control. In the past, I have looked at conceptual models. Now I look at 
physical simulation models, that is models made out of living tissues and engi-
neered parts in order to do simulations of phenomena that scientists can’t have 
any access to physically either because they can’t get the control that they need 
to do experiments or because ethically you couldn’t do those kinds of things, to 
even animals. In addition, I’m studying the computational modeling practices 
of systems biologists. Through the study of these scientists’ modeling practices 
we can come to see the importance of understanding, as opposed to explana-
tion, in science.
Let me outline the paper. I’m going to start by asking “why does the philoso-
phy focus on explanation?” I find it quite interesting that the scientists whom I 
have studied, including historical scientists, really don’t talk about explanation. 
They talk about “understanding,” “getting a grip,” or “trying to figure it out,” 
but not about explanation. So I’m going to give a gloss on some of the history 
of the philosophy of science. Then I’m going to make a plea for understanding. 
And then I’m going to look at a couple of cases and talk about understanding 
and control in the context of biosimulation laboratories. Finally, I’m going 
to discuss “living apart together,” which is a lovely Dutch expression that I 
borrowed here from Henk de Reget who was trying to resurrect the notion of 
understanding in science.
The History of Philosophy of Science
Typically listed among the aims of science are understanding, explanation, 
and prediction. And since understanding and explanation generally lead to 

134  
M  Nancy J. Nersessian
prediction, we don’t really need to focus on prediction much. In the positiv-
ist era, understanding was relegated to the context of discovery. The context 
of discovery involves history, psychology, and all of the non-evidential stuff 
that goes into scientific discoveries. By contrast, explanation belonged to the 
context of justification. The context of justification involves all of the consid-
erations that go into justifying our scientific beliefs. So when Kekulé saw the 
ouroboros in a dream, that was part of the context of discovery. The subsequent 
empirical findings that confirmed the shape of the benzene ring was part of 
the context of justification. Imagination, history, psychology, and the like fall 
outside of scope of philosophy. So proper philosophical discourse was to talk 
about justification and explanation, as opposed to that psychological thing, 
understanding.
Consider a classical statement by Hempel, “Very broadly speaking, to 
explain something to a person is to make it plain and intelligible to him, to 
make him understand it.” He goes on and says, “Explanation in this prag-
matic sense is thus a relative notion” (Hempel 1965, pp. 425–426). Thus, 
someone can understand and another person might not understand; thus, 
understanding is a subjective phenomenon. The only sense in which under-
standing is objective is in the theoretical sense of demonstrating that a phe-
nomenon to be explained is a special case of a general regularity. This is, 
of course, the covering model or deductive nomological account of expla-
nation. The problem with understanding, on this account, is that under-
standing is a subjective by-product of explanation. It requires an additional 
element beyond the explanation—something like a feeling of grasping the 
connection between the explanans and the explanandum. This kind of feel-
ing is subjective.
The philosophy of science has focused on physics as the primary science 
and physics has laws. From laws we can get the deductions we need in order 
to have the deductive nomological or covering law account of explanation. 
But in recent years, since about the 1990s, the putative direct relationship 
between theory and phenomena has been challenged. People have developed 
model-based accounts of explanation. But, again, model-based explanation, 
by and large, has been in the context of physics theories. For example, there is 
a simulacrum account of Cartwright that basically says that explanations are 
models derived in some sense, but not strictly speaking derived, from theories 
(Cartwright 1983, 1999). A model mediates between the theory and the world. 
A “models as mediators” view was developed by Morrison and Morgan where 
the role of models is to fit theory to phenomena and vice versa (Morrison and 
Morgan 1999). But again, these views were developed in domains where there 
are robust theories. These model-based accounts work well when applied to 
domains in which there are developed theories. But when you are talking 
about situations where theories are developing, that is, when one is talking 
about the context of discovery, these accounts of explanation do not work 
very well.
Theory-centric accounts of explanation do not work very well in the bio-
sciences. Consequently, within the biosciences a new account of explanation 

Getting a Grip  M  135
has developed over about the last 15 to 20 years: the mechanistic account. 
Biologists often talk about mechanisms. They rarely talk about theories and 
they almost never talk about laws. Without theories or laws, how is expla-
nation supposed to work? There are two basic accounts, the first account is 
the account by Machamer, Darden, and Craver, “Mechanism are entities and 
activities organized such that they are productive of regular changes from start 
or set up to finish or termination conditions” (Machamer, Darden, and Craver 
2000, p. 3). It has been argued that this is a very linear account that cannot 
capture the complex nonlinear dynamical phenomena that take place in the 
biological fields (Bechtel 2012). Bechtel and Abrahamsen have put forward a 
different view: “A mechanism is a structure performing a function in virtue of 
its component parts. Component operations in their organization the orches-
trated functioning of the mechanism is responsible for one or more phenom-
ena” (Bechtel and Abrahamsen 2005, 423).
In what follows, I will focus on cases from within the biosciences domain. 
I am going to be looking at cases where scientists are attempting to develop an 
understanding or representation of phenomena for which there is no theory. 
Thus, in the cases I focus on, there is no theoretical basis from which models 
could be constructed. As we examine the following cases, we want to ask the 
following questions: Is mechanism something these scientists are interested in? 
Are they able to develop a mechanistic explanation? Do they need to do so in 
order to achieve some important scientific successes? The argument I am going 
to make is a plea for understanding. This argument is based on the fact that 
much of the science that goes on in the biosciences simulations area does not 
give mechanistic accounts. But at the same time, it provides understanding and 
in an objective sense.
If we are already convinced that understanding is subjective—that it belongs 
in the context of discovery—then there is not much hope for progress. So before 
moving on, we should consider a quote from Catherine Elgin that I think is 
quite nice. She writes,
Although knowledge involves belief, no one is inclined to say that knowledge 
is merely psychological and not epistemological . . .  There’s no justification for 
simply assuming without argument that understanding is subjective, keyed to 
historical circumstances or interrelated to a feeling of understanding if, indeed, 
understanding has a specific feel. (Elgin 2010)
I want to show that explanation does not subsume understanding and 
understanding is a significant epistemic aim of scientists. Understanding is 
related to skills and judgment, which are not subjective. In the cases that 
we are looking at, scientists get a grip on phenomena through the model-
building process. They develop a mathematical understanding of dynamical 
relations among variables in the system. The understanding that they develop 
does not provide an explanation in any of the senses of explanation that are 
currently in the philosophical literature. But it does enable them to control 
phenomena.

136  
M  Nancy J. Nersessian
Two Cases Studies
Understanding Without Explanation in Neural Networks
The first lab we will discuss was trying to understand the mechanisms of learn-
ing at the network level—the network properties of living neurons. This was 
a fundamentally new research paradigm when it was introduced in the early 
2000s. Previously, studies of learning were customarily done on single neuron 
interventions. In this case, the principal investigator (PI) felt that, because the 
brain is a network of neurons, if you were really going to get a grip on under-
standing neuron behavior you needed to construct dishes of networks of living 
neurons. The PI developed an eight-by-eight grid—called the multielectrode 
array—on to which embryonic rat neurons are plated. They are disassociated 
first and then allowed to grow their own connections. The resulting dish is 
a generic model of basic neurological processes in the brain: a living neural 
network. The dish is then embodied by connecting it to some kind of robotic 
device. The overarching research aim is to develop the control structure for 
goal-directed learning in this embodied network.
The sexiest robotic embodiment of the dish is called MEArt. It is a mechan-
ical drawing arm, a living robotic artist. It lives in primarily Australia and 
communicates to the United States via satellite. It has also traveled around the 
world. It has had art shows in Paris, St. Petersburg, and China.
MEArt starts with a freehand spontaneous drawing as a response to neu-
ral activity in the feedback loop. So it is pretty much drawing wherever the 
research question is, “can MEArt learn to draw within the lines? Can you get 
it to draw within a box?” If MEArt can learn to draw within a box, then the 
research team will have controlled its behavior. I’m going to very, very quickly 
tell the story of how the research team managed to teach MEArt to draw within 
the box.
There were three researchers involved in the project: D2, D4, and D11. D2 
was the one doing the robotics. He traveled the world with MEArt and other 
embodiments. D4 was the researcher doing the open-loop electrical stimula-
tion, trying to get an understanding of the behavior of the dish under various 
circumstances. Initially D11 was developing the software used by the group. 
D4 worked on solving a very significant problem—getting the dish to be quiet. 
The dish kept bursting all of the time. There was spontaneous network electri-
cal phenomena across the dish all of the time and they could not figure out 
how to quiet the noise. The story I am going to tell highlights the interaction 
between the physical model—the dish—and the computational model of the 
dish developed by D11.
The story starts with the problem that motivated the development of the 
computational model. Their initial construal of bursting was in terms of the 
engineering concept of noise. The spontaneous network electrical phenomena 
across the dish looked random, like noise that needed to be eliminated. The 
bursting prevented the detection of any systematic change due to controlled 
stimulation; the signal was drowned out by the noise. Consequently, there was 
no way to detect learning in the dish.
 
 

Getting a Grip  M  137
The lab formed a hypothesis: learning required quieting the bursts. They 
hypothesized that they could quiet it by providing a substitute for natural sen-
sory input, that is, via electrical stimulation. So they tried to do this, unsuc-
cessfully, for over a year. Finally, D4 was successful. She got the dish to be 
quiet. The bursting stopped. And then nothing happened. Every time they 
tried to give it stimulation so it could learn, it would drift into another pattern 
of spontaneous bursting. They called this the problem of drift. It was such 
a significant problem that D4 said, “if I don’t solve this within the next six 
months I really am going home because this is a waste of my time.”
D11 is the one who started to do computational modeling. The advantage 
of computational modeling is that you can measure everything. D11 felt that 
modeling could provide information about the problem of drift that was other-
wise unavailable. So he built a computational simulation of a generic dish and 
then fit it to their data. This was a novel approach for the lab. The lab did not 
do network modeling. They had a philosophical stance against it. The PI moved 
to working with living neural networks because he felt that the computational 
modeling was not going to get to the kinds of issues that he wanted. But the PI 
said to D11, “Well, Okay. It’s your PhD. You go do what you want.”
Building the computational model was a very complex process. First, the 
initial model was built by putting together a number of constraints from the 
modeling platform, from the literature, from the single neuron studies, from 
other dish studies, from brain slice studies, from every piece of information 
and data that D11 could get his hands on.
Building the model was an iterative process. The initial goal was to make 
an analogy to the living dish so that they could transfer the insight that they 
gained via the computational model over to the dish. But the computational 
model only gradually becomes a helpful analogy; the model gained complexity 
throughout the building process. Eventually, it could enact the behavior of the 
target system—not any specific system, but rather a generic representation that 
exemplified selected features.
The researchers began to understand the system through the dynamical 
interactions that they were building into the model—they built an understand-
ing of how these variables interact dynamically to produce behavior. They went 
through several cycles of model construction simulation adaption, etc. The 
computational model, as opposed to the living dish, afforded the running of 
limited scenarios, stopping and starting, tracking dynamical variables.
Most importantly, the computational model allowed the researchers to “see 
into the dish.” The researchers asked a counterfactual question, “What would 
it look like if I were able to see into the dish?” The computational simulation 
was extraordinarily important in answering this question. D11 imagined the 
dish as a network. In other words, he started out thinking about looking at net-
work properties. But if you look at that eight-by-eight grid representation they 
had developed of the per-channel activity of the dish, it’s not really displaying 
network properties. The network properties are hidden under the spike data in 
the grid. That is, representation captures the activity per channel but does not 
capture the network behavior.

138  
M  Nancy J. Nersessian
In addition to constructing the representations, D11 made movies of the 
dynamic network visualizations. He watched the movies over and over and 
over again. He had the group watch the movies over and over again. He had 
us, the ethnographers, watch the movies over and over again. We all saw the 
same thing. The bursts were structurally similar. There seemed to be a small 
number of patterns of propagation. Most importantly, the spontaneous activity 
or spontaneous bursts were very stable. If the bursts were very stable, then they 
could be used as a signal rather than noise. They could be used for creating the 
control structure that the lab needed. The representations D11 built enabled 
the mathematical analysis of the propagation of burst patterns—what they call 
“the center of activity trajectory.”
D4 finished up by collaborating with a doctor to extend their insights about 
bursting to Parkinson’s disease. Eventually, D2 and D11 got to MEArt learn to 
draw within the lines. They stayed on for about another year to develop a con-
trol structure first for a computational simulation of that mechanical arm and 
then for the robotic version. Interestingly, the control structure is counterintui-
tive. Normally, you would think that to reinforce learning you would repeat a 
stimulation. But they discovered that, in fact, you have to give the stimulation 
and then follow it by a random stimulation, which stabilizes the initial stimula-
tion, and finally give the initial stimulation again.
The point to take away from all of this is that there were many things that 
the researchers were able to do once they understood the dynamical behavior 
of the system. A purely mathematical understanding allowed them to track and 
control the propagation of the patterns throughout the system. It gave them 
affordances for action, but in no way did they have a mechanistic explanation. 
There is still no explanation for what is causing the bursting phenomena. They 
were able to make an enormous amount of scientific progress without such an 
explanation.
Understanding Without Explanation in Integrative Systems Biology
Reliance on dynamical modeling was key to the force of previous example. 
These computational simulation models model the interaction among dynami-
cal variables—not among mechanisms—yet provide affordances for control. 
So in this section we will consider another example where dynamical modeling, 
but not mechanistic explanation, provides insight and understanding. In the 
second example, I want to look at integrated systems biology, which relies on 
computational simulations of the dynamics of biological phenomena.
The integrated systems biology lab I’ve been studying is largely populated 
by engineers with little biological background. This is true among integrated 
systems biology labs more generally. Yet these engineers are very successful at 
modeling biological practices. Where do they get their biological understand-
ing and background? They learn the systems through their model-building 
processes. The skills and judgments they use in their modeling processes are 
related to the mathematical relations among variables. That is, they try to 
understand the systems dynamics. So their understanding of the biological 
 

Getting a Grip  M  139
phenomena is at the mathematical level. One could not reasonably call this 
mathematical understanding an explanation.
The lab I am going to focus on here, Lab G, gets biosystems modeling prob-
lems from experimental collaborators. They usually know nothing about the 
system they work on when they start. Today they might be working on cancer, 
tomorrow on atherosclerosis; there is very little continuity—biologically speak-
ing—between their projects. But over the course of learning how to model, 
these engineers develop skills and judgments for building a models of biological 
phenomena. I’ll start with who G12 was given the problem of modeling pro-
cesses of atherosclerosis, to give an overview of the modeling processes.
The engineers working on integrated systems biology often start with little 
data on which to build their models. They have the data the benchtop scien-
tists gave them and they have whatever data they can find via literature and 
databases searches on the Internet (a kind of “Google Biology”). G12’s original 
model contained five variables. She had been given a piece of a pathway, but 
she needed to fill it out before constructing the simulation model. To do so, she 
moved iteratively back and forth, back and forth between preliminary simula-
tions and building the pathway. Her final model contained 14 variables.
The model-building process is filled with all kinds of choices that one 
makes, depending on the feeling the researcher has for the model that she 
is building and depending on what the representational dynamics are going 
to need. So you choose, for example, what kind of mathematical representa-
tion are you going to use, what kind of modeling framework—mechanistic, 
agent-based? Are you going to use ordinary differential equations or partial 
differential equations? These researchers all use ordinary differential equations 
(ODE) representations. Then when they do the parameter estimation and opti-
mization, they again make all kinds of fitting assumptions. With a final fitted 
model, they do all kinds of various model diagnostics on it until they feel that 
they have something that is stable enough to be able to say, “this is an adequate 
representation of the behavioral dynamics of the phenomena.” Once they have 
a final fitted stable model, they can use it to do some kinds of exploration and 
possibly control. Thus, building the model is primarily a task of managing 
complexity.
We liken this kind of model-building process to “bird’s nest building,” 
because what a bird does is it grabs anything it possibly can to make a stable 
platform for its eggs and its chicks. In this particular case, G12 had no steady-
state data, no rate constant data on the enzyme reactions, and she had to make 
lots and lots of assumptions, for example, that the timescale is over hours. In 
order to create a stable model, she grabs anything she can, making judgments 
about the reasonableness of it along the way.
G12 did things like judge the reasonableness of the pathway additions and 
whether the selected representation is tractable to model. G12 will change 
the pathway, not necessarily on any existing experimental data, but on what 
makes it tractable in order to build a simulation model. She makes simplifying 
assumptions; chooses a modeling framework; has to choose a mathematical 
framework; has to decide on various kinds of theoretical elements that would 

140  
M  Nancy J. Nersessian
go into the model, for example, the kinetic orders and the effects of cell bound-
aries; and then has to determine parameter estimations. Then she has to do 
things like sensitivity analysis. In this case, she had three possible additions she 
could make to piece together a model. She had to do Monte Carlo sampling to 
see which one made the best case.
In the end, she built a stable, robust model that provided the collaborating 
the lab with insight into the disease processes that they wanted to investigate. 
The G12 case, in which there are very little data, is the kind of situation in 
which these modelers mostly work.
Not every case is like the one we just considered, though. The best-case sce-
nario is when the engineers are able to have a lot of robust data and they build 
a computational simulation that then enacts the phenomena, enabling them to 
make predictions and to have the kind of control that they want.
Let’s consider a wonderful case of a very significant discovery. Lignin is a 
polymer that keeps plants rigid. If you are going to do biofuels production, you 
would really like to be able to break down lignin. A modeler, G10, was given 
this question: could we understand the lignin model sufficiently such that we 
can tweak it somewhere in order to break it down better?
Unlike the previous case, where G12 had to build the model nearly from 
scratch, G10 was given reams and reams of data by the benchtop scientists. The 
biological scientists had so much data they could not manage it all without a 
model. Furthermore, there was already a long-time accepted pathway for G10 
to work with, so he was only expected to make small changes.
G10 built the initial model going back and forth doing some preliminary 
simulations. He added a few new feedback loops to the accepted model. But he 
was having trouble getting the model to work in replicating the dynamics. The 
only explanation he could find was that there was an entire component left out 
of the accepted pathway. Because G10 is not a biologist and knows no biology, 
he had no idea what this component could possibly be, so he called it “X.”
This case provides interesting insight into how these modelers and bench-
top scientists “collaborate.” By and large, the collaboration is quite poor. The 
benchtop biologists come and say, “Please do modeling for us. We have all these 
data.” Then they will not give the modelers the data. The benchtop biologists 
will say, “Oh no, you can only have this much because I want to publish them 
first,” and they do not understand that computational people are not going to 
publish the data. So G10 waited six months before he was able to do his final 
modeling because the biologists were not cooperating with him. But he finally 
got their attention when he convincingly showed them that there was some-
thing significant that was affecting the dynamics of the pathway and needed to 
be incorporated into the lignin pathway, which of course was a major discovery 
and far from the minor tweaking of the pathway they had initially expected. 
So the biologists rushed to do their experiments and they discover that salicylic 
acid needs to be added to the pathway.
What do these two cases of systems biology modeling have to tell us about 
explanation? I think that in any sense in which we understand explanation, 
the modeling and simulations folks like G12 and G10 are doing cannot be 

Getting a Grip  M  141
understood as providing mechanistic explanation. In the best-case scenario—
the scenario where the modeling is actually successful—we arrive at an under-
standing of the dynamical relations among the variables that comes through the 
model-building process and can afford control and intervention. Furthermore, 
this kind of model building is the only way one is going to be able to do inte-
grated systems biology. So here’s a whole field in biology where mechanistic 
explanations don’t seem possible.
The problem is that mechanistic explanation is at too low a level. The 
understanding these models provide is at the high level of dynamical relations. 
So mechanistic understanding might not be attainable in modeling complex 
nonlinear dynamical phenomena. The parts and interactions in biosystems 
modeling are variables and their relations and are expressed abstractly in math-
ematics. This provides understanding but likely not explanation, at least as 
currently understood.
Conclusion
To wrap it up, let us reconsider “living apart together.” Explanation does not 
subsume understanding. Researchers can gain understanding of phenomena 
without providing an explanation of them. Understanding, especially in the 
form of skills and judgments, plays a significant epistemic role and provides 
affordances for action. Understanding is not just psychological; it should not 
be relegated to the context of discovery. In all of the cases we have considered, 
there were really important things that one could do once one had the simula-
tion model. Mechanistic explanation might not be attainable in biosystems 
modeling, but mathematical understanding of complex nonlinear dynamical 
relations is.
This opens up an important new area of research for philosophy—the proj-
ect of resurrecting understanding and specifying its relationship to explanation. 
As I said, it was a first pass, but I just wanted to put the question on the table. 
I’d like to end with quoting de Regt: “For a long time, the marriage between 
explanation and understanding was taken for granted and left unanalyzed . . . 
Do understanding and explanation need each other, or should they go their 
own way? In the interest of a healthy relationship, living apart together would 
seem advisable at least for the time being” (de Regt 2013, 508).

CHAPTER 11
Modes of Explanation:  
Complex Phenomena
Sandra Mitchell
C
ontemporary scientific studies of complexity in biology, social science, and 
elsewhere have generated new domains for philosophical thinking about 
explanation. The complexities and contingencies of the structures that 
biologists, psychologists, neuroscientists, and social scientists explore have major 
implications for the epistemology of explanation and have consequently generated 
new modes of explanation. In large part, this is a result of the complexity of the 
structures themselves. The structures I have in mind have multilevel organiza-
tion and multicomponent causal interactions—think of social insect colonies, the 
brain, social institutions. Thus, different causes collaborate, if you like, to gen-
erate features of these complex structures, and they display plasticity in relation 
to variation in context, either internal or external. These responsive dynamic 
structures change in response to other changes, both internal and external. 
This responsiveness is a very useful adaptive mechanism for living in a world 
that itself is changing.
In addition to the abovementioned features of complexity, the structures 
that are studied by neuroscience, biology, and social science display historical 
and local dependencies that contribute to the generation of their behaviors, 
and these dependencies have to be taken into account in explaining why we see 
what we see in the world. Why do we have our current structures and why do 
they behave in the way they do?
The emphasis of this chapter is the implications of these features of complex 
structures for explanation. In particular, I focus on two implications: the now 
scientifically legitimate category of emergent phenomena and emergent prop-
erties, and a re-characterization of the lawful behaviors that explain evolved 
contingent complex phenomena.

144  
M  Sandra Mitchell
The Science of Emergence
On Emergence
Complex structures display emergent properties. We are all familiar with the 
old characterization of emergence, attributed to Aristotle (1999), that “the 
whole is more than the sum of its parts.” However, for many decades identify-
ing something as an emergent property was considered to be unscientific. It 
was widely accepted that science was a reductive enterprise, and that every-
thing at a higher level of organization should be and could be, in principle, 
explained by appeal solely to the properties of the components that constituted 
that complex structure.
Much of the contemporary understanding of emergence was developed in 
the British emergentist literature from Mill (1843) onwards, through Morgan 
(1923) and Broad (1925). This characterization of emergentism continues to 
be endorsed by contemporary philosophers, particularly those working in the 
philosophy of mind, such as Kim (1999). The contemporary characterization of 
emergence requires that emergent properties have three features: they are sup-
posed to be novel, to be unpredictable, and to display downward causation.
While the philosophical community has, historically, viewed the existence 
of this kind of emergent property as unlikely, contemporary science has re-
embraced the notion of emergence in ways that are really quite striking. You 
can track this on Google n-grams and also by a quick Google search. It is my 
contention that the contemporary scientific understanding of “emergence” is as 
a legitimate explanatory category that shares many, but not all, of the features 
of the traditional account.
How are scientists describing emergence? Emergence is sometimes charac-
terized as the “arising of novel and coherent structures, patterns and properties 
during the process of self-organization of complex systems” (Goldstein 1999). 
Thus, self-organization is one of the mechanisms or modes in which higher 
orders or properties can be generated. As Karsenti (2008) said, “Dynamic orga-
nization emerges from the collective behavior of agents, the individual proper-
ties of which cannot account for the properties of the final dynamic pattern.”
There is thus a great deal of interest in these higher-level properties. For 
example, how do the division of labor and the partitioning of individuals in a 
social insect colony work? Why are there so many individuals who are attend-
ing their brood and so many who are foraging? Among the foragers, why are 
there individuals foraging for nectar and others foraging for pollen? How do 
these various features of the structure emerge, how are they stabilized, and how 
do we explain them?
The patterns that count as emergent are often those of biological aggrega-
tions, such as schooling fish and flocking birds. They display features that are 
best characterized by chaotic dynamics. So these higher-level structural proper-
ties invite us to reexamine what we think of as a legitimate mode of explana-
tion. These higher-level emergent properties have impelled us to give a different 
characterization of how explanation works in certain cases. Two examples will 
illustrate the changes in the mode of explanation that are required.
 
 

Modes of Explanation: Complex Phenomena  M  145
Escherichia Coli and Emergence
There are many examples in the literature that provide a flavor of what is 
generating this new interest in explanatory character. One is chemotaxis and 
Escherichia coli. E. coli is a bacterium that tracks nutrients in the medium in 
which it swims. It has a tumbling behavior and a non-tumbling behavior, and 
adapts to the chemical gradients of its environment through chemotaxis. The 
change of a chemical stimulant induces a rapid change in its tumbling fre-
quency, which is one of these plastic responses that complex systems are able 
to produce.
What is interesting about this behavior is that it is possible to change almost 
all of the internal components of the bacterium and still get the behavior—
there is little change in the metabolic function of chemotaxis, even if you 
change many of the genes that code for the components that make up the 
bacterium—so it is not a dedicated behavior that could be explained by the 
presence or absence of a control mechanism. The presence or absence of a com-
ponent does not generate this higher level of behavior; rather, the behavior is 
a consequence of the ways in which the system responds robustly, even in the 
face of deletions of internal components, to a change in the environment. This 
kind of robustness is one feature of emergent properties. Emergent proper-
ties do not depend merely on the aggregation of components, but are instead 
dependent on the system’s dynamic responses to the absence of components as 
well as the external and internal environments.
Honeybees and Emergence
In another example of emergent properties, social insects, there is evidence of 
downward causation. In a honeybee colony, what causes a particular bee to 
fly out of the nest to forage for nectar at a particular time? The answers that 
would be expected from a reductive account would focus on the individual, for 
instance, that the bee has genes that code for a certain threshold of response 
to stimulus. One bee might be a nectar forager and another a pollen forager, 
and their different genetic makeups explain why one forages for nectar and the 
other does not. That would be an example of a bottom-up explanation.
This is a piece of the story, but it is not going to provide the whole story 
about why a particular bee goes out and forages for nectar at a particular time. 
It turns out that the behavior of individual bees is responsive to a property of 
the colony as a whole. The property is the amount of nectar already stored in 
the colony. The colony, the higher-level system, has a property that is not that 
of an individual bee, namely how much nectar it has stored, which influences 
the behavior of the individual bees to go out and forage for nectar and bring it 
back to the colony.
How does the colony obtain nectar? The nectar is produced by all the indi-
vidual bees going out and foraging for nectar and bringing it back to the colony 
so that it can be stored. There is a sense in which this higher-level property is 
generated by the behavior of individuals, but at the same time it influences 
the behavior of individual bees. How does it do this? There is no centralized 

146  
M  Sandra Mitchell
account of how much nectar is stored and nobody directing the bees to do what 
they are doing. There is, however, a system of self-organization whereby the 
information about what is stored in the colony is available to the bees in terms 
of how long they must wait in order to unload the nectar they bring in.
The explanation of how bees know how much nectar is stored in the colony 
depends on the higher-order property, which is itself generated by the behav-
ior of individuals. The result is a complicated feedback system in which the 
emergent property of the amount of nectar that is stored plays a crucial role. 
An individual bee flies out to collect nectar and returns to the colony. Other 
bees waiting at the colony unload the nectar and then fly around internally to 
find an empty cell in which to deposit it. While they are doing that, another 
bee lands and has to wait for the unloading bee to return. The time it takes for 
the unloading bee to return is directly correlated with how many empty cells 
there are: if there are many empty cells, the wait is short; if the colony is full 
of nectar, it takes a long time to find an empty cell. Thus, the length of time 
an incoming bee must wait reflects a higher-level property and this influences 
the probability that the bee will return to foraging. This is an example of 
downward causation: the higher-level property is changing the behavior of the 
components, which themselves generate the higher-order property.
This kind of emergent behavior cannot be detected by merely taking a snap-
shot of the system and seeing what properties it has and how they stand with 
respect to each other. To notice the emergent behavior you have to look at the 
dynamics of the system, how the higher-order property becomes established 
and maintained. One of the things that happens in emergence is that in order 
to explain the behavior of E. coli or the individual honey bee, you have to 
appeal to things at a higher level of organization. There is a robustness of 
behavior in the feedback mechanisms that tune the behaviors of the individual 
bees to the needs of the colony. The whole exploration of the way in which 
these emergent structures are understood and explained requires a fundamen-
tal shift in our mode of explanation. We have to give up a certain kind of static 
view, in which we can explain higher-level properties by simply looking at the 
components that constitute the system in an instant of time. It is not pos-
sible to explain these higher-order properties unless we consider the dynamics 
of self-organization, feedback, feedforward, and chaotic interactions. It is the 
dynamic perspective demanded by these explanations that some frameworks 
for explanation have not been able to accommodate. That is where the philo-
sophical challenge comes from: explaining dynamic emergence.
Dynamic emergence satisfies the letter of the emergentist law. It has unpre-
dictable properties. The formation of these higher-level structures has been 
associated with chaotic dynamics that are, by definition, unpredictable, as 
in bird flocking and in other mass aggregate behaviors. Dynamic emergence 
displays novelty. The structures of the higher order are not possessed by any 
of the individual components; they are not even possessed by an aggregation 
of the individual components. They exist as a result of the dynamic inter-
actions between the components, the external context, and the internal con-
text. Dynamic emergence displays the gold standard of emergence: downward 

Modes of Explanation: Complex Phenomena  M  147
causation, when properties of the whole change the behavior of the constituent 
parts, by both positive and negative feedback. Meanwhile, the properties of the 
whole become stabilized by the behavior of the components, permitting this 
kind of multilevel, inner causal dependence. There is a reductive character to 
this phenomenon. We are not saying that this higher-level property emerges 
independently of the components; however, to understand its properties and its 
stability, as well as the properties of the components, you need to appeal both 
to higher and lower levels and to downward causation.
Emergent structures and properties identify an important class of phenom-
enon that require a revision in how explanations are generated. Philosophically, 
we need to represent not just the presence or absence of properties but their 
dynamic stabilization, the unfolding of new structures, new laws governing 
their behavior, and feedback and feedforward processes that engage entities at 
multiple levels of organization. The need to appeal to multiple levels requires 
non-reductive explanations and the appeal to the dynamics of behaviors requires 
non-static explanations. We have to have new modes of explanation, because 
both reductive and static approaches are inadequate to accommodate these new 
developments.
The Modal Status of Biological Laws
The second point I want to make about the implications for explanation of the 
contemporary study of complex and evolved systems has to do with the role of 
contingencies. In both philosophical accounts and scientific writing, one can 
find concepts of explanation that require an explanation of a particular phe-
nomenon to appeal to the laws governing the phenomenon. There has been a 
long tradition of trying to characterize what it is that counts as a law of nature 
or a law of science. Philosophers have typically described laws of nature as uni-
versal and exceptionless. Laws carry with them natural necessity.
By way of example, consider a case from physics. There is something natu-
rally necessary, universal, and exceptionless about the relationship between fall-
ing bodies and the gravitational constant of the earth. In some instances, there 
may be ceteris paribus conditions that must be met, but the gravitational law is 
necessary and holds both universally and exceptionlessly. This kind of example 
gives rise to the view that there are universal generalizations that are exception-
lessly true and that these laws explain why there are connections between cause 
and effect. This is an old story, part of which is that this understanding of laws 
fails to apply to most of biology.
Consider Mendel’s law of segregation. This holds that in a sexually repro-
ducing organism, the gametes that are produced in eggs and sperm have a 
50–50 distribution of parental genetic information. It turns out that Mendel’s 
law is not universal as there are exceptions, such as meiotic drive or segregation 
distortion, and these are generated by a couple of different mechanisms.
Not only is Mendel’s law not universally true, it does not seem to be 
necessary even of all current sexually reproducing organisms. It seems that 
things could have evolved in a very different way such that Mendel’s law 

148  
M  Sandra Mitchell
was neither lawful nor true. There could have been a different distribu-
tion of gametes, say 30–70; there might not have been sexually reproducing 
organisms; there might have been three or ten parents, or even one, rather 
than two. All of the features of evolved organisms display this evolutionary 
contingency in a way that some generalizations, for instance, about the ideal 
gases, do not.
Why does the knowledge of biological systems fail to fit the standard account 
of laws? Is it that biology is still in its infancy? Maybe it has had its Galileo but 
not yet its Newton. Or is there something else responsible for this failure to fit 
the standard account of laws?
There are different responses to this problem. Some people have argued that 
biology simply does not have laws, such as Beatty (1995) with his defense of 
an evolutionary contingency thesis. He attempts to explain why biology does 
not have laws by arguing that biology studies contingent structures; there-
fore, the causal relations that describe and explain these structures are contin-
gent. Others, including Brandon (1997), have agreed with Beatty that biology 
studies contingent, ephemeral, not necessary structures, so it does not have 
laws. And indeed, others like Cartwright (1994) and Woodward (2001) have 
argued that science does not actually need this kind of law to explain. It is 
possible to explain with something less than universal, exceptionless, necessary 
generalizations.
Others, such as Sober (1997) and Waters (1998), have argued that biology 
does have laws, on the standard account of laws, but that there are not very 
many of them. These laws may be ceteris paribus laws or they may be very 
abstract; maybe they are mathematical truths. Finally, I have defended the view 
that biology does have laws, but that we have to revise the standard account of 
a law.
This is the kind of conceptual space that the debate about laws and their 
failure to apply to biology has occupied. It is a kind of menu. You can choose 
“no to laws in biology; yes to standard view,” “yes to laws in biology; yes to stan-
dard view”—although these end up being very odd-looking laws, like Hardy–
Weinberg equilibrium; or “yes to laws in biology, no to standard view.” I would 
suggest that the third one is the appropriate way. The motivation for accepting 
this view also follows from what we are learning about complex evolved systems 
and their impact on our philosophical conception of explanation by appeal to 
laws. Again, contemporary science is demonstrating that there are modes of 
explanation—in this case, appealing to contingent laws—that need to be char-
acterized philosophically in order to keep up with the scientific discoveries and 
understandings that are being developed.
What do I mean by contingency? It is clear that all natural truths are logi-
cally contingent. There is an argument that aims to organize everything into 
two distinct boxes: the logically necessary box and the logically contingent 
box. Suppose that there is a domain that only contains As and Bs. Then further 
suppose that in this domain all of the As are Bs. One might say, “All As are Bs.” 
This is either a logical truth with logical necessity or it is a contingent truth 
that depends on what the As and Bs are. “All squares are four sided” is logically 

Modes of Explanation: Complex Phenomena  M  149
necessary; “all animals with hearts are animals with kidneys” is a contingent 
truth. This is something that was discovered by looking at animals with hearts 
and animals with kidneys.
That language of logical necessity, which has a dichotomous structure, has 
been carried over to natural necessity. Some truths about the natural world are 
naturally necessary: for example, there are no spheres of uranium larger than 
100 meters in diameter because such a sphere becomes unstable and would 
implode. Some truths about the natural world are accidentally true generaliza-
tions: for instance, there is no sphere of gold that has a diameter more than 100 
meters. The standard view is that accidental generalizations—that is, general-
izations that are merely true of our universe—are not laws. For a true general-
ization to be a law, the generalization has to display natural necessity, which is 
modeled after logical necessity. However, all laws of science and laws of nature 
are true of our world but not true in all logically possible worlds, so they are all 
logically contingent.
On this kind of view, there are only two options regarding a logically con-
tingent true generalization. Everything is either in the one box, naturally nec-
essary, or the other box, contingent. As it turns out, almost nothing is in the 
naturally necessary, universal, exceptionless box. We are very hard pressed to 
find any scientific laws of fundamental physics, of non-fundamental physics, of 
chemistry, of biology, of anything that has the features that are supposed to be 
the features of a law. However, on the standard view, a law is needed in order 
to generate explanations, so we are in trouble here.
My argument is that this dichotomous structure—contingent versus natu-
rally necessary—is the wrong conceptual frame. Rather, there are dependencies 
in nature and they come in degrees. True (logically contingent) generalizations 
are not all in one box or the other; instead, there are degrees of contingency, 
different levels of dependency. Some structures are more ephemeral; others 
are more stable. There are structures that have endured since the first three 
minutes after the Big Bang and there are others that come and go. We can 
have knowledge of all of these structures, but all of these pieces of knowledge 
are going to fit into the “naturally contingent” box. So having a dichotomous 
framework does not give us the right tools to understand the kind of knowledge 
and generalizations that can explain what occurs in our universe.
I would suggest that we should not think about laws in terms of whether 
they satisfy this dichotomous strict law model; rather, we should think about 
them in terms of their functions. What is it that laws do? What kinds of truths 
can satisfy that function?
Laws are what science allegedly looks to discover about nature. They explain 
why what happens happens. They permit us to predict what will happen in the 
future or what would have happened in other circumstances. They provide us 
with tools to intervene in the world in order to achieve our pragmatic goals: 
going to the moon, building a bridge, curing cancer. There are many truths 
that fulfill these functions yet fail to meet the strict notion of a law. We can 
explain, predict, and intervene in the world with things that do not satisfy the 
strict notion of laws.

150  
M  Sandra Mitchell
The difference between physics and biology, or between very simple sys-
tems and complex systems—especially complex evolved systems that display 
many forms of contingencies and dependencies—is not the difference between 
systems that have laws and systems that do not. Rather, the difference is one 
of degrees of contingency. While generalizations that are true of fundamental 
physics are different from those that are true of biological systems, the differ-
ence can be located on a continuum.
The contingency of the truths we can obtain about complex, evolved, vary-
ingly dependent structures indicates that explanations can be had, but that 
these explanations appeal to generalizations that do not cover everything, 
for all times, exceptionlessly. Rather, these explanations cover these kinds of 
things, under these kinds of circumstances, for these kinds of stimuli, and so 
on. In order to use these “pragmatic laws” to generate explanations, we have 
to have a model of explanation that does not rely on strict laws. A strict law 
applies everywhere for all times; context is irrelevant. The same is not true of 
pragmatic laws. To apply a pragmatic law successfully, I need to know more 
than merely that the relationship being described is one between gamete pro-
duction and frequency of gametes. I need to know whether or not the contex-
tual circumstances are ones that are generated in meiotic drive. I need to know 
whether I am dealing with a sexually reproducing organism. Explanation is 
going to take a different shape, but it is not going to fail to be explanatory. Such 
explanations are going to appeal to laws, but not all of these will be strict laws. 
Some are going to be more or less contingent laws.
Conclusion
The upside of these considerations regarding our contemporary understanding 
of complex structures is the demand for pluralism in modes of explanation. 
Explanation is not one size fits all and not all explanations are reductive by 
appeal to strict laws. Instead, there are multiple modes of explanation that are 
tuned to the kinds of phenomena that populate our world. The more we under-
stand about nature, the more different kinds of things we discover, and our 
accounts of explanation and our modes of explanation need to accommodate 
that kind of variety.
 

CHAPTER 12
Narrative as a Mode of Explanation: 
Evolution and Emergence
Rukmini Bhaya Nair
N
arrative is a linguistic form that accommodates fictional as well as 
factual accounts of the world. It is, of course, widely recognized that 
there has always been a long and leaky boundary between the two 
apparently orthogonal concepts of “fact” and “fiction,” and narrative straddles 
both. This hybrid nature of narrative is a salient feature that endows the form 
with its challenging ambiguity and recursive complexity.
The Question of Narrative Context
“Why is the sea blue?” This simple, startling question was posed by Sir C. V. 
Raman, an Indian scientist who won the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1930. He 
answered it in a way that was surprising in his time. It was believed before 
Raman that the sea reflected the color of the sky, but he showed that it was an 
independent phenomenon to do with the diffraction of light. Raman, that is, 
used a “universal” physicists’ vocabulary to explain the notion of the blueness 
of the sea, and his story found acceptance and approval as a “true” account of 
physical phenomena. At the same time, this scientific success story is not part 
of a world mythology of science. It is little known in the West owing partly 
to another set of cultural phenomena, namely the facts of colonization and 
the “invisibility” of India as an arena where modern science was vigorously 
practiced. Both contexts, I would contend, are relevant to a broader “meta-
interpretation” of the Raman narrative.
Another way of looking at Raman’s question is not to categorize it as a 
physicist’s query at all but, rather, as a philosopher’s question, where discus-
sions might focus on matters of sense and reference, truth conditions, and the 
relationship between the argument “sea” and the predicate “blue,” and where 
we might go on to talk about qualia, sense datum, and so forth. Alternatively, 

152  
M  Rukmini Bhaya Nair
the same question could be asked by linguists who might, for instance, discover 
that the concept “blue” in one language does not have a particular word that 
designates it, while in another “blueness” is covered by the word “grue,” which 
encompasses ranges of green as well as blue. This sort of investigation would 
give rise to deep questions of linguistic relativism, and once again direct our 
attention to the “meta” difficulties of separating fiction and fact.
My point here is simply that the “blueness” of the sea could be very differ-
ently construed, not only across histories, geographies, and countries but even 
across disciplines. How do we manage all this complexity? This remains one of 
the most difficult problems in training machines to process incoming linguis-
tic information flexibly and to arrive in milliseconds at the “right” conclusions; 
something that humans do effortlessly and ceaselessly. Can narrative analysis 
help us approximate the ways in which humans handle complexity?
The Evolution of Narrative as Theory
Let us bring this basic, irresistible “urge to question” to a particular inquiry 
concerning the evolution of narrative as a form. Is the ability to produce nar-
ratives as answers to enigmas, to questions about origins, to queries about the 
relationship of “cause and effect” a species trait? Socio-biologist S. J. Gould 
(1979 with Lewontin) has plausibly argued that such questions about the 
origins of our cognitive capabilities, including narrative, constitute “just so 
questions”—that is, we cannot ever have definitive answers to them. However, 
he concedes that our knowledge that these puzzles we set ourselves are “fac-
tually” unanswerable does not in the least prevent us from continuing to ask 
them or from constructing “fictions” around them. In a way, this argument 
sounds strangely similar to a claim by a thinker as different from Gould as 
is possible to imagine, Slavoj Zizek’s post-Marxian claim about “sublimely 
ideological” narratives. The online Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy phrases 
the point in the following manner: “According to Zizek, the attitude of politi-
cal subjects towards political authority evinces the same logical form: ‘I know 
well that (for example) Bob Hawke/Bill Clinton/the Party/the market does not 
always act justly, but I still act as though I did not know that this is the case’” 
(italics mine).
Such a tolerance of uncertainty and paradox in narrative accounts brings 
together our linguistic capacities to interweave surmise with surety and to wed 
enigma to explanation, so that fictional and factual modes of narrative blend 
and psychologically support each other rather than remain unconnected in 
separate silos. Thus, the cognitive scientist Dennett (1994) is quite willing to 
take the risk of answering the question of whether narrative is a species trait in 
the thumping affirmative. He explicitly claims that human beings were born 
to tell stories as naturally as birds build nests and beavers build dams. In my 
own work on narrative pragmatics, I interpret Dennett’s statement to mean 
that narratives enable us to fashion our cognitive environments more securely. 
Just as much as we need food and security and shelter, we also need narrative to 
describe and explain to ourselves how we fit into our environments, and then 
 

Narrative as a Mode of Explanation  M  153
to push and tug to change these contexts to suit us better. That, in brief, is the 
story of human progress.
Narrative is a linguistic form that helps us monitor and mediate what Searle 
has called the “direction of fit” between words and the world. It is, as I see 
it, a form specifically designed to probe into the context of and persistently 
reexamine the words/world relationship, to present conflicting hypothesis 
about phenomena, and lay out causal connections. Taking Dennett further, 
I argue that our stories are a form of “natural theory” and that they embody 
an instinctive research methodology. Storytelling enables an examination of 
causal evidence, decisions on what can be considered “fact” and what “fiction” 
on the basis of contextual knowledge, and, finally, a coming to some kind of 
“resolution.”
As I see it, this process constitutes quite a lot of hard intellectual labor; and 
even though Eco (1994) has declared narrative a “lazy machine,” I think it 
also demands plenty of work in terms of basic theory-building. Of course, it is 
true that when academics talk about theory and theory-building, whether in 
the sciences or the humanities, they often use an all-too-familiar vocabulary 
of inductive and deductive reasoning and typological and notational variants. 
There are levels of explanation such as observational, descriptive, and explana-
tory adequacy, and there are experiments to verify theoretical accounts as well 
as empirical evidence to be investigated in favor of or against them. Paradigm 
shifts occur in theory from time to time, but the goal of theory in general, we 
are told, is to make correct predictions about the world.
Narrative and Theory Typologies
In this chapter, however, I am not going to be too reliant on the well-oiled 
apparatus I have just described. Instead, I am going to argue that, as a species, 
we are designed to process the world and to store our multiform experience in 
telic narrative formats that conspire, as Dennett has suggested, to give us our 
“sense of self.” This process of continuous cognitive appraisal and inference-
making is something that we cannot help. In an inductive sense, a representa-
tion immediately invites us to step inside a narrative scenario where we have to 
make interpretive choices from the word go. We then proceed to process this 
“factual–fictional” information via our tacit knowledge of context.
Speculating on everyday narrative activities could give us telling insights 
into our evolutionary history. Narrative functions across cultures as proto-
theory and proto-method. In the history of cultural evolution, what narratives 
have done is introduce us to foundational versions of biological theory—how 
the leopard got its spots; political theory—Robin Hood was a revolutionary 
who challenged oppressive class structures; aesthetic theory—the folk tale of 
the mirror on the wall; and varieties of moral and ethical theory, typically 
introduced through epic and legend. Stories across cultures perform essential 
paradigmatic functions not dissimilar to those that Darwinian theory accom-
plished for biology or Marxist theory for political science or Christianity for 
ethics.

154  
M  Rukmini Bhaya Nair
If you look at the narrative bases of theorizing across cultures, you might be 
able to derive a typology of these various sorts of theories. Here is a putative 
typology of theories that I have constructed to illustrate the idea:
Explanatory theories, which aim to explain and predict the behavior of 

M
phenomena, including the behavior of humans beings, on the basis of 
universal “laws” (prototype disciplines: physics, chemistry, linguistics, 
economics, and logic).
Elaborative theories, which seek to interpret and comment on the phenom-

M
ena, do not postulate laws and are only weakly predictive, if at all (proto-
type disciplines: literature, some kinds of philosophy, and psychology).
Ecumenical theories, which deal in “oughts” and “shoulds” (typically 

M
including legal theories, religious theories, etc. that usually try to bring 
everyone under the umbrella of a single faith or set of beliefs).
Emancipative theories, which focus on the power structures that prevent 

M
freedom of thought, action, and belief. These sorts of theory are “predic-
tive” in the sense that they envisage a free—or at least, freer—world.
My suggestion is that all these putative notions of theory are, in embryo, nar-
ratively derived. One could further contend that there might be disciplines like 
physics and biology that are by and large devoted to the notion of explanation 
and other disciplines like literature and philosophy that specialize in descrip-
tion and elaboration. In these latter cases, the exemplar questions motivating 
narrative productions might differ somewhat from the ones in the sciences; for 
instance, they might ask: “What was the relationship between Cinderella and 
her stepmother, or between Beauty and the Beast?” In addition, one could have 
theories that privilege “emancipation,” proposing that universal moral orders 
exist. The most obvious examples of such theories might be religious.
If the role of theory is to use forms of language from the mathematical to 
the mystical to describe, explain, and convince, then the above line of argu-
ment could support the following strong hypothesis: Narrative as a generic form 
functions across cultures as both the base and instrument of theory, where “theory” 
in its core sense is conceived of as an “abstract” answer to questions about the 
phenomenological world. Modern scientific theory, in this respect, would only 
constitute a highly specialized version of these primal storytelling abilities.
Memory, Recursion, Empathy
The problem is that we can construct wonderful narratives, but we cannot look 
into our own brains. Here is a simple example. Suppose I were to ask you, “How 
many words do you have in your head?” A simple computer program can figure 
this out, but not even the Einsteins among us can. However, what we can do is 
to get at this information indirectly. We can, for example, attack the problem 
through a statistical analysis of a large speech corpus and we can follow up by 
writing computer programs that mimic this knowledge. Or we can choose to 
concentrate not on words themselves, but on how words combine. This is the 
 

Narrative as a Mode of Explanation  M  155
move made, for example, by Noam Chomsky, who sees recursion, or the power 
to combine a finite number of verbal elements to yield infinite combinations, as 
the defining characteristic of language. However, Chomsky (2008) also writes, 
rather surprisingly:
It is quite possible, overwhelmingly probable one might guess, that we will 
always learn more about human life and human personality from novels than 
from scientific psychology. The science forming capacity . . .  is only one facet of 
our mental endowment. We use it where we can, but we are not restricted to it, 
fortunately.
Putting together these two very different observations, about the psychologi-
cal power of novels or stories and the recursive resources of language, seems 
naturally to lead us to narrative as a formal structure. Narrative is a genre with 
recursion built into its very structure, with an infinite capacity to embed epi-
sodes embedded within episodes, in a structured fashion. Thus, narrative is to 
discourse what the sentence is to grammar. The strong linguistic property of 
recursion helps us weave the chaotic phenomenological world around us into 
a set of manageable and linear strings. This is what makes narrative analysis 
valuable as an approach to complexity theory.
Narrative fictions constitute relatively inexpensive means of teaching us 
about the world, rather like flight simulators. You don’t actually have to take 
the plane up into the sky; you can learn a lot from simulating the experience 
instead. You don’t have to destroy the species by climbing up mountains and 
throwing yourself off cliffs to learn about survival strategies in dangerous situ-
ations; you can learn about love and wonder and cultural survival in a much 
less expensive way by simply watching Romeo and Juliet.
Narrative economies thus constitute major cultural resources. Stories are 
inexpensive cognitive means of soaking up social experience. They are the coin 
of the realm, passing every day from hand to hand and from person to per-
son. As recursive linguistic devices, narratives are perpetually geared to help 
us adapt, evolve, and transact the business of community living. That is their 
evolutionary import.
Conversation is like narrative in that it also has a repetitive structure. It 
typically goes A B, A B, A B, back and forth between conversationalists. This 
structure has changing deictic centers of self. It passes a conversational ball in 
real time between players and thereby creates “you” and “me” agents, ratifying 
us through this process as interdependent subjects in a community.
Narratives express their recursive tendencies differently. As a form of dis-
course, they are linear and embedded in structure: A, B, C, D, E, B, C, D, F, 
A, and so on. Indeed, one of the most interesting problems in discourse studies 
is to analyze how we easily and effectively bring together these two powerful 
modes of repetition, narrative and conversation, in everyday life. In my own 
research, I have found that many of the Labovian parts of narrative, such as 
evaluations, codas, and even resolution, are often performed by listeners rather 
than tellers in face-to-face conversations.

156  
M  Rukmini Bhaya Nair
Such joint tellings and co-constructions through everyday talk make narra-
tives even more important as tools for the creation of community belief systems 
or forms of knowledge. In addition, during evolution we would of course have 
had other linguistic structures as supports for thinking and theory-building. 
For example, the form “A is to B as C is to D” would give us metaphor and, 
even earlier, during the evolution of language we would have had the rhyth-
mic structures of humming, clapping, and foot tapping, to produce the basic 
rhythms of poetry. In this manner, we can go back speculatively in evolution 
to think about how robustly different forms of community intersubjectivity 
were created.
The Information Revolution and Narrative Intersubjectivity
I want to end this chapter by relating a small part of my current research into 
technological change. A central question here is: If, as I have suggested, nar-
ratives are empathy machines that create intersubjective space, how are they 
adapting to the e-realities of today? Without going into a complex ethnography 
of videogames and other forms of online storying, I want to raise again that 
fundamental question of whether the changes we see in our modes of narrative 
are affecting our emotional and ethical attitudes.
Just imagine an ordinary guy with a computer. He is no longer the messy 
person of two decades ago with lots of paper, pencil, pens, and so on: he is 
fully wired and seemingly freer, at least physically. What can we tease out 
of this simple observation in terms of the narrative of evolution? A special 
issue of Science on “The Evolution of Language” (2004) constructed a timeline 
that went roughly like this: maybe 100,000–200,000 years ago, humans had 
the hardware in place for the language faculty to develop—we stood upright, 
the brain cooled and grew in size, and so on. Then 40,000–50,000 years ago 
the species settled, following which there was a social revolution: the building 
of communities, people discovering each other socially, arguing, pontificat-
ing, gossiping, all of which we still take so much interest in today. And then 
only 5,000–7,000 years ago did the technology of writing develop. One might 
speculate that writing further supported the brain changes in lateralization 
that had happened owing to the left-brain location of language. Physical right-
handedness in humans was thus both a biological and a cultural adaptation, 
and it remained so until the late twentieth century, providing basic support for 
the written transmission of our narrative discourses.
However, if you turn back to the guy typing away at his computer, you will 
note that the situation has changed. Stone and chisel, metal and stylus, pen and 
paper—all of these needed what is known as the “dexterous grip” where thumb 
and forefinger join delicately. Today, we no longer require this kind of grip, at 
least for the purposes of writing, because on a keyboard we can use all five fin-
gers. We have also evolved texting, which is thumb oriented but has no use for 
the index finger. Paper used to lay flat on a desk, but now we have the computer 
screen and it is upright, facing us at 90˚. In addition, the original physical page-
turning that we associate with paper books is on its way out because now we 
 

Narrative as a Mode of Explanation  M  157
have tablets and iPhones and so on. All of this observation is merely scratching 
the surface, but it demonstrates how our bodies have reoriented in radically dif-
ferent ways over just the last decade or two. How do these external and physical 
factors affect mental changes?
First, the social relationship between writing and speech is changing quite 
dramatically. Writing has long been more prestigious than speech. Sites of high 
culture such as universities have depended on writing; the rural peasantry who 
had less access to literacy were also, by and large, poorer across cultures. So 
access to reading and writing was in fact a good predictor of economic status; 
in the past, it was also a good differentiator of location, such as country and 
city. However, is all this set to change? Are forms that are poised between 
speech and writing, like SMS, going to be preferred modes of communication 
in virtual as opposed to geographical space?
Second, one good measure of the success of a technological revolution is to 
gauge whether it has created not only new prestige forms but also new discourse 
and narrative genres. For example, during another revolutionary technological 
phase, the printing press created the novel. The process of quick printing meant 
that you could read long tales in the privacy of your bedroom. And now that we 
have an e-revolution, it once again signals a key moment for narrative studies. 
We can now ask: Since narrative is an ancient and highly adaptable form, how 
will it adapt to these new changes in technology? Will we have new narrative 
genres? Will different ways of reflexive self-understanding be created through 
computers via all the things we access electronically, like emails and chats?
Most crucially, as our patterns of social contact change and virtual contact 
rather than face-to-face interaction becomes a characteristic of the species, will 
our emotional worlds change? Human communities have traditionally moni-
tored their emotions through sharing stories, but are our foundational notions 
of shared intersubjectivity changing? I think these are very interesting ques-
tions for narrative theorists. My belief is that we are confronting new emotional 
landscapes, partly on account of the new virtual worlds we inhabit, and that 
this change will give us fresh insights into the structure of narrative.
Aristotle privileged the great emotions of pity and awe, but if we look on 
Facebook and the Internet, what I call the postmodern emotions of boredom, 
anxiety, frustration, rage, and resentment seem to figure much more promi-
nently. These are our new narrative emotions and we need much more research 
on them. Think of “trolling” today as a widespread, anonymous pastime and 
you will see what I mean. Indeed, I would say that the journey in narrative 
culture from Aristotle onward has been from the idea of catharsis to the idea of 
crisis, from daydreams to depression dreams, and from mimesis to memes.
I have therefore added a third paradox with a cultural-cognitive angle to two 
famous previous paradoxes of narrative:
Searle’s paradox of fictional discourse: How do words in fiction both have 

M
and not have their ordinary meanings?
Dennett’s paradox of the authorless narrative: Can we have a story with-

M
out a narrator?

158  
M  Rukmini Bhaya Nair
My paradox of the Indian rope trick: How do narratives succeed in mak-

M
ing us believe things that contradict beliefs for which we have very con-
vincing evidence?
My question highlights the inalienable place of uncertainty and paradox in 
narrative accounts. Perhaps it is just the Zeitgeist, but I find that people are 
paying attention to this aspect of my work. For example, Poulton (2005), writ-
ing on ethics and morality in business organizations, refers to these narrative 
notions, as does James Hegarty, a fine Sanskritist, who says that my arguments 
concerning narrative as theory helped him better understand the structure of 
the Mahabharata. Dr. Ronald Pies, who does clinical medicine at Tufts, has 
followed my general proposition that humans have a compulsive drive to gener-
ate narrative in the context of depression narratives, suggesting that this gener-
ates a particular genre of story, the sad and hopeless story. Others have used my 
work to suggest that the “law of necessary incompleteness” in narrative can be 
applied quite directly to videogames. I should emphasize that my point is not to 
say how important my work is—not at all!—but rather to make the point that 
this wide use of cloistered academic output has only really become possible in 
the Age of the Wiki.
Finally, I want to mention a small part of a large research project on emo-
tions and narrative at the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, where I teach. 
Language—the raw material of narrative—is markedly different from our 
other senses of vision, hearing, touch, smell, and taste as far as the process of 
acquisition goes. Most of our senses are “cooked” within a year of birth, but 
language simmers for a long time. It takes at least four full years for a human 
child to acquire the full structures of language. My question in this particular 
project is: Do language and emotion grow hand in hand in humans, so that 
narrative, as an empathy machine, can draw on both these cognitive resources 
as children learn about their social world?
In asking this difficult question, I have to say that I was initially inspired by 
a work of Darwin (1872/1968) called The Expression of the Emotions in Man and 
Animals, which I first came across in Cambridge as a graduate student. Darwin 
based this book on a questionnaire he circulated in 1867 in about 30 countries 
across all five continents asking how various emotions like shame, anger, sad-
ness, happiness, surprise, and so on were expressed in different cultures. His 
hypothesis was that that there was likely to be invariance across cultures in 
emotional expressions; there were likely to be some basic emotions that were 
common to all humans. Given his evolutionary stance, Darwin also postulated 
that there would be some features, like aggression, that might be common even 
across species.
In our turn, we conducted a large cross-sectional study in which we looked 
at a population of 1,000 people (500 men and 500 women) and collected 500 
qualitative narratives as well as administering very complicated schedules of 
questionnaires and picture identification tasks for over 20 emotions. Our data 
indicate quite definitively that all adults, men as well as women, are excellent 
at immediately picking up an emotional response from a photograph, with an 

Narrative as a Mode of Explanation  M  159
overall success rate of over 85 percent. This seems to go against the theory that 
certain emotions are necessarily more basic than others.
We also held long conversations with the 500 women in our study, who were 
all mothers, and we have more than 500 hours of talk and narrative on tape 
as a result. We are still analyzing the data, but we have found what seems to 
be incontrovertible evidence that mothers’ memories and their narrative intro-
spection are robust sources of learning about the order of emotional acquisition 
in children. It is impossible to go into the details of our protocols here, but they 
were rigorous. For instance, we gave all our mothers age bands, one to three 
months, three to six months, and so forth all the way up to ten years, to fill in 
concerning when they noticed a particular emotion in their children. Our data 
reveal that hardly any mother chose any of the age bands over four years and 
that, by and large, they also agreed on the order of acquisition of the emotions. 
Lastly, and most significantly, the mothers’ free choice of ages of acquisition of 
the emotions seems to provide strong evidence that language and emotion do 
indeed grow side by side and that both arrive at their full-blown forms around 
four years. This is a major insight and we have many others, proving my point 
that narrative analysis is rewarding in multiple ways.

CHAPTER 13
Economic Explanations
Paul Thagard
T
his chapter discusses explanation in a particular field, economics, and 
approaches reflexivity in order to try to understand it in terms of psy-
chological mechanisms, which enables some interesting things to be 
said about economic change. It will also draw out some of the implications for 
economics and also for more general questions regarding explanations of social 
complexity.
Howard Raiffa, a famous decision theorist, and Ernest Nagel, a famous phi-
losopher of science, were both teaching at Columbia. One day Nagel encoun-
tered Raiffa in the hallway. Raiffa was pacing up and down muttering to 
himself, “What should I do? What should I do?” Nagel said, “Howard, what’s 
the problem?” Raiffa replied, “Oh, it’s really difficult. I got a job offer and 
I just can’t decide whether to accept it or not.” Nagel, who did a lot of work 
on probability theory, said, “Well, Howard, you’re one of the world’s greatest 
experts on decision theory, so why don’t you draw out the decision tree? Why 
don’t you plug in the probabilities and utilities, calculate how to maximize 
your expected utility, and decide?” Raiffa looked back at him and said, “Ernest, 
this is serious.”
All of us have encountered serious problems in our lives: what job to take, 
whether to go to graduate school, whether to get married, whether to get 
divorced, whether to have a baby. If you have ever tried to use mathematical 
methods for this, you have encountered the same problem that Raiffa did in 
this situation. This is relevant to economics because most of economics for the 
last few decades, at least since the 1940s when von Neumann and Morgenstern 
had a huge influence, has assumed something like rational choice theory: that 
what individual consumers do and should do is to maximize their expected 
utility. This operates at the microeconomic level of individuals, but what hap-
pens at the level of whole societies in macroeconomics is also assumed to be an 
aggregate of that, so if you work out the microeconomics, everything else will 

162  
M  Paul Thagard
follow. The problem with this theory is that it is not true. Some philosophers 
have worried about economics being unfalsifiable. Well, rational choice theory 
is clearly falsifiable because it has been falsified.
I would say the same about creationism. It is not unfalsifiable, it is false. In 
the case of creationism, there are alternative theories that provide much bet-
ter explanations of the evidence. That is unfortunately one of the big lacks in 
economics. Nevertheless, empirically, economic theory has been shown to be 
false at the microeconomic level by a whole series of experiments in behavioral 
economics and behavioral game theory.
At the macroeconomic level, the standard economic theory is also clearly 
false. The problem is not just that the economists failed to predict collapses 
such as in 1999 and 2008, it is that they predicted the opposite assumption. If 
people are being rational, and if there is perfect information in society, then 
you simply cannot have a collapse, but you did, so that is a falsification.
Given that this has happened, it is a really interesting sociological question 
why economic theory of this brand is still dominant and still taught. There are 
two reasons for that. One is ideology, that the theory fits with the goals of peo-
ple who have certain interests in the way the economy should work. The other 
is that there is no good alternative. In the philosophy of science, Popper (1959) 
is famous for saying that the mark of science is falsifiability, but it has been 
pointed out by a number of people, including Lakatos (1970) who was a student 
of Popper’s, that that is not how science works. A scientific theory rarely gets 
falsified because it does not succeed in its predictions. What happens instead 
is that people start to look for alternative theories, and it is when an alternative 
theory has been developed that the original theory gets rejected. That is what 
happened with creationism when evolution by natural selection came along.
One way to look for an alternative theory in economics is to try for more 
detailed explanations using psychological and social mechanisms. Keynes 
(1936), who was certainly no rational choice theorist, gave explanations of how 
the crash of 1929 took place in terms of a seventeenth-century term, animal 
spirits, by which he meant emotions. People were not being rational, they were 
responding to their emotions. That was pretty good for 1933 when he wrote the 
general theory, but oddly enough some leading economists today, like Akerlof 
and Shiller, are no more psychologically sophisticated, even though we know 
much more about cognition and emotion.
My own preferred way to approach economics is to look at the emotional 
mechanisms that underlie human decision making. Why was Howard Raiffa 
having such a problem? If you have to make an important decision about 
whether to take a new job, clearly it is emotional. There are different sorts of 
goals, family issues, maybe even cultural factors. These are all things that are 
highly emotional to us and we have to figure out how to put them together. If 
you have an understanding of the cognitive and emotional mechanisms, you 
might be able to start to answer these questions.
Nevertheless, I want to try to convince you that if that is the emotional 
valence you attach to mechanisms, you are not thinking about the right kinds 
of mechanisms. When people disparage mechanisms, they are attacking very 

Economic Explanations  M  163
simple kinds, pushes and pulls or straightforward linear cases where A causes 
B causes C causes D. I am not talking about that sort of mechanism at all. 
Drawing on recent philosophy of science, I consider a mechanism to be a sys-
tem of parts whose interactions explain regular changes and also critical transi-
tions. These mechanisms are nonlinear systems that are capable of generating 
multiple attractors, with movement from one attractor to another constituting 
a critical transition or a tipping point with many emergent properties.
All the kinds of biological systems of which I am aware, like the heart and the 
lungs and certainly the brain, which is often cited as one of the most complex 
systems in the world, have all of these kinds of properties. They are also open to 
chaos in the technical sense that small inputs can produce large outputs, with 
many feedback loops. So these are very complex systems, but nevertheless they 
are describable in terms of mechanisms in the sense I intend here.
What is a psychological mechanism? Can we talk about the way the mind 
works in terms of parts and interactions? The answer is clearly yes. In cogni-
tive science, parts are mental representations that stand for things in the world 
that interact with each other: concepts, beliefs, analogies, visual images. These 
are both cognitive and emotional, so there is not a sharp division in the mind 
between what is cognitive and what is emotional; there are many interconnec-
tions in the brain.
It is legitimate also to talk about the social in terms of mechanisms. In 
social mechanisms, the parts are people, who interact with each other. The 
regular interactions between people include verbal and nonverbal communica-
tion, exchanging not only ideas, but also analogies, visual representations, and 
emotions.
Financier Soros (1987) claims that the problem with explanations of eco-
nomics is that economists do not take into account reflexivity, which requires 
a different way of approaching social science. This is a concept discussed by 
sociologists like Giddens, Bourdieu, and Woolgar, and is similar to philosopher 
Hacking’s (1995) ideas about what he calls the looping effect of human kinds, 
by which he means that when you introduce a new human category into think-
ing about the world, you can actually change the world—a kind of reflexivity. 
Soros says that the role of intentions and future expectations in social situations 
sets up a two-way connection between the participants’ thinking and the situ-
ation in which they participate. If people think that the economy is going up 
and they can make money, they are optimistic, but that feeling feeds back and 
creates the situation where optimism turns into a bubble, and once the bubble 
bursts the situation is reversed. This kind of reflexivity in economic change is 
difficult to handle within the conventional approach assuming perfect ratio-
nality and perfect information.
Reflexivity can be explained at a deeper level in just the same way that 
Keynes’s ideas about animal spirits can be fleshed out in terms of psychological 
and neural processes. The central idea of cognitive science is mental represen-
tation: you can represent the world, but you can also represent yourself in the 
world. You have various concepts of yourself and the markets you are partici-
pating in, buying and selling, various things that you believe or do not believe 

164  
M  Paul Thagard
about stocks going up or stocks going down. You are happy when the stocks 
you buy are going up, and you are fearful that they will stop going up or that 
they might go down. These are all different kinds of mental representations: 
not only words, but various kinds of images and emotions as well. The mental 
processes, the interactions between the parts, include different kinds of infer-
ences, calculations, and emotional feedbacks. All of these make reflexivity hap-
pen, with effects on the economy that can be understood as mental processes.
In the rest of this chapter, I want to outline my theory of emotional coher-
ence and how emotions and cognitions operate in our minds, within the con-
text of the mental representations and processes that are most responsible for 
economic booms and busts.
Emotional Coherence
The standard view of inference from philosophy and artificial intelligence is 
sequential: you start with some beliefs, you apply rules and inference, and you 
acquire more beliefs. The coherence approach to this is different. It is inspired 
by neural network models and it says that what happens when people reach 
conclusions is in fact much more holistic, but not in a mystical way. You have 
a collection of different beliefs that are connected to each other in different 
ways and you come up with a coherent account of how they should operate. 
So coherence is essentially the normative theory of how you ought to make 
inferences.
Of course, people do not always behave normatively; sometimes they do 
things that are not sensible. Every element in our network of coherent or inco-
herent elements is going to have not only a degree of acceptance, which is anal-
ogous to a probability, but also an emotional valence, which could be thought 
of as desirability. When you are thinking about something like whether stocks 
are going to keep going up, it is not merely that you think it is probable or 
improbable. You are also thinking about whether it is desirable or undesirable, 
and that is factored into the conclusion. When people make decisions, they are 
doing it on the basis of emotional coherence and they need to have some way 
of getting utility into the picture, not only probabilities. How are you going to 
calculate utility?
That is really hard, because you often cannot be very precise and so you have 
to go with your emotional judgments. What you obtain is something like an 
emotional gestalt, an overall picture taking into account the emotions of what 
you should do. Once you have that picture, you can give an account of how 
inferences go well, but you can also use it to figure out the reasons for them 
sometimes going badly. I have developed accounts of different kinds of emo-
tional mechanisms (Thagard, 2006) that can get in the way of thinking well.
Any important decision is going to be emotional and often we do it well, 
but sometimes we really get it wrong. In economics, you buy and sell stocks 
based on your goals, but you can get misled by different kinds of inferences. 
The one that is most familiar, because it has been discussed by psychologists 
for 20 years, is motivated inference. This is where you let your desires get in the 
 

Economic Explanations  M  165
way of your beliefs. Another error pattern is fear-driven inference. In this case, 
you do not believe something because it makes you feel good, as in motivated 
inference, you believe something because it makes you feel bad. The last error 
is rage-driven inference, where the actions that you take come about because 
you are really angry about something. This governs many political movements, 
but it is not so relevant to the economic case.
Motivated Inference
Motivated inference is the idea that when you form your beliefs you do it not 
only on the basis of the evidence, but also on the basis of goals and desires that 
distort that evidence. In philosophy, this is sometimes called wishful thinking, 
though it is psychologically more complicated; psychologists talk about posi-
tive illusions or the optimism bias, all ways in which your beliefs are affected 
not only by the evidence coming in, but also by what you want to believe. 
My favorite example is Muammar Gaddafi just before he was brought down, 
who said, “I have millions of supporters including God.” This is a motivated 
inference—he did not have much evidence that God was on his side, but he 
really wanted to believe that.
However, motivated inference happens to all of us all of the time:

M Relationships: I have heard it said that the difference between men and 
women when they get married is that women believe their husbands 
will change and men believe their wives will not change, and they are 
both wrong. Either case is clearly a motivated inference, because people 
have a rosy view of the relationship that is usually not directly based on 
reality.

M Medicine: People have medical problems and they think these are going to 
go away. I know somebody who walked around with a lump under his arm 
for a year before he got it checked out; it turned out to be a melanoma.

M Politics: We think a leader can bring us hope and change. Motivated infer-
ence is rampant concerning climate change, for instance, even though the 
evidence is strongly in favor of global warming being caused by human 
actions.

M Economic bubbles: Part of what happens in economic bubbles is the moti-
vation to believe that stocks can only keep on going up or that this time 
is not like all the others. You would think that people in business would 
learn from the past that there is a bubble and a crash about every 10 or 
20 years.

M Sports: People get themselves pumped up to think that they are going to 
play well today. This is a case where a positive illusion might be helpful. 
If you think that you are going to play well, maybe you will, but it is not 
based on much in the way of evidence.

M Research: When I start a new project, I often start out thinking that the 
output will be one of the best papers I ever wrote and it will be published 
in a top journal. Only later when it appears in the Albanian Journal of 

166  
M  Paul Thagard
Irreproducible Speculations do I realize that it was not as good as some of 
the others I have written.

M Religion: You may have a motivated inference to think that there is a God 
who is going to look after you, which is very reassuring but not always 
based on much evidence.
Fear-driven Inference
Fear-driven inference is where you believe something not because it makes you 
feel good, but because it makes you feel bad. One classic case is Othello. In 
Shakespeare’s play, Othello is in love with his wife Desdemona, but Iago plants 
little bits of evidence that suggest Desdemona is unfaithful. Clearly, Othello 
is motivated to think that his wife is faithful to him, but he starts to worry 
about the evidence until he becomes convinced that Iago was right. So he ends 
up believing something that he is motivated not to believe, but he cannot help 
himself believing it because it worries him so much.
Elster (2007) calls this “countermotivated inference,” but that does not 
indicate the driver. J. S. Mill (1843) also talked about it in System of Logic, 
although he did not give it a name. Philosopher Mele (2001) called it “twisted 
self-deception,” in which you are using motivated inference to trick yourself 
into believing something, but it is twisted because it makes you less happy. The 
originator of the idea, according to Elster, was French fable writer Jean de la 
Fontaine, who said that people naturally believe both what they want and what 
they fear. Here are some examples:

M Relationships: When social psychologist Dave Nussbaum first told me 
about this concept, my sons were teenagers. One kind of fear-driven infer-
ence happens naturally to parents, particularly once children are out in 
the world and you don’t always know what they are doing. If you haven’t 
heard from them in a while or if they are late one day, it is natural to start 
thinking that something bad has happened. You don’t have any evidence, 
but you can’t help thinking about it.

M Medicine: Hypochondriacs became much more concerned than they 
should be when they think they have a particular disease, especially an 
unusual one that is only read about in medical textbooks.

M Politics: Fear-driven inference comes along in conspiracy theories, when 
people convince themselves that something really horrible is happening 
because they are afraid that it is.

M Business: Panics are the flipside of bubbles. In a bubble, you think that 
things are much better than they really are, but in a panic, you can move 
to the other extreme where you think that it is the end of the economy, 
as in 2008 when some people were saying that the capitalist system was 
collapsing.

M Research: Around the time I first heard of fear-driven inference, I had sub-
mitted a book proposal to MIT Press and I still had not heard back from 
the editor after a few weeks. I have published seven books with MIT Press, 
 

Economic Explanations  M  167
so I should have had some reason for confidence, but I kept thinking that 
the editor hated this book and he was not going to want to publish it. I 
had no evidence for that, but fear-driven inference got me thinking that 
way until the encouraging email response finally arrived.

M Religion: If you are afraid of death and of a vengeful God, then the sheer 
fear can make it seem more plausible to you that there is such a God.
Psychological Mechanisms
What is happening in fear-driven inference is a feedback loop where what you 
take to be the evidence for the negative belief is that you feel bad. I call that a 
“gut overreaction,” because you are overreacting to your gut feeling. The same 
happens in motivated inference when you have a positive gut overreaction. 
In a new romance, you think that your lover is wonderful and that generates 
good feelings, which produce more evidence that your lover is wonderful. The 
feedback loop can make you think that things are better than they are. In 
economic cases, the difference between somebody being excessively positive 
about the stock market and somebody being excessively negative is the differ-
ence between motivated and fear-driven inference. Of course, this is happening 
not only at the individual level, but also at the social level, with people sharing 
information and emotions to produce shared illusions.
Why do people engage in motivated inference? Why has natural selection 
not led people to be more rational than they are? There is actually a neurologi-
cal reason for this: the brain did not evolve to do probability and utility very 
well. Probability theory was only developed in the seventeenth century, and 
utility theory came much later. These are cultural developments and they can 
often be useful tools, but they are not built into our brains.
There is a good deal of empirical evidence that in the brain there is no 
division between cognition and emotion, between probability and utility. For 
instance, Loewenstein (2001) and others wrote a great paper called “Risk as 
Feeling” in which they summarized the evidence for people estimating risk in 
terms of emotions. Another social psychologist, Schwartz (1990), wrote a paper 
called “Feelings as Information,” in which he said that we assess probabilities 
and utilities through our emotions. There is also some related work in neurosci-
ence by Harris (2008), who is more famous for his critiques of religion. He has 
found that the neural correlates of belief and disbelief are tied in with different 
brain areas: when people agree with something, it is connected with the posi-
tive emotion parts of the brain, whereas when people find something false, it is 
the negative emotion parts of the brain that are involved. So the brain is using 
emotions for these purposes and that can get us into trouble.
Unfortunately, there are not yet any psychological experiments document-
ing the occurrence of fear-driven inference. Dave Nussbaum tried to do some 
experiments, but the problem is that in order to do effective tests you have 
to make people really afraid, about which there are obvious ethical concerns. 
However, anecdotally, rumination (thinking about things over and over again) 
generates an amplified feedback loop in which the representations feed on each 

168  
M  Paul Thagard
other to become an internally reinforcing system that makes you convinced 
that what you fear is actually true.
Fear-driven inference can produce a critical transition in a complex system in 
which there is a bubble based on motivated inference. When something really 
big happens in the economy, like the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008, an 
emotional transition takes place toward fear-driven inference. This happens to 
individuals every day: you are in a good mood and then you get some bad news 
that puts you into a bad mood. The emotional transition leads to fear-driven 
inference, which is my attempt to explain economic booms and busts.
Of course, sometimes this happens in reverse. Take a political revolution 
like the Arab Spring, where people were driven by fear-driven inference. They 
thought there was nothing they could do because the oppressive regime was 
too strong, but then there was an emotional transition sparked by a particular 
event, like a man in Tunisia setting himself on fire. People then went over to 
the other extreme and motivated inference made them think that revolution 
could take place.
Social Mechanisms
Psychological mechanisms are only part of the story, because people do not 
make decisions or develop emotions on their own; they do it through inter-
action with other people. To understand those interactions we need social 
mechanisms for the modes of interaction that can lead to the transmission of 
cognitions and emotions from one person to another:
One of the most basic ways of transmitting information neurologically is 

M
mirror neurons, where you see something happening in someone else and 
you end up with the same kind of neural firings in your brain that would 
be happening if you were doing it yourself. “The smell of fear” is not only 
a metaphor: people who are afraid produce different kinds of molecules 
in their sweat, and when other people perceive that, they are more likely 
to be afraid.
At a more psychological level is emotional contagion, where you pick up 

M
on the emotions of others. One way in which that can happen is through 
mimicry. Your brain develops emotions partly by taking in signals from 
your face, so if your mother said “Put on a happy face,” she was right that 
it can actually lead you to be happier. People do this not merely individu-
ally, but also socially.
Interaction rituals are important in religion or in the army. People march 

M
together, sing together, or stand up and sit down together, becoming attuned 
to each other emotionally in another kind of emotional contagion.
Attachment-based learning is an idea from Minsky (2006) that we tend to 

M
acquire the emotions of people who teach us and to whom we are attached, 
such as parents or religious leaders.
Empathy and emotional analogy also contribute to emotional transmis-

M
sion. One kind of empathy is fundamentally physiological, as in mirror 
 

Economic Explanations  M  169
neurons; the other is more cognitive, where you think your way into some-
body else’s position by imagining how you would feel if you were in their 
shoes, in a kind of emotional analogy that can also lead you to acquire 
new emotions.
Altruism and sympathy transfer emotions, when you adopt some of the 

M
emotions of people you care about.
Emotional cuing is a more complicated social process where what some-

M
one else is doing can actually put you in a different emotional state. If 
somebody is really angry at you, you may feel guilty because you are sensi-
tive to social situations.
Power is often used to transmit emotions. One way people get emotional 

M
power over others is by having rewards to offer them to make them feel 
good, so they affiliate with you to gain the rewards. The other way is fear, 
where you make people think that if they don’t do what you want, you’re 
going to make something awful happen to them.
Other methods like propaganda and advertising also manipulate people’s 

M
emotions.
These social mechanisms are probably only a subset of the total, but they 
show that communication operates at the level of high-level inference as in ver-
bal empathy, but also at fundamental biological levels like mirror neurons and 
molecular communication. These mechanisms explain how it is that emotions 
can spread through a community, sometimes rationally when everybody is feel-
ing good because the situation really is good, but sometimes in ways that are 
driven by collective motivated inference or collective fear-driven inference.
Feedback Loops and Transitions
In any complex system, you can have both stability and transitions. In the 
cases we are considering here, the stability comes from dampening, or negative, 
feedback. In psychological terms, you have inhibition between elements: if you 
are feeling good about the stock market, you won’t be feeling bad about it. At 
the social level, different kinds of intimidating communication can promote 
stability. If somebody is saying something you don’t like and you glare at them, 
you inhibit their communication. At the individual level, feedback loops can 
either flip you into a mode where you are experiencing motivated inference or 
one where you are experiencing fear-driven inference.
In a group, transitions can happen as a result of amplifying feedback, where 
one thing excites another that excites another and everything gets heated up 
even more. In psychological models, there is excitation between different ele-
ments, just as among neurons, resulting in a whole circle of excitation. At the 
social level, with amplifying feedback there is a kind of collective energy where 
people go to a meeting or join a party. At both the social and psychologi-
cal levels, using the kinds of psychological and social mechanisms that I have 
described, you can have both situations where you get stability and others 
where you get dramatic change.

170  
M  Paul Thagard
Conclusion
This approach has methodological implications for the idea that there have 
to be two different ways of doing science, as Soros suggests. If you do not 
appreciate the mechanisms that are operating in people’s minds, then you prob-
ably have to do social science differently. However, if you do social science 
in a way that integrates neural mechanisms, psychological mechanisms, and 
social mechanisms, then you can produce a sufficiently complex account that 
is similar in its methods and results to what happens in natural sciences such 
as physics and biology. Prediction is difficult because these systems are highly 
nonlinear and chaotic in the sense that they are easily perturbed. Nevertheless, 
for giving a mechanistic explanation of what goes on in complex social phe-
nomena like economic booms and busts, this is a perfectly reasonable way to 
proceed.
I have made the case that economic explanations are in fact mechanistic in 
that they are based on the complex psychological and social mechanisms I have 
described. Explanations are not mechanistic at the level of the abstract econ-
omy, but if you are addressing what is going on in the minds of individuals and 
paying attention to how cognition and emotion operate, then you can develop 
some reasonable explanations of economic change. Furthermore, the ideas of 
animal spirits and reflexivity that economists have used in order to get beyond 
the empirical inadequacy of mainstream economics can be spelled out by look-
ing at the mechanisms of emotional coherence and social communication.
 

CHAPTER 14
Narratives and Models in  
Complex Systems
Timothy F. H. Allen, Edmond Ramly, Samantha Paulsen, 
Gregori Kanatzidis, and Nathan Miller
H
umans often deal with the world through narratives. Mechanistic sci-
entists do not necessarily recognize when they are using narratives, 
and some might imagine narratives as nonscientific. The thesis in 
this chapter is that narratives are in fact the deliverable in science, and that 
models are a means of improving the quality of that bottom line. It may appear 
that we are asserting an antirealist point of view, but that is not the case. 
Most of the time, we are agnostic as to reality, while accepting that the writer, 
Allen, is in his material study, typing on a real keyboard. That would be a 
soft realism, which is perfectly acceptable. Our case against hard realism is 
that reality is often used prematurely as an intellectual crutch in the scientific 
endeavor. We wish to tighten up standards by getting a clear view of narrative 
and modeling.
Our reservations about realism come from the way it encourages slovenly 
thinking and careless analysis, which muddles the discourse. All we do in sci-
ence is associated with levels of analysis that determine what is in, what is out, 
what is related and how, and so on. We have no reason to suppose that there 
are levels of analysis in the real external world. Inserting reality into experience 
introduces random elements at undefined levels of analysis. Small changes in 
those levels of analysis are particularly sinister, because it is easy to overlook 
them, even though the consequences for the investigation might be large. Levels 
of analysis are subtle and need to be treated in a nuanced manner. Narratives 
are problematic for modernist realists in science because there is no obvious 
way for a narrative to be tied to reality in any straightforward manner.
Funtowicz and Ravetz (1992) make the case that all modernism has an exter-
nal reference for quality that pertains to external reality: the closer the model is 

172  
M  Timothy F. H. Allen et al
to reality, the higher its quality. That would be the default setting for the major-
ity of biologists. Modernism does not seem to acknowledge that we only have 
access to experience and data; we do not have access to reality except through 
our senses. Even the apparently clean shot at reality resulting from a methodi-
cally rigorous experiment is misleading, because embedded there is a host of 
arbitrary, unstated decisions. Modernists view measurements as a refuge that is 
concrete. Unfortunately, measurements are never clean, and are set in models full 
of arbitrary decisions. Rosen (2012, p. 214) said pointedly that the most abstract 
thing you can do is to make a measurement, because you have to exclude all the 
rest of the universe to get it. As a result, there is in fact much more intrusion 
from arbitrary decisions of the observer than modernists usually realize. When 
the study is over, or at least at a stage for reflection, realism does no harm and 
may hearten scientists for the tedium of data collection and analysis.
Changes in reference occur often in biology. There is frequently someone at 
the back of the lecture room who says, “Yes, but what about such and such?” 
imagining it is validly part of the discourse. In fact, the “such and such” is 
often in a different universe that causes it to be in a different logical type that 
does not belong in the discussion. Science not so much discovers and explains 
what happens; it rather discovers when a new logical type is needed—that is, 
when a new level of discourse pertains. Logical types fix the level of analysis 
that is in use.
Different logical types are not simply different, they must relate to each 
other in general terms. Roughly the same situation applies, but at a new level 
of inclusion. For instance, left versus right distinction belongs to a logical type 
different from the contrast of up versus down. Left and right sides are possessed 
by the individual in question. The up versus down distinction is shared, not 
owned by individuals. So up versus down belongs to a different discourse in a 
larger universe relative to left and right, even though the distinctions may only 
be at right angles to each other. That is whence comes the quandary of “How 
come a mirror switches you left and right but not up and down.” There are dif-
ferent logical types involved, so the two polarities can switch independently, 
so there is no quandary. In biology, cat and dog share a logical type that is dif-
ferent from the logical type of “carnivore.” Cat and dog can be different forms 
in the order Carnivora: both lines are carnivorous, but that does not make the 
set or class carnivore the same logical type as cat and dog. Cat and dog are in 
the same logical type, but carnivore is a different logical type that defines an 
animal by what it eats. Accordingly, carnivore and herbivore are the same logi-
cal type. Things may indeed exist in the external world, but they do not exist 
there as things belonging to logical types.
Too Much Credit for Models
Almost everyone knows not to commit the error of which Korzybski (1994, 
p. 750) warned: “The map is not the territory.” Nevertheless, the two are con-
founded all the time, precisely because there is insufficient focus on what the 
observer or model builder decides. For instance, most biologists would say that 
 

Narratives and Models in Complex Systems  M  173
the genetic distinction between dominant and recessive genes is a material 
issue; that is, dominant genes form a class of phenomenon that has a material 
basis. They do, but only once a normative value judgment has been made that a 
given trait is dominant at the outset. “Dominant” as opposed to “recessive” is a 
normative decision, not a materially justified verity. In sickle cell, a genetically 
caused blood disease, the gene is not expressed as the disease in the heterozy-
gote (only one copy of the gene exists in the genome, its complement being the 
normal type). As a wrinkle in all this, the heterozygote is resistant to malaria. 
We never say that sickle cell is dominant with regard to malarial resistance, 
although it clearly is. The reason for the oversight is that sickle cell is a killer 
and so cannot become the common gene. Dominant usually means some ver-
sion of “normal,” “desirable,” or “functional,” and that is an observer decision. 
Sickle cell is functional for malaria resistance, but is never more common than 
the normal.
All genes are dominant for the protein they make; all genes are recessive 
relative to what all other genes make. This is how a rare mutant is nearly always 
recessive, because of the situation in which it is judged. Should a recessive 
mutant become useful (a value judgment), it becomes dominant in the mind 
and experience of the biologist. Nothing has changed as to how the gene codes 
for protein; the material happenings are unaltered. It is just that as the now 
more common condition, the mutant is now considered the normal advanta-
geous character. The overwhelmed, previously dominant, “normal” gene still 
codes for what it always coded. Dominant and recessive are not the territory; 
they are part of the map for dealing with genetics. The model can be easily 
confused with material reality if observer decisions are not recognized and 
acknowledged.
The above example shows that normalcy is an observer decision; it took 
Tainter and Lucas (1983) to illustrate that significance is a material distinction, 
but it is in fact a decision, just like dominance. Tainter and Lucas (1983) were 
explicit that the significance of an archeological site does not have a material 
basis. A site may become significant because of a new technology at hand, such 
as carbon dating or the ability to recognize the origins of certain carbon frag-
ments. A majority of problems that are challenging in science are not material 
issues and so are not data problems.
The same error arises in the conviction that the critical experiment that 
will settle the big issue is not just around the corner. That is rarely the case. 
The solution lies more often in clear thinking and clever conception of logical 
types. For instance, there is an abundance of experimentation on whether or 
not a higher temperature increases the rate of decomposition of recalcitrant 
carbon in soils (Wixon, 2011). Unfortunately, each experiment is so locally 
focused in time and space that nonlinearities make the results appear to be at 
odds with others, when in fact it is simply that the conflicting experiments are 
measuring something different from some other logical type. Disagreement 
comes from local experiments overreaching the local universe of discourse in 
which they are set. All of the above conflicts arise from some version of mistak-
ing the model for the thing being modeled.

174  
M  Timothy F. H. Allen et al
Models are important because their internal consistency gives the modeler a 
well-founded confidence. Nevertheless, the price paid for the focus of models 
is the narrow scope over which they apply. Models have to be quite local if they 
are to be consistent, otherwise the model would be pulled off its parameters (its 
implied equation would break down). For instance, one can model the shock 
wave of a terrorist’s bomb in a bus, but one cannot model the larger issue that 
a terrorist for one side in a conflict is a freedom fighter for the other. What 
to call the actor comes from a wider discourse within which the model for the 
bomb is set.
Narratives Relative to Models: Making the Science Operational
The four pairs of contrasts
Given how easy it is to mistake the model for the thing being modeled, it is 
useful to identify modeling relative to narrative, and the role of the observer 
in each. Zellmer et al. (2006) developed a scheme that linked together four 
distinctions relevant to models:
Pattee’s (1978) distinction between laws and rules;

M
Allen and Hoekstra’s (1992) distinction between scale and type;

M
the distinction between the protocol in addressing scale and type as 

M
opposed to what is observed under a given scale and type; and
Rosen’s (2000) distinction between essence and the realization of an 

M
essence.
When all four distinctions are linked together, a scheme emerges that shows 
how a model is created, and how models are used in general. It then becomes 
easier to evaluate how models work and why they are so useful.
Pattee (1978) introduces the concept of laws, making it clear that he does 
not mean “laws of nature.” He does not mean for laws to apply outside obser-
vation. Laws are an epistemological device, not something from metaphys-
ics. There are different laws in physics than in biology, so laws are discourse 
specific. Carbon is a law in biology but not in physics. Both laws and rules 
express limits, but of different sorts. The laws of physics are a special case, 
but possess the general characteristics of all laws in Pattee’s terms. To Pattee, 
laws are
Universal. They apply everywhere in the general discourse, beyond what 

M
the observer chooses to recognize. Physics is a discourse, so we refer here 
to everywhere in the discourse, not everywhere in nature.
Inexorable. They are offered to the observer in what is observed and can-

M
not be suspended for convenience. Gravity cannot be suspended, so even 
in an airplane the coffee stays in the cup.
Structure-independent. Gravity, for instance, applies to all structures.

M
Rate-dependent. Again, gravity manifests itself as relative rates.

M
 
 

Narratives and Models in Complex Systems  M  175
In contrast to laws, rules are more local and derive from observer decisions. 
They come from restrictions in a narrower universe. Rules are
Arbitrary, just as definitions are. Definitions are neither right nor wrong; 

M
they are simply announcements of the observer.
Local. The discourse in which rules apply restricts things to only what is 

M
allowed, a subset of possibilities. Consider, for instance, that the class to 
which small feline animals belong might be spelled CHAT as opposed to 
CAT. The French and English universes are local and different.
Linguistic. They invoke names for things. The names impose rules as to 

M
what is recognizable and is recognized.
Rate-independent. They can invoke meaning, which does not have a rate. 

M
A cat is not a cat at a rate; it just is a cat. Recognition, mentioned above, 
is instantaneous and does not occur at a rate, so the linguistic and rate-
independent aspects of rules are linked.
The distinction between rate-dependence and rate-independence is crucial; 
structures, significance, and identity are all rate-independent. A change from 
one structure to another is rate-independent and is generally irreversible in 
some sense. Of course, one can change the level of analysis, so what is discrete 
and rate-independent can appear as continuous and rate-dependent. Death is 
rate-independent, but the death rate is not. In such switches, the level of analy-
sis has changed and one is talking about something different. The whole point 
here is to avoid use of the level of analysis in the slovenly way that realism 
encourages. Behavior involves a change of state and is rate-dependent. Rate-
dependent processes are the links between structural levels in a hierarchy. So 
we need both laws and rules to deal with hierarchical conceptions.
If laws versus rules is our starting point of tension, scale and type present 
our second polarity. Scale and type are commonly confused, at least in ecol-
ogy. Almost all freshman-level biology textbooks start with grand hierarchies, 
from the cell to the biosphere. However, these are not scaled arrangements; the 
textbooks mistake type for scale. For instance, organism is a type of thing, and 
organisms come in all sizes. Type does not relate to scale in any simple way. A 
type is what stands out from the background and is assigned to a class. If types 
are linked in a hierarchy, it is not by scaled relationships, but by definition. 
Population linked to organism is not bigger than organisms in general, because 
there is a proviso in the definition of population, that the organisms (compris-
ing the population) should be similar in some relevant way. Populations are not 
simply collections of any old mixture of organisms; the members have to be 
equivalent in some way. As a result, the population of dust mites on your dead 
skin is smaller than the organism that is you. You are not equivalent to a mite, 
and so are not in their population, your proximity notwithstanding. Scale is a 
matter of relative size in things that are linked in a way sufficient to apply the 
scale.
The third paired distinction is between protocol for observation versus what 
is seen thereafter. Both scale and type have a protocol for measuring before the 

176  
M  Timothy F. H. Allen et al
fact, as well as an application after the object is observed. The scale protocol 
involves things like choosing a microscope versus a telescope. The protocol for 
seeing a type of organism comes from past experience leading to expectations 
as to what one might see. Organism is one such scale-independent class, but 
once you have seen an elephant, it will be of a certain size. So scale, type, pro-
tocol, and observed entity interact in complicated ways.
The last distinction is essence versus realization. By essence we do not mean 
something in the external world that is concrete, as Plato asserted. An essence 
does not exist independent of a model created by the observer. Essence needs to 
be investigated by the model, and comes into consideration only as an observ-
able is used to propose a model.
While the model is a human creation, there are things that are observed 
independent of the process of model building. We use the model to probe and 
understand those independent parts of observation. We try to understand what 
we see that we did not fix and decide. Essence helps us do that, but it is always 
tied to the specific model. Essence emerges from how we play the model and 
has no generality beyond that. Essence for us is therefore not Platonic idealism, 
where for Plato the essence was a reality that gives the shadows on the cave wall. 
For us there is no essence until there is a shadow. Essences are not “out there.” 
Essence for us is only to answer questions about the shadow; it does not exist 
independently of questions about the shadow. Models assert structure and rela-
tionships, and, in Zellmer et al. (2006), models appear as equivalent classes, 
to which an observed entity is assigned. The essence is that which can be used 
to explain the equivalence in the equivalence class; it follows the implication 
of the model.
The model derives from an observable that has been realized such that we 
can experience it. The observable might be a biological or social structure, 
which will have its own model and narrative about itself and its world. In biol-
ogy and sociology, we are modeling the model that is possessed by the observ-
able. We propose to find the origins and reason for those narratives and models 
that exist beyond our decisions as observers.
Essences are undefinable because they keep changing, perhaps through evo-
lution, but also through maturation. The scheme works for biology as well as 
social structures. US presidents each have a model as to what should be done. It 
comes from the incumbent’s experience in the light of a set of expectations as to 
the undefined presidency. The presidency usually realizes a president through 
elections. But presidents can change the presidency that realized them. For 
instance, Nixon’s Watergate ordeal changed the presidency. Presidents and the 
presidency are not so much things as they are together a relationship. We make 
them things as we model what we experience in the realization. This means 
that things come from us as observers. Probing the observable and its general 
condition in a scientific investigation might allow the essence to clarify for us 
what all those presidents have in common.
Scientific analysis should help us to understand what we have created in the 
equivalence class of the model. It will also capture some of the model that the 
observable has for itself. While the things modeled in biosocial systems have 

Narratives and Models in Complex Systems  M  177
their own models, physical entities do not have models for themselves or their 
environment. In physical systems, we more investigate the how of the realiza-
tion, a simpler matter compared to modeling biology.
Linking the Four Contrasts Together
Kuhn (1970) addressed science in a self-conscious way that identified intellec-
tual frameworks that he called paradigms. These frameworks accept a shared 
vocabulary, methodology, and a view of what is worth studying. Paradigms are 
narratives. Like all narratives that lie behind an investigation, they are neither 
true nor untrue; they are simply an announcement of a point of view. When 
quantum mechanics and relativity moved beyond Newton, we continued to 
use the Newtonian paradigms to build bridges, leaving alone the contradic-
tion between the two paradigms. The power of narratives is that they can 
survive incompatibility. Splitting an atom is one story, while building a bridge 
is another. Neither story is obliged to agree with the other.
Zellmer et al.’s scheme links direct observables to paradigms in Kuhn’s 
sense. The linkage is not straightforward; it involves working up through levels 
of intrusion of the human modeler and storyteller. Stories are built up through 
levels of involvement. Zellmer et al. (2006) essentially present a model of how 
we model. Their scheme is complicated because it invokes a hierarchy of con-
siderations as the observable is fitted into the narrative, as the normal science is 
performed inside the paradigm. Their scheme needs to be hierarchical so that 
we can move between levels of discourse in an orderly fashion. The levels per-
tain variously to the four contrasting pairs spelled out above: laws/rules, scale/
type, protocol/observed, and essence/realization. Before the modeling begins, 
at the highest level of n+3 (Figure 14.1), the meta-observer makes the original 
decisions as to the arena of discourse. In other terms, the meta-observer brings 
a paradigm.
Just below the overarching meta-observer, at level n+2 we find what Pattee 
(1978) calls laws, the universals in the discourse. Laws operationalize the para-
digm. At level n+1 occur Pattee’s rules and Rosen’s essence. There are two sides 
to level n+1. One of them is the realm of observer decisions. That is where 
models lie, the models that are structured by Pattee’s rules. The other side of 
level n+1 is still part of observation, just those parts that arise beyond the deci-
sion of the observer. We choose to study lions and their spatial placement, all 
under the observer’s choice. But then the lion appears to move, and that does 
not come from the observer’s decisions. It is still part of observation, so we are 
still in the realm of epistemology. The technical term coming from postmodern 
positions for that other part of observation is called “the other.” That is where 
observed behavior arises, and where external considerations give rise to the 
realized structure that is being observed.
Let us start the process of creating models in this scheme. It starts at level n, 
where is an observable that is initially only perceived and experienced. A loop 
arises linking the observable structure at n to the model and its rules at level 
n+1. First, the observer suggests that something like the observable at n has 

178  
M  Timothy F. H. Allen et al
been seen before as a type. At level n+1, a class of things seen before is erected. 
There is equivalence across class members that seems to apply to the observable 
at n. A check follows to see whether the entity at n is indeed a member of the 
class. There is an iterative checking to see that the observable is generalized by 
the set, and checking in the other direction to see if it is a member. The class 
gives the observable a name. In the end, the entity at n is asserted as belonging 
to the set that is the model at the next level up. That is model building.
As a separate issue, the observable came into existence as a realization on the 
other side of the scheme. The process of realization is seen in retrospect to the 
construction of the model. We cannot see the process of realization directly. All 
we see is the realized structure. That experience starts the modeling, from which 
the realization is understood. The observable straddles the realms of observer 
decision and the other. At level n+1 in the realm of the other is the essence. The 
loop on the side of the other is a process of realization of the observable, and a 
modification of the essence under the influence of the realization. The essence 
might be an evolving species and the realization might be an organism belong-
ing to that species. The connection back up to the essence might be natural 
selection; the connection down to the realization might be the developmental 
biology of the organism. In social situations, an incumbent can influence the 
institution that offers a role to play. Thus changed, the role will realize a dif-
ferent incumbent than it might have otherwise done. Role and incumbent map 
onto essence and realization. The name of the game here is to find out about 
the relationship between the model and the essence, both at level n+1. The 
connection is through the observable at level n. Essence is not material much 
Meta-observer sets 
paradigm at Level n+3
Level n+2
Level n
Level n+1  
Hierarchy 
theory is a
metatheory
Universals of
observation
Organizational 
intermediates
Entity under 
observation
Meta-observer’s
paradigm fixes
universals
Local observer 
chooses
intermediates
Local observer
may or may not
be meta-observer
Figure 14.1 The level scheme of Zellmer et al. (2006) in terms of the new edition of Allen and 
Hoekstra’s Toward a Unified Ecology (2015).
 

Narratives and Models in Complex Systems  M  179
as significance is not material. Essence is a normative device. The tool used is 
inference. Working through an example may help show that essences do not 
exist independently of a model whose patterns need to be taken into account.
If we see a dog and recall that we have seen something like it before, we may 
assign it to a collection of dogs to give it identity (Figure 14.2). The essence 
that would apply to a class of dogs might be dogginess. However, that essence 
depends on what is in the equivalence class “dogs” and would change with a 
different set of dog-like things for inclusion. For instance, humans look at each 
other on the nose, then up and diagonally to an eye, which has something to 
do with human faces being only quasi-symmetric. Dogs look at human faces 
that way as well, but not at each other’s faces. Tellingly, wolves do not look at 
humans that way, so only domesticated dogs have human recognition as part 
of their identity. But put a wolf in the set of dog, they are quite doggy, and 
the essence of dogginess that applies does not have a human side to it. One 
might include hyenas in the class too. They look and hunt like dogs, but are 
more closely related to cats by about 20 million years. At that point, dogginess 
is not a genetic line of relatedness, but is one way of being in the Carnivora. 
Tasmanian tigers (so called because they had stripes) look distinctly wolf-
like. These too might be in our class of dogs, but they are not even placental. 
Dogginess then becomes a special mammalian style of hunting without retract-
able claws. Incidentally, cheetahs hunt with high-speed chase, rather than the 
cat ambush strategy. Cheetahs also have doggy claws, while the whole is a per-
fectly good cat. Essence offers the reason for the equivalence in the equivalence 
class. The chosen class is a model, but we will not be aware of the implications 
of the class unless we come to understand what appears to underlie the equiva-
lence. The essence is a useful tool in understanding equivalence.
Realm of conscious 
Observer decisions
Realm of 
the Other
Animal realized
Apply to class
Check membership
Is it a dog?
Genetic
selection
Dogs
Dog
Dogginess
Essence
Laws – limits of Discourse
Figure 14.2 Levels in Zellmer et al. (2006) seen as a set of cyclical processes.

180  
M  Timothy F. H. Allen et al
In Figure 14.2 are three of the four levels previously described, with cycles 
of modeling and realization. The game is to iterate between the two cycles so 
that we can build a justification for saying that we understand something of 
essences, even if they are undefinable and cannot be observed or scaled directly. 
The method of adaptive management works well because it plays both sides in 
an orderly manner (Figure 14.3). A model for management is created, perhaps 
for forest management. At level n, it is put into action. There will of course be 
processes of emergence that arise as the model is implemented. Trees in a for-
est management example may grow faster or slower than the model suggests. 
Depending on what is desirable, the forest plan is kept, perhaps amplified, or 
it might be countermanded. In this iteration back and forth, the management 
is improved in scientifically justifiable ways. In all this, the essence is driven to 
change, so it cannot be defined. We are finding what is a good thing to do even 
in the absence of definition.
Holding on to identity despite material turnover
The openness of living systems means that as structures, they are not made of 
the same stuff over time. In humans, even bones are flushed through about 
every seven years, and other body parts much more often. We are like the 
woodsman’s axe that has had its handle replaced ten times, and the adz twice; 
and yet it is still the woodsman’s axe. Allen’s body has turned over completely 
as to what it is made of some ten times in his life; and yet it is still him. So what 
is he, exactly? The relationship between the essence and realization can help 
here. In biosocial systems, there are two sets of components. One is material 
Realm of conscious 
Observer decisions
Realm of 
the Other
Result observed
Check Result
Choose Plan
Impose plan
Adaptive managers’ 
model
Explicit Action
Realization 
cycle
Planning
cycle
Result in field
Laws – limits of Discourse
Figure 14.3 The cycles applied to adaptive management, which works because the dynamics of this 
figure form a figure of eight, iterating from one side to the other.
 
 
 
 
 

Narratives and Models in Complex Systems  M  181
and molecular, the other is informational. The material part obeys thermo-
dynamic equations. Processes like that are scale-dependent. Size in biology 
affects all sorts of rates. But information is not scale-dependent in this way. As 
a result, an organism can get information from the essence that realized it, even 
though the organism is newborn. The information it received from the essence 
has taken millions of years to accumulate. Many past foals and mares have had 
experience that tells the foal what to do about its mother.
The notion of information wrinkling time applies to humans, not just in 
terms of evolution but in day-to-day living. Your credit card company does not 
care who uses your credit card, so long as you meet its expectation that you 
pay. As your physical self materially flushes through, what remain over time 
are your expectations and those for you of the world around you. It is through 
capturing distant information that living things do indeed anticipate.
The transfer of information in evolution fills biology with anticipation. An 
example arises in allelopathy, as it presents some problematic experimental 
results. Allelopathy is chemical warfare in plants. Problematically it cannot be 
shown directly, because it is always in the middle of an evolutionary flux. A 
straightforward logic applied to allelopathy might look for the direct effects of 
a poison collected from the allelopathic plant. The test is then simply to show 
a poisonous effect of eluted washing collected from an allelopath. Such experi-
ments fail; the target appears to be unaffected. So perhaps the issue is that the 
poison is delivered by the plant so as to be more focused than a simple washing 
of the poisonous plant. The response might be to concentrate the fluid, and 
that works. The difficulty is that the target suffers, but at that concentration, 
the poison also debilitates the allelopath itself. This is a quandary.
Realm of conscious 
Observer decisions
Realm of 
the Other
Resistant plant 
realized
Experiment fails
Perform Experiment
Natural selection
Poisonous 
Allelopath
Target Plant
Model building
Evolution tolerant 
target population
Laws – limits of Discourse
Figure 14.4 The cycles of Zellmer et al. (2006) are applied here to plant chemical warfare, allelopa-
thy. The wrinkle in time that evolution embodies means that you cannot show allelopathy until it stops 
working.

182  
M  Timothy F. H. Allen et al
The critical experiment that will show allelopathy employs two populations 
of the same target species, one with a history of exposure to the poison and 
another that is naive (Geoff Sagar, personal communication). Use whatever 
concentration of solution it takes, because the difference between the targets 
makes for a strong “all else equal.” If the naive population suffers more, you 
have shown allelopathy, but in the more meaningful context of evolution. The 
selective advantage of dealing with the poison has changed the exposed popula-
tion. In the face of evolution of the target, there is apparently nothing more the 
allelopath can do, without poisoning itself. You cannot show allelopathy until 
it stops working (Figure 14.4). The essence of the evolved target expects to be 
assaulted by the poison. Competition has the same problem with history. What 
appears to be effects of competition is in fact “the ghost of competition past” 
(term coined by Connell, 1980).
Shifts between Model and Narratives
Narratives are tested by models in a way that encourages improvement. The 
consistency of models allows for more confident statements and inference, at 
least for the local space. The price of the focus of models is that they are 
required to be consistent, and that is a limitation. As models are stretched so as 
to be questionable, narrative is robust enough to take over. Inconsistency and 
contradictions are part of storytelling. In fact, the ability to deal with narra-
tive gives humans their unique capacity to problem-solve creatively. We readily 
slip-slide between different accounts of things until we can find a way through. 
By changing what is significant, we can wait until the problem has passed or at 
least becomes manageable.
There is a relationship equivalent to the dance between model and narrative, 
that between experiment and theory. David Bohm, in his Wholeness and the 
Implicate Order, made some telling remarks:
Thus, in scientific research, a great deal of our thinking is in terms of theories. 
The word “theory” derives from the Greek “theoria,” which has the same root as 
“theatre,” in a word meaning “to view” or “to make a spectacle.” Thus, it might 
be said that a theory is primarily a form of insight, i.e. a way of looking at the 
world, and not a form of knowledge of how the world is. (1980: 4)
Bohm is likening a theory to a set of models cast in comparable terms. 
This allows models and experiments to be set in each other’s context. While 
models improve narratives by grounding them, theories are actually tested in 
experiment.
Figure 14.5 stacks up four levels of point of view, and the devices for testing 
ideas. As an example of a metanarrative at the top of the figure is Kuhn’s notion 
of paradigm shifts. His metanarrative is built from local examples of rapid 
scientific change, where defensive subterfuge and misrepresentation abound. 
Kuhn’s most energetic critics show that his own examples did not work the way 
he says. The same can happen when models generally support but do not com-
pletely agree with the narrative. Lower-level devices can assist their  upper-level 
 
 
 

Narratives and Models in Complex Systems  M  183
account, but they do not have to fit exactly because of the uncertainty that 
accompanies level change. Experience the idiocy of peer review, and you know 
that Kuhn’s grand narrative of endemic unfairness in paradigm fights rings 
true even if his examples do not.
There are high- and low-quality narratives. Models raise narrative quality by 
inviting them to be consistent with something held with some confidence. For 
instance, Allen predicted that a mix of plant types would increase complexity, 
which should increase the capacity of vegetation to do work (Allen et al., 2003). 
The work the plants did was by using heat to evaporate water. Therefore, more 
work was signaled by a cooler vegetation surface, because of the consumption 
of heat in the active process of evaporation. The experiment showed Allen 
that he was wrong: the vegetation made of mixed fast and slow wind-reared 
plants was warm at all wind speeds. It appeared that diversity lowered the work 
achieved, against expectations. Nevertheless, being human and a storyteller, 
Allen said to himself, “I can’t be that wrong.” So he wrestled with the experi-
mental result, which led him to realize that he had mistaken complicatedness 
for complexity.
Meta-Level
Point of View
Device to
Test or Inform
Meta-
Narrative
Local
Narrative
Model
Question
Experiment
Inform-build
Test-improve
Test-probe
Test-falsify
Narrative
Theory
Hypothesis
Higher Level
Middle Level
Lower Level
~~
~~
~~
~~
~~
~~
Figure 14.5 Models, questions, and experiments are not simply different, they are different as logical 
types. The same applies to the narrative, theory, hypothesis relationship. It is hard to cross levels, and 
that has hidden the commonality heretofore and led to some muddled use of the terminology. Local 
narratives build metanarratives (Zellmer et al., 2006).

184  
M  Timothy F. H. Allen et al
Complexity is not just diverse, but also costly and efficiently organized; 
meanwhile, something only complicated is simply a sum of parts with no 
increased organization. As an example, the expeditionary Allied Force land-
ing at Casablanca in the Second World War was at first only complicated, and 
was not organized. Batteries were heavy and so had been stowed in the hold. 
Medical supplies, particularly useful in scaling beaches, were not available at 
that crucial time. Guns, gunsights, and ammunition were all stowed in differ-
ent parts of the ship. Only when the army got organized did it become com-
plex, whereupon guns and gunners could aim and fire efficiently. As a complex 
structure it met with success (Atkinson, 2002). Much as the Allied Force might 
on its first arrival be mistaken as complex, Allen had mistaken mere complicat-
edness for complexity in his contrived vegetation.
Allen’s plants were grown in fast and slow wind as a treatment, which allowed 
the plants in slow wind to grow taller. As a result, when they were mixed, the 
plants grown in slow wind were tall and so in the canopy. Meanwhile, plants 
grown in fast wind were short and so in the understory, out of the wind. The 
diversity of types (slow and fast wind reared) was only a sum, not an organiza-
tion into a complex relationship. The measurements were valid, but their sig-
nificance was misunderstood. In a new experiment, the vegetation was arranged 
as in nature. Taller plants grown in fast wind were in the canopy, while shorter 
plants grown in low wind were in the understory. This more natural vegetation 
was cooler. The new contrived vegetation was indeed complex and was work-
ing harder. The model challenged and improved the narrative by forcing the 
distinction between complicated and complex.
Rosen’s (1991) modeling relation, in Figure 14.6, illustrates how narrative is 
used in science. A formal model is a set of scaling equations, making the model 
Decode
Decode
Encode
Encode
Formal
Model of
Aerodynamics
Become 
analog 
models of 
each other
Airliner
Paper dart
Figure 14.6 Rosen (1991) modeling relation. Drafted by Joyce VanDerWater.
 
 

Narratives and Models in Complex Systems  M  185
scale-independent. Two material systems encoded and decoded into and out of 
the formal model become analog models of each other. Narrative sits above to 
unite the relation as a representation of a compression. The narrative encom-
passes the whole relation. Narratives are representations of a compression. The 
compression is down to only that which occurs in between “Once upon a time” 
and “They all lived happily ever after.” Also part of narrative compression is to 
squeeze down to only that which is significant enough in the whole chronology 
to be included.
Using Lattices to Explore Narratives and Models
In a series of two-by-two tables, our research group identified a complicated 
relationship between models and narratives, showing a deeper message in what 
Zellmer et al. (2006) had achieved. The first table looked at one-to-many 
and many-to-many relationships with regard to conceptual tools. From the 
Rosen modeling relation (Figure 14.6), it appears that metaphor is a one-to-
many expansion. A formal model, which is a set of scaling relationships, can 
be encoded into and decoded from a material system as a metaphor. In our 
scheme, a single metaphor can apply to more than one material thing or situ-
ation. Metaphor is associated with a coded representation (Figure 14.6). It is 
in the one-to-many quadrant of Figure 14.7. If two material systems can be 
represented by one formal model (Figure 14.6), then the two material systems 
become analog models of each other. Analogies are compressions down to only 
what the analogs have in common. They therefore belong in the many-to-one 
quadrant, diagonally opposite to metaphor in Figure 14.7.
There are various usages to the term metaphor. Certainly some metaphors 
go only one way, from representation to what is represented. The metaphor 
“time is money” does not reverse to “money is time.” At the least, the reverse 
Many
Many
to
Relation
Look to
generalities
Analogy
(compression)
Function
focus on
specifics
Metaphor
(expansion)
1
1
Figure 14.7 A two-by-two lattice that spells out many-to-one and one-to-many relationships in 
combination.

186  
M  Timothy F. H. Allen et al
of time and money will not be the same metaphor. We understand that some 
things called metaphor by some scholars go both ways symmetrically, the first 
to another and the other back to the first. If there are two items with links 
going both ways, like Aristotle’s plow and ship’s prow, in our parlance that 
would be an analog compression down to structures both able to cut through 
fluid material (water or soil). We wish to make the distinction between meta-
phor and analogy. For us, metaphor only works in one direction of model to 
material object, as distinct from analogy, which is a mutual compression down 
to what the two or many have in common (Figure 14.6).
The one-to-one quadrant of Figure 14.7 yields a mathematical function, 
where a point on one variable plots to just one point on another. It is sometimes 
taken as a model that means that one thing determines another. The many-to-
many quadrant yields what mathematicians call relations. Each variable value 
can map to many points on the other variable. There is slack in a relation. 
When scatter diagrams between a pair of variables produce an oval cluster 
of points, the width of the oval, or the thickness of the sausage, shows the 
slack in the relationship. That is quantified by r2 for correlation coefficients. 
Function means a specific relationship, while relation pertains to a more gen-
eral condition.
Figure 14.7 invites comparison between the cells. Those comparisons are 
entered in a new lattice in Figure 14.8. The margins of the new lattice are 
“model” and “narrative.” The cells are situated at one of four transitions in 
moving through the modeling process: model to model; model to narrative; 
narrative to model; and narrative to narrative. The function version of meta-
phor leads to a model, in that models are local and explicit, relative to narra-
tives. Alternatively, metaphor to relation is more open, and suggests narrative, 
not a model. There is slack in a narrative as there is in a relation.
Analogy is the compression down to the class of things defined by the model. 
While metaphor has meaning, analog compression is about devices for making 
comparisons, the compression carrying no particular meaning, just an analog 
equivalence. Experimentation requires the analogic compression of the thing 
to be modeled down to the model system that will be used in the experiment. 
1
1
Many
Many
Metaphor
in other
Function
Analogy
in model
Relation
4
1
2
3
(Specifics)
(Slack)
Model
Narrative
Model
Narrative
Refinement
Experimental
result
Role,
Essence,
Bounded
   infinity
Experiment
4
2
1
3
Figure 14.8 By relating the cells of Figure 14.7, we achieve a new matrix in which the margins of the 
derived lattice are changes between narrative and model and vice versa.
 
 
 
 
 

Narratives and Models in Complex Systems  M  187
In an experiment, the compression goes both ways, from model system to phe-
nomenon and phenomenon to model system.
In Figure 14.8, metaphor and analogy are separately juxtaposed to the focus 
of the function and the openness of the slack of the relation. When we perform 
an experiment—that is, we implement a model—investigators start with their 
general impression of what is going on in the slack narrative. Scientists then 
focus it down to an experiment, with its parameters fixed. Experimentation is 
tied to the specifics of the function. Experiments do not tell us much, because 
everything is set in very specific circumstances, but it is fairly clear what they 
are telling us. So arrow 2 shows how the narrative goes to a model, as the 
analogy involved in experimentation is applied. While the experimental result 
would on its face appear to be a specific outcome, once it happens the discus-
sion is hurled back into treatment of what the result means for the narrative. 
The narrative is an open space with lots of slack in it. So arrow 3 takes the 
experimental result and indicates what it means for the narrative in the slack 
of the function.
Analogy is clear in the observer’s experimental process; that is why we 
tied analogy to the observer-controlled side. By contrast, the metaphor in 
Figure 14.7 can be applied to the story and model of the biological or social 
thing under investigation. Remember that there are two narratives and mod-
els, one on the side of the modeling process, and the other on the side of the 
other possessed by the realized biosocial entity being addressed. As we apply 
metaphor to relation, we see metaphor as belonging on the side of the other 
in the Zellmer diagrams. The derived lattice from Figure 14.8 maps onto the 
cycles in the Zellmer diagrams in Figure 14.9. This opens up the possibility 
of mapping change from narrative to model and back again onto the Zellmer 
scheme. Change appears different on the side of the other compared to the side 
of observer decisions in modeling. Change on the side of observer control is as 
Model
Narrative
Model
Narrative
Refinement
Experimental
result
Evolution
Experiment
Rules
Experiment
Laws
observer
other
realization
concrete 
object
Essence
Level n+2
Level n
Level n+1
Figure 14.9 Showing how the derived matrix of Figure 14.8 maps onto the cycles of the Zellmer 
cycles. The diagonals of the matrix map onto the two cycles, one in the observer realm and a second in 
the realm of the other. Change on the two sides is different. In the observer’s realm, experiments give 
results separately from the results generating a new experiment. But on the side of the other updates are 
of realizations being refined, and undefinable essences being updated.

188  
M  Timothy F. H. Allen et al
discrete steps in an investigation. Scientists’ models are updated discretely to 
some new form. Change on the side of the other, as perhaps through evolution, 
appears more continuous.
The experiment is done, and its result sits for a while. Then the narra-
tive implications of the result go back to the laboratory, where they spur a 
new experiment. There are two separate sequential moves on the side of the 
observer: do experiment; use result. On the side of the other, updating in 
nature appears as a new realization from the essence. The other is more eas-
ily seen as an update that requires going round the whole left-hand cycle in 
the Zellmer diagrams. Starting at the realization end of the cycle, the real-
ization influences the essence, which in turn generates a new updated and 
refined realization. The realization is a model of the generalized narrative 
of the essence. The trip is around the cycle of realization from level n back 
to level n. The other update is of the essence from the top of that cycle to 
a new essence. The journey is from level n+1 back to level n+1. The essence 
creates a realization that then influences and updates the essence, perhaps 
through natural selection. Change may take the form of evolution. Notice 
that the presidency is continuously changing as the incumbent influences 
public attitudes.
If we wish we can see changes in the observer space in terms of the whole 
cycle, but it is more a cobbling together of parts, as opposed to the obvious full 
cycle of n to n and n+1 to n+1. There is a critical difference between what is 
seen on the side of the observer as opposed to the side of the other. On the side 
of the observer we see structures, whereas on the side of the other we detect 
changes of state embodied in the behavior of structures. That explains the 
depiction of half cycles in the realm of the observer, as opposed to the depiction 
of full cycles on the side of the other in Figure 14.9. We find that we can unite 
the two-by-two matrices with the two Zellmer cycles.
The derived matrix of Figure 14.8 maps onto the cycles in the Zellmer cycle 
diagrams of Figure 14.2. In Figure 14.8, we can relabel the arrows on the 
Zellmer cycles informed by the matrices in relation to both metaphor and anal-
ogy and narrative and models. Figure 14.10a labels the processes of updating on 
both sides, going round the whole respective cycle. Change in the other involves 
the whole cycle of updating, either realizations getting refined (through evolu-
tion) or evolution changing the general condition. The arrows on Figure 14.10a 
in the realm of the observer have squared shoulders to indicate that the process 
of updating a model is discrete. In evolution under artificial selection, change 
is seen as more discrete than in natural selection, but with the involvement of 
human goals and sentience, it is no surprise that domestication appears more 
discrete.
The whole cycles can still be broken down to separate steps, and all the rest 
of the panels in Figure 14.10 do that. There is a series of new labels applied 
to Figures 14.10b–14.10g. Each one captures a different facet of the matrices 
in Figure 14.8. In Figure 14.10b, we see the generalization of Figure 14.2 that 
referred to dogs and dogginess, but Figure 14.10b indicates the general process 
going on in the special case of dogs. In Figure 14.10c, we note the process of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Step 2
Rules
Experiment
Essence
realization
result
concrete
object
Update model
Refine realization via essence
Update essence via realization
Step 1
Ideas move forward
Step 1
Step 2
Essence
Essence is realized
Realization
affects essence
Check to see if
It is a member
Entity indicates
class
realization
result
concrete
object
Rules
Experiment
Rules
Experiment
Essence
Observable
behavior in context 
Result suggests
next experiment
Change in observable
Experiment
yields result
realization
result
concrete
object
Figure 14.10 The matrices of Figure 14.8 inform us as to how to label the arrows in the Zellmer 
scheme. Figure 14.10a labels the whole loop on both sides. The loop of the observer has square arrows 
to show that the updates are discrete. Figure 14.10b has a slightly different construction, in that the 
loops are broken into upward and downward segments. There are echoes of the matrices in Figure 14.8 
in the labels on Figures 14.10c–14.10g. All appear to refine the notion of a general condition leading to 
specifics, which then encourage new generalities.
(a)
(b)
(c)

Rules
Experiment
Essence
Change model using 
nature’s narrative
Model improves
narrative in nature 
Apply model to
Improve narrative
Make model
From narrative
realization
result
concrete
object
Give meaning
to a function
Associate analogy
with relation
Rules
Experiment
Essence
Give model in
nature a meaning
Map natures metaphor
to a function
realization
result
concrete
object
Rules
Experiment
Essence
Realize general
condition into structure
Relate realization
to general situation
Make general
specific
Check to see
that specifics fit
realization
result
concrete
object
Figure 14.10  Continued.
(d)
(e)
(f)

Narratives and Models in Complex Systems  M  191
experimentation in relation to the observer’s narrative, coupled to the changes 
we see in the other. The observable is put into context. In Figure 14.10d, we see 
the relationship between models and narratives. In Figure 14.10e, we see the 
mapping of meaning in the terms of Figure 14.7. In Figure 14.10f, we consider 
the processes of generalization and specification.
In Figure 14.10g, we see Polanyi’s notion of focal versus tacit attention. This 
will allow us to bring in the explicit assistance that the humanities might lend 
the sciences and their mode of understanding. Although a physicist, Polanyi 
uses the distinctions to build meaning, richness, and ambiguity in hierarchies 
of literary structure. Needham (1988) is explicit as he points to the limits of 
literary criticism. To play out Figure 14.10g, let us turn to Needham’s treat-
ment of Polanyi’s focal and tacit attention. Needham refers to the Shakespeare 
sonnet in which the bard says, “Bare ruined choirs where late the sweet birds 
sang.” First, the poet appears old and desolate, comparing himself to a ruined 
church, and then an old tree. The birds in the tree are the choristers. The 
choristers are like the young man who wrote the early sonnets. And then there 
is a more distant reference to the galleries of old trees appearing as the pillars 
and arches of the church. There is a banging up and down the levels of asso-
ciation. Much as the holon of Koestler (1967) is contradictorily both a part 
and a whole at the same time, the poet is both old and young, a choirboy and 
a bird, set in the context of the tree while also under the arches of the ruined 
church.
Again in terms of Polanyi’s tacit versus focal attention, Needham takes 
apart Daisy Miller, a novella by Henry James in Cornhill Magazine in June–
July 1879. Winterbourne is attracted to Daisy, but cautious. So Daisy takes 
up with Giovanelli, a fortune seeker. Winterbourne inquires about it. “We are 
just good friends,” she claims, and James tellingly adds, “she answered sparing 
but a single small queer glance for it, a smaller queerer glance, he felt, than he 
had ever yet had from her.” Needham starts the analysis with the word small.
Focal to
Tacit attention
Rules
Experiment
Essence
Tacit to focal
attention
Focal to
Tacit attention
Tacit to focal
attention
realization
result
concrete
object
Figure 14.10  Continued.
(g)

192  
M  Timothy F. H. Allen et al
The word most obviously drawing attention to itself is “small”. We take it as 
something like “quick” or “little”; neither of which would quite do. And we 
sense that “small” is physically suggestive, making us purse our lips a little. It 
also probably calls to mind the vulnerability we sometimes feel in Daisy; she 
seems here to shrink momentarily. Thus thinking (tacitly) about “small” makes 
us think about “queer”, since we have to fit them together. At this level of usage 
“queer” can mean something like “upset” or something like “suspicious”: “she 
looked queer” or “she gave me a queer look.” Both meanings come in here, cor-
responding with Daisy’s vulnerability and reaction against it. The words react 
with each other and the whole that they are forming and they react in subtle and 
complex ways. (1988, p. 37)
Winterbourne defends Daisy after she left the party, rebuffed by the hostess. 
He does this even though we might imagine that he takes “just good friends” 
to mean that Giovanelli is Daisy’s lover. There are more contradiction here as 
to his feelings. In the end, it appears that Giovanelli is forced to meet Daisy’s 
standards, and they are literally only “just good friends.” Needham interprets 
this too in tacit and focal terms. All this leaves us uncertain about her feelings, 
and Winterbourne’s too. Daisy dies. Winterbourne, it appears, has tragically 
misread Daisy liking him and her real desire for his respect; the blush and small 
queer look. Small is linked with queer, which then as a pair cascades upscale to 
uncertainties in our interpretation, and in Winterbourne’s. Daisy is ambiguous 
too. And all is not so much resolved, as it is left as the critical polarity of tacit 
and focal attention at all levels. Complexity can be seen in hierarchical terms. 
There are tacit levels contextual to focal levels, and vice versa.
Thus, it seems that the matrix in Figure 14.7, which mixes literary device 
with scientific mathematics, applies exactly. In general, the culture in the 
humanities does not move easily in mathematical terms. Mathematicians are 
often not particularly literary when they are on the job. So the commensurate 
treatment across those cultures is remarkable. The very processes whereby lit-
erary nuance is expressed are linked comfortably to the mathematical devices 
used in scientific models. There is a startling unity across humanities and sci-
ence. While practitioners in both cultures often see themselves as respectively 
relatively separate, both the humanities and the mathematician work in deeply 
abstract spaces. There is a parallel creativity in both fields, although the termi-
nology describing it is different. George Bernard Shaw once said: “England and 
America are two countries divided by a common language.” The humanities 
and sciences are perhaps divided by common practice, with different labels.
Commensurate Experience
In the end, the bottom line in science is narrative. Models play their role in 
improving narratives. We can again use the Zellmer loops to deliver that bot-
tom line. When George Box said “All models are wrong, but some are useful,” 
the corollary is that all assumptions are false. When physics insists on closed 
systems, close to equilibrium, those assumptions are false. It is just that physics 
 
 

Narratives and Models in Complex Systems  M  193
can get away with the lie. In biology, closure and equilibrium are false too, but 
the difference is that in biology we simply cannot get away with those assump-
tions. Science is not about truth, but it is about finding which lies we can agree 
to get away with.
Predictions are often taken as an indication that we are close to reality. In 
fact, truth is not the issue, but rather that our narratives become more convinc-
ing. The power of a compelling narrative is not that it is true. “True narrative” 
is an oxymoron anyway. The bottom line is that good stories bring about com-
mensurate experience. With commensurate experience we can take advantage 
of the wisdom of crowds. The US Navy had lost the submarine Scorpion in a 
cylinder of water 20 miles wide and 1000 feet deep. It collected opinions from 
informed experts as to where the vessel might be. Although no one estimate 
was close, a Bayesian analysis of all the guesses was only 220 yards from the 
location of the vessel (Surowiecki 2005).
If there are different stakeholders addressing some issue like a failing fishery, 
each will have their own model. The starting dates of each narrative will be dif-
ferent. The ecologist will go back to the Native Americans crossing the Bering 
Straits. Native Americans might start their narrative with the Euro-American 
invasion. The toxicologist might become interested in the period just before 
the chemical firms who pay them started releasing so-called new chemicals 
into the waters. The fisheries manager will go back just to the beginning of 
the decline in question. Members of the Sioux may look to a cause associated 
with disrespect toward the Great Spirit. The ecologist might look to dams or 
chemical pollutants, while the fisheries manager might focus on recent over-
fishing. They all have different models, and accordingly will invoke different 
Decision of Observers
Laws
(Universals in discourse)
Historical happenings
Evolving
Fish Population
Adaptive
System
Adaptive
Management
Fish Subjected
to Poison
OTHER
OBSERVER
E
n
g
i
n
e
e
r
E
c
o
l
o
g
i
s
t
T
o
x
i
c
o
l
o
g
i
s
t
M
a
n
a
g
e
r
F
i
s
h
e
r
i
e
s
b
i
o
l
o
g
i
s
t
N
a
r
r
at
i
v
e
Figure 14.11 Multiple stakeholders addressing a failing fishery. The loops on the right refer to the 
models of each respective player. They can be united with a narrative that will subsume the contradic-
tions (after McCormick et al.)

194  
M  Timothy F. H. Allen et al
essences. But since they all address the same species and waters, there will be 
some overlap in the essences (Figure 14.11).
The various essences in Figure 14.11 will overlap to a degree. The players 
will each have their own model for the fishery failure, and so will need differ-
ent essences for explanation. There may be some overlap, signified by the black 
triangle in Figure 14.12. If a prediction can be achieved, the narrative in ques-
tion becomes more convincing. A compelling narrative can effect a consonance 
of the models, so bringing greater overlap of the corresponding essences. As the 
essences become unified, the experience becomes consonant, and real progress 
can be made on a politically workable footing.
Consider a group of independent observers (Figure 14.13). They come first 
as a collection of independent assessments (Figure 14.13a). In Figure 14.13b, 
we see how one observer sees some subset. There will be a collective experi-
ence at the trivial level of what everyone has seen. That is simply a collection 
(Figure 14.13c). Much more interesting is Figure 14.13d, which is a conse-
quence of a culture, of a shared narrative. This set is not only what everyone has 
seen, but it is also what anyone could have seen. The set in Figure 14.13d is lim-
ited by the shared predilections and anticipations of what that culture will see. 
The disparate observers of Figure 14.11 are brought together in Figure 14.12. 
Figures 14.12 and 14.13d correspond. Science is particularly good at getting 
independent observers to see the same thing.
The editors of journals are often forced into an overreach, not being fully 
conversant with everything that turns up in their journal. As a result, editors 
OBSERVER
OTHER
Narratives converge
Observer models
become commensurate
Laws – common limitations
Prediction makes
more convincing
narrative
T
o
x
i
c
o
l
o
g
i
s
t
M
a
n
a
g
e
r
E
c
o
l
o
g
i
s
t
Engineer
F
i
s
h
e
r
i
e
s
b
i
o
l
o
g
i
s
t
C
o
nt
ex
t f
or
 fi
s
h
e
r
y
C
o
m
m
e
n
s
u
r
a
t
e
E
x
p
e
r
i
ence
Figure 14.12 The essences invoked by the players are seen as the white circles on the left. They have 
a shared partial essence in the black triangle. Conversation and mutual respect among players cause the 
essences employed to come to overlap more. The dotted lines show the shifts of each essence to that of 
the agreed-upon commensurate essence. Through the development of the compelling narrative, all the 
stakeholders may be able to buy in. Under that narrative, all will enjoy a commensurate experience and 
so be able to contribute to the wisdom of the crowd.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Narratives and Models in Complex Systems  M  195
resort to ritual. Ritual is very conservative. The journals certainly do not 
include what are often the most interesting things, but they do for the most 
part always contain, edition to edition, the same thing. Editors insist on that, 
and it is crucial for scientific progress. Progress is not change, but is lack of 
change in every direction but one. And that is important, because otherwise 
science would degenerate into a shambles of bright ideas. Life is not as rich and 
diverse as it is because of mutation. DNA is a very conservative molecule and is 
dragged kicking and screaming into change. That is what gives the commen-
surate experience of many living things. That is what generates the rich upper 
levels in biology. The same applies to the social process of scientific develop-
ment. Commensurate experience facilitated by compelling narrative is some 
sort of bottom line in complex things.
Non-equivalent 
Observers in one 
Context
 
What one
observer sees
What all
observers
see
 
Culture:
Limits of what is allowed;
what any observer
possibly see could
Figure 14.13 Four accounts of multiple observers addressing the same situation. We hesitate to reify 
“same situation,” so think of it as a dummy variable, as in calculus. Figure 14.13a is simply the sum of the 
observations. Figure 14.13b is what one observer sees. Figure 14.13c is what everyone sees. Figure 14.13d 
is the most profound and is the culture of the group. Culture is the shared set of predilections as to what 
one might see. It will be not only what anyone saw, but is what anyone could see, because of the collective 
filter that all members bring.
(a) 
(b)
(c) 
(d)

196  
M  Timothy F. H. Allen et al
We have come a long way in this discussion. By dissecting the process of 
making and using models, we have created a language that can offer a certain 
unity. The research group here combines biological expertise and backgrounds 
in various sorts of engineering. Comparison appears to be a favored device with 
us, which is facilitated by our respective backgrounds. We have wanted to reach 
out to the humanities, so as to invite them into our world. While scientists and 
engineers are big on data, the humanities have a bottom line in the documents. 
We hope that we have managed to lay out a method and perspective that bring 
others into our tent. In the end, it is all about precision of thought, which we 
all share, and which we all need to improve as we all enter a world where com-
plexity cannot be ignored.

CHAPTER 15
Evaluating Explanations through  
Their Conceptual Structures
Steven Wallis
M
any scholars discuss concepts and even conceptual systems along 
with the importance of understanding them. As Umpleby (1994) 
claims, “Explicit attention to conceptual systems, or to beliefs and 
values, is not a new development within the social sciences.” Past investigations 
have been useful in helping us understand (to some extent) the place of concepts 
within a larger process of communication and action (the science of cognitive 
systems). However, we have not become adept at understanding our concep-
tual structures from a systemic perspective (the science of conceptual systems). 
Indeed, because our minds are full of conflicting mental models (Lane, 1992), 
our conceptual lenses are not very clear. Thus, many investigations may have 
been made using one fuzzy lens to evaluate the fuzziness of another lens; we 
do not understand conceptual structures as systems unto themselves. This, for 
systems thinkers, is highly problematic.
In the study of conceptual systems, each set of concepts is seen as a system 
unto itself, because “[i]f one is interested in science as a process, conceptual 
systems cannot be viewed as seamless wholes” (Hull, 1988, p. 493). That is, it 
is insufficient to investigate conceptual systems without delving into how and 
why they are systems. Checkland’s important distinction that “systems think-
ing is thinking in terms of systems rather than being about actual systems” 
(Cabrera, Colosi, and Lobdell, 2008, p. 301) holds here. If we can understand 
conceptual systems more effectively, as systems, we can more easily work with 
them and improve them—in much the same way that we strive to understand 
and engage biological systems and social systems.
I want to emphasize this one point, if no other. It seems that we live in a 
systemic world. Therefore, we will achieve a better understanding of that world 
when we use conceptual systems that are more systemic. Metaphorically, cogni-
tive systems science involves the process of looking through lenses. In contrast, 

198  
M  Steven Wallis
a science of conceptual systems would be focused on the process of looking at 
the lenses to make certain that they are clear. This should occur before looking 
through the lenses to make claims about the world. How can we legitimately 
claim, for example, that “all the world is the color of roses” until we know what 
tint has been applied to our spectacles? Of course, in the present chapter as 
with the ISCE 2013 conference, we are looking at the world through system-
tinted glasses. We hope that we have guessed correctly and that this is a useful 
and reasonable approach.
Shaw and Allen (2012) note that an important problem in theory construc-
tion occurs when the conceptual components are chosen in a way that is not 
systematic. Further complicating the process is this:
Theorists . . .  rarely build their theories in textbook fashion from the bottom-up. 
Real theory building is less organized and a good deal more fun. You start at the 
top, with an intuition for how some systems, some structure of things or concepts 
works. From there you feel your way, by intuition, trial and error, luck and logic, 
to what looks like the right answer. (Friedman, 1997, p. 40)
As blithely attractive as this approach may seem, it is far from scientific or 
systematic. So, in the process of constructing theories, it seems that we too 
often rely on nonsystemic methods to acquire concepts that are assembled in 
nonsystemic ways. It should come as no surprise that our theories are of rather 
limited usefulness in understanding our systemic world. Two wrongs do not 
make a right.
We need better approaches to system design than intuition (Warfield, 2003), 
because intuition is an unreliable tool for system design (Forrester, 1994). 
Typical forms of academic analysis, such as randomized trials, have provided 
a good look at the parts (how a few concepts might relate) without giving us a 
good look at the whole conceptual system.
Some suggest that we should be striving for simplicity; that “complexity 
reduction leads to quality improvements” (Villegas and Shirvani, 2007, p. 889). 
However, this is not always a viable option; for example, when one is attempt-
ing to deal with international policy or global economic collapse. While it is 
certainly possible (and often desirable) to break a problem into pieces then 
reassemble them, “[t]here is ample evidence to suggest that the unaided human 
mind is incapable of coping effectively with modern societal issues” (Warfield 
and Perino, 1999, p. 226).
There are some insights to the contrary. For example, Klochko (drawing on 
Vygotsky) suggests that theories of psychology will be more effective when they 
are more multidimensional instead of simpler or more binary (Klochko, 2010). 
This suggestion is supported by my own research, where I have shown that 
theories of psychology have not become more complex over the past century 
(Wallis, 2012). In addition, by coincidence or correlation, we have not seen 
much improvement in the practice of psychology.
It is generally accepted that a complex conceptual system enables complex 
behavior by allowing for the understanding of more behavioral options (Satish, 

Evaluating Explanations  M  199
1997). “Cognitive complexity” may be measured in a variety of ways, includ-
ing verbal ability and intellectual ability (O’Keefe and Sypher, 1981) as well as 
“integrative complexity” (Suedfeld and Tetlock, 1977). This, in part, enables 
successful behavior, as we understand from Ashby’s law of requisite variety 
(Ashby, 1958). Also, as developed in complex adaptive systems (CAS) theory, 
it is generally understood that more complexity allows for better adaptation 
(Wallis, 2008a,b). Finally, as applied in organizational learning processes such 
as consortial benchmarking (Schiele and Krummaker, 2010), more complexity 
enables more effective organizational performance.
Some structures of explanation are more useful than others in support of 
learning, understanding, and enabling more effective action. More recently, 
my research has shown that each explanation (including narrative, knowledge, 
theories, ethics, policies, and more) is similar in at least one very important 
way. Each may be understood as a system unto itself. This is in addition to the 
conceptual structures’ more commonly accepted place within larger systems of 
research and praxis.
This is important because “[t]he goal of complex systems research is to 
explain, across disciplines, how complex and adaptive behavior can arise from 
systems composed of large numbers of relatively simple components with no 
central control and with complicated but limited interactions” (Mitchell, 1998). 
If we can identify a few types of causal relationships between concepts within 
conceptual systems, we will be able to identify how conceptual systems adapt. 
One key idea is that those conceptual structures may be quantified in terms of 
their complexity and internal co-causality; that co-causality, or internal coher-
ence, is conceptually similar to reflexive relationships within an individual 
mind or within a social system.
Each conceptual system reflects a level of understanding as well as some 
capacity for thought and action. Importantly, research that quantifies the com-
plexity and co-causality of the conceptual structure finds that structures of 
higher complexity and higher co-causality are more effective in practical appli-
cation. There is an ecological similarity between the conceptual world and the 
material world. Cabrera (2008, p. 19) states that “concepts move through a 
conceptual ecosystem, interacting and ultimately competing for survival. They 
constantly evolve in response to their conceptual environment, obeying rules 
of conceptual Darwinism.” In biology, molecular systems multiply as they con-
sume energy from their environment and combine to form organisms (Cabrera, 
2008). In the conceptual world, we see the same sort of events as complex sys-
tems of interrelated concepts (such as theories and religions).
One method for evaluating that complexity is called integrative proposi-
tional analysis (Wallis, 2014). This test of the logical structure of a conceptual 
system can also be understood as a test of robustness, internal coherence, 
systemicity, and co-causality. A conceptual system (such as a theory) is com-
posed of interrelated propositions (Weick, 1989). Each proposition is (in turn) 
composed of concepts and their causal relationships. The relationships within 
and between propositions may be described in terms of their logical casual 
structures.

200  
M  Steven Wallis
Wallis (2013) identified five structures of logic that correspond to structures 
of causality: atomistic (A is true); linear (more A causes more B); circular (more 
A causes more B causes more C causes more A); branching (more A causes 
more B and more C); and concatenated (more A and more B cause more C). As 
Waldmann et al. (1995, p. 205) claim: “Causal-model theory predicts that it 
is the underlying causal structure, rather than more superficial characteristics 
of the specific content domain, that primarily determines the representation of 
relations among feature in causal categories.”
To improve a theory (or explanation), to make it more useful, that theory 
should be moved along a path. That path often starts with the theory existing 
at a low level of systemicity. Ideally, the theory should move toward greater 
systemicity. That path is useful because it can inform research in a number 
of ways. First, if a concept is not concatenated, research can look for addi-
tional concepts to add to the conceptual system that are causally related to 
the existing concepts. Second, research can seek to identify causal relation-
ships between existing concepts within the conceptual system. Third, complex 
concepts might be deconstructed to identify causal relationships between the 
newly identified sub-concepts. Fourth, multiple concepts might be integrated 
to create new understandings—new ways of looking at what something “is” in 
the world. This path provides a direction for improving theories that is more 
transparent than fuzzy intuition.
In the study of theory, it is understood that
Causal loops in general are hard for most people to treat intuitively. This intui-
tive difficulty is one of the reasons that, up to now, there has been a strong 
tendency for empirical research to be done on trivial one-step causal hypotheses, 
rather than on the interesting theories that tell us something about how societies 
work. (Stinchcombe, 1987, p. 148)
In short, we obtain more useful theories by building in multiple complex loops. 
Conceptual systems with higher levels of systemicity will have more causal rela-
tionships between concepts, more causal loops, more concatenated structures, 
and more concatenated concepts. Thus, the systems will have a higher level of 
systemicity—they are “more” systemic.
If we wish to advance the systems sciences more rapidly, if we wish to develop 
theories and practices that will be more useful for solving the problems of the 
world, we must develop more effective understandings of conceptual systems. 
This is not to repeat the call for more rigorous empirical studies in the creation 
of more theories; this is to call for more empirical studies of theories as con-
ceptual systems.
While the focus of the present chapter has been the development of a greater 
understanding of theory, it is recognized that the act of inference or insight is 
absolutely inescapable when engaging in higher-order thought and complex 
action. An important consideration in building or applying theory is the dif-
ficulty of bridging that inferential gap. That is, whenever we transmit informa-
tion (write or speak of something), we can never communicate what that thing 

Evaluating Explanations  M  201
absolutely “is.” Further, when the receiver hears what we speak (or write), that 
receiver must infer some meaning. For communication of theories or concepts, 
we must strive to bridge that inferential gap to achieve clear and useful com-
munication. This difficulty is related to our assumptions, how they might be 
structured, and how we might structure our communications to improve our 
ability to communicate.
Curseu, Schalk, and Schruijer (2010) describe seven types of relationships: 
causal (changes in A cause changes in B), association (includes structural and/
or hierarchical), equivalence (some level of similarity between A and B), topo-
logical (how A and B are spatially related to one another), structural (A is 
composed of [or may be deconstructed into] B and C), chronological (A occurs 
before B), and hierarchical (categorical relationships).
Dubin (1978) talks about levels of efficacy in theory based on the relation-
ship between the concepts. While it is of course useful to know what concepts 
are contained within a theory, a more useful theory is one where we know 
the directionality of the relationships between those concepts; that is, which 
concepts are causal to others. Of greater use is a theory where we can identify 
covariation—how multiple concepts are interrelated in their causal relation-
ships. Friedman (2003, p. 518) also discusses how better theories are found in 
conceptual systems with higher levels of systemization.
Salmon (1984) argues that the best way to make a scientific explanation is 
to describe causal relationships. In a nutshell, theories are useful only when 
they represent causal relationships, because those are the best (perhaps the only 
effective) way to represent the patterns we detect with our senses that provide 
the ability to predict future sensations. While Salmon does not delve directly 
into the systems sciences, it is important to note how he describes the uni-
verse as working in patterns. Using causal relationships narrows the inferential 
gap—the gap between presentations of knowledge on the one hand and under-
standing that represents usefulness on the other. That gap must be filled in by 
the minds of readers before they may pass safely to the other side.
Therefore, I suggest that we go along with Salmon and accept the privileged 
position of causal logics as a path to more easily reducing that inferential gap. 
For example, to say “more A causes more B” provides a clear link between A and 
B and minimizes the need for assumptions that are less visible, less amenable 
to testing, and more prone to failure. This inferential gap may be related to the 
“scale of abstraction” or “level of abstraction” and how the differences between 
those levels both encourage and impede our ability to generalize our research 
results, create useful categories, aggregate data, and deal with other important 
parts of research and practice (Wallis, in press).
It seems reasonable to focus on causal relationships for analysis and to recog-
nize those as valid components of theory. The existence of other forms of rela-
tionships suggests that they, too, might have a place in this emerging stream of 
research. It may be useful, in advancing this research, to quantify many forms 
of relationships as part of a study of theories and their types—perhaps as sug-
gested by the late Paul Meehl and his call for studies into changes in theory 
over time (Meehl, 1992).

202  
M  Steven Wallis
A variety of insights from systems thinking may be readily applied to the 
study of conceptual systems. While there is not adequate space here for a deep 
treatment, I encourage scholars to investigate how those insights from physical, 
biological, and social systems might also be applied to conceptual systems. For 
example, the idea of holism (from von Bertalanffy’s (1968) work on biological 
systems) may be applied to conceptual systems. It seems clear that the whole 
conceptual system is more than the sum of its parts. Each concept is better 
understood in relation to other concepts within the system, and the whole 
theory is more useful in practical application than its disconnected parts. 
Many other interesting investigations are called for, including essential systems 
assumptions of holism, relationships, environment, indeterminism, causality, 
self-organization, observation, and reflexivity.
If we are to think effectively, explain effectively, and act effectively, we must 
learn to approach our modes of thinking systemically—and to look at them as 
systems. Then, we may use them to address our world systems (including physi-
cal, biological, and social systems) more effectively. That is, we can and should 
apply rigorous systems tools to understand the world within us better so that 
we can understand the world around us better.
Science 1 empiricism and Science 2 logics are of different worlds (Thagard, 
1989; Wallis, 2008c). They are things and connections. Like yin and yang, 
they are “differentiable, yet inseparable” (Zude and Yolles, 2006). In this chap-
ter, I have placed a cornerstone for a science of conceptual systems by suggest-
ing how conceptual systems might be investigated and understood as systems 
unto themselves. Of course, it is important to recall that that we cannot look at 
conceptual systems in isolation. The act of practice external to the conceptual 
system must be linked to the coherence of logics within the conceptual system. 
The greatest opportunity may exist in the creation of theories that are fractal 
in structure or nested within one another.

CHAPTER 16
Investigating the Lay and Scientific  
Norms for Using “Explanation”
Jonathan Waskan, Ian Harmon,  
Andrew Higgins, and Joseph Spino
I
n the mid-twentieth century, Hempel (1962, 1965) bucked positivist ortho-
doxy and proposed that explanations have a legitimate role to play in sci-
ence. Yet, when it came time to offer up a model of explanation, Hempel 
held fast to the positivist tendency of abstracting both from facts about human 
psychology and from the specific contents of claims (i.e., in favor of bare logi-
cal form). At the broadest level, he proposed that explanations are sets of true 
statements arranged into formally acceptable arguments. That such arguments 
count as explanations has, Hempel thought, nothing to do with what anyone 
thinks or feels; explanations are dissociable, even doubly so, from psychology.
Many commentators still agree that explanations comprise sets of descrip-
tions or, more broadly, representational artifacts (e.g., images, diagrams, or 
computer models). Let us call this the category of explanations. Many also 
accept the substantive thesis, which we term substantive anti-psychologism, that 
explanations are not psychological in nature. Recent arguments for this the-
sis attempt to dissociate explanations from psychological events by noting that 
some explanations, such as hypercomplex computer models, are so complex that 
they are incapable of evoking any relevant psychological events (e.g., familiarity, 
satisfaction, insight, or intelligibility; see Craver, 2006, 2007; Trout, 2007). An 
apparent corollary of substantive anti-psychologism is the methodological thesis 
that experimental psychology has (outside of supplying case studies of science in 
general) nothing to teach philosophy about the nature of explanation. (The lines 
are sometimes drawn in terms of ontic, epistemic, and pragmatic conceptions, 
but we maintain that these are theses about the function of explanations, about 
what they do rather than about what they are; Waskan, 2011.) Many theorists 
also claim that explanations are necessarily accurate (Craver, 2007; Hempel, 
1965; Humphreys, 1989; Salmon, 1998; Trout, 2007).

204  
M  Jonathan Waskan et al
Proponents of the so-called ontic view point out that at least some explana-
tions are sets of (generally nonrepresentational) objective processes. Let us call 
these explanations. They similarly claim that explanations are dissociable from 
psychological processes (Salmon, 1984). As for accuracy, it makes little sense to 
talk of the accuracy of nonrepresentational processes.
On a third conception, prevalent in experimental psychology, “explanation” 
picks out a certain kind of representational psychological state (see Simon, 
1966; Brewer, 2001; Vosniadou, 2002; Keil, 2006; Lombrozo and Carey, 2006; 
Nersessian, 2009; Thagard and Litt, 2008; Churchland, 1989). The states in 
question appear to be doxastic in nature, so we call this the category of expla-
nations. Experimental research on explanation commonly focuses on the expla-
nations of children and science-naive laypeople, which are often inaccurate to a 
significant degree, so accuracy is not regarded as essential for explanation.
It may be that all sides are correct in that the noun “explanation” is actually 
ambiguous in at least these three senses. One might say, for instance, “There 
is an aquatic-ape explanation for human furlessness on page 37 of The Naked 
Ape.” Here, “explanation” refers to a set of descriptive representations that 
express the possible cause of the target occurrence. Or one might say, “The 
explanation for combustion is oxidation.” Here, “explanation” seems to refer 
not to a set of descriptions, but to a set of objective processes that cause the tar-
get occurrence. Last, one might say, “The pre-verbal child had an explanation 
for the meowing coming from the closet.” What the child plausibly has in this 
case is a belief about the cause of the target occurrence.
To say that “explanation” is ambiguous in this way is to make an empirical 
claim about the norms of use regarding the term. Such claims are at least tacitly 
indexed to particular populations, such as the populations of English-speaking 
laypeople or scientists. The claim of ambiguity means that something is taken 
to distinguish the three senses of “explanation.” Knowing what it is would put 
us in a better position to study the role of the entities referred to by the various 
senses of “explanation” in our lay and scientific lives.
Like Hempel, we maintain that we will never fully understand how science 
works and what makes it such an exemplary epistemic exercise unless we figure 
out what explanations are and what role they play in the scientific enterprise. 
Also like Hempel, we allow that once we know the norms of use for the term 
“explanation,” it may make sense to prescribe certain modifications or precisifi-
cations of those norms. We would reiterate, however, that any such explications 
presuppose as their starting point a firm grip on the preexisting norms of use.
A common way in which philosophers of science go about answering empirical 
questions about how people (laypeople or scientists) use the term “explanation” 
is to consult their own judgments about cases. For instance, one might imagine a 
hypercomplex model of a physical process. One might imagine further that it has 
any number of positive theoretical virtues, but that, because of its complexity, 
nobody will ever fully comprehend it. One might then judge that such a model is, 
or could well be, an obvious or clear-cut case of explanation (Craver, 2007; Trout, 
2007). This is just to say, we suppose, that some target population (one that pre-
sumably includes scientists) would also classify such a model as an explanation. 

Scientific Norms for Using “Explanation”  M  205
From this supposition, again, one might argue that an artifact’s ability to engen-
der psychological states (take your pick) in humans is irrelevant to their standing 
as explanations. Practiced in isolation, this method is clearly fraught with peril, 
as it presupposes that the philosophers in question have mastered the relevant 
scientific and linguistic norms. More worrisome, it presupposes that the phi-
losophers’ own judgments are not merely issuing from the very theories they are 
meant to prove (Cummins, 1998). In psychology, this kind of worry is addressed 
by employing theoretically naive coders; not so in philosophy.
Another staple strategy in the philosophy of science is to turn to the histori-
cal record for evidence that supports or undermines a given theory. Philosophers 
often look to the writings, graphs, and diagrams that are the products of sci-
entific research. To do this effectively, one must be careful that one’s sample is 
adequately large, representative, and unbiased in its selection (Thagard, 2012). 
Nevertheless, these requirements are seldom met in practice. For one thing, 
research of this sort often focuses on the most noteworthy and revolutionary 
developments in science, or else it centers on a small number of particular 
developments (e.g., long-term potentiation) of which a philosopher has in-
depth knowledge. Like the previous strategy, this one is not well constrained 
by broad-based facts about usage.
In its attempts to understand how “explanation” and other terms are used 
and how their referents are conceived of, the philosophy of science would do 
well to expand its arsenal so that the best descriptive theories of science might 
enjoy converging evidence from various sources. The bibliometric techniques 
currently in vogue in the digital humanities would, for example, make for one 
powerful new addition to the philosopher’s toolkit. Overton (2013) has, in fact, 
already supplied what appears to be the first bibliometric investigation of how 
“explain” and its cognates are used in recent scientific articles. Unfortunately, 
he only considers the semantics of “explanation”-talk in a small set of case stud-
ies, and he primarily relies on manual search. Nonetheless, his basic strategy 
could easily be augmented, bringing to bear the broader arsenal of techniques 
available at the intersection of information and computer science (e.g., machine 
learning algorithms, big data text mining) in order to support the analysis of a 
far more comprehensive sample of scientific articles.
One might also obtain useful data by applying the methods of experimental 
and social psychology to the study of scientists themselves. Studies of this sort 
have already been conducted in order to discern how the use of terms such as 
“gene” and “innate” varies between laypeople and scientists and how it can also 
vary within these two populations (Stotz and Griffiths, 2008). We have been 
pursuing a similar line of investigation with regard to how “explanation” is 
employed by laypeople and scientists.
In earlier studies (Braverman et al., 2012; Waskan et al., 2013) we focused 
exclusively on explanation. We found that both laypeople and scientists regard 
explanation as inherently psychological. In particular, they seem to regard it as 
a crucial, or at least a central, component of explanations that they have actually 
rendered the target phenomenon intelligible to someone, which is to say that the 
representational artifact has enabled someone to understand how or why-possibly 

206  
M  Jonathan Waskan et al
the phenomenon occurred (or occurs). This runs counter to much mainstream 
thought in the philosophy of science. The closest philosophers seem to have 
come to this view is the proposal that a representation merely needs the capac-
ity, even if unexercised, to render the target phenomenon intelligible (Scriven, 
1975; Achinstein, 1984; Waskan, 2011). Our findings suggest, however, that the 
mere, unexercised capacity to render intelligible does not suffice. These findings 
held for laypeople under two very different paradigms. The first (Figure 16.1) 
involved traditional brief vignettes (~200 words) followed by ratings questions.
The second utilized a lengthy article (~1,000 words) about the cause of dis-
tant gamma-ray bursts that was adapted from an online popular science publi-
cation. Rather than asking for explicit “explanation” ratings, which we worried 
might lead participants to engage in amateur philosophizing, we disguised the 
explanation probe as merely another item in a larger memory task. The task 
involved determining whether or not particular sentences seemed likely to be 
true based on the material in the article. Rather than recruiting episodic memo-
ries and explicit deliberation, such “semantic integration” tasks recruit semantic 
memories of the meaning conveyed (Powell, Horne, and Pinillos, forthcoming). 
Using this second paradigm, we continued to find that laypeople place great 
value on actual intelligibility (Figure 16.2a). We repeated the experiment using 
practicing scientists as subjects and the results were comparable (Figure 16.2b).
–0.4
–0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
Intelligible
Potentially 
Intelligible
Never 
Intelligible
Explanation Rating
**
***
** p < .01
*** p < .001
Figure 16.1 Mean “constitutes an explanation” ratings among laypeople by condition.
 
 
 
 

0
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
90
100
Intelligible
Potentially 
Intelligible
Never 
Intelligible
% Memory fo Explanation r-a
**
**
** p < .01
0
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
90
100
Intelligible
Potentially 
Intelligible
Never 
Intelligible
% Memory fo Explanation r-a
***
**
** p < .01
*** p < .001
Figure 16.2 Percentage of lay participants (2a) and scientists (2b) remembering that the materials 
described in the article constitute an explanation.
(a)
(b)

208  
M  Jonathan Waskan et al
Our findings undermine a popular argument for substantive anti-psycholo-
gism, which depends on it being the case that hypercomplex models that fail to 
render a phenomenon intelligible to anyone are clear-cut cases of explanation, 
which is to say that most everyone ought to agree. Our work suggests that these 
cases are anything but clear-cut and that laypeople and scientists generally 
regard the psychological state of finding intelligible as a necessary, or at least 
highly central, feature of explanations.
In our latest study, we have undertaken to compare the application condi-
tions of both the representational-artifact and ontic senses of “explanation” 
for laypeople and scientists. It seemed to us at least possible that intelligi-
bility is also important to the ontic conception—for instance, it could be 
that an objective process is only regarded as an explanation if someone can 
possibly understand how it brings about the target occurrence. We thus com-
pared memory for the presence of explanation and for explanation under two 
conditions:
Intelligible—the article describes a hypercomplex computer model and a 

M
published research article describing it (hereafter “materials”) that have 
numerous theoretical virtues and have actually rendered the target phe-
nomenon intelligible to a scientist (Dr. Brown).
Never intelligible—the same as intelligible, except that the materials are 

M
described as being so complex that they are incapable of rendering the 
target phenomenon intelligible to anyone.
We also included a lengthy distractor (a separate article about neuroscience) 
so as to heighten reliance on semantic memory. As part of the memory task, we 
further incorporated a measure of whether or not participants remembered that 
the materials enabled Brown to understand how the target occurrence comes 
about (labeled “Understands why-possibly” in Figures 16.3 and 16.4).
Though it was only a small part of the story, memory for whether or not 
Brown understands how-possibly did vary to a significant extent across intelli-
gible and never intelligible conditions among both laypeople (Figure 16.3) and 
scientists (Figure 16.4). We also continued to find that, in both populations, 
memory for whether the materials constitute an explanation varied between the 
intelligible and never intelligible conditions, though the manipulation had no 
discernible effect on memory for explanation. This is important because intel-
ligibility seemed, especially given prior results regarding explanation, a promis-
ing candidate for a psychological event that people would regard as crucial, or 
central, for ontic explanation.
In short, we take our results to show that whether or not lay and scientific 
populations classify a set of representational artifacts as an explanation for a 
phenomenon is affected by whether or not the artifacts enable anyone to find 
the phenomenon intelligible, but whether or not participants classify a set of 
physical processes as the objective explanation is unaffected by whether or not 
anyone finds that objective process intelligible. Notice as well that there is 
no across-the-board hesitation in calling either the artifacts or the objective 
 
 
 

Scientific Norms for Using “Explanation”  M  209
process “explanations” under the right conditions, supporting the idea that 
there is an ambiguity in play.
We next wondered whether these two forms of explanation might come 
apart in other ways, such as by manipulating the impression that the materials 
in question are accurate. On most views, accuracy is essential for explanation. 
This suggests that if we manipulate the accuracy of the materials discussed 
in the article, then there should be a difference in memory for whether or not 
those materials constitute an explanation. Likewise, insofar as the materials are 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Intelligible
Never Intelligible
% Memory
R-A
*** p < .001
***
Understands Why-possibly
Explanation
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Intelligible
Never Intelligible
% Memory
Ontic
Understands Why-possibly
Explanation
Figure 16.3 Percentage of lay participants under intelligible and never intelligible conditions remem-
bering (3a) that Dr. Brown’s materials constitute an explanation and Dr. Brown understands why-
possibly and (3b) that the conditions described by the materials are the explanation and Dr. Brown 
understands why-possibly.
(a)
(b)

210  
M  Jonathan Waskan et al
inaccurate, the physical process they designate ought not to be remembered as 
constituting the explanation. In other words, where accuracy is concerned, the 
two senses of explanation should stand or fall together. In order to alter judg-
ments about whether or not the materials were accurate, we varied whether or 
not the theories they advance survive an apparently crucial test. This time, 
instead of measuring memory for the understanding of the phenomenon, we 
measured memory for the accuracy of the materials (i.e., the model and the 
article describing it).
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Intelligible
Never Intelligible
% Memory
R-A
* p < .05
*
Understands Why-possibly
Explanation
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Intelligible
Never Intelligible
% Memory
Ontic
Understands Why-possibly
Explanation
Figure 16.4 Percentage of scientists under intelligible and never intelligible conditions remembering 
(4a) that Dr. Brown’s materials constitute an explanation and Dr. Brown understands why-possibly 
and (4b) that the conditions described by the materials are the explanation and Dr. Brown understands 
why-possibly.
(a)
(b)
 

Scientific Norms for Using “Explanation”  M  211
We found, among both laypeople (Figure 16.5) and scientists (Figure 16.6), 
that the crucial test manipulation did have a powerful impact on memory for 
whether or not Dr. Brown’s materials were accurate. Moreover, the manipulation 
had a significant impact on memory for whether or not the materials describe 
the explanation, but it had no effect on memory for whether the materials con-
stitute an explanation. Thus, we find that the two senses of explanation have 
once again come apart, this time in the opposite direction, supporting the idea 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Crucial
Test Pass
Crucial
Test Fail
% Memory
R-A
Accurate
Explanation
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Crucial
Test Pass
Crucial
Test Fail
% Memory
Ontic
** p < .01
**
Accurate
Explanation
Figure 16.5 Percentage of lay participants under crucial test pass and crucial test fail conditions 
remembering (5a) that Dr. Brown’s materials constitute an explanation and are accurate and (5b) that 
the conditions described by the materials are the explanation and the materials are accurate.
(a)
(b)

212  
M  Jonathan Waskan et al
that they are ambiguous. At the same time, our findings undermine a popular 
philosophical claim about explanation—namely, that accuracy is essential.
Our research also illustrates how the methods of experimental and social 
psychology can provide their own useful mode of attack on problems regarding 
the facts about science, such as what norms are in play regarding “explanation” 
and how scientists conceive of explanations. This method is distinct from, and 
may complement or undermine, the results of other ways of studying those 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Crucial
Test Pass
Crucial
Test Fail
% Memory
R-A
Accurate
Explanation
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Crucial
Test Pass
Crucial
Test Fail
% Memory
Ontic
*** p < .001
***
Accurate
Explanation
Figure 16.6 Percentage of scientists under crucial test pass and crucial test fail conditions remember-
ing (6a) that Dr. Brown’s materials constitute an explanation and are accurate and (6b) that the condi-
tions described by the materials are the explanation and the materials are accurate.
(a)
(b)
 

Scientific Norms for Using “Explanation”  M  213
same norms and concepts. We have only begun to map out the contours of 
the various senses of “explanation,” and clearly more research is needed. We 
should, for instance, like to establish that there is in fact a third, doxastic sense 
of “explanation” in use, one that is distinct from the other two senses. For what 
our own intuitions are worth, it seems to us that one has an explanation for a 
phenomenon—that is, one is in the appropriate doxastic state—insofar as one 
understands how or why the phenomenon came (or comes) about and that one 
lacks an explanation otherwise. If this is right, then the psychological state that 
is so central to explanation may just be explanation itself. In any case, further 
experimental research will help us to determine whether this is so and enable 
us to map out more fully the contours of what appear to be three distinct senses 
of the noun “explanation.”

Conclusion
Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
I believe that we are in a much stronger position now than we have been for many 
years, provided that we are:
Realist in acknowledging the actuality of an independent, causally effica-

M
cious world while recognizing the limitations on our access to it.
Systemic and interdisciplinary because the world is a complex intertwining 

M
or lamination of many kinds of mechanisms—physical, biological, psycho-
logical, social, political, economic—that interact in complex non-linear 
ways.
Empirical or evidence-based in accepting the importance of data and infor-

M
mation and its analysis, especially when there is so much of it available—
‘big data’ and analytics—while recognizing the limitations of both the data 
itself and purely empiricist analyses of it.
Interpretive in accepting that in the social world individuals and groups to 

M
some extent construct their own interpretations and valuations, and that 
we must understand and pay due attention to this in researching and in 
resolving problems.
Multimethodological . . .  we need to be eclectic in our use of methods and 

M
methodologies in both research and in practical interventions, and much 
more interdisciplinary in our use of theory.
Critical and committed in recognizing the unavoidable ethical and moral 

M
dimensions to all our decisions and actions, and not hiding behind techno-
cratic, managerialist or positivist arguments that they are somehow ‘value-
free’.
If we follow these maxims sincerely and consistently, then the systems approach 
and critical realism can genuinely help us tackle the intractable, wicked problems 
that currently beset the world (Mingers, 2014).
We apply the term ‘adequacy of meaning’ to the subjective interpretation of a 
coherent course of conduct when and insofar as, according to our habitual modes 
of thought and feeling, its component parts taken in their mutual relation are 
recognized to constitute a ‘typical’ complex of meaning. It is more common to 
say ‘correct’. The interpretation of a sequence of events will on the other hand 

216  
M  Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
be called causally adequate insofar as, according to established generalizations 
from experience, there is a probability that it will always actually occur in the 
same way . . .  Thus causal explanation depends on being able to determine that 
there is a probability, which in the rare ideal case can be numerically stated, but 
is always in some sense calculable, that a given observable event will be followed 
or accompanied by another event. (Weber, 1922)
The model is that I, as theorist, can occupy, if only temporarily and imperfectly, 
the point of view of the universe, and see everything from the outside, including 
myself and whatever moral or other dispositions, affections or projects, I may 
have; and from that outside view, I can assign to them a value. The difficulty 
is . . .  that the moral dispositions . . .  cannot simply be regarded, least of all by 
their possessor, just as devices for generating actions or states of affairs. Such dis-
positions and commitments will characteristically be what gives one’s life some 
meaning, and gives one some reason for living it . . .  there is simply no conceiv-
able exercise that consists in stepping completely outside myself and from that 
point of view evaluating in toto the dispositions, projects, and affections that 
constitute the substance of my own life . . .  It cannot be a reasonable aim that I or 
any other particular person should take as the ideal view of the world . . .  a view 
from no point of view at all. (Williams, 2006)
Is Mingers right? Can Weber and Williams be reconciled? Throughout this 
book, we have endeavored to create and recreate as best we can the experi-
ence of engaging in a pragmatic hermeneutic circle around the experience and 
concept of explanation. We merely outlined our definition of this task in the 
introduction with the hope that by remaining a conceptual outline, our defini-
tion would not obscure the readers’ own experiences with what followed. Now 
as we reach the end of our journey, it is time to draw back the veil and explicate 
what we believe to be the lessons learned along the way.
Explanation is one of those words that we all use with many meanings, 
seldom being specific about which meaning it is we are trying to evoke at any 
particular time. The irony is that for a word whose roots are “the act of mak-
ing plain and the product thereof,” these multiple meanings are anything but 
plain. To the scientist whose work lies in the domain we have labeled Science 
1, explanation most often takes the form of answering a so-called why question 
with reference to how an item is categorized, where that category fits within a 
predefined overall structure (the sub-domain’s conceptual environment), and 
then perhaps some “covering law” or “mechanism” that then “explains” how 
change fits within that portion of the predefined structure. To the scientist, 
such an explanation is an explication of “truth.” To the practitioners (be they 
scientists or otherwise) whose work lies in the domain we have labeled Science 
2, explanation most often takes the form of explicating the various contingen-
cies and volitions whose presence or absence from a particular situation gives 
rise to an observation that itself has differed from the expected in a given 
sub-domain. In Science 1, explanations are about regularities and the task is 
to bracket (to commandeer from Husserl) the contingencies that otherwise 
can obscure the explained regularity. In Science 2, explanations are about the 

Conclusion  M  217
contingencies that have arisen and thus afforded deviance from expectation—
where the expectation is a series of regularities. Contingencies play the role of 
“noise” in Science 1 explanations and, along with volitions, the role of protago-
nist in Science 2 explanations. Nevertheless, we call all of these by the same 
word—explanation.
Not only do we use the same word for these seemingly opposite processes, 
instinctively we will assert that the “same phenomenon” is occurring when we 
explain. At the most basic level, a question has been asked in the form of how 
or why and an answer has been provided that is satisfactory to the questioner 
such that the asking of the question stops. This immediately gives rise to the 
question of what it is that leads the questioner to stop asking (and leaving aside 
coercion or exigencies such as the questioner’s death) and thus constitutes a 
“satisfactory” explanation. As our chapters have revealed, trying to define what 
makes an explanation “satisfactory” is anything but uniform. Even proclama-
tions of “truth” are resisted as satisfactory by those who claim that any such 
“truth” is a creation of its authors and thus devoid of the privileged status that 
would otherwise be implied by Truth with a capital T.
Our journey has been an effort to reach a better understanding of these dif-
ferences and of why and how we choose to describe the experience via the same 
word, “explanation,” and why and how we cling to the concept that there is 
indeed an underlying unity to the idea of explanation itself. To do so, we believe 
that the method cannot be to pretend to some “objective” perspective on what 
makes up an explanation. Such a view demands, as the Williams quote above 
if taken on its own highlights, that we strip the people away from the under-
standing of the concept itself. However, there are people involved—the one 
who asks the question and those who attempt to supply the explanation. They 
come to the experience with their own histories, meanings—“ fundierung,” if 
you like—and that “baggage” will likely play a large role in the determination 
by both the questioner and the interlocutors that the answer given constitutes 
an explanation. Given the importance of the people involved, it seemed critical 
to embody a true hermeneutic circle approach. We call this a pragmatic herme-
neutic circle and it involves a recursive cycle examining
the understanding and interpretations of a “text” by its author;

M
the understanding and interpretations of that same “text” by its readers;

M
the differences among contexts and histories that underlay the interpreta-

M
tions offered by author and readers; and
the commonalities that can be found among the contexts and the 

M
interpretations.
The recursive cycle continues until some sense of stability can be felt. The 
cycle itself is a dialogue—not in the Bohmian sense, but rather in the Gadamer 
and Buber sense. A conversation or a dialogue, Gadamer tells us,
is a process of two people understanding each other. Thus it is characteristic of 
every true conversation that each opens himself to the other person, truly accepts 

218  
M  Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
his point of view as worthy of consideration and gets inside the other to such an 
extent that he understands not a particular individual, but what he says. The 
thing that has to be grasped is the objective rightness or otherwise of his opinion, 
so that they can agree with each other on the subject. (Gadamer, 1960)
The interrelation of explanation, understanding, and the potential for action is 
an important theme both throughout this book and for our understanding of 
how pragmatic hermeneutics can be instantiated in practice. We have embed-
ded in our approach to pragmatic hermeneutics a tool to generate questions and 
help guide participants through the cycle’s many stages, and we made use of 
this tool at the end of most of the chapters. By doing so, we hoped to meet both 
the standard laid down by Schutz (1962)—“Each term in a scientific model of 
human action must be constructed in such a way that a human act performed 
within the life-world by an individual actor in the way indicated by the typi-
cal construct would be understandable for the actor himself as well as for his 
fellow-men in terms of common-sense interpretation of daily life”—and a criti-
cal notion of Gadamer’s: “all understanding involves not only interpretation, 
but also application” (Bernstein, 1982). To use Erbele’s (2014) version of this 
standard: “adequacy of meaning is only reached if explanatory understanding 
is evident.”
Each term in a scientific model of human action must be constructed in such a 
way that a human act performed within the life-world by an individual actor in 
the way indicated by the typical construct would be understandable for the actor 
himself as well as for his fellow-men in terms of common-sense interpretation of 
daily life. Compliance with this postulate warrants the consistency of the con-
structs of the social scientist with the constructs of common-sense experience of 
the social reality. (Schutz, 1962)
That is why the hermeneutic circle seems so attractive, for it promises to achieve 
a community of understanding and a degree of agreement that other interpreters 
cannot possibly offer. An interpretation that seeks to uncover an intersubjective 
substrate or text of which the subjects of investigation are not aware is not only 
trying to get them to recognize their hidden unities of belief, it is first of all 
meant to reveal the necessary agreement among interpreters who are willing to 
enclose themselves within the hermeneutic circle and its ends. (Shklar, 2004)
This pragmatic approach thus contrasts with more creative approaches to expla-
nation, such as the Friedman (1953) theorem: “Truly important and signifi-
cant hypotheses will be found to have ‘assumptions’ that are wildly inaccurate 
descriptive representations of reality, and, in general, the more significant the 
theory, the more unrealistic the assumptions,” and with more “theory-laden” 
approaches:
The reductionist unity-of-science movement seems alive and well among the 
practitioners of this approach. According to this view, because human action 
belongs to physical reality, and the workings of physical reality are supposed a 
priori to be everywhere the same, any genuine explanation must be in keeping 

Conclusion  M  219
with a causal-scientific approach borrowed from physical science . . .  One thing 
that seems not to be considered is that the context of everyday interaction might 
have other motivations than the search for laws, causal explanations, prediction, 
and control that we associate with the ideas of natural and biological science. 
(Carr, 2008)
Somebody has to ask a why question, whose topic is an event, before an expla-
nation can be attempted. The context of why questions stipulates which aspects 
of events are the topics of questions. Scientific confirmation of theories requires 
a variety of recurring events and relevant properties to ascertain that a positive 
case is not coincidental anecdotal evidence, to help decide among competing 
theories, and to determine which of the hypotheses that compose a theory a 
piece of evidence tests (Tucker, 1988). The best theories are selected according 
to their consilience, simplicity, and analogy (Thagard, 1988).
By making explicit use of the pragmatic hermeneutic question guide, we can 
better probe the understandings, interpretations, and representations offered 
by both questioner and potential explainer. Those representations need them-
selves to be understood as helping to define the question and to define what 
it is that will constitute a “satisfactory” explanation. As Tucker (1998) notes: 
“The properties of events in conjunction with the context of inquiry as mani-
fested in the formation of the why-question decide the possibility of scientific 
explanation.”
Storytelling obeys rules that are imbedded in action itself, and narrative is at 
the root of human reality long before it gets explicitly told about. It is because 
of this closeness of structure between human action and narrative that we can 
genuinely be said to explain an action by telling a story about it. Telling the 
story of an action, as we’ve seen, involves more than just finding the motive, 
thought, or intention behind the action. It ties the action to its background 
circumstances, its antecedent events, and its subsequent results. Telling a more 
extended story, or contrasting the agent’s original story with other accounts of 
the same event, often involves questioning the prima facie reason and revis-
ing it. The explanatory story, in other words, may be very different in many 
respects from the initial agent’s story. But the point of emphasizing the same-
ness of form between narrative explanation and what it explains is to show that 
the narrative explanation does not inhabit a different conceptual universe from 
the narrated, and hence explained, original scene. In fact, the business of revis-
ing motives, reassessing the reasons for action-that is, changing the story-may 
occur in the course of the action itself. As agents acting in the world, we try to 
understand our own actions and experiences as we go along, often revising our 
own story in the course of the action (Carr, 2008).
I think Heidegger is right in saying that the fallacious inference from “better for 
mastering” to “more objective” is just a quirky inference of the Western meta-
physical tradition. But it is central to that tradition. So I think that in order 
to get out from under the non sequitur which goes from nature’s causal inde-
pendence of thought to the need for “subject-independent terms” we have to 
try to distance ourselves from the idea that knowledge consists in the subject 

220  
M  Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
having representations which “correspond” to the object. (Rorty, 1979 as quoted 
in Verges, 1987)
This pivotal metafoundationalist error can only arise if one assumes that once 
the scientists have told their causal stories about human reality, these are the 
only stories to tell. And one would be more inclined to be captivated by such 
pictures if one were to accept scientific realism or to presuppose uncritically 
other epistemological doctrines of [pre]givenness. But once we have loosened our 
philosophical categories so as to recognize the continuity of scientific research 
programs with other forms of political, social and artistic life, we can begin to 
free ourselves. (Verges, 1987)
Explanations of whatever variety seem to be “more satisfying” to the extent 
that the conclusions, affordances, or implications therefrom can be applied 
to some sort of group, regularity, or “cluster.” It may be that the implications 
and so on take the form of predictions. It may that they instead take the 
form of a cognitive or semiotic environment that then “affords” a particular 
kind of action or behavior. For example, there are a number of “launcher” 
programs designed to create a “friendly” or “meaningful” environment on the 
“home page” or “start screen” of a mobile telephone. It is assumed by many 
web companies that getting a user to set the company’s web page as the user’s 
start page will in turn influence their behavior. Libraries are designed with 
visual cues to inspire respect for silence, just as many a religious worshipping 
site, such as a cathedral, is designed to inspire awe. Car and plane manufac-
turers devote thousands of man-hours to the design of dashboards that they 
believe will influence the behavior of drivers and pilots. Shoemaker (1997) 
comments:
We know and recognize properties by their effects, or, more precisely, by the 
effects of the events which are the activations of the causal powers which things 
have . . .  The behavior of objects, that is, the displays of their powers, will reveal 
that they have certain conditional powers. Once it is discovered that certain 
conditional powers are connected in a lawlike way, we can use these to ‘fix the 
reference’ of a property term to the cluster containing those conditional powers 
and whatever other conditional powers are related to them in the appropriate 
lawlike relationship. (Shoemaker, 1997)
Once we have identified the properties in the cluster, we are then free to label 
those properties, label the cluster, and make use of those labels to “frame” or 
“prejudice” how we next encounter similar environments and situations. As 
Gadamer (1960) tells us:
It is not so much our judgments as it is our prejudices that constitute our being . . .  
Prejudices are not necessarily unjustified and erroneous, so that they inevitably 
distort the truth. In fact, the historicity of our existence entails that prejudices, 
in the literal sense of the word, constitute the initial directedness of our whole 
ability to experience. Prejudices are biases of our openness to the world They 
are simply the conditions whereby we experience something-whereby what we 

Conclusion  M  221
encounter says something to us . . .  there is undoubtedly no understanding that is 
free of all prejudices, however much the will of our knowledge must be directed 
towards escaping their thrall.
As we previously noted, this volume takes a “show, don’t tell” approach to our 
subject matter. We take the content herein to illustrate an important point 
about the nature of explanation and about our methods for thinking about 
explanation. (This is not, of course, to suggest that the preceding pages only 
offer a single valuable insight.) While the “show, don’t tell” approach has many 
strengths, it also has its weaknesses. Foremost among these is the relatively 
high probability that the reader may not recognize the point that the authors 
wished to make. We have thus far pointed to important conceptual relations 
between explanation and Science 1/Science 2. We have not, however, said much 
to connect our early focus on scientific realism and pragmatic constructivism 
to these ideas.
There is an important relationship between the hermeneutic circle, a con-
cept familiar from the continental tradition, and the method of reflective equi-
librium, an approach to philosophy popular among analytics. The hermeneutic 
circle notes an important circular relationship that holds with regard to our 
interpretation of any text: our understanding of any particular passage will 
shape our understanding of the text as a whole; our understanding of the text 
as a whole will shape our understanding of any particular passage. Thus, judg-
ments about the whole influence our judgments about particular instances, and 
vice versa.
The method of reflective equilibrium, first highlighted by Goodman (1955) 
then popularized by Rawls (1971), notes a similar relationship regarding the 
method of analysis. Consider skepticism about the external world motivated 
by Cartesian considerations. The following rule seems plausible: If A and B 
are mutually exclusive propositions and I have no evidence that points to the 
truth of A over B (or vice versa), I ought to remain agnostic about the truth 
of both A and B. Acceptance of this rule appears to rule out knowledge of the 
external world. I have no evidence that would distinguish between the follow-
ing two hypotheses: my perceptions are of an external world and my percep-
tions are an illusion caused by a deceptive demon. Contrast our commitment to 
this general rule to our commitment to a particular knowledge claim: “I have 
hands” (Moore, 1959). Our understanding of knowledge will be determined by 
our acceptance of both general rules and judgments about particular cases of 
knowledge. As with the hermeneutic circle, the general rules we are willing to 
endorse will depend on our judgments about particular cases, and our willing-
ness to make certain judgments regarding particular cases will depend on the 
general rules we have accepted.
As is always the case, the notions of reflective equilibrium and the herme-
neutic circle can be applied to this text at multiple levels of analysis. One 
can apply these notions to each subunit of the text; one can apply these 
notions to the text taken as a whole; further, one can apply these notions to 
the debate over explanation as a whole. While each interpretive stance may 

222  
M  Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
offer important insights, we are primarily concerned with this last perspec-
tive. What does this work reveal about the broader debate in which it is 
embedded?
The authors represented in this volume take a variety of different approaches 
to explanation and arrive at a variety of different conclusions regarding the 
nature of explanation. Unsurprisingly, the conclusions the contributors reach 
are influenced by the approach they take. Importantly, the approach each con-
tributor takes toward explanation is influenced by his or her judgment about 
paradigm cases of explanation. This is perhaps clearest when we consider 
the pieces by Nersessian and Mitchell. Both develop careful case studies of 
instances of what they take to be successful explanation. Each then argues 
that, if such-and-such is a successful case of explanation, this-and-that broader 
conclusion follows.
The contributions to the Dialogue section were not picked at random, nor 
was the organization accidental. Roughly speaking, the volume is organized 
to chart a spectrum of approaches toward explanation. The early texts in the 
Dialogue section take as their starting point comparatively traditional instances 
of explanation. The texts in the latter section take as their starting point expla-
nations and explanatory strategies that are less frequently seen as paradigm 
instances of explanatory success.
This same organizational structure appears to fall on (at least) two further 
spectra. The first is the spectrum that ranges from the plausibility of realism 
to the plausibility of antirealism. Both realism and constructivism are domain-
specific theses. While realism appears rather plausible with regard to (some of) 
the theories of physics, it may appear less plausible with regard to economics or 
anthropology. Similarly, while antirealism may appear plausible with regard to 
anthropology, it may appear less plausible with regard to physics. As Habermas 
(1996) notes, “There is no one Science which itself is neutral; scientific activity 
is anything but monolithic—it fragments into a number of competing view-
points that are shot through with values.” Or take Beck’s (1996) view: “Naïve 
constructivism fails to see that behind the constructions of social actors there 
are objective realities and naïve realism neglects the extent to which social 
actors and science constructs reality.”
Second, our organizational structure further appears to fall on the spec-
trum that ranges from paradigm instances of Science 1 to paradigm instances 
of Science 2. The deductive-nomological model of explanation that is the 
focus of Salthe’s work was developed as a reaction to the success of explana-
tions in physics. Physics is, of course, the quintessential discipline of Science 
1. Contributions that occur later in the volume fall increasingly within the 
domain of Science 2.
We think that it is no accident that these three spectra coincide. Rather, we 
are of the opinion that our judgments about paradigm cases of explanation are 
intimately connected to our judgments about the domain-specific plausibility 
of realism and antirealism. Furthermore, our judgments about the domain-
specific plausibility of realism and antirealism appear to be importantly related 

Conclusion  M  223
to the extent that the science in questions falls within the domain of Science 1 
as opposed to Science 2.
In short, we think that the story goes roughly as follows. In virtue of reflec-
tive anticipation, volition, and emergence, the phenomena studied by Science 
2 are less epistemically tractable than are the phenomena studied by Science 1. 
Consequently, we are less comfortable taking a realist stance toward Science 2. 
Epistemic intractability gives rise to epistemic uncertainty that, rightly, makes 
us hesitant to reify the theoretical entities of Science 2 theories. The plausible 
refusal to reify the theoretical entities of Science 2 leads us to take the explana-
tions proffered by Science 1 as paradigm instances of successful explanation. 
The analogy between fiction and the explanations of Science 2 is much too 
close for comfort. We further suspect that our hesitance over explanations that 
do not rely on reifiable explanans stems from philosophy of science’s early fas-
cination with physics. Our early focus on physics influenced our judgments 
about what counts as a paradigm explanation.
Increasingly, there is a push back against modeling explanations on the 
physics paradigm (cf. Kaiser, 2014). Many of the contributions in this vol-
ume fit this model. While we applaud this movement, it remains the case that 
the examples of explanation driving the discussion continue to be drawn from 
within Science 1. While there are important differences between physics and 
sciences that are less paradigmatically Science 1, there are still greater differ-
ences between physics and Science 2. The aims of Science 1 and Science 2 
are importantly different. Consequently, the standards for a successful Science 
1 explanation are importantly different from the standards of success for a 
Science 2 explanation.
In her contribution, Nersessian speaks of a “plea for understanding.” We 
view this volume as a plea for Science 2. The contemporary literature on expla-
nation, while expanding, continues to focus almost exclusively on Science 
1 explanations. The move away from the physics paradigm is changing our 
understanding of the content of a successful explanation. Inclusion of Science 
2 explanations will reshape our very understanding of the aims of explanation. 
A new focus on Science 2 explanations will force us to reconsider the view that 
the goal of an explanation is objectivity and reliable prediction. While Science 
2 explanations fail badly by the standards of Science 1, Science 2 explanations 
are both ubiquitous and strikingly successful by their own desiderata. As Marx 
(1845) noted: “All mysteries which lead theory to mysticism find their rational 
solution in human practice and in the comprehension of this practice.” And 
Pierce (1901) agreed:
Looking out my window this lovely spring morning I see an azalea in full bloom. 
No, no! I do not see that; though that is the only way I can describe what I see. 
That is a proposition, a sentence, a fact; but what I perceive is not proposition, 
sentence, fact, but only an image, which I make intelligible in part by means of a 
statement of fact. This statement is abstract; but what I see is concrete. I perform 
an abduction when I so much as express in a sentence anything I see. The truth 
is that the whole fabric of our knowledge is one matted felt of pure hypothesis 

224  
M  Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
confirmed and refined by induction. Not the smallest advance can be made in 
knowledge beyond the stage of vacant staring, without making an abduction at 
every step.
This volume has not offered an argument that demonstrates the all-things-
considered importance of Science 2 explanations. It may be that Science 1 
and Science 2 explanations are different enough that it would be a mistake 
to attempt to treat them as a unified object of study. It may be that the cur-
rent consensus is correct: Science 1 explanations are the appropriate object of 
inquiry; Science 2 explanations are their degenerate kin. These are, however, 
substantive claims. They should not be taken for granted.
Our claims in this volume are a little more broad. Much of the philosophical 
discussion of explanation has been muddled between epistemology and ontology. 
We believe that much of that “muddle” can be attributed to background assump-
tions holding that each of the pairs, Science 1 and Science 2, scientific real-
ism and pragmatic constructivism, epistemology and ontology, are oppositional 
to one another. It is our claim that rather than being in opposition, the items 
in each of these pairs—insofar as explanation is concerned—are congruent but 
orthogonal. When the domain of inquiry is Science 1, context and contingency’s 
role in explanation is to be cast aside in favor of regularities. The approach to 
such activity is often based in scientific realism and the relevant questions con-
cern ontology. By contrast, when the domain of inquiry is Science 2, the focus of 
explanation is on the context and contingencies that have provided an environ-
ment wherein the “to be explained” occurs despite regularities. The approach 
to such activity is often based in pragmatic constructivism and the relevant 
questions concern epistemology. As noted above, however, the line between the 
domains is seldom clear and the activity described seems to fall on a spectrum.
Explanation needs to avoid what Bhaskar (cf. Spencer, 2000) terms the 
epistemic fallacy: “that statements about being can always be transposed into 
statements about our knowledge of being.” Vygotsky (1927), years before, 
warned that we should not “mix up the epistemological problem with the onto-
logical one.”
The epistemology/ontology confusion echoes throughout the Science 1/
Science 2 domain distinction. Science 2, as you will recall, picks up where 
Science 1 leaves off (see Figure C.1).
Figure C.1 What Science 2 deals with that Science 1 cannot.
 
 

Conclusion  M  225
Blunden (2009) notes that:
Vygotsky explains this with a metaphor about reflection. The image in a mirror 
is nothing real; it is a “virtual reality”, the result of the intersection of two mate-
rial processes, the optical properties of the mirror with its related optical pro-
cesses, and the material processes producing the objects reflected in the mirror. 
It is just as wrong to identify the image in the mirror (the virtual object) with the 
object of which it is an image, as it is wrong to identify the image with the optical 
processes alone, which cannot create the object which is reflected.
Where Science 1 desires to express the simple and the complicated, Science 2 
desires to express the complex. When practitioners of scientific realism regard 
ideas and social constructs, they often express pragmatic constructivist con-
cepts. When practitioners of pragmatic constructivism describe the materialist 
and physical background of environment and context, they often do so in sci-
entific realist terms. The roles of context and contingency often seem to flip-
flop between “noise to be disregarded” and “causal affordance.”
Except in the retrospective retelling of a science journal article, lecture, or 
book, the claims we have made regarding spectra of ideas being congruent but 
orthogonal seem to match the experience of science as it is practiced and of 
everyday inquiry. The Mobius strip we described in the Introduction where the 
notions of the two sciences and the differences between simple, complicated, 
and complex arrange themselves on a one-sided surface with no beginning, no 
end, and no obvious transition points seems to apply generally. Only when a 
“relator” tries to tell a “pure” story of Science 1, Science 2, scientific realism, 
pragmatic constructivism, epistemology, or ontology does the muddle seem to 
enter the explanation with full force. We thus further claim that much of the 
muddle is due to background assumptions of both relator and assumed audi-
ence. These assumptions can be flushed out by use of the pragmatic hermeneu-
tic questioning guide that we describe throughout the book.
Takeaways
We have five takeaways from this book:
1. The Science 1/Science 2 Mobius strip

226  
M  Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber
2. Each of the pairs—Science 1/Science 2, epistemology/ontology, scientific 
realism/pragmatic constructivism—should be regarded as being congru-
ent but orthogonal rather than oppositional in nature.
3. Much of the muddle regarding explanation can be cleared by bring-
ing the congruent but orthogonal nature of these pairs to the forefront 
of the discussion rather than remaining as unarticulated background 
assumptions.
4. Our pragmatic hermeneutics questioning tool can help in discussions 
aimed at enacting a hermeneutic inquiry and as a set of heuristics to help 
bring the congruent but orthogonal perspective to the forefront.
5. With explanation as with other areas of inquiry and life that seem to 
embody complexities, the following heuristic often helps: to a river be a 
canyon.
Figure C.2 The questioning tool.
 
 

Conclusion  M  227
If our project is successful, this volume will help to reveal the fundierung 
of the contemporary philosophy of explanation. As always, the revealing of a 
fundierung offers affordances for action. We hope to have revealed important 
assumptions underlying the way we think about explanations and, by doing so, 
to have opened up avenues for further exploration. The value of this project can 
only be judged by the work it inspires. That is a task that we leave to others.
Our latest thoughts will always be available online at http://modesofexpla 
nation.org

AFTERWORD 1
The Scientific Attitude Toward Explanation
Lee McIntyre
T
he problem with explanation in the sciences is not that we do not have 
the right concept of what it means to “explain” or that we misunder-
stand the domain of science. The problem is that many of those who 
profess to seek an explanation do not actually seek knowledge, but instead 
confirmation for what they already believe.
There is a lot of ignorance in the world, but this ignorance cannot always 
be overcome merely by “explaining.” First, we had better be sure that we are 
explaining things to someone who really wants to understand. This is not a 
trivial matter. Many people are convinced that they already understand (on 
extra-scientific grounds) how things work and turn to science only for the pres-
tige of its confirmatory power over their ideology. That is, they pursue explana-
tion, but they do not want to understand. Explanation is relative to a question, 
but if someone thinks that they already understand then there is actually no 
question.
What is missing, therefore, is not the right definition of explanation or of 
science. Science is not a method or a subject matter or even a way of knowing. 
It is an attitude. Philosophers cannot “define” their way out of the problem of 
ideology or willful ignorance. For what needs changing is not our conception 
of scientific explanation, but instead our attitude toward it.
The scientific attitude is one where you set out to do two things: (1) learn 
from empirical evidence and (2) change your theories based on what you have 
learned. It is appalling how much of what passes for science does not do these 
things. Until recently, I would put in this camp a good deal of what came out 
of economics. The simplifying assumptions and focus on perfect rationality 
just did not jibe with actual experience and were not expected to. Over the last 
decade, however, the advent of behavioral economics has changed this situ-
ation. Now we understand that the study of human behavior also can be an 
experimental discipline. Just because we are complex thinking beings does not 

230  
M  Lee McIntyre
mean that our behavior is not caused and that we cannot gather evidence in 
order to understand it.
Perhaps the best demonstration of the need for a scientific attitude is to 
examine a case where it is completely lacking: the debate over intelligent design. 
It is sometimes said that intelligent design is creationism in a cheap tuxedo. 
What does this mean? It means that at its heart intelligent design does not seek 
scientific explanation. Its motivation instead is to gather evidence to support 
the ideological belief that the creation story in the Bible is correct and that 
evolution is an incomplete—if not outright false—account of human origins. 
This is to say that when intelligent design theorists approach the question of 
whether we can explain human origins, they are not actually seeking an answer; 
they think they already have it. They know at the outset where they want their 
“scientific” inquiry to end up. This is why intelligent design is not science (and 
why in my judgment recent court cases have been correct in keeping it out 
of the public school science classroom). For it is missing something essential 
to science, which is the scientific attitude. The scientific attitude requires an 
openness to new evidence and a willingness to revise based on what is discov-
ered, which is completely missing in creationism. That great philosopher Bill 
Clinton perhaps put it best: “The problem with ideology is that it gives you the 
answer before you look at the evidence.”
I am afraid that all of this means, however, that the labored distinction 
between Science 1 and Science 2 (which seems to be at the heart of this book) 
is a false choice. There are not different senses of science—some of which 
deal with simple, ordered phenomena and some of which deal with complex, 
emergent ones—because science is not a subject matter. Neither is it a method. 
Instead, science is an attitude that can be applied to any field of study. You 
cannot break things off into different senses of science based on some alleged 
a priori distinction about what you are studying. If you really want to under-
stand what is essential about scientific explanation, you must look instead at 
the way in which scientists approach and learn from evidence. This is why I 
am a skeptic about the Science 1 versus Science 2 distinction. There should be 
no different senses of science. There is only good science and bad science. All 
science should aim at the same goal, which is the discovery and understand-
ing of the causes at work behind the phenomena about which we are puzzled. 
In some cases, these causes are contingent on human decision making. This 
does not make them any less discoverable through using the scientific attitude, 
else why does behavioral economics work at all? We cannot defy the causes of 
human behavior just because we know about them. Even where free will exists, 
we encounter the stunning regularity of human action. Is this not enough to 
motivate us to come to the study of social science with a genuine sense of won-
der about why we keep behaving in the ways that we do?
And I am afraid that there is another false dichotomy at work here: the one 
between realism and constructivism. This is surely a heated debate, but it has 
left out one of the most important antirealist players, which is a position that 
I will call—for want of a better word—“nominalism.” This is the idea that we 
are realist enough to suppose that we do not create the world merely through 

The Scientific Attitude Toward Explanation  M  231
our language, but we are antirealist enough to understand that we do create the 
language that we use to describe and understand the world. And this makes all 
the difference to our explanations. Indeed, language is the backbone of scien-
tific explanation. We do not come to the study of the world as naked perceivers. 
We have categories and we make our explanations relative to these. Does this 
mean that if our theories work, we have a blueprint (or something close to it) 
for how the world actually works? What naïve hubris to suppose that we have 
somehow stumbled our way into a true conception of nature just because we 
have gotten some data points to fit. But science does not require this; all that it 
requires is that we have models that work. Yet, there may be an infinite num-
ber of other models that work just as well, which we have not yet discovered, 
and admitting this is part of scientific understanding. This is the problem 
with taking the success of science as any sort of evidence for realism. It is well 
known that theory is underdetermined by evidence. There are many possible 
“true” explanations for one and the same phenomenon. Scientific explanation 
therefore cannot guarantee that it has discovered the truth, but only that it has 
given us a fitting answer to a question that was formed relative to a particular 
description of nature. However, this returns us to the original point: explana-
tion is always relative to a question. It is based on a point of view. This does not 
mean that we are creating the world; instead, we are intended to understand 
that any linguistic or theory-bound explanation of the world will always be 
incomplete. In formulating scientific explanations we are seeking to grasp a 
reality that—due to the limitations of our language—we will never completely 
understand.
Yet, science is marvelous. And it can work equally well for simple, well-
ordered phenomena as it does for complex, emergent, reflexive phenomena. 
Can scientific explanation occur at many different levels of description? Yes—
just look at the difference between a physicist’s conception of a molecule and a 
chemist’s. Can science work in explaining human behavior, when the person is 
trying his or her best to be unpredictable? Yes—just look at the latest models of 
cognitive irrationality in behavioral economics. Science need not be reductive 
to explain, but this does not mean that we need to cleave our understanding of 
science in two. We can be antirealists and anti-reductionists and still embrace 
scientific explanation, once we understand what scientific explanation is truly 
about. Scientific explanation can proceed at many different levels of descrip-
tion; there are a multitude of scientific explanations even for one and the same 
reality.
Science is about a commitment to following the evidence, in search of causa-
tion, wherever it may lead. This means that we must be willing to redescribe 
the world when our scientific vocabulary is failing us and to change our theo-
ries altogether when they are not explaining what it is that we seek to know. 
Why can science do this? Because science is not defined by its subject matter or 
its method: neither is it defined by its commitment to reductionism, realism, or 
any preconceived notions of simplicity or complexity. Science is instead defined 
by its attitude toward evidence: toward being genuinely interested in having 
something explained, because we are secure enough to understand that even 

232  
M  Lee McIntyre
though we may have a preferred vocabulary, and perhaps even some ideologi-
cal prejudices, we do not understand something until it has been scientifically 
scrutinized.
Nearly everything I have said so far about the scientific attitude can be 
summed up by a physicist who largely deplored the role of philosophy in under-
standing science. In his own effort to capture what was special about science, 
Richard Feynman once said to an audience of undergraduates: “It doesn’t mat-
ter how beautiful your theory is, it doesn’t matter how smart you are. If it 
doesn’t agree with experiment, it’s wrong.”
The ability to admit that we may be wrong . . .  that our understanding is 
incomplete . . .  that our ideology may reflect only wishful thinking . . .  that our 
descriptions may capture only a piece of the true nature of reality—that is the 
scientific attitude toward explanation.

AFTERWORD 2
Explanation Revisited
Jan Faye
E
xplanations spring up everywhere where people are. And for good rea-
sons. Explanation is one of the main sources of human understanding. 
We may even say that the purpose or function of an explanation is to 
communicate understanding. The explainer is involved in an intentional act 
in which he or she expresses his or her understanding of a particular issue 
to others, perhaps to address an explicit question raised by an interlocutor. 
How this understanding is received by the other person is governed by the 
communicative situation in which the explainer and explainee take part, their 
background knowledge, the subject being entertained, and their cognitive and 
personal interests.
Explanations take many forms and address many types of questions. One can 
find explanations that appeal to laws, causes, functions, structures, analogues, 
intentions, interpretations, or what have you; and what is being explained are 
effects, traces, outcomes, movements, behavior, actions, appearances, and 
meanings. Explanations do not only address how- and why-questions, other 
explanation-seeking questions could be, for instance, what-questions. It all 
depends on the topic of explanation, what the explainee wants to understand, 
and the explainer´s ability to provide a convincing answer. For some, this may 
seem both plain and obvious, but only recently almost all philosophers took a 
different view. Their focus was on the appropriate logical form of explanation 
or the appropriate content of an explanation. Now more philosophers realize 
that explanations are inseparable from the way we use them and the context 
which gives rise to them. This is also how I see it. In my opinion, explanation 
arises in a rhetorical situation that contains an exigency (an epistemic prob-
lem), an audience, and some constraining factors.
In her contribution, Nancy Nersessian argues that scientists focus more on 
understanding than explanation, whereas philosophers are more occupied with 
explanation than understanding. She believes that there are historical reasons 

234  
M  Jan Faye
for that, and I think she is right. But I also think that she misses the point 
that explanation is not an act of reason that can be separated from the com-
municative practice of science. Understanding, scientific or otherwise, has to 
be communicated to others and the only way this can be done is by publish-
ing explanations in journals, textbooks, talks, handouts, power point presenta-
tions, etc. An explanation need not have a fixed structure or a definite content. 
In practice, no scientists do Hempelian-style explanation or anything like that, 
nor do they have to appeal to causal mechanisms or the like. It is the sci-
entists’ intentions that determine whether or not a description counts as an 
explanation. Much of scientists’ understanding comes by reading explanations 
given by others in journals, textbooks, emails, or by listening to explanation in 
talks, interpersonal communication, teaching, etc. In those contexts, the word 
“explain” or “explanation” may seldom be used. Instead, the context together 
with the argumentative or narrative structure of the text or the use of words 
associated with proofs, processes, mechanisms, functions, structures, inten-
tions, meanings, etc. in the text or in the speech act gives the audience the 
impression that the description functions as an explanation due to the inten-
tions of the communicator. So when philosophers explicitly use words like 
“explain” and “explanation” it may very well be in settings where they attempt 
to give a philosophical reconstruction of science.
However, explanation is not the only way by which one may achieve under-
standing which I take to be organization of beliefs. Understanding also comes 
with interpretation in which one relates meaning to the phenomenon under 
investigation. In these cases, interpretation is a process of constructing mean-
ing, not a process of explaining meaning. This is what happens, I think, in the 
examples Nersessian mentioned. Scientists construct models as representations 
of a process or a function and such constructions may be top-down from some 
highly theoretical principles or bottom-up from experimental data and physical 
or computational simulation. How understanding is related to both explana-
tion and interpretation is something I have elaborated in detail in my most 
recent book (Faye, 2014).
The editors of the present book, Michael Lissack and Abraham Graber, draw 
a distinction between Science 1 and Science 2 coinciding with the natural sci-
ences on the one hand and the social sciences and the humanities on the other. 
Indeed others have seen a similar distinction. Gustav Droysen and Wilhelm 
Dilthey described it as a distinction between the disciplines aiming at expla-
nation and those seeking understanding. William Windelband and Heinrich 
Rickert later characterized the distinction as one between the nomothetic and 
idiographic disciplines. But humanistic theories like structuralism, genera-
tive grammar, semiotics, formal semantics, behaviorism, and cognitive science 
prove these characterizations dead wrong—relics of a bygone age. Science 2 
explains as much as Science 1 and the latter involves understanding as much as 
the former. I think it is fair to say that the functional role of explanation is to 
provide understanding and that the natural sciences use interpretation as much 
as social science and the humanities. But how you define your research object 
depends on your research interest. It is not given by nature herself whether you 

Explanation Revisited  M  235
should see an object nomotetically as only one of a kind or idiographically as a 
unique individual.
Lissack and Graber take Science 1 to target at objectivity, truth, universal 
laws, invariance, and context-free descriptions by the use of models of repre-
senting in contrast to Science 2 which they see attempts to understand contin-
gencies, individuals, meaning, and how human considerations, deliberations, 
and decisions are context-bound. They associate Science 1 with a worldview of 
scientific realism, according to which the world consists of unobservable and 
mind-independent entities, very much similar to Kant’s things-in-themselves. 
Science 2 does not share this worldview; rather the worldview underlying it can 
be identified with pragmatic constructivism. It works with meaning and con-
texts, with how context influences our thinking and bestows meaning to our 
actions. This position considers the world in which we live and act as a result 
of useful constructions. Like all generalizations, these worldviews only hold at 
a certain level of abstraction. Unfortunately, this has become the ideology of 
the sciences as well as the humanities and has been nurtured by philosophers, 
scholars, and scientists ever since.
If we look at the scientific practices in Science I and Science 2, respectively, 
I think it is obvious that the distinction generates a false dichotomy. The result 
of Science 1 is not less dependent on interest and context than Science 2, and 
Science 2 needs not be less objective and truth-tracking than Science 1. Several 
of the many quotations in chapter 3 attest to this claim. Context, interest, and 
contingency do not preclude truth and objectivity, nor does the opposite. I 
prefer what may be called constructive realism that has room for both atoms 
and human intentions, including as real those social institutions that follow 
from such assumptions. I do not claim that the contrast between Science 1 
and Science 2 does not make sense. In some sense, it is important. It tells us 
something about which explanation we usually will select, since which types 
of explanation we pick as relevant is determined by how we understand the 
topic of the explanation. Here, Science 1 and Science 2 deal with topics with 
different ontological characteristics. The objects of Science 1 are real but not 
intentionally constituted, whereas those of Science 2 are real but intentionally 
invented. The acclaimed ontological differences make some explanatory genres 
appropriate and others inappropriate. In short, the distinction reflects that we 
often exhibit contrasting cognitive interests in Science 1 and Science 2 because 
we believe their research objects come into the world by different causes. A 
good explanation is a linguistic response to an explanation-seeking question 
that has been adjusted to the explanatory situation, including the nature of 
the topic, the cognitive interests involved, and the audience’s expectation. This 
point brings me to another important issue.
Explanations and methods are quite distinct. In my opinion, explanations 
reflect our cognitive interest, which undoubtedly varies from understanding 
the atmosphere of the planet Venus to Titian’s Venus of Urbino. Most of work-
ing scientists and scholars think of these phenomena as belonging to different 
ontological categories. However, the general methods of science by which we 
can possibly warrant our explanation are the same for Science 1 and Science 

236  
M  Jan Faye
2. Claims within Science 2 must be justified by empirical evidence as much as 
claims within Science 1. Such a requirement is due to the fact that the practice-
oriented methods as well as the most sophisticated methods have their origin 
in the cognitive evolution of Homo sapiens. Ancestors who were not adapted 
to using cognitive mechanisms such as induction and deduction on sensory 
information did not have a chance of survival. Lions took them. Even very 
sophisticated methods of science have to answer our innate cognitive mecha-
nism for collecting, interpreting, and treating information. So Science 1 and 
Science 2 are united, in the sense all disciplines have to stand up to what we call 
the empirical methods; comparing their explanations with supporting evidence 
and data is the only legitimate way scientists and scholars can make sure that 
their explanations are true. This is how our biology has given us the ability to 
stay tuned to the world and select between all our free thoughts, imaginations, 
and speculations. (For a further vindication of a methodological unification of 
Science 1 and Science 2, I confer the reader to an earlier book of mine (Faye 
2010), which gives a naturalistic reconstruction of the humanities.)
This takes me to my comments on the case study on creationism and intel-
ligent design (ID). Most philosophers have seen explanation as a statement 
that has to be true in order to count as an explanation. But I do not share this 
belief. Indeed, we all want our explanations to be true, but it is not a defining 
characteristic of an explanation that it has to be true. Whether a statement 
functions as an explanation depends on the discursive context in which it plays 
a role and not on its truth content (Faye, 2014). Thus, the adherents of ID just 
come up with a different explanation than evolutionary biologists. It is a false 
explanation, not a pseudo-explanation. However, it ought to be mentioned 
that the so-called anthropic principle (AP), which some cosmologists swear 
to, have, by some, been given a strong interpretation that seems to support ID. 
But in a weaker form it can be construed as a kind of functional explanation. 
What is wrong with the explanation in terms of the AP or in terms of ID is 
not that it could not in principle be true. The problem is twofold: first, both 
types of explanation are launched because some converts believe that there is 
an exigency that has to be explained, which traditional biology or traditional 
cosmology cannot explain, whereas others deny that there is such an urgent 
problem; and second, there is no way in which science could test the truth of 
such explanatory claims. Nevertheless, they offer understanding.
In his response to Kopplin, Graber claims that creationism is not unscien-
tific per se. This is indeed correct. However, science has become a naturalistic 
enterprise not only with respect to methodology but also with respect to its 
ontology. The connection between these two components seems to be, both 
historically and epistemically, that the success of empirical methods in the 
justification of our beliefs forced scientists to discard any dualistic ontology. 
According to a dualistic worldview à la Descartes, there exists—besides a mate-
rialist substance—one which has an immaterial nature and which therefore 
cannot be subordinated any mechanistic explanation. It may be divided into 
individuals or be of an omni-scientific nature. Moreover, since this substance 
is not in space we cannot have direct sensory access to it. Hence, we cannot use 

Explanation Revisited  M  237
empirical methods to examine its existence. Still, Descartes and his followers 
assumed that it had a role to play as an explanatory entity of those spiritual 
things which did not exclusively belong to Res extensa. Here, the existence of 
a creating and sustaining God was the antipode of a monistic ontology, espe-
cially because God is assumed to have the power to interact with the mechani-
cal laws of nature. I agree with Graber that creationism was the best scientific 
theory until Darwin’s theory of natural selection. What happened was that the 
materialistic–mechanistic point of view, which had more or less dominated 
physics since Descartes, was carried over into chemistry, geology, and finally 
into biology and psychology. In science, Res extensa eventually replaced Res 
cogitans. From then on, it seems as if science, and scientific explanation, pre-
supposes a monistic ontology and a monistic methodology due to the massive 
practical success of this worldview approach. What was regarded as a scientific 
response to questions in geology, biology, and psychology in the seventeenth 
century is no longer considered as such in the twenty-first century. Today’s 
debate between the creationists and the evolutionists is not just about labels but 
who has the right to tell the other what constitutes science.
This brings the distinction between realism and pragmatic constructivism 
to the fore. Lissack seems to think of them as contrastive and it is true that 
they are often used in this way. Realism goes with description and the natural 
sciences, whereas pragmatic constructivism is associated with interpretation 
and the social sciences. The fact is, however, that the terms “realism” and “con-
structivism” cover several different positions and some of these in fact attempt 
to combine both realist and constructivist insights. Think of positions like 
Thomas Kuhn’s paradigm theory, Hilary Putnam’s internal realism, Bas van 
Fraassen’s constructive empiricism, and Ronald Giere’s constructive realism—a 
term which the Danish philosopher, Harald Høffding, used more than a hun-
dred years ago to characterize his own view (Faye, 1991). Neither realists nor 
pragmatic constructivists would deny that there is a world independently of 
our representations. Evolution has handled the skeptical problem. Those of our 
ancestors who did not believe in an external world did not survive. Realism and 
pragmatic constructivism can also agree that our cognitive success of represent-
ing this world depends on the ability of our representation to fit our observa-
tion and experimental practice. If our representation cannot generate actions 
by which we can determine its fitness, it may give us understanding, but not 
scientific understanding. What divides realism and pragmatic constructivism 
seems to be the amount of influence which one would allow that the world has 
on our representation. Again the two “schools” may agree that we establish a 
representation for certain purposes but disagree about how much the world is 
able to guide us in the construction of a representation.
There are many possible standpoints between the extreme view of scientific 
realism (that our scientific theories move closer and closer to a description of 
how things-are-in-themselves) and the other extreme view (that everything we 
can think of is a result of a constant process of interpretation and construc-
tion). Somewhere in between are placed more moderate forms of realism and 
constructivism. For example, the position called entity realism is much less 

238  
M  Jan Faye
radical in its claims than theory realism. Some would be more inclined toward 
entity realism in the natural sciences and less inclined toward entity realism in 
the social sciences since the entity realist would take physical entities to have 
natural features independent of our theories in contrast to those entities treated 
by the social sciences. The latter entities have only those sortal features which 
our classification permits them to have. Indeed, in making the natural sci-
ences, truth is not enough; we also need coherence among our beliefs to acquire 
understanding. However, in making the social sciences and the humanities, 
coherence is not enough; we need something by which one can measure truth 
unless one wishes to subscribe to relativism. What is required to understand the 
practice of Science 1 and Science 2 is not only an understanding of how con-
sensus is socially achieved but also how disagreements are empirically settled. 
This puts an adequate account of the various sciences somewhere in between 
realism and constructivism where description presupposes construction and 
where constructions depend on our natural capacities.
A suggestion might be that Science 1 and Science 2 appear distinct because 
they are occupied with systems on different levels of complexity. Science 1 
deals with simple systems and attempts to reduce more complex to less com-
plex phenomena. In contrast, Science 2 works with complex systems and aims 
to show that what are characteristic of such systems are non-reductive, emer-
gent properties. However, I think that this difference fails to take account of 
some important ontological features of Science 1 and Science 2. It is a dis-
similarity based on different epistemic reasons that we can find everywhere 
and across all disciplines. There are emergent properties even in physics. The 
problem is their causal status. A scientist may be interested in understanding 
a system from within. She will dedicate herself to the various internal features 
and causal mechanisms that sustain the system as a whole and explain how 
the system works. Thereby she excludes the environment from her consider-
ations. Another scientist may be interested in a system as a whole and why it 
behaves as it does with respect to its environment. He will therefore ascribe 
emergent features to the entire system, features in terms of which he will 
understand the activity of the elements of the system. The emergent features 
of the system as a whole act as containing conditions for the behavior of the 
elements. He will be looking for a causal explanation on a different level than 
she is. In my opinion, this does not require the existence of downward causa-
tion as Sandra Mitchell claims. Downward causation is a phony ontological 
category: It does not fulfill the standard criteria of causal dependency and 
priority. Emergency, however, is a result of the fact that we understand a 
system with regard to its causal function as much as we understand it with 
respect to its causal origin.
Addressing every interesting suggestion of the papers in this volume has 
not been possible. I have attempted to address some of them in the light of a 
pragmatic-rhetorical theory of explanation which claims that explanations are 
intentional acts of communication, that the role of explanation is to provide 
understanding to an audience (which may or may not include the explainer), 
and that the form and the content of an explanation are determined by the 

Explanation Revisited  M  239
explainer’s as well as the explainee’s cognitive interests. On this view of expla-
nation, understanding is not only an insight that comes with explanation. 
Understanding exists already in us as innate instincts and embodiments, as 
skills and dispositions, but is also extended by learning from interpretations 
and explanations.

AFTERWORD 3
Is The World Completely Intelligible?  
A Very Short Course
Peter Achinstein
T
his is a question that perhaps only philosophers, religious think-
ers, literary writers, and a few physicists might seriously ponder. (No 
doubt others ponder it, but less systematically.) Here are two different 
answers: (1) the world is completely intelligible; (2) the world is not completely 
intelligible. The first answer is given by some physicists (who believe that string 
theory provides a “theory of everything” that makes the world completely intel-
ligible1) and by some philosophers influenced by the “unity of science” program 
started in the 1930s (who believe that there must be some “theory of every-
thing,” whether or not it is string theory, cf. Chalmers, 2012). An extreme 
form of the second answer would be given by skeptics who say that nothing is 
intelligible, either because the world itself is completely random and disorderly 
(“as flies to wanton boys are we to the gods” to quote King Lear), or because, 
even if the world is orderly we can never know and therefore understand what 
this order is (“How unsearchable are His judgments, and His ways past finding 
out,” Romans 11.33). A moderate form of the second answer would be that some 
things about the world are intelligible, others not. A religious scientist might 
hold such a position. So might some philosophers, who think that not all men-
tal states can be reduced to, and understood in terms of, physical ones—the 
gold standard of intelligibility for physicalists (Kim, 2005). A somewhat dif-
ferent answer is given by Nagel (2012) in a recent book, which is that whether 
or not the world is in fact completely intelligible, “science is driven by the 
assumption” that it is. Otherwise, he claims, “we cannot really understand the 
scientific world view.”
What is an inquiring mind to think? There are various ways to deal with the 
question, depending on how “intelligibility” is to be construed. Here are two 
issues that need to be addressed:

242  
M  Peter Achinstein
1. What is it for the world to be “intelligible”? Is it something about the 
world independently of us? If so, what? Or does it mean “intelligible to 
us”? If so, how?
2. What does “complete” intelligibility require? Is there some ideal stan-
dard of completeness to be satisfied, or does it depend on the context of 
inquiry?
What Is Meant by an “Intelligible World”?
What does an “intelligible world” involve, whether or not we do, or even can, 
come to understand this intelligibility? Various answers have been offered. For 
Aristotle, it meant a world whose constituents are subject to four causes: formal, 
material, efficient, and final. Since the seventeenth century, scientists and phi-
losophers have understood an intelligible world to be one that is subject to laws. 
What sort of laws? “Mechanical philosophers” from the seventeenth through 
the nineteenth centuries taught that these are universal causal laws involving 
bodies and forces. Quantum theorists of the twentieth century taught that 
the laws are fundamentally probabilistic, not universal. Nagel supposes that 
in addition to probabilistic laws of physics, the universe is subject to teleologi-
cal laws that determine the formation and continuation of mental events. In 
addition, some theorists hold a reductionist view, according to which there is 
a set of “fundamental” constituents of which everything else is composed but 
which are not composed of anything further; and everything that happens in 
the universe is determined by the states of these fundamental constituents. 
One’s view about what counts as an “intelligible world” depends on one’s sci-
entific view about what the world is like. Mechanical philosophers understood 
intelligibility in terms of universal laws, in part at least because they believed 
that events in the world are governed by such laws. Quantum theorists under-
stand intelligibility in terms of probabilistic laws, in part at least because they 
believe that the world is governed by laws of that type. Reductionists require 
intelligibility in terms of reduction to basic “atoms” (e.g., to strings in string 
theory), because they believe that everything in the universe is composed of 
these “atoms,” whose behavior determines everything else.
Accordingly, there is no universally accepted conception of “intelligibility,” 
as far as the world is concerned, especially if one looks at the history of science. 
And there is a good reason for this, namely that it depends on one’s scientific 
views about what the constituents of the world are, what sort of properties they 
exhibit, and whether, and if so how, they produce everything else. The great 
nineteenth-century physicist Maxwell (1965) wrote:
When a physical phenomenon can be completely described as a change in the 
configuration and motion of a material system, the dynamical explanation of 
that phenomenon is said to be complete. We cannot conceive any further expla-
nation to be either necessary, desirable, or possible, for as soon as we know what 
is meant by the words configuration, motion, mass, and force, we see that the 
ideas they represent are so elementary that they cannot be explained by means 
of anything else.
 

Is The World Completely Intelligible?  M  243
He is expressing the idea that a sufficient and perhaps necessary condition for 
intelligibility, as far as the world is concerned, is that it be composed of mate-
rial systems of bodies with mass, in motion, and subject to forces (governed by 
universal Newtonian laws). Contemporary physicists have a somewhat differ-
ent idea of intelligibility because they have a very different physics.
Is the claim that the world is “intelligible” to be understood as something 
about the world itself independently of us, or does it mean “a world intelligible 
to us”? We will start with the former sense. An “intelligible” world is one with a 
certain “rational order,” whether or not we know, or can know, what this order 
is. Let us adopt a “modern” scientific view, prevalent since the seventeenth 
century, and say that it is a world subject to laws. But let us take this further, 
and suppose, in a reductionist spirit, that there is some set of fundamental laws 
that can be given no further explanation, and require none. Moreover, adopting 
a view of “rational order” dominant since at least the nineteenth century, let 
us suppose that macro-objects are composed of micro-objects whose behavior 
determines the behavior of the macro-objects; and, further, that there are “fun-
damental” micro-objects whose behavior determines everything. Let us start 
with “intelligibility” for a phenomenon P, “complete intelligibility” (because of 
the appeal to “fundamental” laws and objects). On such a view, a phenomenon 
P (whether a particular one or a type) would be “completely intelligible” if and 
only if these conditions are satisfied: (1) There is some set of fundamental Xs of 
which everything else is composed (e.g., strings), and which are not composed 
of anything else. (The Xs may be of one type only, or of several.) (2) These Xs 
are governed by fundamental laws that have no further explanation, and need 
none. (3) Phenomenon P is determined and correctly explained by the existence 
of, and laws governing, Xs. We might then say that “the world” is “completely 
intelligible” if and only if (1)–(3) hold for all phenomena.
How shall we understand “explanation” and “laws” in (2) and (3)? Let us 
start with laws. Must they be universal laws, as Newtonians believed, or can 
they also be probabilistic? In the nineteenth century, physicists such as Maxwell 
introduced probabilistic laws into statistical mechanics, and in the twentieth 
(irreducible) probabilistic laws into quantum mechanics. If the laws are to be 
universal ones, then, following Hempel’s (1965) deductive-nomological model 
of explanation, we could say that an explanation of a phenomenon by appeal 
to such laws requires that the laws (plus “initial conditions”) deductively entail 
the phenomenon. If probabilistic laws are allowed, can they explain events even 
if those events are low-probability ones according to the laws? Railton (1978) 
and Salmon (1971) say yes. Hempel and, following him, Thomas Nagel, say no. 
According to Hempel and Nagel, if a phenomenon is to be explained by a law, 
that phenomenon must be made probable or certain by the law and the initial 
conditions. In what follows, I will not choose between these alternatives. Nor 
will I claim that the satisfaction of (1)–(3) by all phenomena is the only way to 
understand the idea that the world is “completely intelligible.” Nevertheless, it 
is one way, and it is a way adopted by various contemporary scientists and phi-
losophers, especially by those with reductionistic sentiments. In what follows, 
I will consider this perspective.

244  
M  Peter Achinstein
If there are phenomena that fail to satisfy (1)–(3), then the world is not com-
pletely intelligible. If some phenomena satisfy (1)–(3) and some do not, then 
we might say that the world is “partly” but not “completely” intelligible. Now 
consider these possibilities: (A) It could be that the world does not satisfy one 
or more of the conditions (1)–(3). (B) It could be that the world satisfies condi-
tions (1)–(3), even though we humans are unable to discover the fundamental 
Xs, or the laws governing them, or that even if we are, we might be unable to 
apply the laws to the fundamental Xs in such a way as to explain phenomena 
in the macro-world. What shall we say if (A) or (B) obtains? In case (A), on the 
present conception, the world is not completely intelligible. In case (B), it is 
completely intelligible, but not to us.
Complete Intelligibility: A “Theory of Everything”
Is the world “completely intelligible” in the sense defined above? String theo-
rists in physics, such as Greene (2003) and Weinberg (1993), believe that 
the world does satisfy (1)–(3). They believe that string theory, when fully 
developed, will be a theory that describes the basic “atoms” of the universe 
(strings), that formulates the basic laws, and that with these “atoms” and laws 
string theory can explain everything else in the universe. String theorists 
often call their theory a “theory of everything” (or TOE for short). I shall 
use this expression for any theory, whether or not it is string theory, that 
correctly describes the world in such a way that (1)–(3) are satisfied. String 
theorists believe such a TOE exists whether or not it is ever discovered or 
constructed. If it does exist, then, on the perspective above, the world is 
“completely intelligible.”
How could it ever be established that the world is “completely intelligible” 
in this sense? String theory itself has not been established to be true. The 
energies required to determine whether strings exist are at present too great 
to achieve; and even if this is determined, it has not yet been shown by string 
theorists how the theory can explain certain phenomena that it is supposed to 
explain (e.g., dark matter and energy, and the basic parameters of the “stan-
dard model” in physics), let alone “everything.”2 No matter, string theorists, 
or at least some of them, argue that there must be a correct and complete TOE, 
whether it is string theory or some successor. The world must be “completely 
intelligible” in the sense that I have described. Elsewhere I have examined 
arguments that string theorists and others use to support the idea that some 
TOE must exist, or at the very least (following Nagel) that scientists must 
presuppose that one does exist in order to continue their scientific pursuits.3 
Some of the arguments are very general empirical ones; some are very general 
a priori ones. I find none of them at all persuasive. I claim that the idea that a 
TOE exists can only be supported by producing one, arguing empirically that 
the basic entities and laws that it postulates really exist, and giving empirical 
reasons for supposing that everything else can be explained in terms of these 
basic entities and laws. “Complete intelligibility” of the world, in the present 
sense, is something that must be established empirically, which has not been 
 
 
 

Is The World Completely Intelligible?  M  245
accomplished. Nor, I argue, is it a presupposition that needs to be made by 
scientists in their pursuits.
Here, I want to focus on a different claim. The claim is not that a TOE (or 
“complete intelligibility of the world”) must exist, or must be presupposed, 
but a more modest one: It would be a good thing if a TOE existed, if the 
world were “completely intelligible.” This would be motivation enough for 
searching for a TOE. Why would it be a good thing? Perhaps there are aes-
thetic reasons: A world of the sort described by a TOE would be more beau-
tiful, simple, unified, and so forth than a world in which no TOE existed. 
A world of the latter sort might contain no entities or laws that are funda-
mental; or if it did, it might be that such entities and laws do not determine 
everything that occurs (there is “emergence”). Or it might contain no laws 
at all, whether universal or probabilistic; the world might be chaotic. Such a 
universe would not be “lovely,” to borrow a term used by Lipton (2004). It 
would not have a “rational order.” A universe in which a TOE existed would 
be “lovely.” It would have a “rational order.” A world of the sort depicted by a 
TOE would be completely explainable by that TOE, which can be considered 
to be a good in itself.
Let us grant that a world completely explainable by a TOE would be a good 
thing, from an aesthetic point of view. Would it necessarily be a good thing for 
scientific pursuits? My claim is that it would be a good thing, but only if there 
is some reason to believe that scientists can come to know and understand the 
world by reference to the fundamental entities and laws invoked by that TOE. 
Suppose that the fundamental laws are too complex for scientists to understand; 
or that while not too complex, when scientists attempt to make a calculation 
from them needed to produce an explanation they cannot do it.4 The physicists 
Laughlin and Pines (2000) offer an example of a quantum mechanical equa-
tion relating charge and mass of electrons and atomic nuclei that covers many 
macro- and micro-bodies. In criticizing the very idea of a TOE, they write:
However, it is obvious . . .  that the Theory of Everything is not even remotely 
a theory of every thing . . .  We know this equation is correct . . .  However, it 
cannot be solved accurately when the number of particles exceeds about 10. No 
computer existing, or that will ever exist, can break this barrier because it is a 
catastrophe of dimensions.
Cartwright (1999) employs a simpler example (due to Otto Neurath) in which 
a thousand-dollar bill, subject to forces of gravity, wind, and friction, is swept 
away and eventually falls to the ground; even knowing all the forces acting, 
scientists are unable to calculate where the bill will fall and hence to explain 
why it fell where it did. Examples of these sorts abound. Unless a “completely 
intelligible” world is also one that is intelligible to us, the situation becomes 
like God telling the suffering Job that the world is completely intelligible, just 
not to him. That may be comforting to Job and to others of faith, but it should 
not be to scientists. What they seek is intelligibility to them, intelligibility that 
they can come to know and understand. What is that?

246  
M  Peter Achinstein
Contextualism
I have assumed (A) that a necessary and sufficient condition for a phenomenon’s 
being “completely intelligible” (to us) is that it be derivable from a TOE satisfy-
ing conditions (1)–(3), and that scientists can come to know what that TOE is 
and can in fact derive it from that TOE (in some fairly robust sense of “can”). 
I have also assumed (B) that if and only if all phenomena are so derivable (by 
us), then the world is completely intelligible (to us). Now I want to argue that 
even if (A) provides a sufficient condition for a phenomenon’s being completely 
intelligible to us, it is by no means necessary, or at least that standards of “com-
pleteness,” as far as intelligibility of a phenomenon is concerned, can vary from 
one context of inquiry to another. I also want to argue that even if (B) provides 
a sufficient condition for the world’s being “completely intelligible” (to us), it is 
by no means necessary. On this contextual view, completeness in intelligibility 
of a phenomenon, or of all phenomena, does not require the use of a TOE to 
do the explaining, nor, in the case of explaining all phenomena, does it require 
the use of a single theory to do so.5
Newton (1999) made the motions of the planets, their satellites, the tides, 
and falling bodies on the earth intelligible in terms of his law of gravity. 
(Assume, for the sake of argument, that his law is true, or true enough.) Did 
he make these phenomena “completely intelligible”? On the contextual view, 
if we pick a certain context, such as Newton’s own in the third book of the 
Principia, the answer is yes. Newton’s aim in Principia is “to discover the 
forces of nature from the phenomena of motions and then to demonstrate 
the other phenomena from these forces.” In the third book, his aim is to 
demonstrate from the motions of the planets and their satellites that there 
is a universal force, namely gravity, which operates between all bodies and 
varies inversely as the square of the distance between pairs of bodies. This 
force, and the law governing it, will make the motions of the planets and their 
satellites intelligible. Given Newton’s context—given what he was attempting 
to explain (various celestial and terrestrial motions), and given the manner 
in which he was attempting to do so (by means of a universal force and a law 
governing that force)—we might say that he made the phenomena in question 
“completely” intelligible (again assuming the truth of the explanation). He 
did so because in the context in which he was operating, an appropriate stan-
dard of “completeness” was satisfied. That standard called for demonstrating 
empirically that the force of gravity exists, that it is one force, not many, that it 
obeys the law he formulates, and that it is causally responsible for the motions 
he is explaining.6
At the end of the Principia, Newton writes:
Thus far I have explained the phenomena of the heavens and of our sea by the 
force of gravity, but I have not yet assigned a cause to gravity.
He claims that he has “not as yet been able to deduce from phenomena the 
reason for these properties of gravity,” and that he will not “feign hypotheses.” 
 
 
 

Is The World Completely Intelligible?  M  247
He continues: “And it is enough (‘satis est’) that gravity really exists and acts 
according to the laws that we have set forth and is sufficient to explain all the 
motions of the heavenly bodies and of our sea.” From his perspective —given 
the task he sets for himself—the explanation is “complete.” Of course, further 
questions remain to be asked, including “What causes gravity?” The task of 
providing an answer to that question is not complete. But that is a different 
task. On a contextual view, “completeness” in explaining some set of phenom-
ena does not require that the phenomena be derived from a TOE. Nor does 
it require that laws and other facts invoked in the explanation themselves be 
explained. Indeed, even the standards to use in assessing the explanation in a 
more general way as both true and good depend on contextual factors and not 
just on the world. Whether an explanation is correct depends on the world. 
Whether it is good depends also on the context. For example, whether precise 
laws are to be invoked, whether causes without laws are sufficient, whether the 
explanation is to be given on a macro- or a macro-level, depends on contextu-
ally determined standards.
Similarly, on this view, whether all phenomena can be made “completely 
intelligible” does not depend on whether all phenomena are derivable (by us) 
from some TOE. It depends on whether all phenomena can be (correctly) 
explained at some contextually fixed level of completeness. The answer to this 
question will depend not only on the world and the ability of scientists, but 
also on the standards of completeness appropriate for the context selected, 
which can vary considerably. If the question is “are all phenomena derivable by 
us from some TOE?,” (again in a fairly robust sense of “derivable”), the answer 
is “not now, and who knows if ever.” I am tempted to add: “Who cares?” 
Perhaps a few philosophers, TOE theorists, and literary writers do, but work-
ing scientists in general do not. It is sufficient to them, as it was to Newton 
explaining the motions and bodies he was talking about, that the phenomena 
in question be explainable at the level sought, and with the completeness that 
is appropriate. Working scientists pick out a certain problem to solve and 
propose certain standards for doing so without supposing that all scientific 
problems are solvable, or that they are so in the same way. As Maxwell (1965) 
wrote,
In all scientific procedure we begin by marking out a certain region or subject 
as the field of our investigation. To this we must confine our attention, leaving 
the rest of the universe out of account till we have completed the investigation 
in which we are engaged.
Scientists do and, I think, should proceed in this way, without concern for 
whether the world is “completely intelligible” in a non-contextual TOE sense. 
So far, no one knows whether it is “completely intelligible” in that sense. It is 
a very speculative empirical question. And scientific activity does not depend 
on whether the world is “completely intelligible” in this sense. Such activity 
is successful if it supplies appropriate intelligibility for the phenomena under 
consideration. Satis est.

248  
M  Peter Achinstein
Notes
1. String theory postulates that all the particles and forces of nature arise from strings 
that vibrate in an 11-dimensional space–time and are subject to a set of simple 
laws specified in the theory. The strings vibrate in different patterns, giving rise to 
particles such as electrons and quarks.
2. For the difficulties, see Lee Smolin, The Trouble with Physics (Boston, MA: 
Houghton Mifflin, 2006).
3. “What Is a ‘Theory of Everything’ and Why Should We Want One?” (manuscript).
4. Weinberg mentions this as a possibility: “Perhaps there is a final theory, a simple 
set of principles from which flow all arrows of explanation, but we shall never learn 
what it is. For instance, it may be that humans are simply not intelligent enough 
to discover or to understand the final theory” (p. 233). But don’t despair, he adds, 
“my own guess is that there is a final theory, and we are capable of discovering it” 
(p. 235).
5. This contextual idea derives from my own “illocutionary” theory of explanation, 
developed in The Nature of Explanation (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983). 
The basic idea is that while the correctness of an explanation depends on the world, 
the goodness of an explanation (where completeness is just one consideration) is to 
be assessed also contextually in terms that include the aims of the explainer and 
those of the actual or potential audience.
6. For an exposition and discussion of Newton’s argument, see my Evidence and 
Method: Scientific Strategies of Isaac Newton and James Clerk Maxwell (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2013).
 
 
 
 
 
 

AFTERWORD 4
Explanation and Pluralism
Beckett Sterner
H
ow do the multitude of perspectives on explanation fit together, if at 
all? The “Modes of Explanation” conference was daring in the way it 
brought together scholars whose fields ranged from philosophy of sci-
ence to narrative theory, crossed the analytic–continental divide in philosophy, 
and incorporated business practitioners interested in management and orga-
nization theory. One of the interesting outcomes in this book is Lissack and 
Graber’s proposal that the complex and conflicting discourse around explana-
tion can be understood in terms of “concurrent but orthogonal” perspectives. 
For example, they suggest that scientific realism and pragmatic constructivism 
are not antithetical views but different models for the process of inquiry.
In this response, I will start by discussing Lissack and Graber’s view of how 
the different perspectives on explanation are more than merely mutually exclu-
sive alternatives. Their account leaves a number of issues still to be resolved, 
so I will then turn to showing how the articles in the book jointly raise an 
important and general problem for any pluralistic view: there are in fact many 
pluralisms, few of which have been carefully articulated as alternative stances. 
The variation on which I focus here has to do with different kinds of inter-
dependence (or its absence) between elements of the plurality. In order to set 
the stage for a broader discussion about pluralism and explanation, I start by 
showing how the issue of pluralism arises naturally out of engaging with the 
contributions to this book. I then point to different possible models for plural-
ism as a major issue for arriving at a complete understanding of explanation 
and for concepts more generally.
“Concurrent but Orthogonal” Views of Explanation
First and foremost, Lissack and Graber offer the book as an affordance for 
understanding the concept of explanation. In bringing together these diverse 

250  
M  Beckett Sterner
views, the book facilitates the reader’s ability to encounter and interpret the 
full range of approaches to explanation. In particular, chapter 3, “The Context 
of Our Inquiry,” situates different aspects of the discourse around explanation 
together without already predigesting them into an overarching argument or 
historical narrative. For the reader who attempts to make sense of the variety 
on offer, new challenges emerge: How do the different views relate to each 
other? Is one correct and the rest mistaken? Is each correct and separate in its 
own, isolated way? Are they different facets or parts of a complex whole?
Lissack and Graber offer the notion of “concurrent but orthogonal” as an 
answer to these questions. They start by distinguishing two types of science, 
called Science 1 and Science 2, which I will only gloss here for the sake of brev-
ity. As I understand it, we can take “Science 1” as referring to an image of sci-
ence based on physics as an exemplar; that is, a science that aims for universal, 
exceptionless laws and axiomatically rigorous theories. We can then understand 
“Science 2” as an image of science based on the human sciences, with history as 
a plausible exemplar. Under this image, narrative takes the place of law, empha-
sizing contingency and context rather than necessity and universality.
In addition to Science 1 and Science 2, Lissack and Graber emphasize sci-
entific realism and pragmatic constructivism as another important dichotomy. 
For example, they offer contrasting interpretations of the creationism debate 
from these two perspectives in the book’s case study section. Rather than sum-
marize these perspectives again here, I will point the reader toward the relevant 
chapters in the case study and the further literature they reference.
The purpose of “concurrent but orthogonal” as a concept is to provide a 
pluralistic alternative to several primary oppositions that have shaped the dis-
course around explanation. For instance, some scholars believe that the human 
sciences should be eliminated as autonomous disciplines and simply treated 
using methods in the physical sciences (e.g., a strong version of sociobiology 
or a philosopher who is a naturalist and eliminative reductionist about inten-
tion and other related concepts). For other scholars, the supposed authority of 
the physical scientists to speak about “Nature” is a fiction created by human 
culture and amounts to simply another object for study in the human sciences 
(e.g., deconstructionists or a strong social constructivism). In contrast, Lissack 
and Graber attempt to find some common ground: “a concept that we believe 
helps to reconcile the Science 1 and Science 2 perspectives is the notion of 
concurrent but orthogonal. Science 1 and Science 2 are indeed different, but 
they are not oppositional. They are also not ‘super-positional’, where one would 
claim a status of truth only in the light of a revealed contingency. Concurrent 
but orthogonal suggests a simultaneity that is perpendicular, much like [inter-
secting] planes.”
This geometric metaphor is an alternative to the classic way of visualizing 
two opposing concepts as constituting a line segment whose points exist as 
intermediates between two extremes. Scientific realism and pragmatic con-
structivism, for example, might coexist without conflicting by applying to 
different ontological domains. Realism would apply to the “hard” natural sci-
ences such as physics or chemistry, while constructivism would apply to the 
 

Explanation and Pluralism  M  251
“soft” human sciences such as history or sociology. Instead of being opposites 
in this manner, the two elements in the pair could coexist in the larger space 
of domains (concurrence) without conflicting due to their distinct contexts 
(orthogonality).
Lissack and Graber, however, ultimately reject this interpretation as too sim-
plistic. In particular, they point to the pairing of epistemology and ontology as 
more fundamental than the other dichotomies, and they assert that scientific 
realism and pragmatic constructivism reflect two models for the process of 
inquiry as it “moves” through the space created by epistemology and ontology 
as orthogonal planes. Their idea as I understand it is to generate the possibil-
ity of relations between otherwise conflicting opposites by distributing them 
within a larger space of possibilities. In the ontological plane, for example, one 
could locate a view of explanation in terms of what it allows or prioritizes as 
the objects of explanation. In the epistemological plane, one could then cross-
reference this ontological position with a corresponding procedure for inquiry. 
As discovery progresses, the position that a researcher holds might move as her 
understanding of the target of her inquiry changes and she succeeds or fails to 
generate satisfactory explanations.
Much remains to be done, though, before the idea of “concurrent but orthog-
onal” can offer a full accounting of the conceptual structures underlying the 
debates over explanation. Further questions we might raise include: Are the 
only relevant differences between theories of explanation ones of epistemology 
and ontology but not, for example, issues of language or mind? Also, what are 
the processes of inquiry described by scientific realism and pragmatic construc-
tivism, and how are they similar or different? Furthermore, how strong is the 
pluralism implied here? That is, do realism and constructivism interact in some 
positive way, or does each function in isolation for its own aims?
Understanding Through Interpretation
Arriving at a stance about the character of the relationships between views of 
explanation is necessary to achieve complete understanding of the concept. 
The reason, I argue, is that the diversity of views raises basic challenges to our 
philosophical expectations about concepts and their meanings in general. As 
disruptions to one’s methodological tradition, these challenges obstruct our 
ability to formulate a coherent understanding of explanation, in the sense of 
developing a systematic know-how for its use and evaluation.
We first encounter these challenges in the process of interpreting the dif-
ferent views; that is, seeking to render what may seem strange or wrong about 
them in a way that is as intelligible and sensible as possible given their contexts. 
Coming to grips with these other perspectives can throw into doubt certain 
assumptions that we implicitly bring to the exercise from our own philosophi-
cal traditions or disciplinary starting points. How we resolve these doubts in 
turn establishes new relationships between our view and the others. We may 
reassert the existence of conflict under revised terms, for example, or allow for 
positive interaction and agreement where these were previously lacking.

252  
M  Beckett Sterner
Before coming to grips with these doubts, we first have to seek a careful 
understanding of each of the different views. As a kind of discipline or project, 
understanding begins by taking a neutral stance with respect to its object. 
Think, for example, of the common saying that one should seek to understand 
before judging. As Lissack and Graber point out, this process of interpretation 
is usually understood in terms of the concept of a “hermeneutic circle.” As with 
any core term of art for philosophy, the hermeneutic circle has different but 
related meanings for major thinkers in the history of philosophy (e.g., Dilthey, 
Heidegger, and Gadamer, the last of whom Lissack and Graber cite in particu-
lar). The practice of hermeneutics first emerged several hundred years ago out 
of the challenge of reading the Bible when its content had become confusing 
or obscure.
In many cases, these obstacles have their source in changes of culture 
over time or location: common knowledge about when and where the text 
was written has become forgotten or is unknown, and the written language 
might have changed, too. The notion of the hermeneutic circle seeks to over-
come these obstacles to interpretation by hypothesizing a coherent meaning 
for the text as a whole, though this meaning is unknown at the start, and 
then using relationships among sentences or other sections of the text to 
resolve local confusions systematically and arrive at an overall interpreta-
tion. Having such an interpretation would allow a reader to understand the 
meaning of the text; for example, to be able to paraphrase or restate the 
meaning of some section in different words without contradicting the con-
tent of other sections.
Developing an interpretation in this way involves several key assumptions 
and consequences. The reader must possess some meanings in common with 
the text, for instance, otherwise there will be no place to start and the text will 
be entirely obscure. The outcome of interpretation also implies a new, higher 
level of understanding between the interpreter and the interpreted. This does 
not necessarily involve agreement, but more generally an increased ability to 
share meaning; for example, to engage in conversation or to argue on terms 
that the opponent recognizes as his or her own.
Most importantly for our purposes, engaging in a hermeneutic circle involves 
a certain risk on the interpreter’s part. Things we take for granted at the outset 
may surface as problematic during the encounter, and coming to an under-
standing of the other may alter our stance toward our own, now explicit back-
ground. In the disciplinary context of philosophy and the study of explanation, 
this background consists primarily of the philosophical tradition or method 
that we bring to the study of concepts. In the language of hermeneutics, this 
background tradition loosely corresponds to a sort of “fore-knowledge” of how 
the analysis of any particular concept will go. This might include expectations 
about the ultimate structure of the analyzed concept, along with the techniques 
or methods that we should use to make progress. An analytic philosopher, 
for instance, might expect an analyzed concept to be formally defined as a 
predicate with a certain semantic extension or in terms of rules of inference 
in an axiomatic theory. This notion of interpretive expectations also reflects 

Explanation and Pluralism  M  253
the partial knowledge and values of the particular person carrying out the 
interpretation, and so is not entirely defined by a general type of philosophy 
or community.
Being “brought up short” or facing a “breakdown” of our fore-knowledge 
is an opening for new possibilities of understanding. It illuminates the inad-
equacy of what we brought to the interpretive process and took for granted as 
sufficient for the task at hand. Similarly, the breakdown demands a response, of 
potentially very different scope depending on the particular difficulty.
An Example from Modes of Explanation
In the case of explanation, the views we seek to understand conflict with each 
other at a depth that throws into doubt the idea that there is a single notion of 
understanding that we can apply to all of them simultaneously. In other words, 
the conflict goes beyond the meaning of explanation itself, because differing 
views of explanation have arisen in part from differing views of the general 
project of investigating the meaning of concepts. As a result, the complexity 
of the discourse around explanation reflects this multiplicity of more general 
commitments: what concepts are, how they acquire meaning, and how we can 
come to know their meaning.
As an example, consider Jonathan Waskan et al.’s paper on psychologism 
and explanation (chapter 15). The key question here is whether something 
can be an explanation independent of any effects it has on our minds. For 
example, consider an incredibly long and complicated description of a series of 
causes leading up to some event: even if this description is unintelligible for any 
human, does it still count as an explanation? The description lacks the capacity 
to produce understanding in us, but it possesses the same sort of basic content 
and structure, a sequence of causal relationships, as descriptions that do have 
these effects. For the latter half of the twentieth century, most philosophers 
believed that psychological effects were irrelevant to the quality of an explana-
tion. It should be an “objective” matter, in the sense that something’s status as 
an explanation is independent of our mind. Waskan et al. point out, though, 
that this can be taken as a claim about how the concept of explanation is actu-
ally used, either by scientists or in common language. In this case, it is relevant 
whether people use explanation in such a way that psychological effects like 
intelligibility do matter.
The difference between psychological and anti-psychological views of con-
cepts can run quite deep. In the strongest form, the difference amounts to the 
claim that meaning is determined by the logical structure of concepts alone—
not how we subjectively experience them—instead of by concepts’ psychologi-
cal roles or effects, which may not be realized or produced by a single logical 
structure. Nersessian (chapter 9) gives a relevant summary of the history of 
explanation in relation to the contexts of discovery and justification. If one 
comes to the topic of explanation with either stance on psychologism as an 
implicit presupposition, the other will initially seem alien or simply wrong. The 
challenge of interpretation is to arrive at a shared horizon of understanding 

254  
M  Beckett Sterner
wherein at least the disagreements make sense as motivated and reasonable 
given a certain starting point, and this may lead us to question the basis of our 
own presuppositions.
For Waskan et al., the basis at risk here is the claim that philosophers 
analyzing explanation have an adequate grasp of the norms that govern the 
use of the term within some community. How do we know that philosophers 
do possess this competency of judgment? For analytical philosophy, this has 
often been construed as an issue of agreement with the community about 
how to classify certain cases as explanatory or not. A classic example would 
be one of the core problematic cases for the deductive-nomological model 
(Hempel and Oppenheim, 1948): the height of a pole explains the length of 
its shadow over time in relation to the sun, but the length of the shadow does 
not explain the height of the pole. Either length can be computed symmetri-
cally from the other using the theory of ray optics, but only one deduction 
counts as explanatory. Another example is the ongoing debate about whether 
the Hodgkin–Huxley model of neuron firing is explanatory (see Craver, 
2008; Levy, 2013).
Philosophers use these cases to test the validity of some account of expla-
nation by comparing how they are classified under the account with the 
accepted correct answers. Scientists, however, rarely engage in this sort of 
project about their own concepts, so it is usually philosophers who develop 
a portfolio of cases and correct classifications. The case where a description 
of a series of causes is too complex to be intelligible has been pivotal for the 
argument against a psychological view of explanation. In an earlier paper, 
however, Waskan et al. write that “in leveling such arguments philosophers 
are presuming that their own judgments about the relevant cases are issuing 
from a mastery of the lay or scientific norms regarding the use of ‘explana-
tion’. Whether or not this presumption is accurate is, we would add, a matter 
best settled through psychological experimentation” (Waskan et al., 2013, 
p. 1014). Two fundamental issues are therefore at stake here: whether concep-
tual meaning is psychological and the epistemic grounds for using cases in 
philosophical analysis.
If we had started with the expectation that conceptual meaning is defined 
solely in terms of logical structure, how should we proceed in the face of this 
challenge to anti-psychologism, especially for the sake of progressing further 
with our inquiry into explanation? This is the challenge of applying our new 
understanding of explanation in terms of the structure of the discourse around 
it. That is, do we reject or embrace the merging of horizons between alterna-
tive views, and do we alter our aims and actions as a result? Do we seek to 
maintain a monolithic anti-psychological view, switch to the opposing view, or 
allow both as options? If we do not contest the basic results of Waskan et al.’s 
paper, then something else will likely have to change in our view of general 
conceptual analysis: perhaps a more negative assessment of the competency of 
philosophers, or a more radical endorsement of psychological experiments as 
an alternative to armchair intuitions. It may also influence our assessments of 
explanatory practices.

Explanation and Pluralism  M  255
Challenges for Pluralism About Explanation
The range of approaches that we see in Modes of Explanation indicates that 
any sort of commensurately broad pluralism about explanation must also dig 
quite deep into our assumptions. I have considered psychologism versus anti-
psychologism in Waskan et al.’s work, but other chapters raise independent 
and similarly deep issues. Mitchell (chapter 10), for example, uses the existence 
of complexity in nature to argue for pluralism about the structural form of 
explanations (“pragmatic laws”) and about the domains of nature, grounded 
in the dynamic emergence of higher-level properties. Narrative, as discussed 
by Rukmini Nair (chapter 11), also introduces a host of complex dimensions, 
including the issue of how we as humans use explanations to make meaning out 
of historically contingent, often unique events in our history: the psychological 
value that we can get from telling a story to explain an event does not depend 
wholly on the story’s truth (Trout 2007), creating an uneasy tension between 
imagination and knowledge. The debate over explanation will not be solved 
with a shallow sort of contextualism, for example, simply recognizing that the 
qualities of an explanation depend on the question at hand and who receives 
the answer.
How, then, can we deal with multiple approaches to a concept that do not 
even agree on common standards for what would count as a good definition for 
a concept? In order to grapple with this difficulty, we need to have a systematic 
sense of the range of possibilities for a pluralistic stance. Indeed, this will be 
valuable even for justifying the rejection of pluralism in favor of a monistic 
view. Fundamentally at issue is the problem of how we judge when a concept 
has been fully analyzed, especially when it resists a universal analysis into a 
single definition. To put it another way: In the face of pluralism, what are 
appropriate standards for investigating a concept that has multiple, partially 
interdependent meanings?
In fact, the possible structures of pluralism are an increasingly pressing 
problem for the field of philosophy of science in general, beyond the topic 
of explanation. For various reasons, a number of key scientific concepts have 
proven resistant to analysis into a single, universal meaning. Philosophers of 
biology, for example, generally view the concepts of biological function, gene, 
and species as having multiple established meanings in biologists’ practices. 
Scientific models are another, more general example. Moreover, philosophers of 
science no longer believe that scientific concepts acquire their meanings solely 
through being part of a scientific theory. Concepts, for example, can function 
in models or in guiding experiments and observations that are autonomous 
from theories. The logical positivists’ original hope of analyzing concepts in 
terms of first-order logic and axiomatic theories has turned out to be only one, 
limited way in which to approach meaning.
More interesting for our purposes is that the multiple meanings of com-
mon scientific concepts often interact in research practices: a computational 
model might help scientists construct a material model, for instance, or know-
ing the biological role function for some part of an animal might suggest new 

256  
M  Beckett Sterner
hypotheses for its evolutionary functions. These interactions can be understood 
in different ways, however. From a monistic perspective, the interdependence 
of the different meanings signals that there is a possibility of synthesis under 
a single definition. From a pluralistic perspective, the interdependence signals 
that we need a systematic account of the nature of their relationships that goes 
beyond a static coexistence of meanings as a bare multitude.
The challenge for pluralism that I suggest here is to describe the variety of 
modes or types of practical interdependence that can exist within a pluralist 
setting. Waskan et al.’s discussion of ontic, epistemic, and pragmatic theories 
of explanation in fact offers a useful launching point for thinking about the 
origins of the variety of pluralisms. In ontic terms, for example, we might 
understand interdependence in terms of there being multiple kinds of causes 
for a phenomenon that are also partially responsible for each other’s existence 
or properties. If we think of a functional system with different types of causal 
components, the components could calibrate, regulate, or otherwise modify 
each other’s states in order to produce the overall system capacity. In epistemic 
terms, interdependence could originate from different limitations on our abil-
ity to know or explain a phenomenon. Imagine that we are studying a dynamic 
phenomenon that crosses over multiple size scales or temperature, so that no 
single lab instrument is able to measure its state over the entire trajectory. We 
might therefore rely on multiple instruments to track the entire process and 
have to coordinate their use as a sort of relay race at the edge of each instru-
ment’s domain of application. In pragmatic terms, interdependence could arise 
among a community of people who are pursuing distinct but related aims. 
One scientist might focus on improving a model’s ability to predict some class 
of events correctly, while another might use this new model to test a novel 
explanation.
Of course, all three of these sources of pluralism can operate simultaneously 
and be arranged in distinctive ways. In Sandra Mitchell’s notion of integra-
tive pluralism, for example, answering a single pragmatic question requires the 
bringing together of multiple epistemic tools such as models due to the under-
lying causal complexity of the phenomena (Mitchell, 2003; Mitchell, 2009). 
Another arrangement, however, might start with multiple, distinct aims that 
have to be addressed by a community across a wide domain of phenomena, 
for example, explanation, prediction, and control as aims across the physical 
sciences. Exactly what sort of pattern would best match the concept of explana-
tion remains an open and extremely important question for anyone considering 
a pluralistic view.

Reprise
Michael Lissack
We often think of the human mind as a computer, one that takes input from its 
surroundings and acts based on our immediate goals. But this view is flawed. 
Rather than working in a logical, controlled manner, the brain multitasks. It 
doesn’t break down in the face of ambiguity but, instead, uses confusion to 
achieve complex thought. When the brain is given conflicting goals or informa-
tion, it uses that conflict to generate novel solutions, sometimes producing ideas 
that have never been thought of before. (Weems, 2014)
W
hen starting on this project to explore “explanation,” I had the some-
what naive idea that perhaps there would exist one or two “homolo-
gies” (underlying samenesses) that would tie together the various 
conceptions of the idea of explanation that I encountered among the various 
sciences, humanities, and everyday life. These homologies would be in contrast 
to the novel solutions of which Weems writes above. In their contributions to 
the afterword, each of the contributing authors seems to entertain that same 
hope. In this, the final section of the volume, I can report success. At least to 
this author, a few such homologies seem to exist.
Explanations are answers to questions—answers that allow the questioner 
to perceive sufficient confidence so as to stop asking those same questions. 
Explanations come in a variety of forms: analytic, causal, description-giving, 
functional, intentional, interpretive, mechanistic, nomic, reason-giving, struc-
tural, and teleological (Faye, 2014). However, common among all these forms 
is the idea that the content of the explanation being offered by the explainer is 
intended to constitute an answer to the questions being posed. Explanations 
help us to cope with that “buzz of dynamic activities, imprecise, riven with 
knowledge absences, and not readily defined—forever ‘under construction,’ in 
part because of its many possible futures, and in part because of its ambiguous 
present and past” (Spender, 2014) that we call “life.”
Heisenberg (1963) told us: “the world is not divided into different groups 
of objects but rather into different groups of relationships . . .  The world thus 
appears as a complicated tissue of events, in which connections of different 
kinds alternate or overlap or combine and thereby determine the texture of the 

258  
M  Michael Lissack
whole.” Explanations help us to understand and make sense of both those con-
nections themselves and how they fit into our lives. Or, as Vaihinger (1924) put 
it: “the object of the world of ideas as a whole is not the portrayal of reality—
this would be an utterly impossible task—but rather to provide us with an 
instrument for finding our way about more easily in this world.”
In the realm of what we have called Science 1, explanations can be judged 
to be explanations by virtue of their content alone. Claims for objectivity and 
“truth” are reflected in the content. This explanatory process can be charted 
as in Figure R.1:
The question-and-answer process is shown as interacting arrows to allow for 
the possibility of dialogue, learning, and revision. The circle that these arrows 
create surrounds a center of coherence (the form of knowledge that allows the 
content to be declared an explanation) and is in turn surrounded by a context. 
There is an observer somewhere in this context who is making the judgments 
regarding the adequacy and coherence of the explanatory content. The circle is 
a flat surface, but it has a front and a back. Where the questions and answers 
are shown on the front surface, the backside holds the assumptions underlying 
the process.
By contrast, in the realm we have called Science 2, explanations can only 
be judged to be explanations by the person receiving the explanation. There 
need not be claim to either objectivity or truth. This explanatory process can 
be charted as in Figure R.2.
The difference between the charts lies in the addition of the “half twist” in 
the “questions asked” arrow. This half twist turns the flat circle into a Mobius 
strip. Mobius strips (as noted in the Introduction) have only one side (not 
two). This means that the hidden assumptions underlying both questions and 
answers are now present as part of the displayed surface, and that the middle of 
the circle (the “coherence” in the first chart) has now joined with the context 
surrounding the circle. In effect, the perspective of the observer has been incor-
porated into the circle itself (and thus no separate observer is shown).
The questioning called for in the Science 2 process can be portrayed as in 
Figure R.3.
This is a redrawing of the question-generation model described in the 
Introduction but now displayed as a Mobius strip.
The homology observed here is that by inserting the half twist, by convert-
ing the flat circle into a Mobius strip, one can portray a constructivist perspec-
tive with what had been a realist diagram. By displaying both, one is thus able 
to capture quite simply the idea of congruent but orthogonal. The Science 1 
process as displayed captures the essence of what will be the synecdoche of the 
described explanatory relation. The Science 2 process as displayed then reveals 
the ongoing questions to be asked about not only that synecdoche but also its 
accompanying fundierung, models, and affordances.
While critics such as McIntyre may opt to decry the use of divisions between 
Science 1 and Science 2 and between realism and constructivism, practitioners 
and pragmatists will discover that the use of these divisions to be displayed 
as both/and (and not as either/or) allows for the very richness of thought that 
 
 
 

Figure R.1 Explanation as content.
Figure R.2 Explanation as understanding.
Figure R.3 The questioning process underlying understanding.

260  
M  Michael Lissack
“good” explanations provide and exposes the lack of such richness that often 
plagues “bad” explanations.
Spender (2014) warns:
Attaching meaning to data is an act of imagination quite distinct from perceiv-
ing the facts (sense-data perhaps). It points to a separation between the real lying 
beyond us and our interpretation of it as the basis for our reasoning about our 
actions. Put differently, despite what we often hear, facts are never self-evident. If 
they were there would be no call for strategic work. Because we are only bound-
edly rational and do not understand everything, or indeed understand anything 
for sure, we proceed through life in a reasoned manner only by constructing a 
world of meanings that structures our life-world, meanings that we project onto 
our situation to make it comprehensible and actionable. We make a practice-
based map. The facts of our situation must be brought into it if they are to shape 
our practice; the map is symbolic, constructed from what we think, it is not an 
objective or factual representation of the real.
When the question asked is in a context that allows for a content-driven response, 
the Science 1 process is more than sufficient and can be efficient. Nevertheless, 
the Science 1 process is a mapping process. The explanation offered is a repre-
sentation of “knowledge” or “truth.” “Learning” from this process is a matter 
of analogical application where the previously identified representation “maps” 
onto some new analogy. By contrast, the Science 2 process is an “understand-
ing” process. The observer (now fully incorporated into the process itself rather 
than standing outside it) develops an understanding that can then be applied 
as a “model” (relying on the Rosen modeling relation discussed in chapters 6 
and 13) to other situations or contexts to which that same observer is exposed. 
Both analogy and understanding can trigger the “this fits” response in the 
observer—the very response that allows the questions to stop being asked and 
the answers to be ascribed the status of “explanations.”
Implicitly, we are intimately aware of these processes. When we choose to 
offer up an “excuse” to someone with whom we are interacting, we call on the 
Science 2 process to help us determine what to offer, how to phrase it, what 
context to attempt to summon up in the other person, and so on. Yet, at the 
same time we know all too well that if that same excuse needs to be offered as 
an explanation in a court of law, it will be treated as if it were a Science 1 pro-
cess. Our ability to interact with the other is captured in our ability to insert 
that half twist and make the underlying assumptions part of the dialogue. 
Once we are “trapped” into a representation (e.g., the Science 1 process), we are 
“stuck” with the content itself and how independent, non-dialogically engaged 
observers may view it.
Content-based mapping explanations are not as “rich” as process-based 
understanding explanations, but each can produce a “fit” when the context 
is right. As Faye (2002) phrased it: “Pre-judgments comprise all the beliefs 
and attitudes constituent in the horizons of understanding we bring to the 
process of understanding. We acquire a fresh understanding whenever our pre-
judgments fail to fit with what we are trying to understand.” Explanations are 
 
 

Reprise  M  261
context dependent and as such their form, purpose, domain, audience, and the 
worldview of both explainer and explainee all matter.
Distinctions such as those between Science 1 and Science 2, realism and 
constructivism, representations and models all can contribute to a better under-
standing of how it is that explanations explain. To ignore these distinctions and 
thus “blur” the mechanics seems only to obscure the issue, and yet, to highlight 
the distinctions in the form of oppositions is to throw away the very homolo-
gies we initially sought.
Explanations function in a world that is congruent but orthogonal—exist-
ing in the simultaneity of the distinctions we might otherwise impose and 
dependent on context far more than content. The key to understanding seems 
to lie in the analogy to the “half twist” of the Mobius strip—through which 
we as observers can enter into the realm of the observed, include our assump-
tions, models, and contexts, and thus make explicit the boundaries we draw 
to define “the explained.” A parallel can be found in cybernetics, which in its 
“first-order” form is about applying the science of “steering” (where content 
and present context are all important) and in its “second-order” form is about 
learning how to be a steerman (where lessons about applications of varying 
content and contexts and the role of the observer as an actor acquire far greater 
importance).
Mapping-style explanations find their optimal use in the world of Science 
1, where the goal is reliable prediction and the assertion of ceteris paribus has 
meaning. Understanding-style explanations find their optimal use in the world 
of Science 2, where the presence of volition, emergence, and reflexive anticipa-
tion means that the goal is attunement to ever-shifting context.
Explaining is the ability to relate a narrative to the questioner, which, at a 
minimum, allows a “fit” between question asked and “attended to” context 
and, in depth in the form of acquired understanding, allows the explainee 
to apply such narrative to new contexts and new questions. The shift from a 
study of explanation to the study of explaining, from content to context, from 
explainer to questioner is analogically captured by the insertion of the half 
twist to convert a flat circle into a Mobius strip. Our understanding of what it 
means “to explain” is enhanced when we remember that both the circle and the 
strip are ever-present, congruent but orthogonal.
“I’ll take a twist with that.”

References
Achinstein, P. (1983). The Nature of Explanation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Achinstein, P. (1984). The pragmatic character of explanation. In: PSA 1984. Vol 2. 
East Lansing, MI: Philosophy of Science Association.
Achinstein, P. (2013). Evidence and Method: Scientific Strategies of Isaac Newton and 
James Clerk Maxwell. New York: Oxford University Press.
Achinstein, P. What Is a ‘Theory of Everything’ and Why Should We Want One?” 
(manuscript)
Allen, T. and Hoekstra, T. (1992, 2015). Toward a Unified Ecology. New York: University 
of Columbia Press.
Allen, T., Tainter, J., and Hoekstra, T. (2003). Supply-side Sustainability. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Annila, A. (2010). The 2nd law of thermodynamics delineates dispersal of energy. 
International Review of Physics 4(1): 29–34.
Annila, A. and Salthe, S. N. (2010). Physical foundations of evolutionary theory. 
Journal of Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics 35(3): 301–321.
Annila, A. and Salthe, S. N. (2012). On intractable tracks. Physics Essays 25(2): 
233–238.
Antaki, C. (1994). Explaining and Arguing: The Social Organization of Accounts. London 
and Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Arbib, M. and Hesse, M. (1986). The Construction of Reality Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press
Aristotle. (1999). Metaphysics, Joe Sachs (trans.). Santa Fe, NM: Green Lion Press.
Ashby, W. R. (1956). An Introduction to Cybernetics. London: Chapman & Hall.
Ashby, W. R. (1958). Requisite variety and its implications for the control of complex 
systems. Cybernetica, ISSN 0011–4227 1(2): 83–99.
Atkinson, R. (2002). An Army at Dawn: The War in North Africa, 1942–1943. New 
York: Henry Holt and Co.
Austin, M. (2014). “Creation vs Evolution” Is Not a Debate—It’s Two (February 6, 
2014) retrieved from http://ivn.us/2014/02/06/creation-vs-evolution-debate-two/
Bakhtin, M. (1981). The Dialogic Imagination. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Barker, G. and Odling-Smee, F. J. (2014). Integrating ecology and evolution: Niche 
construction and ecological engineering. In G. Barker, G. E. Desjardins, and T. 
Pearce (eds), Entangled Life: Organisms and Environment in the Biological and Social 
Sciences: History, Philosophy and Theory of the Life Sciences. New York: Springer, 
pp. 187–211.

264  
M  References
Barondes R. (1995). The Limits of Quantitative Legal Analyses: Chaos in Legal 
Scholarship and FDIC v. W.R. Grace & (and) Co., 48 Rutgers Law. Rev. 161.
Bauerlein, M. (1997). Pragmatic Mind: Explorations in the Psychology of Belief. Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press.
Beatty, J. (1995). The evolutionary contingency thesis. In G. Wolters and G. J. Lennox 
(Eds.), Concepts, Theories, and Rationality inthe Biological Sciences. Pittsburgh: 
Pittsburgh University Press, pp. 45–81.
Bechtel, W. (1987). Psycholinguistics as a case of cross-disciplinary research. Synthese 
72 (September): 293–311.
Bechtel, W. (2006). Discovering Cell Mechanisms: The Creation of Modern Cell Biology. 
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Bechtel, W. (2008). Mental Mechanisms: Philosophical Perspectives on Cognitive 
Neuroscience. New York: Routledge.
Bechtel, W. (2011). Mechanism and Biological Explanation. Philosophy of Science 78: 
533–557.
Bechtel, W. (2012). Identity, reduction, and conserved mechanisms: Perspectives 
from circadian rhythm research. In S. Gozzano and C. Hill (eds), The Mental, The 
Physical: New Perspectives on Type Identity. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University 
Press, pp. 43–65.
Bechtel, W. and Abrahamsen, A. (2005). Explanation: A mechanist alternative. Studies 
in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, ISSN 1369–8486 36: 
421–444.
Bechtel, W. and Abrahamsen, A. (in 2010). Dynamic mechanistic explanation: 
Computational modeling of circadian rhythms as an exemplar for cognitive science. 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A 41: 321–333.
Bechtel, W. and Abrahamsen, A. (2011). Complex biological mechanisms: Cyclic, 
oscillatory, and autonomous. In C. A. Hooker (ed.), Philosophy of Complex 
Systems. Handbook of the Philosophy of Science, Volume 10. New York: Elsevier, 
pp. 257–285.
Beck, U. (1996). The Reinvention of Politics: Rethinking Modernity in the Global Social 
Order. Cambridge, MA: Polity Press.
Behe, M. (2007). The Edge of Evolution: The Search for the Limits of Darwinism. New 
York: Free Press.
Bernstein, R. J. (1982). From hermeneutics to praxis. Review of Metaphysics 35(4): 
823–845.
Bex F. J. and Walton D. (2010). Burdens and Standards of Proof for Inference to the 
Best Explanation. In R. Winkels (ed.): Legal Knowledge and Information Systems. 
JURIX 2010: The 23rd Annual Conference. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and 
Applications 223: 37–46. Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Bex, F. J. and Walton D. (2012). Burdens and standards of proof for inference to the 
best explanation: Three case studies. Law, Probability and Risk 11(2–3): 113–133.
Bhaskar, R. (1978). A Realist Theory of Science, 2nd ed. Hassocks, NJ: Humanities 
Press. Original edition, Leeds, UK: Harvester.
Blunden, A. (2009). Critical Realism and Reality. Retrieved from http://home.mira.
net/~andy/works/bhaskar.htm
Boden, M. (1962). The paradox of explanation. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 
62: 159–178.
Bohm, D. (1980). Wholeness and the Implicate Order. P4. London: Routledge.
Bourdieu, P. (1997/2000). Pascalian Meditations. Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

References  M  265
Box, G. and. Draper, N (1987). Empirical Model-Building and Response Surfaces. New 
York: Wiley.
Boyd, R. (1983). On the current status of the issue of scientific realism. Erkenntnis 
19(1/3): 45–90.
Brandon, R. (1997). Does biology have laws? The experimental evidence. Philosophy 
of Science, Vol. 64, Supplement. Proceedings of the 1996 Biennial Meetings of the 
Philosophy of Science Association. Part II: Symposia Papers (December, 1997), pp. 
S444–S457.
Braverman, M., Clevenger, J., Harmon, I., Higgins, A., Horne, Z., Spino, J., and 
Waskan, J. (2012). Intelligibility is necessary for explanation but accuracy may not 
be. Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science 
Society.
Brewer, W. F. (2001). Models in science and mental models in scientists and nonscien-
tists. Mind & Society 2(2): 33–48.
Brewer, W. F., Chinn, C. A., and Samarapungavan, A. (1998). Explanation in scientists 
and children. Minds and Machines 8: 119–136.
Broad, C. D. (1925) The Mind and Its Place in Nature. New York: Harcourt, Brace & 
Company.
Brooks, D. R. (2011) The extended synthesis: something old, something new. Evolution: 
Education and Outreach 4(1): 3–7.
Brooks, D. R. and Agosta, S. J. (2012). Children of time. Zoologia 6(December): 
497–514.
Bruner, J. (1986). Actual Minds, Possible Worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Bruner, J. (1990). Acts of Meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bunge, M. (1959). Causality and Modern Science. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Bunge, M. (1997). Mechanism and explanation. Philosophy of the Social Sciences 27(4): 
410–465.
Bunzl, M. (1993). The Context of Explanation. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Cabrera, D. (2008). Distinctions, systems, relationships, perspectives: The simple rules 
of complex conceptual systems. Paper presented at the ISSS—52nd Annual Meeting 
of the International Society for the Systems Sciences, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, WI, USA. 1999–6918. http://journals.isss.org/index.php/proceedings52nd/
article/viewFile/862/384
Cabrera, D., Colosi, L., and Lobdell, C. (2008). Systems thinking. Evaluation and 
Program Planning, ISSN 0149–7189 31(3): 299–310.
Candy P. (1991). Self-direction for Lifelong Learning: A Comprehensive Guide to Theory 
and Practice. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Carlucci, L., Case, J., Jain S., and Stephan, F. (2007). Results on memory-limited 
U-shaped learning. Information and Computation 205(10): 1551–1573.
Carnap, R. (1950). Meaning and Necessity. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 
Original edition in Revue International de Philosophie 4: 20–40.
Carr, D. (2008). Narrative explanation and its malcontents. History and Theory 47(1): 
19–30.
Cartwright, N. (1980). The truth doesn’t explain much. American Philosophical 
Quarterly 17(2): 159–163
Cartwright, N. (1983). How the Laws of Physics Lie. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Cartwright, N. (1999). The Dappled World: A Study of the Boundaries of Science. 
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

266  
M  References
Cartwright, N. C. (1994). Fundamentalism vs. the Patchwork of Laws. Proceedings of 
the Aristotelian Society XCIV: 279–292.
Chalmers, D. (2012). Constructing the World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chicago Social Brain Network (2011). Invisible Forces and Powerful Beliefs Gravity, 
Gods, and Minds. Upper Saddle River, NJ: FT Press.
Chickering, D. (1995). Learning Bayesian networks is NP-complete. In D. Fisher and 
H. Lenz (eds), Learning from Data: Artificial Intelligence and Statistics V. Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag, pp. 121–130.
Chickering, D. and Meek, C. (2002). Finding optimal Bayesian networks. In A. Darwiche 
and N. Friedman (eds), Proceedings of the Eighteenth Conference on Uncertainty in 
Artificial Intelligence. Burlington, MA: Morgan Kaufmann, pp. 94–102.
Chomsky, N. (2008) The Essential Chomsky. New York: The New Press.
Churchland, P. M. (1989). A Neurocomputational Perspective: The Nature of Mind and 
the Structure of Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Coetzee, J. M. (2004). Elizabeth Costello. New York: Penguin Books.
Cohen, J. (1971). Mathematics as metaphor: A review of dynamical system theory in 
biology. Vol. 1, stability theory and its applications by Robert Rosen. Science, New 
Series 172(3984): 674–675.
Connell, J. H. (1980). Diversity and the coevolution of competitors, or the ghost of 
competition past. OIKOS 35: 131–138.
Conway, M. S. (2010). Evolution: like any other science it is predictable. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 365(1537): 133–145.
Cornwell, J. (2004). Explanations: Styles of Explanation in Science. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Craik, K. (1943). The Nature of Explanation. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University 
Press.
Craver, C. F. (2005). Beyond reduction: mechanisms, multifield integration and 
the unity of neuroscience. Studies in the History and Philosophy of Biological and 
Biomedical Sciences 36(2): 373–395.
Craver, C. F. (2006). When mechanistic models explain. Synthese 153(3): 355–376.
Craver, C. F. (2007). Explaining the Brain. New York: Oxford University Press.
Craver, C. F. (2014). The ontic conception of scientific explanation. In Andreas 
Hütteman and Marie Kaiser (eds), Explanation in the Special Sciences: The Case of 
Biology and History New York: Springer, pp. 27–54.
Craver, C. F. and Darden, L. (2013). In Search of Mechanisms: Discoveries Across the Life 
Sciences. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Cummins, R. (1998). Reflections on reflective equilibrium. In M. Depaul and W. 
Ramsey (eds), Rethinking Intuition. New York: Roman and Littlefield, pp. 113–127.
Cupchik, G. (2001). Constructivist Realism: An Ontology That Encompasses 
Positivist and Constructivist Approaches to the Social Sciences. Forum Qualitative 
Sozialforschung/Forum: Qualitative Social Research, [S.l.], v. 2, n. 1, February.
Curseu, P. L., Schalk, R., and Schruijer, S. (2010). The use of cognitive mapping in 
eliciting and evaluating group cognitions. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, ISSN 
0021–9029 40(5): 1258–1291.
Dallmyr, F. (2013). Being in the World: Dialogue and Cosmopolis. Lexington, KY: 
University Press of Kentucky.
Danto A. (1985). Narration and Knowledge. New York: Columbia University Press.
Darden, L. (2006). Reasoning in Biological Discoveries. New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Darden, L. (2008). Thinking again about mechanisms. Philosophy of Science 75(5): 
958–969.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

References  M  267
Darwin, C., Ekman, P., and Prodger P. (1872/1998). The Expression of the Emotions in 
Man and Animals, 3rd ed. London: Harper Collins.
de Caro, M. and Ferraris, M. (2013). New Realism: Ontology and Epistemology (down-
loaded from http://philo-sci21.fc.ul.pt/wp-content/.../2013/05/S62.pdf).
De Cruz, H. and De Smedt, J. (2013). The value of epistemic disagreement in scientific 
practice. The case of Homo floresiensis. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
Part A 44(2): 169–177.
de Regt, H. (2013). Understanding and explanation: living apart together? Introduction 
to special issue ‘Understanding without explanation’. Studies in History and Philosophy 
of Science A 44(3): 505–509.
de Regt, H. and Dieks, D. (2003). A Contextual Approach to Scientific Understanding. 
[Preprint].
de Sanctis, S. (2012). Postmodernism with a Human Face, Nude Review, May, http://
nude-literaryreview.com/en/05152012_postmodernism_human_face.htm
Dennett, D. (1994). The role of language in intelligence. In Jean Khalfa (ed.), What 
is Intelligence? The Darwin College Lectures. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University 
Press, pp. 161–178.
Devitt, M. (1991/1997). Realism and Truth, 2nd edition. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Dewey, J. (1929). The Quest for Certainty: A Study of the Relation of Knowledge and 
Action. New York: Minton, Balch.
Dewey, J. (1934). Art as Experience. New York: Minton Balch & Company.
Dieks, D., Gonzalez, W. J., Hartmann, S., Uebel, Th., and Weber, M. (eds) (2011). 
Explanation, Prediction, and Confirmation Series: The Philosophy of Science in a 
European Perspective, Vol. 2. Dordrecht: Springer.
Dray, W. H. (1957). Laws and Explanations in History. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Dubin, R. (1978). Theory Building, Revised ed.). London: Free Press.
Duhem, P. (1906/1954). The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Dummett, M. (1982). Realism. Synthese 52(1):145–165.
Earman, J. (1992). Bayes or Bust? A Critical Examination of Bayesian Confirmation 
Theory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Eco, U. (1994). Six Walks in the Fictional Woods. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Eco, U. (1997). The Search for the Perfect Language (The Making of Europe). London: 
Wiley-Blackwell.
Eco, U. (1999). Kant and the Platypus—Essays on Language and Cognition. London: 
Secker & Warburg.
Edmonds, B. (2001). The use of models—making MABS actually work. In. S. Moss 
and P. Davidsson (eds), Multi Agent Based Simulation, Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intelligence, 1979, pp. 15–32. (http://cfpm.org/cpmrep74.html).
Edmonds, B. and Hales, D. (2005). Computational simulation as theoretical experiment. 
Journal of Mathematical Sociology 29(3): 209–232. http://cfpm.org/cpmrep106.html.
Edmonds, B. (2013). Complexity and context-dependency. Foundations of Science 18(4): 
745–755.
Einstein, A. (1934/1954). Principles of research. In Carl Seelig (ed.), Ideas and Opinions 
by Albert Einstein (Sonja Bargmann, Trans.). New York: Crown Publishers.
Elgin C. (2010). Review of Henk W. De Regt, Sabina Leonelli, Kai Eigner (eds), 
Scientific Understanding: Philosophical Perspectives. Notre Dame Philosophical 
Reviews 2010(1).

268  
M  References
Ellerman, D. (2009). Counting distinctions: on the conceptual foundations of 
Shannon’s information theory. Synthese 168(1): 119–149.
Elster, J. (2007). Explaining Social Behavior. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University 
Press.
Emmeche, C., Køppe, S., and Stjernfelt, F. (2000). Levels, emergence, and three ver-
sions of downward causation. In P. B. Andersen, C. Emmeche, N. O. Finnemann 
and P. Voetmann Christiansen (eds), Downward Casation. Minds, Bodies and Matter. 
Århus: Aarhus University Press, pp. 13–34.
Epstein, C. (2013). Constructivism or the eternal return of universals in International 
Relations: Why returning to language is vital to prolonging the owl’s flight. European 
Journal of International Relations 19(3): 499.
Erbele, T. S. (2014). Methodological implications of phenomenological life-world 
analysis. In M. Staudigl and G. Berguno (eds), Schutzian Phenomenology and 
Hermeneutic 9 Traditions, Contributions to Phenomenology 68. Dordrecht: Springer 
Science+Business Media.
Faye, J. (1991). Niels Bohr: His Heritage and Legacy. Dordrecht: Kluwer Publisher.
Faye, J. (2002). Rethinking Science: A Philosophical Introduction to the Unity of Science. 
London: Ashgate.
Faye, J. (2007). The pragmatic-rhetorical theory of explanation. In J. Persson and P. 
Ylikoski (eds), Rethinking Explanation, Boston Studies In The Philosophy Of Science 
Volume 252, 2007. New York: Springer, pp. 43–68.
Faye, J. (2011). Explanation and interpretation in the sciences of man. In D. Dieks, 
W. J. Gonzalez, S. Hartmann, Th. Uebel, M. Weber (eds), Explanation, Prediction, 
and Confirmation Series: The Philosophy of Science in a European Perspective, Vol. 2, 
Springer.
Faye, J. (2012). After Postmodernism: A Naturalistic Reconstruction of the Humanities. 
London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Faye, J. (2014). The Nature of Scientific Thinking: On Interpretation, Explanation, and 
Understanding. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Fodor, J. and Piattelli-Palmarini, M. (2010). What Darwin Got Wrong. New York: 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Francis, D. (2005). Using Wittgenstein to respecify constructivism. Human Studies 
28(3): 251–290.
Franklin, A., Lang, M., Leeds, S., and Cleland, C. (2002). Methodological and 
epistemic differences between historical science and experimental science. Philosophy 
of Science 10(69): 474–496. DOI:10.1086/342455.
Friedman, D. (1997). Hidden Order: The Economics of Everyday Life. New York: 
HarperBusiness.
Friedman, K. (2003). Theory construction in design research: Criteria, approaches, 
and methods. Design Studies, ISSN 0142–694X, 24(6): 507–522.
Friedman M. (1953). Essays in Positive Economics. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press.
Friedman, M. (1974). Explanation and Scientific Understanding. Journal of Philosophy 
71(1): 5–19.
Friedman, M. (1986). Foundations of Space–Time Theories: Relativistic Physics and the 
Philosophy of Science. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Fromm, E. (1947). Man For Himself: An Inquiry Into the Psychology of Ethics. New York: 
Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Funtowicz, S. and Ravetz, J. (1992). The good, the true, and the post-modern. Futures 
24(10): 963–976.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

References  M  269
Gabriel, M. (2012). Prospects for a New Realism, International Conference, 26th to 
28th March 2012, University of Bonn, http://new-realism.de/program.php.
Gadamer, H. G. (1960). Warheit und Methode [Truth and Method]. New York: 
Tubingen.
Garey, M. and Johnson, D. (1979). Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory 
of NP-Completeness. New York: W.H. Freeman. Gebharter, A. and Kaiser, M. (2014). 
Causal graphs and biological mechanisms. In M. Kaiser, O. Scholz, D. Plenge, and 
A. Hüttemann (eds), Explanation in the Special Sciences: The Case of Biology and 
History. New York: Springer, pp. 55–85.
Gee, H. (1999). In Search of Deep Time. New York: The Free Press.
Georgiev, G. V., Nagai, Y., and Taura, T. (2010). A method for the evaluation of mean-
ing structures and its application in conceptual design. Journal of Design Research 
8(3): 214–234.
Gibson, J. J. (1977). The theory of affordances. In R. Shaw and J. Bransford (eds), 
Perceiving, Acting, and Knowing: Toward an Ecological Psychology. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum, pp. 67–82.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. London: Erlbaum.
Giere, R. (2006). Scientific Perspectivism. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Gilovich, T. (1991). How We Know What Isn’t So: The Fallibility of Human Reason in 
Everyday Life. New York: Free Press.
Glennan, S. (2002). Rethinking mechanistic explanation. Philosophy of Science 69(3): 
S342–S353.
Glennan, S. (2005). Modeling mechanisms. Studies in History and Philosophy of 
Biological and Biomedical Sciences 36(2005): 443–464.
Glennan, S. (2013). Singular and general causal relations: A mechanist perspective. In 
P. Illari, F. Russo, J. Williamson (eds), Causality in the Sciences. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Glennan, S. (2014). Aspects of Human Historiographic Explanation: A View from the 
Philosophy of Science. In Explanation in the Special Sciences, Kaiser, M Scholz, O. 
Plenge, D and Hüttemann, A (eds). Synthese Library Volume 367, Springer
Glymour, C. N. (1980). Theory and Evidence. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.
Glymour, C. (2013). Probability and the explanatory virtues. The British Journal for the 
Philosophy of Science 54(2): 245–259.
Glynos, J. and Howarth, D. (2007). Logics of Critical Explanation in Social and Political 
Theory. London: Routledge.
Goldstein, J. (1999). Emergence as a construct: History and issues. Emergence: 
Complexity and Organization 1(1): 49–72.
Goodman, N. (1955). Fact, Fiction, and Forecast. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Goodman, N. (1978). Ways of Worldmaking. Hassocks: Harvester.
Goodman, N. (1984). On Minds and Other Matters. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Gopnik, A. (2000). Explanation as orgasm and the drive for causal understanding. 
The evolution, function and phenomenology of the theorv-formation system. In F. 
KeiJ and R. Wilson (eds), Cognition and Explanation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
pp. 299·323.
Gould, S. (2011). I Have Landed. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gould, S. J. and Lewontin, R. C. (1979). The Spandrels of San Marco and the 
Panglossian Paradigm: A Critique of the Adaptationist Programme. Proceedings of 

270  
M  References
the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences 205(1161), The Evolution of 
Adaptation by Natural Selection (September 21, 1979): 581–598.
Graham, G. (1983). Historical Explanation Reconsidered. Aberdeen: Aberdeen University 
Press.
Greene, B. (2003). The Elegant Universe, 2nd ed. New York: Norton and Co.
Habermas, J. (1996). Between Facts and Norms – Contributions to a Discourse Theory of 
Law and Democracy. Cambridge, MA: Polity Press.
Hacking, I. (1995). The looping effects of human kinds. In D. Sperber, D. Premack and 
A. Premack (eds), Causal Cognition. An Interdisciplinary Approach.. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, pp. 351–383.
Hansen, L. (2006) Security as Practice. London and New York: Routledge.
Hanson, N. R. (1958). Patterns of Discovery. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Harre, R. (1986). Varieties of Realism: A Rationale for the Natural Sciences. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Harris, S., Sheth, S. A., and Cohen, M. S. (2008). Functional neuroimaging of belief, 
disbelief, and uncertainty. Annals of Neurology 63(2): 141–147.
Harman, G. and Kulkarni, S. (2012) Reliable Reasoning: Induction and Statistical 
Learning Theory. New York: Bradford.
Hartman, G. (1999). Saving The Text: Literature, Derrida, Philosophy. Baltimore, MD: 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Hawking, S. and Mlodinow, L. (2011). The Grand Design. New York: Bantam.
Hayles, N. K. (1990). Chaos Bound: Orderly Disorder in Contemporary Literature and 
Science. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Hayles, N. K. (1999). How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, 
Literature and Informatics. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Haynie, D. T. (2000). Biological Thermodynamics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Heeren, F. (1995). Show Me God: What the Message from Space is Telling Us about 
God, Vol. I. Wonders That Witness to the Bible’s Truth. Wheeling, IL: Searchlight 
Publications.
Hempel, C. and Oppenheim, P. (1948). Studies in the logic of explanation. In Hempel 
(1965), pp. 245–290. [originally in: Philosophy of Science 15].
Hempel, C. (1962). Explanation in science and history. In R. G. Colodny (ed.), Frontiers 
of Science and Philosophy. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, pp. 7–33.
Hempel, C. G. (1965). Aspects of Scientific Explanation and Other Essays in the Philosophy 
of Science. New York: The Free Press.
Hempel, C. (1966). Philosophy of Natural Science. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall.
Henderson, D. and Horgan, T. 2011, The Epistemological Spectrum: At the Interface of 
Cognitive Science and Conceptual Analysis. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hendriks-Jansen, H. (1996). Catching Ourselves in the Act: Situated Activity, Interactive 
Emergence, Evolution, and Human Thought. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Herman, D. (2013). Storytelling and the Sciences of Mind. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Hesse, M. (1963). Models and Analogies in Science. London, England: Sheed and 
Ward.
Hesse, M. (1965). The explanatory function of metaphor. In Y. Bar-Hillel (ed.), 
Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy of science. Amsterdam, Holland: Publishing Co., 
pp. 249–259.
Hilton, D. (January 1990). Conversational processes and causal explanation. 
Psychological Bulletin 107(1): 65–81.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

References  M  271
Hiltzik, M. (2014). Creationism again stalks the classroom., Los Angeles Times, January 
22.
Hon, G. (2001). Introduction: The why and how of explanation: An analytical exposi-
tion. In G. Hon and Rakover, Sam S. (eds), Explanation: Theoretical Approaches and 
Applications. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 1–42.
Hon, G., and Rakover, Sam S. (eds) (2001). Explanation: Theoretical Approaches and 
Applications. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Hong F. (2013). The role of pattern recognition in creative problem solving: A case 
study in search of new mathematics for biology, Progress in Biophysics and Molecular 
Biology 113(1) (September 2013): 181–215.
Howard, D. (1998). Interview in the Wall Street Journal as cited by Jonny Scaramanga, 
Darwin inspired Hitler: Lies they teach in Texas, Salon, October, 25, 2013.
Hull, D. L. (1988). Science as a Process: An Evolutionary Account of the Social and 
Conceptual Development of Science. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Humphreys, P. (1989). Scientific explanation: The causes, some of the causes, and 
nothing but the causes. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 13: 283–306.
Jain, S., Osherson, D., Rover, J., and Sharma, A. (1999). Systems that Learn, 2nd edn. 
Cambridge: MIT Press.
James, W. (1907). Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press.
James, W. (1909). The Meaning of Truth: A Sequel to “Pragmatism”. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press.
Johnson, P. (1992). Creator or Blind Watchmaker? First Things. downloaded from http://
www.firstthings.com/article/2008/04/001-creator-or-blind-watchmaker and refer-
enced at http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/johnson.html
Johnson, P. E. (1995). Reason in the Balance: The Case Against Naturalism in Science, 
Law, and Education. Downer’s Grove, Illinois: InterVarsity Press.
Juarrero, A. (1993). From Modern roots to postmodern rhizomes. Diogenes 41–3: 
27–43.
Juarrero, A. (1999). Dynamics in Action: Intentional Behavior as a Complex System. 
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Juarrero-Roque, A. (1985). Kant’s concept of teleology and modern chemistry. Review 
of Metaphysics 39: 107–135.
Kagan, J. (2009). The three cultures: Natural sciences, social sciences, and the humanities 
in the 21st century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking Fast and Slow. London: Allen Lane.
Kaidesoja, T. (2013). Naturalizing Critical Realist Social Ontology. New York: 
Routledge.
Kaiser, M. Scholz, O. Plenge, D., and Hüttemann, A. (eds) (2014). Explanation in the 
Special Sciences: The Case of Biology and History Synthese. Library Volume 367, New 
York: Springer.
Kampis, G. (1991). Self-Modifying Systems in Biology and Cognitive Science: A New 
Framework for Dynamics, Information and Complexity. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Kant, I. (1892, 1952, 2007). Critique of Judgement, James Creed Meredith (trans.). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Karsenti, E. (2008). Self-organization in cell biology: A brief history. Nature Reviews 
Molecular Cell Biology 9(3) (March): 255–262.
Keefe, R. (2000). Theories of Vagueness. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Keefe, R. and P. Smith. (1999). Introduction: Theories of vagueness. In R. Keefe and P. 
Smith (eds), Vagueness: A Reader. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 1–57.

272  
M  References
Keil, F. C. (2006). Explanation and understanding. Annual Review of Psychology 57: 
227–254.
Kellert S. (2009). Borrowed Knowledge: Chaos Theory and the Challenge of Learning 
across Disciplines. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Kelly, G. (1955/1991). The Psychology of Personal Constructs: Vol. 1. A Theory of 
Personality. London: Routledge.
Kelly, K. (1996). The Logic of Reliable Inquiry. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kelly, K. (2002). Efficient convergence implies Ockham’s razor. Proceedings of the 
2002 International Workshop on Computational Models of Scientific Reasoning and 
Applications, Las Vegas, NV, June 24–27.
Kelly, K. (2004). Justification as truth-finding efficiency: How Ockham’s razor works. 
Minds and Machines 14: 485–505.
Kelly, K. (2007a). Ockham’s razor, empirical complexity, and truth-finding efficiency. 
Theoretical Computer Science 383(2–3): 270–289.
Kelly, K. (2007b). A new solution to the puzzle of simplicity. Philosophy of Science 74(5): 
561–573.
Kelly, K. (2008). Ockham’s razor, truth, and information. In J. van Bethem and P. 
Adriaans (eds), Handbook of the Philosophy of Information. Dordrecht: Elsevier.
Kelly, K. (2010) Simplicity, truth, and probability. In P. Banyopadhyay and M. Forster 
(eds), Handbook on the Philosophy of Statistics. Dordrecht: Elsevier, pp. 983–1026.
Kelly, K. and Glymour, C. (2004). Why probability does not capture the logic of sci-
entific justification. In C. Hitchcock (ed.), Contemporary Debates in the Philosophy of 
Science. London: Blackwell, pp. 94–114.
Kelly, K. and Mayo-Wilson, C. (2010). Causal conclusions that flip repeatedly and 
their justification. In P. R. Gruenwald and P. Spirtes (eds), Proceedings of the 26th 
Conference on Uncertainty and Artificial Intelligence. Arlington, VA: AUAI Press, 
pp. 277–285.
Keynes, J. (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. London: 
Williams and Norgate.
Kim, J. (1990). Supervenience as a philosophical concept. Metaphilosophy 21(1–2): 1–27.
Kim, J. (1999). Making sense of emergence. Philosophical Studies 95: 3–36.
Kim, J. (2005). Physicalism, or Something Near Enough. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press.
Kitcher, P. (1993). The Advancement of Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kitcher, P. (1989). Explanatory unification and the causal structure of the world. In P. 
Kitcher and W. C. Salmon (eds), Scientific Explanation. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, pp. 410–505.
Kitcher. P. and Immerwahr, D. (2007). History and the Sciences Action, Art, History: 
Engagements, with Arthur Danto. Herwitz D, Kelly M. (eds). New York: Columbia 
University Press, pp. 198–226.
Kleidon, A. (2010). A basic introduction to the thermodynamics of the Earth system 
far from equilibrium, and maximum entropy production. Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society B 365: 1303–1315.
Klochko, V. E. (2010). Cultural-historical psychology of L. S. Vygotsky: Exploring the 
logic of multidimensionality. In Y. P. Zinchenko and V. F. Petrenko (eds), Psychology 
in Russia: State of the Art. Moscow: Moscow State University Press, pp. 25–40.
Koestler, A. (1967). The Ghost in the Machine. New York: MacMillan.
Kopplin Z. (2014). Texas Public Schools Are Teaching Creationism Jan. 16, Slate.
Korzybski, A. (1994). Science and Sanity, 5th Edition. Englewood, NJ: Institute of 
General Semantics.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

References  M  273
Koslowski, P. (2006). The Discovery of Historicity in German Idealism and Historicism. 
New York: Springer.
Kuhn, T. (1957). The Copernican Revolution. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Kuhn, T. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Kuhn, T. (1970). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2nd ed., Chicago, IL: Chicago 
University of Chicago Press.
Kukla, A. (2000). Social Constructivism and the Philosophy of Science. London/New 
York: Routledge.
Labov, W and Waletzky J. (1967). Narrative analysis. In J. Helm (ed.), Essays on the 
Verbal and Visual Arts. Seattle: University of Washington Press, pp. 12–44.
Lakatos, I (1970). Falsification and the methodology of scientific research programmes. 
In I. Lakatos and A. Musgrave (eds), Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge. New York: 
Cambridge University Press, pp. 91–96.
Lane, D. A. (1992). Artificial worlds and economies, Working Paper for the Santa Fe 
Research Program: 62. Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA. http://www.santafe.edu/media/
workingpapers/92-09-048.pdf
Laughlin, R. B. and Pines D. (2000). The theory of everything. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 97(1): 28–31.
Lee, T. D. and Yang, C. N. (1957). Question of parity conservation in weak interac-
tions. Physical Review, 104: 254–258.
Letiche, H. (2012). Belief, parrhesia and practice. In P. Case, H. Hopfl, and H. Letiche 
(eds), Belief & Organization. London: Palgrave, pp. 204–228.
Letiche, H., Lissack, M. and Schultz R. (2011). Coherence in the Midst of Complexity: 
Advances in Social Complexity Theory. New York: Palgrave.
Letiche, H. and Moriceau, J. L. (2012). Hadot and Philosophy as a way of organi-
zational life. In P. Case, H. Hopfl, and H. Letiche (eds), Belief & Organization. 
London: Palgrave, pp. 31–50.
Levi M. J. (2011). The Explanation of Social Action. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Levins, R. (1966). The strategy of model building in population biology. American 
Scientist 54: 421–431.
Lincoln, Y. S. and Guba, E. G. (2000). Paradigmatic controversies, contradictions, 
and emerging confluences. In Norman K. Denzin and Yvonna S. Lincoln (eds), The 
Handbook of Qualitative Research (2nd edition). London: Sage, pp.163–188.
Lipton, P. (1991). Inference to the Best Explanation. London: Routledge and Kegan 
Paul.
Lipton, P. (2004). Inference to the Best Explanation, 2nd ed. London: Routledge.
Lissack, M. and Roos, J. (1999). The Next Common Sense: Mastering Corporate Complexity 
through Coherence. London: Nicholas Brealey Publishing.
Lloyd, M. C. (1923). Emergent Evolution. London: Williams and Norgate.
Loewenstein, G., Weber, E. U., Hsee, C. K., and Welch, N. (2001). Risk as feelings. 
Psychological Bulletin, 127(2): 267–286.
Lombrozo, T. and Carey, S. (2006). Functional explanation and the function of expla-
nation. Cognition 99(2): 167–204.
Lorand, R. (2001). Are there aesthetic explanations? In G. Hon and S. Rakover 
Sam (eds), Explanation: Theoretical Approaches and Applications. Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Louisiana Science Education Act (2008).

274  
M  References
Lundberg, G. (1939). Foundations of Sociology. New York: The Macmillan Co.
Luskin, C. (2014) quoted in Mooney, Chris. Science Deniers Are Freaking Out 
About “Cosmos” Mother Jones, March 17, http://www.motherjones.com/blue-
marble/2014/03/science-deniers-cosmos-neil-tyson
Machamer, P., Darden, L., and Craver, C. F. (2000). Thinking about mechanisms. 
Philosophy of Science 67: 1–25.
Machlup, F. (1955). The problem of verification in economics. Southern Economic 
Journal 22(1) (July 1955): 1–21.
Macklem, P. (2008). Emergent phenomena and the secrets of life. Journal of Applied 
Physiology 104(6): 1844–1846.
MacMillan, D. (2014). As a Reformed Creationist, I Hope Bill Nye Doesn’t 
Underestimate Ken Ham, writing in the Huffington Post 01/23/2014 http://www.
huffingtonpost.com/david-macmillan/bill-nye-ken-ham-debate_b_4651407.html
Magnus R. (2008). Biosemiotics within and without biological holism: A semio-histor-
ical analysis. Biosemiotics 1 (3): 379–396.
Maillat D. (2013). Constraining context selection: On the pragmatic inevitability of 
manipulation. Journal of Pragmatics 59: 190–199.
Maki, U. (2005). Reglobalising realism by going local, or (how) should our formulations 
of scientific realism be informed about the sciences. Erkenntnis 63(2): 231–251.
Malament, D. (1977). Causal theories of time and the conventionality of simultaneity. 
Nous 11(3): 293–300.
Malinowski, B. (1955). Myth in Primitive Psychology. Magic, Science and Religion. New 
York: Doubleday.
Malle, B. F. (2004). How the Mind Explains Behavior: Folk Explanations, Meaning, and 
Social Interaction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Marx, K. (1845). Theses On Feuerbach, http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/
works/1845/theses/theses.htm
Matsuno, K. and Salthe, S. (2000). Global idealism/local materialism. Biology and 
Philosophy 10(3): 309–337,
Matthews, M. (2000). Science education, teacher education, and culture, time for sci-
ence education. Innovations in Science Education and Technology 8: 321–351.
Maxwell, J. (1965). Scientific Papers, W. D. Niven (ed.). New York: Dover.
McCloskey, D. (2010). Bourgeois Dignity: Why Economics Can’t Explain the Modern 
World. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
McGhee, G. (2011). Convergent Evolution: Limited Forms Most Beautiful (Vienna Series 
in Theoretical Biology). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
McGrenere, J. and Ho, W. (2000). Affordances: Clarifying and evolving a concept. 
Proceedings of Graphics Interface (Montreal) 179–186.
McIntyre, L. (2000). Reduction, supervenience, and the autonomy of social Scientific 
Laws. Theory and Decision 48: 101–122.
McMullin E. (1985). Galilean idealization. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
Part A 16(3): 247–273.
Meehl, P. E. (1992). Cliometric metatheory: The actuarial approach to empirical, 
history-based philosophy of science. Psychological Reports, ISSN 0033–2941, 71: 
339–467.
Mele, A. R. (2001). Self-deception Unmasked. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.
Meyer, S. (2013). Darwin’s Doubt: The Explosive Origin of Animal Life and the Case for 
Intelligent Design. New York: HarperOne.
Mill, J. S. (1843). System of Logic. London: Longmans Green.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

References  M  275
Miller, R. (1988). Fact and Method: Explanation, Confirmation and Reality in the Natural 
and Social Sciences. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Minsky, M. (2006). The Emotion Machine: Commonsense Thinking, Artificial Intelligence, 
and the Future of the Human Mind. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Mitchell, S. (1997): Pragmatic laws. PSA 96 (Supplement to Philosophy of Science 64.4): 
S468-S479.
Mitchell, S. (2000). Dimensions of scientific law. Philosophy of Science 67: 242–265.
Mitchell, S. (2002). Biological Complexity and Integrative Pluralism. Chicago, IL: 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mitchell, S. (2009). Unsimple Truths: Science, Complexity and Policy. Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press.
Monod J. (1971). Chance and Necessity: An Essay on the Natural Philosophy of Modern 
Biology. New York: Alfred A. Knopf,
Moore, G. E. (1959). Philosophical Papers. London: George Allen and Unwin, Ltd.
Moreno, A. and M. Mossio. (forthcoming). Autonomy. Springer.
Morris, H. M. (1974). Scientific Creationism. Green Forest, AR: Master Books.
Morrison, M. and Morgan, M. (1999). Models as Mediators: Perspectives on Natural and 
Social Science. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Mossio, M., Bich, L., and Moreno, A. (2013). Emergence, closure and inter-level causa-
tion in biological systems. Erkenntnis 78(2): 153–178.
Muller-Strahl, G. (2013). Metaphysik des Mechanismus im teleologischen Idealismus. 
Journal for General Philosophy of Science 44(1): 127–152.
Muller-Strahl, G. (2014). Mechanisms, Patho-Mechanisms, and the Explanation 
of Disease in Scientifically Based Clinical Medicine, Explanation in the Special 
Sciences, Kaiser, M Scholz, O. Plenge, D and Hüttemann, A. (eds), Synthese Library 
Volume 367, Springer, pp. 99–130.
Nagel, E. (1961). The Structure of Science. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Nagel, E. (1979). The Structure of Science. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.
Nagel, T. (2012). Mind and Cosmos. New York: Oxford University Press.
Nair, R. (2003). Narrative Gravity: Conversation, Cognition, Culture. London and New 
York: Routledge.
Needham J. (1988). The limits of analysis. Poetry Nation (Review) 14: 35–38.
Nersessian, N. J. (1984). Faraday to Einstein: Constructing Meaning in Scientific Theories. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Nersessian, N. J. (2008). Creating Scientific Concepts. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Nersessian, N. J. (2009). How do engineering scientists think? Model-based simula-
tion in biomedical engineering research laboratories. Topics in Cognitive Science 1(4): 
730–757.
Nersessian, N. J. and Patton, C. (2009). Model-based reasoning in interdisciplinary 
engineering. In A. W. M. Meijers (ed.), The Handbook of the Philosophy of Technology 
& Engineering Sciences. New York: Springer, pp. 678–718.
Neubert, S. (2008). Some Perspectives of Interactive Constructivism on the Theory of 
Education (on-line from the University of Cologne).
Newton, I. (1999). The Principia, translated and edited by I. B. Cohen and Anne 
Whitman. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Nietzsche, F. (1967). The Will to Power. Walter Kaufmann and R. J. Hollingdale (trans. 
and ed.). New York: Vintage.
Nørreklit, H., Nørreklit, L., and Mitchell, F. (2010). Towards a paradigmatic founda-
tion for accounting practice. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal 23(6): 
733–758.

276  
M  References
Nørreklit, H., Nørreklit L., and Mitchell F. (2010). Paradigms and pragmatic construc-
tivism: A reply Accounting. Auditing & Accountability Journal 23(6): 764–773.
O’Keefe, D. J. and Sypher, H. E. (1981). Cognitive complexity measures and the 
relationship of cognitive complexity to communication. Human Communication 
Research, ISSN 0360–3989, 8(1): 79–92.
Osbeck, L., Nersessian, N., Malone, K., and Newstetter, W. (2010). Science as Psychology: 
Sense-Making and Identity in Science Practice. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University 
Press.
Orzack S. (2012). The philosophy of modelling or does the philosophy of biology have 
any use?, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 367: 170–180.
Oulasvirta, A., Tamminen, S., and Höök, K. (2005). Comparing two approaches to 
context: Realism and constructivism. In Proceedings of The Fourth Decennial Aarhus 
Conference, Aarhus, Critical Computing: Between Sense and Sensibility, Denmark, 
August 20–24, 2005.
Overton, J. (2013). “Explain” in scientific discourse. Synthese 190: 1383–1405.
Pask, G. (1976). Conversation Theory, Applications in Education and Epistemology. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Pattee, H. H. (1978). The complementarity principle in biological and social structures. 
Journal de la Société de Biologie 1: 191–200.
Peacocke, C. (2014). The Mirror of the World: Subjects, Consciousness, and Self-
Consciousness. New York: Oxford University Press
Pearl, J. (2009). Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1931–1958) Collected Papers, Volumes I-VIII. C. Hartshorne and P. 
Weiss (eds). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Peirce, C. (1899). “First Rule of Logic” found in Reasoning and the Logic of Things, 
The Cambridge Conference Lectures of 1898, Kenneth Laine Ketner, ed., intro., and 
Hilary Putnam, intro., commentary, Harvard, 1992.
Peirce, C. (1908). A neglected argument for the reality of God. In his Collected Papers 
6: 302–339.
Persson J. and Ylikoski P (eds) (2007). Rethinking Explanation. [Boston Studies in the 
Philosophy of Science, v252]. New York: Springer.
Peyrin, C., Michel, C. M., Scwartz, S., Thut, G., Seghier, M., Landis, T., Marendez, 
C., and Vuilleumier, P. (2010). The neural substrates and timing of top-down pro-
cesses during coarse-to-fine categorization of visual scenes: a combined fMRI and 
ERP study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 22(12): 2768–2780.
Piaget, J. (1929/1997). The Child’s Conception of the World. London: Routledge.
Piaget, J. (1970). Psychology and Epistemology, A. Rosin, (trans.). New York: Viking.
Piattelli-Palmarini, M. (1996). Inevitable Illusions: How Mistakes of Reason Rule Our 
Minds. New York: Wiley.
Piattelli-Palmarini M. (2003). To put it simply.(Basic Concepts). Nature 426 (11 
December): 607.
Piattelli-Palmarini, M. (2010). It is now blasphemy to criticise Darwin. The Spiked 
Review of Books Friday 26 March.
Pierce, C. (1901) in Swedberg, R. (2012). Theorizing in sociology and social sci-
ence: Turning to the context of discovery. Theory & Society 41: 1–40 Springer 
Science+Business.
Pincock, C. (2013). Abstract explanations in science. British Journal for the Philosophy 
of Science (preprint).
Popper, K. (1959/1974). The Logic of Scientific Discovery. London: Hutchinson.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

References  M  277
Poulton, M. (2005). Organizational storytelling, ethics and morality: How stories 
frame limits of behavior in organizations. Journal of Business Ethics and Organization 
Studies 10(2): 4–9.
Powell, D., Horne, Z., and Pinillos. N. A. (2013). Semantic Integration as a method for 
investigating concepts. In James Beebe (ed.), Advances in Experimental Epistemology. 
London, Bloomsbury/Continuum Press, pp. 119–144.
Praetorius, N. (2003). Inconsistencies in the assumptions of constructivism and natu-
ralism: An alternative view. Theory & Psychology 13: 511–539.
Psillos, S. (1999). Scientific Realism: How Science Tracks Truth. London: Routledge.
Psillos, S. (2002). Causation and Explanation. Chesham: Acumen Publishing.
Putnam, H. (1975). The meaning of ‘meaning’. In K. Gunderson (ed.), Language, 
Mind and Knowledge, volume 7 of Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science. 
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 215–271.
Putnam, H. (1981). Reason, Truth, and History. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Putnam, H. (1988). Representation and Reality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Quine, W. (1970a). The Web of Belief. New York: Random House.
Quine, W. (1970b). The Philosophy of Logic. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Quine, W. (1985). The Time of My Life—An Autobiography. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Railton, P. (1978). A deductive-nomological model of probabilistic explanation. 
Philosophy of Science 45: 206–226.
Rawls, J. (1971). A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Rescher, N. (1970). Scientific Explanation. New York: Free Press.
Rescher, N. (2005). Cognitive Harmony: The Role of Systemic Harmony in the Constitution 
of Knowledge. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Reutlinger, A. (2013). Why Is There Universal Macro-Behavior? Renormalization 
Group Explanation As Non-causal Explanation. In: [2012] Philosophy of Science 
Assoc. 23rd Biennial Mtg (San Diego, CA) > PSA 2012 Symposia.
Rich, F. (2011). Confessions of a recovering op-ed columnist. New York Times, March 
12, 2011
Ricoeur, P. (1973). The hermeneutical function of distanciation, D. Pellauer (trans.). 
Philosophy Today 17(2–4): 129–141.
Ricoeur, P. (1974). Metaphor and the main problem of hermeneutics. New Literary 
History 6:1 (1974: Autumn): 65–110.
Rissanen, J. (1978). Modeling by shortest data description. Automatica 14: 465–471.
Robertson, P.( 2012). as quoted on CNN, Pat Robertson challenges creationism, 
November 29th, 2012.
Robertson, P. (2014). Pat Robertson disagrees with creationist Ken Ham, Says ‘Let’s 
Not Make A Joke Of Ourselves. Huffington Post, February 5, 2014.
Rorty, R. (1979). Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Rorty, R. (1991). Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Rosen, J. (2012). Introduction to Simeonov, P., Smith, L. and Ehresmann A. (eds), 
Integral Biomathics Tracing the Road to Reality. New York: Springer.
Rosen, R. (1985). Anticipatory Systems. London: Pergamon.
Rosen, R. (1991). Life Itself. New York: Columbia University Press.
Rosen, R. (2000). Essays on life itself. New York: Columbia University Press.

278  
M  References
Rosen, R (2012). Anticipatory Systems: Philosophical, Mathematical, and Methodological 
Foundations, 2nd ed. New York: Springer.
Rosenberg, A. (2000a). Darwinism in Philosophy, Social Science and Policy. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Rosenberg, A. (2000b). Philosophy of Science: A Contemporary Approach. London: 
Routledge.
Rosenberg, A. (2013) see Is Faith in God Reasonable?. Symposia Christi. February 1, 
2013, Rosenberg debated Christian philosopher William Lane Craig over the topics 
discussed in The Atheist’s Guide to Reality.
Ross, H. (2001/2005). The Creator and the Cosmos: How the Latest Scientific Discoveries 
Reveal God. NavPress Publishing.
Rota, G. C. (1989). Indiscrete Thoughts. Boston, MA: Birkhäuser.
Runciman, W. G. (1983). A Treatise on Social Theory: Vol. 1, The Methodology of Social 
Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Ruse, M. (2006). Darwinism and its Discontents. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Ruse, M. (2010). Science and Spirituality: Making Room for Faith in the Age of Science. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Russo, F. (2009). Causality and Causal Modelling in the Social Sciences: Measuring 
Variations.
New York: Springer.
Salmon, W. et al. (1971). Statistical Explanation and Statistical Relevance. Pittsburgh, 
PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Salmon, W. (1984). Scientific Explanation and the Causal Structure of the World. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Salmon W. (1989). Four Decades of Scientific Explanation. In Kitcher & Salmon 
(1989), pp. 3–219.
Salmon, W. (1998). Causality and Explanation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Salthe, S. N. (1993). Development and Evolution: Complexity and Change in Biology. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Salthe, S. N. (2000). A classification of closure concepts. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Science 901, CLOSURE: EMERGENT ORGANIZATIONS AND 
THEIR DYNAMICS 35–41.
Salthe, S. N. (2006). On Aristotle’s conception of causality. General Systems Bulletin 
35: 11.
Salthe, S. N. (2008) Purpose in nature. Ludus Vitalis 16(29): 49–58.
Salthe, S. N. (2010a). Development (and evolution) of the universe. Foundations of 
Science 15(4): 357–367.
Salthe, S. N. (2010b). Maximum power and maximum entropy production: finalities in 
nature. Cosmos and History 6(1): 114–121.
Salthe, S. N. (2012). Hierarchical structures. Axiomathes 22: 355–383.
Satish, U. (1997). Behavioral Complexity: A Review. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 
ISSN 00219029, 27(23): 2047–2067.
Sayer, A. (1992). Method in Social Science: A Realist Approach, 2nd edn. London: 
Routledge.
Schaffner, K. (1993). Discovery and Explanation in Biology and Medicine. Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press.
Schank, R. (1982). Dynamic Memory: A Theory of Learning in Computers and People. 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Schank, R. C. (1986). Explanation Patterns: Understanding Mechanically and Creatively. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

References  M  279
Schank, R. C. (1994). What We Learn When We Learn By Doing. Evanston, IL: Institute 
for the Learning Sciences.
Scheines, R. (2008). Causation, Truth, and the Law, Brooklyn Law Review 73: 2.
Schiele, H. and Krummaker, S. (2010). Consortial benchmarking: a method of aca-
demic-practitioner collaborative research and its application in a b2b environment. 
In: 26th IMP Conference, 2–4 September 2010, Budapest, Hungary.
Schueler, G. F. (2009). Interpretative explanations. In C. Sandis (ed.), New Essays on the 
Explanation of Action. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Schulte, O. (1999). Means-ends epistemology. British Journal for the Philosophy of 
Science 50(1): 1–31.
Schulte, O., Luo, W., and Greiner, R. (2007). Mind change optimal learning of Bayes 
net structure. 20th Annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), San Diego, 
CA, June 12–15.
Schutz A. (1962). Collected Papers: The Problem of Social Reality. The Hague: Springer.
Schwarz, N. (1990). Feelings as information: Informational and motivational functions 
of affective states. In E. T. Higgins and R. Sorrentino (eds), Handbook of Motivation 
and Cognition: Foundations of Social Behavior, Vol. 2, New York: Guilford Press, 
pp. 527–561.
Scriven, M. (1962). Critical notice of thought and action. Mind 61: 100–107.
Scriven, M. (1975). Causation as explanation. Nous 9(1), 3–16.
Searle, J. (1995). The Construction of Social Reality. New York: Free Press.
Searle, J. R. (2010). Making the Social World. New York: Oxford University Press.
Searle, J. (2012). The Unity of Reality. Why We Live in One World at Most, (talk) 
delivered at the Prospects for a New Realism conference http://new-realism.de/pro-
gram.php
Shaw, D. R. and Allen, T. F. H. (2012). A systematic consideration of observational 
design decisions in the theory construction process. Systems Research and Behavioral 
Science ISSN 1092–7026, 29(5): 484–498.
Shermer, M. (2011). The Believing Brain. New York: Holt.
Shklar, J. (2004). Squaring the Hermeneutic Circle, Social Research: An International 
Quarterly Volume 71, Number 3, Fall, pp. 655–678.
Shoemaker, S. (1997/1980) Causality and properties. In D. H. Mellor and A. Oliver 
(eds) Properties, Oxford University Press, pp. 228–254. Originally published in P. 
van Inwagen (ed.) Time and Cause, Dordrecht: D. Reidel, pp. 109–135.
Shook, J. (2003). Pragmatic Naturalism and Realism. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.
Simon, H. A. (1966). Thinking by computers. In R. G. Colodny (ed.), Mind and 
Cosmos: Essays in Contemporary Science and Philosophy. Pittsburgh, PA: University of 
Pittsburgh Press, pp. 268–285.
Simpson, G. (1967). The Meaning of Evolution, Revised Edition. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
Skipper, R. and Millstein, R. (2005). Thinking about evolutionary mechanisms: 
Natural selection. Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical 
Sciences 36(2): 327–347.
Smith, J. M. and Szathmary, E. (2005). The Major Transitions in Evolution. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Smolin, L. (2006). The Trouble with Physics. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Sober, E. (1988). Reconstructing the Past: Parsimony, Evolution, and Inference. Cambridge 
MA: MIT Press.
Souter, D. (2010). Speech at Harvard University.
Sober, E. (1997), Two outbreak of lawlessness in resent philosophy of biology. Philosophy 
of Science 64: 458–467.

280  
M  References
Sober, E. (1999). The Philosophy of Biology, Second Edition. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Soros, G. (1987). The Alchemy of Finance: Reading the Mind of the Market. New York: 
Simon & Schuster.
Spender, J. C. (2014). Business Strategy: Managing Uncertainty, Opportunity, and 
Enterprise. New York: Oxford University Press.
Spencer, N. (2000). On the significance of distinguishing ontology and epistemology, 
downloaded from http://ethicalpolitics.org/seminars/neville.htm
Sperber, D. and Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance: Communication and Cognition. New 
York: Wiley.
Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., and Scheines, R. (1993). Causation, Prediction, and Search. 
New York: Springer.
Staley, R. (2009). Albert Michelson, the velocity of light, and the ether drift. In R. 
Staley (ed.), Einstein’s Generation: The Origins of the Relativity Revolution. Chicago, 
IL: University of Chicago Press.
Steel, D. (2014). Explanation and intervention in coupled human and natural sys-
tems. In M. Kaiser O. Scholz D. Plenge and A. Hüttemann (eds), Explanation in the 
Special Sciences Synthese Library Volume 367, Springer.
Sterelny, K. (2007). Refuting Eliminative Materialism on the Cheap? Mind & Language 
8(2): 306–315.
Stern, C. and Deimler M. (2006). The Boston Consulting Group on Strategy: Classic 
Concepts and New Perspectives. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Stinchcombe, A. L. (1987). Constructing Social Theories. Chicago, IL: University Of 
Chicago Press
Stotz, K. and Griffiths, P. E. (2008). Experimental philosophy of science. Philosophy 
Compass 3(3): 507–521.
Suchman, L. (1987). Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of Human–Machine 
Communication. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Suedfeld, P. and Tetlock, P. (1977). Integrative complexity of communications in inter-
national crises. The Journal of Conflict Resolution 21(1):169–184, ISSN: 0022–0027.
Suppe, F. (1989). The Semantic Conception of Theories and Scientific Realism. Chicago, 
IL: University of Illinois Press.
Surowiecki, J. (2005). The Wisdom of Crowds. New York: Anchor.
Svoboda, J. and Passmore, C. (2011). The Strategies of Modeling in Biology Education 
Sci & EducDOI 10.1007/s11191–011–9425–5
Szathmary, E. (2006). Evolution. Darwin for all seasons. Science Jul 21;313(5785): 
306–7
Tainter J. A. and Lucas G. J. (1983). Epistemology of the significance concept. American 
Antiquity 48(4): 707–719.
Taubes, G (2007). Do We Really Know What Makes Us Healthy? New York Times, 
September 16, http://www.nytimes.com/2007/09/16/magazine/16epidemiology-t.html
Thagard, P. (1988). Computational Philosophy of Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thagard, P. (1989). Explanatory coherence. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, ISSN 0140–
525X, 12: 435–502.
Thagard, P. (2000). Coherence in Thought and Action. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thagard, P. (2005). Mind: Introduction to Cognitive Science, 2nd edition. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Thagard, P. (2006). Hot Thought: Mechanisms and Applications of Emotional Cognition. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thagard, P. (2012). The Cognitive Science of Science: Explanation, Discovery, and 
Conceptual Change. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

References  M  281
Thagard, P. Litt, A. (2008). Models of scientific explanation. In R. Sun (ed.), The 
Cambridge Handbook of Computational Cognitive Modeling. Cambridge, MA: 
Cambridge University Press, pp. 549–564.
Thagard P. and Findlay S. (2011). Changing minds about climate change: Belief revi-
sion, coherence, and emotion. In E. J. Olsson, S. Enqvist (eds), Belief Revision Meets 
Philosophy of Science, Logic, Epistemology, and the Unity of Science 21. New York: 
Springer Science+Business.
Theiner, G. and O’Connor, T. (2010). The emergence of group cognition. In A. 
Corradini and & T. O’Connor (eds), Emergence in Science and Philosophy. New York: 
Routledge, pp. 78–117.
Trout, J. D. (2007). The psychology of scientific explanation. Philosophy Compass 
2(3):564–591.
Tucker, A. (2004). Our Knowledge of the Past: A Philosophy of Historiography. Cambridge, 
MA: Cambridge University Press.
Tucker, A. (2013). Biology and natural history: What makes the difference? In M. 
Kaiser, O. Scholz, D. Plenge, and A. Hüttemann (eds), Explanation in the Special 
Sciences, Synthese Library Volume 367, Springer.
Twining W. (2003). A post-westphalian conception of law. Law & Society Review 37(1): 
199–258.
Umpleby, S. A. (1994). The Cybernetics of Conceptual Systems. Vienna, Austria: The 
Institute for Advanced Studies. http://www.gwu.edu/~umpleby/Conceptual_
Systems.txt
Union of Concerned Scientists. (2007). Smoke, Mirrors and Hot Air. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Vaihinger, H. (1924/1911). The Philosophy of ‘as if’: A System of the Theoretical, Practical, 
and Religious Fictions of Mankind, C. K. Ogden, (Trans.). London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul.
van Fraassen, B. C. (2008). Scientific Representation: Paradoxes of Perspective. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
van Fraassen, B. C. (1980). The Scientific Image. Oxford and New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Van Inwagen, P. (1994). Composition as Identity. Philosophical Perspectives 8: 
207–220.
Varela, F. (2004, as quoted in Poerksen, B). The Certainty of Uncertainty: Dialogues 
Introducing Constructivism. London: Imprint Academic.
Varela, F. and Poerksen, B. (2006). Truth Is What Works: Francisco J. Varela on 
Cognitive Science, Buddhism, the Inseparability of Subject and Object, and the 
Exaggerations of Constructivism – A Conversation. The Journal of Aesthetic Education 
40( 1), Spring 2006: 35–53.
Verges, F. (1987). Rorty and the new hermeneutics. Philosophy 62(241): 307–323.
Viale, R. (2013). Methodological Cognitivism: Vol. 1: Mind, Rationality, and Society. 
New York: Springer.
Viale, R. (2013). Methodological Cognitivism: Vol. 2: Cognition, Science, and Innovation. 
New York: Springer.
Villegas, M. and Shirvani, B. (2007). Management of complexity in automotive compa-
nies in the West Midlands UK. Key Engineering Materials, ISSN 334: 889–896.
Von Bertalanffy, L. (1968). General System Theory: Foundations, Development, 
Applications. New York: George Braziller Press.
von Glasersfeld, E. (1984). An introduction to radical constructivism. In P. Watzlawick 
(ed.), The Invented Reality. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, pp.17–40.

282  
M  References
von Glasersfeld, E. (1995). Radical Constructivism: A Way of Knowing and Learning. 
London and Washington: The Falmer Press.
von Uexküll, J. (1926). Theoretical Biology. New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co.
von Uexküll, J. (1982). The theory of meaning. Semiotica 42(1); 25–82.
von Wright, G. (2004). Explanation and Understanding (Cornell Classics in Philosophy). 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Vosniadou, S. (2002). Mental models in conceptual development. In L. Magnani and 
N. J. Nersessian (eds), Model-based Reasoning: Science, Technology, Values. Berlin: 
Springer.
Vrana, P. and Wheeler, W. (1992). Individual organ-isms as terminal entities: Laying 
the species problem to rest. Cladistics 8: 67–72.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. The development of higher psychological func-
tions (M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner, and E. Souberman, eds; M. Cole and M. 
Lopez-Morillas, Trans.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1997). Thinking and speech. In R. W. Rieber and A. S. Carton 
(eds),The Collected Works of L. S. Vygotsky: Vol. 1. Problems of General Psychology.. 
New York: Plenum, pp.17–40.
Waldman, T., Kinzler, K. W. and Vogelstein, B. (1995). p21 Is necessary for the p53-
mediated G(1) arrest in human cancer cells. Cancer Research 55: 5187–5190. 
Wallis, S. E. (2008a). Emerging order in CAS theory: Mapping some perspectives. 
Kybernetes, ISSN 0368–492X, 38(7).
Wallis, S. E. (2008b). From reductive to robust: Seeking the core of complex adaptive 
systems theory. In A. Yang and Y. Shan (eds), Intelligent Complex Adaptive Systems. 
ISBN 978–1–59904–717–1, pp. 1–25.
Wallis, S. E. (2008c). Validation of theory: Exploring and reframing Popper’s worlds. 
Integral Review, ISSN 1553–3069, 4(2): 71–91. http://integral-review.org/
Wallis, S. E. (2012d). Theories of psychology: Evolving towards greater effective-
ness or wandering, lost in the jungle, without a guide? Paper presented at the 30th 
International Congress of Psychology: Psychology Serving Humanity, Cape Town, 
South Africa.
Wallis, Steven E. (2013). How to choose between policy proposals: A simple tool 
based on systems thinking and complexity theory. E:CO – Emergence: Complexity & 
Organization 15 (3): 94–120, ISSN: 1521–3250.
Wallis, Steven E. (2014). Existing and emerging methods for integrating theories 
within and between disciplines. Organisational Transformation and Social Change 
11(1): 3–24. ISSN: 1477–9633.
Warfield, J. N. and Perino Jr., G. H. (1999). The problematique: Evolution of an idea. 
Systems Research and Behavioral Science, ISSN 1099–1743, 16(3): 221–226.
Waskan, J. (2011). Intelligibility and the CAPE: Combatting Anti-psychologism about 
Explanation. In Phil Sci Archive (online only): http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/8503/
Waskan, J., I. Harmon, Z. Horne, J. Spino, and J. Clevenger. (2013). Explanatory anti-
psychologism overturned by lay and scientific case classifications. Synthese (DOI 
10.1007/s11229–013–0304–2).
Waters, C. K. (1998): Causal regularities in the biological world of contingent distribu-
tions. Biology and Philosophy 13(1): 5–36.
Weber, M. (1922, 1978). Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology. 
Berkley, CA: University of California Press.
Weber, E., De Vreese, L., and Van Bouwel, J. (2013). Scientific Explanation. Dordrecht: 
Springer.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

References  M  283
Weick, K. E. (1989). Theory construction as disciplined imagination. Academy of 
Management Review, ISSN 0363–7425, 14(4): 516–531.
Weinberg, S. (1993) Dreams of a Final Theory. New York: Vintage Books.
Weisberg, M. (2007). Three kinds of idealization. Journal of Philosophy 104(12): 
639–659.
Wells, J. (2006). The Politically Incorrect Guide to Darwinism and Intelligent Design. 
Washington, DC: Regnery Publishing.
Wendt, A. (1999). Social Theory of International Politics. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge 
University Press.
Wheeler, G. and Scheines, R. (2010). Causation, Association, and Confirmation. in 
Explanation, Prediction, and Confirmation. New Trends and Old Ones Reconsidered, 
edited by Stephan Hartmann, Marcel Weber, Wenceslao, J. Gonzalez, Dennis Dieks, 
Thomas Uebe. New York: Springer.
Wheeler, G. and Scheines, R. (2013). Coherence and confirmation through causation. 
Mind 122(485): 135–170.
White, H. (1980). The value of narrativity in the representation of reality. Critical 
Inquiry 7(1), On Narrative (Autumn, 1980): 5–27.
Wiener, N. (1950). The Human Use of Human Beings. Boston, MA: The Riverside Press 
(Houghton Mifflin Co.).
Wilkes, K. (1989). Explanation-how not to miss the point. In A. Montefiore and D. 
Noble (eds), Goals, No Goals and Own Goals. London: Unwin Hyman, 194—210.
Williams, B. (1995). Making Sense of Humanity: And Other Philosophical Papers. 
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Williamson, T. (2000). Knowledge and Its Limits. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wimsatt, W. (1987). False models as means to truer theories. In M. Nitecki and 
A. Hoffman (eds), Neutral Models in Biology. London: Oxford University Press, 
pp. 23–55.
Wimsatt, W. (2007). Re-Engineering Philosophy for Limited Beings: Piecewise 
Approximations to Reality. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Winch, P. (1958/1990). The Idea of a Social Science and Its Relation to Philosophy, 2nd 
ed. London: Routledge.
Wixon, D. (2011). Synthesizing Microbial Community Change and Soil Carbon 
Vulnerability in Warmed Soils. PhD. Dissertation, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 
WI. Proquest/UMI Publication No. 3486760.
Woodward, J. (2001). Law and explanation in biology: Invariance is the kind of stabil-
ity that matters. Philosophy of Science 68(1): 1–20.
Woodward, J. (2003). Making Things Happen: A Theory of Causal Explanation. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Zelmer, A. J., Allen, T. F. H., and Kesseboehmer, K. (2006). The nature of ecologi-
cal complexity: A protocol for building the narrative. Ecological Complexity, ISSN 
1476–945X, 3: 171–182.
Zizek, S. (2001). On Belief. London: Routledge.
Zude, Y. and Yolles, M. (2006). From Knowledge Cybernetics to Feng Shui. Paper pre-
sented at the International Society for the Systems Sciences, Sonoma State University, 
Rohnert Park, California.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

Suggestions for Further Reading
Achinstein, P. and Körner, S. (1975). Explanation: Papers and Discussions. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Achinstein, P. (2010). Evidence, Explanation, and Realism: Essays in the Philosophy of 
Science. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.
Aliseda, A. (2006). Abductive Reasoning Logical Investigations into Discovery and 
Explanation. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Bachelard, G. and Jones, M. (2002). The Formation of the Scientific Mind: A Contribution 
to a Psychoanalysis of Objective Knowledge. Manchester: Clinamen.
Barnes, E. (2008). The Paradox of Predictivism. Cambridge, NY: Cambridge University 
Press.
Bayne, T. and Montague, M. (2011). Cognitive Phenomenology. Oxford New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Berger, P. andLuckmann, T. (1967). The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the 
Sociology of Knowledge. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Bogdan, R. (1997). Interpreting Minds: The Evolution of a Practice. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Bogdan, R. (2009). Predicative Minds the Social Ontogeny of Propositional Thinking. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Braithwaite, R. (1953). Scientific Explanation: A Study of the Function of Theory, 
Probability and Law in Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bronowski, J. (2008). The Common Sense of Science. London: Faber And Faber.
Bruya, B. (2010). Effortless Attention a New Perspective in the Cognitive Science of 
Attention and Action. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Campbell, J., Rourke, M., and Silverstein, H. (2007). Causation and Explanation. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Campbell, J., Rourke, M., and Slater, M. (2011). Carving Nature at its Joints Natural 
Kinds in Metaphysics and Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Canter, D. and Turner, D. (2014). Biologising the Social Sciences: Challenging Darwinian 
and Neuroscience Explanations. London: Routledge.
Chalmers, D. (2012). Constructing the World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Churchman, C. (1971). The Design of Inquiring Systems: Basic Concepts of Systems and 
Organization. New York: Basic Books.
Cormac, E. (1985). A Cognitive Theory of Metaphor. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Craver, C. (2009). Explaining the Brain. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cron, L. (2012). Wired For Story: The Writer’s Guide to Using Brain Science to Hook 
Readers from the Very First Sentence. New York: Ten Speed Press.

286  
M  Suggestions for Further Reading
de Regt, H., Leonelli, S. and Eigner, K. (2009). Scientific Understanding: Philosophical 
Perspectives. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Earman, J., Glymour, C., and Mitchell, S. (2002). Ceteris Paribus Laws. Dordrecht 
Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Engel, S. (1999). Context Is Everything: The Nature of Memory. New York, Basingstoke: 
W.H. Freeman.
Fauconnier, G. andTurner, M. (2002). The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending and the 
Mind’s Hidden Complexities. New York: Basic Books.
Festinger, L. (1962). A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press.
Fodor, J. (2000). The Mind Doesn’t Work that Way: The Scope and Limits of Computational 
Psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gaukroger, S. (2010). The Collapse of Mechanism and the Rise of Sensibility: Science and 
the Shaping of Modernity, 1680–1760. Oxford, New York: Clarendon Press; Oxford 
University Press.
Gentner, D., Holyoak, K., and Kokinov, B. (2001). The Analogical Mind: Perspectives 
from Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Giere, R. (1999). Science Without Laws. Chicago: University Of Chicago Press.
Gigerenzer, G. and Todd, P. (1999). Simple Heuristics that Make us Smart. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Glymour, C. (1987). Discovering Causal Structure: Artificial Intelligence, Philosophy of 
Science, and Statistical Modeling. Orlando: Academic Press.
Gopnik, A. and Meltzoff, A. (1997). Words, Thoughts, and Theories. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Greenspan, S. (2009). Annals Of Gullibility Why We Get Duped and How to Avoid It. 
Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers.
Gregersen, N. (2003). From Complexity to Life on the Emergence of Life and Meaning. 
Oxford New York: Oxford University Press.
Heelan, P. and Babich, B. (2002). Hermeneutic Philosophy of Science, Van Gogh’s Eyes, 
And God: Essays In Honor Of Patrick A. Heelan. Dordrecht Boston: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers.
Henderson, D. (1993). Interpretation And Explanation in the Human Sciences. Albany: 
State University of New York Press.
Hull, D. and Ruse, M. (1998). The Philosophy of Biology. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Humphreys, P. (1989). The Chances of Explanation: Causal Explanation in the Social, 
Medical, and Physical Sciences. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Illari, P., Russo, F. and Williamson, J. (2011). Causality in the Sciences. Oxford, England, 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Jacobson, A. (2013). Keeping the World in Mind: Mental Representations and the Sciences 
of the Mind. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
James, S. (2009). The Content of Social Explanation. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Jardine, N. (1991). The Scenes of Inquiry: On the Reality of Questions in the Sciences. 
Oxford, New York: Clarendon Press Oxford University Press.
Josephson, J. and Josephson, S. (1994). Abductive Inference: Computation, Philosophy, 
Technology. Cambridge, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Kagan, J. (2002). Surprise, Uncertainty, and Mental Structures. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Kahneman, D. andTversky, A. (2000). Choices, Values, and Frames. New York, 
Cambridge, UK: Russell Sage Foundation Cambridge University Press.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Suggestions for Further Reading  M  287
Keil, F. and Wilson, R. (2000). Explanation and Cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Keller, E. (2002). Making Sense of Life Explaining Biological Development with Models, 
Metaphors, and Machines. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kennedy, G. (2008). Evidence And Explanation in Social Science: An Inter-Disciplinary 
Approach. London: Routledge.
Klahr, D. (2000). Exploring Science the Cognition and Development of Discovery Processes. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Knowles, D. (1990). Explanation and its Limits. Cambridge, NY: Cambridge University 
Press.
Lefever, L. (2013). The Art Of Explanation: Making Your Ideas, Products, And Services 
Easier to Understand. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Letiche, H., Lissack, M., and Schultz, R. (2011). Coherence in the Midst of Complexity: 
Advances In Social Complexity Theory. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
Lewis, J. (2012). The Explanation Age. Lexington, KY: Createspace.
Luntz, F. (2007). Words That Work: It’s Not What You Say, It’s What People Hear. New 
York: Hyperion.
Machery, E. (2011). Doing without Concepts. New York, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Mack, A. and Rock, I. (1998). Inattentional Blindness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mackay, D. (1969). Information, Mechanism and Meaning. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Magnani, L. (2001). Abduction, Reason, and Science: Processes of Discovery and 
Explanation. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Malafouris, L. (2013). How Things Shape the Mind: A Theory of Material Engagement. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Manicas, P. (2006). A Realist Philosophy of Social Science: Explanation And Understanding. 
Cambridge, UK, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Margolis, H. (1987). Patterns, Thinking, and Cognition: A Theory of Judgment. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Martin, J. (2011). The Explanation of Social Action. Oxford, New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Mcintyre, L. (1996). Laws And Explanation in the Social Sciences: Defending a Science of 
Human Behavior. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Mcintyre, L. (2012). Explaining Explanation: Essays in the Philosophy of the Special 
Sciences. Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
Mclaughlin, M., Cody, M., and Read, S. (1992). Explaining One’s Self to Others: Reason-
Giving in a Social Context. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum Associates.
Mclaughlin, P. (2001). What Functions Explain Functional Explanation and Self-
Reproducing Systems. Cambridge, New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Meyerson, E. (1991). Explanation in the Sciences. Dordrecht, Boston: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers.
Murphy, G. (2002). The Big Book of Concepts. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Olsson, E. (2005). Against Coherence: Truth, Probability, And Justification. Oxford, UK, 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Olsson, E. and Enqvist, S. (2011). Belief Revision Meets Philosophy Of Science. Dordrecht, 
New York: Springer.
Pashler, H. (1998). The Psychology of Attention. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pitt, J. (1988). Theories of Explanation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Prinz, J. (2002). Furnishing the Mind: Concepts and their Perceptual Basis. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Rakison, D. and Oakes, L. (2003). Early Category and Concept Development Making Sense 
of the Blooming, Buzzing Confusion. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.

288  
M  Suggestions for Further Reading
Rehg, W. (2009). Cogent Science in Context the Science Wars, Argumentation Theory, and 
Habermas. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rescher, N. (2001). Cognitive Pragmatism: The Theory of Knowledge in Pragmatic 
Perspective. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Rescher, N. (2005). Realism And Pragmatic Epistemology. Pittsburgh, PA: University of 
Pittsburgh Press.
Ruben. (1992). Explaining Explanation. London, New York: Routledge.
Saitta, L. and Zucker. (2013). Abstraction in Artificial Intelligence and Complex Systems. 
New York, NY: Springer.
Sandis, C. (2009). New Essays on the Explanation of Action. Houndmills, Basingstoke, 
Hampshire, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Sklar, L. (2000). The Philosophy of Science: A Collection of Essays. New York: Garland.
Sloman, S. (2005). Causal Models How People Think about the World and Its Alternatives. 
Oxford New York: Oxford University Press.
Smee, F., Laland, K., and Feldman, M. (2003). Niche Construction: The Neglected 
Process in Evolution. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Sommers, S. (2011). Situations Matter: Understanding How Context Transforms Your 
World. New York: Riverhead Books.
Sosa, E. (2009). A Virtue Epistemology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stalnaker, R. (1999). Context and Content Essays on Intentionality in Speech and Thought. 
Oxford New York: Oxford University Press.
Sun, R. (2012). Grounding Social Sciences in Cognitive Sciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Wallace, B. (2003). Choosing Reality: A Buddhist View Of Physics And The Mind. Ithaca, 
NY: Snow Lion Publications.
Weinberg, J. (1965). Abstraction, Relation, And Induction. City: University of Wisconsin 
Press.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Contributors
Michael Lissack (editor) is the executive director of the Institute for the Study 
of Coherence and Emergence (ISCE), the President of the American Society for 
Cybernetics, the ISCE Professor of Meaning in Organizations, the first Walter 
J. Hickel Professor at Alaska Pacific University, and a serial entrepreneur. He 
founded both a nonprofit research institute and a charity for artists, launched 
an international PhD program in corporate anthropology, has written half a 
dozen books, been a successful Wall Street banker, and a candidate for pub-
lic office. Dr. Lissack has taught at a number of academic institutions in the 
United States and Europe, run nine international conferences on the topics of 
complexity, management, health care, entanglement and ethics, and founded a 
successful academic journal (E:CO). Worth Magazine recognized Dr. Lissack 
as one of “Wall Street’s 25 Smartest Players” in 1999 and as one of the 100 
Americans who have most influenced “how we think about money” in 2001. 
His most recent invention—an Internet research reference librarian replace-
ment can be found at http://epi-search.com. His most recent academic work 
can be found at http://epi-thinking.org
Abraham Graber (editor) is an assistant professor of Philosophy at Western 
Illinois University, where he specializes in metaethics, and previously was an 
assistant professor at the University of Iowa. His primary research project aims 
to show that acceptance of a scientific worldview commits one to thinking that 
there are mind-independent moral properties. This metaethical project requires 
that Professor Graber defend a strong form of anti-reductionism. He spends 
much of his time attempting to flesh out a novel version of anti-reductionism 
whereby emergent properties have causal powers. Portions of this metaethical 
project have been presented to the Center for Cognitive Science and Semantics 
in Riga, to the British Society for Ethical Theory at St. Anne’s College in 
Oxford, and at the Twenty-Third Biennial meeting of the Philosophy of Science 
Association.
Alicia Juarrero, Professor Emerita of Philosophy at Prince George’s Community 
College (MD), is the author of Dynamics in Action: Intentional Behavior as a 
Complex System (1999) and coeditor of Reframing Complexity: Perspectives 

290  
M  Contributors
from North and South (2007), and Emergence, Self-Organization and 
Complexity: Precursors and Prototypes (2008). Dr. Juarrero was named the 
2002 US Professor of the Year by the Council for the Advancement and Support 
of Education (CASE) and the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of 
Teaching; in 2003, she received the Edward T. Foote Alumnus of Distinction 
Award of the University of Miami; in 1995, the Distinguished Humanities 
Educator Award of the Community College Humanities Association. 
Dr. Juarrero was appointed to the Advisory Board of the National Endowment 
for the Humanities where, from 1992 to 2000, she served as NEH’s Chair of 
Council Committee on State Programs.
Zack Kopplin is an American science education activist from Louisiana. 
Kopplin is known for his campaigns to keep creationism out of public schools 
and focuses on the separation of church and state. He has been involved in 
school voucher, science curriculum, and textbook policy. As a senior at Baton 
Rouge Magnet High School in Louisiana, he launched a campaign to repeal 
the Louisiana Science Education Act, which has been described by the inter-
national science community as a creationism law. Kopplin ran his campaign 
through his RepealCreationism website. Zack currently is a history student at 
Rice University in Houston, Texas. Kopplin is the National Center for Science 
Education’s 2012 Friend of Darwin Award Winner with Judy Scotchmoor 
and also the winner of the 2012 Hugh M. Hefner First Amendment Award in 
Education. In 2014, Kopplin received the American Society for Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology’s Howard Schachman Public Service Award and the 
LSU Manship School of Journalism’s Courage and Justice Award.
William Wimsatt is professor emeritus in the Department of Philosophy, 
the Committee on Conceptual and Historical Studies of Science (previously 
Conceptual Foundations of Science), and the Committee on Evolutionary 
Biology at the University of Chicago. He is currently a Winton Professor of 
the Liberal Arts at the University of Minnesota and Residential Fellow of the 
Minnesota Center for Philosophy of Science. He specializes in the philosophy 
of biology, where his areas of interest include reductionism, heuristics, emer-
gence, scientific modeling, heredity, and cultural evolution. His work centers 
on the philosophy of the special sciences (e.g., biology, psychology, and the 
social sciences), the history of biology, and the study of complex systems.
S. N. Salthe is an evolutionary biologist, now retired from teaching at the City 
University of New York. He is Professor Emeritus in the Biology Department 
at Brooklyn College of the City University of New York. He is also a visit-
ing scientist in Biological Sciences at Binghamton University, and an associate 
researcher at the Center for the Philosophy of Nature and Science Studies of 
the University of Copenhagen. Professor Salthe is the author of several books, 
including a textbook (Evolutionary Biology), a work on hierarchy theory 
(Evolving Hierarchical Systems: Their Structure and Representation), and a 
work on complex adaptive systems (Development and Evolution: Complexity 
and Change in Biology).

Contributors  M  291
Kevin T. Kelly is professor of Philosophy at Carnegie Mellon University. His 
research interests include epistemology, philosophy of science, formal learning 
theory, and computability. He is the author of The Logic of Reliable Inquiry 
(Oxford University Press) and of numerous articles on such computational and 
methodological topics as the problem of induction, causal discovery, Ockham’s 
razor as a guide to truth, infinite epistemic regresses, belief revision, and analo-
gies between induction and computability.
Konstantin Genin is a PhD student at Carnegie Mellon University in Logic, 
Computation & Methodology. His research is focused on Causal Inference, 
Foundations of Statistics, and Machine Learning.
Nancy J. Nersessian is professor of Cognitive Science at the Georgia Institute 
of Technology. She is appointed jointly in the School of Public Policy and the 
College of Computing, and holds an adjunct appointment in the School of 
Architecture. Her research focuses on human creativity in science. A major 
theme of her research is conceptual innovation and change in science and engi-
neering research and learning, specifically the role of analogical and visual 
modeling and thought experimenting (simulative modeling). Her current 
research includes investigating reasoning and representational procedures in 
interdisciplinary research laboratories.
Sandra Mitchell, professor of the Philosophy of Science, University of Pittsburgh, 
is the coeditor of Human by Nature: Between Biology and the Social Sciences 
(1997) and Ceteris Paribus Laws (2002). Professor Mitchell is also the author of 
Biological Complexity and Integrative Pluralism (2003) and Unsimple Truths: 
Science, Complexity and Policy (2009). Her research is on epistemological and 
metaphysical issues in the philosophy of science. Her interests have centered on 
scientific explanations of complex behavior, and how we might best represent 
multilevel, multicomponent complex systems. She has published articles on 
functional explanation, units of selection in evolutionary biology, sociobiology, 
biological complexity and self-organization, and scientific laws. Current inter-
ests include emergence, the methodological consequences of biological robust-
ness, and problems in representing deep uncertainty for policy decisions.
Rukmini Bahya Nair is professor of Linguistics and English at of Humanities 
and Social Sciences department of IIT, Delhi. Nair was a visiting professor at the 
Department of English, Stanford University, in 2005–2006 and has also taught 
at the Jawaharlal Nehru University, the National University of Singapore, and 
the University of Washington at Seattle. Nair serves on the editorial boards of 
the International Journal of Literary Semantics, The Journal of Multicultural 
Discourses, The Journal of Pragmatics, Psychology & Social Practice, and The 
Macmillan Essential Dictionary. As the editor of Biblio, India’s leading literary 
and cultural journal, she is also part of the Australian ABC Radio’s panel of 
experts for its well-known program ‘The Book Show’.
Paul Thagard is a 2013 winner of the Killam Prize from the Canada Council 
of the Arts. He has been crossing the divide between the humanities and 

292  
M  Contributors
sciences for over 30 years, linking fundamental philosophical issues to scien-
tific questions about the nature of the mind and brain. Paul Thagard pioneered 
the philosophical use of computer models to help understand the structure 
and growth of scientific knowledge. A prolific writer, he has contributed to 
research in analogy and creativity, cognition in the history of science, and the 
role of emotion in thinking. He has investigated the relevance of psychology 
and neuroscience for ethical questions about morality and the meaning of 
life. His research has yielded 10 books and some 200 scholarly articles, many 
highly cited. He is currently working on new theories of emotion, intention, 
and consciousness.
Timothy Allen is Professor Emeritus of Botany and Environmental Studies at 
the University of Wisconsin–Madison. His research liaisons provide a scale-
based theoretical framework for groups at the Northern Lakes Long Term 
Ecological Research site and Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Allen is a leader 
in the fields of hierarchy theory, systems theory, and complexity. He served as 
president of the International Society for the Systems Sciences and is a member 
of the scientific advisory board of the Integral Science Institute.
Edmond Ramly is a PhD candidate and lecturer, Health Systems Engineering 
in the Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering University of 
Wisconsin–Madison.
Samantha Paulsen is a PhD candidate in the Department of Bioengineering at 
Rice University. She previously served as a Whitaker Fellow at ETH in Zurich 
Switzerland.
Gregori Kanatzidis is the Chief Technology Officer of QuantitativeIP and a 
student in the mathematics department at University of Wisconsin–Madison.
Nathan Miller is the chief software engineer at EchoMetrix LLC, in 
Madison–Wisconsin and an assistant scientist in the Department of Botany at 
University of Wisconsin–Madison where he earned his PhD in biomechanical 
engineering.
Steven Wallis earned his PhD in 2006 at Fielding Graduate University, with a 
focus on providing more rigorous integration of conceptual systems. He has a 
decade of experience as a facilitator and organizational development consultant 
in Northern California and a broad range of interdisciplinary interests. He was 
recently appointed to the Fulbright Specialist Roster. At Capella University, 
Dr. Wallis mentors doctoral candidates through the dissertation process. As 
Director for the Foundation for the Advancement of Social Theory, he supports 
emerging scholars who are working to identify rigorous paths for the validation 
of conceptual systems.
Jonathan Waskan is an associate professor of Philosophy at the Department 
of Philosophy at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign and codirec-
tor of the Psychology of Philosophy Laboratory. His current research concerns 
mental representation and the psychological basis for explanation. His publi-
cations on these topics include a research monograph, Models and Cognition 

Contributors  M  293
(MIT), and numerous articles that have appeared in journals such a Cognitive 
Science, Synthese, and Philosophical Studies.
Ian Harmon is a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Philosophy at Rice 
University. His research concerns mental representation and its implications 
for epistemology, with a focus on developing an epistemological framework 
that can accommodate nonpropositional knowledge.
Andrew Higgins recently earned his PhD from the Department of Philosophy 
at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign. His research concerns 
material object metaphysics, social network analysis of philosophy, and the 
psychology of metaphysics.
Joseph Spino is a PhD candidate in the Department of Philosophy at the 
University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign. His research is primarily focused 
on ethics, with a concentration on evaluating the use of empirical research as a 
critique of moral theories.
Lee McIntyre is a research fellow at the Center for Philosophy and History of 
Science at Boston University. Dr. McIntyre is the author of Laws and Explanation 
in the Social Sciences (Westview Press, 1996; revised edition 1998) and Dark 
Ages: The Case for a Science of Human Behavior (MIT Press, 2006). He is 
the coeditor of two anthologies: Readings in the Philosophy of Social Science 
(MIT Press, 1994) and Philosophy of Chemistry (Springer, 2006). He has been 
a leading spokesman for the Duncanian position that there is no fundamental 
demarcation between the natural sciences and the social sciences either in their 
nature or their appropriate methodologies.
Jan Faye is a philosopher of science at the University of Copenhagen, Denmark. 
He has written and edited a number of books in English as well as in Danish. 
He is the author of After Postmodernism (2012), a book about the philosophy 
of the humanities, in which he argues that a pragmatic-naturalist understand-
ing of humanistic research overcomes the traditional split in our views of the 
natural sciences and the humanities. Among his other English books published 
are The Reality of the Future (1989); Niels Bohr: His Heritage and Legacy 
(1991); and Rethinking Science (2002).
Peter Achinstein is professor of Philosophy at Johns Hopkins University, direc-
tor of the Johns Hopkins Center for History and Philosophy of Science, and 
Jay and Jeannie Schottenstein University Professor at Yeshiva University. He 
is the author of six books in the philosophy of science, including Particles and 
Waves, which received the Lakatos Award in 1993. A festschrift in his honor, 
Philosophy of Science Matters: The Philosophy of Peter Achinstein was pub-
lished by Oxford University Press in 2011.
Beckett Sterner is a postdoctoral scholar in philosophy of science at the 
University of Michigan Society of Fellows. In 2014, he completed a National 
Science Foundation (NSF) Postdoctoral Fellowship at the Field Museum on 
a collaborative project with biologist Scott Lidgard about the introduction of 
mathematical methods into biological classification and phylogenetics. His 

294  
M  Contributors
research focuses on the general question, “When and why is mathematics use-
ful for biology?”. Dr. Sterner completed his PhD in 2012 at the University of 
Chicago in Conceptual and Historical Studies of Science. His research inter-
ests include the epistemology of scientific practice and computational model-
ing, as well as the process of mathematization in scientific change.

abduction, 78, 223
accidentalism, 97–8, 102
Achinstein, 34, 206, 241–2, 244, 246, 248, 
263, 285, 293
affordance, 4–6, 8–9, 13, 35–6, 40, 53, 55, 
81, 85, 95–6, 101–4, 138, 141, 220, 225, 
227, 249, 258, 269, 274
Allen, 38, 171–2, 174, 176, 178, 180, 182–
4, 186, 188, 192, 194, 198, 263, 271, 
275, 279, 283, 292
alliances, 45
ambiguities, 3, 13, 44, 53, 89, 117, 151, 
204, 209, 257
analog, 36, 49, 163, 184–6, 260, 270, 286, 
291
analogy, 27, 47, 49, 82, 125, 137, 164, 168–
9, 185–8, 219, 223, 260–1, 292
Aristotle, 20–1, 144, 157, 186, 242, 263, 
278
Ashby, xiv, 199, 263
Austin, 34, 97–8, 103, 263
Bakhtin, 38, 263
Barker, 37, 263
Barondes, 32, 264
Bauerlein, 49, 264
Beatty, 148, 264
Bechtel, 23, 28, 45, 135, 264
Beck, 222, 264
behavior, 5, 7, 18, 31, 34, 37, 39–41, 43, 45, 
48, 78, 87, 102, 110, 112, 136–9, 143–7, 
154, 162, 175, 177, 188, 198–9, 220, 
229–31, 233, 238, 242–3, 268, 271, 274, 
277–80, 282, 287, 289, 291, 293
Behe, 75, 264
belief, 3, 10–11, 13, 17, 20, 22, 25, 29, 32, 
44–5, 51, 59–60, 66, 68, 70, 77, 79–80, 
84, 90, 93–5, 97–8, 102–4, 122, 126–7, 
130, 134–5, 154, 156–8, 163–5, 167, 
197, 204, 218, 230, 234, 236, 238, 260, 
264, 266, 270, 273, 277, 281, 283, 291
Bernstein, 12, 218, 264
Bertalanffy, 202, 281
Bhaskar, 224, 264
biology, 7, 27, 30–1, 34, 44, 48, 61, 63–4, 
69, 77, 91, 99, 115–16, 118–19, 133–5, 
138–41, 143–4, 147–50, 152–4, 156, 
163, 169–70, 172–8, 181, 187, 193–7, 
199, 202, 215, 219, 236–7, 255, 263–6, 
269–71, 273–6, 278–83, 286–7, 290–1, 
293–4
Blunden, 225, 264
Boden, 25, 264
Bohm, 182, 217, 264
Braverman, 205, 265
Broad, 6, 116, 144, 205, 224, 255, 265, 292
Bruner, 45–6, 265
Buber, 217
Bunge, 47, 265
Bunzl, 30, 265
Cabrera, 197, 199, 265
Carnap, 26–7, 265
Caro, 39, 267
Carr, 7, 219, 265
Cartwright, 134, 148, 245, 265–6
category, 6, 8–10, 13, 19, 21, 26–8, 35–6, 
40–2, 78, 80, 143–4, 151, 163, 200–1, 
203–4, 216, 220, 231, 235, 238,  
276, 287
Index

296  
M  Index
cause, 7, 10, 22, 25–6, 28, 30–7, 39–40, 
42–3, 46–54, 63–5, 78, 84, 87, 91, 95, 
97, 99, 105, 110, 115–19, 122, 127–30, 
138, 143–8, 152–3, 165, 173, 193–4, 
199–202, 204, 206, 219–21, 225, 230–1, 
234, 238, 242, 246, 253, 256–7, 265, 
268–70, 272, 274–5, 277–9, 282–3, 286, 
289, 291
Ceteris Paribus, 5, 7, 10–11, 22, 48, 52–3, 
148, 291
Checkland, 197
Chomsky, 155, 266
Churchland, 28, 46, 204, 266
codes, 40, 45, 104, 173
cognition, 5–7, 9, 18, 29, 31, 35, 45, 47, 49, 
54–5, 83–4, 94–5, 99, 102, 104–5, 119, 
152–3, 155, 157–8, 162–4, 167–70, 197, 
199, 220, 231, 233–7, 239, 264–7,  
270–1, 273, 275–6, 279–81, 285–9, 
291–3
Cohen, 266, 270, 275
Coherence, xv, 11–12, 23, 96–7, 164, 170, 
199, 202, 238, 258, 273, 280–1, 283, 
287, 289
Colosi, 197, 265
complexity, 5, 8, 23, 31, 33–7, 39, 47, 
50–2, 64, 88, 99, 102, 104, 112, 119, 
121–3, 125, 127, 129, 131, 135, 137, 139, 
141, 143–5, 147–52, 155–6, 161, 163, 
168–71, 173, 175, 177, 179, 181, 183–5, 
187, 192–3, 195–6, 198–200, 203–4, 
208, 215–16, 225–6, 229–31, 238, 245, 
249–50, 253–7, 263–5, 267, 269, 271–3, 
275–6, 278, 280–3, 286–92
complicated, 4, 38, 54, 85, 111, 121, 130, 
146, 158, 165, 169, 176–7, 183–5, 198–9, 
225, 253, 257
concept, 12–13, 26–7, 29, 31, 41–2, 46–52, 
54, 57, 69, 81–2, 91, 95–6, 98, 100–1, 
119, 123, 129, 133, 136, 147–9, 151–2, 
163, 166, 174, 185, 197–202, 213,  
216–17, 219, 221, 225, 229, 249–56, 
264–5, 268–72, 274–8, 280–2, 285–7, 
290–2, 294
Connell, 182, 266
constraint, 3, 9, 13, 37–8, 48, 53, 55,  
112–13, 117–19, 137, 205, 233, 274
constructivism, 9, 11, 13–15, 31, 39–40, 
44–9, 52–3, 73, 76, 79, 83, 86–7, 90, 
93–9, 101–5, 110, 117–18, 137–9, 152, 
156, 178, 198, 221–2, 224–6, 230,  
234–5, 237–8, 249–51, 257–8, 260–1, 
263, 266, 268, 273, 275–7, 279–82,  
285, 288
context, 1, 5–14, 19–23, 25–7, 29–31, 
33–41, 43–5, 47–53, 55, 57, 60, 66, 
80–1, 83, 88–90, 93–4, 96, 102–3, 113, 
127, 133–5, 141, 143, 146, 150–1, 153, 
158, 164, 182, 192, 195, 217, 219, 224–5, 
233–6, 242, 246–8, 250–3, 258, 260–1, 
265, 267, 274, 276, 286–8
contingency, 7, 9–11, 13, 35, 37, 48, 51, 53, 
55, 143, 147–50, 216–17, 224–5, 235, 
250, 264
Craik, 38, 46, 266
Craver, 28, 31, 55, 135, 203–4, 254, 266, 
274, 285
creationism, 45, 59–70, 73, 75–7, 79–80, 
82, 84–8, 90–5, 97–8, 101–4, 156, 162, 
176, 200, 202, 217, 230, 236–7, 250, 
263–4, 271–2, 274–5, 277, 290
Cummins, 205, 266
Cupchik, 39, 49, 94, 97, 266
cybernetics, 45, 261, 263, 270, 281, 283, 
289
Dallmyr, 107, 266
Danto, 35, 266, 272
Darden, 28, 135, 266, 274
Darwin, 60, 67, 75–6, 79–80, 86–8, 91, 
153, 158, 199, 237, 264, 267–8, 271, 
276, 280, 283, 285, 290
Dennett, 152–3, 157, 267
description, 4–5, 7–8, 20, 22, 28, 30, 32, 
35–6, 43, 48–9, 81–3, 88, 96, 99–101, 
103–4, 128, 163, 201, 208, 231, 234, 
237–8, 244, 253–4, 257, 277
design, 6, 44, 47, 60, 62, 65–7, 69–70, 
76–7, 85–6, 99, 112, 198, 220, 230, 236, 
268–70, 274, 279, 283, 285
Devitt, 78, 101, 267
Dewey, 15, 50, 267
Dilthey, 30, 234, 252
Droysen, 30, 234
Dubin, 201, 267
Duhem, 25, 267
Eco, 21, 153, 267
ecological, 31, 36, 76–7, 99, 110, 175, 178, 
193, 199, 263, 269, 283, 292

Index  M  297
economics, 4–5, 59, 154–5, 157, 161–5, 
167–70, 198, 215, 222, 229–31, 268, 
273–4
Edmonds, 49, 267
Einstein, 104, 154, 267, 275, 280
Elgin, 135, 267
Ellerman, 115, 268
Elster, 166, 268
emerge, 6, 18–19, 21, 23, 35–6, 38, 47–8, 
50–1, 59, 94, 97, 99, 118–19, 122, 126, 
143–7, 151, 163, 174, 176, 180, 201, 
223, 230–1, 238, 245, 250, 252, 255, 
261, 268–70, 272–5, 278, 281–2, 286, 
289–92
Emmeche, 48, 268
environment, 5–6, 29, 32, 36–7, 44–7, 55, 
85, 94–6, 99, 101–2, 112, 145, 152, 177, 
199, 202, 216, 220, 224–5, 238, 263, 
279, 292
episteme, 7, 14, 21–2, 26, 30–1, 34, 36, 39, 
41–4, 49, 55, 77, 84–6, 91, 94, 101, 122, 
124, 135, 141, 143, 174, 177, 203–4, 
220, 223–6, 233, 236, 238, 251, 254, 
256, 267–8, 270, 276–7, 279–81, 288, 
291, 293–4
Epstein, 105, 268
Erbele, 218, 268
evidence, 15, 29, 46, 50–1, 54, 57, 59, 65, 
69–70, 76–80, 85–7, 93, 95, 100, 103, 
121, 134, 145, 153, 158–9, 162, 165–7, 
198, 205, 215, 219, 221, 229–31, 236, 
265, 269
evolution, 44, 46, 59–70, 73, 75–7, 79, 
86–91, 93–5, 97–9, 101–4, 110, 116, 
119, 148, 151–3, 155–6, 158, 162, 167, 
176, 178, 181–2, 187–8, 193, 199, 230, 
236–7, 256, 263–4, 266, 269–71, 273–
4, 278–80, 282, 285, 288, 290–1
experience, 6, 16, 28, 38, 44–6, 49–50, 63, 
95, 101–2, 104–5, 126, 153, 155, 169, 
171–3, 176–8, 181, 183, 192–5, 216–18, 
220, 225, 229, 253, 267, 292
fact, 3, 15–17, 19–21, 25, 28–31, 33, 41–2, 
44, 46, 48, 50–1, 54, 59, 64, 66–9, 83, 
87–8, 91, 94, 96–8, 102–4, 107, 109–10, 
113, 119, 135, 138, 151–3, 157, 164, 
170–3, 176, 182, 193, 203, 205, 212–13, 
219–20, 223, 236–8, 241, 246–7, 249, 
255–6, 260, 269–70, 275
falsifiability, 8, 61, 97, 100, 102, 104,  
162, 273
Faye, 33–4, 100, 233–4, 236–8, 257, 260, 
268, 293
Ferraris, 39, 267
foundation, 8, 17, 19–20, 45, 66, 70, 82, 
86, 96, 130, 153, 157, 275, 286, 290, 
292–3
Fraassen van, 33, 50, 93, 107, 237, 281
Franklin, 77, 268
Fundierung, 95–7, 103–4, 227
Funtowicz, 171, 268
Gabriel, 54, 269
Gadamer, 12, 15–16, 217–18, 220, 252, 269
Gee, 77, 269
Gibson, 4, 101, 269
Giere, 107, 237, 286
Gilovich, 28, 269
Glasersfeld, 45, 97, 281–2
Glennan, 34, 36, 48, 269
Glymour, 122, 128, 130, 269, 272, 280, 
286
Goldstein, 144, 269
Goodman, 221, 269
Gould, 15–16, 152, 269
Graber, 3–4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 75–6, 78, 
80, 82, 84, 86, 88, 90, 92, 215–16, 218, 
220, 222, 224, 226, 234–7, 249–52, 289
Graham, 51, 270
Griffiths, 205, 280
Guba, 48, 273
Habermas, 222, 270, 288
Hacking, 163, 270
Ham, 70, 76–7, 79–80, 85, 92, 274, 277
Hanson, 33, 50, 270
Harmon, 203, 265, 282, 293
Hawking, 31, 270
Haynie, 116, 270
Heidegger, 219, 252
Hempel, 10, 22, 26, 28, 32–3, 54–5, 115, 
134, 203–4, 243, 254, 270
Henderson, 79, 270, 286
hermeneutics, 5–6, 12, 14, 25, 216–19, 
221, 225–6, 252, 264, 268, 277, 279, 
281, 286
Hesse, 39, 263, 270
heuristics, 43, 47, 226, 286, 290
Higgins, 203, 265, 279, 293

298  
M  Index
Hiltzik, 69, 271
Hoekstra, 174, 178, 263
Hong, 95, 103, 105, 271
Horgan, 79, 270
Humphreys, 203, 271, 286
Husserl, 216
inference, 6, 20–2, 31, 49–50, 57, 68, 
78–80, 91, 99, 117, 122, 127, 130, 153, 
164–9, 179, 182, 200–1, 219, 252, 264, 
276, 279, 286, 291
Juarrero, 17–18, 20, 22, 27, 271, 289–90
Kagan, 30, 271, 286
Kahneman, 15, 113, 271, 286
Kaidesoja, 42, 45, 52, 271
Kaiser, 223, 266, 269, 271, 275, 280–1
Kanatzidis, 171, 292
Kant, 22, 235, 271
Karsenti, 144, 271
Keefe, 117, 199, 271, 276
Keil, 204, 272, 286
Kellert, 31, 272
Kelly, 34, 94, 121–2, 124, 126, 128, 130, 
272, 291
Kennedy, 51, 64, 287
Kesseboehmer, 38, 283
Keynes, 162–3
Kim, 144, 241, 272
Kitcher, 28, 50, 122, 272, 278
Kleidon, 117, 272
Klochko, 198, 272
Kopplin, 59–60, 62, 64–70, 75–7, 79, 100, 
104, 236, 290
Korzybski, 172, 272
Koslowski, 77, 273
Krummaker, 199, 279
Kuhn, 36, 83, 131, 177, 182–3, 237, 273
Labov, 155, 273
Lakatos, 162, 273, 293
Lane, 197, 271, 273, 278
law, 4, 7, 10–11, 13, 18, 21–2, 27, 29–34, 
36, 39, 43, 45–6, 48–9, 54, 60–4, 66–7, 
71, 89, 93, 100, 103, 107, 109, 112,  
115–19, 121, 124, 127, 134–5, 143,  
146–50, 154, 158, 174–5, 177, 179–81, 
187, 193–4, 199, 216, 219–20, 233, 
235, 237, 242–8, 250, 255, 260, 263–6, 
270–1, 274–5, 279, 281, 283, 285–7, 
290–1, 293
Leibniz, 121
level, 6, 9, 23, 29, 39, 52, 54, 61, 65, 67, 69, 
109–12, 119, 129, 136, 139, 141, 144–7, 
149, 153, 161–3, 167–72, 175, 177–80, 
182–3, 187–8, 192, 194–5, 199–201, 
203, 217, 221, 231, 235, 238, 247, 252, 
255, 268, 275
Levins, 37, 273
Lincoln, 48, 273
Lipton, 79, 245, 273
Lissack, xv, 3–4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 25–6, 
28, 30, 32, 34, 36, 38, 40, 42, 44, 46, 48, 
50, 52, 54, 93–4, 96, 98, 100, 102, 104, 
215–16, 218, 220, 222, 224, 226, 234–5, 
237, 249–52, 257–8, 260, 273, 287, 289
Litt, 204, 281
Little, 4, 29, 33, 52, 62–3, 65, 68, 77–80, 
118, 124, 138–40, 145, 151, 166, 192, 
204, 224
Lobdell, 197, 265
Lombrozo, 204, 273
Lorand, 29, 273
Lucas, 173, 280
Lundberg, 47, 274
Luskin, 93, 274
Machamer, 28, 135, 274
Macklem, 99, 274
Mahabharata, 158
Maillat, 95, 274
Marx, 223, 274
Matsuno, 117, 274
Matthews, 105, 274
McGhee, 75, 274
McGrenere, 101, 274
mechanism, 5, 8–11, 21, 23, 26, 28, 30–1, 
33–4, 36–7, 43, 48, 51–3, 63, 73, 75, 
83, 98–9, 101, 111, 135–6, 138–9, 141, 
143–7, 161–4, 167–71, 177, 215–16, 234, 
236–8, 242–3, 245, 257, 261, 264–6, 
269, 274–5, 279–80, 286–7
Meehl, 201, 274
Mele, 166, 274
memories, 15, 94, 154, 159, 206–12, 265, 
278, 286
metaphor, 11, 21, 36, 39, 102, 107, 156, 
168, 185–8, 197, 225, 250, 266, 270, 
277, 285, 287

Index  M  299
method, 4–5, 12, 16, 21, 30–1, 35–7, 47–9, 
55, 57, 60–1, 66, 68, 78–80, 84–8, 92, 
99–100, 102–5, 121–5, 127–9, 131, 153, 
161, 169–70, 172, 177, 180, 196, 198–9, 
203, 205, 212, 215, 217, 221, 229–31, 
235–7, 248, 250–2, 263, 268–70, 273, 
275, 277–9, 282, 291, 293
Meyer, 75, 274
Mill, 144, 166, 274
Miller, 28, 32, 171, 275, 292
mind, 5, 18, 22, 26, 29, 41, 49, 54, 68–70, 
73, 79, 83, 85, 90, 94, 107, 119, 130, 
143–4, 163–4, 170, 173, 192, 197–9, 
201, 235, 241, 251, 253, 257, 264–6, 
268–70, 272, 274–7, 279–83, 285–9, 
292
Minsky, 168, 275
Mitchell, 10, 52, 143–4, 146, 148, 150, 
199, 222, 238, 255–6, 275–6, 286, 291
Mlodinow, 31, 270
mobius strip, 7, 11, 14, 225, 258, 261
model, 5–6, 9, 11, 14–15, 22–3, 27–8, 
31–3, 35–9, 41, 49, 51–3, 64–5,  
84–5, 95, 99–101, 103–4, 107, 115–17, 
122, 133–41, 149–50, 164, 169, 171–88, 
192–7, 200, 203–4, 208, 210, 216,  
218, 222–3, 231, 234–5, 243–4, 249, 
251, 254–6, 258, 260–1, 264–7, 269, 
272–3, 275–8, 280–3, 286–8, 290–2, 
294
Moreno, 48, 275
Morgan, 134, 144, 266, 275
Morris, 98–9, 275
Morrison, 134, 275
Mossio, 48, 275
Nagai, 52, 269
Nagel, 12, 34, 102, 161, 241–4, 275
Nair, 151–2, 154, 156, 158, 255, 275, 291
narrative, 3, 6–10, 12, 17–18, 32, 38, 40, 
45, 53, 69, 97–8, 151–9, 171, 173–7, 179, 
181–8, 192–5, 199, 219, 234, 249–50, 
255, 261, 265–6, 273, 275, 283
Nathan, 171, 292
Needham, 192, 275
Nersessian, 133–4, 136, 138, 140, 204, 
222–3, 253, 275–6, 282, 291
Neubert, 101, 275
Newton, 11, 21, 83, 111, 148, 177, 243, 
246–8, 263, 275
Nietzsche, 28, 275
Nor, 15, 20, 22, 38, 42, 81, 96, 99, 102, 
148, 175, 177, 222, 234–5, 237, 243, 
245–7
Nussbaum, 166–7
Nye, 76, 274
observe, 3–4, 6–7, 9–10, 12, 16, 27, 37,  
41, 55, 76–8, 80, 82, 85, 88, 90, 92, 
100–3, 127, 153, 156–7, 172–81,  
187–8, 193–5, 202, 216, 237, 258, 
260–1, 279
ontology, 7, 11, 14, 17, 19, 21–2, 30, 33, 
39–41, 44–5, 48–9, 52, 80, 82–5, 97, 
100, 121, 224–6, 235–8, 250–1, 266–7, 
271, 280
order, 8–9, 13, 18–19, 25, 28–9, 31, 35, 
40, 43, 45, 47, 61–2, 68, 78, 81, 84, 101, 
103–4, 110–11, 119, 122, 126–7, 129, 
131, 133–5, 139–40, 146, 148–50, 159, 
161, 167, 170, 172, 182, 200, 205, 210, 
219, 230, 236, 241, 243–5, 249, 255–6, 
261, 264, 268, 282
orthogonal, 7–8, 13, 15, 39, 47, 50, 52, 151, 
224–6, 249–51, 258, 261
Orzack, 41, 276
Oulasvirta, 40–1, 44, 47, 276
Overton, 205, 276
Palmarini, 15, 268, 276
paradigm, 4–5, 11, 17, 81, 83, 102, 136, 
153, 177–8, 182–3, 206, 222–3, 237, 
269, 273, 275–6
Pask, 7, 276
Passmore, 27, 280
Pattee, 174, 177, 276
pattern, 17–18, 27–8, 30–2, 37, 40, 42, 
45–6, 50–1, 82, 94–5, 103–5, 127–8, 
137–8, 144, 157, 165, 179, 201, 248, 256, 
271, 278
Paulsen, 171, 292
Pearl, 128, 276
Perino, 198, 282
phenomena, 4, 17, 19–21, 23, 30–2,  
35–6, 39, 42–4, 46, 49–50, 52, 54,  
73, 75, 79, 89, 96–7, 99, 103–4, 110, 
115, 133–6, 138–41, 143, 145, 147,  
149–51, 153–5, 170, 223, 230–1, 235, 
238, 243–4, 246–7, 256, 268–9,  
274, 285

300  
M  Index
physics, 4–7, 11, 30–2, 40, 48, 84–6, 
89–90, 109, 121, 127, 133–4, 147, 
149–51, 154, 156, 170, 174, 192, 222–3, 
231–2, 237–8, 241–5, 248, 250, 263, 
265, 268, 279, 288
physiology, 30, 119, 168, 274
Piaget, 5, 45, 276
Piattelli, 15, 268, 276
Pinillos, 206, 277
Plato, 20, 130, 176
Poerksen, 95, 281
Poulton, 158, 277
Powell, 206, 277
Praetorius, 104, 277
pragmatics, 4, 6, 9, 11–15, 26, 29, 33, 41, 
44–5, 48–51, 55, 66, 73, 81, 85, 93, 
95–7, 99, 101–5, 134, 149–50, 152, 
203, 216–19, 221, 224–6, 235, 237–8, 
249–51, 255–6, 258, 263–4, 268, 271, 
274–6, 288, 291, 293
prediction, 3–4, 6–8, 10–11, 16, 21–2, 26, 
30, 32–6, 38, 43, 46–7, 49, 55, 76, 78, 
99–100, 103–4, 121–2, 127, 130, 133–4, 
140, 149, 153–4, 157, 162, 170, 183, 
193–4, 200–1, 219–20, 223, 256, 261, 
266–8, 280, 283
principle, 9, 18–19, 21, 29, 31, 34, 43, 59, 
76, 83, 95, 100, 110–11, 117–19, 121–2, 
144, 236, 276
process, 3, 6, 12, 14, 27, 33–4, 36, 44–5, 
50, 55, 73, 76, 78, 80, 94–5, 97, 99,  
103–5, 107, 111, 115, 117–19, 135, 
137, 139, 141, 144, 152–3, 155, 157–8, 
169, 176–8, 183, 186–8, 195–8, 204, 
208–10, 217, 234, 237, 249, 251–3, 256, 
258–60, 271, 279, 288, 292, 294
Prometheus, 18, 279
properties, 4, 19, 23, 30, 39, 41, 43, 47, 
51, 100–1, 110, 136–7, 143–7, 163, 
219–20, 225, 238, 242, 246, 255–6, 
279, 289
Psillos, 54, 277
psychology, 44, 46, 83–4, 94, 104, 134, 
143, 152, 154–5, 162, 164–7, 198, 
203–5, 208, 212, 237, 253–5, 264, 266, 
268–9, 272, 274, 276–8, 281–2, 286–7, 
290–3
Putnam, 237, 276–7
Quine, 20, 28, 277
Raiffa, 161–2
Rakover, 31, 35, 271, 273
Ravetz, 171, 268
Rawls, 221, 277
realism, 4, 9, 11, 13–15, 27–9, 32, 37, 39–45, 
47–9, 51–4, 73, 75, 77, 79–91, 93, 95–8, 
100–1, 104–5, 171–2, 175, 215, 220–6, 
230–1, 235, 237–8, 249–1, 258, 261, 
264–7, 269–1, 274, 276–80, 285, 287
recursion, 5, 7, 12, 31, 151, 154–5, 217
Regt de, 26, 141, 267, 288
regularities, 8–9, 22, 31–2, 36, 39, 43, 
51–2, 110, 112, 216–17, 224, 282
representation, 12, 14, 26, 28, 35, 37, 39, 
41–3, 45–6, 97, 99–102, 107, 116,  
118, 135, 137–9, 153, 163–4, 167, 185, 
200–1, 204–6, 218–20, 222, 234–5, 
237, 260–1, 277, 281, 283, 286, 290–3
Rescher, 30, 277, 288
Reutlinger, 31, 277
Rich, 13, 49, 195, 260, 277
Ricoeur, 5, 277
Robertson, 93, 98, 277
Rorty, 15–16, 21, 28, 49, 104, 220, 277, 281
Rosen, 39, 95, 99–100, 172, 174, 177, 
184–5, 260, 266, 277–8
Rosenberg, 40, 278
Rota, 96–7, 278
Runciman, 5, 278
Russell, 50, 286
Russo, 31, 269, 278, 286
Salmon, 22, 26, 30, 33, 43, 47, 51, 201, 
203–4, 243, 272, 278
Salthe, 115–19, 222, 263, 274, 278, 290
Samarapungavan, 46, 265
Satish, 198, 278
Sayer, 32, 42, 53, 278
Schalk, 201, 266
Schank, 32, 46, 52, 54, 278–9
Scheines, 128, 279–80, 283
Schiele, 199, 279
Schruijer, 201, 266
Schueler, 38, 40, 279
Schutz, 218, 279
Scriven, 30, 32, 206, 279
Searle, 38, 43, 53, 153, 157, 279
sentience, 6, 45, 48, 188
Shakespeare, 166
Shermer, 29, 31, 279

Index  M  301
Shirvani, 198, 281
Shklar, 218, 279
Simon, 204, 275, 279–80
simple, 6, 9, 34–5, 37, 39, 65, 76, 83, 90, 
102, 110, 121–3, 125–31, 139, 177, 198, 
219, 229, 231, 245, 251, 272
situated, 7, 15, 19, 25, 27, 35–6, 38, 47, 
49–50, 52, 80, 94, 101–2, 104, 117–19, 
128, 140, 156, 161, 163, 169, 172–3, 
185–6, 195, 216, 229, 233, 235, 245, 
260, 270, 280
Smedt, 77, 267
Sober, 51, 148, 279–80
Soros, 163, 170, 280
Souter, 39, 279
Sperber, 95, 270, 280
Sterelny, 99, 280
Stinchcombe, 200, 280
stories, 7, 15–19, 23, 28, 31, 38, 45, 54, 67, 
70, 82, 84, 93, 113, 121, 123, 128, 136, 
145, 147, 151–8, 168, 177, 182–3, 187, 
193, 208, 219–20, 223, 225, 230, 255, 
277, 285
Stotz, 205, 280
structure, 5, 10, 12, 25–7, 31, 33, 36–9, 
41–2, 45–6, 49, 53–4, 68, 77, 81, 86, 91, 
99, 104, 110, 119, 135–6, 138, 143–4, 
146–50, 153–8, 174–8, 180, 184, 186, 
188, 197–202, 216, 219, 222, 233–4, 
251–5, 257, 260, 266–7, 269, 272–3, 
275–6, 278–9, 286, 290, 292
Suchman, 27, 280
Suedfeld, 199, 280
synecdoche, 11, 95, 102–4, 258
system, 4–7, 12, 27, 31, 34, 36–7, 43, 45–8, 
54, 59–60, 70, 89, 94, 97, 99–100, 
103–4, 110–12, 116, 119, 122–4, 126–7, 
133, 135–41, 144–8, 150, 156, 163, 166, 
168–71, 173, 175–7, 179–81, 183, 185–7, 
192–3, 195, 197–202, 215, 238, 242–3, 
251, 255–6, 263–6, 269, 271–2, 275, 
277–83, 285, 287–92
Szathmary, 119, 279–80
Tainter, 173, 263, 280
Tamminen, 40–1, 44, 47, 276
Tetlock, 199, 280
Thagard, 161–2, 164, 166, 168, 170, 202, 
204–5, 219, 280–1, 291–2
Theiner, 45, 281
theorem, 27, 125–7, 129, 218
theory, 4–5, 7, 12, 21, 23, 29–32, 35–6, 
38–9, 42–3, 45–6, 49, 51, 57, 59, 66–7, 
69–70, 75–93, 95–103, 107, 109–10, 
121–2, 124–6, 129–31, 134–5, 139, 
152–9, 161–2, 164, 166–7, 178, 182–3, 
198–205, 208, 210, 215–16, 218–19, 
222–3, 229–32, 234, 237–8, 241–2, 
244–52, 254–6, 263–83, 285–93
think, 3–6, 8, 10, 12, 20, 28, 35, 49–50, 
60–2, 64–70, 75–8, 80–3, 85, 87, 
93, 97, 115–17, 119, 122, 124–5, 135, 
137–8, 140, 143–4, 149, 152–3, 156–7, 
162–9, 171, 173, 182, 192, 195, 197, 
202, 219, 221–3, 227, 229–30, 232, 
234–5, 237–8, 241, 247, 252, 256–7, 
260, 265–6, 268, 271, 274–5, 279, 282, 
285–9, 292
truth, 4, 8–9, 11–13, 16, 21–2, 33–4, 38, 
41–3, 47, 55, 60, 68, 71, 75–6, 78–85, 
88, 90, 95–9, 101–2, 104–5, 107, 121–5, 
127–31, 148–9, 151, 193, 216–17, 220–1, 
223, 235–6, 238, 246, 250, 255, 258, 
260, 265, 267, 269–72, 277, 279, 281, 
287, 291
Tucker, 51, 219, 281
Twining, 57, 281
Umpleby, 197, 281
uncertainty, 3, 36, 70, 152, 158, 183, 192, 
223, 266, 270, 272, 280–1, 286, 291
Vaihinger, 95, 258, 281
Varela, 95, 281
Verges, 220, 281
Viale, 42, 47–8, 51, 281
Vosniadou, 204, 282
Vygotsky, 198, 224–5, 272, 282
Wallis, 197–202, 282, 292
Walton, 78, 264
Warfield, 198, 282
Waskan, 203–6, 208, 210, 212, 253–6, 
265, 282, 292
Waters, 148, 193–4, 282
Weber, 29–30, 216, 267–8, 273, 282–3
Weick, 199, 282
Weinberg, 244, 248, 283, 288
Wheeler, 119, 282–3
White, 38, 194, 283

302  
M  Index
Wiener, 46, 283
Wilkes, 25, 283
will, 5–8, 11, 14–15, 19–21, 25, 27, 35,  
37, 39, 43–4, 46, 48, 50, 54–5, 60–1,  
63, 71, 80, 82–3, 85, 87, 89, 91, 94–6, 
99, 101–5, 107, 110–13, 116–19,  
122–3, 129, 135–6, 138–40, 144, 146, 
149–50, 155–7, 161, 164–5, 173, 176, 
178–80, 182, 186, 193–5, 197–200,  
204, 213, 216–21, 223–4, 227, 230–1, 
235, 238, 243–7, 249–50, 252–5, 258, 
260, 275
Williams, 216–17, 272–3, 283
Williamson, 90, 269, 283, 286
Wilson, 95, 128, 269, 272, 280, 286
Wimsatt, 37, 43–4, 55, 109–10, 112,  
283, 290
Windelband, 30, 234
Wixon, 173, 283
Woodward, 10, 52–3, 148, 283
Wright, 30, 282
Yang, 121, 202, 273, 282
Ylikoski, 38, 43, 52, 268, 276
Yolles, 202, 283
York, 13, 248, 263–83, 285–8, 290
Zellmer, 38, 174, 176–9, 181, 183, 185, 
187–8, 192
Zizek, 152, 283

