
FOOD ISN’T 
MEDICINE
Copyrighted Material

Copyrighted Material

FOOD ISN’T 
MEDICINE
CHALLENGE NUTRIBOLLOCKS  
& ESCAPE THE DIET TRAP
DR JOSHUA WOLRICH
BSc (Hons) MBBS MRCS
Copyrighted Material

1
Vermilion, an imprint of Ebury Publishing,
20 Vauxhall Bridge Road,
London SW1V 2SA
Vermilion is part of the Penguin Random House group of companies
whose addresses can be found at global.penguinrandomhouse.com
Copyright © Dr Joshua Wolrich 2021
Illustrations © Joel Stewart 2021
Dr Joshua Wolrich has asserted his right to be identified as the author of this
Work in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988
First published by Vermilion in 2021
www.penguin.co.uk
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 9781785043451
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Clays Ltd, Elcograf S.p.A.
The authorised representative in the EEA is Penguin Random House Ireland, 
Morrison Chambers, 32 Nassau Street, Dublin D02 YH68.
Penguin Random House is committed to  
a sustainable future for our business, our readers  
and our planet. This book is made from Forest  
Stewardship Council® certified paper.
The information in this book has been compiled as general guidance on the specific 
subjects addressed. It is not a substitute and not to be relied on for medical, healthcare 
or pharmaceutical professional advice. Please consult your GP before changing, 
stopping or starting any medical treatment. So far as the author is aware the information 
given is correct and up to date as at February 2021. Practice, laws and regulations all 
change and the reader should obtain up to date professional advice on any such issues. 
The author and publishers disclaim, as far as the law allows, any liability arising directly 
or indirectly from the use or misuse of the information contained in this book.
Copyrighted Material

For those experiencing weight stigma:  
please know you deserve so much better and  
I promise not to stop until you get it.
Copyrighted Material

Copyrighted Material

CONTENTS
Preface 
1
1 Pringles and Ice Cream 
13
2 Your Weight Does Not Deﬁ ne Your Health 
31
3 Food Isn’t Medicine 
61
4 Stop Demonising Carbs 
77
‘CARBOHYDRATES AREN’T ESSENTIAL’ 
89
‘CARBS MAKE YOU FAT’ 
90
‘SUGAR MAKES YOU FAT’ 
93
‘DIABETICS SHOULDN’T EAT CARBS’ 
97
‘SUGAR CAUSES TYPE 2 DIABETES’ 
100
‘SUGAR IS AS ADDICTIVE AS COCAINE’ 
104
‘ARTIFICIAL SWEETENERS ARE HARMFUL’ 
108
5 Is Eating Fat Bad for You? 
113
‘SATURATED FAT DOESN’T INCREASE 
CARDIOVASCULAR RISK’ 
120
‘DIETARY CHOLESTEROL IS BAD FOR YOUR HEALTH’ 
124
Copyrighted Material

‘DAIRY CAUSES INFLAMMATION’
126
‘EATING EGGS IS AS BAD AS SMOKING’
128
‘VEGETABLE OIL IS TOXIC’
131
‘COCONUT OIL IS A SUPERFOOD AND THE ONLY  
OIL YOU SHOULD USE’
134
‘DIETARY GUIDELINES ON FAT ARE WRONG’
135
6	 Ketogenic Diets and Intermittent Fasting
139
‘THE KETOGENIC DIET IS THE BEST DIET FOR  
WEIGHT LOSS’
147
‘THE KETOGENIC DIET CAN CURE TYPE 2 DIABETES’
152
‘THERE ARE NO DOWNSIDES TO FOLLOWING A  
KETO DIET’
153
‘KETOSIS CHANGES VAGINAL ODOUR’
158
‘THE KETOGENIC DIET CURES MENTAL HEALTH  
DISORDERS’
159
‘KETONE DRINKS CAUSE WEIGHT LOSS’
160
‘INTERMITTENT FASTING ALLOWS YOU TO EAT 
WHATEVER YOU LIKE AND NOT GAIN WEIGHT’
164
‘INTERMITTENT FASTING CAN REVERSE AGEING’
167
‘INTERMITTENT FASTING REVERSES TYPE 2  
DIABETES’
169
7	 Meat and Two Veg
171
‘VEGAN DIETS ARE ALWAYS HEALTHIER THAN  
ONES WITH ANIMAL PRODUCTS’
175
‘MILK CONTAINS PUS’
177
‘MILK LEACHES CALCIUM FROM YOUR BONES  
AND CAUSES OSTEOPOROSIS’
179
Copyrighted Material

‘A VEGETARIAN DIET CAN REVERSE HEART  
DISEASE’
181
‘BROCCOLI HAS MORE PROTEIN THAN STEAK’
183
‘RAW VEGAN DIETS ARE THE HEALTHIEST’
184
‘EATING TOO MUCH PROTEIN CAUSES KIDNEY  
DISEASE’
185
‘THE CARNIVORE DIET CURES AUTOIMMUNE  
DISEASE’
188
‘THE CARNIVORE DIET CURES DEPRESSION AND  
MENTAL HEALTH DISORDERS’
190
8	 Food Cannot Cure Cancer
197
‘YOU’VE GOT CANCER BECAUSE  
[INSERT REASON HERE]’
202
‘OB*SITY CAUSES CANCER’
206
‘SUGAR CAUSES CANCER’
210
‘SUGAR FEEDS CANCER’
212
‘ALKALINE DIETS CURE CANCER’
213
‘ARTIFICIAL SWEETENERS CAUSE CANCER’
218
‘RED AND PROCESSED MEAT GIVES YOU CANCER’
219
‘DAIRY CAUSES CANCER’
223
‘FASTING PREVENTS/CURES CANCER’
226
‘JUICING CURES CANCER’
228
‘ORGANIC FOOD REDUCES CANCER RISK’
232
‘PESTICIDES GIVE YOU CANCER’
234
‘SOY CAUSES BREAST CANCER’ 
235
‘ANTIPERSPIRANTS CAUSE BREAST CANCER’ 
238
9	 Improving Your Relationship With Food
241
Copyrighted Material

Further Resources
255
References
257
Acknowledgements
281
Index
283
Copyrighted Material

PREFACE
‘You are completely entitled to opinions that 
are not supported by evidence, but the 
moment you spread that opinion as fact, you 
are a liar, and if  you spread it as fact 
knowing that it’s not supported by evidence, 
you are both a liar and a fraud.’
OCCAM’S BARBER
Copyrighted Material

Copyrighted Material

O
n the 16th of August 2020, Justin Bieber and I became 
friends.
Okay fine, he publicly told me to ‘fuck off’ for challenging him 
in front of his then 144 million Instagram followers, but that’s basic­
ally the same thing, right? Friend, acquaintance, mortal enemy . . . 
what’s the difference?!
I’ll explain how that all came about in a second, but first let me 
introduce myself. I’m an NHS junior doctor currently in the mid­
dle of a postgraduate master’s degree in nutrition. I’ve grown 
increasingly frustrated over the last few years seeing how some 
medical doctors have become bolder in believing that they under­
stand nutritional science. Let’s be clear right out of the gate; the 
scientific study of the relationship between diet and health is not 
the same discipline that we get taught in medical school, other­
wise my current academic study would be a waste of money. 
Doctors are first and foremost biomedical scientists, meaning that 
we focus on learning how the human body functions in order to 
understand and treat disease. There’s less overlap with nutrition 
Copyrighted Material

4 
fOOD ISN’T MeDIcINe
than you might immediately think and an ignorance of the funda­
mental diff erences between the two disciplines has resulted in a 
truly terrible slew of books being written and published by doc­
tors way out of their lane.
Of the top 100 bestselling books on nutrition in 2018, guess 
which profession made up the biggest percentage of authorship? 
You are four times more likely to pick up a nutrition book written 
by a doctor than you would by a dietitian or nutritionist1. If this 
were the other way around and medical books were being over­
whelmingly written by people without a medical degree, I can 
guarantee you that doctors would be up in arms.
Not only that, but the nutritional advice found in these books 
varies widely and is often completely contradictory. Eat carbs, 
Copyrighted Material

Preface 
5
don’t eat carbs; eat fat, don’t eat fat; go vegan, or is it carnivore?! 
They promise weight loss and disease cures. We’ve reached a 
point now where both traditional and social media are awash with 
so much nonsense that it’s almost impossible for anyone to figure 
out what’s actually true. Oh . . . and don’t get me started on books 
that claim to explain why ‘everything we’ve been told about food 
it wrong’. Burn them all.
Nutritional science actually knows an incredible amount about 
food and its impact on our health, but facts like ‘eat more veg’ aren’t 
exactly sexy, are they? It’s much more exciting for someone to claim 
they’re ‘challenging the status quo’ and dogmatically promise a new 
solution to health and weight loss, even though those two categor­
ically aren’t even the same thing. We’ll get to that.
Food Isn’t Medicine
In my humble opinion there is one simple truth that I believe 
would solve a lot of the difficulty sifting through the misinforma­
tion when it comes to nutrition: food isn’t medicine*.
The vast majority of nutrition books rely on the opposite 
being true, despite the fact that you’d be ​­hard-​­pressed to find any­
one with formal training in dietetics or nutrition who uses the 
phrase. That alone should really tell you something.
The fact that food isn’t medicine is not a bad thing by any 
means; it’s actually a really good thing that it’s not! Our health is 
*  I’m well aware that in the context of severe eating disorders recovery this phrase 
can be very useful, especially for those requiring inpatient treatment. I’m not here 
to invalidate that. This specific exception doesn’t make the rule for the rest of us.
Copyrighted Material

6 
FOOD ISN’T MEDICINE
too often sold as something we have complete control over, and 
treating food as medicine only serves to encourage this rhetoric of 
personal responsibility. We need to stop shaming people for what 
they eat and implying that an illness was their fault for not making 
better choices.
Recognising that food isn’t medicine doesn’t mean I don’t 
believe food can have a positive impact on someone’s ​­health – ​this 
isn’t an either/or situation! Not only can the way we live our lives 
have a big impact on chronic disease, but helping people come off 
medication they believed to be lifelong is a wonderful aim. Iron­
ically, accepting the differences between food and medicine leads 
to this pursuit becoming more realistic and attainable.
Hang on a second, didn’t Hippocrates, the ​­so-​­called ‘father 
of Western medicine’, say to ‘let food be thy medicine and medi­
cine be thy food’? Sorry to burst a bubble right at the beginning 
of this book but Hippocrates never actually combined the two; 
this is simply a ​­nice-​­sounding misquote2. Although Hippocrates 
was ahead of his time back in 400 bc about many aspects of 
medicine, it’s a little problematic to be using things that he said 
(or supposedly said) as instruction on how to practise it today. 
For example, he believed that you could stop someone having a 
period by applying ‘as large a cupping instrument as possible to 
the breasts’3  . . . but no one is quoting him on that one, are 
they?
This obsession with wanting food to be medicine has resulted 
in increasing numbers of  doctors playing identity politics with 
their dietary choices. Their social media handles now include 
phrases like ‘low-​­carb’ or ‘carnivore’ as a badge of  honour. 
Copyrighted Material

Preface 
7
When diet infiltrates someone’s identity it can all too often lead 
to bias and ​­closed-​­mindedness. When shown evidence that puts 
this new part of  who they are into question, do you really think 
they’re going to take the time to genuinely explore it? We are all 
perfectly entitled to choose to eat a certain way, but as doctors 
we have to keep this from being projected onto patients during a 
consultation.
Back to Bieber
I’d come across a post that Justin had made on his Instagram 
with the words: ‘The Right Healthy Food Is Actually Medicine’. 
The caption underneath doubled down and read: ‘If you are 
feeling anxious or depressed a lot of it has to do with our diet! 
Try changing up your diet! It has helped me so much!!!’ I had a 
feeling that the Beliebers wouldn’t take kindly to me challenging 
him on his messaging, but I couldn’t let something like that just 
exist without trying to add some nuance, especially when it was 
by someone with so much influence. I left the following comment 
underneath:
‘The intention behind this post is good, but unfortunately 
the potential outcome is quite harmful. Food is many, 
many things but it’s not medicine. That’s not to say it isn’t ​
­important – ​it provides us with nutrition and energy to 
thrive, but it has its limitations. Anxiety and depression 
are very rarely as a result of food intake. Mental health 
is complex and boiling it down to the privilege of food 
Copyrighted Material

8 
FOOD ISN’T MEDICINE
choices is incorrect and stigmatising for those who 
struggle with it on a daily basis. For any of you who read 
this and felt a sense of guilt that if only you changed 
your food you wouldn’t struggle with mental health . . . 
please know that’s not accurate. You are doing a fantastic ​
­job – ​do not compare yourself to a celebrity with all the 
capacity for change and privilege in the world.’
My purpose here wasn’t to specifically get Bieber’s attention (it’s 
rarely ever about the original poster in these kinds of situations), 
but instead to provide some reality to those members of the public 
who might have read his post and been misled. What I couldn’t 
have predicted was the fact that he put my comment in his Insta­
gram stories and said: ‘Bro litterally [sic] fuck off lol’.
While fending off the subsequent slew of hate messages from 
his followers I ended up chatting to him over direct message for 
about an hour. He quoted the dictionary definition of medicine to 
me (a common argument) and then claimed that food can ‘heal 
your frontal lobes’ (a less common one). After quite a bit of back 
and forth in which I said things such as, ‘of course everything can 
be taken out of context but that’s not an excuse to ignore the 
impact our words can have’, I noticed that he’d actually changed 
the caption on his post very slightly to add some nuance. Instead 
of saying, ‘If you are feeling anxious or depressed a lot of it has to 
do with our diet’, it now read, ‘. . . it can often have a lot to do 
with our diet’. Movement in the right direction, however small, is 
movement nonetheless.
The last thing he said to me was, ‘the tone of my fuck off was 
Copyrighted Material

Preface 
9
meant to be cheeky not mean’. I’m taking that reassurance to 
imply we’re now friends. My DMs are always open Justin.
Not another diet book
This book has been a labour of love and I really hope that you find 
it useful when navigating the current state of nutritional discourse. 
I want this to be an encyclopaedia of nutribollocks that you can 
refer back to time and time again after the first read through.
nutribollocks /njʊˈtrɪbɒləks/
noun vulgar slang • british
nonsense nutrition advice with little to no scientific 
evidence; promotes disordered eating habits.
‘drinking apple cider vinegar in order to lose weight is 
complete nutribollocks’
early 21st century: blend of nutrition and bollocks
I want to empower you to be able to filter through diet culture and 
come out the other side with a more relaxed view on nutrition and 
your health. I want you to be able to confidently challenge it not 
only when Katy Perry tells you to bathe in apple cider vinegar and 
Novak Djokovic tells you to drink celery juice, but when your best 
friend tells you about their new fasting regime that they want you 
to do with them. I want you to understand why the ‘food is medi­
cine’ rhetoric is misguided so that you find it easier to avoid the 
nutribollocks it encourages.
There is a lot of nonsense that we could go through but I’ve 
Copyrighted Material

10 
fOOD ISN’T MeDIcINe
chosen the topics that I believe come up the most frequently, and 
also cover the most bases possible. To note, this categorically isn’t a 
diet book claiming to show you how to lose weight. I’ll explain 
why that’s the case in the fi rst couple of chapters.
I wish I had a book like this a few years ago when I was trying 
to sift through the confl icting information available online. Search­
ing for answers on Google doesn’t really help unless you know what 
you’re looking for and it personally led me down a path of   bro­ 
 science and bodybuilding forums. I started demonising carbs and 
buying books that proclaimed food was medicine, the latter of 
which now sit gathering dust on my bookshelf; I don’t particularly 
want to regift them and risk someone else being misled. My hope is 
that this book either saves you from a similar fate or acts as a lifeline 
to help pull you out. Remember, there’s absolutely no shame in 
changing your mind on something you thought was true.
Copyrighted Material

Preface 
11
Scientific cheat sheet
In order to address the nutribollocks in this book we need to have 
discussions about research and different types of scientific studies. 
I’m aware that academic language can mean very little to some, 
so to try to address that problem I wanted to include a cheat sheet 
of sorts right here at the beginning.
Hopefully this will be something you can refer back to if need 
be and should also serve you well for understanding more of what 
you come across online.
Anecdotes
Stories from personal testimony. This is the lowest 
form of scientific evidence as it is heavily influenced 
by things like bias. While that doesn’t mean we 
should automatically disregard someone’s 
experience as incorrect, it’s incredibly important not 
to draw wider conclusions from it.
Association/
Correlation
A link between two things where one may or may 
not be as a result of the other.
Causation
A link between two things where one has been 
proven to be as a result of the other.
Cohort Study
A study following one group of people over a period of 
time, usually consisting of individuals who are at risk of 
developing a specific disease. Different behaviours and 
factors are noted throughout in order to investigate the 
cause of the disease if/when it occurs.
​­Case-​­control 
Study
A study comparing two groups of people, one with a 
condition and one without. They are usually 
retrospective, meaning that researchers look back in 
time to see if different factors can be identified 
between the groups.
Copyrighted Material

12 
FOOD ISN’T MEDICINE
Randomised 
Controlled 
Trial (RCT)
This is an experimental study where people are 
randomly assigned to two (or more) groups and then 
given different interventions. One of these groups is 
usually given a placebo to be able to compare 
against. This is often considered good quality 
evidence.
Metabolic 
Ward Study
This is a tightly controlled study where participants 
live full time at a research unit. They are monitored 
24/7 with everything from food to exercise and sleep 
being controlled, measured and documented. If 
designed correctly these studies can be incredibly 
reliable.
Meta-​
­analysis
This is a way of using statistics to combine the 
results of multiple studies to try to find if a 
conclusion can be drawn. This is useful as studies 
looking at the same topic can often show conflicting 
results when analysed individually.
Systematic 
Review
This is a review of all the available research on a 
particular subject. Studies that are of poor quality 
are often excluded. This is usually combined with a ​
­meta-​­analysis as the way of analysing the research.
Copyrighted Material

1. 
PRINGLES  
AND ICE CREAM
Copyrighted Material

Copyrighted Material

T
o give you some context as to how I became passionate 
about nutrition and challenging diet culture, it’s probably 
best to start right at the beginning. The privilege of growing up 
in a household where I enjoyed ​­home-​­cooked meals the majority 
of the time contributed to me gaining a love of food from an 
early age. My father had always cooked as a hobby, and after 
finding himself assuming the role of the ​­stay-​­at-​­home dad, my 
two younger siblings and I could always count on an interesting 
evening meal from a multitude of different cuisines. How could 
disordered eating have reared its ugly head from that seemingly 
peachy situation?
After losing his mother to pneumonia and a brother to suicide 
within days of each other, my father’s relationship with alcohol 
became even more challenging for us. My memory of the full 
timeline is a little hazy, but there are several things still vivid to this 
day; ones that I feel probably affected me more than my parents’ 
subsequent divorce.
Copyrighted Material

16 
fOOD ISN’T MeDIcINe
Food insecurity
As the years went on, evening mealtimes became increasingly 
 diffi  cult. Usually I’d get food, but my father’s once impeccable 
judgement of appropriate spice levels went steadily out of the 
window. Punished if I didn’t eat it, I grew a tolerance to chilli like 
no other child in my white,  middle­  class neighbourhood. Unpleas­
ant as that was, it was still better than the other days when I’d be 
sent to bed without any food at all. Arguing never worked.
I decided that my only option was to have food stashed away 
so I didn’t have to wait until my mother got home late from work 
to eat something. As a  pre­ teen child I wasn’t exactly rolling in 
pocket money, so I resorted to slightly less legal ways of ensuring 
I didn’t go hungry.
There was a corner shop on my walk home from school that I 
would frequent for sweets and the like. Of the two aisles in the 
store, the one furthest away from the counter had a blind spot that 
I may or may not have used to get really good at pretending to 
look for something in my backpack, while simultaneously knock­
ing a full tub of Pringles off  the shelf into it. I honestly can’t believe 
I never got caught. I still feel guilty about it to this day but I’m 
happy to report that my brief stint as an accomplished thief didn’t 
continue into adulthood (just to clarify).
Was the act of eating an entire tub of Pringles straight after 
school good for me? Probably not. Did my relationship with food 
take a hit during that period? Defi nitely. May it have even led to 
me overeating on a regular basis since I would still ask my mother 
for dinner when she got home? Sure. Is the act of eating when 
Copyrighted Material

Copyrighted Material

18 
FOOD ISN’T MEDICINE
you’re not actually hungry always disordered? No, but to do it as 
a child based on the fear that I wouldn’t have dinner definitely 
was. It taught me to rely on food when I needed to feel in ​­control – ​
often a valid coping mechanism, but one that has great potential 
to become dysfunctional if relied on ​­long-​­term.
I will spend some time talking about just how complex the 
factors influencing our weight are in the next chapter, but child­
hood experiences like the one I’ve just described likely contributed 
as to why I grew up a larger kid than most. The first time I remem­
ber it making a difference to my life was during junior school.
Body image insecurities
There was one kid in my class who always found something to 
pick on me about: my hair was too long or too short; my nose was 
too big; I didn’t have any friends (or I had the wrong ones); or my 
clothes were shit. It changed weekly. At times the unpredictability 
became ​­all-​­consuming as I tried to work out how to get through 
the day without giving him something new to bully me about. 
Having said that, there was one reason he could always consist­
ently rely on: my weight.
There is always an element of insecurity and cowardice with 
those who bully. I’m ashamed to say that I ended up being one 
myself the following year after changing schools and both of those 
elements rang true with me then. I’d left one place feeling small 
and unimportant, while believing there was only one method of 
making sure I didn’t start the new one the same way. People who 
abuse others for their size as adults are no different. Add in the 
Copyrighted Material

Pringles and ice cream  
19
anonymity of the internet and it can embolden those who may 
not dare to discriminate face to face.
From those early years, until relatively recently, I spent a large 
proportion of my life trying to lose weight. My worth as a human 
became intrinsically linked to what I looked like and the number 
on the scales; I had it in my head that I was neither attractive nor 
worthy of love unless I was slimmer. These same insecurities con­
tinued even when I was in my first ​­long-​­term relationship and 
ended up playing a major role in its eventual breakdown. It made 
me a possessive partner, which, completely reasonably, resulted 
in being dumped. At the time, my lack of insight simply led to 
a doubling down on my ​­weight-​­loss efforts in an attempt to 
be attractive enough not to be dumped again. Retrospect is a 
wonderful thing eh?
Being a doctor sounded cool
Growing up I had a real mixture of different career goals, from 
being a chess grandmaster or professional chef to being a singer. 
How different life would have been if I’d have succeeded in my 
audition for S Club Juniors! Despite doctor never featuring on 
that list, I came home from school at the age of  16 and told 
my mother that I was going to study medicine at university. The 
careers counsellor had been in that day and I remember being 
given this thick career book to pick from. The thought of being a 
teacher didn’t sound fun as I knew how difficult my classmates 
and I could be; the broad title of scientist just made me think of 
working in a lab; but the last ‘match’ was doctor, which I thought 
Copyrighted Material

