
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0001
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0001 
Other Palgrave Pivot titles
Tommi A. Vuorenmaa: Lit and Dark Liquidity with Lost Time Data: Interlinked Trading 
Venues around the Global Financial Crisis
Ian I. Mitroff, Can M. Alpaslan and Ellen S. O’Connor: Everybody’s Business: Reclaiming 
True Management Skills in Business Higher Education
Helen Jefferson Lenskyj: Sexual Diversity and the Sochi  Olympics: No More Rainbows
Laurence Pope: The Demilitarization of American Diplomacy: Two Cheers for Striped Pants
P. Carl Mullan: The Digital Currency Challenge: Shaping Online Payment Systems through 
U.S. Financial Regulations
Ana María Relaño Pastor: Shame and Pride in Narrative: Mexican Women’s Language 
Experiences at the U.S.–Mexico Border
Manohar Pawar: Water and Social Policy
Jennifer Yamin-Ali: Data-Driven Decision-Making in Schools: Lessons from Trinidad
Lionel Gossman: André Maurois (–): Fortunes and Misfortunes of a Moderate 
Matthew Watson: Uneconomic Economics and the Crisis of the Model World
Michael Gray: Contemporary Debates in Holocaust Education
Teresa A. Fisher: Post-Show Discussions in New Play Development
Judith Baxter: Double-Voicing at Work: Power, Gender and Linguistic Expertise
Majid Yar: Crime, Deviance and Doping: Fallen Sports Stars, Autobiography and the 
Management of Stigma
Grace Ji-Sun Kim and Jenny Daggers: Reimagining with Christian Doctrines: Responding to 
Global Gender Injustices
L. H. Whelchel, Jr.: Sherman’s March and the Emergence of the Independent Black Church 
Movement: From Atlanta to the Sea to Emancipation
G. Douglas Atkins: Swift, Joyce, and the Flight from Home: Quests of Transcendence and 
the Sin of Separation
David Beer: Punk Sociology
Owen Anderson: Reason and Faith in the Theology of Charles Hodge: American Common 
Sense Realism
Jenny Ruth Ritchie and Mere Skerrett: Early Childhood Education in Aotearoa New Zealand: 
History, Pedagogy, and Liberation
Pasquale Ferrara: Global Religions and International Relations: A Diplomatic Perspective
François Bouchetoux: Writing Anthropology: A Call for Uninhibited Methods
Robin M. Lauermann: Constituent Perceptions of Political Representation: How Citizens 
Evaluate Their Representatives
Erik Eriksen: The Normativity of the European Union
Jeffery Burds: Holocaust in Rovno: A Massacre in Ukraine, November 
Timothy Messer-Kruse: Tycoons, Scorchers, and Outlaws: The Class War That Shaped 
American Auto Racing
Ofelia García and Li Wei: Translanguaging: Language, Bilingualism and Education
Øyvind Eggen and Kjell Roland: Western Aid at a Crossroads: The End of Paternalism

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0001
Toward a Metatheory 
of Economic Bubbles: 
Socio-Political and 
Cultural Perspectives
Nikhilesh Dholakia
Professor of Marketing and International Business in the 
College of Business Administration, University of Rhode 
Island, USA
and
Romeo V. Turcan
Associate Professor of International Business and 
Entrepreneurship, Aalborg University, Denmark

Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
Copyright © Nikhilesh Dholakia and Romeo V. Turcan, 2014.
All rights reserved.
First published in 2014 by 
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN® 
in the United States—a division of St. Martin’s Press LLC, 
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010.
Where this book is distributed in the UK, Europe and the rest of the world,  
this is by Palgrave Macmillan, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited,  
registered in England, company number 785998, of Houndmills,  
Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS.
Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies  
and has companies and representatives throughout the world.
Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States,  
the United Kingdom, Europe and other countries.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available from  
the Library of Congress.
A catalogue record of the book is available from the British Library.
First edition: 2014
www.palgrave.com/pivot
doi: 10.1057/9781137361790
2014 ISBN 978-1-137-36870-6
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 
ISBN: 978–1–137–36179–0 PDF
ISBN: 978–1–349–47477–6

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0001
v
Contents
List of Boxes 
vi
List of Figures 
vii
List of Tables 
viii
Preface 
ix
Acknowledgments 
xii
1 Bubble Troubles 
1
2 Core Building Blocks 
9
3 Temporal and Contextual Boundaries 
22
4 Hype, Hope, and Bubbles 
32
5 Typology of Bubbles 
43
6 Bubble Emergence: Toward a Model 
60
7 Toward a Grand Theory of Bubbles 
73
8 Bubbles: Trouble or Tamable? 
86
Epilogue 
98
Bibliography 
101
Name Index 
112
Subject Index 
115

vi 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0002 
List of Boxes
4.1 China’s housing: a non-bubble bubble? 
39
5.1 
Going to movies: getting there first and  
then run 
47
5.2 Inflating and deflating social media bubble 
49
5.3 Gold fever: distant past, near past, and future 
50
5.4 Sky’s-the-limit optimism: an enduring  
philosophy 
53
5.5 
The U.S. housing bubble: does the story  
repeat itself? 
54

vii
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0003
List of Figures
2.1 
The invisible hand 
14
3.1 
Asset-related and meta-dimensions  
affecting bubbles 
24
4.1 Rise and fall of Zynga stock price after IPO 
34
4.2 Typology of hype 
37
6.1 Process model of bubble emergence 
61
6.2 The bubble thermometer 
66

viii 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0004 
List of Tables
2.1 
Selected books after the dotcom bubble burst 
10
2.2 Selected books after the housing bubble and 
2007–2009 Great Recession 
11
2.3 Comparing core asset-linked dimensions and  
their factors by asset types 
17
3.1 
Key features of the new economy 
23
5.1 
The typology of bubbles 
45
5.2 Boundary meta-dimensions by bubble types 
46
5.3 Asset-linked dimensions by bubble types 
46
6.1 Hype characteristics of selected movies 
70
8.1 
Singapore: real estate bubble and  
steps to control it 
89

ix
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0005
Preface
In this book we put forward a multidisciplinary metathe-
ory of bubbles. Since the notorious “tulipmania” in the 
Netherlands of the seventeenth century, bubbles have been 
part of our modern economic history, and, with advancing 
capitalism, they have become pervasive, more intensive 
and more frequent. In an earlier phase of our intellectual 
career, we became interested in bubbles not so much from 
financial or economic perspectives as from technological 
and strategic angles—the rise and bursting of the so-called 
dotcom technology bubble in March 2000 fascinated us. 
As the new century unfolded, we realized that bubbles 
were becoming increasingly global in scope—the world 
is far different from the eager merchants bidding up tulip 
prices in the relatively confined geography of the pubs of 
Haarlem and Amsterdam; and indeed even different from 
the dotcom tech-bubble that affected mostly the U.S. and 
U.K. markets. We were jolted into intellectual action by 
the interlinked stock market, housing, banking, and other 
bubbles of 2007–2009 that spread into the furthest corners 
of the global economy quite rapidly.
Bubbles, in the past, have been understood primarily in 
financial-economic terms, receiving rational explanations of 
individual as well as collective behaviors, with a few excep-
tional economists venturing out to point to the irrationality 
of investors caught up in bubble frenzies.1 Bubbles, how-
ever, are also socio-political-cultural phenomena. While 
we, the authors of this book, have had some background in 
economics and finance during our postgraduate studies, we 
also are in the fortunate position not to be constrained by 

x 
Preface
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0005 
the doctrines and dogmas of these fields. Our interests and approaches are 
multidisciplinary, weaving together economic as well as non-economic 
ideas into this metatheory of bubbles that transcends the economically 
straitjacketed disciplinary frames of the past. Our metatheory of bubbles 
draws from many economic and social disciplines and reflects pervasive 
irrationality of individual as well as collective behaviors.
We embarked on this journey in the latter part of 2011. Coming 
from different research backgrounds, we had discovered in one of our 
meetings that we have had a common interest in researching bubbles. 
Romeo V. Turcan investigated in his doctoral studies how and why small 
 high-technology firms internationalized, de-internationalized, and even-
tually struggled for survival during the “dotcom” bubble. The analysis of 
his data led to the emergence of number of bubble related behaviors and 
concepts such us hype, vaporware, hyperbole, and delusional optimism. 
In 2010 Romeo presented his model of bubble emergence at a conference 
on “After the Gold Rush: Economic Crisis and Consequences” that took 
place, probably with no surprise, in Iceland. The 2008 crisis and collapse 
of Iceland came out to be “handy” as they corroborated to a large extent 
to Romeo’s model of bubble emergence. Further theorizing was needed 
to move that model to a higher level of generalizability.
In 2011–2012, Nikhilesh Dholakia—as part of his sabbatical leave 
from the University of Rhode Island—made multiple visits to Aalborg 
University, where Romeo V. Turcan is based. He talked during these visits 
of his earlier papers on the “dotcom” bubble (work done in collaboration 
with Anil M. Pandya) as well as his more recent work on financializa-
tion and “finanzkapital,” aimed as understanding the ups and downs of 
the 2007–2009 Great Recession. These mutual discussions revealed a 
common ground and a common interest in studying and interpreting 
bubbles from a multidisciplinary frame.
In this book, we arrive inductively at our metatheory of bubbles weav-
ing throughout the book cases and examples of bubble processes from a 
number of sectors such as entertainment (movies), commodities (min-
erals or agricultural commodities), financial stocks (especially shares of 
technology companies), and housing (real estate values in metro areas). 
These examples serve as signposts to exemplify the emerging metathe-
ory of bubbles, a theory that can offer explanations for contemporary as 
well as historical bubble phenomena. We identify—in a comprehensive 
yet parsimonious way—the constructs of the theory, setting its temporal 
and contextual boundaries, as well as its underlying assumptions about 

xi
Preface
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0005
economic, psychological, social, and political dynamics. Throughout the 
book we discuss and exemplify how the identified constructs, temporal 
and contextual boundaries, as well as theory assumptions are related.
While the contribution of the book is a step toward the development 
of a multidisciplinary metatheory of bubbles, our larger quest—perhaps 
quixotic in some people’s view—is to nudge us all toward a saner future by 
laying bare the social, economic, and political factors that create and drive 
bubbles. At the same time, we lay a foundation to facilitate and encour-
age future dynamic scholarly conversations and research as well as policy 
debates on the sources and outcomes of bubbles as multidisciplinary—
economic, social, political, and cultural—phenomena. The book also 
provides a partial window into the precarious nature of contemporary 
finance-driven capitalism, and suggests some possible ways of overcom-
ing the wrenching ups and downs of the prevalent system. Our proposed 
metatheory of bubbles has far-reaching implications for the study and 
practice of entrepreneurship and marketing, public and corporate finance, 
and public policies toward innovation, economy, and finance.
The approach we took to build our theory is multidisciplinary, and 
therefore appeals not just to faculty and students in finance and econom-
ics, but also to faculty and students in applied and pure social sciences 
and to some in the humanities fields, especially history and cultural stud-
ies related fields. The language is in the form of narratives and concepts 
that can be understood by general intellectual audiences—no specialized 
knowledge of finance or economics is assumed. A variety of cases and 
contexts are employed to make the concepts of bubbles relatable to the 
everyday lives of people.
What follows, we hope, is an exciting multidimensional journey into 
bubble processes; where some bubbles are playful and essentially do no 
social harm while other bubbles are massively global and create pervasive 
dislocations, losses, and misery. If the book succeeds in promoting good 
debate, spurs further multidisciplinary work, and provides some guid-
ance for sound policies, then we would consider our goals to be achieved 
and our project to have arrived at a new plateau on which stronger intel-
lectual structures can be built.
Note
Shiller (2006).
 

xii 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0006 
Acknowledgments
As we worked on this book project, we were fortunate in 
obtaining various types of support—financial, administra-
tive, intellectual, and warm personal encouragement—
from both sides of the Atlantic.
In Europe, we would like to express our gratitude to 
the Department of Business and Management of Aalborg 
University in Denmark for financial and administrative 
support. We are also indebted to Valeria Gulieva, a research 
assistant at the Theory Building Research Programme 
(TBRP)1 of Aalborg University, for her assistance and sup-
port in multiple aspects of this project: data collection for 
many aspects of the book, initial drafting of the vignettes, 
assembling and formatting the notes and references in the 
book, and help with the permissions.
In the United States, we are grateful to Ian Reyes of the 
Communication Studies program at the University of 
Rhode Island for helpful suggested directions to explore in 
studying bubble phenomena.
We would also like to thank Leila Campoli and Sarah 
Lawrence of Palgrave Macmillan for prompt and helpful 
responses to our queries during the manuscript prepara-
tion phase and the publication process.
We are also very appreciative of the family support we 
have received throughout this project. The first author 
would especially like to thank his wife Ruby Roy Dholakia 
not just for the numerous airport trips to enable travel 
related to this book project but also for continuously keep-
ing a sharp eye on unfolding bubble-like phenomena and 
gently urging us to check into useful current sources. The 

xiii
Acknowledgments
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0006
second author is very grateful to his family—his wife Natalia, daughter 
Andreea and son Andy—for their extraordinary support, patience, and 
understanding. And this was visible especially toward the end when 
magic words were aired “the book is over,” and Andy approached and 
asked: “Daddy, is it difficult to write a book? Tell me more about it.” And 
that was a wonderful feeling.
Note
Website for TBRP at Aalborg University: http://www.tbrp.aau.dk/
 

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0007

1
Bubble Troubles
Abstract: In this chapter we introduce the reader to the 
book—to its aim, scope, method and contributions, as well as 
its structure. The chapter starts with a short introduction to 
the history of bubbles and bubbles’ impact on our daily lives. 
The method—the theory building strategy—is presented next, 
highlighting the four essential elements of a complete theory. 
These are the “what” aspects, the “how” aspects, the contextual 
“who-where-when” aspects, and the explanation-seeking 
“why” aspects. We conclude this chapter by providing short 
descriptions of each subsequent chapter, linking it to the 
building blocks of a theory.
Keywords: asset bubbles and everyday life; history of 
bubbles; theory building; tulipmania
Dholakia, Nikhilesh and Romeo V. Turcan. Toward a 
Metatheory of Economic Bubbles: Socio-Political and Cultural 
Perspectives. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014. 
doi: 10.1057/9781137361790.0007.

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0007 
Who sees with equal eye, as God of all, 
A hero perish, or a sparrow fall, 
Atoms or systems into ruin hurl’d, 
And now a bubble burst, and now a world.1
The first decade of the twenty-first century had an eventful start, at least 
in economic terms. After March 2000, the so-called dotcom technology 
bubble burst. In a year-end review, The New York Times summarized the 
carnage that occurred in the tech stock indexes and in specific technol-
ogy stocks during 2000:
What a difference a year makes. The Nasdaq [technology-dominated stock 
market index] sank. Stock tips have been replaced with talk of recession. 
Many pioneering dot-coms are out of business or barely surviving. The 
Dow Jones Internet Index, made up of dot-com blue chips, is down more 
than 72 percent since March. Online retailers Priceline and eToys, former 
Wall Street darlings, have seen their stock prices fall more than 99 percent 
from their highs.2
Even before the dust had settled on the dotcom bubble burst, by 2007, the 
portents were clear that there was another bubble forming in the United 
States, this time in the residential real estate market, fueled by mortgage 
credit available on easy terms with minimal collateral requirements. 
While the dotcom crash wiped out $7–$8 trillion in capital, the housing 
bubble burst in the United States was of a similar magnitude, wiping out 
about $5–$7 trillion of inflated housing values.3
Bubbles—periodic episodes where hype about an asset outpaces 
reasonable expectations about valuing that asset—have been a part of 
modern economic history. Long before the stocks, bonds, technology, 
and housing bubbles of recent decades, there was the notorious tulipma-
nia in the Netherlands of the seventeenth century:
Semper Augustus . . . was a tulip of extraordinary beauty, its midnight-
blue petals topped by a band of pure white and accented with crimson 
flares . . . Around 1624, the Amsterdam man who owned the only dozen 
specimens [of Semper Augustus] was offered 3,000 guilders for one 
bulb . . . the sum was roughly equal to the annual income of a wealthy mer-
chant . . . A few years later, Rembrandt received about half that amount for 
painting The Night Watch . . . Yet the bulb’s owner, whose name is now lost to 
history, nixed the offer.4


Bubble Troubles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0007
The tulipmania style bubbles were infrequent and limited in their geo-
graphic scope. In the twenty-first century, however, the pace at which 
bubbles form, inflate, and deflate appears to have accelerated. In the 
United States, already two bubbles—the dotcom and the housing—punc-
tuate the first decade of the century, and some believe that a third bubble 
(in stock prices or bond prices or both) is imminent. Contemporary 
bubbles also reverberate globally, if not in terms of specific asset price 
inflation/collapse then at least in terms of a global spillover of economic 
losses and misery. From a purely macroeconomic perspective, a report 
on the 2007–2009 Great Recession from the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) found that the fast-rising developing economies, the so-
called emerging markets or EMs . . . 
 . . . with smaller initial vulnerabilities went into [the Great] recession later 
and exited earlier, and suffered considerably smaller declines in output dur-
ing the first stage of the crisis. EMs with stronger external linkages—higher 
dependence on demand from AEs [Advanced Economies] or larger expo-
sure to foreign bank claims—experienced sharper falls in output during the 
crisis. The analysis also indicates that countries that experienced pre-crisis 
credit booms experienced sharper output falls during the crisis . . . Such 
credit booms were typically foreign-financed and more pronounced for 
countries with fixed exchange rate regimes.5
Parsing the econo-speak above, it is clear that in developing nations with 
strong global financial linkages—in terms of trade and debt—the Great 
Recession of 2007–2009, linked inextricably to a real estate lending 
bubble in the United States, made the financial situation of governments 
and populations swoon downward strongly. Understanding these bubble 
processes is, therefore, crucial for managing economic affairs, for craft-
ing government policies, and even for negotiating everyday life of our 
interlinked planet. This book offers a framework to arrive at a multidis-
ciplinary understanding of bubbles.
While the underlying assets that rise or fall in value during bubble 
processes are economic, the processes that make assets rise giddily or 
fall precipitately are more than just economic; these processes are also 
political, social, and cultural. The processes that play out during bub-
bles entail intense and accelerating interactions of engineered hype and 
feverish expectations. It is, therefore, important to view bubbles in a 
multidisciplinary frame. Indeed, the language of bubbles is permeating 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0007 
fields beyond finance and economics: books on “consumer bubbles” and 
“technology bubbles” have been published.6
Aims and approach of this book
Our aim in this book is to lay down a pathway to construct a multidis-
ciplinary metatheory of bubbles as well as to offer a first version of a 
theory of bubbles that draws from many economic and social disciplines. 
We follow a process of theory building whereby an empirically relevant 
theory in the behavioral and social sciences is built on the notion of rela-
tionships rather than on the notion of causality. This does not mean that 
causality (or prediction) is of secondary or lower importance. It means 
we have employed a theory building strategy aimed first at improving 
understanding of bubble phenomena before seeking to improve predic-
tion. If there is a wider understanding of the bubble processes, then 
perhaps such processes could be attenuated and their excesses avoided.7
Building good theories
As we progress in this book, we present our emergent theory of bubbles 
as a mid-range theory. This book is the first stepping stone; there is need 
for much more work—theoretical and empirical—on bubbles. We see 
this book as a catalyst for sustained and dynamic scholarly conversation 
and future research, leading eventually to the development of a robust 
behavioral grand theory of bubbles.
We ground inductively the emergent metatheory of bubbles and related 
types of phenomena, along with their dimensions in the extant empirical 
realm as well as in the emergent theoretical frames derived from some 
work on bubbles.8 Mid-range theories are solutions to problems that 
contain a limited number of assumptions and considerable accuracy 
and detail in the problem specification.9 Such theories are workhorses: 
they do the drudge work of tilling the theoretical fields and sowing the 
empirical seeds, and often help shape the eventual elegant landscapes of 
grand theories.
In this initial theory building effort on bubbles, mid-range theorizing 
helps us manage the complexity of the emergent typology of bubbles 
and related types. Mid-range theorizing transcends pure description 


Bubble Troubles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0007
and single empirical observations. Such theories draw upon divergent 
units of analysis, perspectives, and even disparate disciplines to formu-
late new theory. Such theorizing recognizes that basic knowledge must 
be obtained before complex theoretical questions can be answered. As 
a first stepping stone, mid-range theories offer flexibility in that they 
allow researchers to seek generalizability without totally endorsing (or 
abandoning) the belief that a single, unified social science (of bubbles, in 
this case) is achievable.10
The unfolding structure of this book
A complete theory must contain four essential elements: the “what” 
aspects, the “how” aspects, the contextual “who-where-when” aspects, 
and the explanation-seeking “why” aspects.11 The first element is what: 
what factors (variables, constructs, concepts) logically should be consid-
ered as part of the explanation of the social or individual phenomena of 
interest? There are two criteria for judging the extent to which the “right” 
factors have been included: comprehensiveness, which means answering 
the question whether all relevant concepts have been included in the 
emerging theory and parsimony, which means to inquire whether some 
concepts should be deleted because they add little additional value to our 
understanding of phenomenon we are interested in.12 The principle of 
parsimony (or law of parsimony)—that came to be known as Ockham’s 
Razor—suggests that it is pointless to do with more what can be done 
with less; or put differently, of two competing conjectures, the simpler 
explanation of an occurrence is to be preferred.
The second element is how: how the identified factors are related? By 
answering this question we aim to add order to the process of theorizing 
by explicitly delineating patterns, and typically introducing causality. The 
elements of what and how together constitute the domain or subject of 
the theory. Chapter 2 outlines, elaborates, and exemplifies the constructs 
that are part of our emerging metatheory of bubbles. These constructs 
relate to the core asset-linked dimensions of the emerging metatheory. 
We have aimed for comprehensiveness and parsimony in selecting the 
core dimensions as well as subsequent conditions and assumptions that 
interplay with these core dimensions.
The next building block relates to who, where, and when: these are tem-
poral and contextual factors, which set the boundaries of generalizability, 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0007 
and as such constitute the range of the theory. Chapter 3 sets the tempo-
ral and contextual boundaries of the emergent theory of bubbles, thus 
marking the perimeter of generalizability. To determine the boundary 
of our emerging theory, we identify the key constructs in the form of 
meta-dimensions that cut across all bubble and asset types, and dis-
cuss their limiting values on theory generalizability. These constructs 
 (meta-dimensions), discussed in detail in Chapter 3, are uncertainty, 
velocity over time, and negotiated space.13
The last, but not the least, element of a theory relates to why: what 
are the underlying psychological, economic, and social dynamics that 
justify the selection of factors and the proposed causal relationships? In 
other words, what are the underlying assumptions (or theoretical glue14) 
of our emerging theory of bubbles? During the theory-development 
process, logic replaces data as the basis for evaluation, and in order to 
avoid vacuous discussions, propositions should be well grounded in the 
“whys,” as well as the “hows” and the “whats.”15 Chapter 4 underlines 
the assumptions the emerging theory of bubbles rests on—the psycho-
logical, economic, and social dynamics—that rationalize the selection 
of constructs and proposed relationships. The key emphasis in Chapter 
4 is on sentiment-guiding theories,16 hype processes, and four types of 
hype-related states.17
Chapters 5 and 6 focus on how the core identified asset-linked con-
structs of Chapter 2, the temporal and contextual boundaries described 
in Chapter 3, as well as the fine-tuning assumptions about a theory of 
bubbles—of Chapter 4—are related. Chapter 5 presents and discusses 
the typology of bubbles. Having pulled together the three core asset-
linked dimensions (Chapter 2)—perceived asset availability, perceived 
asset value, and perceived asset communication; and the four boundary 
meta-dimensions (Chapters 3 and 4), in Chapter 5 we propose a sim-
ple yet robust typology of bubbles. Six bubble types are identified and 
profiled in terms of asset-linked dimensions, and the context-spanning 
meta-dimensions.18 Chapter 6 presents and discusses the process model 
of bubble emergence, building on previous chapters, and introduces 
the “bubble thermometer” to exemplify the model, employing real life 
examples.19
We bring together our conjectures from Chapters 2–6 in Chapter 7 
and put forward a grand theory of bubbles. Conclusion and reflections, 
including some key suggestions to curb bubble phenomena, are included 
in Chapter 8. The key conclusions focus on three items: (1) Are bubble 


Bubble Troubles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0007
phenomena unavoidable or are they, under appropriate conditions, con-
trollable? (2) What social-political conditions are required to tame and 
control bubble formation and inflation processes? (3) What specific 
policy actions have the best chance of helping us avoid the extreme pain 
and privations caused by bubbles?
Toward a saner future
While the book is a contribution to the development of a multidiscipli-
nary metatheory of bubbles, our larger quest—perhaps quixotic in some 
people’s view—is to nudge us all toward a saner future by laying bare 
the social, economic, and political factors that create and drive bubbles. 
Throughout the book, as signposts to exemplify the emerging metathe-
ory of bubbles, we weave in cases and examples of bubble processes—
contemporary as well as historical. In this book, we lay a foundation 
to facilitate and encourage future dynamic scholarly conversations 
and research as well as policy debates on the sources and outcomes of 
bubbles as multidisciplinary—economic, social, political, and cultural—
phenomena. The book also provides a partial window into the precari-
ous nature of contemporary finance-driven capitalism,20 and suggests 
some possible ways of overcoming the wrenching ups and downs of the 
prevalent system.
Notes
Pope (1892).
 
The New York Times
 
 (2000).
Orszag (2012), commenting on a speech by Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke, 
 
reported an estimated loss of $8 trillion from dotcom bubble burst. Handley 
(2011) estimated the losses from the housing market crash in the United States, 
from 2007 to the time she wrote the news story in December 2011, to be $6.4 
trillion.
Dash (2000, p. 288).
 
Llaudes et al. (2010, p. 24).
 
Ekström and Glans (2011); Thackara (2005).
 
As suggested by Dubin (1978, p. 96).
 
Turcan (2010; 2011).
 
Weick (1989, p. 521).
 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0007 
Merton (1968).
 
Dubin (1969).
 
Whetten (1989).
 
Dholakia and Turcan (2013).
 
Whetten (1989).
 
Ibid.
 
Dholakia and Turcan (2013).
 
Turcan (2011).
 
Dholakia and Turcan (2013).
 
Turcan (2010).
 
Dholakia (2010); Panitch and Gindin (2012).
 

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0008

2
Core Building Blocks
Abstract: This chapter outlines, discusses, and exemplifies the 
core constructs—building blocks—of our emerging metatheory 
of bubbles. Since bubbles are about the perceived values of 
assets, our starting building blocks related to assets. Regardless 
of the type of asset, three core asset-linked dimensions are 
important for bubbles to form, to inflate (often rapidly and 
dramatically), and eventually to burst; these are perceived 
asset availability, perceived asset value, and perceived asset 
communication. We conclude this chapter by comparing four 
asset types: entertainment (such as movies), commodities 
(such as minerals or agricultural commodities), financial 
stocks (such as shares of technology companies), and housing 
(such as real estate values in a metro area) and analyze the 
transcending properties of these three dimensions: those 
affecting availability of an asset; those affecting valuation of an 
asset; and those affecting communications about an asset.
Keywords: asset availability; asset bubbles; asset 
communication; asset type; asset value; metatheory of 
bubbles
Dholakia, Nikhilesh and Romeo V. Turcan. Toward a 
Metatheory of Economic Bubbles: Socio-Political and Cultural 
Perspectives. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014.  
doi: 10.1057/9781137361790.0008.

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0008 
Bubbles, of course, attract the attention of economic scholars. Bubbles 
also are of interest to those—often journalists, investigative reporters, 
and others who can be regarded as public intellectuals—who write about 
economic issues for the general public. Especially in the aftermath of 
major economic losses that follow the bursting of bubbles, there is a 
significant jump in the writing about bubbles by such “public intellectu-
als.” For instance, the deflating of the dotcom bubble in 2000 spawned 
some popular books (see Table 2.1), and the collapse of the housing 
bubble in 2008, because it led to the Great Recession, led to a couple of 
dozen books—mostly by observers of the economic scene rather than by 
economists (see Table 2.2).
Table 2.1 Selected books after the dotcom bubble burst
Book title, publisher, year
Author(s)
Comments about the book and its 
author(s)
Dot.Bomb: My Days and 
Nights at an Internet  
Goliath. Hachette Digital, 
Inc., .
John David Kuo
Written by an American author 
and journalist. The story of the 
Internet gold rush is told from an 
insider perspective, describing main 
features of the time, for example, 
sky’s-the-limit optimism and belief 
in new rules.
The Internet Bubble: The 
Inside Story on Why It 
Burst—and What You Can 
Do to Profit Now. Harper 
Business, .
Anthony B. Perkins 
and Michael C. 
Perkins
As chief editors of Red Herring 
Communications, the authors 
offer behind-the-scenes look at 
technology and stock market, 
discussing the process of bubble 
formation and the causes of its burst.
Dot.con: How America Lost 
Its Mind and Money in the 
Internet Era. HarperCollins 
Publishers, .
John Cassidy
John Cassidy is a British-American 
journalist, writing for The New 
Yorker. The book is an entertaining 
narrative about the bubble formation 
and burst featuring all the iconic 
figures of the Internet era. 
Origins of the Crash: The 
Great Bubble and Its  
Undoing. Penguin, .
Roger Lowenstein
Roger Lowenstein is an American 
financial journalist and writer. 
The book ties together all of the 
characters of the dotcom bubble 
and offers a detailed portrait of 
the culture of the era, framing the 
understanding of the s.

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0008
Table 2.2 Selected books after the housing bubble and 2007–2009 Great Recession
Book title, publisher, year
Author(s)
Comments about the book and its author(s)
The Great Recession. Lulu Enterprises 
Incorporated, .
Michael Roberts
Michael Roberts is an economist, who worked in the City of London 
for  years.The author explains why the Great Recession happened—
relying on Marx’s analysis of the laws of motion in a capitalist economy. 
Too Big to Fail: The Inside Story of How Wall  
Street and Washington Fought to Save the 
Financial System—and Themselves. New York: 
Viking, .
Andrew Ross Sorkin
Andrew Ross Sorkin is an award-winning financial journalist of The 
New York Times. The book is a popular narrative about days of Great 
Recession, recreating drama of that turbulent time, and revealing new 
details about the period. 
The Great Recession: History, Ideology, Hubris  
and Nemesis. World Scientific, .
Michael S. H. Heng
Michael S. H. Heng is a professor of information systems. The book 
discusses  financial crisis from the point of view of real economy as 
a starting point and places the crisis within the societal context over the 
past several decades. 
On the Brink: Inside the Race to Stop the  
Collapse of the Global Financial System.  
Hachette Digital, Inc., .
Henry M. Paulson
Henry M. Paulson is ex-CEO of Goldman Sachs, and US Treasury 
Secretary during the Great Recession. The book contains autobiographic 
reflections from the participant’s perspective, focusing on key decisions 
and critical moments.
The Big Short: Inside the Doomsday Machine. 
WW Norton & Company, .
Michael Lewis
Michael Lewis worked for the Wall Street firm Salomon Brothers. The 
book describes several key players who created the credit default swap 
market, betting against the collateralized debt obligation bubble, and 
gaining from it.
The Great Recession: Market Failure or Policy 
Failure? Cambridge University Press, .
Robert L. Hetzel
Robert L. Hetzel is a senior economist and research advisor in 
Richmond Fed. The author claims that monetary instability is created by 
central banks, not by boom-bust cycle in financial markets.
The Signal and the Noise: The Art and  
Science of Prediction. Penguin Books, .
Nate Silver
Nate Silver is a statistician and political forecaster at The New York Times. 
In this book that is at the intersection of ICT and scientific progress, he 
examines why some predictions succeed and why some fail.

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0008 
Since bubbles cause widespread social ripples, social scientists (other 
than economists) also sometimes address bubbles. Also, bubble phenom-
ena often have deeply involving human stories associated with them, and 
hence scholars from the humanities—especially historians—also pen 
accounts of bubbles, especially of bubbles that leave indelible historical 
trails. The first bubble with characteristics similar to contemporary bub-
bles occurred in the pan-European, proto-capitalist economy centered 
in the Italian city of Florence during 1100–1347:
In 1300, Florence had five or six times its former population, a wall embraced 
seven times the space of the earlier one [circa 1050], and the factious mer-
chant oligarchy was constructing the new city hall (the Palazzo Vecchio) 
and a vast new cathedral dedicated to Santa Maria de Fiore. Beyond all 
other cities Florence epitomizes the history of the European environment 
and economy during those centuries of growth and the disastrous decades 
that followed . . . Florence became a powerhouse of finance and trade that 
catalyzed economic expansion. It was the leading banking center in Europe, 
an industrial giant, and one of the most populous cities. Florentine busi-
nessmen bustled everywhere in civilized Eurasia. Its gold coin, the florin, 
became the preferred currency throughout Europe . . . The great Florentine 
companies, the Bardi and Peruzzi and their rivals, forwarded and profited 
from the expansion. They were trading firms and banking houses, and 
their business included buying and selling merchandise and raw materi-
als, supervising manufacture, financing trade, exchanging currencies, 
lending money, and doing the accounting necessary to these transactions. 
Sometimes they served as tax collectors for kings.1
Like the contemporary global financial bubbles, the Florentine bubble 
had a strong international dimension, and the prevailing sense that the 
processes leading to the inflation and bursting of the economic bubble 
were beyond the control of the powerful bankers of Florence. Of the 
bursting of the Florentine bubble, historian J. Donald Hughes offers the 
following account:
Edward III had squandered the money he had borrowed from bankers to 
prepare for what became the Hundred Years’ War against France. By 1339, 
his exchequer was empty and he abrogated his debts. This disaster caused 
the bankruptcies of the banking houses of Bardi, Peruzzi, and seven other 
families. The decade of 1340s was the lowest ebb of the Florentine economy. 
Hundreds of citizens went bankrupt, and hundreds starved in the famines of 
1345–47. Property values plummeted and wages shrank as much as forty-five 
percent. Wars and the need for grain from overseas raised the public debt 


Core Building Blocks
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0008
even higher, and the Commune of Florence declared bankruptcy . . . Then 
the Black Death arrived. Between 1347 and 1351, plague killed one-quarter of 
Europe’s population. Three-fifths of the Florentines, about sixty thousand, 
died.2
Not only is the notion of a strong ripple effect of financial trouble in 
one part of the world (England, in the Florentine bubble case) causing 
havoc in the financial center (Florence, in the fourteenth century) an 
early exemplar of the globally connected “financescapes”3 of today, the 
regulatory moves after the Florentine collapse also echo the regulatory 
challenges of the contemporary era. In the case of fourteenth-century 
Florence, the regulatory authority was vested in the Church. The Church 
leaders of the time attempted to ban interest-bearing loans because they 
thought that obscure financial instruments, such as complexly structured 
loans, were against God’s plans for humankind and would bring further 
social chaos. Just as now, the forces of financial capital prevailed over 
regulatory attempts—and the business of speculative finance resumed in 
full force.
Of all the observers and commentators of contemporary bubbles, 
mainstream economists—neoclassical economists and their successor and 
spin-off streams—exhibit the most resistance in recognizing, labeling, and 
analyzing bubbles. This is because bubble phenomena gnaw at—indeed 
make deep gashes in—the very foundational substructure of rationality, 
the substructure that supports neoclassical economics and its successor 
and distributary streams. If bubbles are acknowledged, especially in terms 
of their successive frequent occurrence in recent decades, then economic 
expectations guiding markets and the economy—forces that are usually 
salutary in nature except for the gentle ups and downs of economic cycles—
fall by the wayside. A world of frequent, even accelerating, occurrence of 
bubbles represents a runaway train with failed brakes rather than a train 
that accelerates and decelerates, but whose throttle is basically under the 
benign control of a “fair, invisible hand” (see Figure 2.1).
Building blocks and their deconstruction
That is why conventional economics puts extremely demanding require-
ments for defining and acknowledging bubbles: bubbles threaten the 
very survival of conventional economics. Most phenomena that media 
and public in general readily recognize as bubbles are not acknowledged 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0008 
as such in conventional economics; rather, these are treated as just some-
what extreme forms of economic cycles.
Bubbles, by their very nature, represent a turning—gradually at first 
and rapidly later—of rational expectations into irrational behavior, aided 
and abetted by social processes of sharing and propagating hype, greed, 
and fear. These processes have economic elements, but they are not 
merely economic processes. This is why it is important to employ multi-
disciplinary approaches for understanding bubbles. A multidisciplinary 
theory of bubbles, comprehensive—and yet parsimonious—is not only 
feasible but also very useful in the aftermath of the dotcom, housing, and 
other recent bubbles.
This chapter outlines, discusses, and exemplifies the core constructs 
of our emerging metatheory of bubbles. Since bubbles are about the 
perceived values of assets, our starting building blocks related to assets. 
Regardless of the type of asset, three core asset-linked dimensions are 
important for bubbles to form, to inflate (often rapidly and dramatically), 
and eventually to burst. These are:
Perceived asset availability: If an asset that is highly desired and demanded is 
perceived as being in limited or short supply, then conditions are often ripe 
for bubbles to form.
Perceived asset value: If an asset’s quoted market value is seen as very reason-
able, perhaps even a bargain, compared to its expected future value, then a 
bubble could form.
Figure 2.1 The invisible hand
Source: Charles Barsotti/The New Yorker Collection.


Core Building Blocks
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0008
Perceived asset communication: If the patterns of communications around an 
asset are such that great hype can be created but none or just a few skeptical 
voices can be heard, then conditions for bubble formation exist.
These building blocks constitute the domain of the emerging metathe-
ory of bubbles: at the core, the theory is about perceived value of assets. 
If an asset is abundantly available and accessible at reasonable prices—in 
reality but, more importantly, in perceived terms—then there are no 
conditions that could support a bubble. All the terms—“available,” 
“accessible,” and “reasonable prices”—are operative here. Take the case of 
a commodity such as Crude Oil. Known asset stocks could be abundant 
but if political tensions in the Persian Gulf threaten the accessibility of 
the resource, or vitiate expectations about reasonable price being paid, 
then the asset could become a candidate for a bubble.
Before the asset-linked dimensions are discussed, we would like to 
deconstruct these core asset-linked dimensions and focus specifically on 
the conjecture that is common to all of them, namely, perceived. With 
this conjecture we are trying to capture the process whereby knowledge 
about an asset is created. We define knowledge as a justified true belief, 
“. . .  a belief that stands in a particular relation both to the world (it is 
true) and to the body of evidence the agent possesses (it is justified).”4 As 
to the process of knowledge creation, we view it as “. . .  a dynamic human 
process of justifying personal belief toward the ‘truth’.”5
From the point of view of the process of bubble formation, we define 
the knowledge creation as the emergence of a justified belief toward 
an asset. What characterizes an asset in a bubble is its newness, un-
knownness—hence uncertainty—to the agents interested in that asset. 
Human nature is not able or willing to tolerate uncertainty and is driven 
by a desire to find meanings and patterns everywhere6 and, under 
uncertainty, tends to create corresponding perceptions about an asset 
availability, value, and communication.
An example of such perceived asset availability, perceived asset value, 
and perceived asset communication is the visionary predictions, in late 
1990s, of the effect of e-business on human life, such as brands will die, 
prices will fall, and middlemen will die. The futuristic predictions that 
affected those involved were driven by prospects of the introduction of 
3G mobile phones, adoption of smartcards, Internet banking and data-
mining, to name a few—all new, unknown technologies at that time—
hence uncertain: for instance, bank branches will disappear, and third 
generation mobile phones will replace home computers.7

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0008 
Types of assets where bubble processes could emerge are varied: new 
technologies and innovations (including financial innovations); high-
tech products and services (and related financial securities or stocks); 
fashion items, entertainment products such as movies, and indeed many 
sophisticated derivative financial instruments that convert an otherwise 
slow-traded asset into a hyper-traded asset.8 Building on the principle 
of comprehensiveness and parsimony introduced above, we argue that 
regardless of the type of asset, three core asset-linked dimensions are 
important for bubbles to form, to inflate (often rapidly and dramatically), 
and eventually to burst: (1) perceived asset availability, (2) perceived 
asset value, and (3) perceived asset communication. Each dimension has 
multiple factors that play some role in the formation and inflation (and 
eventual bursting) of bubbles.
To exemplify this first step in our theory building effort, we have 
chosen to compare four asset types: entertainment (such as movies), 
commodities (such as minerals or agricultural commodities), financial 
stocks (such as shares of technology companies), and housing (such as 
real estate values in a metro area) and analyze the transcending proper-
ties of these three dimensions: those affecting availability of an asset; 
those affecting valuation of an asset; and those affecting communications 
about an asset (see Table 2.3).
The building blocks in detail
Bubbles and perceived asset availability
The first dimension concerns the perceived asset availability: how 
graspable, how comprehensible, how much available (how readily, how 
easily, how scarce, how abundant), when, where? The set of factors that 
define this dimension is in trying to understand whether an underlying 
asset is creatable, consumable, storable, duplicable, divisible, renew-
able, perishable, depletable, or destroyable. We term these factors as 
availability-related factors.
All assets—with the exception of minerals (though Bitcoin9 has 
emerged as a non-physical example of an asset with a finite creation 
threshold)—are creatable, but the pace and conditions that affect 
asset creation vary greatly. This gives rise to perceived supply-demand 
imbalances, which, of course, is a basic condition to initiate a bubble. 

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0008
Table 2.3 Comparing core asset-linked dimensions and their factors by asset types
Is the underlying 
asset . . . 
Asset type
(examples)
Notes and comments
Entertainment
(Avatar—the 
movie)
Commodity 
(silver, hog 
bellies)
Financial  
stock (Google)
Housing 
(Shanghai 
mansion)
Dimension: perceived asset availability
Creatable?
Yes
Yes or No
Yes
Yes
Agri-commodities are creatable
Consumable?
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Houses are consumed as durable goods
Storable?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
But see also the perishable dimension
Duplicable?
Yes
No
No
No
Low or no marginal cost per digital copy
Divisible?
No
Yes
Often Yes
Yes
Stock-splits are used to divide financial stocks
Renewable?
No
Yes or No
No
No
Minerals are non-renewable
Perishable?
No
Yes or No
No
No
Agro-commodities are perishable
Depletable?
No
Yes
No
No
Minerals are more depletable than agri-commodities
Destroyable?
No
Yes or No
Usually No
Usually No
Agri-commodities are often destroyable
Dimension: perceived asset value
Depreciable?
Yes
Yes or No
No
Yes
In the accounting sense (losing value with age)
Appreciable?
Yes
Yes
No
Rarely Yes
In the collector sense (rarity, scarcity)
Tradable?
No
Yes
Yes
No
Refers to tradability on an exchange
Wagerable?
No
Yes
Yes
No
Refers to wagerability on an exchange
Dimension: perceived asset communication
Discussable?
Yes
No
Yes
No
Internet has increased discussability
Reviewable?
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Internet has increased reviewability
Hypeable?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Internet has increased hypeability

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0008 
Even a movie—such as a new Harry Potter release—could experience a 
temporary supply-demand imbalance with lines at the box office on the 
release date. Supply and demand, especially for bubble-prone assets, are 
perceptual states—their perceived shortage, and the feeling that prices 
will rise (or the asset will disappear) and the deal must be done quickly, 
that contribute to the inflation of bubbles.
Bubbles and perceived asset value
The second core dimension pertains to the perceived asset value: how 
to value an asset that does not exist, or how to evaluate the prom-
ise of an emerging new asset? The following factors that we term 
 “valuation-related factors” aim to understand whether an underlying 
asset is depreciable, appreciable, tradable, or wagerable. In economic 
terms, there is an implied inverse relationship between perceived avail-
ability and perceived valuation of an asset: the asset that appears to be 
scarcer is valued more highly.
Hence, beyond the perceived availability factors, the main factors 
affecting bubbles are the perceived asset value dimensions—particularly 
the ability to trade (in an exchange) or bet (again, in an organized 
exchange) on the asset. At the height of tulipmania, sometimes the 
ownership of a tulip bulb (still planted in the ground) changed hands 
as much as 8–10 times in a day, via auction houses.10 Financial engi-
neering or financial innovation11—the ability to craft derivatives for 
almost anything—has injected tradability and wagerability (the ability 
to place bets, in stock or commodity exchanges) in asset categories that 
were previously not tradable or wagerable. The housing bubble in the 
United States12 that burst in 2007 was fueled largely by the creation of 
Credit Default Swaps, derivatives that allowed trading and wagering on 
home mortgage debt notes.13 In this sense, the portrayal shown in Table 
2.3 is a cross-sectional snapshot, reflective of the closing years of the 
twentieth century. Indeed, the Internet has accelerated tradability and 
 wagerability—as well as discussability, reviewability, and hypeability—of 
all asset types. Hence, a future portrayal of Table 2.3 would likely look 
somewhat different than the one shown here.
Bubbles and perceived asset communication
The third and final core dimension relates to perceived asset com-
munication: how can the target stakeholders distinguish between hype 


Core Building Blocks
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0008
and reality; how much can the rules be bent; how many “legitimacy 
lies”—defined as “intentional misrepresentations of the facts”14—can be 
told without bursting an inflating bubble? This dimension consists of 
three factors, communication-related factors, that are trying to explain 
whether an underlying asset is discussable, reviewable, or hypeable. 
Intense and frequent communications are necessary (though, of course, 
not sufficient conditions) for the formation and enlargement of bubbles. 
Even in the case of tulipmania, when the mass media were hardly devel-
oped, the bubble phenomenon was essentially an urban one—in the 
Amsterdam and Haarlem metropolitan areas of the Netherlands. Rising 
wages and affluence of craft workers created conditions for these folks to 
meet in pubs and public places, to discuss the qualities of tulip varieties 
and to speculate on tulip bulbs.
The three items in the last set of factors in Table 2.3 are about com-
munications pertaining to the underlying assets. Movies and financial 
stocks have been eminently discussable topics for a long time—in mass 
media, parlors, clubs, and pubs. The spread of Internet has boosted the 
ability to discuss, review, and hype all asset types—including the prosaic 
asset categories of commodities comprising of things such as titanium or 
pork bellies. Of course, for highly valenced and often emotive categories 
of entertainment products (movies, music, books), storied stocks (such 
as those of technology companies), and high-end real estate (Manhattan, 
London), the discussions—facilitated by Internet—have proliferated in 
terms of numbers and intensity.
In the bubble process, the role of such communications is similar to 
the processes found in the formation of what Malcolm Gladwell has 
called “tipping points.”15 For a tipping point to form or a bubble to inflate 
rapidly, the following factors usually come into play:
Propitious context: A fertile and propitious context is helpful. The dotcom 
tech-stock bubble could not have been formed until there were some early, 
dazzling successes in e-commerce.
Irresistible stickiness: Some aspect of the phenomenon must be irresistibly 
attractive to large numbers. In the U.S. housing bubble, the real estate price 
gains in some sunbelt states (such as Florida and California) appeared to 
offer sweet, no-brainer strategies for sure-fire capital gains: buy now, and 
you are guaranteed a higher sale price later.
Nodal roles: Central and nodal roles that advise, mentor, connect, and 
persuade are crucial for the propagation of an idea—including, of course, 
the idea behind a bubble, that an asset’s price will rise and rise and rise; or 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0008 
the dire counter warning that the asset is inflating in unsustainable ways 
and that the bubble will burst. Economist Nouriel Roubini, for example, 
was a lone wolf in warning about the inflating housing and stock bubble of 
2007–2008, and earned him the nickname of “Dr. Doom.” Roubini became 
a nodal and central celebrity once his warnings came true.16
Conclusion: interlocking of the building blocks
The asset-linked building blocks exist in many cases; yet, bubbles form 
only rarely. This is because the precise interlocking of the building blocks 
that would lay the foundation of a bubble spiral requires many more 
conditions.
In the next two chapters, we explore additional factors and conditions 
that may foment bubbles. In Chapter 3, we focus on the boundaries of the 
socioeconomic arenas in which bubbles could (and sometimes do) form. 
Uncertainty, of course, is a primal condition for the possible breeding of 
bubbles. Much like fertilizers and other nutrients enrich the soil for grow-
ing things, other conditions have to conjoin with uncertainty to “prepare 
the soil” for jack-and-the-beanstalk style bubble growth. In Chapter 3, 
we focus on two additional conditions that temper uncertainty about 
the value of an asset—the velocity of the phenomenon being discussed, 
often leading to a rapidly pervading sense that the asset in question is 
not a crazy gamble but a risky-yet-very-lucrative bet (and people should 
be “on board” since the train is about to leave); and the emergence of a 
negotiated space in which opinion shapers (with real or claimed inside 
knowledge about the value of the asset) have the opportunity to influ-
ence large masses of opinion seekers about the potential lure of the asset, 
and getting these masses to invest in the asset.
Chapter 4 goes into greater details of the interplay of hype and hope, 
the two critical states that influence the perceived future value of the 
asset, and often accelerate the asset valuation processes rather uncon-
trollably to create an asset bubble.
Notes
Hughes (2009, p. 89).
 
Hughes (1996, p. 64).
 
Appadurai (1990).
 
Elster (2007, p. 124).
 


Core Building Blocks
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0008
Nonaka and Takeuchi (1995, p. 58).
 
Elster (2007).
 
Coltman et al. (2001).
 
Galbraith (1993); Martin (2011); Perez (2002, 2009); Schmitt (2009); Turcan 
 
(2011).
Feuer (2013).
 
Dash (2000).
 
Perez (2009).
 
Baker (2007).
 
Cohan (2009); Lewis (2006).
 
Rutherford et al. (2009, p. 950).
 
Gladwell (2002).
 
Chen (2009); Das and Roubini (2012).
 

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0009
 
3
Temporal and Contextual 
Boundaries
Abstract: In this chapter we set the temporal and 
contextual boundaries of our metatheory, hence marking 
the perimeter of generalizability. We identify key 
constructs—uncertainty, velocity over time, and negotiated 
space—that cut across all bubble and asset types, and 
discuss their limiting values on theory generalizability. 
Uncertainty is the fallow soil in which the seeds of an asset 
bubble are sown. The velocity of discourse about an asset 
takes on a life of its own: there is rapid transformation of 
the stark uncertainty about the asset value into a seemingly 
graspable, even measurable, level of risk associated 
with the asset. We further view a negotiated space as a 
discursive space in which a “negotiated mix” of hyped 
promotion and hyped price are readily available but the 
material elements such as the product (technology) and its 
physical accessibility are still largely “imagined.”
Keywords: hype process; negotiated mix; negotiated 
space; risk; uncertainty; velocity over time
Dholakia, Nikhilesh and Romeo V. Turcan. Toward a 
Metatheory of Economic Bubbles: Socio-Political and 
Cultural Perspectives. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014.  
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0009.


Temporal and Contextual Boundaries
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0009
In the period from the mid-1990s to 2000—several Internet eons ago1 —a 
widespread belief was emerging that the world was in the grips of 
an e-business revolution.2 The Internet and e-business were in the 
center of attention of many, including the popular press.3 Even the 
normally sedate Wall Street Journal, for example, maintained that 
“[w]hen it comes to technology, even the most bearish analysts agree 
the microchip and Internet are changing almost everything in the 
economy.”4
The acceleration in rate of technical advance in information and com-
munication technology (ICT) became synonymous with the term “new 
economy.”5 Many features of the new economy were based on the impor-
tance of information as a commodity, very different from the standard 
goods and services of the materials-based old economy. Table 3.1 offers 
some key features of this new economy.6
The (seemingly) converging future prospects—partly realized, but 
sometimes vastly exaggerated7—of multiple new information and com-
munication technology (ICT) innovations, markets, and products gave 
birth to several myths regarding the new economy, including the notion 
that the business cycle is dead or business decisions could ignore old 
rules about the marketplace.8 Many believed that the Internet would have 
major impact on global business by 2001.9 Visionary predictions about 
the nascent, emergent forms of e-business—brands will die, prices will 
fall, and middlemen will disappear—were driving the valuation of virtual 
firms to the level of an Internet bubble that burst in 2000.10 For any new 
Table 3.1 Key features of the new economy
Feature
Definition
Digital  
revolution
Prevalence of information and communication technologies, 
especially computers
Human capital
Rapid growth of education and training
Innovation
R&D, know-how, brands, and other forms of intangible capital 
more important than fixed capital
Mobility/
globalization
Capital (financial, fixed, and highly skilled) very mobile across 
national borders
Entrepreneurial 
capacity
Start-ups and new entrants as key drivers of growth
Clusters
Geographical concentration of high-tech firms
Inequality
Increasing wage dispersion and volatility of income, “winner takes 
all” in labor and product markets
Public/private
A blurring of the divisions between the public and private sectors

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0009
asset with bubble potential, key enduring questions are when and in what 
context we may learn the difference between hype and reality, between 
myth and truth about the asset:
Misunderstood, over-hyped, and a long way from delivering on its full 
potential? The hype could be to the detriment of nanotechnology . . . while 
the truth is both more complex and more prosaic.11
The boom in ICT investment over the past decade was accompanied by 
hype . . . the effect of ICT may be no greater than other important inventions 
of the past, like electricity generation and the internal combustion engine.12
After identifying the core asset-linked dimensions of the bubble 
typology—availability, valuation, and communication—we are now 
ready to set the temporal and contextual boundaries of the emergent 
theory, thus marking the perimeter of generalizability. To determine 
the boundary of our emerging theory, we identify the key constructs in 
the form of meta-dimensions that cut across all bubble and asset types, 
and discuss their limiting values on theory generalizability. We identify 
three meta-dimensions that delineate the boundaries of the emergent 
typology: uncertainty, velocity over time, and negotiated space (see 
Figure 3.1).13
Uncertainty
A key factor contributing to bubble formation is the state of uncertainty 
linked to the degree of newness of an underlying asset, be it an innova-
tion, a new product, a new technology, or a new business idea. We view 
Uncertainty
Velocity over
time
Negotiated
space
Sentiment
Perceived
asset
communication
Perceived
asset availability
Perceived
asset value
HYPE
REALISM
Sentiment-
guiding
theories
120
100
80
60
40
Figure 3.1 Asset-related and meta-dimensions affecting bubbles


Temporal and Contextual Boundaries
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0009
uncertainty and newness of an underlying asset as two sides of the same 
coin. For a new asset, uncertainty could arise from many sources: tech-
nical uncertainty (especially for high-tech products), market uncertainty 
(for mass market items), and goal ambiguity.14 In the context of the 2008 
economic crisis, the excitement-triggering newness was in the form of 
emergence of sophisticated derivative instruments tied to an underlying 
asset, developed over the years by bankers and other financial engineers, 
who—like Mary Shelly’s Frankenstein—were themselves often not able 
to fully understand the creatures they had unleashed on the world.15
To illustrate the state of uncertainty, we distinguish between uncertain 
and risky decision-making situations. A risky situation is similar to roll-
ing a dice that is balanced and fair: it is possible to assess the probability 
of the outcomes. An uncertain situation, on the other hand, resembles 
rolling a dice with infinite number of sides, without knowing whether 
the dice is balanced and fair. Under uncertainty thus, it is impossible to 
assess the probability of the outcomes. The stage gets set, in other words, 
for feverish speculation (during bubble inflation) or for panicked exit 
(during bubble bursting).
For example, under uncertain decision-making situations the cash flow 
a new asset is expected to generate (the mean of the distribution) and the 
rate at which the cash flow should be discounted over time (the variance 
of the distribution) are unknown.16 In other words, net present value of a 
new asset cannot be calculated under uncertain decision-making situa-
tions. The following quotes from a Venture Capitalist (VC)—offering his 
reflections on investments in “dotcom” companies in late 1990s and early 
2000s—serve to illustrate the point:
Businesses that we typically backed [by VCs] were businesses which needed 
to sell internationally. It turned out that the world market was a lot slower 
than entrepreneurs forecasted, and their ventures’ revenue base did not sup-
port more than one location. So, we might have made an assumption that 
the revenue would grow such that we could open two or three offices and 
then in a year to break even, but because the market was smaller, we were 
growing slowly. In the end, that strategy did not work, and entrepreneurs 
had to close offices.17
The examples below will further illustrate the degree of uncertainty 
based on the asset types and their core dimensions and factors 
(Table 2.3). In the movie industry uncertainty is seen as being low. 
As a concept, the typical movie is a well-known product. As an out-
come of a creative process, however, the value of a new movie to the 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0009
moviegoers is unknown and this creates an uncertainty and certain 
expectations about that new movie. Social media industry is also 
characterized by low uncertainty. Its concept and technology behind it 
are not new to most of us. What is new—and what generates the state 
of  uncertainty—are the sophistication with which people use social 
media, rapid changes in communication preferences, and constant 
innovation of social media as products and platforms. As an asset, gold 
has always been a highly appreciated commodity under the illusion 
that its value will be rising forever. Seen as a highly secure investment, 
its appreciability, tradability, and wagerability have contributed to its 
reputation as a time-tested asset.
The uncertainty in high-technology sectors is driven, for example, by 
the degree of newness of high-tech products and of forms of organizing 
(e.g., new business models)—be it an innovation, a new product, a new 
technology, or a new dotcom business model. In late 1990s the concept of 
Internet commerce and everything that had dotcom in a name were new 
constructs and frameworks for all involved: entrepreneurs, investors, 
academia, mass media, and policymakers. Without prior experience, 
knowledge, or history about such assets—and given their tradability and 
wagerability properties—such assets were easily overvalued and hyped. 
Thirteen years after the dotcom bubble, another technology bubble is 
being inflated by venture capitalists:18
Nextdoor, a social network for neighbors . . . is now worth at least a few 
hundred million dollars, making it the latest example of fashionable and 
fast-growing start-ups commanding startling valuations despite the lack of 
a proven business model.19
By late 2013, with venture funding approaching $100 million and with the 
backing of major VCs as well as Internet firms such as Google, Amazon, 
and Facebook, Nextdoor was valued at $500 million and this number 
was on an upward zoom.
Velocity over time
Assets with bubble potential also have a temporal dimension, velocity 
over time. That is, with elapsed time, a history about the asset is being 
formed, making the involved and interested stakeholders more knowl-
edgeable about the asset, and in the end allowing them to make more 
accurate predictions about asset potential. In other words, with elapsed 


Temporal and Contextual Boundaries
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0009
time and with growing experience and knowledge, the asset transitions 
from an uncertain state (unknown probabilities) to a risky state (known 
probabilities of outcomes). With such transition, it becomes possible to 
differentiate between hype (a crafted and slanted projection—a mythi-
cal one, if you will—of probability of success) and reality (a projection 
where probabilities of outcomes are calculable). That is, as the history of 
an underlying asset is being formed, the behavior of various stakehold-
ers changes accordingly. The quote below, from a VC during the dotcom 
era, explains the point:
If you go back three years now, the market was extremely bullish, and 
investors were willing to take very large risks, and also had an inflated idea 
of what companies might be worth. The big thing that we’ve been working 
on quite hard to improve for the last five years I guess is to get real views on 
the size and trends of the markets20
In essence, velocity over time defines the rate at which an asset and/or its 
(perceived) value move from uncertain decision-making settings toward 
decision-making settings characterized by “risk.” This transition process 
though is hindered by inertia that in turn is driven by the sticky senti-
ments that contribute to a bubble formation. For example, despite the 
fact that in the second half of 2000 the ICT market in the United States 
started to collapse—that is, a real view of the market was emerging— 
entrepreneurs of high-tech companies in the United Kingdom got 
trapped in (what in hindsight was to become) a failing course of action 
and kept committing resources to ventures with no prospects. The 
following quotes from two entrepreneurs who were running their busi-
nesses during that period exemplify this point:21
When in 2000 things started to go wrong in the US, our sales stopped, but 
we were still making trips, because we invested a lot of money to go there, 
and time and effort.
To raise money we had to make commitments of what we would need to 
achieve. Once we got the money we had to use them in the way we said we 
would. That leads to pressure to do things, rather than not to do things.
Compared to technology bubbles, movie bubbles have higher velocity 
as virtually after the first weekend premiere the true value of a hyped 
movie is being formed. The contemporary social media bubble has lower 
velocity; it started forming in 2005–2006 marking the emergent success 
of Facebook and was still inflating in 2013. Some felt that investments in 
new social network ventures are . . . 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0009
 . . . bound to set off questions about whether venture capitalists are inflating 
another technology bubbles by throwing money at unprofitable start-ups.22
Negotiated space
In addition to the temporal dimension of “velocity,” we also introduce 
the enviro-contextual dimension of a discursive “space” that forms 
around certain exciting assets. That is, regardless of the type of asset that 
is to be made available, valued, and communicated about, in the process 
of bubble formation, a physical exchange usually does not take place. 
The tulips, for example, were in the ground while they were being traded 
in the pubs of Amsterdam. We term this enviro-contextual dimension 
as negotiated space. In contrast to traditional (physical, palpable) market-
place exchange, in the negotiated space the parties arbitrate the value of 
an asset that is not readily available for physical inspection or exchange. 
Rather than speaking about a marketing mix, in the negotiated space 
there is a “negotiated mix”—product and place may have to be imag-
ined, but elements of promotion (often hyped) and price (also hyped) 
are vividly present.
The exchange of a bubble-prone asset between sellers and buyers is 
solely based on the anchored or perceived value of that asset. In other 
words, the only reference point to form an opinion about an emerging 
new asset, that is, about its perceived value, is the anchored or hyped 
value of the asset. For example, the value of a not-yet-released movie 
is negotiated between movie producers and potential moviegoers 
primarily via marketing efforts undertaken by movie producers and is 
moderated, for example, by previous encounters of moviegoers with the 
specific movie director and/or movie stars associated with that movie. 
In this sense, the perceived value of a new movie (or any hypeable asset) 
is nothing else but the anchored view of the future prospects of the new 
movie.
In 2001, an OECD report on the dotcom frenzy showed that the boom 
in the ICT investment in the 1990s was accompanied by considerable 
hype.23 In such an environment, one of the most pressing challenges fac-
ing various actors trying to predict future trends is to determine whether 
a hyped new asset truly has the potential to transform an industry and/or 
usher in a way of life.24 This challenge is amplified by external and internal 
pressures that lead to hyping behavior in both business and investment 


Temporal and Contextual Boundaries
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0009
communities. In the dotcom case—and in the case of any other new asset 
with bubble potential—we can find two such distinct pressures as part of 
the negotiated space: hyperbole and vaporware.25 Hyperbole refers to a 
signal emanating from either competitive or remote environments about 
exaggerated future prospects of a technology, an innovation, a market, or 
a product—typically employing bombastic phrases such as “established 
brands will die,” “prices will collapse,” “middlemen will be disintermedi-
ated,” “bank branches will disappear,” and “3G phones will replace home 
computers.” Vaporware is a signal emanated most frequently by large 
companies to the market and refers to a false announcement of a new 
product in an attempt to deter entry of potential competitors.26 In the 
United States vaporware even became an antitrust concern.27 The follow-
ing quotes exemplify how hyperbole and vaporware shape the behavior 
of entrepreneurs in the negotiated space respectively:
What was common to all our solutions was that people were using the 
Internet more and more in Finance as the way of communicating more 
cost-effectively with customers. At that point there was even an idea to get 
rid of all branches; it will be all internet banking. But we found out that 
branch network was still an important part. So we were looking at where the 
common features of the systems we had built for insurers and some banks 
so that we can build a product round that . . . it happened that our product 
was too immature at that point.28
One of the things you learn about the technology markets is that [big enter-
prise] players spin awfully a lot about what is possible, and raise customer 
expectations. However, they consistently failed to deliver, and the markets 
became very skeptical. As a result, it became very difficult for someone who 
could actually deliver, to come along and penetrate the major market share. 
These companies put a lot of clouds, smoke, and actually prevent small 
businesses getting into the markets most of the time.
Conclusion: fueled and ready, but ignition?
What we have laid out in this chapter are three conditions that till and 
fertilize the soil in which a jack-and-the-beanstalk style monstrous bub-
ble could germinate and grow uncontrollably. Uncertainty is the basic 
ground, the fallow soil, in which the seeds of an asset bubble could pos-
sibly be sown. The velocity of discourse about an asset sometimes takes 
on a life of its own: there is rapid transformation of the stark uncertainty 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0009
about the asset value into a seemingly graspable, even measurable, level 
of risk associated with the asset. There is a rising—and spreading—
feeling that the asset could have huge payoffs in the future; and those not 
investing “now” would be left behind, or would end up paying very high 
prices to acquire the asset. Even when very realistic risk-adjusted value 
estimates begin to emerge, there is often a fast-rolling bandwagon of 
optimistic sentiment, and those riding it often ignore the realistic valua-
tion signals. We posit that there is—at this stage of the bubbles game—a 
negotiated space, a discursive space in which a “negotiated mix” of 
hyped promotion and hyped price are readily available but the material 
elements such as the product (technology) and its physical accessibility 
are still largely “imagined.”
To shift to a different analogy, when the uncertainty has been reigned 
in to some extent and transformed into graspable risk, and when the hype 
is building up (via negotiations about lucrative values, led by “expert” 
opinion makers), the situation is analogous to a rocket at a launch pad: 
fueled and ready to take off. All that is missing is the ignition, for liftoff 
and for the rocket to shoot up with a roar into stratospheric valuations.
Such ignition, of course, does not always happen. We need to delve 
further into the interplay of hype and hope to understand what exactly 
triggers the rocket launch, and the formation of an asset bubble. We take 
up these topics in Chapter 4.
Notes
Pilat (2003).
 
Coltman et al. (2001); Gordon (2000).
 
Aldrich (1999); Downes and Mui (1999).
 
Ip (2000).
 
Gordon (2000); Pilat (2003); Rusek (2004); Van Reenen (2001).
 
Van Reenen (2001).
 
OECD (2001).
 
Bassanini and Scarpetta (2002); Pilat (2003).
 
Booz-Allen and Hamilton (1999).
 
Coltman et al. (2001).
 
Reported in ElectricNew.net (2002).
 
OECD (2001).
 
Dholakia and Turcan (2013).
 
Turcan (2008, 2011).
 


Temporal and Contextual Boundaries
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0009
This was one of the findings of the treasury committee of the UK Parliament 
 
at the hearing on the crisis of the financial and banking sectors (www.
parliament.uk).
Alvarez and Barney (2005).
 
Turcan (2006).
 
Bilton (2013).
 
Gelles (2013).
 
Turcan (2006).
 
Ibid.
 
Gelles (2013).
 
OECD (2001).
 
Christensen and Anthony (2004).
 
Bayus et al. (2001); Coltman et al. (2001); Haan (2003).
 
Haan (2003).
 
For review see Levy (1997).
 
Turcan (2006).
 

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0010 
 
4
Hype, Hope, and Bubbles
Abstract: In this chapter we weave theoretical threads 
together and present a working typology of bubbles. 
Specifically, we delve into the interplay of hype and hope to 
understand what exactly triggers the formation of an asset 
bubble. We view hype and hope as the two critical states that 
influence the perceived future value of the asset, and often 
accelerate the asset valuation processes rather uncontrollably 
to create an asset bubble. The key emphasis in this chapter 
is on hype processes, four types of hype-related states—
delusional optimism, overoptimism, pessimism, and realism 
talk—and sentiment-guiding theories. The central thesis of 
this chapter is that a sentiment about an asset often remains 
temporally invariant and sticky because a majority in the 
stakeholder network is willing to change the  sentiment-
guiding theory rather than the sentiment itself—and this 
helps in coping with the perceived uncertainty.
Keywords: asset valuation process; delusional optimism; 
hope; hype; hype and hope dynamics; hype process; 
overoptimism; pessimism; realism talk; sentiment-guiding 
theory; uncertainty
Dholakia, Nikhilesh and Romeo V. Turcan. Toward a 
Metatheory of Economic Bubbles: Socio-Political and 
Cultural Perspectives. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014.  
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0010.


Hype, Hope, and Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0010
Hype and hope: malevolent to benevolent
The goal of some powerful actors behind many major bubbles is often not 
to build “an enduring business” but an expedient one. The various Ponzi 
schemes and pyramid schemes that appear in the market from time to 
time are clearly businesses where hype is deliberately (and fraudulently) 
employed as a strategy—often as the only strategy—to grow the business. 
Such businesses, of course, are destined to crash, and are illustrative 
more of deceptive practices than of bubble processes. The largest Ponzi 
scheme in the world operated by Bernie Madoff that led to losses of over 
$65 billion (in terms of perceived and believed value of the assets, before 
the scheme unraveled) went undetected for a long time because the 
“hype” was kept at a very low-key (almost non-hype) level:
Madoff may have avoided scrutiny . . . in part because he simultaneously 
operated a legitimate, regulated and high-profile business as one of the 
largest middlemen between the buyers and sellers of stock. In that role, he 
helped to create Nasdaq, the first electronic stock exchange, and advised 
the SEC on electronic trading issues. He was a large campaign contributor 
and a familiar of senior regulators . . . At the same time, Madoff’s separate 
investment business operated on the outskirts of regulation, during a 
period when the  government . . . intentionally allowed private, unregulated 
transactions. Private investment pools, such as hedge funds, are subject to 
limited oversight, and Madoff constructed his investment business to avoid 
most of it.1
He earned his investors’ trust because whenever they requested a with-
drawal, Madoff’s investment company got their money to them promptly. 
In addition, unlike other Ponzi schemers, he didn’t tempt investors with 
unbelievable returns. He reported moderate (albeit, suspiciously consistent) 
returns to his investors.2
In the rest of this chapter, we look at hype processes where the inten-
tion is not usually fraudulent but reflects, at least initially, a genuine 
enthusiasm (a benevolent intent) for the prospects of an asset. In the 
technology-driven fields, especially, there is often close intermingling of 
genuine entrepreneurial enthusiasm—often infectious—and some con-
trived forms of enthusiasm (a questionable intent), emanating usually 
from venture capitalists who develop vested interests in hyping a venture 
because of their sunk investments in the ventures.
The case of the electronic game-maker Zynga and its stock prices is 
illustrative. Because of its close association with Facebook (with its 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0010 
billion-plus users) in 2009–2010, and early popularity of multiplayer 
games such as Farmville, Zynga become a darling of the Wall Street 
prior to its Initial Public Offering (IPO) in December 2011. The hyped 
up stock rose to a high price of a little above $13 within a few months of 
the IPO, but then the stock price collapsed to the $2–$3 level. CEO Mark 
Pincus . . . 
 . . . took Zynga public late in 2011 on the strength of its relationship with 
Facebook . . . and general excitement about social gaming, selling $1 billion of 
Zynga stock for $10 each. Not long after, Pincus sidestepped lock-up provi-
sions and sold $190 million of his own Zynga stock in a secondary offering. 
Since then Pincus has become the poster boy for investor disappointment 
in social media stocks as Zynga’s share price collapsed . . . Pincus . . . tried to 
find salvation in the idea of online gambling by leveraging Zynga’s popular 
online poker franchise, but online gambling is a competitive and highly 
regulated space . . . Meanwhile, the company has been caught in the shift 
to mobile as more gamers abandon web sites and opt for games played on 
wireless devices.3
Figure 4.1 charts Zynga’s stock prices for about 18 months after the IPO. 
While the Zynga hype was orchestrated by the venture capitalists back-
ing the company and the investment bankers chaperoning the IPO, the 
media became fully complicit in promoting the hype, with The New York 
Times speculating that Zynga may become the “Google of Games.”
14
Stock price in dollars
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
16-Dec-11
16-Jan-12
16-Feb-12
16-Mar-12
16-Apr-12
16-May-12
16-Jun-12
16-Jul-12
16-Aug-12
16-Sep-12
16-Oct-12
16-Nov-12
16-Dec-12
16-Jan-13
16-Feb-13
16-Mar-13
16-Apr-13
16-May-13
Figure 4.1 Rise and fall of Zynga stock price after IPO
Source: Authors’ research.


Hype, Hope, and Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0010
Assumptions underlying bubbles
Our emerging theory of bubbles rests on assumptions—psychological, 
economic, and social dynamic—that rationalize the selection of con-
structs and proposed relationships. The key emphasis in this chapter is on 
hype processes, four types of hype-related states,4 and  sentiment-guiding 
theories.5
As discussed in the previous chapter, for some cutting-edge products, 
such as a new genetic biotech therapy, both the availability of the asset 
to the market (will the genetics research and drug tests be successful?) 
as well as its value (how effective and unique will the drug be, and how 
big a market can be expected?) are unknown. Yet, communications—
typically in rosy and optimistic terms—are provided to the market by 
the innovators and lead investors.6 As a result, an overall sentiment of 
the environmental context about the future is created within which the 
asset is embedded—a state that can be termed as “hype.”
To illustrate hype processes in the case of the late 1990s tech bubble—
the so-called dotcom bubble—we draw selectively from the doctoral 
dissertation by one of us.7 In this research study, Romeo V. Turcan 
explored how and why high-technology firms located in the Silicon Glen 
of Scotland internationalized and struggled for survival before, during, 
and after the dotcom bubble. To get a balanced picture of the situation, 
he talked, in addition to entrepreneurs, to these firms’ investors, strategy 
advisors, and liquidators, as well as policymakers regulating that specific 
sector and business journalists who were covering the evolution of these 
firms during the dotcom bubble. A quote from a liquidator of a number 
of dotcom companies that went belly up in the early 2000s explains the 
nature of high-tech hype:
When I look at forecasts in the business plans that were used to get the 
initial funding I can say straight away: this is absolutely ridiculous; there is 
no way the company could grow at that pace. The whole thrust of a young 
technology business is to hype, if you like, to create large expectations about 
sales, and profit levels.8
In the hype processes that lead to bubble formation, mid-level (or meso 
level) signals have a stronger effect on sentiments formation than macro 
level signals. For example, biotech investors pay less attention to the 
growth outlook of a nation issued by the European Union but pay close 
attention to the growth prospects of the biotech sector from a reputable 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0010 
consulting or investment advisory firm. Overall sentiment—the senti-
ment of the multitude—arises from interaction among individuals and 
the changes in behavior which they induce in one another.9 In other 
words, positive feedback reinforces positive behavior, whereas negative 
feedback attenuates behavior—and these processes play out at an accel-
erated pace in the era of the Internet.
In uncertain decision-making settings, hype is important as it creates 
fashion; it is driven by fashion. Hype and fashion are the two sides of 
the same coin. Hype releases the pressure valve in investment decisions 
because it reduces the hassle of extensive search as well as the pain of 
possible failure; whereas human psychology of failure is ameliorated by 
fashion.10 For example, people—driven by “do-not-want-to-lose-out-
on-a-big-opportunity” fashion—often find it financially advantageous, 
and often unavoidable, to fall in with the ideas of the market, even 
though they themselves could have been better informed (if they acted 
wholly independently, rather than as “slaves to fashion”).11 There are 
high emotional and professional costs associated with being the odd 
one out: worldly wisdom teaches us that it is far better for reputation to 
fail conventionally than to succeed unconventionally.12 A quote from a 
strategy management advisor who consulted with a number of dotcom 
companies in late 1990s and early 2000s illustrates this point:
It is not nearly so bad being killed on the first day of the Somme with twenty 
thousand other people than it is being killed on your own in no man’s land 
because you went out and stood up. The former is a glorious failure; the 
second is just an idiot thing to do. What happens in a hype driven market, 
people are making decisions because everybody else is doing it. The hype 
and fashion protect you from being one man odd out. If you feel in your 
heart and gut that this is all rubbish, but you still do it, because it is fashion-
able and hyped.13
Hype-related states
Four types of the hype-related states may occur: (1) delusional optimism, 
(2) overoptimism, (3) pessimism, and (4) realism talk (Figure 4.2).14 
Stakeholders are delusionally optimistic about an asset when sentiments 
about the future—in the environmental context within which the asset is 
embedded—are wildly positive. Reinforcing positive signals could come 
from meso as well as macro levels. Such delusional states typically do not 


Hype, Hope, and Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0010
last long. Stakeholders can be said to turn overoptimistic about an asset 
when they ignore negative signals emanating from the macro environ-
ment, and base their sentiments on the meso level signals which remain 
positive. The following quotes from a tech-business venture capitalist 
and a liquidator exemplifies the above respectively:
The big issue when you invest is to make sure that the markets the company 
is going into are going to be big as you intend them to be. There were a lot 
of analysts in telecom, optical industries, etc. who thought that the markets 
would be huge, but they [ultimately] were not.
It is the hype that generates VCs’ money. When the things are not progress-
ing quite as quickly as they wanted, in my experience, there tends not to be a 
lot of realism talk; there tends to be even more hype. Because usually what’s 
happening is that suddenly they need more money than they thought. And 
the last thing they are going to do is to actually talk the situation down, and 
hype it a bit further.15
When both macro and meso level signals turn negative, then sentiments 
usually sink—often in an extreme and precipitate manner. The sentimen-
tal milieu that emerges in such situations is that of pervasive skepticism 
I
delusional optimism
III
pessimism
II
overoptimism
IV
realism talk
Sentiment about
industry growth*
Sentiment about economy growth
+
–
+
–
* At the moment of creating new industry or new demand within an existing industry
Figure 4.2 Typology of hype

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0010 
or pessimism. In the housing bubble in the United States, this happened 
around 2005–2006, with sentiments at meso-type levels (home buyers, 
speculative real estate investors) and macro levels (mortgage rates, mar-
ket correction, home prices) all slid down a steep slope:
By late 2005, the rapid growth of investment in residential structures had 
come to an end. Shortly thereafter, other indications of the oncoming 
bust became visible. First-time home buyers were increasingly priced out 
of the market, mortgage rates rose by roughly 1 percent, affordability of 
homes decreased substantially, and speculators pulled out of the market. 
The market correction . . . [was] much more abrupt than the onset of the 
bubble. Roughly a decade of growth of investment in residential struc-
tures was eliminated over just 3 years—from 2005 to 2008. Home prices, 
as measured by Robert Shiller’s real price index, . . . [fell] considerably 
from their peak in 2006.16
Finally, realism talk propagates in a social network when the senti-
ments about the future from meso level are negative but signals from 
macro level are positive. The housing bubble (the bubble in residential 
real estate property prices) leading up to 2008 exhibited parts of such 
a cycle. Sentiments about real estate prices went from delusional opti-
mism, to overoptimism, and entered a profound skepticism-pessimism 
phase—devoid of all hope—by early 2011. The next phase of “realism 
talk” in the U.S. real estate market began in late 2011, but by 2013 
there were already indicators of perhaps the next stage of delusional 
optimism beginning to froth up, especially for speculative buyers, in 
selected cities:
Miami has become known as a “global gateway,” much like New York and 
San Francisco, that attracts deep-pocketed investors from all over the 
world . . . The influx of buyers, combined with the economic recovery in the 
U.S. . . . created a dramatic turnaround in Miami’s housing market. Sales of 
single-family homes in Miami climbed 10.3 during the first three months 
of 2013 compared with 12 months earlier and prices jumped 23, according 
to the Florida Association of Realtors.17
In some situations, where markets interact with spasmodic govern-
ment interventions and corrupt practices, such as in China (see 
Box 4.1), the sentiments and sentiment-guiding phases are not as easy 
to tease out as in the tech and housing bubbles in the Western context. 
From a theory building standpoint, our theory of bubbles would even-
tually need to sprout some new branches to deal with special contexts 
such as China.


Hype, Hope, and Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0010
Box 4.1 China’s housing: a non-bubble bubble?
In many ways, the frenzied pace of housing construction and 
flipping of apartments in China give the impression of a rapidly 
inflating bubble. For example, in 2009 Gloria Gu—executive in 
a food company—bought a 140-square meter apartment in the 
Pudong area of Shanghai for $483,000. In just a few months after 
that, another similar apartment in her building sold for $615,000. 
In 2009, average new apartment prices in the tony Pudong financial 
district of Shanghai gained 57 percent to a record $4,061 per square 
meter, while overall prices in Shanghai rose 26 percent to a record 
$2,434 per square meter. Chinese government stimulus programs, 
following the 2007–2008 global slowdown, aided these price rises 
by pumping in $1.3 trillion liquidity into banks, for easy lending for 
various purposes including buying real estate.
With breakneck pace of building, in some parts of China many 
“ghost towns” appeared: entire cities, malls, and office complexes built 
up, but with no occupants. Chinese as well as Western media began 
to take notice of these eerie ghost towns—massive blocks of high-rise 
buildings with no occupants. These turned into forbiddingly dark 
ghost urban zones as daylight receded and night fell. To lay observers 
as well as seasoned economic journalists, there could be no clearer 
sign of a bubble: an asset in oversupply, with no apparent buyers.
The reality of China’s housing, however, is more complex than the 
typical bubble phenomenon. With rising affluence, millions of urban 
households have investible funds but—because of still inadequately 
developed financial markets—not many places to invest. The rich in 
China therefore are buying up property, often multiple apartments, 
with the simple aim of “flipping” (i.e., reselling) them for a handsome 
profit. Many such speculative bets have, of course, gone wrong. Builders 
and bankers, often with corrupt nexuses of money and influence, have 
abetted such behavior by massive overbuilding in some places.
The Chinese government has taken aggressive steps to curb 
the excesses in the real estate market, such as raising sales taxes 
on property transactions and limiting the loans available to those 
who already own multiple properties. Real estate research firm 
Knight Frank believes that speculative activity would be curbed 
somewhat by such measures, but housing prices are not expected to 
fall. Demand from first-time buyers, because of rapid urbanization 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0010 
of China, and from long-term investors looking for capital gains, 
would remain strong. The phenomenon of “ghost towns,” while real 
is limited to only a few towns and not the country as a whole.
China’s real estate, in fact, exhibits simultaneously the signs of inflat-
ing and deflating bubbles—frenzied buying of an asset and (in some 
cases) an oversupply of the asset with no takers. In a real bubble, these 
two conditions cannot coexist. What is happening in China’s housing 
is a unique process where there is interplay of market processes, ram-
pant corruption, and heavy state intervention. Bubble-like processes 
appear from time to time, but not in their full socioeconomic forms. 
Perhaps “unbalanced development” or “speculative side-bets” are bet-
ter ways to express what is happening with real estate in China.
Several sources were consulted to develop this vignette.18
Sentiment-guiding theories
In the typical Western market contexts, sentiments about an asset’s 
value—current and anticipated—are linked strongly to people’s beliefs 
about the performance of the asset. People rely on sentiment-guiding 
theories. Uncertainty, for example, diminishes with elapsed time—and 
eventually transforms into measurable risk. Sentiments, on the other 
hand, are temporally as well as conceptually sticky. Once a sentiment is 
formed, it is very hard to challenge it and eventually to change it. What 
people tend to change instead are the theories they use to justify their 
sentiments. We call these sentiment-guiding theories.
A sentiment often remains temporally invariant and sticky because 
a majority in the stakeholder network is willing to change the 
 sentiment-guiding theory rather than the sentiment itself—and this 
helps in coping with the perceived uncertainty. With sticky sentiments, 
“theories” become convenient and expendable and changeable: it is 
psychologically easy (less taxing) to change the guiding theory rather 
than to drop or reverse the sentiment. During the dotcom phenomena 
examined in the Silicon Glen region of Scotland, the following quote 
from a liquidator of failed tech firms illustrates the above:
Human nature being what it is: keep on driving, keep on driving . . . man-
agement tends to deny the problem until it is at the very extreme stage; and 
I’m getting there usually after it has got badly wrong. The thought “let’s try 
to get out of here” does not occur to the management.19


Hype, Hope, and Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0010
Conclusion: hype, hope, sentiments, and setbacks
In the next chapter, we weave theoretical threads together and present 
a working typology of bubbles. Before doing that, let us revisit the very 
central issues of hype, hope, and sentiments one more time. Bubbles 
simply cannot form when there is no hyping, where hopes do not run 
wild, and where racing sentiments are not guided by conveniently crafted 
theories that make everything seem logical and natural—even as doom 
and disaster await in the wings.
Reverting to the rocket launch analogy, hype and hopes are the key 
fuel-packed stages of the massive asset valuation rocket, ready to ignite 
and takeoff. Hype is a primary-stage fuel that may burn out fast, but it 
helps propel the rocket past the massive pull of the gravity that we call 
“reality.” Hope and optimistic sentiments represent less powerful and 
slower burning fuels, but they often help in keeping the asset-rocket 
going in a steady upward direction. Resistance—in the form of gravita-
tional pull of “reality” (much weakened, since the uncertainty stage has 
been passed) and the atmospheric friction in the form of contrary and 
skeptical sentiments—can be overcome relatively easily when there are 
wide segments of investors who share optimism and hope. Also, in the 
“Mission Control Center” there are very smart people—inventors, engi-
neers, analysts, and venture capitalists—who are willing to apply gentle 
course-corrections to the guidance system of the rocket, in terms of new 
sentiment-guiding theories, to keep the asset-rocket going upward, at 
least until the point that they (the smart, early investors) are ready to 
eject their investment payloads out.
Some asset-rockets reach stratospheric heights, creating danger-
ous asset bubbles, while others take just meteoric forms of sometimes 
spectacular but short-lived fireworks. In the next chapter, we outline the 
characteristics of these various bubble types.
Notes
Applebaum and Hilzenrath (2008).
 
Clark and McGrath (2009).
 
Biddle (2013); Vardi (2013).
 
Turcan (2011).
 
Dholakia and Turcan (2013).
 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0010 
Rutherford et al. (2009).
 
Turcan (2006).
 
Ibid.
 
Ormerod (1998).
 
Strategy management advisor in Turcan (2006).
 
Kahneman (2011); Keynes (1936).
 
Ibid.
 
Turcan (2006).
 
Ibid.
 
Ibid.
 
Byun (2010).
 
Christie (2013).
 
Chadha (2013); Rapoza (2013); Riley and Pang (2013); Veneziani and 
 
Weisenthal (2010).
Turcan (2006).
 

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0011

5
Typology of Bubbles
Abstract: In this chapter we propose a simple yet robust 
typology of bubbles. Six bubble types are identified and profiled 
in terms of asset-linked dimensions, and the context-spanning 
meta-dimensions. These types are transient or playful 
bubble, inflating bubble, deflating bubble, contagious bubble, 
irrational bubble, and punctured bubble. While small, playful 
bubbles are not particularly harmful to overall society or 
economy where they occur, the large technology and financial 
bubbles have not only devastating economic impacts but also 
corrosive social impacts as people lose not only their savings 
or abodes but also faith in the institutions, private and public, 
that they have come to trust as protectors of their interests. To 
illustrate and discuss properties and indicators of these types of 
bubbles, we developed vignettes that present short overviews of 
movie, social media, gold, dotcom, and housing bubbles.
Keywords: contagious bubble; deflating bubble; dotcom 
bubble; financial bubble; gold bubble; housing bubble; 
inflating bubble; irrational bubble; movie bubbles; 
punctured bubble; social media bubble; technology 
bubble; transient bubble; typology of asset bubbles
Dholakia, Nikhilesh and Romeo V. Turcan. Toward a 
Metatheory of Economic Bubbles: Socio-Political and Cultural 
Perspectives. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014. 
doi: 10.1057/9781137361790.0011.

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0011 
Witch’s brews and perfect storms
The three core asset-linked dimensions discussed in Chapter 2— 
perceived asset availability, perceived asset value, and perceived asset 
communication—set the basic conditions under which bubbles could 
form. When there is a perceived scarcity of the asset and a perception that 
the “boat would be missed” if the asset is not acquired quickly at the 
prevailing price, and when the perceived communication flows seem to 
converge on the notion that—even with rising prices—the asset is still 
reasonably valued (tomorrow’s price would indeed be higher, raising 
the cost of acquisition), then the conditions for bubble formation ripen; 
but bubbles still may not form in all such cases. This is where we need to 
push our understanding of the bubble phenomena further by turning 
to the meta-dimensions that delineate the boundaries, discussed in 
Chapter 3—uncertainty, velocity over time, and negotiated space; and 
the underlying assumptions discussed in Chapter 4—the types of hype-
related states and  sentiment-guiding theories. Just as the witch’s brew 
requires the perfect blending of the Newt’s Eye, the Toad’s Tongue, the 
Hemlock Root, the Snake’s Slice, Baboon’s Blood and more, the formation 
of a bubble requires a perfect amalgam (in a given space-time frame) of 
asset-linked dimensions, the boundary conditions or meta-dimensions, 
and the  fine-tuning assumptions.
The bubble broth could create a storm in a teacup, with minor 
impacts, or a massive ocean-spanning “perfect storm” with widespread 
misery. In this chapter, we propose a simple yet robust typology 
of bubbles. Six bubble types are identified and profiled in terms of 
 asset-linked dimensions, and the context-spanning meta-dimensions. 
Table 5.1 presents the basic typology of bubbles and labels the bubble 
types. Tables 5.2 and 5.3 profile the six bubble types in terms of the 
meta-dimensions (see Figure 3.1) and in terms of the asset-linked 
dimensions (see Table 2.3).
The typology
Playful bubbles
Compared to the other five bubble types, transient or playful bubbles are 
the least socially harmful. Particular individual investors or corporate 


Typology of Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0011
executives may be hurt by the bursting of transient bubbles, but the 
social effects are minimal. Examples of such transient or playful bub-
bles occur occasionally in the movie making industry, specifically in the 
period prior to the movie release and immediately after. Though char-
acterized by low uncertainty, the buzz about certain as-yet-unreleased 
movies creates a virtual asset where the hype far outpaces the realistic 
box office prospects, leading sometimes to overoptimism or delusional 
optimism. The 2012 Disney sci-fi film John Carter is a case in point: it cost 
over $300 million to make and market and earned only a disappointing 
$31  million on the first weekend of release.1 The value put on such virtual 
asset depends chiefly on the previous experience the stakeholders have 
Table 5.1 The typology of bubbles
Bubble types
Examples
Comments
Social impacts
Transient or 
playful bubble
Massive failure of 
Disney sci-fi film 
John Carter, 
For a particular 
(usually 
entertainment—film, 
TV program, 
videogame) asset, 
hype far outpaces 
realism
Individual persons 
or corporations may 
suffer, but such bubbles 
are socially harmless
Inflating bubble
Social media 
stock valuations, 

Asset valuations are 
rising, but not too  
fast
Major problems can be 
avoided if asset values 
are carefully monitored
Deflating 
bubble
Gold 
prices— to 
, and 
Asset valuations 
are falling, but at 
precipitate speeds
Major problems can be 
avoided if asset values 
are carefully monitored
Contagious 
bubble
Dotcom 
valuations, 
Asset valuations 
are rising at hyper 
speed—everyone 
wants to be “in on 
the action”
No visible locus of 
control—bubble has 
its own logic and 
momentum
Irrational 
bubble
U.S. Housing 
valuations, 
–
Asset valuations are 
rising in inexplicable 
ways (Schiller )
Dangerous and 
unsustainable rise 
in valuations—often 
supported by financial 
engineering 
Punctured 
bubble
Dotcom 
valuations in 
mid-
Asset valuations drop 
at precipitate speed 
paralyzing asset 
holders who seek 
quick exit
Crisis state—huge 
loss of asset values 
and wealth, major 
bankruptcies

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0011 
Table 5.3 Asset-linked dimensions by bubble types
Bubble types
Perceived asset 
availability
Perceived asset value
Perceived asset 
communication
Transient or 
playful bubble
No (once the asset  
is available, it is 
valued very quickly 
and realistically)
Wagerable (actual or 
mock bets are placed)
Discussable, 
reviewable, 
hypeable
Inflating bubble
Yes
Tradable and 
wagerable (bets  
tend to be well-
calculated)
Discussable, 
reviewable, 
hypeable
Deflating bubble
Yes
Tradable and 
wagerable (bets tend 
to be well-calculated)
Discussable, 
reviewable
Contagious  
bubble
Usually No (trading 
is based on asset’s 
promise)
Tradable and 
wagerable (rising  
loss of logic)
Discussable and 
ultra-hypeable
Irrational bubble
Yes
Tradable and 
wagerable (rising  
loss of logic)
Reviewable, 
hypeable
Punctured 
bubble
Yes (for palpable 
assets) or No (for 
virtual, promised 
assets)
No
Reviewable (but 
only after the 
shock phase)
Table 5.2 Boundary meta-dimensions by bubble types
Bubble types
Uncertainty
Velocity over 
time
Negotiated 
space
Sentiment-guiding 
theories
Transient or 
playful bubble
Low 
uncertainty
High velocity
Virtual asset
Overoptimism, 
sometimes 
delusional optimism
Inflating  
bubble
Low 
uncertainty
Low and 
decelerating 
velocity
Virtual asset
Overoptimism
Deflating  
bubble
Low 
uncertainty
Low but 
accelerating 
velocity
Virtual asset
Build up of 
skepticism
Contagious 
bubble
High 
uncertainty
High, first 
accelerating 
velocity; then 
decelerating 
velocity
Virtual asset
Delusional optimism 
(especially near the 
peak)
Irrational 
bubble
High 
uncertainty
Low and 
decelerating 
velocity
Palpable  
asset
Delusional optimism 
(especially near the 
peak)
Punctured 
bubble
High 
uncertainty
High and 
accelerating 
velocity
Virtual asset
Profound pessimism


Typology of Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0011
had with similar assets and on the extent and degree of its discussability 
and reviewability. Transient or playful bubbles move away from the 
uncertain state relatively fast, either reinforcing or dissipating the hype 
around the asset.
Box 5.1 Going to movies: getting there first and then run 
Modern movie industry can produce outstanding degree of hype 
and anticipation. Movies from Twilight franchise had probably the 
highest buzz among the recent blockbusters. An example of fan 
loyalty can be provided as an illustration here: Kristy Noriega, 19, 
is a student at California State University, Northridge. She bought 
tickets for the first four nights of “Twilight” demonstration in theat-
ers and slept on the sidewalk the night before to see her heroes at 
the première.
In this day and age, being influenced by the massive (and very 
expensive) marketing campaigns that accompany most of the 
blockbusters to its opening night, it’s hard not to get excited all out 
of proportion. Often a point is reached where it’s almost impos-
sible for those expectations to be met. Today, public perceptions 
about the new movie hits are formed in a complex interaction 
between explicit advertising, word of mouth rumor, independent 
media evaluation, and paid ads mimicking independent media. 
These factors generate something that can be called movie bubbles. 
When a long-awaited blockbuster is released, fans have spent so 
long anticipating the première, reading features and articles, that 
no matter how good is the final product, it’s rarely going to live up 
to the hype.
Movie bubbles can also be characterized by the term box office 
bomb or flop. It generally refers to a film that turned out to be highly 
unsuccessful or unprofitable during its theatrical run; it can happen 
despite the prior hype, high production cost, or marketing efforts. 
Sometimes, a film may do reasonably well at the box office, but still 
be considered a failure due to a large budget.
2002’s Treasure Planet was an ambitious animation project released 
by Walt Disney Pictures. It was the first movie to be released simul-
taneously in both IMAX and regular formats. Despite the impres-
sive visuals and good professional reviews, the public did not show 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0011 
any signs of appreciation. As a result, the $180 million movie earned 
only $38 million at the U.S. box office.
An example of an inexpressive movie failure is Sahara (2005), an 
adventure motion picture starring Matthew McConaughey and 
Penelope Cruz. It opened at number one, made $18 million in 
its first weekend and earned $119 million at the box office. This 
sort of statistics would make almost any film producer happy. 
But instead, Sahara turned out to be a box office disaster, since its 
budget of $241 million was more than twice what the movie man-
aged to earn.
Speed Racer (2008) is another flop. After the Matrix trilogy and V 
for Vendetta, Larry and Andy Wachowski chose to adapt the Japanese 
cartoon Speed Racer to the big screen. The movie’s massive marketing 
support from such partners as LEGO, Mattel, and McDonald’s was 
worth $80 million. However, the movie received reviews that were 
indifferent at best. As a result, the actual net losses for this project 
were $106,054,234.
Among the recent examples of overhyped movies that failed to 
live up to expectations according to the professionals’ and enthu-
siasts’ reviews are Oz the Great and Powerful (2013), The Hobbit: An 
Unexpected Journey (2013), Quantum of Solace (2009), The Amazing 
Spider-Man (2012), The Matrix Revolutions (2003).
Several sources were consulted to develop this vignette.2
Inflating bubbles
Inflating bubbles are characterized by low uncertainty whereby the asset 
valuations are rising at a slow pace driven by an overoptimistic sentiment 
about the asset potential. The example of such bubbles is the 2011–2012 
emergence of the social media bubble. Low uncertainty around an 
asset such as social media is driven by its availability in a vividly visible 
form, a form that facilitates understanding and actual experiencing of 
it. In the context of inflating bubbles, the velocity is low and decelerat-
ing. The asset value moves toward more uncertain settings, driven by 
the overoptimistic sentiments about the potential of the asset combined 
with the asset tradability and wagerability as well as asset discussability 
and reviewability. Given the low velocity of the hype that is built around 
the asset, major problems associated with such bubble could be avoided, 
provided the values put on the asset are monitored carefully.


Typology of Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0011
Box 5.2 Inflating and deflating social media bubble
The social media bubble was forming due to the successes of a 
number of new tech companies such as Google, Facebook, Youtube, 
LinkedIn, Groupon, Foursquare, and Twitter to name the most 
prominent. The early investors of Google and Facebook have 
become venture capitalists and were constantly looking for other 
opportunities that can turn into a new Facebook.
Social media companies per se are a phenomenon that has all 
rights for existence, the reason why it becomes a bubble is the high 
level of hype surrounding it. The frenzy over social media com-
panies as a group is claimed to be rooted in what economists call 
the network effect. The more users a site attracts, the more people 
will want to use it. This creates a sort of a natural monopoly and 
becomes a magnet for advertising agencies, therefore, generating 
profits. Facebook is a classic example here.
Within a few years, the popularity of the major social networking 
sites was growing consistently; it encouraged investments and made 
people overestimate the potential of these media. The peak of the 
new wave tech companies’ growth came in the third-quarter of 2011. 
With dynamic user growth at Facebook, Twitter, and Zynga, inves-
tors were euphoric about the Internet sites that were connecting 
people.
The professional networking website LinkedIn was the first social 
media site that went public in May, 2011. Its shares were almost 
doubled to close at $94.25 after trading at $122.70 on the first day. 
Facebook followed at $38 a share. Within the same year, Internet 
companies such as Groupon, Zynga, and Yelp went public too. The 
new tech companies were getting extremely optimistic evaluations: 
Facebook was valued as nearly $105 billion, Groupon as $13 billion, 
Twitter—$8 billion to $10 billion, LinkedIn—$3 billion. “Social” 
became a new buzz word; the excitement over the new phenomenon 
can be compared to e-commerce in the times of a dotcom boom. 
However, since then the euphoria started fading.
Facebook’s shares could not exceed the $38 barrier. The shares’ 
further decline accelerated after the company’s first earnings report 
as a public company. In September, 2012, Facebook shares hit its 
lowest, and sank to $17.73. Other Internet companies were showing 
even worse dynamics. Groupon was offered a $6 billion takeover 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0011 
bid from Google in December 2010, which it rejected. After going 
public, the company got a market value of $13 billion. But after this 
point, the movement was downhill: in August, 2012 market capitali-
zation of Groupon was a bit over $3 billion, a half of what Google 
had offered. Zynga’s shares were down by 70 percent.
These declines gave analysts the grounds to talk about the start 
of a social media bubble deflation. However, in comparison to the 
Internet bubble of the late 1990s, in this case the air seems to be 
released quite gently. Of course, Zynga crashed and Groupon lost 
its attractiveness, but overall tech investment continues at a reliable 
pace. Facebook’s shares picked up and overcame the initial $38 
threshold (traded at $51.90 in October, 2013). The total amount of 
venture investment in Internet companies last quarter was $3.625 
billion, close to what it was in the third-quarter of 2011.
Several sources were consulted to develop this vignette.3
Deflating bubbles
Deflating bubbles are rarer—sometimes found in commodity markets. 
Gold prices deflated relatively fast (but not in a precipitate manner) dur-
ing 1980–1983, and continued to decline mildly or stagnate for the rest 
of the twentieth century. Asset values decrease—at least at the deflation 
stage—at an accelerating velocity. We characterize the deflating bubble 
with the following conditions: (1) low uncertainty decision-making set-
ting; (2) driven by an overall skepticism about an asset potential; and  
(3) the asset is available, tradable, wagerable, discussable, and reviewable. 
The low velocity associated with a deflating bubble, and thus the gradual 
rise in skepticism, may allow actors and policymakers to avoid major 
problems or potential negative effects by carefully monitoring the values 
of the assets. The vignette in Box 5.3 presents a short overview of the 
gold bubble to exemplify the nature of deflating bubbles.
Box 5.3 Gold fever: distant past, near past, and future
Gold is losing its allure after an impressive 650 percent rally from 
August 1999 to August 2011. Today, a mere two years after its price 
peak, gold is quickly sinking. Its price has fallen more than 20 per-
cent since late 2011.


Typology of Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0011
Gold has gone through booms and busts before, including at least 
two from its peak in 1980, when it traded at $835, to its latest high 
in 2011. However, anyone who bought gold in 1999 and held on has 
done much better than the average stock market investor. Even after 
the recent decline, gold is still up 515 percent.
For a generation of investors, the golden decade created the illu-
sion that the metal would keep rising forever. The financial industry 
managed to successfully market a growing range of gold invest-
ments, making the current downturn in gold more sensitive than 
previous ones. A poll by Gallup (April 2011) found that 34 percent 
of Americans thought that gold was the best long-term investment, 
more than any other investment category, including real estate and 
mutual funds. That was a triumph for those marketing gold.
The phenomenon that can be described as a gold bubble is some-
what everlasting. Throughout the history, gold has probably been 
the most highly appreciated commodity ever. In the modern times, 
gold was worshiped as a safe haven for investment, “a timeless 
classic,” and a tangible guarantee of prosperity. However, today, the 
analysts are claiming that gold is a mere bubble and overly appreci-
ated due to a number of misconceptions. Two main misconceptions 
can be mentioned here.
The first misconception is inflation is a looming threat, and 
gold offers you better protection than stocks or bonds. In reality, 
the price of gold is the only thing that seems to be rising. A study 
conducted by the investment management firm Research Affiliates 
found gold prices and inflation had very little correlation. Between 
January 1977 and April 1980, small-company stocks were actually 
the best-performing asset. One reason why gold may have been 
such a popular inflation hedge in the 1970s was that there were few 
alternatives for small investors back then.
The second misconception is unlike stocks, gold is real and tangi-
ble. So it will hold its value. In reality, gold prices fell for a quarter-
century before the recent intensive growth. The same “real equals 
safer” argument was cited as the reason housing values would never 
sink precipitously—and we know how that ended.
So, two things that keep gold prices climbing are fear and greed. 
“When something goes up as quickly as gold has, the main thought is, 
Why am I not in it? And how can I get in it quickly?” says behavioral 
economist Dan Ariely, author of Predictably Irrational. “That’s the 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0011 
same thing that happened with housing.” At the same time, investors 
have turned to gold for centuries in times of trouble. Gold bubble is 
sometimes called a fear bubble, a defensive reaction to the burst of 
the latest housing bubble in the United States, which manifested itself 
in negative risk-free real interest rates and a soaring price of gold.
The experts make contradictory forecasts about the further 
behavior of the gold market. The 1970s can offer insights, though 
history never repeats. The gold price from 1974 to 1976 corrected 47 
percent before it rose 8x to peak at US$887/oz in 1980.
Several sources were consulted to develop this vignette.4
Contagious and punctured bubbles
High uncertainty dominates the process of emergence of contagious 
bubbles that have their own logic and momentum with no visible locus 
of control. The dotcom bubble is an eloquent example of such contagious 
bubbles: there was rapid rise in 1999 of e-commerce valuations, which 
continued even into the first few weeks of 2000, and then there was spec-
tacular and precipitate collapse by March 2000. During such bubbles the 
virtual assets that are tradable and wagerable usually are not available for 
palpable exchange: the dotcom stocks existed as electronic scrips and, 
in many cases, there were no operating physical businesses behind the 
scrips. The valuations of such assets rise at hyper speeds, being driven by 
delusional optimism over the promises these assets make. Such bubbles 
have high, at first accelerating (an epidemiological process—contagion 
spreading fast) and then a decelerating velocity (every vulnerable entity 
is infected). There is hyper-speed movement toward uncertain decision-
making settings, making it hard for the stakeholders to learn and actually 
distinguish between hype and reality.
Punctured bubbles are characterized by high uncertainty and 
high, accelerating velocity. The system moves away from uncertain 
 decision-making settings, and toward profound pessimism. An example 
of such bubbles is the dotcom (e-commerce) valuations in mid-2000. 
Although the underlying assets may or may not be available for palpable 
exchange, during such punctured bubbles asset valuations drop at pre-
cipitate speed, and asset holders are paralyzed at first (like in a traumatic 
fire) and then start looking for a quick exit. Effectively the system is in 
a crisis state whereby huge losses of asset values and wealth are encoun-
tered, and major bankruptcies are witnessed.


Typology of Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0011
Box 5.4 Sky’s-the-limit optimism: an enduring philosophy
From January 1994 to February 2000, the NASDAQ composite index 
rose from 776.80 to 4,696.69, a 605 percent increase, almost entirely 
influenced by prices of high-technology stocks. The impressive 
escalation of the share prices of Internet-related companies during 
the late 1990s were given a name of dotcom bubble (also referred to 
as the dotcom boom, the Internet bubble, and the information tech-
nology bubble). Furthermore, most of these companies experienced 
an abrupt fall in 2000 and reported losses in 1999 and 2000, so most 
of their capitalization was due to investor expectations. The growth 
of the bubble was stimulated by various causes. The main features 
of the time are described as the sky’s-the-limit optimism, the huge 
amounts spent to get a market share, the investors’ attempts to be 
inside, and the belief that there really were new rules.
By 1994, the general public got access to the Internet. Almost 
immediately, the businesses saw the global web as a unique profit 
opportunity. America Online provided households with the 
Internet connection on a large scale. In the same year, the Yahoo! 
search engine and Internet portal was started. Amazon.com became 
the first online book retailer in 1994. eBay started its activities as 
an online auction site in 1995. The Internet was commercialized 
quickly; many online businesses and their founders became very 
wealthy.
During the 1990s, the U.S. computer industry was primarily focus-
ing on computer software development. Unlike computer hardware, 
the software products potentially had very high profit margins. 
Throughout the 1990s, software companies’ stocks performed very 
well. Fueled by outstanding enthusiasm over the software business, 
numerous small software start-ups were created, many of which 
were launched by college students in basements or garages. Many 
of these start-ups attracted attention of venture capitalists that were 
looking for the opportunities for financing them, taking them pub-
lic, and getting massive profits.
The novelty of the situation was confusing for investors. The stocks 
of dotcom companies were initially overvalued due to the difficulty 
to adequately estimate the non-traditional firms that appeared 
within a short period of time in big quantities. Besides, the investors 
were striving to participate in the quickly unfolding events and be 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0011 
in time for the “next big thing”. There was an enormous demand for 
the stocks of the start-ups. Thus, the stock prices were rocketing as 
soon as the companies went public.
At that point of time, some start-ups paid their employees with 
company shares that would become very valuable when the company 
goes public. This is a good example of the irrational exuberance that 
took place at that period. At the peak of the dot-com bubble in 1999, 
a new millionaire was created almost every 60 seconds in Silicon 
Valley. Many of the dotcom companies were run by inexperienced 
entrepreneurs, lacked clear business plans and had no earnings. For 
example, Pets.com, which was presented as an online pet products 
retailer, was losing money before it went public and raised billions 
of dollars.
By early 2000, things started falling into places. Investors soon 
realized that the dotcom dream had developed into a classic specu-
lative bubble. The Internet bubble officially burst on March 10, 2000 
as the NASDAQ peaked at 5,048.62.
Several sources were consulted to develop this vignette.5
Irrational bubbles
Irrational bubbles resemble contagious bubbles in that they are also 
driven by high uncertainty, though at low and decelerating velocity. 
Probably the key difference is in the availability of what we call palpabil-
ity of assets—the assets are available to touch, see, feel—but the values are 
rising in inexplicable ways.6 U.S. housing valuations during 2003–2007 
exemplify this type of bubble. Irrational bubbles are characterized by 
dangerous and unsustainable rise in valuations that are often engineered 
by few stakeholders, eventually leading to delusional optimism display-
ing the same contagion effects as in contagious bubbles.
Box 5.5 The U.S. housing bubble: does the story repeat itself?
It is a widely accepted opinion that the housing bubble precipitated 
the financial crisis of 2008, also called the Great Recession. The 
Great Recession is now widely acknowledged to be the most dev-
astating global economic crisis since the Great Depression. From 
1997 to 2006, nominal U.S. housing prices rose by 188 percent. By 
mid-2009, however, housing prices had fallen by 33 percent from 


Typology of Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0011
peak. Since the first-quarter of 2006, U.S. households have lost over 
$7 trillion in home equity. Such a massive housing collapse is not 
typical for a recession.
The American property market bubble started growing long 
before its actual burst. The starting point of its growth is dated as 
early as in mid-1990s. During the period from 1990 till the peak in 
2007, the American mortgage market climbed from $500 billion 
to almost $4 trillion. In the first-quarter of 2007 there was the first 
fall in prices; this moment is considered to be the beginning of the 
bubble bursting.
The Great Recession influenced different states and groups of 
population unevenly. After the bubble burst, the housing prices 
went down throughout the country, however, the decline had 
disproportional impact in certain areas. For example, prices have 
fallen by 59 percent from their peak in Las Vegas compared to only 
10 percent decline in Denver. Minority households (Hispanic and 
Black families) experienced the most severe equity losses.
The causes of the Great Recession are widely contested. But most 
often the crisis is associated with high-risk financial innovations 
and subprime mortgage lending (loans with low standards). This is 
why, the Great Recession is also called “subprime crisis.”
Today, the U.S. housing market is showing signs of recovery 
with positive dynamics in home prices, sales, and construction. 
Foreclosures are also down as the Federal Reserve has pushed 
mortgage rates down. A one-story home in Menlo Park, California, 
listed for $2 million got six offers in April 2013, including four from 
builders planning to tear it down to construct a bigger house. An 
open house for a five-bedroom brownstone in Brooklyn, New York, 
priced at $949,000 drew 300 visitors and brought in 50 offers. In 
south Florida, ground zero for the last building boom and bust, 
3,300 new condominium units are under way, the most since 2007. 
The opinions on the nature of this recovery differ. Some analysts are 
predicting the story to repeat itself, reading American papers today 
one can see titles such as “Reinflating the housing bubble,” “A new 
housing boom.” Really, the White House seems to be pushing for 
polices that fueled the housing bubble. In April 2013 administration 
began pressuring banks to lend to people with lower credit scores.
Barclays Capital report forecasts that home prices fallen after 
the bubble burst in 2007 can be back to peak levels as soon as 2015. 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0011 
Constructing is predicted to grow by at least 20 percent a year for 
each of the next two years. Home builder stocks are up 162 percent 
in the past 12 months. Another opinion, however, is that housing 
rebound can produce a ripple effect that can help get the entire 
economy growing at a much stronger pace which will add to more 
demand for housing.
Several sources were consulted to develop this vignette.7
Are there brewmasters?
While we do not wish to launch a witch-hunt of the agents behind bub-
bles, the following question is still relevant, especially in view of the 
[witch’s] “brew” analogy we introduced at the beginning of the chapter: 
Are there brewmasters, those with specialized tools and skills to create 
special blends that foment rapid rises in asset prices? The answer is a 
clear “Yes, but  . . .  !”
The “yes” part of the answer is because of the very evident rise in the 
size as well as the sophistication of the “financial engineering” enterprise 
that operates behind the scenes in Wall Street, London, Frankfurt, and 
other global financial centers. While not central to the discourse of this 
book, we nonetheless provide a brief overview of the rise of financial 
engineering; followed by a quick overview of the “but” part of our 
answer—which refers to the stark uncertainties and abject control 
failures that even the biggest and most talented investment houses have 
faced.
Yes: rise of financial engineering
In medieval times, alchemists were engaged in a ceaseless quest to turn 
base metal into gold. After all, gold was a precious and finite asset, and 
whoever discovered the secret to “manufacture” gold from base met-
als would reap enormous riches. The alchemists did not succeed in 
their quest but, by late twentieth century, the major investment houses 
developed near-alchemical techniques and skills. Commodities, number 
of shares of a publicly listed firm, the stock of real estate available for 
sale—these are all finite commodities. If an alchemical method could be 
found to multiply these assets, then the possessor of such a method could 
become rich beyond dreams. While no one has found a way to replicate 
such assets, the investment bankers have discovered something close to 


Typology of Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0011
alchemical magic: the creation and trading of derivatives. While an asset 
may be finite, a derivative financial instrument based on that asset can 
be multiplied manyfold. Indeed, at the beginning of the Great Recession 
crisis, the value of Credit Default Swaps (CDS) and similar derivative 
instruments in circulation—the derivatives being based on the underly-
ing asset of mortgage debt—exceeded ten times the GDP of all nations 
on the planet combined.
But: spectacular failures of even high and mighty
While the wizardry of the “quant-jocks” and financial engineers has 
helped Wall Street and other financial center firms reap rich rewards 
from the 1980s onward, there also have been some spectacular failures. 
Sometimes the witches’ brew, instead of becoming a magical potion, 
turns into disgusting dishwater. In the United States, one of the most 
visible and jarring failure was that of the hedge fund Long-Term Capital 
Management (LTCM).
LTCM was born with all the right genes and pedigree, and exhibited 
strong and steadily high performance for nearly three years. Launched 
in March 1994, LTCM had two Nobel laureate economists on its board—
Robert H. Merton and Myron Scholes, the latter especially known for his 
famed options pricing model. In just over a year after its launch, LTCM 
tripled the portfolios of its wealthy investors. The fund almost had no 
bad month—the worst monthly drop in value was under 3 percent. 
Then came the severe downdraft of August 1997. The value of the LTCM 
investment portfolio fell by 44 percent that month, and declined by 52 
percent by the end of 1997. A year later, LTCM was on the ropes, gasping 
to survive:8
On September 23, 1998, the boardroom of the New York Fed was a tense 
place. Around the table sat the heads of every major Wall Street bank, 
the chairman of the New York Stock Exchange, and representatives from 
numerous European banks, each of whom had been summoned to discuss 
a highly unusual prospect: rescuing what had, until then, been the envy of 
them all, the extraordinarily successful bond-trading firm of Long-Term 
Capital Management.
The rescue effort was coordinated by the U.S. Federal Reserve, but 
entailed the deployment of private funds to bail out LTCM, which was 
on the verge of not being able to make payments on its margin loans. 
Reporters from the Wall Street Journal wrote on September 24, 1998:9

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0011 
Terms of the pact reached late Wednesday call for 11 firms to put in $300 
million apiece and four other firms to put in between $100 million and $125 
million each—all in exchange for a 90 stake in the hedge fund. Five of 
the firms will also form a new committee to oversee Long-Term Capital’s 
overall strategy, procedures, controls and even compensation. They would 
also have an option to buy 50 of the management company for a dol-
lar . . . Long-Term’s situation was so dire that if the bailout plan hadn’t been 
sealed Wednesday night, the hedge fund wouldn’t have been able to meet 
margin calls Thursday, people familiar with their situation say.
Through such extraordinary rescue efforts orchestrated by the U.S. Fed 
and funded by private bankers, LTCM did not default but it did not 
survive as an independent financial firm. It became a large footnote in 
the economic history of late twentieth century, a stunning example of 
how even the best economic in the world—while it can contribute hand-
somely to the inflation of a bubble—cannot prevent the bursting of the 
bubble.
Conclusion: the systemic inevitability of bubbles
While small, playful bubbles are not particularly harmful to overall 
society or economy where they occur, the large technology and financial 
bubbles not only have devastating economic impacts but also corrosive 
social impacts as people lose not only their savings or abodes but also 
faith in the institutions, private and public, that they have come to trust 
as protectors of their interests.
In the next chapter, we pull together various building blocks of 
Chapters 2–5 to present an overall model of bubble formation, with 
special focus on the “contagious,” “irrational,” and “punctured” bubbles 
of the type that have taken massive economic and social tolls in the 
twentieth century and that continue to threaten the economic and social 
well-being of people the world over in the twenty-first century.
Our model and “working theory” points to—in the absence of 
 substantial systemic and/or policy shifts—the systemic inevitability 
of bubbles. What is of special concern is the possible speeding up of 
the bubble formations, a compression of the time between bubbles. In 
Chapter 7, we offer some thoughts on taking our “working theory” to the 
stage of a “grand theory,” a conceptual schema that can help us in gain-
ing a fundamental understanding of economic bubbles. In Chapter 8, 


Typology of Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0011
the concluding chapter, we review some of the policy options to counter 
bubbles, or to recover from the damage caused by bubbles.
Notes
Kay (2012).
 
Barnard (2013); CNBC (2013); Dirks (2013); Hanson (2010); Kronke (2008); 
 
Wild about Movies (2013).
Brustein
 
 (2013); Colombo (2012b); Gustini (2012); NASDAQ (2013); Stewart 
(2012).
Gandel (2010); Glasner (2013); Gruber (2013); Salmon (2013).
 
Colombo (2012a); EconPort (2006); Galbraith and Hale (2003); Kuo (2001); 
 
Lynn (2011); Madslien (2010).
Schiller (2006).
 
Ghei (2013); 
 
Gopal and Howley (2013); Ellen and Dastrup (2012); Isidore (2012, 
2013); Levitin and Wachter (2011); Russell Sage Foundation (2013).
Lowenstein (2001).
 
Raghavan and Pacelle (1998).
 

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0012 
 
6
Bubble Emergence: 
Toward a Model
Abstract: In this chapter, we pull together various building 
blocks of Chapters 2–5 and present an overall model of bubble 
formation, with special focus on the contagious, irrational, and 
punctured bubbles of the type that have taken massive economic 
and social tolls in the twentieth century and that continue to 
threaten the economic and social well-being of people the world 
over in the twenty-first century. To illustrate our model of 
bubble formation, for example how theories behind sentiments 
were changed in order to justify sticky sentiments, we draw 
on examples from the dotcom bubble in the United Kingdom 
and from Nordic Europe—Iceland. To provide a stronger 
visualization of the model of bubble emergence, we invoke 
the concept of value-pricing thermometer and introduce our 
adapted version of the bubble thermometer. To exemplify the 
bubble thermometer, we explore social processes that attempt 
to build up movie hype, and their aftermath, and relate such 
exploration to our emerging interdisciplinary theory of bubbles.
Keywords: bubble thermometer; contagious bubbles; 
dotcom bubble; hype; Iceland; irrational bubbles; movie 
hype; playful bubbles; punctured bubbles; typology of 
asset bubbles
Dholakia, Nikhilesh and Romeo V. Turcan. Toward a 
Metatheory of Economic Bubbles: Socio-Political and Cultural 
Perspectives. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014.  
doi: 10.1057/9781137361790.0012.


Bubble Emergence: Toward a Model
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0012
Model of bubble emergence
Our model of bubble emergence builds on the three core asset-linked 
dimensions: perceived asset availability, perceived asset value, and per-
ceived asset communication. It draws on the temporal and contextual 
boundaries: aspects of uncertainty and negotiated space.1 Finally, it 
incorporates our theory assumptions: sentiment-guiding theories and 
hype.
In an uncertain environment, the probability distribution of outcomes 
yet to be created by exploiting a (market) opportunity is unknown: it’s 
like playing poker facing a deck of cards with some cards missing and 
other cards appearing multiple times. Under such conditions, different 
actors may make different predictions with respect to the same new 
asset, resulting in different outcomes:2 there is a multitude of expected 
asset values.
These relationships and the process between uncertainty and the emer-
gence of a new bubble-susceptible asset are depicted in Figure 6.1. The 
initial, objective state of a new asset presumably has an objective value, 
but (because the asset is new) this value is impossible to quantify (we have 
used a question mark in Figure 6.1 to indicate this indeterminacy). If the 
asset is deemed attractive (and there is buzz around it), then investible 
funds are attracted to it. Managers of such funds seek information—any 
and all information—that helps them develop expected values that these 
actors believe the new asset will generate and/or expected values the new 
asset is to generate as conceived by its creator.
Objective
value (?) of the
asset
Investible funds in search
of validating information
Expected
value of the
asset
Hyped value
of the asset
Readjusted, reformulated 
sentiment-guiding theories
Supportive sentiment-
guiding theories
Attempting realism
(e.g., the odd man out,
the lone “Dr. Doom”)
Figure 6.1 Process model of bubble emergence

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0012 
As we discussed earlier, the intolerance of uncertainty generates a 
desire to search for meanings and patterns, thus creating corresponding 
perceptions about the new asset availability, value, and communication. 
Such desire in turn makes people invest in the acquisition of informa-
tion to state or to reinstate a belief about an expected, perceived value 
of a new asset. It is important here to note that—given the uncertain 
decision-making setting within which the information is acquired—the 
outcome of the search for information is, by definition, not known at the 
time decision to search is made.3
The array of expected outcomes of a new asset creates severe competi-
tion for resources among those actors who possess intimate knowledge 
about the potential of the new asset, albeit themselves being uncertain 
about its actual outcome. Knowing that the other actors are not able 
to properly evaluate the potential of the new asset, an asset creator will 
tend to skew its potential toward delusional optimism or overoptimism, 
hyping the new asset value and its skyscraping potential.4 This phenom-
enon, known as anchoring, is considered one of the strongest and most 
prevalent of cognitive biases.5 The result of the phenomenon is the hyped 
value of the asset, shown on the right extreme of Figure 6.1. In other 
words, the actors develop theories that guide the overall sentiment of the 
environmental context, within which an underlying asset is embedded, 
and on which they base the future valuations of the asset. As a result, 
there emerges an overall sentiment about the exaggerated future pros-
pects of the new asset—a sentiment that we have called hype.
For example, such behavior—anchoring—was observed during the 
dotcom (or Internet e-commerce related) boom. Internet entrepreneurs, 
on the one hand, were trying to hype their business plans on the basis 
of various exaggerated market outlooks issued by leading research and 
consulting organizations in order to raise venture capital; and Venture 
Capitalists (VCs), on the other hand, were trying to get real views on the 
size of and trends about the markets and assets they invested in or were 
considering investing in (see also Chapter 3).
Anchoring leads to the creation of a positive feedback loop among the 
actors that in turn leads to trends being reinforced rather than reversed.6 
When caught up in this positive feedback loop, sentiments often become 
“sticky.” The actors try to change the sentiment-guiding theories (if ear-
lier theories crumble) rather than the sentiments themselves—and this 
helps in coping with the intolerance for uncertainty. In Figure 6.1 we have 
depicted the processes of initial and adjusted sentiment-guiding theories 


Bubble Emergence: Toward a Model
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0012
via the bold dashed arrows, with the adjusted and reformulated theories 
depicted as the backward arching dashed arrow. As we discussed earlier, 
sentiments are temporally sticky within the uncertain decision-making 
context, and once a sentiment is formed, it is very hard to challenge it and 
eventually to change it. In such a situation, theories behind sentiments 
become convenient and expendable and changeable: it is psychologically 
easier (less taxing) to change the guiding theory rather than to drop or 
reverse the sentiment. Of course, the initial and reformulated theories 
set up a dangerous spiral, an unsustainable upward spiral pushing up the 
expected asset value.
To illustrate these processes, let us look at an example from the 
dotcom bubble in the UK. In the mid-2000, a software company was 
set up in the UK with initial funding from four co-founders to develop 
off-the-shelf software platform for handheld devices for industrial and 
enterprise sectors. At the time that was an unknown opportunity, charac-
terized by uncertainty over the pursuit of that new underlying asset. The 
company started growing very quickly by acquiring—within six months 
from its inception—companies in the UK, the Netherlands, and Dubai, 
and by opening overseas offices at the beginning of 2001 in Denmark, 
Saudi Arabia, India and Bangladesh, having plans to expand further to 
Germany and France. In 2001 the company estimated its turnover at £6 
million by 2002, £15 million by 2003, and approximately £60 million over 
the next five years. Their projections were based on one of the leading 
market research organizations that estimated in 2000 the value of the 
market in Europe—a hyped value, in hindsight—at 40  million mobile 
workers, representing a market worth £8.2 billion. Despite the heady 
growth and rosy predictions, the owners struggled to convince potential 
investors to invest in the company, and turned for help to that market 
research organization—to adjust the sentiment-guiding theories. As one 
of the co-founders explained:
We decided that the engagement of a leading market research organization 
to comment on our proposition and positioning in the emerging market to 
assist with our fund-raising would greatly improve our chances of success.
As a result, the founders hyped a plausible-sounding business plan that 
“the investors could buy into.” To calm the fears of investors, the found-
ers asked for lesser funds than were required to carry out their ambitious 
business plan as originally developed. By the end of 2001, it was clear 
that the company was behind its revenues, and there was a delay in 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0012 
developing the platform. The founders could not persuade VCs to change 
the business plan in light of the actual developments. For the investors, 
uncertainty was fading, and the certainty of failure was looming on the 
horizon. The early venture investors withdrew from the investment 
portfolio as a result of evidently poor performance. There was no time to 
look for any other funding options, and the co-founders had no alterna-
tive but to put the company into administration (insolvency); it ceased 
trading in March 2002.
Occasionally in such situations there might be a few actors trying to 
induce a sense of realism amid a milieu of such feverish, hyped expecta-
tions (see also Chapter 4). Such behavior is intermittent, however. Most 
actors involved find it financially advantageous, and often unavoidable, 
to fall in line with the ideas of the market, even if they harbor reser-
vations and doubts. There are high emotional and professional costs 
associated with being the odd one out and the worldly wisdom teaches 
that it is far better for reputation to fail conventionally than to succeed 
unconventionally.7 Hyped value of an asset is a homeostatic value—a 
value which tends to be stable in empirical reality, even though there are 
forces which tend to change it.8
Banking crisis of Iceland
An example from Nordic Europe further illustrates how theories behind 
sentiments were changed in order to justify sticky sentiments (Figure 
6.1). As early as 2006, amid Iceland’s euphoria, Iceland’s government 
received a warning note from International Monetary Fund (IMF) in a 
report that identified its vulnerabilities, such as:
 . . . considerable near-term refinancing needs, credit quality, the long-term 
sustainability of the banks’ presence in the domestic mortgage market, and 
the crossholdings of equity.9
This was the draft version and the published version of the report was 
toned down (adjusting of sentiment-guiding theories, back-arching 
arrow in Figure 6.1) at the request of Iceland’s prime minister and the 
finance minister who argued that the initial report was overly critical.10 
At the same time, Denmark’s Danske Bank—which was thoroughly 
familiar with the Iceland situation—published a report on the economic 
outlook in Iceland, in which Danske Bank described Iceland as geyser 
economy, arguing that Iceland was “the most overheated in the OECD 
area.”11 Rather than paying attention to IMF’s original report and Danske 


Bubble Emergence: Toward a Model
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0012
Bank warnings, Iceland’s government and mass media chose, to a large 
extent, to ignore them and instead continuously quoted IMF revised 
claims (i.e., the adjusted sentiment-guiding theories) that the institu-
tions and policy frameworks were strong (sticky sentiment). The revised, 
adjusted IMF report read:
Markets are open and flexible, and the skillful management of the coun-
try’s natural endowments has diversified the economy and helped to 
ensure sustainability. Further, these factors are combined with a culture of 
entrepreneurial dynamism that has led to economic outcomes that belie the 
country’s small size.12
To the above, in the same year, Iceland Chamber of Commerce added 
a report (further adjustment to sentiment-guiding theories) commis-
sioned from Columbia Business School that affirmed the stability of 
Icelandic banks and Icelandic economy (sticky sentiment).13 Next year, 
Iceland Chamber of Commerce commissioned another report from 
the London Business School (further adjusting sentiment-guiding 
theories) that virtually reached the same conclusion—“the institutional 
and regulatory framework appears highly advanced and stable” (sticky 
sentiment)—arguing that “the ‘mini-crisis’ of 2006 was an informational 
crisis, arising from external criticisms”14 (further adjusting and tweaking 
of sentiment-guiding theories). As the history demonstrated, the failure 
of Iceland’s entire banking system and economy was not a matter of if, 
but when. Indeed, by October 2008 the economic situation in Iceland 
turned dire:
The Icelandic economy collapsed in early October 2008. Within a few days 
the three major banks had collapsed, transfer of funds in and out of the 
country was difficult or impossible, and firms were busy sending notes 
to the Directory of Labour regarding mass layoffs (sending such notes is 
required by law when the number of layoffs is over a given limit). The value 
of the currency collapsed, the inflation rate soared, and the finances of 
ordinary people were in shatters, even for those that kept their jobs.15
Bubble thermometer
To provide a stronger visualization of the model of bubble emergence, 
we invoke the concept of value-pricing thermometer16 and introduce our 
adapted version of the bubble thermometer (see Figure 6.2). One pointer 
on the thermometer—an indeterminate one—is the Objective Value an 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0012 
asset may generate, a value that is impossible to quantify in uncertain 
decision-making settings (see question marks in Figure 6.2). Indeed, this 
indeterminacy is germinal for any bubble process—if the Objective Value 
of the asset is objectively and clearly known, there is no room for bubble 
processes to come into play. The indeterminate position of the Objective 
Value on the thermometer scale vis-à-vis other values (Expected Value 
and Hyped Value) opens the door for the possible emergence of a bubble. 
Another pointer on the scale is the Hyped Value of an asset—a value that 
reflects an overall sentiment about exaggerated future prospects of that 
asset. On the thermometer scale, below the Hyped Value pointer, there 
is the Expected Value pointer. This is a value that the asset is expected to 
generate.
The difference between Hyped Value and Expected Value is what 
we call the Sentiment Surplus. This excess over Expected Value—the 
Sentiment Surplus—emerges because actors (investors, media, analysts) 
get caught up in and are driven by a “do-not-want-to-lose-out-on-a-big-
opportunity” philosophy. Sentiment-guiding theories emerge (or are 
promulgated) to act as actors’ incentives to demand the new asset.
At the bottom of the thermometer scale is the pointer related to the 
Cost of Goods Sold (COGS)—a value that must be charged in order for 
an asset to stay “alive” in terms of covering enterprise operating costs. The 
Objective value?
Objective value?
Cost of Goods Sold>>>
Expected Value>>>
Hyped Value>>>
Knowledge &
experience
Marketing efforts
+
–
SENTIMENTS SURPLUS
NORMAL RETURN
ASSET EXUBERANCE 
Figure 6.2 The bubble thermometer


Bubble Emergence: Toward a Model
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0012
position of the COGS pointer on the scale will vary depending on the 
type of an asset: be this a high-tech product, a movie, a rare tulip in the 
Netherlands, a house in Shanghai, or a tradable financial asset (see also 
Chapter 2). We label the difference between Expected Value and the Cost 
of Goods Sold as “Normal Return.” The difference between Hyped Value 
and Cost of Goods Sold is the attractiveness (the promise, the dazzle, the 
lucre) of an underlying asset to the interested actors. We call this the “Asset 
Exuberance”—a sum of “Normal Return” and “Sentiment Surplus.” Asset 
Exuberance is very high for assets around which the discourses of promise 
and profit—in terms of the processes described in this book—turn very 
intense (revisit the Semper Augustus tulip example, Chapter 1). For exam-
ple, Asset Exuberance explains the attractiveness of new high-technology 
firms to investors. The ideal time for investors to exit is when the internal 
rate of return that measures the investment return is at its highest value; 
usually within three to five years after the investment was made.
While discussing the enviro-contextual aspects of an asset in uncertain 
decision-making settings (see Chapter 3), we introduced a correspond-
ing dimension—negotiated space—to suggest that regardless of the type 
of asset that is to be made available, valued, and communicated about, in 
the process of bubble emergence, a physical exchange does not take place. 
In contrast to traditional (physical, palpable) marketplace exchange, in 
the “negotiated space” the parties arbitrate the value of an asset that is 
not readily available for physical inspection or exchange. Rather than 
a marketing mix, in the negotiated space there is a “negotiated mix”—
product and place may have to be imagined, but elements of promotion 
(often hyped) and price (also hyped) are vividly present. In such situa-
tions, it is expected that marketing efforts will reinforce the Hyped Value 
of the asset (see the left side of the Figure 6.2 thermometer diagram, the 
plus-sign indicating the impact of marketing efforts). The only means 
left for actors to somehow mitigate the hype around such asset is prior 
experience, or knowledge. Insightful knowledge and relevant experience 
can have some attenuating, moderating effect on the Hype Value (see, 
again, the left side of the Figure 6.2 thermometer diagram, the minus-
sign indicating the attenuating effect).
Going to the movies
To exemplify the above, we explore the social processes that attempt to 
build up movie hype,17 and their aftermath, and relate such exploration 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0012 
to our emerging interdisciplinary theory of bubbles.18 In this example, 
we relate the hype process observable in the selected movies to a more 
generic view of the social-institutional processes that build reasoned 
expectations as well as hype—irrational exuberance—and also the proc-
esses and performances that follow. Since movies are microcosmic phe-
nomena (the context for relatively harmless “playful bubbles” to form) 
compared to financial and technology hypes and bubbles—phenomena 
that are global, macroscopic, few, and historically infrequent—studies of 
movie hype cycles provide an abundant, easy-to-access, and data-rich 
field for studying bubbles in general. Table 6.1 presents the list of movies 
that we chose for this purpose.19
We purposefully selected ten movies that represent movies where 
Critical Acclaim (Critics, C) exceeds the ratings by movie viewers 
(Viewers, V), on one hand and movies that have the opposite characteris-
tic: Viewer Popularity (V) exceeds the ratings by critics (C, in Table 6.1). 
In developing the list, we also looked at the marketing efforts that went 
into building the hype for the movie, the production budgets, and revenue 
impacts. The revenue garnered by a movie relates to opening weekend 
revenue, first week revenue, and 13-week box office revenue. Of these, the 
first week revenue is of special interest, since it indicates either positive or 
negative sentiments that are built up following the opening weekend.
We use the ratio of the marketing effort to the production budget 
as a proxy for hype. We measure the instant effect of hype as the ratio 
of opening weekend revenue to the same denominator, that is, the 
production budget. We further use this denominator to measure the 
sentiments about a movie following its release as well as to measure 
the actual, realized effect during the 13-week period. The difference 
between realized effect and hype shows the influence of hype on the 
movie performance.
For example, The Artist has the highest hype index, suggesting movie 
producers invested a lot (compared to the production cost) in building 
up viewers’ expectations about the movie. Compare this, for example, 
to The Hangover that also had a relatively high hype index, The Artist 
was overhyped as its follow-up and realized indexes indicate. This 
suggests that negative rather than positive sentiments were being built 
up following the opening weekend. Such negative (or not-so-positive) 
sentiments influenced other movie goers’ behavior, creating an overall 


Bubble Emergence: Toward a Model
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0012
negative (unfavorable) sentiment about the movie that had a negative 
effect on movie performance (see also Chapter 4). In contrast, instant 
index for The Hangover indicates that larger-than-hyped positive 
sentiments were built up after the opening weekend—sentiments that 
positively influenced the behavior of next movie goers, who in turn 
reinforced these positive sentiments as its follow-up and realized 
indexes indicate.
The above example supports our earlier assertion that the positive or 
negative sentiments about the movie or about any other hypeable asset 
arise as a result of the interaction between individuals and the changes 
in behavior which they induce in one another.20 Positive feedback that 
generally rules the real world of the economy and society21 will lead to 
trends being reinforced rather than reversed; when negative feedback 
predominates, any differences between individuals’ behaviors will tend 
to be smoothed away.
Conclusion: can hype be curbed?
One question that arises immediately from the model we put forward 
in this chapter is this: Can we manage (and even curb) the hype? In 
a milieu that seems ripe for hyping an asset’s value, can we change/
adjust sentiment-guiding theories away from a (usually ruinous) hype-
building spiral and toward instilling a sense of realism in the emerging 
context of the new asset in order to alter the sentiments? Is it possible 
emotionally or professionally not to follow hype-created fashion and 
be the odd man out, thus going against worldly wisdom that teaches 
that it is far better for reputation to fail conventionally than to succeed 
unconventionally?22 Managing hype would effectively mean to man-
age the sentiment surplus. Could this be the missing link in the Adam 
Smith’s theory of market economy that does not function in the pres-
ence of greed?
There are no easy answers to these questions, but not seeking answers 
is a sure way to pave the path to frequent, intense, and increasingly 
harmful bubbles. In the next chapter we lay out the steps toward build-
ing a grand theory of bubbles, and in the final chapter—Chapter 8—we 
return to the pressing questions about taming of bubbles.

Table 6.1 Hype characteristics of selected movies
Movie 
Ratings
Budgets  
(USD, mn)
Hype
US revenue  
(USD, mn)
Effect on market
Critics  
[C]
Viewers  
[V]
Difference  
[V – C]
Production 
[P]
Markweting  
[M]
Hype index  
[H = M/P*]
Opening weekend  
[OW]
First week [FW]
Thirteen Week 
[THW]
Instant index  
[I = OW/P*]
Follow on index  
[FO = FW/P*]
Realized index  
[R = THW/P*]
Reality vs. hype  
[R – H]
Comments 
The Artist 
()













Oscar winner (picture, director, 
actor, costume, design, original 
score) Golden Globe winner 
(motion picture, performance 
by an actor in a motion picture, 
original score)
No Country 
for Old Men 
()


–






.
.
.
.Oscar winner (picture, director, 
actor, supporting actor, adapted 
screenplay) Golden Globe winner 
(performance by an actor in a 
motion picture, screenplay)
The  
Descendants 
()


–






.
.
..Oscar winner (adapted 
screenplay) Golden Globe winner 
(performance by an actor in a 
motion picture, performance by 
an actress in a supporting role in 
a motion picture)

The 
Hangover 
()





.



.
.
..Golden Globe winner (motion 
picture)
Red Tails 
()





.



.
.
.
.
Dreamgirls 
()


–


.
.
.

.
.
.
.Oscar winner (actress in a 
supporting role, sound mixing) 
Golden Globe winner (motion 
picture, performance by an 
actress in a supporting role in a 
motion picture, performance by 
an actor in a supporting role in a 
motion picture)
The Hunger 
Games 
()





.



.
.
..
King Kong 
()


–


.



.
.
.
.Oscar winner (Sound editing, 
sound mixing, visual effects) 
Golden Globe winner (new star 
of the year)
The Golden 
Compass 
()





.



.
.
.
.Oscar winner (visual effects)
Avatar 
()





.



.
.
..Oscar winner (cinemato graphy, 
art direction, visual effects) 
Golden Globe winner (motion 
picture, director)

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0012 
Notes
For the purpose of this model, the assumption of velocity over time is relaxed 
 
as this model is developed for the uncertain-decision making setting only.
Carlaw et al. (2006).
 
Elster (2007, p. 133).
 
Turcan (2011).
 
Lovallo and Kahneman (2003).
 
Keynes (1936).
 
Ibid.
 
Stinchcombe (1965).
 
IMF (2006, p. 24).
 
Wade and Sigurgeirsdottir (2010).
 
Valgreen et al. (2006, p. 2).
 
IMF (2006, p. 23).
 
Mishkin and Herbertsson (2006); according to Wade and Sigurgeirsdottir 
 
(2010), Mishkin was paid $135,000 for this report.
Portes and Baldursson (2007, p. 1).
 
Matthiasson (2008, p. 2).
 
Dolan and Gourville (2009).
 
Perren (2004).
 
We do not wish to contribute to the established stream of research that 
 
analyzes large samples of movies via statistical methods to determine 
relationships between budgets, revenues, star power, critics, director power, 
and so on (examples of such work are Basuroy et al. 2003; Eliashberg and 
Shugan 1997; Hennig-Thurau et al. 2007; Ravid 1999).
Data on selected movies were drawn from the film review aggregator Rotten 
 
Tomatoes (www.rottentomatoes.com), from online movie publication and 
box office reporting services such as Box Office Mojo (www.boxofficemojo.
com) and The-numbers (www.the-numbers.com), as well as from the 
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (www.oscars.org), and the 
Hollywood Foreign Press Association’s annual Golden Globe Awards (www.
goldenglobes.org).
Ormerod (1998).
 
Ibid.
 
Keynes (1936).
 

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0013

7
Toward a Grand 
Theory of Bubbles
Abstract: In this chapter, we put forward our grand theory 
of bubbles that reflects pervasive irrationality, of individuals 
and markets and builds on three transcending constructs 
that explain the formation of bubbles regardless of the asset 
types. These are sentiment-guiding theory, sentiment, and 
newness of assets. One of our central insights is that during the 
stage of rapid bubble inflation, there is a tendency to discard 
sentiment-guiding theories rather than sentiments themselves. 
To help theorize the emergence of bubbles further, we turn to 
the concept of turning points, and also introduce a number 
of constructs such as ignorant belief toward a new asset, 
subjective probabilities, and illusionary certainty of negotiated 
mix. We argue in this chapter inter alia that ignorance and 
illusion of skill are phenomena present not only at the level 
of individuals, but also at the level of industries, and various 
private and public institutions for the society as a whole.
Keywords: ignorant beliefs; illusion of skill; newness of 
assets; psychology of bubbles; risk; sentiment-guiding 
theories; theories of asset bubbles; turning points; 
uncertainty
Dholakia, Nikhilesh and Romeo V. Turcan. Toward a 
Metatheory of Economic Bubbles: Socio-Political and Cultural 
Perspectives. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014. 
doi: 10.1057/9781137361790.0013.

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0013 
Bubbles precede capitalism. They have, however, become pervasive, more 
intensive, and more frequent with advancing capitalism. Indeed, the first 
appearance of bubbles occurred at the cusp of a waning feudalism and 
emerging nascent forms of proto-capitalism. Ever since, the phenom-
ena of bubbles have received rational and irrational explanations,1 of 
individual as well as collective behaviors.2 Our grand theory of bubbles 
reflects pervasive irrationality, of individuals and markets; yet we dis-
cern an overarching as well as an undergirding systemic rationality—the 
prevalent global politico-economy system may hate bubbles but seems 
incapable of avoiding them. This systemic nature of bubbles—that they 
are endemic, unavoidable, dangerous concomitants of finance-driven 
capitalism—is a topic most economic and financial theorists skirt 
around, and do not confront head-on, for doing so would cut off the 
very legs on which such academic and business enterprises stand.3
One of our central insights is that during the stage of rapid bubble 
inflation, there is a tendency to discard sentiment-guiding theories rather 
than sentiments themselves. In other words, for a bubble to emerge, 
rather than alter the sentiment itself when discordant notes appear, 
emotionally involved actors develop and continuously alter theories—
sentiment-guiding theories—that direct their overall sentiment about 
exaggerated prospects of a new asset.
Revisiting the building blocks
Our grand theory builds on three transcending constructs that explain 
the formation of bubbles regardless of the asset types (the “what” aspect 
of a theory—see Chapter 1). These are sentiment-guiding theory, sentiment, 
and newness of assets. Before we discuss how these constructs are related 
(the “how” aspect of a theory), let us first define temporal and contextual 
boundaries of our theory (the “who-where-when” aspects of a theory).
As with any other theory, our theory has its own temporal boundary 
(the “when” aspect of a theory) that delineates its range. The temporal 
boundary of our grand theory of bubbles is defined by uncertainty about 
a new asset. We view uncertainty and newness of an asset as two sides of 
the same coin. The newness of an asset could be typified as an uncharted 
innovation: a new product, a new technology, a new business idea, or 
a new business model such as sophisticated derivative instruments 
developed in recent years by bankers and financial engineers who seek 


Toward a Grand Theory of Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0013
new sources of revenue via such sophisticated financial business models. 
Uncertainty is the accompanying fallout of the process of emergence of 
a new asset.
We define the contextual boundary of our theory (the “who” and 
“where” aspects of a theory) as uncertain decision-making setting. 
Policymakers, entrepreneurs, CEOs, investors, analysts, and mass/
social media are the key actors—as individuals and/or representatives of 
respective institutions—that “make” decisions (and more appropriately, 
signal the decisions they have made or are about to make) regarding 
the potential or fundamental value of a new asset. We put inverted 
commas around “make” because in uncertain decision-making settings 
these actors cannot know not only the chances of various outcomes, but 
they also cannot know all the outcomes that are possible.4 In such an 
environment—a zero-validity environment5—different actors may make 
different choices with respect to the same new asset, resulting in differ-
ent outcomes.6 Despite the fact that under uncertainty the probability of 
outcomes and the nature of outcomes are impossible to assess, the actors 
involved do make seemingly confident predictions about a fundamen-
tal value of a new asset—a phenomenon called collective blindness to 
uncertainty.7
Such collective blindness to uncertainty is caused by ignorance 
 masqueraded as knowledge so that decisions or choices may be made.8 
In other words, the actors involved appear to be ignorant of their 
ignorance,9 with, of course, some troubling exceptions where some 
(unethical) actors may know the realities about asset values but choose to 
let the asset acquisition frenzy continue. With passage of time—moving 
from “uncertain” decision-making settings toward “risk” decision-
making settings—a history of the new asset is being formed. More accu-
rate information about the assets is coming from the market about its 
fundamental value, making it possible to perform statistical calculations, 
including much needed regression to the mean in order to make valid 
predictions.10
What glues together the above three constructs (the “how” aspect 
of a theory)—sentiment-guiding theory, sentiment, and new asset—is 
knowledge created about the new asset. We define knowledge creation 
in uncertain decision-making settings as the emergence of an ignorant 
belief toward a new asset. Inability or unwillingness to tolerate uncer-
tainty (the “why” aspect of a theory; psychological) drive the actors 
involved to find meanings and patterns about the fundamental value 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0013 
of a new asset. In search for such meanings and patterns, the actors, 
being ignorant about their ignorance, acquire more knowledge—
ignorant belief—and  eventually develop an enhanced fantasy about 
their skill (illusion of skill) and become unrealistically overconfident.11 
Such belief creates corresponding perceptions about availability, value, 
and communication of a new asset. Ignorance contributes to the crea-
tion of perceived knowledge of asset availability, asset value, and asset 
communication or what we call subjective probabilities. These subjective 
probabilities typify an overall sentiment of the environmental context 
about the future, that is, hype.
As a homeostatic or equilibrium-seeking value, hype tends to be stable 
in empirical reality, which initially is an uncertain decision-making real-
ity. As our theory suggests, a bubble emerges when actors involved alter 
sentiment-guiding theories rather than the sentiment—hype—itself. We 
posit that ignorance and illusion of skill are driving forces that generate 
and discard sentiment-guiding theories. In the context of uncertainty, 
we view sentiment-guiding theories as subjective confidence that is deter-
mined by the coherence of the story or theory one has constructed, and 
not by the quality and amount of information that supports it.12
Ignorance and illusion of skill are phenomena present not only at the 
level of individuals, but also at the level of industries, and various private 
and public institutions for the society as a whole (the “why” aspect of a 
theory; economic and social). With quick advancement of information 
and communication technologies as well as sophisticated, innovative 
financial/business models, the boundaries between real economy and 
financial economy, as well as meso and macro levels, are blurred. These 
trends have changed and continue changing the way bubbles are concep-
tualized: from individual phenomena in early days, to holistic (in terms 
of spanning industries, technologies, and/or sectors) phenomena in 
recent years and decades, to global socio-political phenomena at present 
and in the currently conceivable future.
From a social perspective, the overall behavior of individuals in a 
given uncertain decision-making setting still depends on the interac-
tion between these individuals and the changes in behavior which they 
induce in one another. In other words, positive feedback—fanning the 
sentimental embers into leaping flames—will continue to rule the real 
world of the economy and society and will lead to trends being rein-
forced rather than reversed.13 From a political perspective at the macro 
level, however, there will be institutional pressures which are beyond any 


Toward a Grand Theory of Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0013
individual decision-maker and which will constantly create conditions 
conducive to bubble emergence. We expect the signals emanating from 
the macro level to become at least as strong as the signals emanating 
from the meso (industry and sector) level, if not stronger.
Within this context, delusional optimism and overoptimism (see 
Figure 4.2) could be seen as engines of capitalism,14 but only under the 
condition that bubbles are tamable so that there are no negative effects 
on the economy at the macro level. When bubbles are endemic and not 
tamable, these could turn into “runaway engines” that pull entire nations 
and populations “off the track,” and could cause major accidents, even 
catastrophic crashes. At the meso (industry, technology category, and 
sector) level, there will continue to be a number of optimistic martyrs15 
or catalyst ventures16 that—although they do suffer losses, economic as 
well socio-psychological (including the cultural “loss of face”), when 
meso-level bubbles burst—do drive the market-based processes of 
invention and innovation, contributing possibly to a positive net effect 
on the social level.
Bubbles as turning points
To help theorize the emergence of bubbles further, we turn to the concept 
of turning points. As a concept, a turning point has a number of proper-
ties that allow us to advance our understanding of bubbles. By theorizing 
bubbles as turning points we move away from extant trajectory-based 
approaches to bubbles. Turning points are “more consequential than tra-
jectories because they give rise to changes in overall direction or regime, 
and do so in determining fashion.”17 A process has turning points because 
it has regular sub-processes between which we switch only rarely;18 and 
in this context we view bubbles as these rare switches.
Theorized as turning points, bubbles are also seen as radical shifts 
redirecting the paths with reference to two points in time, not one.19 The 
hindsight property of turning points suggests that a turning point can 
only be defined a posteriori rather than a priori.20 This means that neither 
the beginning (inflating a bubble) nor the end (deflating a bubble) of a 
turning point can be defined until the whole turning point has passed, 
and that the analysis of a turning point makes sense only after the fact 
when a new trajectory or system state (e.g., pessimism or realism, see 
Figure 4.2) is clearly established.21

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0013 
Uncertainty—as another property of turning points—further contrib-
utes to our understanding of bubbles. Seen as a change in overall direc-
tion or regime, a bubble (as a turning point) moves out of one trajectory 
or state (inflating) onto a new trajectory or state (deflating). The nature 
of the trajectories or states, on either side of the turning point (bubble), 
is different: an asset moves out of uncertain decision-making settings 
onto risk decision-making settings.
To further our discussion on this issue, we borrow from the ideas of 
the Nobel laureate Daniel Kahneman—a psychologist whose work the 
Nobel economics award committee found to be of deep significance for 
economics (in a vein similar to earlier recognition of Herbert Simon 
by the Nobel economics award committee). Specifically, we turn to 
Kahneman’s concept of range of uncertainty. A “range” of uncertainty 
has as its edges the bottom and the top of the region of uncertainty.22 To 
facilitate an understanding of this idea, Kahneman uses the following 
example:
 . . . take a sheet of paper and draw a 2½-inch line going up, starting at the 
bottom of the page—without a ruler. Now take another sheet, and start at 
the top and draw a line going down until it is 2½ inches from the bottom. 
Compare the lines. There is a good chance that your first estimate of 2½ 
inches was shorter than the second.23
Kahneman, citing other related work in psychology, argues that in 
the first drawing of the line (from bottom up) we are operating at the 
lower end of the range of uncertainty, and therefore underestimate the 
actual length. In the second drawing of the line (from top down), we 
switch—we operate at the upper end of the range of uncertainty, thereby 
estimating the line to be longer than actual length.
A (turning) point, located somewhere at the edge of the region of 
uncertainty when you move up from the bottom of the page, defines the 
bottom of the region of uncertainty. To apply this concept—bottom of 
the region of uncertainty—to our theory of bubbles, we shall redefine the 
assumptions that this concept is based on, namely that the actors involved 
in “drawing” know what “2½ inches” mean and know what “a line” is. In 
uncertain decision-making settings—a context within which a new asset, 
an uncharted innovation emerges—the probability of outcomes (2½ 
inches) and the nature of outcomes (a line) are impossible to assess. One 
way to mitigate the formation and burst of a bubble might be to focus 
on educating the decision-makers about processes (such as drawing) 


Toward a Grand Theory of Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0013
rather than outcomes (2½ inch length; a relatively straight line) during 
the emergence of a new asset. The problem during bubble formation, of 
course, is that even the major decision-makers (let alone their followers) 
are not very interested in learning about drawing, geometry, or metrics: 
the blinds are drawn, and sunlight cannot get in (we urge strongly for 
letting “sunlight” in, in the next and final chapter of the book).
An inflating bubble might resemble “a move from the bottom of the 
page” in search for a turning point located at the bottom of the region of 
uncertainty. Driven by subjective probability and subjective confidence, 
however, the actors involved at all levels—individual, industry, private, 
and public—cultivate an illusory certainty24 of not reaching the bot-
tom of the region of uncertainty (or the turning point)—what we call 
an illusionary certainty of negotiated mix—and continue negotiating the 
fundamental value of an asset, pushing up the bottom of the region of 
uncertainty, and thereby postponing the (inevitable) beginning of turn-
ing point. In other words, the blinds are kept drawn, and—if some light 
begins to filter in through some crack—the action moves to a darker 
corner, away from the light; and the process that we have characterized 
as willingness to change sentiment-guiding theory rather than the senti-
ment comes into play.
Reconciling the differences
In 2013, the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science was awarded to 
three professors who brought to the table different views on the linkages 
and interactions between financial markets and the overall economy. 
These are Eugene Fama and Lars Peter Hansen of University of Chicago 
and Robert J. Shiller of Yale University. The first two professors are 
proponents of the efficient-markets theory that posits that prices reflect 
all available information and rejects the existence of bubbles.25 On the 
other side of the economics discourse, Professor Shiller stresses the 
massive role human error and irrational behavior play in asset bubble 
formation and bursts, arguing that the markets are not perfect and need 
regulation.26
According to Professor Hansen, what unites their work—of all three 
Nobel Memorial Prize winners—is “. . .  puzzling implications that 
emerge from financial markets data,” but what differentiates their work 
are the approaches they employ to understand and explain the puzzle.27 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0013 
This puzzle is fundamental value of an asset. Differences may arise then 
not only from wearing different lenses—approaches—to look at this 
puzzle, but also from looking at different puzzles; a fundamental value of 
asset in risk decision-making settings is one type of puzzle (Type II), and 
a fundamental value of an asset in uncertain decision-making settings is 
another (Type I).
The general proposition the efficient-market theory rests on is that a 
price—fundamental value of an asset—reflects all available information. 
According to our theory, all (objective) information about a value of an 
asset is available only in risk decision-making settings where it is pos-
sible to calculate the chances of various outcomes as well as the types of 
outcomes. Putting aside the issue of whether all available information is 
indeed included in the price, we rather focus on all available information. 
In other words, in risk decision-making settings, traditional marketing 
mix rules the world with known product (2½-inch line) and known 
place for the exchange. To hype and inflate such assets (Type II)—even 
if the asset is new—via traditional promotion channels is rather difficult 
(though possible—such cases representing the rare but not impossible 
“black swan”28) under risk decision-making settings. And indeed, in 
this context, there might be the case of no place for bubbles in efficient 
markets, as Professor Fama argues.
Bubbles do exist, however. But they exist in another dimension—in 
uncertain decision-making settings where the product (2½-inch line 
or, more appropriately, “how-many-inches-what?”) is unknown; and 
the probability of outcomes (2½ inches) and the nature of outcomes (a 
line) are impossible to assess. In this context, the fundamental value of 
that new asset (Type I) is conveyed via a negotiated mix: the product 
(2½-inch line) and the place for exchange may have to be imagined (as 
we saw in the wondrous technology promises of the “dotcom” era), but 
elements of promotion (often hyped) and price (also hyped) are vividly 
present. Subjective probability and subjective confidence give rise to 
illusionary certainty of such a negotiated mix—perceived knowledge of 
asset availability, asset value, and asset communication—thereby push-
ing up (inflating) the fundamental value of a new asset.
Irrational behavior is built in both puzzles—Type I and Type II—and 
this goes back to the issue of whether all available information is reflected 
in a price or fundamental value of an asset. If all Type II assets reflect all 
available information, hence are correctly priced, then no one can expect 
either to gain or lose by trading, hence there shall be no room for trading 


Toward a Grand Theory of Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0013
or an exchange.29 The only way to solve this logical contradiction is to 
assume that not all available information is reflected in prices, opening 
up complex pathways to imperfection and irrational behavior. In con-
trast, Type I assets may reflect all available information or knowledge 
that we call ignorant belief toward a new asset (where ignorance and 
illusion are the two lenses that actors involved are wearing, making them 
collectively blind to uncertainty), thus the key actors making confident 
predictions about the fundamental value of a new asset.
Indeed, the common theme is pricing that seemingly reflects a 
 fundamental value of an asset. The concern with Type I puzzle it seems 
is not so much about (hyped) pricing as a monetary value, but about 
the role (hyped) pricing plays vis-à-vis the emergence of a new asset 
and its perceived value, availability, and communication. The question 
is whether (hyped) pricing—as part of the negotiated mix—is seen as 
a mechanism that fosters competition during the emergence of a new 
asset in uncertain decision-making settings, and at the same time tends 
to destabilize the firms in the market; or, is (hyped) pricing seen more 
as a mechanism to mitigate the competition among various actors to 
achieve stability in the market, as the goal of the market is to ensure the 
survival of a new asset?30
In this respect, it could be argued that a bubble bursts when (hyped) 
pricing turns into a “competition” mechanism rather than remain an 
insulating (from competition) and “stabilizing” mechanism. It could 
further be argued that using (hyped) prices as a mechanism to bring 
stability in the market by coordinating the efforts to avoid destructive 
forces of the competition during the bubble emergence would mean, 
among other things, that hype could be managed and as a result high 
prices could be perpetually increased (though marginally).
An example of such model can be found in BlackRock, the firm that 
is the biggest investor in the world with $4.1 trillion of directly control-
led assets and another $11 trillion-worth assets that BlackRock oversees 
through its trading platform, Aladdin.31 The risk-management model 
that BlackRock developed discovers the value of any asset by melding 
various actors’ different conclusions and opinions on prices—that these 
actors arrive at based on their own idiosyncratic analyses—into a single 
price. The actors involved are looking at the financial world, at least 
in part, through this lens—model—crafted by BlackRock.32 It appears 
that this model allows careful identification and selection of investable 
assets without destabilizing the respective markets. The model strives 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0013 
for a small, incremental, and—as BlackRock’s steady rise to the top 
demonstrates—an enduring upside.
From a public policy perspective, the issue is how much regula-
tion or government intervention is needed during the process of the 
emergence of a new asset in uncertain decision-making settings. As we 
have argued, this process of new asset emergence occurs (even if there 
are actual new technologies and/or products involved) in the financial 
sphere. The process is more about the formation of the market or 
negotiated space (battle for resources or competitive advantage) rather 
than actual exchange (in traditional marketing sense), and macro-level 
politics is not in the picture, except perhaps in the aftermath of a crisis 
(as the recent bubbles associated with the 2007–2008 Great Recession 
demonstrated).
Indeed, the path of negotiated space formation for the new uncertain 
asset begins in the invisible sections of financial markets and then moves 
onto visible sections. Values of most new and uncertain assets are first 
formed in the cloistered depths of venture capital and private equity 
markets, then transferred to those financial spaces where banks and 
investment firms transact with each other, and finally perhaps in pub-
licly traded and observable financial spaces such as the stock and bond 
markets. These valuation paths for new assets start with the formation of 
invisible (to the public) private markets where initial exchanges occur, 
then move to increasingly visible and public markets, and finally—almost 
always after some type of crash or collapse—the macro-level political 
discourses open up, to examine why the crisis happened and what could 
be done to prevent it.
For example, after the Great Recession of 2007–2008, it took five years 
of macro-level political and policy discourse in the United States to cre-
ate a significant regulation known as Volcker Rule aimed at curbing some 
of the speculative investing practices of government-insured banks, with 
the hope of preventing future trading blowups on Wall Street.33 In this 
game, however, “Big Finance” is generally a step ahead of “Big Politics.” 
Even before the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul legislation that proposed 
the Volcker Rule was voted by the legislators, and considerably ahead of 
the actual crafting of the details and language of this rule by regulatory 
agencies, big banks such as Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley had 
started inventing new business models that would allow the banks to get 
around the regulation:


Toward a Grand Theory of Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0013
Some banks like Goldman Sachs have already test-run certain strategies, 
such as putting together a separate investment vehicle to make loans to 
companies in the event the [Volcker Rule] regulation limits the ability of 
bank-owned hedge funds to continue that business . . . “Morgan Stanley and 
Goldman Sachs will go out and hire the best and brightest lawyers, and 
they will say, ‘How do we do this?’ ” said Bill Singer, a securities lawyer who 
represents individuals and brokerage firms in disputes with regulators and 
advises clients on regulatory compliance. “The mind-set,” he said, is “how 
do we get around it?”34
Conclusion: mopping up the bubble froth
The answer to the question of “how much and what type of regulation is 
needed for bubble-prone assets”, of course, depends on the type of asset 
and the scope of a bubble. The box office collapse of a hyped-up movie 
hurts some people but does not constitute a case for regulatory inter-
vention. Indeed, the severe financial and reputational beating that the 
producers of an unrealistically hyped movie take, when that unworthy 
movie fails at the box office, can be seen as poetic justice: they deserv-
edly got what was coming to them.
The collapse of asset values in a technological category or sector 
represents a mixed picture. The hype and buildup of tech bubbles do 
accelerate the race for innovation. While asset buyers are scrambling 
to acquire assets, innovators and entrepreneurs are also scrambling, 
in parallel, to create asset varieties within the theme that is being 
hyped up. It could be argued that when the bubble bursts and the 
dust settles, while the field may be littered with failed ventures, the 
society still comes out ahead because of the strong surviving innova-
tive technologies. Innovative firms such as Amazon, eBay and Yahoo! 
represent such survivors of the “dotcom” tech bubble, and—it could be 
argued—that additional innovative firms such as Google and Facebook 
may not have been possible if there was no “dotcom” frenzy and crash, 
with the application of lessons learned from “dotcom” failures to build 
more robust business models. Such meso-level logic, while accept-
able, nonetheless ignores the numerous instances of micro-level losses 
in terms of money and employment. It ignores the thousands, even 
 millions of narratives of loss and misery, not just of investors losing 
but also of well-trained entrepreneurs and employees losing work and 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0013 
self-confidence. Thus, the meso sector-level bubbles represent a mixed 
picture of social impacts.
Large, globe-spanning financial bubbles linked to physical goods such 
as housing or to virtual assets such as financial derivatives or stock prices 
do not seem to offer anything that is socially redemptive, notwithstand-
ing the positions espoused by efficient-market proponents. The misery 
and pain caused by the 2007–2009 Great Recession—which entailed 
various bubbles in assets such as housing, derivatives such as Credit 
Default Swaps (CDS), and in European bank valuations—are well docu-
mented (see Chapter 2). The continuing longer-term impacts of the Great 
Recession include a sharp rise in income and wealth inequality, especially 
in the United States; various types of structural unemployment, even for 
trained and educated workers; and the widening of a destructive political 
ideological divide that pits a fraction-of-one-percent of the population 
(the ultra-rich) against the rest. Such bubbles bring privations and pains 
for almost everyone, and public policies options have to be created to 
prevent and/or tame such bubbles. But are such bubbles tamable? This is 
the issue we take up in the next and final chapter.
Notes
U.S. Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan famously introduced the 
 
phrase “irrational exuberance” in popular lexicon. See Greenspan (1996).
Kestenbaum (2013).
 
There are, of course, occasional exceptions, and the works of economist 
 
Hyman Minsky (1977) are noteworthy in this regard—Whalen (2008) 
revisited Minsky’s ideas after the 2007–2008 crisis. Also, those dealing 
with practical investment advice are well aware of this, and do sound out 
warnings (see Roubini 2006), but—once again—confronting the systemic 
issue head-on would undercut the very legitimacy of the intellectual and/or 
practical enterprises they are engaged in.
Loasby (1976).
 
Kahneman (2011, p. 240).
 
Carlaw et al. (2006).
 
Kahneman (2011, p. 262).
 
Loasby (1976).
 
Kahneman (2011).
 
Ibid.
 
Ibid.
 


Toward a Grand Theory of Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0013
Ibid.
 
Ormerod (1998).
 
Kahneman (2011).
 
Ibid., p. 261.
 
Davidsson (2004, p. 13).
 
Abbott (2001, p. 249).
 
Ibid., p. 247.
 
Danto (1985).
 
Turcan (2013).
 
Abbott (2001, p. 250).
 
Kahneman (2011, p. 121).
 
Ibid., p. 120.
 
Ibid., p. 14.
 
Sommer (2013a, b); see also Kestenbaum (2013).
 
Sommer (2013b); Shiller (2013); see also Kestenbaum (2013).
 
Sommer (2013a).
 
Taleb (2010).
 
Kahneman (2011).
 
Fligstein (2001).
 
The Economist
 
 (2013).
Ibid.
 
Tangel et al. (2013).
 
Goldstein and Protess (2013).
 

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0014 
 
8
Bubbles: Trouble or Tamable?
Abstract: In this concluding chapter, the issues are clear and 
straightforward: (1) Can bubble processes be detected early 
and stopped before they turn dangerous? (2) If bubbles form 
and burst, can steps be taken to control the damage and 
recover quickly? We argue that in bubble-prone situations, the 
inflation of a dangerous bubble could be avoided, or at least 
mitigated, by encouraging multiple, independent opinions on 
the realistic value of the asset; creating transparency about the 
motives of, and possible gains for, those who hype the asset; 
uncovering and shining a light on the linkages among asset 
inventors-creators, owners, funders, analysts, promoters, and 
speculators. Governments, nongovernment organizations, 
media, and universities can take up the responsibilities of 
doing these things. The pathways to regulate bubbles are 
clear-cut; however, the political economy of taking such actions 
is fraught with complexity.
Keywords: asset bubbles; political economy; regulation; 
transparency
Dholakia, Nikhilesh and Romeo V. Turcan. Toward a 
Metatheory of Economic Bubbles: Socio-Political and Cultural 
Perspectives. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014. 
doi: 10.1057/9781137361790.0014.


Bubbles: Trouble or Tamable?
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0014
Bubbles are not about to disappear. The concern the world over is 
whether bubble phenomena can be detected early and actions taken 
to tame these before they inflict enormous damage on institutions and 
individuals.
The damage done by the 1980s stock bubble to Japan stands as a stark 
lesson on how the economic engine and the corporate innovation cul-
ture of an entire nation—a nation feared at one time for its unbeatable 
technology and brands—could grind to a halt for decades because of 
macro-level mismanagement of speculative processes:1
As the Nikkei stock average roared to new heights in the 1980s, investment 
bankers gained riches and new respect in Japanese society. They exerted 
increasing influence over corporate clients, relationships cemented at 
upscale bars and hostess clubs in Tokyo with thousand-dollar bottles of 
champagne and gold-dusted chocolate mousse deserts [sic]. Brokers found 
willing customers in dying industries such as basic chemicals and textiles, 
persuading them better returns could be had investing in stocks or bonds 
than in core operations . . . after the Plaza Accord in September 1985 . . . major 
industrial powers agreed to devalue the dollar. The yen appreciated sharply, 
gutting Japanese corporate profits . . . Suddenly the idea of using “zaitech,” 
or financial engineering to pad earnings made sense . . . The Nikkei average 
peaked on the final trading day of 1989 and promptly went into a tailspin, 
losing nearly 40 percent the following year, crushing stock portfolios across 
the corporate sector.
Two decades of stagnation followed the bursting of the Japanese bub-
ble. The social and economic impacts have been far-reaching. The 
vaunted lifetime employment system of Japan shrunk from 85 percent 
to 65 percent of the workforce and keeps shrinking. Temporary and 
part-time jobs have become the norm for young people entering the 
workforce. Living standards are eroding due to rising tax burdens 
and shrinking pensions. The young in Japan are especially paying a 
heavy price because good, secure jobs are scarce; the social security 
burden is rising because of unfavorable age ratios; and a culture of 
ennui has taken hold in cities and small towns. The older generation 
of Japan—those retired or near retirement—came away less bruised 
because they kept their savings in postal bank accounts rather than in 
speculative stocks and mutual funds. Untamed inflation of bubbles and, 
even worse, ineffective policy responses after bubbles burst can have 
debilitating economic, social, and cultural impacts. The issues for this 
final chapter are clear and straightforward: (1) Can bubble processes be 

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0014 
detected early and stopped before they turn dangerous? (2) If bubbles 
form and burst, can steps be taken to control the damage and recover 
quickly?
The Singapore strategy: effective but not replicable
One way to tame bubbles is to craft a local variant of capitalism where 
a strong state intervenes and exercises multiple controls on asset-
valuation mechanisms and activities, even as it maintains solid link-
ages with relatively unbridled global capitalism. The soft-authoritarian 
Singapore model and the post-Deng Chinese model, which drew many 
of its ideas from the Singapore model, are such capitalism variants.2 
In both these nations—Singapore and China—multiple state interven-
tions have been employed to tame bubbles in real-estate prices. China’s 
interventions have had limited effects but Singapore’s interventions, 
more numerous and far-reaching than China’s, did eventually manage 
to slow down the rapidly inflating bubble of real-estate prices in that 
city-state (see Table 8.1).
What the “Singapore Solution” teaches us, however, more than 
anything, is the very limited applicability of such methods. To some 
extent, the 2012–2013 intervention measures did slow down and even 
curb the rise in real estate prices in Singapore. But a city-state of three 
million people—with its unique form of soft-authoritarian governance 
and the strongly ingrained culture of national discipline, a culture 
where even public chewing of gum is prohibited—is no model for 
any other entity but itself. Even China, with its strong-authoritarian 
system, a nation that has adopted many aspects of the Singapore 
model, has not been able to succeed much in curbing the real-estate 
bubble because of the vastness of China’s economy, polity, geography, 
disparity, and diversity—compared to the compactness of everything 
in Singapore. And, of course, when we turn to smaller democratic 
states, such as Iceland, the authoritarian structures and processes—
and the very centralized institutions that control the economy, as they 
do in Singapore—do not exist, and thus the Singapore model becomes 
irrelevant.
What, then, are the options for policymakers who are concerned about 
the destructive and sapping effects of asset bubbles, and who are seeking 

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0014
Table 8.1 Singapore: real estate bubble and steps to control it
Date
Event or action
Comments
Bubble formation and inflation
–
Home ownership rate in Singapore rose from  to  in  and 
then to  by 
Government policies encouraged citizens to leave poor quality 
government subsidized housing and to move into fancier private 
condominiums
Nov. 
Housing prices rose by almost  in late . From under , 
units sold in Q of , housing units sold jumped to over , in 
Q of 
Several “loosening measures” from  helped inflate the bubble: 
() Loans up to  of home value; () Down payment as low as  
permitted; () Foreigners permitted to buy homes in Singapore
–
Housing prices rose by  in –, and by another  after 

Housing demand was driven up by purchases by both Singapore 
citizens and buyers from China and Southeast Asia

Buyers queued up overnight to view premium “show flats” and 
“desirable projects” sold out the entire inventory in days, months 
before the buildings went up
The “hype building process” was in full gear
State interventions to control the bubble 

Interest-only loans to developers were banned
Attempt to control supply of the asset

Developers banned from “absorbing interest payments” for a few 
months, a tactic used to lure buyers
Control on sales incentive for the asset
–
Borrowing for real estate capped at  of the asset value
By August , government had enacted eight rounds of “curbing 
and controlling measures” to influence demand for and cost of 
acquiring/owning residential real estate

Raising of stamp duty on home purchases

Increase in real-estate taxes

Minimum down payment requirement for second home purchases 
raised

New taxes introduced for foreign and corporate buyers of residential 
real estate
Real estate values in Singapore increased by  vs. over  in 
Hong Kong during –. Sales of homes in Singapore actually 
declined in mid-
–
New home sales expected to drop from , units in  to , 
units in 
Some Asian observers felt the new real-estate rules in Singapore were 
“draconian,” not implementable even in statist China
Source: Authors’ research.

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0014 
ways to tame if not stanch bubble phenomena? It should be evident from 
the discussions in the foregoing chapters that “silver bullet” solutions, 
short of complete systemic change, do not exist. In the aftermath of bub-
bles, however, there are attempts to rethink and reorient, and to search 
for policies that could prevent or contain bubbles. In the rest of this 
chapter, we review a few such policies that have been proposed, and offer 
our own concluding comments.
Policies to counter asset bubbles
Most public policies pertaining to bubbles come into effect after the 
bubbles burst—as damage control and repair and rebuild policies, rather 
than as policies to curb or control the inflating of values of bubble-prone 
assets. Therefore, almost all the evidence we have of bubble-directed 
public policies (extremely few of which have proved to be effective) is 
from the post-bubble rather than pre-bubble or mid-bubble phases. In 
what follows, we review four policy approaches, some of which have 
been tried and others that need to be tried.
Qualitative restrictions on collaterals for loans
Mason Gaffney argues that, at least in the United States, the Great 
Depression of 1929–1931 as well as the Great Recession of 2007–2009 
were fueled by rising real-estate values, which reached unsustainable 
levels and then collapsed, causing catastrophic chain reactions through-
out the economy via bank lending “freezing up”:
There is direct conflict between the high land values of the boom phase and 
the rate of return on productive, job-making real investments. High land 
values may mean low rates of return on new investments. The high land 
values are supported by siphoning off part of cash flow to income payments 
to those who own the land, or to those who lend entrepreneurs funds to buy 
it. The combination of high creditworthiness with low returns on newly 
created capital can only spell trouble: banks expand as real investment 
falls. At the same time, rising land values discourage saving and encour-
age consumption, for example, by using home equity loans. When land 
is so overpriced as to cut deeply into rates of return on job-making new 
investment, banks turn to taking land itself as collateral. When land gets so 
overpriced that the borrowers cannot pay the loans, banks panic, freeze up, 
and stop originating new loans. Then as old debts are paid, the money goes 


Bubbles: Trouble or Tamable?
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0014
into the bank and never comes out again. What banks have created they can 
destroy. Just as expanding banks issue new money, contracting banks swal-
low it up again . . . “Where has all the money gone?” people ask . . . Most of it 
has simply been retired by banks that collect old debts without originating 
new ones.3
Gaffney’s argument is that the inflating of such (real-estate linked) bub-
bles is from excess liquidity flowing from banks to real estate developers 
and buyers (such speculative lending often siphoning off funds from 
productive activities), and the collapse of such bubbles is due to banks 
pulling in as much money as possible into their coffers—as things turn 
sour—and not creating enough liquidity, even for productive activities 
such as industrial expansion and working capital for businesses. The 
drying-up of liquidity leads to multiple contractions and crashes, not 
just in the housing markets, but throughout the economy, triggering the 
bubble-bursting downward spiral that causes a recession and (without the 
massive interventions that occurred in 2008) could lead to a depression.
The policy solution Gaffney offers is simple and drawn straight from 
his analytical argument: banks should be prohibited from accept-
ing illiquid assets such as real estate as collateral. Since banks are in 
essence acceptors of deposits from savers and providers of liquidity for 
productive activity, bank lending should be confined to working capital 
needs of businesses. Residential mortgage lending, and business lend-
ing based on accepting a business firm’s real estate as collateral, should 
be eliminated. Bank loans, under such a policy, would be short-term, 
self-liquidating loans, regenerating the liquidity every few weeks or at 
most every few months. The conditions under which bank liquidity gets 
trapped in speculative real estate assets simply would not exist—and at 
least a major cause of bubble inflation and deflation would be removed.
Of course, the political climate to create such a drastic change in bank 
lending policies does not exist, even in an authoritarian state such as 
Singapore. As we saw in Table 8.1, even in Singapore, bank lending for 
real estate was curbed in many ways but not banned. A major Western 
nation, however, could possibly break free from the monetarist non-
interventionist mold (our current predicament, that Gaffney critiques) 
and impose qualitative controls on what banks can and cannot lend for. 
Should such a change happen, especially in one of the top five Western 
economies, and if the resultant economy could show a great deal of resil-
ience and freedom from bubble phenomena, then other countries could 
be motivated to follow such a lead.

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0014 
The Swedish solution?
With a population size of less than ten million, the Swedish approach to 
banking reform is to some extent subject to the small-country critique 
that we offered for Singapore. But the Swedish case is different in many 
ways from that of Singapore. Sweden is a large country in geographic 
terms, it is run very democratically and consultatively, and its economy 
is a combination of an old and diversified industrial economy overlaid 
by a modern technology and service-intensive economy. All these 
conditions do make Sweden, in contrast to Singapore, much more com-
parable to many of the major economies of North America and Western 
Europe.
The 1992 banking crisis in Sweden was near-catastrophic. The real 
estate bubble in Sweden, fueled by frenzied bank lending of the 1980s, 
deflated rapidly in 1991 and 1992.4 There was a run on the Swedish krona 
and the Central Bank had to raise the interest rate to 500 percent at one 
point in an attempt to control capital flight. The cumulative employment 
loss from this crisis exceeded the employment loss in Sweden during the 
Great Depression.
The steps Sweden took in the aftermath of the 1992 crisis offer clear, 
relevant, and emulation-worthy lessons for major Western economies. 
While the small country size and relative homogeneity of the population 
helped in the case of Sweden, nonetheless there is nothing in the Swedish 
approach that can be dismissed as being untenable or impossible for a 
United States, a United Kingdom, or a France. In brief, Sweden took the 
following steps:5
The two major opposing political parties decided to act jointly to 
 
face up to the crisis.
The two largest banks were taken over by the government and 
 
merged to create the new bank that is now called Nordea (which is 
still partly government owned).
All bank depositors were provided an iron-clad guarantee for their 
 
deposits.
Bank shareholders, however, were not offered any guarantees; and 
 
shareholder equity was used first before public funds were made 
available to banks.
To receive government bailout funds, banks had to open their 
 
books completely to the government.


Bubbles: Trouble or Tamable?
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0014
Writing in The New York Times in September 2008 and drawing parallels 
between the brewing financial crisis in the United States in 2008 and the 
Swedish one of 1992, Carter Dougherty found that the salutary impacts 
of the Swedish crisis-response policies offered lessons for U.S. policy-
makers in the throes of the 2008 crisis:
By the end of the crisis, the Swedish government had seized a vast portion 
of the banking sector, and the agency had mostly fulfilled its hard-nosed 
mandate to drain share capital [of the banks] before injecting cash [into 
them]. When markets stabilized, the Swedish state then reaped the benefits 
by taking the banks public again . . . Soon after the plan was announced, the 
Swedish government found that international confidence returned more 
quickly than expected, easing pressure on its currency and bringing money 
back into the country.6
The U.S. policymakers, of course, paid no heed to the lessons from 
Sweden, even though Bo Lundgren, Sweden’s minister for fiscal and 
financial affairs during that country’s 1992 crisis, visited the United States 
in September 2008, prior to the U.S. announcements of its  crisis-response 
measures, and tried to convince U.S. officials to draw some lessons from 
the Swedish experience.
Curing technology addiction, curbing contagion?
We have argued that, especially during the phase of bubble formation 
and inflation, processes of contagious hype come into play. There are 
swirls of negotiated marketing of the bubble-prone assets (or of ideas 
that support the acquisition of such assets). The hype conditions 
impose certain patterns of consumption such as, for example, dictating 
what technology or style or strategy to use—and how to “consume” it, 
including how to signal to others that the user is hip, contemporary, 
and “with it”; in short, creating a form of social addiction. Until the 
bubble bursts, people may remain addicted to such consumption 
patterns:
Technologies like Facebook are addictive by design. According to [Internet 
use tracking firm] comScore, Facebook users spend an average of 400 min-
utes per month on the site. A recent study from the University of Chicago 
suggests that Facebook and Twitter are more addictive than cigarettes and 
alcohol. Further, there is increasing evidence to suggest that, over time, 
Facebook use reduces subjective well-being.7

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0014 
If a major reason for bubble processes to emerge and zoom and 
mushroom is a form of social addiction to certain behaviors (which 
ultimately lead to excessive, indeed morbid, interest in and acquisition 
of  bubble-prone assets), then perhaps the public policy imperative is 
to fight such contagious addictions. In the same way that public health 
authorities monitor and fight infections and addictions using various 
tools, the policy bodies responsible for financial and economic health 
need tools to fight the addictive aspects of bubble processes.
The problem, in times of infectious contagion and inflating bubbles—as 
we have pointed out—is the stickiness of the optimistic sentiments. Like 
addiction to certain substances, once individuals have enjoyed the “high” 
of participating in certain forms of bubble-linked consumption—not just 
individually but as part of a surging constituency of fellow enthusiasts—it 
is difficult to wean them away from such experiences. If policymakers 
interested in financial literacy and health offer advice and warnings to 
avoid risky behaviors, a majority may reject such advice—the process of 
changing the sentiment-guiding theories usually trumps the possibility 
of changing the sentiment.
Just as happens in some tough addiction treatments, a shock therapy 
approach may be needed to shake people out of their addiction to 
 asset-loving sentiments. There is little evidence so far of governments 
or public interest groups trying approaches to “shock” investors out 
of addictive optimism about bubble-prone assets, but such moves are 
bound to happen relatively soon—more likely from socially minded 
groups who want to protect people from losing their life savings rather 
than by government agencies.
Bringing in large doses of sunlight
There is a very famous quote attributed to Justice Louis D. Brandeis, who 
served on the U.S. Supreme Court from 1916 to 1939: “Publicity is justly 
commended as a remedy for social and industrial diseases. Sunlight 
is said to be the best of disinfectants; electric light the most efficient 
policeman.”8 There are obvious merits in high and clear transparency: in 
public as well as commercial affairs. Wide-ranging disclosure, multiple 
and convergent analytical opinions, and wide dissemination of all the 
available information about the realistic value of a bubble-prone asset 
can help in curbing overoptimism about the asset, which, of course, is a 
key condition for an asset bubble to form and inflate rapidly.


Bubbles: Trouble or Tamable?
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0014
During the formative stages of a bubble, the “greater fool” process is 
often at work:
The greater fool theory of bubbles holds that investors knowingly overpay 
for an asset (relative to fundamental value) because they believe a yet 
“greater fool” may arrive in the future to pay even more . . . research on the 
recent US housing bubble documents that speculators and house flippers 
played an important role in contributing to price booms in a number of 
markets . . . [We can] separate an asset’s price into two components: a fun-
damental value and a resale option value. The fundamental value is the 
present value of future asset cash flows and represents the benefit from 
buying the asset and holding it forever. The resale option value is a . . . “bub-
ble component” of asset prices, and relates to the possibility of reselling 
the asset later at a higher price . . . A key insight . . . is that when . . . investor 
disagreement is greater, so too is an asset’s resale option value and hence 
its bubble component. Thus, to the extent that greater public dissemination 
of information about fundamentals reduces investor disagreement, it will 
mitigate bubbles.9
Andrade and his associates studied the emergent stock market bub-
ble in China during 2006–2007, focusing especially on the number of 
analysts covering the stocks and the buy-sell-hold opinions of these 
analysts. These researchers found that for those stocks for which the 
number of analysts covering the stock was large, and when the analysts 
offered convergent rather than contradictory opinions, the bubbles were 
smaller.10 In other words, the greater the dose of sunlight shining on a 
bubble-prone asset, the less likely (or less severe) is the formation of a 
bubble.
If these research findings hold in additional studies, then there are 
some obvious implications for public policymakers and social groups 
(such as consumer/investor education and protection groups). In 
bubble-prone situations, the inflation of a dangerous bubble could be 
avoided, or at least mitigated, by:
Encouraging multiple, independent opinions on the realistic value 
 
of the asset.
Creating transparency about the motives of, and possible gains for, 
 
those who hype the asset.
Uncovering and shining a light on the linkages among asset 
 
inventors-creators, owners, funders, analysts, promoters, and 
speculators.

 
Toward a Metatheory of Economic Bubbles
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0014 
Governments, nongovernment organizations (NGOs), media, and uni-
versities can take on the responsibilities of doing these things. Just as 
the task of forming and disseminating opinions about other potentially 
lethal things—toxic chemicals, potent drugs, certain foods, construc-
tion sites—are not left entirely to private analysts, there is no reason to 
leave the tasks of forming and disseminating opinions about the prices 
of widely owned stocks and residential real estate only to private actors, 
most of whom are likely beneficiaries of bubble inflation, or bubble 
burst, or both. There is no social reason why (although there are often 
obvious political and economic motives as to why) the “attempting real-
ism” task and process (see Figure 6.1) are “lone wolf” activities, voices in 
the wilderness, at best, and nonexistent in the worst.
Future scenarios and concluding observations
While the causes and processes that lead to asset bubbles are systemic, 
within such systems—once the conditions for bubble formation begin 
to foment—there are usually individuals and/or institutions that spot 
opportunities to make gains, sometimes spectacular gains. Once such 
opportunities are spotted, some form of the “greater fool” process comes 
into play. The early opportunity spotters may not only acquire the 
bubble-prone asset, and increasingly perhaps just the derivative rights 
to trade the asset (thereby multiplying the potential gains by large fac-
tors), these early asset opportunity spotters also may have motives and 
incentives to hype the asset. In the case of the U.S. housing bubble that 
inflated until 2007–2008 before deflating rapidly, these early oppor-
tunity spotters were large Wall Street investment banks who crafted a 
variety of Mortgage-backed Securities (MBS) and Credit Default Swaps 
(CDS) as ways to invest—in indirect and multiplicative ways—into 
residential mortgages. Because of their vast global connection networks, 
these Wall Street bankers also found large pools of “greater fools,” in the 
form of eager investors from Azerbaijan to Argentina. Since the remote 
investors—the greater fools—admired the investing skills and acumen 
of the Wall Street investment bankers, they had no problems in buying 
up exotic, untested assets that were being pitched by Wall Street. And, on 
the Wall Street side, the exacting culture of quarterly earnings along with 
the gold-plated culture of annual bonuses ensures that there always are 


Bubbles: Trouble or Tamable?
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0014
ultra-smart people available to design and market financially engineered 
products that appeal to the greater fools all over the world.
Recent economic history suggests that the systemic factors that 
lead to asset bubbles are not only not disappearing; they are perhaps 
intensifying and accelerating. The dotcom-tech bubble and the U.S. 
 housing-plus-stock bubble happened within less than a decade of each 
other, and there are indicators that other bubbles may be forming before 
another decade passes.
The long-term need is to move past a system where the requirements 
and dictates of financial capital are paramount; and toward social and 
political formations where people—as whole humans, not merely as 
investors or consumers or workers—are able to set and guide economic 
agendas. In the short term, it is important to bring in very large doses 
of sunlight into the murky spaces where asset valuations are mystically 
formed and hyped, and seductive asset-acquisition sentiments are 
crafted and propagated. It is imperative that such sunlight, and multiple 
searchlights, shine from sources that are committed to public interest: 
regulators, protection agencies, educators, fiduciary advisors, public 
advocates, and impartial researchers. We believe the world has far more 
smart people who believe in the greater good compared to people in 
search of greater fools.
Notes
Layne et al. (2011).
 
Ortmann (2012).
 
Gaffney (2009, p. 1004).
 
Dougherty (2008).
 
Based on Stahl (2012).
 
Dougherty (2008).
 
Robert R. Morris, Ph.D. candidate, MIT Media Lab: http://www.
 
robertrmorris.org/pavlovpoke
Brandeis University (2013).
 
Andrade et al. (2012a, pp. 2–3); see also Andrade et al. (2010, 2012b).
 
Andrade et al. (2010, 2012c).
 

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0015 
 
Epilogue
At the time of completing this book, a set of big, global 
bubbles—in residential property prices in the United 
States and elsewhere, in derivatives based on mortgage 
lending, in European bank valuations, and more—reached 
their zeniths and collapsed during the 2007–2009 Great 
Recession. Just a few years prior, in the early months of 
2000, the “dotcom” tech bubble had burst. The hyper-
inflation and bursting of such bubbles affected not just the 
rich, not just the pension funds with large pots of investible 
funds, but millions of common people—especially in the 
United States and Europe—who found themselves jobless, 
and often without job prospects, as structural shifts in the 
economy accompanied the roller-coaster asset values. As 
this book was going to press in early 2014, however, signs 
of other bubbles forming were evident.
A Martian looking at Planet Earth would ponder: “Is 
there no long-term systemic learning of lessons by the 
people of Planet Earth? The Earthlings suffered so mas-
sively during these bubble collapses, and yet they seem to 
be enmeshed in the same processes all over again.”
The reason our Martian visitor would be perplexed 
is because she/he cannot peer into the depths of human 
psychology, social influence processes, and the political-
economy power dynamics of Planet Earth.
Robert Shiller, co-winner of the 2013 Nobel Economics 
Prize, has pointed out that the very idea of a bubble is 
hard to accept by his fellow professional economists and, 
therefore, has received relatively little scholarly attention 
in the economics discipline (of course, Shiller’ own work 


Epilogue
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0015
being an outstanding exception1), and thus the subject has received a lot 
more popular attention than scholarly attention. Disciplines other than 
finance and economics, surmising (wrongly, of course) that bubbles are 
basically economic phenomena, have largely stayed away from scholarly 
efforts to explore and understand bubbles. Well, in this book, we have 
ventured into this relatively uncharted multidisciplinary territory.
Shiller, of course, knows that bubbles represent much more than 
economic phenomena. He has developed a relatively simple checklist to 
determine whether a bubble process is in progress or not.
During an inflating financial bubble, Shiller advises us to watch out 
for the following:2
A time of rapidly increasing prices.
 
People tell each other stories that purport to justify the reasons for 
 
the bubble.
Some people tell each other stories about how much money they 
 
are making.
Other people feel envy and regret that they did not participate.
 
The news media are involved.
 
In this book, we have attempted to capture such processes. We decided 
that opening the concept of bubbles to more than just financial assets, 
and including minor bubble processes such as the meteoric hyping of 
some movies, would provide additional windows into bubble processes. 
We hope we have succeeded in garnering a few more insights (than cur-
rently available in the scholarly social science literature) about bubble 
processes—such as those in Shiller’s checklist, above—by broadening the 
scope of the study of bubbles.
The columnist who offered the Shiller checklist also examined the 
opposing views of the two 2013 co-winners of the Nobel Economics 
Prize, Eugene Fama, who does not believe bubbles exist, and Robert 
Shiller, who has spent a career studying (and predicting) bubbles. The 
columnist Morgan Housel concludes thus:3
If the history of bubbles teaches us anything, it’s to be humble. Many gasped 
at Shiller and Fama sharing the Noble Prize, since the two hold what look 
like opposite beliefs. But the two economists have a common denominator: 
They both advocate humility. Fama doesn’t think we can predict bubbles. 
Shiller thinks we can, but doesn’t think we can ever know when they’ll 
collapse. What we need, but I know we’ll never get, is more of this type of 
thinking. I’m holding out for a humility bubble.

 
Epilogue
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0015 
We do not intend to either inflate or burst the humility bubble. We 
realize that what we offer here is but a small step in what would be a 
long multidisciplinary, multi-pronged journey of inquiry into bubble 
phenomena. But we are also not pessimistic like the columnist cited. We 
believe that, at this juncture, an increasing number of well-intentioned 
and well-skilled scholars from many disciplines are ready to take on 
the bubble phenomena that economists have either largely ignored, or 
outright rejected.
Notes
Shiller (2006).
 
Reported in Housel (2013).
 
Housel (2013).
 

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0016

Bibliography
This list includes books, articles, and other sources cited 
in various chapters as well as selected other key readings 
about economic bubbles and related social and political 
processes.
Abbott, Andrew (2001), “On the concept of turning 
point,” in Andrew Abbott, Time Matters: On Theory and 
Method (pp. 240–260). Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Aldrich, Howard (1999), Organizations Evolving. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Alvarez, Sharon and Barney, Jay B. (2005), “How Do 
Entrepreneurs Organize Firms under Conditions of 
Uncertainty?” Journal of Management, 31(5), 776–793.
Andrade, Sandro C., Jiangze Bian, and Timothy R. Burch 
(2010), “Does information dissemination mitigate 
bubbles?” September 11 (accessed October 20, 2013), 
[available at http://goo.gl/hk2QAZ].
Andrade, Sandro C., Jiangze Bian, and Timothy R. Burch 
(2012a), “A practical anti-bubble prescription,” (accessed 
October 20, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/h45o6x].
Andrade, Sandro C., Jiangze Bian, and Timothy R. Burch 
(2012b), “A Practical Anti-bubble Prescription,” The 
Economists’ Voice, 9 (1), 1–5.
Andrade, Sandro C., Jiangze Bian, and Timothy R. Burch 
(2012c), “Analyst Coverage, Information, and Bubbles,” 
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis.
Appadurai, Arjun (1990), “Disjuncture and Difference 
in the Global Cultural Economy,” Theory, Culture & 
Society, 7(2), 295–310.

 
Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0016 
Applebaum, Binyamin and David S. Hilzenrath (2008), “SEC Didn’t Act 
on Madoff Tips,” (accessed October 31, 2013), [available at http://goo.
gl/r2ZdqO].
Arthur, W. Brian (1996), “Increasing Returns and the New World of 
Business,” Harvard Business Review, 74(4), 100–111.
Baker, Dean (2007), “Housing Bubble Update: 10 Economic 
Indicators to Watch,” Center for Economic and Policy Research, 
Washington DC.
Barnard, T.J. (2013), “8 Overhyped Movies We Can Consider Fairly Now 
the Dust Has Settled,” Whataculture, September 19 (accessed October 
20, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/nzpx8x].
Bassanini, Andrea and Stefano Scarpetta (2002), “Growth, 
Technological Change and ICT Diffusion: Recent Evidence from 
OECD countries,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 18(3), 324–344.
Basuroy, Suman, Subimal Chatterjee, and S. Abraham Ravid (2003), 
“How Critical Are Critical Reviews? The Box Office Effects of Film 
Critics, Star Power, and Budgets,” Journal of Marketing, 67, 103–117.
Bayus, Barry L., Sanjay Jain, and Ambar G. Rao (2001), “Truth or 
Consequences: An Analysis of Vaporware and New Product 
Announcements,” Journal of Marketing Research, 38(1), 3–13.
Biddle, Sam (2013), “Here’s Everyone Who Hyped Zynga before It Shit 
the Bed,” (accessed October 31, 2013), [available at http://valleywag.
gawker.com/heres-everyone-who-hyped-zynga-before-it-shit-the-
bed-511090658].
Bilton, Nick (2013), “Disruptions: Are Eager Investors Overvaluing Tech 
Start-Ups?” The New York Times, October 27 (accessed October 31, 
2013), [available at http://goo.gl/algRoa].
Booz-Allen and Hamilton (1999), Corporate Internet Banking: A Global 
Study of Potential. New York: Booz Allen Hamilton Inc.
Brandeis University (2013), “Justice Louis D. Brandeis,” (accessed 
October 20, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/B5LU1V].
Brustein, Joshua (2013), “The Social Media Bubble Is Quietly Deflating,” 
Bloomberg Business Week, July 16 (accessed October 25, 2013), 
[available at http://goo.gl/qW5AN].
Byun, Kathryn J. (2010), “The US Housing Bubble and Bust: Impacts on 
Employment,” Monthly Labor Review, 133(12), 3–17.
Carlaw, Kenneth, Oxley, Les, Walker, Paul, Thorns, David, and Nuth, 
Michael (2006), “Beyond the Hype: Intellectual Property and the 


Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0016
Knowledge Society/Knowledge Economy,” Journal of Economic 
Surveys, 20(4), 633–690.
Chadha, Sunainaa (2013), “Why Talk of Property ‘Bubble’ in China Is 
Exaggerated,” Firstpost, March 18 (accessed May 20, 2013), [available 
at http://goo.gl/72VW3].
Chen, Alice C. (2009), “Who Is Nouriel Roubini?” BNET.com, January 5 
(accessed April 28, 2012), [available at: http://bit.ly/I5eTv6].
Christensen, Clayton M. and Scott D. Anthony (2004), “Are You 
Reading the Right Signals?” Strategy & Innovation, 2(5).
Christie, Les (2013), “Venezuela Money Helps Fuel Miami Housing 
Boom,” (accessed October 31, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/
ol9wDk].
Clark, Josh and Jane McGrath (2009), “How Ponzi Schemes Work,” 
Howstuffworks.com (accessed October 31, 2013), [available at http://
goo.gl/0iuc6I].
CNBC (2012), “The 15 Biggest Box Office Bombs,” CNBC Slideshows 
(accessed October 20, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/5ZTn8A].
Cohan, William D. (2009), House of Cards: A Tale of Hubris and Wretched 
Excess on Wall Street. New York: Doubleday.
Colombo, Jesse (2012a), “The Dot-com Bubble,” The Bubble Bubble, 
August 19 (accessed November 1, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/
k00nsP].
Colombo, Jesse (2012b), “The Social Media Bubble (aka The Facebook 
Bubble),” The Bubble Bubble, January 14 (accessed October 25, 2013), 
[available at http://goo.gl/BjfG5j].
Coltman, Tim, Timothy M. Devinney, Alopi S. Latukefu, and David 
F. Midgley (2001), “E-business: Revolution, Evolution, or Hype?” 
California Management Review, 44(1), 57–86.
Danto, Arthur C. (1985), Narration and Knowledge: Including the 
Integral Text of Analytical Philosophy of History. New York: Columbia 
University Press.
Das, Arnab and Nouriel Roubini (2012), “A Divorce Settlement for the 
Eurozone,” Financial Times, FT.com, April 2 (accessed April 28, 2012), 
[available at: http://on.ft.com/IyOZfF].
Dash, Mike (2000), Tulipomania: The Story of the World’s Most Coveted 
Flower & the Extraordinary Passions It Aroused. New York: Crown.
Davidsson, Per (2004), Researching Entrepreneurship. Boston, MA: 
Springer.

 
Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0016 
Dholakia, Nikhilesh (2010), “Finanzkapital in the Twenty-First 
Century,” Critical Perspectives on International Business, 7(1), 90–108.
Dholakia, Nikhilesh (2012), “Finanzkapital and Consumers: How 
Financialization Shaped Twentieth Century Marketing”, Journal of 
Historical Research in Marketing, 4(2), 453–461.
Dholakia, Nikhilesh and Romeo V. Turcan (2013), “Bubbles: Towards a 
Typology,” Foresight (Cambridge), 15(2), 79–88.
Dirks, Tim (2013), “Greatest Box-Office Bombs, Disasters and Film 
Flops,” Filmsite.org, (accessed October 20, 2013), [available at http://
goo.gl/4iYBGW].
Dolan, Robert J. and John T. Gourville (2009), “Principles of Pricing,” 
Teaching Note No. 9-506-021, Boston, MA: Harvard Business 
School.
Dougherty, Carter (2008), “Stopping a Financial Crisis, the Swedish 
Way,” New York Times, September 22 (accessed October 28, 2013), 
[available at http://goo.gl/9B0HZA].
Downes, Larry and Chunka Mui (1999), Unleashing the Killer App: Digital 
Strategies for Marketing Dominance. Boston, MA: Harvard Business 
School.
Dubin, Robert (1969), Theory Building. New York: The Free Press.
Dubin, Robert (1978), Theory Building. Rev. ed. New York: The Free Press.
EconPort (2006), “The dot-com Bubble,” (accessed November 1, 2013), 
[available at http://goo.gl/gZaZL8].
Ekström, Karin M. and Kay Glans, eds. (2011), Beyond the Consumption 
Bubble. Taylor & Francis: US.
ElectricNews.net (2002), “Nanotechnology May Be Over-Hyped,” The 
Register, July 12 (accessed December 14, 2013), [available at: http://
goo.gl/ZeSnMl].
Eliashberg, Josh and Steven M. Shugan (1997), “Movie Critics: 
Influencers or Predictors?” Journal of Marketing, 61, April, 68–78.
Ellen, Ingrid Gould and Samuel Dastrup (2012), “Housing and the Great 
Recession,” Russell Sage (accessed May 15, 2013), [available at http://
goo.gl/rlyVB].
Elster, Jon (2007), Explaining Social Behavior: More Nuts and Bolts for the 
Social Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Feuer, Alan (2013), “The Bitcoin Ideology,” International New York 
Times, Sunday Review, December 14 (accessed December 14, 2013), 
[available at: http://goo.gl/wBkxKe].


Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0016
Fligstein, Neil (2001), “Social Skill and the Theory of Fields,” Sociological 
Theory, 19(2), 105–125.
Fromm, Erich (1990), Man for Himself: An Inquiry into the Psychology of 
Ethics. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Gaffney, Mason (2009), After the Crash: Designing a Depression-Free 
Economy. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Galbraith, James K. and Travis Hale (2003), “Income Distribution 
and the Information Technology Bubble,” paper presented at 
the Association of Public Policy Analysis and Management Fall 
Conference.
Galbraith, John Kenneth (1993), A Short History of Financial Euphoria. 
New York: Whittle Books.
Gandel, Stephen (2010), “Coming Down with Gold Fever,” CNNMoney, 
February 4 (accessed October 30, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/
BbIpCk].
Gelles, David (2013), “Nextdoor, a Start-up, Raises 60 Million,” The New 
York Times, October 29, (accessed October 31, 2013), [available at 
http://goo.gl/XMk2tE].
Ghei, Nita (2013), “Reinflating the Housing Bubble,” The Washington 
Times, April 10 (accessed May 15, 2013), [available at http://goo.
gl/3c4Y8].
Gladwell, Malcolm (2002), The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make 
a Big Difference. New York: Back Bay Books.
Glasner, David (2013), “The Gold Bubble Is Bursting: Who’s to Blame?” 
Uneasy Money, April 11 (accessed October 30, 2013), [available at 
http://goo.gl/TDRmrT].
Goldstein, Mathew and Ben Protess (2013), “Near a Vote, Volcker 
Rule Is Weathering New Attacks,” The New York Times, December 8 
(accessed December 10, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/IXbDnd].
Gopal, Prashant and Kathleen M. Howley (2013), “From Brooklyn 
to California, Housing Bubble Threat Grows,” Bloomberg, May 16 
(accessed May 15, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/DvWvp].
Gordon, Robert J. (2000), “Does the ‘New Economy’ Measure Up to the 
Great Inventions of the Past?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(A), 
49–74.
Greenspan, Alan (1996), “Remarks by Chairman Alan Greenspan at 
the Annual Dinner and Francis Boyer Lecture of the American 
Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research,” The Federal Reserve 

 
Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0016 
Board, December 5 (accessed October 20, 2012), [available at http://
goo.gl/5UahDm].
Gruber, James (2013), “Gold: A Great Buying Opportunity Approaches,” 
Forbes, April 4 (accessed October 30, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/
koX6b6].
Gustini, Ray (2012), “Is Social Media the Next Big Bubble?” Atlantic 
Wire, February 10 (accessed October 25, 2013), [available at http://
goo.gl/wrhxv4].
Haan, Marco A. (2003), “Vaporware as a Means of Entry Deterrence,” 
The Journal of Industrial Economics, 51(3), 345–358.
Handley, Meg (2011), “Home Values Down $6.4 Trillion since Housing 
Crash,” U.S. News and World Report, December 23 (accessed on 
December 14, 2013), [available at: http://goo.gl/kN6hBX].
Hanson, Robin (2010), “Movie Manipulation,” Overcomingbias, 
March 31 (accessed October 20, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/
Sfrb6C].
Hennig-Thurau, Thorsten, Mark B. Houston, and Gianfranco Walsh 
(2007), “Determinants of Motion Picture Box Office and Profitability: 
An Interrelationship Approach,” Review of Managerial Science, 1(1), 
65–92.
Housel, Morgan (2013), “Bubble, Bubble, Where’s the Bubble?” USA 
Today, December 9 (accessed December 14, 2013), [available at: 
http://goo.gl/rzQeBR].
Hughes, J. Donald (1996),”Medieval Florence and the Barriers to 
Growth,” Capitalism Nature Socialism, 7(1), 63–68.
Hughes, J. Donald (2009), An Environmental History of the World: 
Humankind’s Changing Role in the Community of Life. New York: 
Routledge.
IMF (2006), Iceland: 2006 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff 
Statement; and Public Information Notice on the Executive Board 
Discussion. Washington DC: International Monetary Fund.
Ip, Greg (2000), “Market on a High Wire,” Wall Street Journal, January 
18, p. C1.
Isidore, Chris (2012), “A New Housing Boom,” CNNMoney, October 12 
(accessed May 15, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/lH6IF].
Isidore, Chris (2013), “Home Prices: Biggest Rise Since Housing Bubble,” 
CNNMoney, March 26 (accessed May 15, 2013), [available at http://
goo.gl/2QIue].
Kahneman, Daniel (2011). Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York: Allen Lane.


Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0016
Kay, Jeremy (2012), “John Carter’s Failure to Launch Shows Studios Are 
on Another Planet,” The Guardian, Film Blog, March 12 (accessed 
October 31, 2013), [available at http://bit.ly/zuwHZx].
Kestenbaum, David (2013), “What’s a Bubble?” NPR Planet Money, Radio 
Broadcast Transcript, November 15 (accessed December 2, 2013), 
[available at http://goo.gl/JsY1hz].
Keynes, John Maynard (1936), The General Theory of Employment, Interest 
and Money. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Kronke, David (2008), “Vampire Film Could Rival ‘Harry Potter’ 
Franchise,” Los Angeles Daily News, November, 18 (accessed October 
20, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/w8qOqw].
Kuo, J. David (2001), dot. bomb: My Days and Nights at an Internet Goliath. 
Hachette Digital, Inc.
Layne, Nathan, Taro Fuse, and James Pomfret (2011), Bubble Trouble. 
Special Report, December, London: Thompson Reuters.
Levitin, Adam J. and Susan M. Wachter (2011), “Explaining the Housing 
Bubble,” Geo. LJ, 100, 1177–1258.
Levy, Stephan M. (1997), “Should “Vapourware” Be an Antitrust 
Concern?” The Antitrust Bulletin, 42(1), 33–43.
Lewis, Michael (2006), “Customer Acquisition Promotions and Customer 
Asset Value,” Journal of Marketing Research, 43(May), 195–203.
Llaudes, Ricardo, Ferhan Salman, and Mali Chivakul (2010), “The 
Impact of the Great Recession on Emerging Markets,” IMF Working 
Papers, 1–34.
Loasby, Brian J. (1976), Choice, Complexity, and Ignorance: An Enquiry into 
Economic Theory and the Practice of Decision-making. CUP Archive.
Lovallo, Dan and Daniel Kahneman (2003), “Delusions of Success,” 
Harvard Business Review, 81(7), 56–63.
Lowenstein, Roger (2001), When Genius Failed: The Rise and Fall of 
Long-Term Capital Management. Random House Digital, Inc.
Lynn, Matthew (2011), “How to Avoid the Pitfalls of a New Tech 
Bubble,” Bloomberg News, April 5 (accessed November 1, 2013), 
[available at http://goo.gl/u0svt8].
Madslien, Jorn (2010), “Dotcom Bubble Burst: 10 Years on,” BBC News, 
March 9 (accessed November 1, 2013), [available at http://goo.
gl/92I8gP].
Martin, Ron (2011), “The Local Geographies of the Financial Crisis: 
From the Housing Hubble to Economic Recession and Beyond,” 
Journal of Economic Geography, 11(4), 587–618.

 
Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0016 
Matthíasson, Thorolfur (2008), “Rent Collection, Rent Distribution, and 
Cost Recovery: An Analysis of Iceland’s ITQ Catch Fee Experiment,” 
Marine Resource Economics, 23(1), 105–117.
Merton, Robert King (1968), Social Theory and Social Structure. Enl. Ed. 
New York: The Free Press.
Minsky, Hyman P. (1977), “The Financial Instability Hypothesis: An 
Interpretation of Keynes and an Alternative to ‘Standard’ Theory,” 
Challenge, 20(1), 20–27.
Mishkin, Frederic S. and Tryggvi Thor Herbertsson (2006), Financial 
Stability in Iceland. Iceland Chamber of Commerce.
NASDAQ (2013), “Facebook, Inc. Stock Chart,” (accessed October 25, 
2013), [available at http://goo.gl/LdbLUz].
Nonaka, Ikujiro and Horitaku Takeuchi (1995), The Knowledge-Creating 
Company. New York: Oxford University Press.
OECD (2001), The New Economy: Beyond the Hype, the OECD Growth 
Project. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Ormerod, Paul (1998), Butterfly Economics: A New General Theory of 
Social and Economic Behavior. London: Faber and Faber.
Orszag, Peter (2012), “Bad Models Mistook Housing Bust for Dot-Com 
Bubble,” Bloomberg, May 1 (accessed December 14, 2013), [available at: 
http://goo.gl/yiHcrO].
Ortmann, Stephan (2012), “The ‘Beijing Consensus’ and the ‘Singapore 
Model’: Unmasking the Myth of an Alternative Authoritarian State-
Capitalist Model,” Journal of Chinese Economic and Business Studies, 
10(4), 337–359.
Panitch, Leo and Sam Gindin (2012), The Making of Global Capitalism. 
London: Verso.
Perez, Carlota (2002), Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital: 
The Dynamics of Bubbles and Golden Ages. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar 
Publishing.
Perez, Carlota (2009), “The Double Bubble at the Turn of the Century: 
Technological Roots and Structural Implications,” Cambridge Journal 
of Economics, 33(4), 779–805.
Perren, Alisa (2004), “A Big Fat Indie Success Story? Press Discourses 
Surrounding the Making and Marketing of a ‘Hollywood’ Movie,” 
Journal of Film and Video, 56(2), 18–31.
Pilat, Dirk (2003), ICT and Economic Growth: Evidence from OECD 
Countries, Industries and Firms. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Pope, Alexander (1892), Essay on Man. Oxford: Clarendon Press.


Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0016
Portes, Richard and Friðrik M. Baldursson (2007), “The 
Internationalisation of Iceland’s Financial Sector,” Iceland Chamber of 
Commerce, 7103.
Powell, Thomas C. (2003), “Varieties of Competitive Parity,” Strategic 
Management Journal, 24(1), 61–86.
Raghavan, Anita and Mirchell Pacelle (1998), “A Hedge Fund Falters, 
So the Fed Persuades Big Banks to Ante Up,” The Wall Street Journal, 
September 24 (accessed October 31, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/
giO0w2].
Rapoza, Kenneth (2013), “China’s Non-Bubble Housing Bubble,” Forbes, 
November 3 (accessed May 20, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/
jriaR].
Ravid, S. Abraham (1999), “Information, Blockbusters and Stars: A 
Study of the Film Industry,” Journal of Business, 72(4), 463–492.
Riley, Charles and Esther Pang (2013), “China Cities Move to Cool 
Red-Hot Housing Market,” CNNMoney, April 1 (accessed May 20, 
2013), [available at http://goo.gl/OBns5].
Roubini, Nouriel (2006), “Why Central Banks Should Burst Bubbles,” 
International Finance, 9 (1), 87–107.
Rusek, Antonin (2004), “Financial Integration and Growth in the Global 
Economy,” International Advances in Economic Research, 10, 278–288.
Russell Sage Foundation (2013), “Social and Economic Effects of the 
Great Recession. Tables, Figures, and Analyses,” (accessed May 15, 
2013), [available at http://goo.gl/7yEGQ].
Rutherford, Matthew W., Paul F. Buller, and J. Michael Stebbins (2009), 
“Ethical Considerations of the Legitimacy Lie,” Entrepreneurship 
Theory and Practice, 33(4), 949–964.
Salmon, Felix (2013), “Gold: The Fear Bubble Bursts,” Reuters, April 15 
(accessed October 30, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/SPZHRA].
Sarton, George (1955), The Appreciation of Ancient and Medieval Science 
during the Renaissance (1450–1600). Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Schmitt, Richard B. (2009), “The Born prophecy,” ABA Journal, 1 May 
(accessed May 20, 2010), [available at: http://goo.gl/yJKP2w].
Shiller, Robert J. (2006), Irrational Exuberance, 2nd edition. New York: 
Broadway Books.
Shiller, Robert J. (2013), “Sharing Nobel Honors, and Agreeing to 
Disagree,” New York Times, October 26 (accessed November 20, 2012), 
[available at http://goo.gl/3KWMGm].

 
Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0016 
Sommer, Jeff (2013a), “Lars Peter Hansen, the Nobel Laureate in the 
Middle,” The New York Times, November 16 (accessed November 20, 
2012), [available at http://goo.gl/DpxfXn].
Sommer, Jeff (2013b), “Robert Shiller: A Skeptic and a Nobel Winner,” 
The New York Times, October 19 (accessed November 20, 2012), 
[available at http://goo.gl/Rzv4sN].
Stahl, Jeremy (2012), “How Sweden Saved Itself,” (accessed October 15, 
2013), [available at: http://goo.gl/BPzxuI].
Stewart, James (2012), “When the Network Effect Goes into Reverse,” 
The New York Times, August 17 (accessed October 25, 2013), [available 
at http://goo.gl/uv5Xot].
Stinchcombe, Arthur L. (1965), “Social Structure and Organizations,” 
in March, J. (ed.) Handbook of Organizations (pp. 142–193) Chicago: 
Rand McNally.
Taleb, Nassim Nicholas (2010), The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly 
Improbable Fragility. Random House Digital, Inc.
Thackara, John (2005), In the Bubble: Designing in a Complex World. 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
The Economist (2009), “What Went Wrong with Economics,” (accessed 
October 20, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/rBNFb0].
The Economist (2013), “The Rise of BlackRock,” December 7 (accessed 
December 8, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/O7M5rD].
The New York Times (2000), “The Dot-Com Bubble Bursts,” (accessed 
October 28, 2011), [available at http://goo.gl/OXsbwP].
Turcan, Romeo V. (2006), “De-internationalisation of Small High-
technology Firms: An International Entrepreneurship Perspective,” 
PhD dissertation, University of Strathclyde.
Turcan, Romeo V. (2008), “Entrepreneur-Venture Capitalist 
Relationships: Mitigating Post-investment Dyadic Tensions,” Venture 
Capital, 10(3), 281–304.
Turcan, Romeo V. (2010), “Understanding the Bubbles,” Paper presented 
at After the Gold Rush: Economic Crisis and Consequences, Iceland.
Turcan, Romeo V. (2011), “Toward a Theory of International New 
Venture Survivability,” Journal of International Entrepreneurship, 9(3), 
213–232.
Turcan, Romeo V. (2013), “The Philosophy of Turning Points: A Case of 
De-Internationalization,” Advances in International Management, 26, 
219–235.


Bibliography
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0016
Valgreen, Carsten, Lars Christensen, Peter Possing Andersen, and Rene 
Kallestrup (2006), “Iceland: Geyser Crisis,” Den Danske Bank.
Van Reenen, John (2001), “The New Economy: Reality and Policy,” 
Fiscal Studies, 22(3), 307–336.
Vardi, Nathan (2013), “Zynga’s Shares Get Crushed As Mark Pincus 
Tries Another Reboot,” (accessed October 31, 2013), [available at 
http://goo.gl/W8Y83N].
Veneziani, Vince and Joe Weisenthal (2010), “Why Shanghai Real 
Estate Is the Most Obvious Bubble Ever,” Business Insider, January 13 
(accessed May 20, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/PbZZm].
Wade, Robert Hunter and Silla Sigurgeirsdottir (2010), “Lessons from 
Iceland,” New Left Review, 65, 5–29.
Watzlawick, Paul (1977), How Real Is Real? Confusion, Disinformation, 
Communication. New York: Vintage Books.
Weick, Karl E. (1989), “Theory Construction as Disciplined 
Imagination,” Academy of Management Review, 14(4), 516–531.
Whalen, Charles J. (2008), “The Credit Crunch: A Minsky Moment,” 
Studi e Note di Economia, 13(1), 3–12.
Whetten, David A. (1989), “What Constitutes a Theoretical 
Contribution?” Academy of Management Review, 14(4), 490–495.
Wild about Movies (2013), “Oz Is NOT Really That Powerful  . . .  Even 
Though the Movie Was #1 At Box Office,” March 8–10 (accessed 
October 20, 2013), [available at http://goo.gl/SsjVzE].
Web links
www.boxofficemojo.com, Box Office Mojo (accessed November, 2011).
www.goldenglobes.org, Hollywood Foreign Press Association’s annual 
Golden Globe Awards (accessed November, 2011).
www.oscars.org, Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences 
(accessed November, 2011).
www.parliament.uk, the UK Parliament website.
www.robertrmorris.org/pavlovpoke, website of Robert R. Morris, Ph.D. 
candidate, MIT Media Lab (accessed October, 2013).
www.rottentomatoes.com, Rotten Tomatoes (accessed November, 2011).
www.tbrp.aau.dk, website for TBRP at Aalborg University.
www.the-numbers.com, The-numbers (accessed November, 2011).

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0017
 
Name Index
Abbott, Andrew, 101
Aldrich, Howard, 101
Alvarez, Sharon, 101
Andersen, Peter Possing, 111
Andrade, Sandro C., 101
Anthony, Scott D.,  103
Appadurai, Arjun, 101
Applebaum, Binyamin, 102
Arthur, W. Brian, 102
Baker, Dean, 102
Baldursson, Friðrik M., 109
Barnard, T.J., 102
Bassanini, Andrea, 102
Basuroy, Suman, 102
Bayus, Barry L., 102
Bian, Jiangze, 101
Biddle, Sam, 102
Bilton, Nick, 102
Booz-Allen & Hamilton,  
102
Brandeis University, 102
Brustein, Joshua, 102
Buller, Paul F.,  109
Burch, Timothy R.,  101
Byun, Kathryn J., 102
Carlaw, Kenneth, 102
Chadha, Sunainaa, 103
Chatterjee, Subimal, 102
Chen, Alice C., 103
Chivakul, Mali, 107
Christensen, Clayton M., 103
Christensen, Lars, 111
Christie, Les, 103
Clark, Josh, 103
Cohan, William D., 103
Colombo, Jesse, 103
Coltman, Tim, 103
Danto, Arthur C., 103
Das, Arnab, 103
Dash, Mike, 103
Dastrup, Samuel, 104
Davidsson, Per, 103
Devinney, Timothy M., 103
Dholakia, Nikhilesh, x, 104
Dirks, Tim, 104
Dolan, Robert J., 104
Dougherty, Carter, 104
Downes, Larry, 104
Dubin, Robert, 104
Ekström, Karin M., 104
Eliashberg, Josh, 104
Ellen, Ingrid Gould, 104
Elster, Jon, 104
Feuer, Alan, 104
Fligstein, Neil, 105
Fromm, Erich, 105 
Fuse, Taro, 107
Gaffney, Mason, 105
Galbraith, James K., 105
Galbraith, John Kenneth, 105
Gandel, Stephen, 105
Gelles, David, 105


Name Index
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0017
Ghei, Nita, 105
Gindin, Sam, 108
Gladwell, Malcolm, 19, 105
Glasner, David, 105
Goldstein, Mathew, 105
Gopal, Prashant, 105
Gordon, Robert J, 105
Gourville, John T.,  104
Greenspan, Alan, 84, 105
Gruber, James, 106
Gustini, Ray, 106
Haan, Marco A., 106
Handley, Meg, 106
Hanson, Robin, 106
Hennig-Thurau, Thorsten, 106
Herbertsson, Tryggvi Thor, 108
Hale, Travis, 105
Hilzenrath, David S., 102
Housel, Morgan, 106
Houston, Mark B.,  106
Howley, Kathleen M.,  105
Hughes, J. Donald, 12, 106
IMF, 106
Ip, Greg, 106
Isidore, Chris, 106
Jain, Sanjay, 102
Kahneman, Daniel, 78, 106, 107
Kallestrup, Rene, 111
Kay, Glans, 104
Kay, Jeremy, 107
Kestenbaum, David, 107
Keynes, John Maynard, 107
Kronke, David, 107
Kuo, J. David, 107
Latukefu, Alopi S., 103
Layne, Nathan, 107
Levitin, Adam J., 107
Levy, Stephan M., 107
Lewis, Michael, 107
Llaudes, Ricardo, 107
Loasby, Brian J., 107
Lovallo, Dan, 107
Lowenstein, Roger, 107
Lynn, Matthew, 107
Madslien, Jorn, 107
Martin, Ron, 107
Matthíasson, Thorolfur, 108
McGrath, Jane, 103
Merton, Robert King, 57, 108
Midgley, David F.,  103
Minsky, Hyman P., 84, 108
Mishkin, Frederic S., 108 
Mui, Chunka, 104
NASDAQ, 108
Nonaka, Ikujiro, 108
Nuth, Michael, 102
OECD, 108
Ormerod, Paul, 108
Orszag, Peter, 108
Ortmann, Stephan, 108
Oxley, Les, 102
Pacelle, Mirchell, 109
Panitch, Leo, 108
Pang, Esther, 109
Perez, Carlota, 108
Perren, Alisa, 108
Pilat, Dirk, 108
Pomfret, James, 107
Pope, Alexander, 108
Portes, Richard, 109
Powell, Thomas C., 109 
Protess, Ben, 105
Raghavan, Anita, 109
Rao, Ambar G.  102
Rapoza, Kenneth, 109
Ravid, S. Abraham, 102, 109
Riley, Charles, 109
Roubini, Nouriel, 20, 103, 109
Rusek, Antonin, 109
Russell Sage Foundation, 109
Rutherford, Matthew W., 109

 
Name Index
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0017
Salman, Ferhan, 107
Salmon, Felix, 109
Sarton, George, 109
Schmitt, Richard B., 109
Shiller, Robert J., 38, 79, 98, 109
Shugan, Steven M.,  104
Sigurgeirsdottir, Silla, 111
Sommer, Jeff, 110
Stahl, Jeremy, 110
Stebbins, J. Michael, 109
Stewart, James, 110
Stinchcombe, Arthur L., 110
Takeuchi, Horitaku, 108
Taleb, Nassim Nicholas, 110
Thackara, John, 110
The Economist, 110
The New York Times, 110
Thorns, David, 102
Turcan, Romeo V., 35, 110, 104
Valgreen, Carsten, 111
Van Reenen, John, 111
Vardi, Nathan, 111
Veneziani, Vince, 111
Wachter, Susan M.,  107
Wade, Robert Hunter, 111
Walker, Paul, 102
Walsh, Gianfranco, 106
Watzlawick, Paul, 111
Weick, Karl E., 111
Weisenthal, Joe, 111
Whalen, Charles J, 111
Whetten, David A., 111

DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0018

a justified belief, 15
acquisition frenzy, 75
Adam Smith’s, 69
addictive optimism, 94
adjusted sentiment-guiding 
theories, 65
Amazon, 26
Amazon, 83
Amazon.com, 53
America Online, 53
Amsterdam, 2, 19
anchoring, 62
Andrew Ross Sorkin, 11
Andy Wachowski, 48
Anthony B. Perkins, 10
aspects of uncertainty, 61
asset availability, 62, 76, 80
asset communication, 76, 80
Asset Exuberance, 67
asset potential, 48, 50
asset valuations, 48
asset value, 48, 76, 80, 83
asset-linked dimensions, 14, 44
asset-valuation mechanisms, 88
availability-related factors, 16
available information, 80
Bangladesh, 63
banking crisis, 92
Bardi, 12
Barsotti, 13
Bernie Madoff, 33
best-performing asset, 51
Bitcoin, 16
BlackRock, 81
Bo Lundgren, 93
boom, 62
Box Office, 45
box-office collapse, 83
box-office revenue, 68
Brooklyn, 55
bubble, 78
bubble bursts, 81
bubble deflation, 50
bubble emergence, 77
bubble formation, 79
bubble inflation, 74
bubble phenomena, 13, 19
bubble process, 19
bubble spiral, 20
bubble thermometer, 6, 65
bubble-directed public policies, 
90
bubble-prone asset, 28, 96
bubble-prone assets, 90, 94
bubbles, 68, 80
bursting of bubbles, 10
business cycle, 23
busts, 79
buzz, 45
California, 19
Carter Dougherty, 93
China, 39, 95
Clusters, 23
Columbia Business School, 65
commodities, 16
commodity markets, 50
Subject Index

 
Subject Index
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0018
communication, 62
competition’ mechanism, 81
comScore, 93
conditions for bubble formation, 44
consumer bubbles, 4
consumption patterns, 93
contagious bubbles, 52
contagious hype, 93
conventional economics, 13
Cost of Goods Sold (COGS), 66, 67
credit booms, 3
Credit Default Swaps (CDS), 18, 57, 
84, 96
crisis-response policies, 93
Dan Ariely, 51
Daniel Kahneman, 78
Danske Bank, 64
decelerating, 48
decelerating velocity, 52
deceptive practices, 33
deflating, 78
Deflating bubbles, 50
deflating of the dotcom bubble, 10
delusional optimism, 36, 45, 52, 62, 77
Denmark, 63, 64
Disney, 45
dotcom, 2, 62
dotcom bubble, 52, 63
dotcom era, 27
dotcom failures, 83
dotcom frenzy, 28,83
dotcom tech bubble, 83
Dr. Doom, 20
Dubai, 63
eBay, 53, 83
e-business, 15
e-commerce, 19
economic cycles, 14
economic expansion, 12
efficient-market theory, 79, 80
emerging markets, 3
emotional and professional costs, 36
England, 13
entertainment, 16
entertainment products, 16
Entrepreneurial capacity, 23
enviro-contextual dimension, 28
estate bubble, 92
eToys, 2
Eugene Fama, 79, 99
European Union, 35
exaggerated prospects, 74
Expected Value, 61, 66, 67
Expected Value pointer, 66
Facebook, 26, 83, 93
Farmville, 34
fashion, 36
fear bubble, 52
Federal Reserve, 55
finance-driven capitalism, 7
financial and technology hypes, 68
financial bubbles, 12, 84
financial engineering, 18, 56, 87
financial innovation, 18, 55
financial stocks, 16
fine-tuning assumptions, 44
finite commodities, 56
flipping of apartments, 39
Florence, 12
Florentine bubble, 12
Florida, 19, 55
France, 92
Frankfurt, 56
fundamental value of a new asset, 80, 
81
generalizability, 6, 24
genuine enthusiasm, 33
geyser economy, 64
ghost towns, 39
global capitalism, 88
Gloria Gu, 39
goal ambiguity, 25
Gold, 50
gold bubble, 51
Goldman Sachs, 11, 82
Google, 26, 83
Google, Facebook, Youtube, LinkedIn, 
Groupon, Foursquare, 49


Subject Index
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0018
government stimulus programs, 39
grand theory, 74
grand theory of bubbles, 6, 74
Great Depression, 54, 90
Great Recession, 3, 11, 54, 57, 82, 84,  
90
Groupon, 49
growth outlook of a nation, 35
Haarlem, 19
hedge funds, 33
Henry M. Paulson, 11
Herbert Simon, 78
high-end real estate, 19
high-tech product, 67
high-tech products and services, 16
high-technology stocks, 53
hope, 38, 41
housing, 16
housing bubble, 2, 18, 54
Human capital, 23
Hundred Years’ War, 12
hype, 14, 41, 47, 61, 68, 76, 83
hype driven market, 36
hype processes, 35
hypeable asset, 28
hype-building spiral, 69
hyped expectations, 64
hyped pricing, 81
hyped value, 63
Hyped value, 64, 66, 67
Hyped Value pointer, 66
hyped-up movie, 83
hyperbole, 29
hype-related states, 35
hyper-traded asset, 16
hyping, 62
Iceland, 64
Iceland Chamber of Commerce, 65
ICT market, 27
ignorance, 75
ignorant belief, 75, 81
illiquid assets, 91
illusion of skill, 76
illusionary certainty, 80
illusionary certainty of negotiated mix, 
79
India, 63
ineffective policy responses, 87
Inequality, 23
infectious contagion, 94
inflating, 78
inflating bubbles, 48, 79, 94
Inflation, 51
inflation hedge, 51
information and communication 
technology (ICT), 23
information technology bubble, 53
Initial Public Offering (IPO), 34
innovations, 16, 83
institutional pressures, 76
institutions and policy frameworks, 65
interdisciplinary theory of bubbles, 68
interest-bearing loans, 13
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 
64
Internet Bubble, 23
internet commerce, 26
Internet entrepreneurs, 62
Internet-related companies, 53
invisible hand, 13
irrational behavior, 14, 79, 80, 81
Irrational bubbles, 54
irrational exuberance, 68
Irresistible stickiness, 19
J. Donald Hughes, 12
Japan, 87
John Carter, 45
John Cassidy, 10
John David Kuo, 10
Justice Louis D. Brandeis, 94
knowledge about an asset, 15
Lars Peter Hansen, 79
Las Vegas, 55
legitimacy lies, 19
LEGO, 48
London, 19, 56
London Business School, 65

 
Subject Index
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0018
Long-Term Capital Management 
(LTCM), 57
low uncertainty, 45, 48
macro environment, 37
macro level, 77
mainstream economists, 13
Malcolm Gladwell, 19
Manhattan, 19
Mark Pincus, 34
market uncertainty, 25
Mason Gaffney, 90
Matrix trilogy, 48
Mattel, 48
Matthew McConaughey, 48
McDonald’s, 48
meso (industry and sector) level, 77
meso-level signals, 37
meso-level bubbles, 77
meso-level logic, 83
meta-dimensions, 24, 44
metatheory of bubbles, 14
Miami, 38
Michael C. Perkins, 10
Michael Lewis, 11
Michael Roberts, 11
Michael S. H. Heng, 11
micro-level losses, 83
mid-bubble phases, 90
mid-level (or meso level) signals, 35
mid-range theory, 4
model of bubble emergence, 61, 65
Morgan Stanley, 82
Mortgage-backed Securities (MBS),  
96
movie, 16, 67
movie bubbles, 47
movie hype, 67
movie industry, 25
movie making industry, 45
movie release, 45
multidisciplinary approaches, 14
multidisciplinary metatheory of 
bubbles, 4
multidisciplinary theory of bubbles, 14
Myron Scholes, 57
NASDAQ, 2, 33, 53
Nate Silver, 11
nature of outcomes, 80
negative, 68
negative (unfavorable) sentiment, 69
negative feedback, 69
negotiated mix, 28, 30, 67, 80
negotiated space, 24, 28, 61, 67
Netherlands, 2, 19, 63, 67
network effect, 49
new asset, 74, 75, 80
new business idea, 24
new economy, 23
new technologies, 16
new underlying asset, 63
New York, 38, 55
New York Fed, 57
New York Stock Exchange, 57
New York Times, 11, 34, 93
newness, 15
newness of assets, 74
Nextdoor, 26
NGO, 96
Nikkei, 87
Nobel Economics award, 78
Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic 
Science, 79
Nodal roles, 19
Nordea, 92
Nordic Europe, 64
Normal Return, 67
Nouriel Roubini, 20
objective value, 61, 65
Ockham’s Razor, 5
OECD, 28, 64
of technical advance, 23
optimistic sentiment, 30
overall sentiment, 36, 62
overall skepticism, 50
overoptimism, 36, 45, 62, 77, 94
palpability of assets, 54
Penelope Cruz, 48
perceived asset availability, 14, 44, 61
perceived asset communication, 15, 44, 61


Subject Index
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0018
perceived asset value, 14, 44, 61
perceived communication, 44
perceived knowledge, 80
perceived scarcity, 44
perceived valuation, 18
perceived values of assets, 14
perception, 44
Persian Gulf, 15
Peruzzi, 12
pervasive irrationality, 74
pessimism, 36
phase of bubble formation and 
inflation, 93
playful bubbles, 44, 68
Ponzi schemes, 33
positive behavior, 36
positive feedback, 36, 69
positive feedback loop, 62
positive sentiments, 68, 69
post-bubble, 90
post-Deng Chinese model, 88
pre-bubble, 90
Predictably Irrational, 51
price, 80
Priceline, 2
principle of parsimony, 5
probability distribution of outcomes, 61
probability of outcomes, 25, 75
process of bubble emergence, 67
property market bubble, 55
Propitious context, 19
Pudong, 39
Punctured bubbles, 52
pyramid schemes, 33
range of uncertainty, 78
real estate bubble, 88
realism talk, 36
realistic risk-adjusted value estimates, 30
realistic valuation signals, 30
realistic value, 94
realized effect, 68
Red Herring Communications, 10
region of uncertainty, 78
regulation, 79
regulatory authority, 13
regulatory challenges, 13
regulatory intervention, 83
Rembrandt, 2
Resistance, 41
ripple effect, 13, 56
risk, 75
risk decision-making settings, 80
risky decision making, 25
Robert H. Merton, 57
Robert J. Shiller, 79
Robert L. Hetzel, 11
Robert Shiller, 38, 98
Roger Lowenstein, 10
Sahara, 48
Salomon Brothers, 11
San Francisco, 38
Saudi Arabia, 63
scope of a bubble, 83
SEC, 33
Semper Augustus, 2
sense of realism, 69
sentiment, 74, 94
sentiment guiding theories, 61
sentiment surplus, 66, 67, 69
sentiment, 75
sentimental milieu, 37
sentiment-guiding theories, 35, 40, 62, 
63, 66, 69, 74, 75, 76, 94
sentiments, 41, 62, 74
Shanghai, 39, 67
Silicon Glen of Scotland, 35
Silicon Valley, 54
Singapore model, 88
Singapore Solution, 88
Six bubble types, 44
skeptical sentiments, 41
sky-scraping potential, 62
sky’s-the-limit optimism, 53
social addiction, 93
social and economic impacts, 87
social effects, 45
social media bubble, 48
Social media companies, 49
Social media industry, 26
social ripples, 12

 
Subject Index
DOI: 10.1057/9781137361790.0018
soft-authoritarian governance, 88
speculative bubble, 54
speculative processes, 87
speculative stocks, 87
Speed Racer, 48
Spider-Man, 48
stabilizing mechanism, 81
start-ups, 26
state of uncertainty, 24
sticky, 62
sticky sentiments, 27, 40, 64, 65
stock bubble, 87
subjective confidence, 76, 79, 80
subjective probability, 76, 79, 80
subprime crisis, 55
subprime mortgage lending, 55
supply-demand imbalances, 16
Sweden, 92
Swedish approach, 92
systemic nature of bubbles, 74
technical uncertainty, 25
technology bubbles, 4, 83
temporal and contextual boundaries, 
24, 61, 74
The Artist, 68
the Black Death, 13
The Hangover, 68
The Hobbit, 48
The New Yorker, 10, 13
the UK, 63
three core asset-linked dimensions, 61
tipping points, 19
tradable financial asset, 67
transient or playful bubbles, 44
transparency, 94
Treasure Planet, 47
Treasury Secretary, 11
tulip, 67
tulipmania, 2, 18, 19
turning points, 77, 78
Twitter, 49, 93
type of asset, 83
typology of bubbles, 44
U.S. Federal Reserve, 57
UK, 63
uncertain decision-making, 62, 76
uncertain decision-making settings, 36, 
50, 67, 75, 80, 81
uncertain environment, 61
uncertain state, 47
uncertainty, 24, 40, 63, 64, 74, 75, 78
United Kingdom, 92
United States, 82, 84, 90, 92
University of Chicago, 93
unknown opportunity, 63
US housing bubble, 95
V for Vendetta, 48
valid predictions, 75
valuation related factors, 18
value, 62
value of an asset, 80
value-pricing thermometer, 65
vaporware, 29
velocity, 48
velocity over time, 24, 26
venture capitalists, 25, 49, 62
virtual asset, 45, 52
Volcker Rule, 82
Wall Street, 56, 57, 82
Wall Street Journal, 23, 57
White House, 55
working theory, 58
Yahoo!, 53, 83
Yelp, 49
zero-validity environment, 75
Zynga, 33, 49

