
BRONZE AGE MINDSET
AN EXHORTATION
BY
BRONZE AGE PERVERT
This book dedicated to the memory of Dean Dejana, a
spiritual brother, a Sardinian giant of high vision, man of
superhuman physical strength. You were too strong for this
world, friend. Be reborn in a better time—we meet again, we
fight together!
Cover illustration by owen cyclops @WesternIdentity
 
VICTORY TO THE GODS!
PROLOGUE
 
This is not book of philosophy. It is exhortation. I hardly
have anything to say to most who aren’t like me, still less do I
care about convincing. This is account of my reveries. I tried
to put, as brief and simple as I could, the thought that
motivates me and the problem faced by life in ascent and
decline.
I was convinced to write this book by certain frogs who
told me, “Is it not a shame that hucksters are multiplying lies,
and jizzing their filthy doctrines into receptive minds
everywhere? Perversions—lame ones—are born by the
thousands and haunt, like myriad cripplette midgets in halls of
mirrors, they haunt the world, books, the internet. Minds are
lost. If you wait any longer everything will be pounded to
garbage, there will be nothing left—it will all turn, the whole
world will turn to a Bulgarian rest stop lavatory. But have you
seen the movie Midnight Express…and…and how did it make
you feel?”
I was roused from my slumber by my frog friends and I
declare to you, with great boldness, that I am here to save you
from a great ugliness.

If you look around eyes of some people you see a kind of
demented energy. It’s pure anger or lust for power with
nothing more. I hate to dirty these pages with mention of
names of nobodies in our time. But if you see photo of Hillary
Clintong or Adam Schiff with his eyes bugged out on stims
and antidepressants or who knows what, you know what I
mean. There is a crease around the eye that tells it, it looks like
cyborg gone off-script, these people have an inhuman gaze and
are vehicles for something else. You see this also in the chiefs
of the EU bureaucracy with tiny moleman eyes behind small
glasses, and the tiny lenses that reflect light. You see it in the
dead robot eyes of the new hue-man automatons running
government departments, the DMV, the brutal zombies
running the security in airports or hospital “health care” rooms
under vicious yellow fluorescent lights.
I wanted to expose the grim shadow of a movement that is
hidden behind events of our time and from before. This is a
great power that acts like a ghost. It hides in its own darkness
and it has been absorbed by the lands and the peoples so that
you can’t really see it anymore. There is just an eldritch
quality embedded in things and on some faces. The same was
said of Hades. Some said he would feel a great shame when
some other god drew back the veil on the underworld so all the
vile things that are there could be seen. Is this Hades of our
time capable of shame? I heard also of such things being under
the sea, the disgusting and frightful things revealed when the
sea recedes before a great storm. I will draw back the curtain
on this Iron Prison and show you where it is you really live…
The secret things show in dreams. Heraclitus say, “All the
things you see awake are death, all the things you see asleep
are sleep.” He was trying to be coy! In his day many gods,
clove-footed satyr, and other things showed themselves to men
in dreams.
Spiritually your insides are all wet, and there’s a huge hole
through where monstrous powers are fucking your brain,
letting loose all your life and power of focus. You don’t see

yourself as you really are, but maybe some nightmare can
show it to you. I am here to show you the way out.
There was Empedocles, a philosopher, man of high vision.
He jumped into volcano Aetna in Sicily because he knew he
would be reborn as a god. Now imagine yourself in front of
rim of Aetna. It’s dry and sandy. You feel the heat but is not
like you thought it might be. Is not Romantic. Is just hot, dry,
you can’t breathe, and the smell of infernal sulfur and wet
earth and even worse things triggers an old memory or instinct
in you to run. You’re brought to face with a vehemence and
brutality of rock and you start to feel dizzy staring in. Molten
rock in your nostrils and it’s not just that it scares you. If it
were great fear, that could be a spur to action. But it fills your
nostrils with banality and dullness of plain molten dust, you
see gray and black. It reminds you of torrid summer afternoon
by abandoned gas station, you are stranded on dirt road,
choked by heat and so much dust. You see flames in the hole
but it lacks the romance of fire as you imagined it. Is this it? It
seems like nothing to you, because to your eye it’s nothing. So
you pull away from it. You’re not reborn as a god, you remain
a mule. Your lying mind now comes up with many thoughts
about why it’s right to pull back. Why, of course! There’s a
nice meal to have, a glass of wine. Maybe there’s a girl
waiting. Her pussy is warm and inviting. Empedocles was
deluded.
No, don’t jump in Aetna or Mauna Loa or Puyehue or
Eyjafjallajökull, Titans of the world, even if you get yourself
to do it, it won’t work now. These portals are closed for ages.
But! Other doors are closed to you too. What Mount Aetna
was to Empedocles—is there something like that to you? Is
there something like that at all anymore?
Life has a thing inside it that reaches beyond itself. This is
intergalactic worm, I can’t say here, you must wait. But if you
don’t reach beyond yourself you are dead! Most of mankind is
the walking dead.
I tell you other story. In Stone Age man appears, very
strong shoulders, with club in hand. He is believed by the

people to be a son of some god…of a mortal woman who
cucked her husband with a god. As child he already displays
superhuman strength. When he grows he goes into the deepest
wild to fight great cave lion. He emerges from cave with skin
of lion on his back. Lion had been eating and working terror in
the people, but now he wears this terror on his shoulders. He
carries lion mane on head, lion pelt on back and a great club in
the hand. This man comes to be worshiped by the people: his
progeny become lines of kings, of Sparta and many other
places. What was his act of foundation? He slaughtered
monsters, he made the seaways known to man and tamed the
rock-face. But don’t forget the lion-skin on his shoulders. This
was lion of Nemea. Do you understand what Nemesis is?
There is in nature a great purgative function. You know about
monkeys who switch sex in certain times. In lake of some
reptiles, when they overpopulate it and there is a surplus of
refuse, there is trigger in nature: a monster is born to them. A
lizard many times the size of a normal one is born, who deals
out destruction and culls the lake. The Greeks believed in this
great power and worshiped its justice. In Bible it appears as
allegory of the Flood, which in fact refers to the irrepressible
spirit of the Sea Peoples, and the divine justice they brought to
cities whose life had grown pointless, and a great ugliness on
the world. You bring lion cub into the house, but Aeschylus
say, it will become a priest of doom when it reaches age: in
nature there is irrepressible force. Its violence against the
surfeit of populations is divine justice. Its destruction of the
feeble designs of reason, the pointless words of man—this is
beautiful. This what the power of Nemesis means: few are
chosen to wield it, fewer realize they are chosen or know what
to do with it. When Hercules puts on the power of Nemesis on
his shoulders he becomes hero who makes the world tame and
safe for cities of real men. But that was in his time, and ours is
an age of surfeit. It is different function. The star of Nemesis is
sure to return, and it must already be burning inside some of
you.
In the Bronze Age men had life and force, and I already
see, far on the horizon of our world, but the glimmer is surely

there—may it not be a mirage!—I see this spirit returning
surely in our time. Piratical bands and brotherhoods will take
to the seas, and not just to the seas. The enemies of Western
man and the enemies of beauty are to learn just what was
meant by a piratical race, a nest of pirates like the Chinese
thought of the Dutch on first meeting them. I want to prepare
you to receive this old spirit—old spirits are moving, from
behind the reeds… the silhouette shimmers against a river in
late summer, and I see already men who know how to honor
such uncanny old friends.
May they inhabit us again and give us strength to purify
this world of refuse!

Part One: The Flame of Life
1
What if you’ve been misled about what is life? They do
this by showing you two red marionette and shake them in
front, then you stay mesmerized and clap like trained seal. Is
like in politics before last year. You had in years before
Trump, the fat bald gluttons of the Right put in a fighting ring
against the Janet Renos, the womyn with pickup trucks, the
thin-lipped transnumales of the Left. You had good people
mesmerized even by this show: and it’s funny to see a fat bald
man try to tear out the eyes of woman of strong forearm with
mullet, both frothing at mouth. Both saying nothing, but grunts
of pigs and pre-made platitude, formula. But meanwhile the
nation suffered and the future of youth was given away. When
they trick you about what is life, this even worse because you
don’t see problem right away… but then comes out sixty years
later and your grandchildren don’t exist, or they are 56%
humanoid shifting about between shadows, or they are of
noble power but have to hide under half-finished buildings
because are hunted. But you must understand both left and
right have been fooled about what is life.
2
Group of horses in broad plain, and the lead stallion is
captured by a wild spirit, starts to gallop this way and that, and
the whole herd follows in a great rush of power and freedom—
Nietzsche talks about this. I’ve seen many things like this
myself: was at big waterfall, gathering place of many birds and
other animal. Through all the cycles of history this place
remains and birds who witnessed the coming and going of
human civilizations remember it through the aeons and always
return there. I saw many group of small birds, when the
weather slightly changed, this waterfall so big that a small
wind would make spray of water everywhere. Sun came from
behind clouds and spread many small rainbows, birds would
become excited, come out from crevasses in rock face and
would glory in the sprays of water and the rainbows, they

swoon doing acrobatics this way and that. Like when Homer
says that on some Asian meadow tribes of geese, and crane
and long-necked swans glory in the power of their wings
above it, then land between the rivers, in Skamandrian plain,
with a great clang. Is not enough just to say, what is purpose of
this to survival or reproduction? Surely some pedant can make
a story. But when you see this behavior, is not so alien. Maybe,
in happiest moments you were free to act and feel the same:
what anything to do with survival or reproduction! That kind
of heavy necessity is the spirit of gravity, and this is opposite.
That petty and cramped view of life…but in truth, life as it is,
when free, life in abundance knows luxury, surfeit and
waste…survival and reproduction are side effects of
something else…
3
The most noble animals refuse to breed in captivity. Many
animal, not just man, choose death when trapped. But I
thought all life strove for mere survival and reproduction; but
this not enough? But if not enough then must understand
animal in some other way. Very much when thinkers talk about
“evolutionary psychology” they abstract from way of yeast to
way of animals and man, but this is backward.
4
There’s a sociology of the world of scientists like of
everything else. This is a cause of much confusion about
biology and ideas of evolution. You think you’ve been given
objective truth, but the minds of biologists are in general very
limited. The truth is the biggest minds always went for physics
among the sciences, then maybe chemistry. Until recently but
even now biology gives little opportunity for the kind of
thinking that penetrates mystery of nature, the kind of insight
into physical relations that attracts the best scientific minds.
They’ve been on the whole a half-and-half group in history.
Schopenhauer refers with contempt to the people who have
their “catalogues of monkeys” and think they understand
nature. Darwin himself, Nietzsche called him a petty mind, the
kind of calculator who likes to collect many small facts and

synthesize some clumsy theory. The theory is clumsy and full
of holes. This is the biggest reason Creationists, who are also
wrong, have been able to challenge it, where they were never
able to challenge theoretical physics. There is much dishonesty
and stupidity among scientists and biologists when they talk
about evolution and life.
5
The problem now is you think I want to attaq idea of
evolution or to change it because it’s racist or uncomfortable,
just like the left and others attaq or suppress it. This is not
true! Listen: you don’t need Darwin to believe in heredity and
even evolution. People knew about heredity and the different
lineages of man long before Darwin. In the political sense the
promotion of Darwin teaching and its application to mankind
is a great good. The left and its many robots—I will talk of
their origin later—want nothing more than to hide truth about
human nature. And Darwin, evolutionary science in all its
forms, is a great weapon of truth against them. In all this I
agree, but remember the marionettes I mentioned. Don’t be
distracted by the puppet play. It is important not to be misled
by a fierce debate with a stupid opponent into just accepting
the only other alternative that is presented to you. Although
the left, or what I have termed the Bug-man, hates and fears
evolutionary ideas applied to humans, Darwinism itself is the
product of bug-thought. In the end it won’t show you way out
of the prison of the ages. The hereditary nature of the qualities,
and the suitability of an organism to its environment and vice-
versa, all of this is true observation. And that true observation
about heredity is in the end enough: you don’t need more than
that to utterly crush all the designs and vanities of the Bug-
man. The Bugman fears heredity and nature, not Darwin.
6
You must understand that the evolutionary psychologist,
the evo-biologist, the Darwinist in general—most such people
are very good, and even great minds, who are just misled by
the fight—plays a game of bait-and-switch. Many times he’s
not aware he does this himself. He believes in Darwinism as a

teleological faith, that reproduction and survival are the ends
of life, the purpose toward which all life strives and that this
explains how life or an organism behaves; and also how it is
adapted to its environment. But when you confront him on
this, he will deny all notion of teleology. He will say he
doesn’t believe in any of this, but only in a material
mechanism of natural selection. Through this mechanism
those organisms that are not in keeping with demands of
environment at some time are slowly pared out. By a process
analogous to our breeding of animals like dog and horse,
nature itself breeds organisms and life this way and that, by
accident. There is no end or purpose, he will say, you are
crazy! But then when he’s not paying attention he will talk a
different way. They all do this. He will start to say that this or
that animal is behaving this or that way because it is trying to
secure either reproduction or survival. He will explain physical
features in this way too, and when he really forgets himself he
will make a moral principle out of it. The most honest ones,
when they trust you, will talk about replicating themselves as
an aspiration and a goal. This is human, all-too-human but also
very natural, because it’s very hard to talk about biology or life
without teleology or some consideration of ends or purpose.
Clearly physics and chemistry seem to be driven by no
purpose or goal. But animals seem very much driven by
motive or purpose, and is hard to explain a biological feature
without reference to its end or purpose. So the Darwinist
forgets, or tries to change the topic all the time: he knows what
is really interesting is the question of what drives life, what
explains 
animal 
behavior 
and 
what 
explains 
the
correspondence between organism and environment. This is
the question. The mechanism of heredity or the means by
which a species is shaped, natural or unnatural selection,
which is really Darwin’s only insight, is the least interesting
part of all. Actually it is a tautology: yes, only those animals
who have managed to reproduce actually pass on their traits.
Something every sheep breeder in history has known. But that
this alone explains animal adaptation or behavior is nonsense.
7

There is Alpine mouse that collects food for winter.
Somehow it knows exactly the proportion of poison herbs to
include in winter stores, to preserve them. Too much, and the
food it gathered becomes poison, too little and it spoils. There
is example Schopenhauer gives: two insects, and one will kill
the other on sight. Yet this other presents no immediate danger
to the first, but will only eat its eggs in the future. How does
that first insect know this? It is not taught, nor does it see. It
has very primitive nervous system. It knows this somehow “in
the blood.” This is a very specific and complicated behavior.
There are many such cases in nature! Creationists have
focused too much on complicated physical features, but even
for something like the eye or the bacterial flagellum it is
possible to construct stories of how they evolved gradually. I
don’t believe those stories, they sound improbable and made-
up, but they’re more believable than the stories you have to
make up in the case of behaviors. And many more! So many
animals and simple insects have such complicated behaviors
they are born with already. At some point the incremental
explanation becomes so convoluted it is hard to believe. Please
remember that Aristotelian-Ptolemaic system for calculating
motion of planets and so on worked quite well for long time. It
was abandoned because ever more convoluted explanations
had to be invented to support the fundamental and wrong
assumption of geocentric model. Evolutionary theory today is
slowly in same position, and nowhere more than where they
may try to explain inborn behaviors of this kind. It is obvious
that such behaviors—if you want to call them “adaptations”—
came about as we see them now, complete and without
significant incremental change. How did such “miracle”
occur? This is not Creationist book—I do not believe in that.
Nor do I believe in the “miracle” that modern science has
invented, hiding under the word “random mutation” and the
hand-waving of “incremental change.” There is not enough
time, nor enough number of specimens, nor the kinds of
“mutations” observed to support either natural selection or
Lamarckianism as explanations for evolution. Many of the
mathematical models for how a trait will spread in a

population have failed—they don’t tell you this. No, I don’t
talk about miracles, whatever words you put them under. And
the “design” is there, but it is by no means benevolent or
intelligent, nor comprehensible. You see in the spider’s web a
creature of rudimentary nervous system and little intelligence
“design” something beautiful and complex, and this is key to
understanding also all of nature. There is an inherent
“intelligence” inside things, uncanny, silent and demonic. Its
workings and aims are obscure to us. Our own intelligence is
only a crude deviation of it, an approximation. There is an
“intelligence” in all things, and inborn in our bodies before
anything to do with the brain or the nervous system. And all
“adaptations,” no matter how much natural or unnatural
selection may have gone to spreading them within a
population, occur not by random but by a spontaneous
correspondence of some kind between the organism and the
environment. Some day we may discover the material cause or
manifestation of this correspondence, or the chain by which it
travels from the rock-face and the elements of brute matter up
the forms of life—there is some as-yet undiscovered
“signaling” system. But the adaptation by no means takes
place at random, nor even primarily by natural selection,
which is just one of the means by which it spreads in a
population.
8
A truly objective or scientific approach to life would be to
start without assumptions. Make no big stories. Take animal
and study. Study what it does in nature, not lab, when left
alone from human. Study different specimens, the mood, the
behavior at different time of year, in different places, at
different levels of fortune and well-being. Make no
assumption about what it wants ultimately, study how it
behave today, tomorrow, in the moment, which is only thing
that exists for animal. Look inside its brain! Study its
hormones and its internal states with great care, and, with
clinical objective eye, correlate these internal states to what it
does, or what it’s driving at—and driving at that day or in that

moment, not what you think about “reproduction or survival.”
This is true path to understand animal, adaptation, behavior
and life. There is some of this done, but much too little, and
not well. In the end, are you so different from goat, dog or
even ant that you look at such beings and really remain
puzzled? For sure the real research I just named must be done,
if only to convince the boneheads. But the behavior of an
animal would be a complete mystery to you if you weren’t
very similar yourself; but we understand right away a bear
angry at bees, or playing under white-silver birch in thick of
forest, or lizard frightened and winding between rocks, why it
does what it does. It is no mystery to us, who are also like
them. We love dogs because they express so honestly and
without dissimulation what we also are and want. They and
other pets calm us because promote a kind of carelessness
normal to animal life, unencumbered by thoughts of the past or
worries about the future, none of which actually exist. Women
are, in their natural state, close to this condition as well, or
closer on the whole, which is where they get much of their
charm and power from (the modern education, that teaches
women to be hyper-aware, anxious for the future, abstract
neurotics, etc., actually takes away their power to a great
degree, while tricking them into thinking they are being tough
or sassy; but a hyper-conscious woman is made powerless and
charmless). But study must be made of inner state of animal,
now in this condition, now that. What anyway would objective
study of an organism say? What does life want?
9
Darwin and his style of thinking would never have made
so much impression or ever had such power if it were simply
false. Actually Darwinism is true, but only under certain
conditions. It’s not even a “half-truth,” it’s actually the full
truth about a kind of life, but the mistake is to think it
describes all life. Darwin is meaningless without Malthus, but
this is why Nietzsche is right about both of them when he says
they describe only life in England, or more precisely the
England of that time. The beginning of the industrial age, and

England as the first nation that solved the problem of infant
mortality: these are the relevant facts. England was able to
colonize so much of the New World because it was the first
country to solve this problem. Many criticize in some way the
Spanish or Portuguese model of colonization but you must
know the Portuguese had a population of one million when
they began the age of discovery with Henry the Navigator.
And of that population, many fewer were young men who
could embark on voyages of great danger; some say up to a
fourth or more died on these voyages alone. They had no
manpower to settle faraway lands but continued the old pattern
of “elite dominance,” where brotherhoods of conquering men
often took local wives and such. By contrast the English could
now transplant entire populations, being surfeit of huemans.
But it was still not enough. The cities became crowded, the
filth unbearable as the lowest classes swarmed the monstrous
new machines of industry. The living conditions of workers
well into the 20th Century were purely hellish: Marx and his
followers, at least, were right about that, and that’s why they
could prey on this condition. It was a condition of misery and
destitution similar to or worse than we see in the shantytowns
of the Turd World. Solution to infant mortality problem meant
these lower classes put all excess income into supporting more
mouths to feed, not improving the quality of life of the
children they had: just an exponential increase in human
biomass! And this is the world of Malthus and of Darwin, life
under filth, life under distress. Darwinism describes life under
extreme stress. From this very partial view he thinks he has
discovered the truth about life in general, but animal under
conditions of extreme stress, crowded condition, observed and
watched, filthy, beaten and imprisoned, its life severely
regimented away from what it would like to do if left to its
devices, will not give you secret to what life is. It will be very
misleading example, and this is basis of Darwinism and of all
thought that comes from it. It is the philosophy of life of the
tenement and the slum, of the open air work-camp.
10

No kind of distress is worse than the feeling you are
trapped. My worst nightmares are about opening a door only
to find myself in the same aluminum cell, over and over. The
exhaustion that sets in after a long night of chess, when you
sleep and your mind dreams repeat nonsense moves, I know of
few worse forms of torment. And this is self-imposed, through
exhaustion, but even worse is when an outside force or being
restrains you, yet you are in full control of your spirits and
power, at least to begin with. That condition is intolerable for
the most noble animals, who choose death if necessary, or at
least any way to escape no matter how painful. Many Caribs,
trapped into slavery, died because they couldn’t endure this,
some bit through their arms to escape their chains and endured
any pain to escape captivity. Germanic mothers would kill
infants when Roman legions closed in: Tacitus describe life of
Germanic warrior, who lived his whole life dedicated to war
and fame, never became a domestic! At Masada and at other
times the Jews killed their own children to escape subjection,
when they were still a noble people. Xenophon describes in
Anabasis how mother with infant would jump off a cliff in the
highlands of Urartu, to escape the advance of the Greek army:
we see same videos in Japan in Okinawa, mother jump off
cliff. Buddhist monks Vietnam self-immolated and brought
great shame on the West. For this reason Nietzsche say, noble
peoples do not endure slavery, they’re either free or they die
out. There is no “adaptation” to slavery for some types of life.
What is that people, who has chosen survival at any price? The
price they paid was monstrous and such a people becomes
monstrous and distorted if it accepts this. The distinction
between master races and the rest is simple and true, Hegel
said it, copying Heraclitus: those peoples who choose death
rather than slavery or submission in a confrontation, that is a
people of masters. There are many such in the world, not only
among the Aryans, but also the Comanche, many of the
Polynesians, the Japanese and many others. But animal of this
kind refuses entrapment and subjection. It is very sad to
witness those times when such animal can neither escape nor
kill itself. I saw once a jaguar in zoo, behind a glass, so that all

the bugs in hueman form could gawk at it and humiliate it.
This animal felt a noble and persistent sadness, being observed
everywhere by the obsequious monkeys, not even monkeys,
that were taunting it with stares. He could tell—I saw this! He
could tell he was living in a simulated environment and that he
had no power to move or live. His sadness crushed me and I
will always remember this animal. I never want to see life in
this condition!
11
Just a few weeks ago I was outside night club in city that is
still untouched by first-world regimented hygiene: well-
lighted, clean streets made safe for women come at a high
price for the mood of a city. In this place the government and
bureaucracy couldn’t extend its rules and cleanup efforts even
if it wanted. There are then many nooks and hidden corners
that are under no one’s control. In this no-man’s land there is
mafia, so many perverts, there is some crime, but it’s kept at
mostly very low or nonviolent level because place is full of
off-duty cops on the make and no doubt spooks foreign and
domestic, and who knows what else. I find life without such
refuge to be almost intolerable, so here I felt free but I think
was after day in a haze and the glycine was kicking in. I must
have taken 600 mg theanine as well, and after much coffee I
was spacing out… under vicious neon yellow lights I stood
looking at the bouncer almost in a trance. I wondered what it
was like to be him. He was alert, knew what posture to take for
his job and what look in the eye to emulate… or put on an act
of being vigilant, and was imposing in broad frame under
leather jacket with military-type epaulettes, but there was a
kindness or softness in his eyes. Maybe would have taken
some power of perception to see this, and I doubt he was
challenged often by the customer riffraff because of it, but I
could see it, how at times he sunk into a sadness and boredom
looking in the distance. I too looked down the long broad
street, mostly empty except for some small groups of drunks,
hookers, some revelers, in the distance there was great
fountain in plaza lighted up on all sides. I don’t know why,

maybe the calmness of the blessed aminos hit me but my gaze
veered off to one of the apartment buildings on the side of the
road. There was just one light turned on in the middle of
building and my mind wandered to who lived there and what
they were like, and then to how it would be if I was the boy or
girl who lived there. Many times I’ve wished, not so much that
I was someone else, nor that I was immortal, but that I could
live many different lives simultaneously and not be limited to
being only one thing. At such moments of mood where you’re
both calm and at least feel free every detail of life becomes
interesting, all takes the character of images from a peaceful
dream that present themselves in turn and don’t move you one
way or another, because you see through them. I wonder then
at least as a zoological experiment what it would be like to be
a Vietnamese girl, a nail shop owner, or even an obese
Angolan middle-aged woman running a pedicure operation
with pink walls…yes, no form of hueman life is beneath me at
such moments. I’ve even had dreams that I was a door or a
vase, free to observe—I imagine only the seeing, the
satisfaction of curiosity, and not the thousands of cares that
must affect these people who I want to inhabit. But most of all
then, when to this love of curiosity is added some sudden burst
of energy, I start to wonder about men like myself of around
my age, and what it would be like to be them, what they think
moment to moment, what pulls them this way and that. I feel
then a great longing for them and also for myself, and think of
the friendships that I could have had with them and the great
tasks that could await. I feel beset by this as an almost erotic
irritation that is diffuse, and a great sadness and irritation that I
will never know who lived in that building at that window,
never see what they saw looking out. These ways…this is all
my version of “love for mankind.” Of the other abstract kind,
it means nothing and those who invoke it are bullshitters.
12
Very young rams, very young stag even when fawn, well
before horns appear, play-fight with heads butting. This is in
anticipation of horns that will grow. Yet no one teaches them

this, but they know it in the blood. What came “first” for this
animal, the development of horns or the “knowledge” and will
to fight in this manner? In phenomenon like this is kept the
secret and truth about evolution and life.
13
Struggle for space—A healthy animal not under distress,
not maimed, not trapped by man, seeks first when young:
space. Animal seeks space in physical sense, territory. But this
meaning isn’t crudely physical, I give this as vivid image
which is true for many animals that seek ownership of
concrete territory. But more generally you must take it to mean
something else, space to develop inborn powers. Monkey that
lives in trees seeks skills to master canopy, beaver seeks
ownership of river and banks and reeds in its grasp, many big
cat of course seek mastership of actual territory and claims to
prey and mates in this territory. Big feline, hunting dogs seek
full use of claws, fangs, development of smell and other
senses, to extend their reach over space. They seek these
things because they want to master matter. All of this is higher
organism organizing itself to master matter in surrounding
space. Successful mastery of this matter leads to development
of inborn powers and flourishing of organism, which allows it
to master more matter, to marshal the lower to feed the higher.
It is mobilization of matter to develop the inborn character or
idea or fate—this true not only for food literally. In social
animals an analogous process takes place within social
relations or social “space”: there are some important changes
that happen here, but principle is same. Important to
understand that there is a circular process: organism seeks
mastery of space, environment, to master matter in ways
particular to its own abilities, and as a result of this mastery of
matter there is development of its body, its senses, and all of
its faculties, and the unfolding of its inborn destined form or
nature, in time, its particular form flowering in the spring of its
season. All of this requires precisely freedom from struggle for
survival, or time away from this, a reprieve from this pressure.
As for reproduction, animal in natural state will not even seek

at this point, will not even think it. Very far from its aims: it
seeks to become strong, skillful, to master problems and feel
the expansion of its powers, and not just feel them, but
perceive it to be truly so, perceive intuitively its mastery over
its space. Only after full development of its powers and its
mastery over space specific to its needs does the need or desire
for reproduction come. Reproduction is side effect of animal
desire for discharge of strength, after mastery over space is
achieved. For this reason many lower animal breed very fast
and in great hurry, but the higher and more organized the form
of life, the more complex its needs for development are, the
longer is delayed the time of reproduction and the more
vulnerable it is to the stresses of competition for survival.
Animals that have “evolved” under intense competition are in
some sense “stunted,” less beautiful, less intelligent, less
magnificent. There are many “factions” in nature and many
paths that pull in opposite directions. You must learn to see the
secret language of nature and what it drives at: there is one
path that drives for the production of a supreme specimen. It is
the path that governs higher life; survival and reproduction are
only side effects of this path. Life is at most basic, struggle for
ownership of space.
14
Some things make my blood boil far more than a direct
physical challenge might. I once left the gym and some Chad
came up to me and started to feel me up. Then I discovered he
was feeling up my pockets, was trying to see if someone stole
his missing stuff. I found this very amusing. Maybe was post-
workout and I was very calm, but was not offended by this,
partly his manner was not obtrusive despite what he was
doing. It was possibly a form of muscle worship. But rarely do
I feel angrier as a violation of my privacy than if I eat in
restaurant alone and someone comes to sit right next to me
when the whole place is empty. Vilest of all is when a group of
something, I think were subcons or Han, came and sat just by
me in entirely empty restaurant and started to eat with mouths
open. That sound too, fewer things grate on the nerves and

present themselves as imposition on your space than the sound
of so-called hue-man eating. Other animals making sound
eating don’t bother me, but I find charming. Different types
even within same grouping of animals—I refuse the word
species—have very different needs of life. My blood starts to
boil, against my kindness and judgment, even when I stay with
gril and she insists on setting air conditioner off or closing
window because “too cold.” I like open spaces and slightly
cool, and there can be no living together with creatures who
like a huddled and over-warm existence. I believe also the
white race, or rather some groupings within it—there are far
more races than people want to admit—is in general hostile to
the way of life of the tribes that like a close-packed existence.
These are biological requirements of this or that way of life,
and no laws, no common beliefs, can bring such different
types together. A hybrid of such types would probably be born
and remain physiologically confused or sick.
15
Whoremoans: Energy and higher life the same—If we had
very advanced sensors where we could observe the inside of
animals from far and in great detail, without interfering,
without them feeling irritated or oppressed by our impositions,
we could learn much about what life means. From observing
many different ones in different places we could see what
conditions an animal seeks in life in general. Such sensors
would need to be much more advanced than equipment we
have now, and to show what parts of the brain are activated, to
see the relationship of this to blood pressure and heart rate, the
actions of the immune system, the level of various
inflammatory and anti-inflammatory markers, and most of all
the balance and action of the various hormones on the body’s
systems, on the brain, and how these correlate to what the
animal is doing at any one time. Any information we have
right now on this subject is at most rudimentary. The medical
literature is confused, is presented with great confidence, but is
corrupted by money, career, and other interests of all kinds.
The scientific literature is less known, and itself remains

contradictory. We know at most a few relations of what, say,
elevated thyroid or cortisol means at such and such time of
day, and its multiple effects on various body tissues and
systems. We have no real overall understanding of how such
things interact, nor what they mean for the body’s overall
processes, still less in the life of an organism as a whole, and
the few who have attempted to achieve such understanding,
like Ray Peat, are treated as cranks. But it’s not possible to
understand what life means, nor what an organism drives at,
nor what any specific behavior or physical adaptation means
until this is taken up. If biologists had been honest people they
would have tried to proceed in this way, without assumptions,
just amassing observations about different organisms in
different situations. But they did this only very little, and it’s
always distorted by their various agendas and prejudices. The
data we have itself is therefore at this point much too sparse
and it will take decades to get what is needed even if
researchers begin now. It will be a genius of the ages who will
really be able to understand and explain the complete view of
how hormones act in an organism. There is no irony here: I
don’t do irony! Learn that I don’t understand the gay idea of
“irony.” Hormones hold the key to the meaning of life in the
most fundamental way, and if this sounds “reductionist” to
you, if you think I demystify things too much, it’s because you
think you know what you don’t, or you think scientists know,
when they actually don’t. These substances, seen with fresh
eyes, are pure Big Magic. They govern all cycles of an
organism’s growth and its decay. They can turn small calf or
baby gorilla into giant elephant or half-ton silverback on diet
of greens, they can turn skinny man into Herculean half-god or
make strong man take on the aspect of woman, and change
tendencies and feelings, mirroring the magical transformation
of some animals that switch sexes by signals we don’t yet
understand. This doesn’t even begin to cover the different
meanings 
of 
thyroid, 
progesterone, 
the 
various
neurotransmitters, and many others that act one way on the
nervous system, another way on the gut, another way on the
immune system, that govern cell division and the preservation

of function in ways that are for the moment a mystery to
doctors and to science. Only a complete understanding of
these hidden substances will reveal the fullness of life in its
glory! The study of life as a “black box” has led to
misunderstandings because the observers are dishonest and
stupid and will report an action, but not what comes before or
after, nor its place in the life of an animal, nor do they try to
intuit from within themselves: the study of hormones, among
many other internal processes of an organism, will prevent
them from lying in this way. For example, an animal may act
one way under stress and pressure, but then appear to do the
same action out of a spirit of openness and self-increase, and
the same action or behavior may actually have completely
different meanings biologically: this will be shown by actions
of hormones, neurotransmitters, cytokines in the body. And I
will tell you what they likely to discover! So far only Ray
Peat, a man blessed by a grand and alien understanding, has
tried to decipher the secret language of these blessed
substances. Learn that there are at least two kinds of life.
Usually you think of life versus inanimate matter—how
strange that the most primitive languages, the agglutinative
grunts of Neanderthals like Basque, distinguish not between
gender of noun, but between animate and inanimate! I wonder
then what they would call yeast. Learn that there are two kinds
of life, and yeast is different from higher life. Higher life
means many fancy and mysterious things too of course but at
its most basic it has to do with differentiation and structure.
Yeast is an “amorphous blob” that expands, whereas a higher
organism has different parts with different functions, different
organs, different systems within itself. The sexes are different
because it reproduces sexually, and some have taken this to be
the main distinction, asexual versus sexual reproduction. But
it’s obvious that “differentiation” in higher organisms goes
much beyond this. And to preserve the function of the
different organs and different systems within itself, an
organism sacrifices the ability to expand and replicate
indiscriminately, like yeast does for example. You can think of
it as “sacrifice” of this ability, or just say that these two modes

or tendencies, expansion and replication of cells on one hand,
and preservation of higher or differentiated function on the
other, are at odds with each other. They are governed by
different hormones and neurotransmitters, where estrogen and
serotonin are “stress” substances that govern cell division, but
thyroid and progesterone are those that govern the
preservation of function. It is not correct to call estrogen then a
“sex hormone,” but a stress hormone, and its greater
proportion in body of female is because female is under
greater stress due to demands of inner cell division and
menstruation. The picture is far from complete of course, but
this leads to many good observations. Considering this from
the other side, the side of pathology, the indiscriminate cell
division, the return of “primitive life” within the human body
is called cancer, which looks and acts very much like a fungus
does. Conversely, from the side of health, the structure of the
body is preserved to the extent that cells successfully
command energy, and so, to speak artistically but to be right,
on one side the hormones that promote cell energy are
precisely those that promote the preservation of function,
namely thyroid and the like, whereas the hormones that
promote “lassitude” and that take away energy are precisely
those that promote cell division, inflammation, the production
of free radicals, the breakdown in order and function. At a
deep level this must be connected to the fundamental truth of
nature, that structure and energy must be the same, that energy
is not as “diffuse” as we imagine it, but has an inner
“intelligence”—this word is very bad in this case, because it is
rather the imperfect intellect of our brains that is a mere
approximation of this primordial and primal Will. This Will is
almighty. Its forms are endless. It is no different from the fire
of Heraclitus, a pervasive energy at play, inside all things, that
seeks to order and reorder itself into ascending, uncanny
objects. Its intent is mischievous, and beyond our ability to
understand in words. In the life of organisms, this seeks to
order itself into higher and more differentiated forms, that is,
concretely, seeks the production of one supreme specimen.
Peoples are nature’s circuitous ways to great specimens and

for this reason the peoples that have arisen out of nature must
be preserved in their distinct forms. In same way see from all
this that aesthetic physique has the most cosmic significance,
and it is because of what I have said so far that aesthetic
bodies are a “window to the other side,” because they are the
pinnacle of nature. The gods that surely exist but remain
hidden have the most beautiful bodies we can imagine—they
appeared to the ancient Greeks in dreams. Contrary to this
exists the surfeit of flesh we see on the obese and in general
the lassitude, the spiritual obesity, not only of modern life but
of many historical forms of life as well, the domestic life of
the village, of the village sewer, of the fetid valleys, of
matriarchy and domestics, of slaves, the pollution of cities
built on filth, the life of the swamp, the life of the human
animal collapsed to mere life, life for the sake of life, as it
devolves to the yeast form aesthetically, morally, intellectually,
physically. On the other side is the life of the immortal gods
who live in pure mountain air, and the sign of this life, where
energy is marshaled to the production of higher order, is the
aesthetic physique, the body in its glorious and divine beauty.
What of the mind then? Well as rare as beautiful bodies are,
the mind in the same condition is even more rare. Let us strive,
in our decrepit, cancerous and fetid world, for what is concrete
and what we can try to attain. Those who forget the body to
pursue a “perfect mind” or “perfect soul” have no idea where
to even start. Only physical beauty is the foundation for a true
higher culture of the mind and spirit as well. Only sun and
steel will show you the path.
16
Chimp in state of nature never jerks off, but in captivity he
does, wat does this mean? In state of nature he’s too busy, to
put plainly. He is concerned with mastering space: solving
problem of life in and under trees, mastering what tools he
can, mastering social relations in the jockeying for power and
status. Deprived of this drive to development and self-increase
he devolves to pointless masturbation, in captivity, where he
senses he is in owned space and therefore the futility of all his

efforts and all his actions. The onanism of modern society is
connected with its supposed “hyper-sexualization” and its
infertility. It’s not really hyper-sexualization, but the
devolution of the spirit to the lassitude of a diffuse and weak
sexuality. Life in owned space becomes drained of energy
through low-grade pointless titillation—and nofap is a kind of
cargo cult that tries to reestablish energy in order, on path of
ascent. Sometimes, however, it’s a successful cargo cult, but
whether it works or no can be seen usually within a week. The
unfortunate thing about all this is that w*m*n have
exceptionally good antennae for this kind of thing, and when a
man frees himself from these pressures…they see this from
very far away. They have an instinct to seek out ascending life
and drain it…they and the species thereby achieve their goals,
but you are bled dry and sometimes left a husk. They revert
life back to its irritated state, and by their drainage of vital
essence they’ve laid low many great tasks.
17
I’ve always been attracted to filth and dirt, because
something in me knew intuitively that it is only in the
underseam of life as it exists today that you find the real
“lacunae,” the “holes” where its reach is limited or weak. I
always sensed there was some real freedom in the blackest of
red light districts among whores and junkies, perverts, and
worse, with whom I’ve always chosen to take my dinners
when I had the chance. I like the stories they told me, some
showed letters from delusional Spanish engineer who wanted
to marry her, another told me story of miscarriage her friend
had in old pervert’s bathroom, and how they flushed it down a
toilet and then its name written on a piece of toilet paper. It’s
in this world and almost only in this world today that you can
start to polish the claws nature gave you, assuming it gave you
any. Unfortunately it’s easy for a man with good antennae to
see that even this world of shadows has at most a conditional
existence. The truth is that they are allowing these “holes”
because they, or the people who crafted the fabric in which the
masters of lies operate, are smart enough to know you need

these “free spaces”: they are of great use to a manipulator. See
how the Japanese, so famed for their love of law and order,
have nevertheless always allowed the yakuza to operate
running prostitution and meth rings and even worse. Such
things have a serious function in Japanese society, as the mafia
and other institutions have had in Western society. Only a
cretinous government will get rid of such a world entirely, and
thankfully we have very stupid governments in the West now.
Their days are numbered. It is with sadness that you realize,
eventually, after the first exhilarating rush of freedom in this
world of the damned, that these spaces too, though not so
pervasively “owned,” have portals and gates manned by that
which owns everything else. Still, it’s better than nothing
because in the moment all of that’s still far away… on a late
summer night when you are asked by corrupt lawyer to spy on
Lebanese strip club owner and you’re out in courtyard with
20-year-old prostie, she put cocaine on your tongue and you
feel the ocean air at night fill you with the longing of the great
sea…. you might almost forget suffocating air of gravity
outside, and feel for a few minutes like animal before moment
of hunt.
18
When speak of whoremoans you might think I’m a
materialist reductionist, or am saying you are like machine.
This is attitude of many scientists or maybe just cultists of
science. Actually many on the left claim to have this attitude,
though they can never explain what moral force their “rights”
and “compassion” have, if it doesn’t come from God or have
some reality in human nature. When they say they are atheists,
I never believe them: atheists act like Stalin or Brezhnev, not
like a Presbyterian schoolmarm. The truth is that these who
make the core of the modern left are moral fanatics. There’s
not a drop of atheism or relativism in them. They don’t enjoy
the clear air of skepticism and never have. They always sneak
in the soul or free will when you’re not looking. They actually
get off on this, and are acting out of spite, even spite against
themselves. They want to feel they’re not in control, “my

hormones made me do it”: what is this you apart from your
hormones, your genes, your inborn instinct, then? “It’s the
genes,” “it’s the environment,” “it’s the economy or the
oppression”—all versions of the milieu theory, a neurotic’s
theory according to Nietzsche. This is how they can also get
themselves to believe in the transgender: these are people who
believe that matter can somehow be corruptly configured, and
that we all have disembodied souls with male or female
essences. The whole attempt to redefine identity, not just
sexual identity, as a matter of decision, meaning decision made
arbitrarily, freely, a choice of the intellect or reason, is their
desperate reach to find a new justification for the freedom of
the will, the soul unrestrained by nature or biology. Such
things make no sense when you realize you’re your body and
there’s no you aside from this. The first lines of the Iliad make
this clear: you do have a “soul” of sorts apart from your
body…it just isn’t you. It’s a shade. It’s completely
homosexual.
19
Some think this view absolves you of your responsibility
for your acts. But actually you’re responsible for much more
than your acts. That which is said to constrain or determine
you biologically is actually what you are. It does restrain your
acts according to its inherent ways of desiring and acting, but
you are this it, and it decided to be, so actually you are
responsible for much more, you’re responsible for what you
are. You are responsible for the good and bad things that
happen to you, for any accident or disease you might
experience! Actually it was all going to happen to you just the
way it did at the moment of your birth or conception and even
before, at the moment your parents had a glint for each other
in the eye. There is fundamentally no difference between you
and that glint.
20
Animals walk around in a state of permanent religious
intoxication. This is the natural condition of the mind and
intellect, the moment-to-moment perception, of man as well. I

heard some computer fool say that religion is the “older virtual
reality” experience, to justify his scam industry. No, the
denuded state of the spirit and intellect, where you walk
around “demystified” and “disenchanted” is the virtual reality
condition, and a terrible condition at that. For the longest
period of which we are at present aware, for hundreds of
thousands of years in the Paleolithic, humans walked around,
like healthy animal, in a state that we would today call
religious delirium, but which is in fact the default state of all
conscious and semi-conscious life. For long after the coming
of civilization also, many continued in this condition, or did so
during special times of the year or festivals where man could
regain his free and natural state. It was civilization and in
particular agricultural civilization that forbad this condition
and plunged the majority of humans into a semi-permanent
repressive or depressive frame. That this is consistent with,
and even a prerequisite for, the impressive works and
development of higher civilization and higher culture
shouldn’t be surprising: the majority of mankind suffered
terribly also in their bodies from the coming of agriculture, the
backbreaking labor, the malnourishment that shows itself in
the smaller stature and more slender build of farmers’
skeletors, of the destruction of their teeth, the atrophy of their
brains and other organs. Agriculture allowed a steady food
source, an increase in numbers, and above all the maintenance
of an elite, free from these exactions, that lived parasitically on
the many. But agriculture broke the human animal and
domesticated him. Do you understand then what the
“disenchanted” worldview is? I have to laugh at the “secular
worldview,” the disenchanted worldview, which is in fact the
worldview or mood of the broken peasant farmer. “Science,”
supposedly the content….that’s not even relevant here…
21
My favorite thing is to walk around the city during the day
completely plastered, on very crowded streets or on boardwalk
by sea or river, with container maybe it looks like iced tea or
water but is full of alcohol. At night I don’t enjoy as much, but

during the day to walk around in a state of great enthusiasm
and energy powered by liquor or, best of all, some kind of
wine that energizes you to a great and holy rage. I don’t mean
really rage, because I’m laughing on the inside, but I love to
walk around like this, to see the people, to accost strangers in
all kinds of ways, nothing is more entertaining. I’ve often
wondered at these times what it would be like, and how
blessed life would be, if I could feel this way all the time and
not just when I drink, and also never pay the price for it.
Alcohol should never, by the way, be used for stress relief
because after it crashes, and even the next day, there is a rise in
cortisol so that unpleasant feelings become worse. But I
wondered what it would be like to feel like this all the time
and that there must be, or have been, people who do. Aren’t
we told this world is full of mutants? Why not a mutant who is
perpetually full of this kind of euphoria…but even more, why
not just one set of emotions, or one emotion. I’ve wondered at
these times how life could be if you were possessed only by
one specific feeling, and if there is a man who has only felt the
purest and most intense anger, continually and nothing else, or
who has felt only a very specific kind of joy and no other
feeling…even sadness of certain kinds makes life beautiful
and can be a spur to great things. Even panic is better than the
numbness promoted in our time. What would a creature who
only ever felt such a thing be like, and why can’t one exist? It
would be a monster, or a god, or in any case he would be
possessed by a god.
22
Do you imagine that men of genius or, let’s say, men of
science 
in 
history 
walked 
around 
clear-headed,
“disenchanted,” reasonable, with the tight-assed attitude of the
science cultist and materialist? No great discovery has ever
been made by the power of reason. Reason is a means of
communicating, imperfectly, some discoveries to others, and
in the case of the sciences, a method of trying to render this
communication certain and precise. But no one ever made a
discovery through syllogisms, through reason, through this

makeshift form of transmission. Great mathematicians saw
spatial relations, as great physicists saw and to some extent felt
physical relations. In contemplation of mathematical forms,
there is almost a physical feel of geometric relations, and all
mathematics at bottom is about geometric relations even when
it doesn’t seem so. Compare the Euclidian proof of the
Pythagorean theorem, based on syllogism, which helps you
understand nothing that’s actually going on, with the imagistic
proof of the three squares, that makes you perceive, physically
perceive even in your body, why this theorem is true. Gauss,
so beloved even by the tedious scientistic goblins that even
Google gave him a cartoon, is famous to have said something
like, “I got it…now I have to get it.” Meaning, he had seen and
felt the fundamental spatial relation he was searching, but now
he had to translate it into the imperfect language of
mathematics for others. Thus all mathematics and all science
in general—mathematics is only the prototype and most
precise of the sciences—is about the definitions, not about the
proof, not about the process or—absurd!—the “algorithm.” All
great scientific discoveries, supposedly the great works of
“reason,” are in fact the result of intuitions and sudden grasp
of ideas. And all such sudden grasp and reaching is based on
what, in other circumstances, would be called a kind of
religious intoxication: it depends on a state of the mind where
the perceiving part of the intellect is absolutely focused,
limpid, yet driven by the most relentless energy, an energy to
penetrate. Direct perception is already “intellectualized” and
in fact much closer to the innate “intelligence” of things than
cerebral syllogisms. No scientist worth anything has ever felt
pride at using algorithms or trial-and-error to solve a problem.
Yes, feminists are right that “science” is patriarchal in this
sense, that it is a “rape” of nature. Real scientists like Galois
are monsters of will, and the preponderance of men in the hard
sciences is explained by this orientation of character, as also
by the fact that the minds of men more than of women are
capable of sustained focus on one thing (women are better at
multitasking). There are women who were great scientists, but,

like women who were great chess players, or poets, they are
probably spiritual lesbians.
23
The modern peasant just replaces the artificial prejudices
of superstitions and village old wives’ tales with the
superstitions of science, which he receives ready-made from
authorities among the popularizers of science. He loves them
because of the creature comforts he believes they provide
through technology. He is a cargo cultist—he knows nothing
of what goes into the discoveries of science, nor the way the
substance is transmitted among scientists, he just has a
propagandized image of some of the results. This is no
different from belief in Big Magic, which is how many
primitives think of science—the Big Magic of the white man.
It’s not even the substance of science that is the problem
because it could be of great use, as much as any other popular
religion has been: the problem is the frame of spirit that it puts
the acolyte in. It makes him think he has power over the
processes of nature which are at present actually very poorly
understood. By removing primal fear—the only kind of awe
that drives the many—it injects a toxic mix of complacency,
arrogance, brutality, fanaticism that is all just under the surface
only so long as times are good. Science as popular religion
brings no true consolation but instead feeds a kind of false
pride, pride in spiting oneself—does this sound familiar? It
should sound familiar to women most of all. It actually makes
the many more servile to the authorities who are presumed to
understand and manipulate the technology. That is its purpose,
to make the many submit, which wouldn’t be bad, if they
weren’t submitting to the lords of lies. You can see from all
this anyway why Enlightenment can never happen but also
why those critics of Enlightenment like most of the followers
of Heidegger go the wrong way. They are right when they say,
in so many words, that the inborn character of every man is in
some way unique, the biology too particular, much more so
than the more uniform character of animals. For animals the
worker ant, or two fruitflies, will have exactly the same

inborn, but humans are all slightly different. From this they
draw the conclusion that no common “way” can suffice for all,
but that the only authentic way for you can come from the
needs of your inner self. Every adherence to an external code,
religion, or ideology is “inauthentic” and represents essentially
a form of mind control, your adopting the thoughts of another,
inappropriate for your own metabolism, biology, peculiar
conditions for growth or flourishing. Yes, it is true, Nietzsche
went so far as to avoid reading anything written by others, so
as not to infect his mind! And he was a mutant with a very
particular biology—such types often are, and he was right that
for them, physiology, diet, may be the most pressing research
necessary. But he never forgot that the fundamental fact of
nature is inequality, and this is something these people, the
followers of Heidegger, and Heidegger himself to a great
degree, all forget. It is madness to ask the common prefab run
of man to fashion his own way, his own “religion”—the many
find solace and meaning only in submission. It is good that
this is so, and they shouldn’t be made to feel ashamed for it.
So much of the modern idiocy is based on shaming those who
would find true pleasure in submission! The long chain of
being is held together by command and obedience. The many
are not so different from one another, nor their conditions of
life so different. In the end you too, no matter how special or a
genius you may be, are held together to the average man
through many ties of biology, so that you would both do well
to pay attention to what is common, especially insofar as the
body is concerned. The body is not a private thing: the
“individual” body is likely diseased. The universal body, the
correct type discovered by ancient Greek science and art, is
not something you will develop by nurturing your own
“individual” quirks, doxies and faggotries. Biology works
according to types and grades of manifestation, not according
to the development of “unique” personal eccentricities.
Science rightly understood helps us understand the types, the
species, the true cleavages of nature. Science is not in and of
itself the cause of our problems, of your “alienation,” nor does
it have any content beyond who uses it and for what. Science

is a great tool because it can uncover for us the biological
conditions of all life and the relationships between types of
life. It can, as Nietzsche predicted, settle the question of the
true hierarchy of values, or more precisely, the real ladder of
life, the true hierarchy of biological types. What prevents this
from happening is not inherent to science or technology as
such. It is a political and sociological problem—one way or
another, in time, the right force will take hold of the power of
science and reveal its true potential. Science was never meant
to be for comfort!
24
I don’t talk about if God exists, I don’t know this. I’ve
never had any feeling for this one way or another. I’ve sat in
houses of religions, but I always felt nothing, it put me to
sleep. Even the novelty of a Buddhist or Hindu temple wore
off very fast: I enjoyed the spectacle but could tell…these
priests are just more piledrivers. I was always so bored. How
can the secret and hidden and precious things be about
doctrine and just more talking? But—and I don’t know why
people put these things together, because for me they never
had anything to do with each other—even as a small boy I felt
every object was inhabited by an uncanny shadow or spirit. I
paid honor to certain toys and certain objects I found outside
and hid carefully. No one ever taught me to do this. I found
dead animal and buried it with ceremony. I always felt I could
talk to animal and that they were my brothers and sisters. This
“animism” is the natural religion of man, and shows itself even
to small child left alone to play. I remember fondly a small
white dog under thickets of wisteria bushes growing on
corrugated steel, and I believe this dog has followed me in
different forms my whole life. But I’m almost sure that gods
exist, and in any case, the argument against the one God isn’t
the same as against the other gods. In all the fulminations of
Sam Harris, and Hitchens, and the “new atheists,” there’s
nothing really new—they want to banish not just religion from
public life, but to enter your own mind and replace whatever
vestiges of old organized religions are there with their own

very stupid organized religion. If they have an easy time of it,
this is because monotheism overreached. It made such grand
claims… and when these claims were abandoned it left people
with the impression that there really is nothing besides
“science,” which of course, nobody really understands,
because it’s nothing but a method. It would have been far more
honest to embrace skepticism but of course they would never
let you take the logical conclusion. But still, forget for a
moment all the claims made about God, about the creation of
matter out of nothing—which runs against all intuition and all
observation that you can make yourself…you don’t even need
science for that. Paglia said once that the real novelty of the
one God was that he spoke the world into existence. How
different this was from all other creation myths! All pagans
knew the world was eternal, and that its present condition was
a result of cycles of birth, rebirth, regeneration, copulation: the
Japanese even have myths about gods shitting on fields to
make them fertile! How proper, it makes many other things
about Japanese culture easier to understand. Monotheism, even
of the intellectual or deist variety, and especially that variety,
makes all kinds of claims too about the lawfulness of matter or
of nature, about intelligent design and the like. It’s actually
much closer to the science that claims to disprove it, than to
the original paganism of all mankind. So much of this story
makes time a line and makes matter conditional on a deity or
creator that lives outside it: the creation of matter out of
nothing, the creation of your soul out of nothing. Matter is
dead, in some ways homogenous, and its meaning is “divine”
only in the sense that it reveals the creation of the external
deity, or even better, just the laws he made to govern it. It
seems and feels wrong, or runs against the immediate
perception of the world, so it requires faith, a concept
unknown to ancient pagans of all kinds. For this reason the
Romans considered Christians and Jews to be no different
from atheists. That view is very different. As such, there is no
“scientific” reason why you would have to rule out the
existence of beings stronger, superior, more intelligent, more
magnificent than us, equipped with powers that appear

magical to our understanding. The only reason I can think to
dismiss this is Schopenhauer’s, his amusing refutation of God
—that any being of intelligence higher than man’s would have
already abolished itself long ago. But if you don’t believe that,
what reason can there be? Please no say “there no proof,” “I
didn’t see it.” Scientific proof would be totally forbidden here:
in fact there are many strange occurrences that have been
recorded by many, as much as any event can be recorded, but
this lacks any scientific meaning, it’s a case of “not
applicable.” If an impish deity of the lower kind, with which
the world is full, some purple goblin with a wicked face
showed itself to a pedant in a white coat, the scientist would
convince himself he was hallucinating—and in any case,
without being available for study, for testing, for experiments
that can be seen by others (this standard has been abandoned
for many fields lately), its existence would not fall within the
power of “science” at all. No, and what do you say to ancient
accounts that such creatures showed themselves to men before,
and maybe still do? Why would they show themselves to you?
The weakness and spinelessness of modern man—no god
would show himself to such creatures, to be jeered at! Why?
Remember why the young men in Mishima’s story of the
League of the Divine Wind were so inflamed with passion and
anger on behalf of the immortal gods. They knew that, without
them, without the breed of warriors, the many would forget the
gods. They would become powerless spirits hiding among the
reeds, the subject of superstition, ridicule. The true gods have
a kind of power, but not the kind the many imagine. Why
should they care for mankind? They are rare and precious, and
it is for man to find, acknowledge, and honor them. This, at
least, was the ancient view: and the foundation and
preservation of oracles was the first question of life and also
of statecraft. Gods could not control nature or fate, but could
reveal its workings at key times. If a god showed himself
today to you, in a dream, would you have the inner energy and
power to honor him and do his bidding in the world? Or would
you, neutered by the modern pervasive hivemind of the slave,
dismiss it, and yourself as unreal or unworthy, when it is the

modern bugman and his blabbering that lacks reality. But I
want you to be intoxicated with the highest enthusiasm and
ready to receive these greatest blessings with great confidence!
25
Nerds, so prized by the middlebrow clothmos who rule the
cities and want to think that, well, at least they’re smart and
deserve RESPECT, are people who possess a kind of self-
destructive parody of intelligence. Their facility with pointless
concepts and abstractions make them think they have an
understanding of real things when all they have is a
misunderstanding of words and grammar, overgeneralized to
the point of meaninglessness. Simple people confuse a facility
with words for real intellect. It would be very easy to
speculate, for example, on the two forms of life I mentioned
above and to say, as some do, that there is a progress in the
universe from the simple to the more complex. This is similar
to those who believe in historical progress, and that there is a
motion in history to greater reasonableness, or peace, or
prosperity, or freedom, whatever. All of this way of thinking is
wrong. While I believe the two physiological processes I
mentioned do describe two different kinds of life, and their
differing conditions and aims, there is no evidence for any
motion in time in favor of one or the other, either when we
consider the universe or just human history. If anything, the
evidence is motion toward the lower forms of life. I have no
doubt anyway that beings of magnificent beauty and
complexity existed before, but disappeared because the
conditions for their preservation were that much more
difficult. No doubt also that human civilization came and went
in many cycles, over many hundreds of thousands of years.
Civilizations far more advanced than ours are buried under
miles of ash and rock, or under the ice of Antarctica, or were
entirely pulverized. The memory of such things comes to very
sensitive youths with a nervous system so strong that, as a
parasite, it takes over the organism: in moments of limpid
calm, a small perturbation in the will brings a faint feeling of a

memory from long ago…they suddenly remember, like a
revelation…
26
Reincarnation is the original belief of every society or tribe
that drew its conclusions from observation of life and nature.
The new religions, the faith of Israel and those that have come
from it, and many others that came about at that time, or have
arisen since—I believe Zoroastrianism is likely the root also of
the faith in the Bible—have some divine inspiration at their
beginnings, but I believe at least the way they are interpreted
now is a design of the human mind, and calculated. They are
abstract, utilitarian, and crudely political. Before this nearly
every society had a belief in reincarnation. This still has
remained in some places, although the moral meaning imposed
on reincarnation by Buddhism and Hinduism is, like Plato’s,
for reasons of social utility and is political. But there is much
significance in the primitive belief in reincarnation, which is
more like a primal and perennial belief. It is universal and
naïve, and I believe therefore it must have some truth. It’s not
possible to dismiss it as wish-fulfillment, and a false desire for
immortality: first, because as we see, the later religions
achieve this in a much better way with the teaching of the
afterlife, but most of all because to many people, reincarnation
is a kind of hell. You’ve all had very comfortable lives and
maybe wouldn’t mind reliving something like this again, but
try to visit a burn ward. Life is so painful for so many that
suicide, an escape from this infernal prison, is very common at
all times. But, unfortunately for the suicides, that death is not
the end of the story. I believe reincarnation is fundamentally
true, even though most of these religions taught it in a
metaphorical and popular form called metempsychosis. This is
the belief that the soul, the supposed (but false) unity of will
and intellect, is fully reborn. This is false. The intellect is a
merely physical quality like muscular strength and can’t be
“reborn” any more than your muscles are literally reborn. You
are not at bottom your intellect, this is impossible, although
this is the assumption of almost all modern people even when

they claim otherwise. They pay lip service to “supremacy of
the desires,” or to biological determinism, but they still believe
they are their intellects, just imprisoned by flesh and matter
and genes and a biological “programming.” This is wrong!
And it’s not the intellect that is reborn, I will tell you what is.
Take a fruitfly, or a worker ant. This type of being is very
close to plant-life in some ways. It has very primitive intellect,
very primitive nervous system. There are inborn ways of
behaving, of reacting to certain stimuli, inborn desires and
orientations “in the blood,” and when you kill one ant, the next
one over will be identical in this regard. Its rebirth is
“instantaneous” because the ant has a will that is shared
uniformly across its type in the hive, and is therefore persistent
and enduring. Once the queen dies, the next queen is
indistinguishable from it in that thing that Schopenhauer calls
the will, what he says is inborn way of wanting, and is in a
very literal sense a “reincarnation” of this same thing. If you
don’t see this it’s because you keep confusing yourself for
your intellect. But that part of you that is really you persists
even when your intellect is asleep, and would persist even if
you experienced total amnesia. If you doubt, just ask
yourself… someone you love, if you had to choose—would
you rather they forgot everything but still behaved the way
you always knew they did, or would you rather that they kept
all their memories and knowledge but had a radical change in
personality? This question is easy to answer…if you love
someone only for what they know or remember…everyone
knows this is a betrayal because that’s not who you are. And in
fact there’s no such thing as a radical change in personality.
The lower forms of life are nearly uniform in their wills or
inborn ways of acting, and also very simple: in the case of
amoeba, yeast, and such they are not far removed from the
behavior of the natural forces, like gravity, which is
completely uniform and persistent. Once dead, they are
immediately reborn, and indeed live simultaneously in
numerous bodies. For higher and more differentiated animals,
the Will appears more particularly defined for each type,
species, and finally each specimen when it comes to the

human. But this biological reality, independent of what is
known, remembered, or consciously decided, is a matter of the
blood and body, and this same being, thing, or Will, call it
what you will, will be reborn in just the same way. In a
different time, but this same particular way of desiring and
behaving that is inside you will come again: this is the real
meaning of reincarnation. And with the glut of humans in our
time, we have to wonder if the same being also lives now in
multiple bodies sometimes. Where do these beings come
from? Some have said that these new billions of hue-mans,
that in a previous life they must have been yeast, amoeba,
locusts and other insects that are born in multitudes in each
season. I’d like this to be true, but I think rather that in
previous ages mankind also swelled to many billions or even
more …and also I have no doubt the entire universe is teeming
with life of all kinds.
27
It would be interesting to know what the “extinction” event
or path is in each previous human cycle of civilization. If it is
something completely random and external, like asteroids or
volcanoes, or if it is something inherent to civilization as
such…some circumstance or behavior that leads to virulent
disease, or some kind of great weapon or maybe even
something more uncanny. I wonder if the peoples and religions
that exist now also existed in past cycles under different names
with 
slightly 
different 
superficial 
circumstances 
and
appearances, but in all fundamental ways otherwise the same.
And if one or a set of these, or some new belief that hasn’t
even appeared yet, is the cause of the end of civilization in
every cycle. A frog once suggested to me that the explosion of
African populations in our time is the event that the movie
Alien describes, a population bred under the most extreme
pathogenic load, and that, despite its weaknesses in cold
weather, can nevertheless wreak so much damage on the rest
of the world that societies collapse under the march of the
zombi …I personally doubt this. Asia will shut them out
without glancing twice or hearing of their suffering. I think

instead the end in previous cycles has varied but that very
often, and most interesting, one cause has been the emergence
of brotherhoods of savage men who have decided to purify the
earth and rid it of the infestation of the human-cockroach.
Because unfortunately in the long run the development of
civilization and comfort leads to the proliferation of damaged
life, the innovation of mankind leads to unspeakable abortions
of life, and men on the periphery who want to preserve the
natural order begin to plot the end of everything. I also wonder
if some ancient civilization has managed to escape all these
cycles of destruction and has hidden underground somewhere.
Maybe they are really eternal and live life as an experiment,
detached, seeing it as a playful dream they can observe at a
distance…maybe an emissary surfaces from time to time so
they can amuse themselves. I shudder to think, though, that by
this same reasoning the aborted robot life to which the mass of
mankind inevitably degenerates in each cycle of civilization
also survived, maybe in small communities of “moles,” inside
dry hills of limestone, or not far underground in old networks
of caves and tunnels. No doubt stories of vampires, kobold,
cryptid humanoids and many others might refer to these
degenerated stragglers that prey on us and terrorize us….no
doubt many among the ranks of deities have come from both
types, and stranger things still exist under the earth. Please see
DEROs if interested. There are more things….
28
There can be no “artificial intelligence” in the way that
people really mean it. If they mean some machine that
approximates the intellect of man, this may be possible, and
even very useful, although they’re very far from their goals at
the moment. Success at chess is their one great achievement,
but they fail still at kicking a ball, pouring ketchup,
recognizing simple objects …could one hunt, or survive being
hunted? But they never mean just the intellect in this way, or a
crude approximation of it: when people speak of “artificial
intelligence” what they always mean is artificial life, a robot of
some kind, or an artificial consciousness indistinguishable

from human consciousness. There is an apparently different
but in fact similar speculation that nerds love: that the universe
is “logic” or information. That what constitutes matter can in
fact be recorded as “information,” as relations of logic, and
that therefore the universe must be precisely this—this is
behind also the belief that you can “upload” your intelligence
to a computer and attain immortality, and many related forms
of imbecility. The motivation for this is nerdishness and also
somewhat the Jewish way of thinking, or the Judaizing
tendency that promotes facility with words and number, but
approaches mental deficiency and even retardation when it
comes to anything visual. The Jewish hatred of matter, an
ancient prejudice that precedes the Bible, and the hatred also
for beauty that they share with other Semitic peoples—and
many others besides—all of this comes together to promote
this kind of aggressive nerdishness. This is the origin of many
of these claims, though it shouldn’t be imagined that here or
elsewhere I am referring to all Jews, or that this absolves non-
Jews. Because the “Judaizing” tendency I talk about is
inherent to human nature, and is very common also among
non-Jews, and in some degree it exists within everyone,
together with the counter-acting love of vibrant matter, image,
and beauty. It just exists in different degrees in different
people, and peoples. In any case, all of these delusions, that
you can be “uploaded” because your “brain” can be uploaded,
that “the universe is information” or that something like
“artificial intelligence” actually can exist, are all at bottom the
same delusion and the same power fantasy of the nerd. The
nerd can be described as a person of inelegant and pedantic
intelligence, often middling intelligence, who takes excessive
pride in the intellect, even in the memorization of facts, the
design of clumsy concepts to which reality is then expected to
fit like to bed of Procrustes…. And he identifies with it. There
are very rare people in history, even a few saints and martyrs,
who were ashamed of their evil character and will, and sought
salvation in contemplation, sought some escape in this. These
are sometimes noble people, but this doesn’t describe the nerd.
The nerd doesn’t hate himself, his nature, his tendencies or

spirit, nor is his intellect powerful enough to over-awe his
needling will and consider things without the pressure of
interest or the gravity of petty desires. He never sees things
like the true genius or the artist does, when the perceiving part
of the intellect becomes so powerful that it really overpowers
everything else…so that the fullness of the object occupies all
of consciousness and an idea, or some new insight into the
world, is actually grasped. No, the nerd is a creature of will,
under the direction of a petty will in the everyday sense, and
all of his thoughts, concepts, and designs have a forced quality
because they refer always to need and desire for some kind of
gain. This very often is just material gain, but the desire for
prestige is even worse. In men of intellect the desire for
prestige is often the most disgusting, especially when there’s
no native manliness, because this leads to cowardice and lies,
to others and oneself. For this reason Nietzsche said manliness
is the first requirement of the philosopher, but there’s no one
farther from the philosopher than the unmanly nerd, and
there’s no enemy more implacable of the human race and of
the genius of the species, than just this nerd and everything he
represents. The attempt to “mimic” life through algorithms,
through the brute-force of trial-and-error, will never create
either life or “consciousness”—just what would such a
machine be “conscious” of?—but just that, a mimicry or
parody of the middling human intellect. A mirror and
exaltation of the false intellect of the nerd, that never leaves
the stream of words, syllogisms, motives and desire, that is
always forced and contrived, because it’s under pressure of
some petty need. And it’s really grotesque. It’s as if you have a
girl you desire, she dies but using Big Magic you reanimate
her corpse, put makeup on her, re-teach this zombi to speak,
force her to copy all of her old habits, condition her like you
would a pigeon to act in ways you remember and that you
liked. But in the end she’s just a reanimated live-action doll,
and this is grotesque. This is just what “AI” is. It is a fantasy
of power of the conspiracy of biological interests that unites
the nerds, the intellect of “reason”—the party that believes in
empty words—the middling, and the Jews of the human spirit

into hoping for their golem. “AI” is the golem of those who
hate life…. It is their true Messiah and their vengeance.
29
Youth and beauty are universally hated in almost all
human societies in history. These societies are run by decrepit,
sclerotic old men. Sometimes they use image of fat woman
“Earth Mother” to beat the young men over the head with and
make them submit. Other times they promote ugliness in all
ways: ugliness and perversity in custom, scarification,
circumcision, 
self-mutilation. 
Customs 
and 
religious
authorities that concern themselves with how you should wipe
your ass, brush teeth, how many fingers to insert in anus to
achieve such and such “magical-medical” goal, petty legalisms
of all kinds—the Shiite sect among Muslims and rabbinical
Judaism are most like this. All of this smothers genuine
religious enthusiasm and the true oracular science, from which
can evolve arts of great beauty. Often their food is
unappetizing and looks like boiled rocks. Their languages—
most human languages are so hard to listen to! Tagalog is
almost torture to hear, though I don’t mean to single out this
culture, it’s hardly the worst in terms of love of ugliness
(actually the Filipinos can be a pleasant people with an impish
sense of humor inherited from the long-lost negritos now
absorbed in their population). Their people are ugly: millennia
of arranged marriages, for financial gain, among the Indians—
originally a noble people—led to a nation now, of one billion,
that almost never wins any athletic contests, that has won
fewer gold medals since its inception than tiny Croatia has
since 1992, where both the men and the women are inbred,
ugly, unsexy, and almost deformed. I don’t mean to pick on
them, because they’re hardly the only ones, and this ugliness,
physical ugliness, is almost universal in the human race.
Beauty is the very rare and precious preserve of tribes that
have striven to promote child-making for something other than
financial, social and political gain. No, the promotion of
ugliness is nearly universal and the love of beauty is so rare:
among the great civilizations, only the ancient Greeks, the

French, the Japanese, and somewhat the Italians are true lovers
of beauty and refinement, and have based their existence
exclusively on the promotion of beauty. How many times in
history have cultures become ugly and petty because financial
interest overrode eugenics in marriage—and free love, though
not perfect, is somewhat more eugenic than letting fathers
trade daughters for personal gain. In their hatred and distrust
of beauty one feels such societies live under a tremendous
pressure of needs. Their true ruler is the god of gravity and
they are dominated by fears of the future, unspeakable
anxieties about money and matter, and importune, brutish
behaviors all motivated by need, by the desire to grasp, by the
feeling they all nourish that they’re being taken advantage of.
They always feel they’re being disrespected. The desire for
respect is the true mark of the forever-slighted. The distrust of
beauty is sometimes sold as the high-minded rejection of
material desire by the saintly or the kind or the contemplative.
But that’s just nonsense, and you can see it in this way.
Beauty-hating cultures have one other peculiarity they all
share, which is very revealing. They hate also privacy and
personal space, they hate also beauty in good and refined
manners. These societies are based on such popular solidarity
that it’s considered normal to barge in on other people, absurd
to demand to knock; they make animal sounds when eating—
or, the way such people are often said to smell in history
whenever such societies are encountered—all of this tells you
what the hatred of beauty is really about. Freud refers to the
inner pain many of his clients experienced trying to shift from
this kind of medieval, collective, smothering culture of
ugliness to one where personal space and distance, refinement
and beauty, were instead valued. It’s about the hatred of
distinction or superiority, hatred of the principle of difference
and distance between individuals, that is by contrast so prized
in those very few beauty-loving cultures. And the hatred of
superiority comes from the suspicion the many in such beauty-
hating societies feel, that, in not being subject to the horrible
pressures of need and anxiety under which they themselves
live, that the beautiful and carefree make a mockery of what

they take most seriously. The beautiful threaten to unravel the
regimentation under which they must subject their constant
crude need for things. This is why such societies descend to
the lowest types of faggotry whenever their native laws are
even slightly relaxed. Islam is most like this. Jews, when
devoid of their religion, as well as Persians who live under the
tyranny of Shiite law, and most of all the people of the Gulf
States, all revert to a crude animal condition without their rigid
laws and become completely dissolute, as the Arabs were said
to have been before Islam. And they will soon return to this. I
don’t need to add notes for spergs and pedants: men like John
Milius are excepted from such judgments, but their existence
has nothing to do one way or another with my point here,
which is about general types and the ways these generate. I am
speaking of two opposing views of life that are based in two
very different needs of two very different biological
orientations. There can be no compromise between those who
live under the pressure of need and of material increase, who
are the walking shadows of the dead, and on the other side,
those who are carefree, joyous, pleasure-loving and worship
beauty. One seeks the preservation and expansion of mere life,
the other seeks the exaltation of life.
30
Among the Greeks the man of power was called aner, who
was different from the other word used, anthropos, which
referred just to some shadow-being, indistinct, some kind of
humanoid shape. The real man was rare, and most males were
not and are not real men! The word in beginning was used
only for demigods and superhumans like Achilles or
Diomedes or Odysseus. In the Iliad Diomedes in his moment
of glory is compared to lion whose spirit has been aroused by
anger at wound, and scatters the shepherds and dogs before
him. Athena kindled a fire on his head and shoulders and
marked him as one possessed by the true inner force inside all
things. This burst out of him now and made itself light up
above all others. The real man was a man filled by courage
and daring that all came from an excess of being. This idea

was shared also by other Aryan cultures; the Roman vir, the
Sanskrit and Avestan nar, the Welsh ner, the Proto-Indo-
European Hner all ultimately refer to a kind of vital life-force
capable of superhuman strength. There is other word, related,
having to do with manly youth: ayu; ayu refers to the youthful
life-force that renews itself in each generation, that moves
from life to life without end, forever persisting. It is behind all
the Indo-European words for youth, and youthful strength and
power. It appears in Latin iuuenis, in Sanskrit, and all the
Germanic and English forms. But most of all it is this same
word, this same idea that is behind the Latin aetas and
aeternus, behind the vision of an age, a cyclical age, of
eternity. How pregnant in meaning that youth and eternity are
the same word and idea in these languages! The Gothic and
Germanic words are the same. This idea very vivid in Greek!
In this the words aiei, meaning forever, and the word aion,
both contain at their root this meaning: of life-span, life-force,
youthful strength. These peoples saw the vigor of youth as the
true driving force behind life and behind all things, forever
renewing itself, reincarnating itself anew in each generation in
full force, though the memories of men and of societies may
disappear. If you want the most beautiful poetic expression of
this view, you must see in the Iliad when Homer describes the
death of Euphorbus. His death is compared to young tree in its
prime blown down by strong wind. Pythagoras, looking on
Euphorbus’ shield in Sicily, broke into tears, remembering that
he had been this man. He knew of what was hidden on the
other side of the shield. This view persists: and this is why
someone like D.H. Lawrence could look on the sarcophagi of
the ancient Tuscans and see in this pleasure- and beauty-loving
people a celebration of something very similar. They put on
their funerary objects images of reveling, and feasting, and
abundant flourishing life and great joy, wine parties, leaping
dolphins, to remind themselves that this irrepressible force,
nature, youth continues anew in each generation and is never
defeated by death. In same way when I poast physiques of
beautiful and handsome youths I do so because in
contemplating them I am filled with a deep calm and joy—I

see in them the persistent rejuvenation of this same eternal
force, that is inside all things. I see in this force the hidden
design and intention of nature, its reaching beyond itself. Its
designs are unspeakable and what it reaches and wants is
mysterious to us, can only be understood imperfectly and
through metaphor. Its “plan” and design is beyond human
comprehension, but it is without doubt that it is striving,
against numerous other “factions” and centrifugal forces, for
the production and creation of a superior creature of some
kind, a specimen of terrible beauty and power. I have no doubt
that the gods, if they exist, would look only like perfected and
improved versions of beautiful physiques of young men, just
like they showed themselves to the Greek oracles in dreams.
They were the first to discover the true biological and physical
form of the man, the correct form, the true proportions. I have
no doubt also that this force, in being inside us together with
others, has made human history, life, and our own minds the
battleground and stage of its action, and that passivity in the
face of its power is therefore absurd: it calls on us to allow
ourselves to be possessed by it, and to wage war on its behalf
against its enemies. If you want to understand the true power
of aion, of the eternal youthful energy that is the universe, you
must study what remains from Heraclitus when he uses this
word, and how he connects it to the idea of fire that is the
essence of all things and all action. And he is very right when
he says, “The best desire one thing above all, ever-flowing
eternal fame among mortals; but the many glut themselves like
cattle.” This is what I believe in!

Part Two: Parable of Iron Prison
31
If you recognize pathology, brokenness, denatured life as
what it is, it can teach you a lot about life in healthy state.
There is nothing wrong with looking in life under distress, if
you no confuse it for life in ascent and freedom. When you put
some kind of working dog, like terrier, even cute Jack Russell
in city apartment, they will start to try to dig through the floor.
This mode is inborn to them, they seek the development of
their powers, and there are very few sadder things than to see
animal thwarted like this. Playing at becoming itself, but
reduced to a doll and useless acting. Carl Schmitt said,
“They’ve put us out to pasture.” This is the condition of life in
modern world.
32
Modern world not bad just because modern; and it is better
than some ages in the past. Many parts of past were as bad, or
worse, than our situation, and for the same reasons. The
modern is “nothing new”: it is the return of a very ancient
subjection and brokenness under new branding, promoted by
new concepts and justifications. If you want to see our future
look to Europe as it existed before 1600 BC, or much of the
world as it was until recently and still is….the communal life
of the longhouse with its young men dominated and broken by
the old and sclerotic, by the matriarchs, the blob and yeast
mode in human life overtaking and subjecting all higher
aspiration. Aztec “cities” with twenty morons sleeping and
eating off the floor, demagogued in the masses by blood-
hungry priests with dead eyes. It is no different if they use the
doxies of Reason and Logos to cart us off to this life.
33
A history of modern brokenness—So many different things
have been written about the evils of modernity, or the crisis of
our situation. Both on left and right many, maybe most, feel
something has gone terribly wrong. Even those who love some

aspects of the new age, like technology, look away from our
banal time and instead hope for a futuristic flourishing that is
not yet here. I’m a little tired of all this! I don’t want to just
repeat more aspersions of modernity, which many of you
already know. Most of these are footnotes or commentaries to
Nietzsche’s Prologue from Zarathustra, where he describes
the Last Man. The Last Man has been wrongly confused for
the bourgeois, though Nietzsche says it’s something much
worse. Houellebecq, whose explanations of the sexual problem
of modernity, of the incel —all of these explanations are
amazing and true, but even he is just following Nietzsche. If
you want to understand true problem of our time, you can read
that, then, and I won’t dwell on it. I want only to deal with one
particular case of domestication, brokenness, of potentially
high life that has been thwarted, to illustrate modern problem.
The peculiar “history” of how the queen develops, the modern
effeminate homosexual, is very telling. The problem of the
modern homosexual is revealing because it is the model
according to which many other kinds of higher life have been
thwarted and warped into something else. Don’t be fooled by
propagandists: the modern homo has nothing to do with
ancient “predatory bisexuality” or with the pederastic rites
found in many societies. On one hand such people as the
modern queen have always existed but on the other, there are
many specimens now who become this, who would not have
before. It is very unfortunate event in life of animal. Camille
Paglia says that the modern homosexual is the product of the
pressures of post-industrial life. Her model for this is that a
very sensitive young boy, open to aesthetic experience of all
kinds, maybe the kind of slightly neurotic and artistic boy that
a century ago would have experienced synaesthesia; such boy
is turned off by the horseplay and “rough” masculinity of his
brothers and father and other boys his age. The distancing
from this masculinity is concurrent with his becoming over-
close with his mother, idolizing the feminine: upon puberty,
the distance or fear from masculinity leads him to eroticize it,
while he turns away from women, either because of too much
familiarity, or too much awe. In this she is only half right, and

the other half of the story I discovered from an alien mind
whose teachings have been spread among some of the frogs.
His name Harro MJ, but I think this is false name. I tell some
of his ideas here as best I understood. He tells I believe his
own story, or someone he knows: he tells of how modern
world corrupted his nature through stricture and turned him
into a homo. But I think his story speaks to many others, who
didn’t turn into ghey, but who have nevertheless been
disfigured in some other way… by the same force. Now,
Paglia’s restatement of Freud is correct, but she misses an
important element of the story, which is why such a boy turns
away from the masculinity of his peers in the first place. It is
not horseplay or the roughness of male competition as such
that makes him turn away, but the utterly fake or artificial
character of such displays, usually, in our time. Such boy
perceives what his peers don’t, the conditional and entirely
dependent character of life in our age. It is not the masculinity,
the competition for status among men, the physical roughness,
that makes him turn away… but the fact that all such play is
happening in already owned space. It is this aspect of our time
that is crucial to understand. When I speak of something like
owned space, it must not remain mere word. When you
understand something: I mean you must see and feel it like
you would a landscape you know from youth, how to navigate
all its nooks, the different heights of earth, the banks of
streams, where the trees are and how it feels inside them, how
long it takes walking from this or that group of beech to the
abandoned factory, so that the map is already in your body.
This is only way to really understand something. I believe boy
like this is one of the types that sees through the charade the
lords of lies have dangled in front, the shadow-play to dazzle
the many, and he is turned off, maybe not by manliness, but
the buffoonish, deluded character of modern masculinity. The
defeated male that is turned into a peon and a neutered beast
for women and hidden masters is a terrible thing to see. The
jockeying for status, the physical fights, the adventures boys
are supposed to have in a state of nature…all of this is in
nature meant as preparation for life, for a life of conquest and

expansion. Roman teenagers of patrician class were sent
already on missions on behalf of Empire abroad. Modern adult
Western male seeks permission to watch other men playing
sports, quaff vegetable oil relish, beg for “coochie” in
simulated intercourse, masturbation with plastic on dick.
Precisely a character born for conquest, for expansion, a
precocious type of boy who seeks real development and the
real domination of the space around him, who understands in
his blood that play and manliness are to this end, precisely
such a boy will have his expectations about life crushed and
thwarted as soon as his eyes open. This may be around the age
of six or seven, but it sometimes happens earlier. Such boy
then comes to have only contempt for those among his peers
who, not seeing the subjection we are in, continue under their
delusion and accept the breaking that the lords of shadows
begin on the human spirit around this age of awakening—by
nine or ten, the “education” is almost already complete in our
time. They submit to the yoke and their sham simulated
masculinity is now a parody of the true manliness, which in a
state of ascent develops into the will to actually dominate
space around oneself, not into a caricature for the benefit of
women. But this domination is not possible when space is
already owned. This intuition of owned space comes on one
very early: with eyes open, it’s like an evil spirit inhabits
everything. I think there are many types of energetic and
perceiving boys who reach this stage, who are turned off by
the moral and biological self-castration of their conventional
peers, who sense the suffocating limitations of modern space.
The rest of this story is more particular to the boy who as
response becomes a homo or trap, and Paglia is right about
that part—masculinity rejected simply because of distance
from other boys in general, mostly as a result of a certain
native over-sensitivity. But then there is the added observation
that when, late in adolescence or some time in youth, such boy
decides he is “gay,” that is but the final act of self-
misunderstanding. The drama of his spirit is reinterpreted on
sexual terms. He has convinced himself that the feeling of
suppression and dread that had accompanied him his whole

life was because his sexual desires or “sexuality” had been
repressed by “society.” He forgets how these sexual desires
developed in the first place, that these desires themselves were
a circuitous result of the truth that dawned on him in silence,
the truth of the utter subjection and domestication of the space
in which he found himself. In becoming “gay” he believes he
is escaping that sense of primal limitation and subjection that
he felt as a small boy: he has reinterpreted his entire drama as
a maudlin story of sexuality suppressed or oppressed by
retrograde social and political norms. In this he becomes an
unwitting pawn himself of the very power that as a young boy
he had intuited to be the enemy, the great and suffocating
shadow of our time, that smothers all higher life out. The gay
is the spiritual foot-soldier of the new regime, when he is born
to be its enemy. This is the unusual part of this realization, that
some of the most sensitive and perceptive youths, those maybe
imbued with spark of inspiration and a conquering, expanding
spirit, end up becoming the vanguard of that which has
smothered and broken them. In a previous age they wouldn’t
have been gay at all in the first place. The story of such boy is
story of all higher types in our time. Not all gays are of this
origin—there is Jeffrey Dahmer, there are others. And of
course not all higher types become gay, only a tiny minority.
But all higher types in our age are afflicted by a similar drama
of the spirit—what happens later, the sexualization of this
alienation particular to this case, I use only as the most vivid
example. Now in all this you see this idea of space or territory
that is already closed and owned. And this brings up the
question of who or what this force is. I think the answer to this
problem isn’t so simple, but one feature of this new condition
in modern age is that the masters are hidden. That is even why
this condition of subjection seems so suffocating, because they
hide, and so there is no opportunity for open and manly
challenge. This problem is then to be understood through
example of a different type…and I mean that of the spook.
Vivid and instructive is the matter of the gay underworld,
which no longer really exists in our time. But in the 1950’s and
a little before then, when the system of global tyranny was

being firmly erected, it should not be a surprise from
everything that has been said, that the gay underworld was the
“negative” of the new world order, its sieve and pressure
valve. The gay underworld was part of “the remainder.” The
phenomenon of “homosexuality” in the modern world reaches
up to the most profound of political and social problem: it was
always the ghost world, the underworld left over that the
engineers of our time couldn’t manage or account for in the
erection of the Leviathan. This underworld included far more
than the gays of that time, of course: that’s the point. But the
gays formed a kind of “bulk population” that allowed an easy
bridge between this world and ours. They made it far more
permeable to others as well: if you had girlfriend, maybe artsy
girlfriend, she had ghey friend; you could go with them to
lounge of this half-world, and there would be there…maybe
two social contacts removed…there would…one of them. But
now that this world has disappeared, you have no easy way of
even knowing where to start. Its boundaries were policed, its
entry points were surveilled, but it always existed as a space of
freedom outside the pervasiveness of domestication in post-
industrial civilization. Let’s not forget, I repeat, that the “gay
underworld” was hardly just the gays, but precisely that world
penetrated by all types of deviants, perverts, whores, pimps,
impresarios, night club owners, mafia, gangsters, spooks,
intelligence services of all kinds—just see the Dark Ocean
Society and you will understand. The Dark Ocean Society of
Japan is the key to understanding all modern political and
social organization because underneath the pervasiveness of
the domestication and management of modern civilization,
underneath its superficial orderliness, there remained the
“floating world,” the free world as a still and dark ocean in
which moved monsters, including the lords and crafters of this
new civilization themselves. They still live in that world, not
in ours. Our world is the house of subjection, they live in the
estate of freedom and power. It is only that, with the relatively
large number of gays that exist, this world was much larger
than it is now, and more varied, its entry points more
penetrable. The space of night that gays created for

themselves, in which such types could at least feel they had
new opportunity to expand and act, was nuked in the 1980’s
with AIDS first of all, and then at the same time with the “gay
rights” and “gay identity” movement, through which they
came “into the open,” and became the worst and most
merciless enforcers of the global slave state. But enough about
them: you must understand! I use this as illustrative and true
example of what happens to all higher types in our time. The
vast majority don’t become gay, but the plight of the gay is the
most simple and therefore instructive example of this. Anyone
born with a will to conquest and expansion, any specimen born
to courage and the expansion of boundaries, will feel thwarted
now, will awaken at a young age to find themselves in a world
pervaded by an evil and smothering shadow that seeks to blot
out their spirit and break them. How one responds to this…
that is different. And the responses are various. Look at litter
of pups, of whatever species, some will be inquisitive, playful,
seek to experiment, to push boundaries, to leave gaze of
parents and the old, to conquer space; others will be far more
docile and will lack curiosity. The only ones who survive the
modern education “whole,” not to speak of the regime of
modern medication, are precisely those in the litter who are
born docile. And more to the point; who can look at the
beaten-down males of today and think that a boy who inside
him has the spark of conquering spirit won’t have anything but
disgust for their clownish parody of masculinity! What matters
here is which way the spirit turns, and if it can survive the
obstacle course of domestication that modern life and the
modern education imposes on the best. “Homosexuality” in
our age, in any case, is unlike any behavior in the past: as a
total phenomenon, it represents one of the characteristic ways
that some of the most unusual specimens respond to
domestication and are broken by it. Modern homosexuality is
a form of vacuum behavior and stereotypy.
34
As sad as the story of many of the modern gays is, the
story of the modern transsexual is the same in all ways, but

worse. This explains also why so many traps are obsessed with
Hegel. They know in their blood—but they misunderstand
themselves and forget who broke them. The story of the
modern transsexual is the story of our collective future.
35
Should the tyranny that has descended on our age ever
gain the power it seeks and then be challenged enough to feel
itself in danger, the mass annihilations that will be carried out
by 
homosexual, 
transsexual, 
and 
especially 
lesbian
commissars will exceed in scale and cruelty anything that has
yet happened in known history. Imagine lesbian mulatta
commissars with young Martin Sheen face and haircut
manning the future Bergen-Belsens, installations that will span
tens of miles.
36
Barbarism and Civilization—It’s funny when Westerners
defer to China or the old cities of the Near East and the Orient
as the fountains of civilization, the standards of city life:
“we’re latecomers, we were in loincloths in forest with painted
face hunting boar while they had cities and writing.” This true,
but Westerner forgets what civilization means. Less myopic
than others, but still myopic, he thinks when he hears
Chinamen lived in cities for five thousand years, that these
must be like the cities in his own history. There are cities and
cities. But what was writing? Most of it was for inventory or
the most tedious kind of national or dynastic chronicles. Lists
and lists: the kinds of passages that make the young bored
even with the Bible. The oldest part of Greek literature is from
the Iliad, the catalogue of ships: the heroes and their retinues
are recounted with much flourish and poetry, so it’s not so
boring, but is just barely saved by Homer’s artistry. But nearly
every national “writing” is like this, and most “writing” stayed
in that condition for a long time. Chinese have always lived in
houses, yes, if that’s all you mean by “civilization”; but their
history is marked by convulsions of annihilation. Just look in
their history, the Cultural Revolution is the norm: mass
extinction of millions of faceless peasants in the name of

remaking a new society. They are no hive: they ignore the
dead in the street and look away. I’ve known of ravens who
have more consideration for one of their own. Everything for
oneself, everything for personal utility: a pleasure in cruelty
toward the weak and toward animals. This is the end-result of
thousands of years of “civilization.” Don’t be fooled by the
supposed historical self-conception of such people. Many
periods of forgetfulness, when they erased and threw away
their chronicles even and totally falsified their history (small
example even today: they teach that Genghis Khan was a
Chinese general…) This true for many other civilizations.
Even religious texts: leaving aside the problem of translation,
the Koran is, as Schopenhauer claimed, a tedious book of
wretched, repetitive stupidity, with not a single new idea in it,
“the poorest form of theism.” Unfortunately this is sufficient
for the level of most people’s religious needs. Is not clear that
writing is a great advance, for much of history…its value is
questionable. Only quite late some productions of genius arise
that redeem the skill of writing. In similar way, different
societies mean quite different things by “city.” In the Orient
this has always referred to a steaming pile of humanity, with
crowded, fetid eateries, close-packed throngs wading through
shit and the filth of animals, rabbit and hen kept in cages,
abused orphans, endless drone of yelling humangs hawking
wares and spitting phlegm on street. You see this still in the
cities of the Far East. Even in Japan, that all love for its
supposed order, there is a terrible menace hanging on the
streets of Tokyo that drives too many of the good people there
to the mental asylum. The workplace is hell and transportation
system is chaotic and suffocating, it reduces everyone again to
the cipher he has always been in the Oriental city… a shadow
even in his home where the woman inhabits all the terror of
the ancient family deities. The Japanese man gets allowance
from wife, who often physically depletes him, takes his phone
allowance, his lunch money. The woman rules Vietnam, and
the faceless clerk or merchant who claws his path in the
antheap of this society is beholden to his hectoring wife like
slave. Matriarchy and anonymity are the principles of these

piles of biomass—never call them hives! The hive is noble:
the hive can be a work of beauty and order, but the city, the
city in its original form, is humanity reduced to a steaming
ratpile. In the hive the ant or bee achieves the full development
of its inborn nature as worker or warrior or queen, but who can
say this of most cities in history—do you think man stamping
papers, scheming to escape wrath of long-nailed office
autocrat with spittoon, who hawks smoked fish out of
newspapers with fingerless gloves or sells birds with clipped
wings to jeering hueman macacas, do you think such creature
is a specimen of well-turned out life? And the more depressing
possibility that, for the vast majority, such life is the
expression, the full expression of their inborn reach and wants,
still it must be the case that they were selectively bred by their
masters to this degraded and zombified form. But even the
scared and huddled ash-and-sallow-faced schemer of Saigon
or Chengdu was in his remote ancestry like the free Black Yi
who terrorized the Han as recently as a hundred years ago, or
the powerful-bodied, self-sufficient Tibetans who have made
sport of them for centuries. Existence for such life is hell,
trapped not only in a miserable society of anonymity, but in a
body bred for such a society. Still there must be a spark they
can never extinguish, that at least asks for all this to stop. Do
you understand what Buddhism is now? No, look north: to the
Manchus and other Tungus-peoples hardened in the taiga and
the Arctic, to the freedom-loving Mongols who to this day
love nothing more than to drive out into open country with no
roads and consider our cities horribly claustrophobic. Actually
in history when you look at life of true nomads who are
always on the move and in open space, they never engage in
the kind of depressive introspection and questioning of life
that you only see in settled and civilized peoples. The Buddha
became a world-denier in the city—look at his conversion,
what drove him to it! It is the injustice but above all the filth,
the disgusting suffocation of city life, the vision of life
degraded and under distress, that led him to his escape…he
said, “the home is a place of filth.” And what was this escape,
after all, but just an attempt to re-establish the freedom and

openness of the steppe, where man can once again be what he
was born to be? He thought he was opening up a steppe of the
spirit, and in the sangha, the brotherhood of disciples and
monks, he was re-creating that true secret society of the
steppe, the society natural to a man like him, the brotherhood
of warriors and the free youths! In such way you must also
understand “the West,” or actually the city of the West. The
small, orderly city of the north Italians, the German and Swiss
cities Machiavelli praises for how well-run they are, this is
entirely alien to the Orient, and indeed to all other civilized
societies that we know of. The very idea of the citizen is alien
to civilization as such. In the respect for privacy, for distance,
for property and propriety—in the small and orderly character
of the cities, in the relentless concern of the aristocracy with
biological quality, you see an attempt to mitigate the great
evils of civilization. Actually you see an attempt to reestablish
some of the character of barbaric and free life inside the city, if
only for the citizen class, or the upper class. If there can be any
defense of civilization it is this, that historically it gave a class
the full or nearly full benefits of the free life of the steppe and
forest and mountain while ridding them of some of its
inconveniences—at the price, of course, of misery for the vast
majority. In nearly all other parts of the world but the West, the
misery inside civilization was universal and the elite, such as it
was, didn’t redeem this misery: they themselves remained
servile. A city means nothing, but could even mean a
retrogression in the human type. If the only civilizations that
had existed were all like Han China, then the choice between
barbarism and civilization would be easily made in favor of
barbarism, of free Mongol life.
37
The modern city is a monstrosity, but it doesn’t yet
approach the anonymous squalor of Oriental civilization, of
default civilization. It’s a contradictory place but you see a
counter-drive even in the attempt to preserve parks. This exists
in Tokyo, in many European and European-derived cities like
Buenos Aires—its makers must have been obsessed with

preserving some piece of nature inside the city, and hired the
French to beautify it—and in non-Western cities that have
copied this way. In the arrangement of public spaces as well,
of the streets, and even of the social life, the modern city is not
entirely a reversion to the pre-modern squalor of pure
civilization, but an attempt to preserve or at least simulate a
natural space for man to move, to expand, to practice and
perfect some excellences, as limited or stunted as these may
be. In the modern world the return of pure civilization is the
slum and the shantytown. It is slowly but certainly
encroaching on the modern city as it still exists, which is in all
ways a left-over from European domination of the world, and
is by no means the form toward which life is progressing. The
future of Blade Runner is much too optimistic, and even that
in Elysium doesn’t approach the true wickedness of our fate if
nothing is done. Mohammed Atta, one of the leaders of the
9/11 plot, was an architecture student. He was deeply moved
by what had happened to Aleppo, and the corruption of
Muslim life that finds itself disoriented in the modern city, not
just in its different moral life, but in the arrangement of space
and buildings that upsets the life of the faithful. He was
reacting to the modern city as such, not necessarily to the
slum, although the expansion of modern life in the third world
is very ambiguous here; there’s always some slumification.
The cities of the Near East, of North Africa, of most of the
Muslim world and even much of the Orient, were in any case
always 
differently 
arranged 
from 
the 
West, 
having
neighborhoods closed off physically from each other, walled
compounds with inner courtyards, and in general a turning
away from public, political space, into the space of the family
and the clan. This was a result not only of the corruption of
authorities, but of an entirely different feeling of what the city
existed for in the first place. There is a confusion about what
different peoples object to in the modern world: they don’t
necessarily hate in the modern the same thing you hate in it. I
would rather ally with the leftist hipster than with China! The
Chinese will actually “appropriate” everything and pretend
they invented it.

38
Aristotle says Greeks are different from north Europeans
and the Orientals. The Asian is civilized but slavish; the
European barbarian is uncivilized, unlearned, but free. In this
formula is assumed Aristotle believed in a “balance” between
these two extremes, and that Greeks were better because they
were the “median” between these two deficient extremes.
Actually neither Aristotle’s view nor the view of the Greeks of
his time, and even later, took things quite this way. There was
no equivalence drawn between the free northern barbarian and
the slavish Asian, but the Greeks valued and respected the free
barbarian far more than the Asian. You can see this is so from
many things: as late as the Crusades, when Anna Comnena
wrote the Alexiad, she refers with some horror but also much
respect to the Western barbarians. She is in awe at their
handsomeness, their bravery and often their intelligence and
cunning. Similar praise never exists for the civilized or slavish
peoples of the Near East. The same attitude existed also in the
age of the classical Greeks. Herodotus among others expresses
much admiration for the Scythians and sees them as the
innovators of a new and magnificent way of life, the nomadic,
through which they confounded and defeated Darius and the
Persians. Very often you can read of classical Greeks who,
perched on the shores of the Black Sea, “went native” at least
for part of the year and joined the nation of the Scythians, in
admiration of their free life. The same thing happened much
less often, and usually not at all, in the Near East: there were
mercenaries, artisans, architects that worked for the Persian
king and others, but they didn’t go native in this way (the
charge, “to Medize,” referred to a political alignment taken out
of necessity, not to a cultural preference or affinity for a way
of life). The Athenians used Scythians as police in their city,
but, aside from a few very old families with claims to
Phoenician heritage, there was no equivalent use of Orientals
and Asians, except as slaves. The beauty of northern European
children is praised in antiquity very late: children of Angles
for sale are referred to as “not Angles, but angels.” Many of
the Greek heroes and gods had fair hair and blue or grey eyes,

among which, Aphrodite, Athena, Apollo, Achilles, Menelaus,
and many others; many ancient poets refer to the Dorians as a
blond race. It’s hard to believe that such idealization would
have been made for the qualities of neighboring nations that
were despised. No, from all this and more it’s clear the Greeks
admired the power and freedom of the barbarian far more than
the “civilized” way of the slave, and his false intelligence. And
the “balance” often attributed to Aristotle between these two
ways is no such thing, but a reference to what I speak of here,
that Western civilization, the European city, is unusual because
it is the attempt to preserve free and barbaric life within the
confines of the city. It’s an attempt to exalt and develop certain
tendencies of that free life that could presumably benefit from
the arts, the science, and the leisure that can only be promoted
inside a city. It’s an exception in history. And by settled city
and settled life, I mean settled with SLAVES! And let’s not
forget that the Greeks never abandoned that mobile and
nomadic life, but transposed it to the sea, as to a large extent
the Germanic peoples also always have—they’ve always been
a seafaring people. Entire Greek cities, like those of the
Phocaeans, rather than submit to Persian rule preferred to
embark their ships and move to colonies as far away as France
and Spain—Marseille was founded by them, but there were
outposts farther west as well. The Athenians were ready to do
the same to escape subjection, and like the Scythians, take to
the open sea in their sea-wagons, which in fact they did for a
while. The call of the open steppe, the freedom of the new
steppe of the seas, this never left them. It’s clear from this and
even more how much contempt they had for the civilized and
slavish life of the Asian, and how much respect and longing
they had for the life of the free barbarian. This extended in
some way even to their respect for the blaq Ethiopian, about
who Herodotus says such nice things, especially when he
compares them to the neighboring Egyptians. But in this case,
there was very little familiarity with the African, his nature too
foreign to the Greek, and there was the suspicion, supported
by Aristotle and many others, that the African and also the
Arab were too stupid to represent an admirable alternative.

Nevertheless in spirit I would say even now the European has
much more in common with the African than with the
“Asian,” meaning the inhabitant of the broad swathe of land
stretching from Han China to the Near East, that includes the
long-settled farming serf regions of the planet. I know many
dorks who fetishize IQ above all else will disagree with this.
The Orient and Asia has always been the enemy…Africa is
mostly irrelevant. The “African” may even be an ally and only
became a problem under conditions of modern mass
democracy, when he has been manipulated and stirred up by
others.
39
Some of the modern right wing is “environmentalist,” and
even beyond this, but mostly has contempt for the left Greens
and other half-and-half because they misunderstand the
problem of civilization and of technology. The problem of
modern left is they seek not to defend nature, but to blame the
West for the modern condition. And this is because the
problem is said to be technological or “civilizational” progress
as such. These people don’t understand that the rapacious life,
the buglife, is the default condition of mankind and that the
West along with a couple of others has attempted, since its
beginnings, to try mitigate the evils of “pure civilization” and
to bring the benefits of free life within civilization, as far as
this was possible. The left environmentalist is not a reliable
defender of nature: he’s “anti-racist” first and cares for nature
second. Actually the two things are incompatible. China and
India are by far the sources of the most serious obvious
pollution, which is the destruction of the world’s oceans with
plastics and garbage. The contempt for animal life is rare in
India—Schopenhauer says it’s for this reason that they easily
rejected Christianity, because they heard of the gross
mistreatment of animals in Europe of the time—but animal
cruelty and abuse is exceedingly common and the rule in
China and most of the rest of the non-European world. It is
only Indian and, today, European man that is moved by
compassion for animals, who are our brothers and sisters. The

practice of industrial agriculture is a great evil that must be
stopped, but who besides European man really cares for this?
Others seem to take a great joy in the humiliation and torture
of even cats and dogs. Furthermore it is, as is well known, the
zombi hordes of the third world that care nothing for public
and national parks and that are the ones who litter and exploit
them, often by flinging feces as they’ve long learned, being
sons of the honey badger that eats its own shit. As is well
known, 
the 
Sierra 
Club 
and 
other 
environmentalist
organizations used to oppose mass immigration, in part quietly
for this reason, but also because population increase will on its
own place unacceptable strains on nature. The populations of
Europe and Japan, under the strain of life in high population
density in the late 20th Century, chose to limit their fertility,
and there’s nothing wrong with this: it is the governments,
corrupt and under the lash of financiers dependent on
population increase, that forbad a natural retrenchment of
population. Therefore the modern left, “anti-racist,” pro-
migrant, can never really be environmentalist. But, even more,
in the promotion of the third world “primitive” (he is no such
thing) and the false belief that life there is easier on the
environment, they promote the slum, the shantytown,
“civilization,” the locust default existence of mankind. It’s true
that the non-Western man lives “closer to nature” in terms of
his material needs, but this doesn’t translate into a more
natural life or less stress on resources: he uses any excess to
breed indiscriminately and make more like himself. Any aid to
Africa or much of the rest of the third world doesn’t translate
into improved quality of life, even into improved nutrition, but
is immediately converted into more children who continue to
live at the same level of misery. The true environmentalism is
racism and has a racial foundation, and in fact the two things,
environmentalism and racism, are indistinguishable. This is
why there’s endless discussion of “global climate change,”
because it takes attention away from concrete problems that
are within our grasp to solve—the destruction of national
parks, of public spaces, of the mistreatment of animals, and
most especially of the oceans. All of these problems are

problems of race, not of the modern city as such, modern
progress, or the progress of technology. In fact, the attempt to
limit this progress and to screw back humanity or freeze it in
some supposedly pre-modern form, the attempt for example to
bring back “small communities” in the modern world, is the
greatest danger and a possible source of the most thorough-
going and totalitarian subjection.
40
The true understanding of peasants you aren’t going to get
from those modern windbags who extol their life or that of
“noble savage”; but more likely to get from Chekhov’s story
of that name. They are a wretched bunch, and locusts on the
earth. You can get a good image of them also from Kurosawa
movie like Seven Samurai. The peasant and serf, the default
state of mankind has, like animal, his nose directed toward the
earth and the ground, because it is there that the objects of
interest are found, the needs of bare life. He is far from
contemplation even of the stars, that Homer says gladden the
heart of the shepherd alone on mountain. The dwellers of the
valleys and tillers of the soil are the prototype for all the
modern “bugmen,” don’t be fooled otherwise. This is the
“frame” or worldview that turns all matter and all things into
mere utilities. It doesn’t need technology to do so, and never
has. In primitive farming societies they will immediately
execute any of the intelligent as a witch: this is still done in
Africa and there is the famous Chinese saying about how the
intelligent must be killed. This is always the case in much so-
called “primitive” life, life under the thumb of the empowered
old matriarchs and the conceptual dildoes they use to clobber
the heads of young men. What is worst about the modern
world is the reimposition of this life, which is taking place for
political and biological reasons. The problem of our time has
never been with technology as such. There is no inner working
of technology that inevitably leads to human subjection. The
tendency exists merely because, by allowing an overwhelming
increase in the numbers of the superfluous, it gives them and
those who cater to them power when it is mixed with

democracy. The left environmentalist, among many others, is
misguided because he wants more power given to such people.
He attacks precisely those elements of the modern West, of
modern technology, even of modern culture, that can mitigate
somewhat the rule of the superfluous and their destruction of
nature, including human nature. I can imagine few fates worse
than if we decided to “live closer to our means,” to retrench
and stop technological progress and innovation, to scale back
to “small, integral communities,” to bring back “traditional
forms” in our circumstance. I understand the desires of those
on the right who long for the great parts of the past, but
understand this: any such attempt in the modern world, I mean
to promote the small village, the rustic life, the modest life,
will lead not to the reestablishment of the glories of past ages,
but to the freezing of modern corruption, to its stabilization
and permanence. You will get small communities run by the
gynocracy, to suppress true manhood and youth, but this time
with the benefit of whatever modern technology is already
around. They will do so in the name of “traditional virtue.”
They will be Christian, maybe, but their Christianity will be a
cover for Marxism in one way or another. It doesn’t matter
what ideology or religion or “ideals” you give them, they will
still behave the way they’re born to. The problem of the
modern world, as also of the degradation of the environment,
isn’t technology or a way of life or an ideology, but the
ubiquity and rule of a certain kind of human…. and until this
problem is solved………
41
I don’t know if the wardens of this prison and owners of
this space are present or not, but I suspect they are. I don’t
think we live just in some impersonal emergent mechanism, a
“system” 
that 
entraps 
everyone, 
something 
like
“managerialism,” or “post-industrial ennui.” I think all of this
was consciously crafted. It’s possible much of known history
is falsified. Nietzsche among many others hinted at this. I
don’t think we can ever know who these individuals are, but I
suspect they walk among us like average men. I once knew a

woman of Rockefeller branch—and let me say, this is exactly
what I don’t mean by these hidden powers I’m talking about,
you don’t know their names—but she went to vegetable shops
or on subway without anyone knowing who she was, without
jewelry, and had only contempt for the known rich who have
to walk with retinues and bodyguards and are under constant
surveillance by media and others. What could they want, then,
you ask, if not to enjoy and show wealth? Just that, freedom
and power, that everyone else lacks. They live outside all law
and constraint, we are but the material and fodder for their
hunger. Their schemes are demented: the movie Mulholland
Drive revealed some of what they do, indirectly and with
metaphor. They have learned how to harness various kinds of
energy, for example, the kind of energy bestowed by human
attention in large numbers, and to power certain kinds of
machines with it. The attention that Hollywood gets is
received and absorbed by a machine of great power, that
amplifies it and serves some use. They founded this rite with
human sacrifice and human blood, and that is what this movie
is about. They know how to harness sexual energy, which is
why they persecuted Wilhelm Reich but stole his technology.
Trump’s family knows the secrets of Tesla. They know many
other things: science and rationalism are the “public religion”
of our time, but the rulers believe in something quite different.
The masses are dazzled by the fridge, the hairdryer, the phone:
they live drugged and hypnotized by assurances that the
wizards who produce these things are modest engineers who
live by publicly known and verified procedures, that they’re
just quiet men who master unremarkable and docile physical
forces. Their comfort is a surety of their faith in the regularity
of nature, that has taken divine fear and awe away from them.
Meanwhile the world is run by men like Erik Jan Hanussen,
or, actually, he was only a tool of others like him, but you
don’t know their names. Someone wore green gloves in Hong
Kong. They live in the realm of power and freedom.
42

Great lie of our age is that it is about the freedom of the
senses, liberation of the desires from stodgy social and moral
controls. In fact even Middle Ages man lived with more lust
for life, even more sexual lust, than the modern: he worked
less also. Most of the year there were feast days. There was the
minimum amount of work done possible to have enough crops
and to pay the taxes, that were relatively small. Most modern
men hardly have the property of the medieval freeholder.
Hygiene was bad and disease rampant, infant mortality very
high: many other problems too. Is not my favorite time. But
once you survive childhood, work is the great difficulty in life,
it’s the curse of Adam: go to small book shop in Thailand, you
find complete chaos among the books on sale there. If you ask
the owner why he doesn’t arrange alphabetically or some other
way, he will say, because would be too much work and I make
enough as it is. But in this one thing, “Merry Old England,”
for example was a place of joy and drunkenness and feasts.
They drank ale without hops, but used gruit made from heather
and other herbs: this drink they had all day, filling them with
passion for life…beer at this time was a stimulant and
aphrodisiac. They considered the water-drinker much like we
look at the dry hipster herb who stirs caffeine-free rooibos and
looks at you with dour eyes. It was the Puritans who
introduced hops, precisely to make beer bitter and unpleasant,
and to turn it from a stimulant into a soporific that kills the
sexual instinct in man. But before this, the people of England
had surely more intense sex0rz, if that’s how you measure
things. Actually it’s how you should measure things because
it’s a sign of something else. A life of great and real joy or
passion is a life receptive to certain other instincts and desires,
that also come from nature, but that the modern lords of lies
are terrified of. It is these others that they want to suppress, at
least for the laity. The sexual irritation that the many are kept
under is different from the kind of unencumbered and carefree,
passionate and demonic lust you found in premodern times,
and that you still find in pockets of the Third World. This
modern parody of lust drains all energy, that other true lust sets
the heart on fire with many other wild enthusiasms: Paglia is

wrong, they will never allow her brand of “feminism” to
flourish; it would defeat the purpose! Entire purpose of
modern education is to suppress that enthusiasm, to make you
second-guess yourself when you hear the voice of old
friends…goading you on…..And yes, they achieve this by
promoting the tedious, exhausted sexual irritation you find
among the obese, the “polyamorous,” the weirdo old
tribesmen who get off on exposing themselves to women. This
pervasive irritation blinds the many also to receptivity to these
other desires I’m talking about. “Telepathy” is public and
mythical version of something real. This is same way that
many religions teach metempsychosis because truth of
reincarnation is too impersonal and too hard to grasp. It’s not
out of the question that we are constantly receiving motions
inside the unity of things from many inanimate objects, some
possibly on the other side of the known universe, but
occasionally from people we know, trees, and many other
objects. We may have close bond on this level with individuals
related to us, even in the future, or an intimation of those that
the genius of the species intends as our mate, because it wants
the production of this or that child at this or that moment. The
most significant of these “telepathic” connections is indeed
when two such people, supremely suitable for each other on a
biological path, recognize in each other this inner intention or
striving of nature for the production of something—of course
they think it’s about something very different. In the normal
case this is almost always man and woman, for production of a
certain child, that nature wants to bring into emergence. But
on rare cases there can be other reasons for similar connection
in will, such as, two friends who are intended to achieve some
task together. “We reach out with open arms in anticipation of
satisfying our desire or delusion, meanwhile nature achieves
her secret intention”: it is so in the birth of certain children, but
also of other things. The suspicion of friendship that the “ghey
rights movement” promotes has worked to destroy this.
Women are likely to be able to receive such messages more
than others, because in them the intellect is more firmly
planted in the body and the inborn will. Many times this

means they are, more than others, slaves of utility, but it also
means they live more in the moment, less encumbered by
concepts and abstractions, have more access to direct
perception of things. They can see through many lies and can
know people’s intentions before they know what they want
themselves. Saddam Hussein was like this: he was a
transsexual in his soul. Not all women, but there are cases
where a certain turn in spirit frees their intellect from the
confusions of their drives and the chaos of their hormones, and
yet they don’t lose that rootedness in nature that is usually
harder for men to achieve. This is why the Greeks and many
other ancient peoples knew that women are more likely to be
Oracles and to know the future and also the intentions of
others (they “know” the future from innate sensation of the
intentions and the blood of others). Cassandra was such a
prophetess, and even the great seer Tiresias was said to have
turned into a woman for a while. Many shamans practice
transvestism among various peoples—fools interpret this as
“gay rights,” not seeing the cultic understanding of femininity.
The Pythia was a woman, and the ancient Germans always
consulted women before great decisions, because they could
provide a different and more direct view of things. The
modern lords of lies have alienated women from this by
promoting the hyper-conscious, talky, neurotic-obsessive
persona among urban slave women. That is a parody of the
worst kind of men. Oracles in nature are already rare enough,
and how many have been lost to us because they were misled
by the snakes who seduced her into thinking she should ape
the snappy, chatty self-consciousness of the midget
homosexual and “comedian”? They know how powerless we
are without knowledge of the future; they keep this for
themselves.
43
Many times in a new country I got so restless in small
apartment and filled with such a desire to act out that, if bars
and everything else is closed, I go to the nearest hostel and
make a nuisance of myself. I was kicked out of a number of

such places, and also out of frathouses in the past, when I told
them my theories about mind control, about the numbers in
phone books arranged in suggestive ways, about the habits of
African hunting dogs and the strength of hyena’s bite and
neck. The people liked my stories, but the staff watched me
from the side with great jealousy and wanted to “call security.”
In mall I’ve been frequently asked by sallow guard if “Sir, do
we have to call security,” because, while walking, I felt myself
grabbed with a fast spirit, and ejaculated all kinds of words in
Tourette way. I went to troll gay bars with Hitler mustache,
and outraged the patrons there with stories of how the National
Socialists started out as a gay-rights movement in a basement
in Munich, and how this is admirable. Hunger for space,
claustrophobia—the most noble phobia—isn’t “just spiritual.”
Nothing serious is ever just “of the spirit.” Of the spirit means
fake and gay—all real orientations exist only in the blood and
show themselves, not just in the higher reaches and tastes of
one’s spirit, but in daily life and daily needs. I want always to
be in center of room in front of big window when I must work,
which I hate doing. All real thoughts come only when you
walk outside, standing up, in fresh air: I knew this long before
I was made aware of it through Nietzsche, who says you
should distrust any thoughts you’ve had indoors. Add to that,
any thoughts that come into your head in the fetid miasma of
most cities. Add to that, when the whole day you’re harassed
and needled by the viciousness of others, that comes from a
vulgar desire for power displayed by secretaries, service
workers. Service workers have often tried to oppress me. Larry
David understands this problem; but he is still trying to be too
“nice,” he presents his struggle against the oppression of the
service industry as self-deprecating, self-criticism. They are
mostly vicious demons. Just today waitress came to try to take
away coffee cup, even though it had small layer on bottom, my
favorite cold layer of coffee….I told her, no I drink this, I
signaled with my hand, and still she bend over, while looking
me in the eye, trying to take, and I could see in the look in her
eye a mixture of defiance, lust, masochistic lust, a desire to
usurp, a desire to eat me alive. I had to repeat three times. I’ve

had to push customer service bitchmale against the wall, he
wouldn’t stop following me around and commenting on the
wine. I don’t pretend to be a rebirth of Theseus or Ajax, but if
any such man were born today, he’d be fast in a mental asylum
or dead. Only the small in spirit can thrive. In this way they
chip away at your spirit in a thousand ways. Traffic lights train
you to obedience like animal in cage, especially at night when
there are no other cars around. Having to be in passenger seat
while moron is driving, I couldn’t even stand this friend and
asked him if he wouldn’t mind if I jacked off while we drove
between two cities. “Yeah man, sure, go ahead no big deal…”
he agree, so I know there was nothing left in him. It’s for this
reason also that I go in the dirtiest of red light districts or enter
porn cinemas: I like to see trap injecting industrial-grade
silicon in chest, I like to hear whores trade stories how the
word “homosexual” comes from “a sexual man,” and that
homos are just hypersexualized whore-males. I believe this is
true.
44
There was night club on top of strange cinema that during
the day doubled as place of porn. I decided to go inside once
with friend, and old man farther on same row contrived so that
he got out right in front of us and brushed right by me,
grabbing my crotch. I shoved his face into the wall, and had to
push my way past security-guard with terrible breath and
goblin-like pockmarked face. There was loose vampire bat in
lobby that had flown in, but this normal. Outside on the street
as I ran looking for taxi there was black woman taking shit in
middle of road. At intersection in gray beaten up Volvo there
was a driver with no head and on seeing this I entered a state
of vertigo and fugue. Some talk  about this “madness behind
things.” The real world is very different from the one that
appears to us in waking life, but it’s not so different as to be
entirely alien or abstract or “philosophical” in the way you
might think. It’s not abstract, or made of perfect and eternal
forms, it’s not somewhere else: it’s immanent, here, and within
things, and it’s twisted. It doesn’t have any moral significance

that can be understood by us. When Heraclitus speaks of all
things being one, and all things being fire, he means this: when
this actually shows itself to you, there is a demoniac and
violent madness underlying things. The real world is similar to
the apparent, but uncanny, devilish, disordered for us. Its
hidden order, the fatal X behind things, reaches for things and
aims beyond our scope as humans: it’s why Lovecraft knew it
was true, our world is fashioned by a demiurge who is a blind,
retarded schizophrenic. Its origin and happenings and its fate
is in the play and war of the most gruesome factions, forgotten
gods…to them we’re like stowaway rats on a ship. This shows
itself most vividly in some dreams, which, if they had
continuity, we couldn’t distinguish from waking life. Some but
not all of the insane are able to see parts of this world, but
they’re all unheard prophets, and ever more so in our time…
psychiatry, a fraud, has weakened all faith in them, and of
them in themselves. Everywhere the signal is jammed.
45
I’ve always been attracted to the dirtiest and filthiest of the
Gnostic sects: the Carpocratians, and later their analogues the
Khlysty in Russia, Rasputin’s evil coven. They formed groups
of women around a great teacher and sorcerer who could drive
them into orgiastic madness: the rebirth of the Maenads! Man
who plays the wrong way with this ends up being eaten alive
like Euripides’ Pentheus (otherwise an inadequate piece). The
Jews had a parallel version, the Frankists. All of these believed
that inside us is a spark of divinity that is trapped in matter.
Since matter and this world are the work of an evil Demiurge,
the laws governing matter and human life as they appear
especially in the Bible are the laws of Satan. Therefore to free
yourself you must overturn every single one of these laws, you
must engage in every act of evil, every crime, every atrocity:
only in this way does the gate open out of the kingdom of
shadows… only this way you find Paradise and get past the
angels guarding its paths. I don’t recommend this way! Some
say much of the left is motivated by such a faith, its
secularized variety. There are, in the case at least of Frankism

some weird historical peculiarities: many of the prominent
leftist Jews, the founders of the most aggressive leftism at
least, are said by some orthodox Jews to be of Frankist origin.
This was so in the case of Brandeis; hardly the worst, but
supposedly there are many others. I myself don’t believe this,
though it should be studied. I feel a kinship to such sects, but
this not direct: I must explain. In general you can understand
Gnosticism, in all its forms, in this way: the Hebrew faith is
based in claim “saw that it was good” …the claim that the
world is crafted by a benevolent God and that matter and the
world is good. There are only a few other faiths like this: Islam
is another, and Schopenhauer claims Greek and Roman
paganism are same, although this is not the full truth. Greek
optimism is of an entirely different sort than Biblical optimism
anyway. But Hinduism and Buddhism see the world as
something you must escape, they believe in nirvana or moksa
that frees you from the cycle of rebirths. This is more normal,
and a lot more widespread in history. And this is in a sense
true since suffering so obviously outweighs its opposite: in any
individual life this is true, where moments of happiness are
rare and pass quickly. But also, if you imagine the pleasure of
an animal eating versus the pain and agony of the animal being
eaten, you can’t be fooled …you see that suffering exceeds
pleasure or happiness in this world, by many magnitudes.
Many bears, some African hunting dogs and others, they bite
out of animal before it is even dead. Best, like I said, to be
killed by jaguar that dispatches you with quick bite to the
skull! Its jaws are strong, grown to bite through turtle. I
believe it’s the most compassionate cat, but most murder in
nature isn’t like this. Houellebecq talks about how as a boy he
couldn’t stand the self-satisfied, dronelike and calm
“reasonable” voice of narrators on nature shows, that try to
obscure the worst agonies of animals, murder in blood.
According to any rational calculation, life is not worth living,
because pain far outweighs pleasure. Heavily medicated
nihilists are likely to deny this—the blessed and happy know
it’s true…but also know that reason and rationality are false.
Gnosticism is driven by the problem of suffering, or

compassion for those who suffer, and tries to absolve God of
responsibility for this state of things. Sometimes it says the
God of the Bible was put to sleep, or imprisoned himself, or
that he is bound with chains of adamantine and kept in a cage,
and that a usurper took his place. Other times it says that the
God described in Genesis isn’t the real God, but a demiurge,
and the real God sent his emissary Jesus to overturn the rule of
this demiurge. There are many variations, and some interject
not one demiurge, but ninety-nine, all to remove responsibility
from the Godhead for the creation of this world of evil. They
should have just become Buddhist or Hindu and stopped trying
to save the mythology of Canaan! Maybe in its beginnings the
Christian faith was the same as the Buddhist, and this is now
lost in the confusions of hateful sects that distort history. It’s
easy to think that this is the religion of a hopeless age, that it’s
a byproduct of the decay of the Roman Empire and the
symptom of despair or suffering. It’s much worse than that!
The problem for man as for other animal isn’t stress or
suffering, but the feeling that one can’t escape: the despair and
panic of exhaustion and entrapment. Beyond the borders of the
known inhabited world, the oikoumene, there lay uncrossable
oceans, including the great earth ocean of the steppe, and the
Sahara in the other direction. China and India were known,
and trade existed, but this was only a vague knowledge that
could have, in theory, stimulated the sense of conquest and
adventure. There were, in other words, plenty of possible
sources for the feeling that beyond the known world still
remained the unexplored. The same unknown that called the
enterprise and spirit of the Portuguese, Spanish and other
Europeans who set out on a colonial mission of world-
conquest and discovery, all of this existed in late Roman times.
But the will or spirit was not there, there was only exhaustion
on all sides, the same exhaustion that explains the pointless
history of China, India, and all long-settled farming places.
Civil wars and palace coups will always continue, but the
spirit of man is broken by habituation to an overlong
domestication, and nothing genuinely great in body or spirit
takes places again after a while. This “habituation” includes of

course those “habits of the blood,” which leads to the breeding
and overproduction of the superfluous. Once a great power
imposes domestication on its neighbors and then itself,
comforts grow, and so many are born who experience life
already at birth in an exhausted state, and who call upon
themselves the governments and religions of the exhausted
and stressed. Surely the external obstacles we face now are far
greater: outer space for us is not traversable even in theory,
and we know of nothing on the other side of empty space…
everything outside the already known seems barren. And yet, I
repeat, this kind of physical limitation isn’t the real cause of a
spiritual exhaustion that yearns for escape of some sort. It is
the very character of domestic life to present the world as an
enclosed owned space, and, although mankind adapts itself on
the whole to this condition, both biologically and culturally,
yet there remains a glimmer of the opposite tendency inside
even the lowliest. He can’t help but experience this new state
of things in late civilizations except with dread, the dread
suspicion…an uncanny suspicion….. that the world is
artificial. He begins to sense that this hothouse he lives in is
the malevolent creation of a demiurge that likes to observe our
sufferings, that He and his minions feed on them. In the
remote future, should the evil of human innovation continue
unchecked, we really will live in the world the Gnostics
feared, and that spark of vital life and energy that is the gift of
nature to all youthful peoples born from its womb, that spark
will remain entrapped in “matter wrongly configured,” matter
entirely foreign to its inborn desires and workings, but
fashioned instead for the benefit of something else. In many
ways the world we inhabit now already anticipates this living
hell of the Gnostics, and the response of those in whom the
pain of civilization and modernity is most advanced, the
transsexuals, unwittingly help to further uncouple reality from
nature, and to make our progressive domestication more
totalitarian and aggressive. And yet, for yourselves, who wish
to fight the encroaching tyranny, remember that in conditions
of crisis the “Carpocratian” option, the attraction precisely to
the criminal and deviant, can be very great …but…one here is

at the edge of the abyss. And the way you interpret the call of
this instinct…
46
I am interested in the falsification of history and possibly
of geography. I think mankind is exceedingly stupid and
wicked, you can’t trust a word you receive. I have no doubt
your religions are true, but can you be sure some vicious
faction didn’t insert itself into the hierarchy of priests some
time ago, or of religious authorities, or of book printers, and
insert all kinds of things that weren’t there to begin with? For
example, all Old Slavonic copies of the Bible in Russia used to
have heavy Gnostic interpolations. This explains the multitude
of such sects that sprung up there, including those who
castrated themselves, and others like the Duhobors who make
a mockery of the higher and noble nudity by practicing the
nudity of the deformed. In the West there were similar things:
how do you think the Cathars found such currency in north
Italy, in the Rhineland? It wasn’t just a new teaching, but very
old practices and old formulas that found a ready home among
a population long prepared to receive them. Some were pre-
Christian, while others had spread along with the early
Church, and preserved elements of early Christianity mixed in
with Manicheanism and Magianism and other even stranger
things. Why do you assume then that the main religions that
survived are not in fact forgeries? Islam could very well be
such a forgery: the Koran is a mishmash of nonsense, and
possibly was originally a Syriac Christian devotional book that
was re-edited much later. Mohammed was their name for
Christ, and the faith originally was a version of Nestorianism
that was spread by the Persian king, not by Arabs. The entire
history of Heraclius’ crusade against Persia, as of Persia’s
downfall in “battles” against Arabs may be entirely fabricated
by both sides, though of course now this lie has long been
forgotten. What historical or archaeological evidence is there
at all for the existence of a Mohammed? But do you have any
idea how speculative the conclusions drawn from archaeology
are in general? Just read, for example, the kind of “evidence”

they used to establish horse-riding on the great steppe before
1000 BC—a few, maybe not even five or six, bones that
seemed to look like bits. Life is short; rebirth as a man is
uncertain, and may happen a billion years from now: to these
pitiful liars to trust your only life? Look at Thucydides, who is
a great man and a genius of the ages: he seeks to outdo
Herodotus, and this pattern is followed throughout all
antiquity. Each great historian was setting out to outdo his
predecessor as a rival. Do you think they made some things
up? How much do you think then that the scholar, the scribe,
the vain “monk”—the “nerd” as a type—is likely to lie? They
will lie far more than you think…the nerd more than a
Thucydides is possessed by infinitely greater mendacity and
also vanity, jealousy, spite and pettiness. Don’t you think such
people, who, for the longest time in the form of the monk were
the only keepers and copiers of texts from antiquity, don’t you
think they would be willing to change the text, to add, and
even to make up entire books and authors? Corroborations
from “third sources” would be relatively easy to manufacture
as well. But anyway, Josephus uses this rivalry among the
Greek writers to cast doubt on Greek histories in general, and
in this he’s not entirely unreasonable. Of course where he’s
wrong is in supposing that the centrally-controlled archives of
the other peoples, like the Egyptians, the Babylonians, or his
own, are any more reliable. Nietzsche refers to the falsification
of the history of Israel that occurred at some time before
Josephus—and I think he was referring to the Maccabees.
There is no external record anyway of the Jews existing before
the kingdom of the Maccabees—Herodotus never mentions
them. But there is evidence that the falsification Nietzsche was
referring to is even of a later date. Much of antiquity could
have been invented by sects or orders of Christians or even
Jews, to make it look like their contrived and artificial,
utilitarian religions had some basis in human nature or were
anticipated by wise men in the past. When, in fact, the entirety
of their energy was directed toward suppressing the natural
spirit of man, the innate reverence of man for the magnificence

inside animals and inside things. In the end, nothing can be
trusted, that you can’t see and feel yourself.
47
We don’t know if all of antiquity, or maybe if large
portions of it, was entirely made up by medieval monks or by
Italian humanists in the Renaissance…or if some eccentric
scholar at Constantinople or a monk in Iberia added entire
books and passages to Plato or to others. When Nietzsche says
that Plato “studied with the Jews” in Egypt…what does he
really mean? Could it be, as some have said, that the Jews are
actually themselves a recent invention, a sect of the Arabs in
Cordoba, and that this group made up parts of Plato or of
Aristotle…or so heavily corrupted their works…perhaps
working with scattered groups of monks in Europe and with
the Vatican later? What is the Vatican—and if it didn’t exist
before, say, the year 1200, how could you be sure…?
Machiavelli mentions that St. Gregory wanted to entirely
destroy and blot out all pre-Christian culture, and that these
bearded men in black robes smashed temples in their
hysterical rages, crushed statues, burned books. How do you
really know how successful they were, or when this actually
took place?  How do you know that the legacy of the ancient
world that Machiavelli claims they preserved only out of
necessity—because they shared Latin as the same language—
wasn’t almost entirely corrupted by their “transcriptions”?
Every new form of life among mankind seeks to blot out the
memory of its predecessors, to rewrite the history, and maybe
does so literally, corrupting the texts themselves. Is there any
evidence the desultory and unfortunate “doctors of the early
Church” ever even existed? Augustine is almost surely a
complete fiction, and there never was any such man—his
pidgin “Greek” is nonsense in that area to begin with, and is
rather the makeshift Greek of the medieval monk, maybe
living somewhere in Burgundy. You don’t need to go that far
though. I’ve heard other less strange, but still wild theories:
that the New Testament was written by a Jewish woman, as a
parody of Greek tragedy. It was an effort to overturn Roman

life and power, “Roman privilege,” by means of the Passion
story—the dead god as an inversion of Greek mystery cult
surrounding Dionysos. Does this sound familiar in our own
time, when monstrous historical hoaxes…including the so-
called and entirely fake “Cold War,” during which the United
States was funding and arming the Soviet Union the whole
time? If Nietzsche believed such things, he would have never
put them under his own name or said them openly—but, could
it be, when he says that Plato is unGreek, that he really means
precisely this? Was Plato, or at least many of the works of
Plato, the invention of a Byzantine polymath, or of a
Benedictine? 
Such 
speculations 
are 
the 
opposite 
of
comforting, especially in a world where the consolations and
certainty of religion are rare. History has somewhat taken the
place that religion had, I mean to provide stability to a world
that is otherwise lost in complete confusion and chaos and
uncertainty. I want this chaos, because what I want to bring
thrives in it. The continuity of history, if not its progress, is
that last thread that secular, scientific man, unmoored in the
universe on this floating rock, the play of titanic and foreign
forces…it’s the last connection that he had to any sanity. I
want a world of psychosis, I want the end of his sanity. What if
there is no firm ground to what we receive from history, and
the continuity we think we have is actually a jumbled and
confused mess—that events from antiquity have been
confused with events from the Middle Ages, for example? I
found the suggestion of Fomenko, that the Crusades and the
Trojan War were really the same event, to be so disorienting
that I had to act out in a very vehement and stern way that day
later. At the lounge, when the bouncer asked me if “I was on
drugs” …and I pushed his forehead away from me in a gesture
of majesty and power. I was soundly beaten up by his goons in
the alley. The speculations of Anatoly Fomenko, as well as the
so-called “phantom-time hypothesis,” which claims that three
centuries have been wrongly added to our chronology…this is
small stuff. It’s very small—From these doubts I was led to
many others far more horrific. I’ve lived a wandering life, and
at times I was confused by a strange similarity between certain

street corners, the smell of this and that building that I
supposed were different, the uncanny likeness of two streets
that, years later, I can’t tell anymore which was which, or if
instead I dreamt it. I believe it needs to be investigated, for
example, if Mexico City is not in fact the same as Bangkok,
and the so-called Baja peninsula not the same as the Malay.
The similarity of dishes like mole and Thai curries only lends
further support to this hypothesis, as does the kwak’ing
language of the Oaxacans and Chiapans…it’s the same as
Laotian. I’ve heard rumors that as you go inland from Port-au-
Prince you start to see the lights of Manila, and that the
Caribbean islands are no different from the Philippines. Both
enjoy the grilled pork, the rice with cheese, delights like
spaghettis with ketchup and hot dogs or spam, and, I hear,
certain other things also. The slums of Bangkok are the same
as those of Mexico City, and Cambodia is the same as
Guatemala (Honduras is entirely fake). Thus it is said in some
corners, when Columbus came upon Cuba, it really was
Cipangu, or Japan, and he really did discover Asia. The entire
New World (and many other areas of the world also) is thus a
fraud of the first order. Shanghai can be accessed in two hours
from Manhattan by secret bullet train. And if you ask how it is
that so many travel by plane, well, it’s not so hard for there to
be an understanding among the relatively few active pilots to
keep this a secret and use circuitous routes to make flight-time
seem a lot longer. If you don’t want to go this far, remember
how they can, nevertheless, keep entire continents or islands a
secret—you’re not allowed, as far as I know, to approach the
North or South Poles, and it’s not out of the question that a
tropical refugium exists in both. There is an esteemed scholar
from Bangalore who points out that the year in the Vedas has
six months of daylight and six months of darkness.
48
But you think I’m promoting idea of “noble savage”? Do
you understand your visions of what is “noble savage” are just
a miniature over-spent China, a spiritual China on a smaller
scale? I know there no such thing as noble savage: Mark

Twain attacked the Red Man as a faithless liar and rogue.
Well, fine. That doesn’t bother me: my idea of noble and vital
power is different. But…choose whatever view of nobility you
will, it doesn’t matter, you won’t find it among primitives as a
rule. You idolize peasants. You look up to island savages
living “at one with Nature,” I ask you to see what happened to
Margaret Mead, and how the Polynesians punked her—most
of the things she wrote about their views on life, about their
sexual freedom, was nonsense they made up to make her look
foolish. In same way the fools like Gimbutas and others who
believe that mankind at some remote point lived under a
benevolent matriarchy, again, “at one with Nature,” in balance
with the needs of the soil and such: sheer nonsense.
Everywhere historians, archaeologists find what we thought
was matriarchy was really no such thing. You see this in the
Odyssey where it is clear that the right of succession belongs
to he who is husband of Penelope, and Odysseus’ son
Telemachus isn’t assured of his inheritance of the kingdom.
Local priestess of the rites of fertility, of the flowering and
blooming of the seasons of the earth, who made crops assured
to spring from the soil: priestess of the local earth goddess or
spirits— whoever married this woman was given a certain
prestige or legitimacy as king. This much is true, but it was
men who decided who she married, and they decided the
sovereignty of the kingdom as well. Everywhere you look to
find any kind of formal matriarchy you see that in reality it
was nothing of the sort, but something very much like this.
When you find polyandry as among some inhabitants of the
Himalayas, it is men sharing a woman for lack of resources or
because of some other circumstance. By what mechanism
could, after all, women rule since they are so much weaker
physically, and seem unable to politically organize without
men? But…but…there is way for them to rule. And so the
debunkers of matriarchy are correct but don’t see far enough
into social relations among primitives, and even the civilized,
to realize that matriarchy of a sort is a reality. I already spoke
before of one kind. But you find among the Chinese, the
Sicilians, that household is run by grandmother. When many

of you moderns pine for “communal living,” and talk about
inter-generational households…you seem to forget that this
would mean subjection to a strong-willed Dragon or Gorgon
lady. The modern girl, when she pines for the community of
the pre-modern extended family imagines that she gets from it
the emotional and social support of her female cousins, and a
crew of servants in the grandmothers, not the reality…which is
utter subjection to the mother-in-law. The modern southeast
Asian whose ancestors have lived in Oriental “cities” for
generations is completely beholden to his wife…read any
anthropological study written before 1970 to see the truth
about Asian social life. In Africa, the men are utterly defeated
and beholden to matriarchy in complicated ways: the women
run all food production without the help of the men, who rely
on them for the daily ration of bland sop mushed up from
grains. At times to break this monotony they seek bushmeat,
but they mostly live as farmers dependent on big-armed
woman tending messy patch of roots. The entire social life in
this area is managed through secret societies. The apparent
political power is brittle and meaningless: interlocking secret
societies, based on the manipulation of black and white magic,
are the true source of all important decisions reached in the
village and even in the cities. Women play a prominent role in
such societies, or outright rule them: there is among them a
long tradition of respect for woman as oracle, which is only
natural. The Yoruba water priestess chimping out in ecstasies
over the boa, receiving visions, this is not so different from the
Pythia. But where the Pythia had submitted to the solar and
boyish manliness of Apollo, such a conquest of the power
from under the earth never took place in Africa, nor in many
other places. And so here as elsewhere there is a kind of
matriarchy, but it works covertly, so that both the “left” and
the “right” are fooled on this point. In the end then the “left” is
more correct: the worship of the titanic powers of the earth, of
the Great Mother, is connected to a kind of matriarchy, but
where they’re wrong is in imagining that this leads to any kind
of freedom, that it represents a kind of liberation from the
strictures of modern civilization, the pain of specialization, the

submission to moral authority, the modern “alienation,” and
every other thing they like to blame. In fact everything that
you hate about modern life and that makes it into an Iron
Prison—and I agree it is a prison—represents a return of the
endless sallow night of matriarchy. It is a return in every way,
you must understand this literally! Nietzsche says that in the
modern Europe you see the reassertion of pre-Aryan modes of
life, the return of socialism, of the longhouse, of feminism,
and that this is happening also to us internally, where the
higher 
instincts 
of 
the 
spirit 
are 
being 
overtaken
physiologically by the retrograde and prehistoric. The life of
the village and of the primitive is one of utter subjection, total
domestication and total brokenness. The “matriarchy” that
does exist, and that exerts enormous influence and power in
the social and moral realm, is only the manifestation of this
brokenness of the males. Communal solidarity absorbs and
snuffs out any personal distinction or intelligence and this task
is relatively easy where it concerns the majority of the parts of
the village: the real problem becomes what to do with the
young males. In every way they represent a threat to the
established customs and the physiological torpor that benefits
the old and the women. The social problem in primitive tribes
as well as most civilized and unfree societies becomes this,
what to do with the young males, their aggression, their sexual
instincts: in every way they must be broken and subsumed for
the benefit of the tribe. This is more or less easy for the
majority, who lack life force in any significant quantity, harder
for the remainder, and where impossible—the fate of the
outcast, or, more likely, death. You fool yourself if you
imagine that “young males are needed for protection from
external threat.” In fact most societies of the settled, primitive
and as well as civilized, are more than willing to accept the
risk of submission to an alien tribe. In a given area, if many
such tribes follow this same path of self-domestication the risk
is hardly even that great in one’s own lifetime and a few
benighted, spineless “warrior” drones are sufficient to contend
against similar neighbors. But even in cases where there is
great external threat from vigorous tribes, such societies, ruled

by women, the old, and the imbeciles, are willing to rather
accept subjection to the alien than to allow freedom and
flourishing for their young men. They are right in this
calculation too: subjection to an alien force rarely means
extermination at its hands, whereas allowing their own youths
freedom and power would end their way of life for good. But
submission to the alien just often means some sporadic
taxation that used to be relatively hard to enforce: peasants are
very good at hiding stores of goods, and even fields. The
routine humiliations of subjection, the loss of honor, the rare
but occasional rapes, the loss of sovereignty means little to
such people. They are allowed to continue their communal life
unchanged under the subjection of another, and even thrive
under such subjection. They prefer it, anyway. This is the
condition of the so-called “old civilizations” of mankind, and
especially China and India. The Chinese Han faced the most
dreadful external threats from the steppe, and were frequently
conquered by a few scattered men on horseback that they
outnumbered many times over. They didn’t care: their stolid,
unchanging life as a community continued, whether it was
Jurchen or Mongol or Black Yi that preyed on them. The
Indians, once they reached their period of priestly rule and
senescence, also degenerated to this condition: they were
conquered every summer by adventurers and warlords from
the Hindu Kush and beyond. Afghanistan ruled India. But
subjection suited them. Slowly, with the patience that yeast
enjoys because time is on its side, the Chinese would wait:
“the day will come when this conqueror too will become
exhausted, his blood spent; then he will join us, the people.”
And they were right. This is the famous assimilation of
Chinese civilization, the assimilation of the exhausted and
spent. And there’s no real way to understand the Chinese other
than the reduction of the human animal to mere life: they are
not 
what 
you 
understand 
normally 
when 
you 
say
“civilization,” but rather a perpetual subject population, a
uniform and undifferentiated blob of serfdom that seeks
subjection and undermines through it. This is the rule of
matriarchy. The Indians and many others are the same. The

Chinese on many occasions preferred this path to the
alternative, of letting their own men assert themselves and
gain the sovereignty. On the brief occasion in the 15th century
when they began to have a navy, with its glimmers of freedom
and empowerment for youths, they noticed the ferment and
disorder that this brought to their society and immediately
quashed the whole project. Such societies can’t change their
condition even if they want to: the interests of mere life are too
entrenched. The way of settled life is just this then: to break
the youths from early age, to take the boys and caponize them
physically, mentally and spiritually. This happens in the
smallest tribes as well. When they become civilizations, they
look much like Han China, or the sinkhole cities of the Aztecs,
Babylonians, and others. You see here why people like Evola,
Jung, Guenon and all their followers go the wrong way. There
is only this: whether life is stunted and broken by a “tradition,”
or whether it is one of the very few, the rare exception, that
allows the ascent of life. As a rule, life is stunted and
deformed by huemans. This is why huemans are disgusting as
an animal, and must be overcome. This is the “free and
primitive life” of the noble savage, this is the “matriarchy” that
keeps its faith to nature in “sustainable” form. In fact the
society of the grass hut is hardly sustainable: such places are
rapacious of natural resources, and often vicious to animals
and vicious tyrants to people. A good parody of such a society
on a small scale is the movie The Beach. The rule of weakness
is not good but something of incredible cruelty, even
cannibalism. Cannibalism is the way of all yeast life, to which
the human animal degenerates under these conditions of
gynocracy. Cannibalism is the eternal way of those erased hue-
mans who submit themselves to the Venus Willendorf and all
“earth mammies,” because this faction of nature is a putrid evil
dripping blood from its claws and seeking the dissolution of
all higher life, spiritually and biologically, to the amorphous
muck of the primeval swamp. If you traveled in Europe around
maybe 3000 BC or so you would find wise-eyed cowlike
black-haired Neolithic matrons overseeing vast villages of
longhouses where lived the hueman animal, fifty or a hundred

to a room, with sheep and goats, wallowing in its own shit,
tilling the soil, eating those of its members deemed to be
“chosen by the gods”—anyone, man or woman, distinguished
by vital spirit—and she might even smack you on the head
with a lingam-dildo and question your privilege as a traveler.
This is the condition of most of mankind until recently, and it
is the suffocating miasma to which the modern world is fast
returning, inside and out.
But enough of this prison. I suppose you want to know of a
way out, or, at least, to hear of a different way of life?

Part Three: Men of Power, and the
Ascent of Youth
49
Life appears at its peak not in the grass hut village ruled by
nutso mammies, but in the military state. In Archaic Greece, in
Renaissance Italy and in the vast expanse of the heroic Old
Stone Age, at the middle of the Bronze Age of high chariotry,
lived men of power and magnificence in great numbers. We
are in every way their inferiors. Physically, spiritually and in
intellect they exceed us in every way. I give example: our elite
athletes, our special forces operators, are nothing compared to
them. We find Paleolithic bones, the femur, so robust that
nothing from our runners or power-lifters equals. These men
were capable of sustained speeds unimaginable today. You
know about Marathon, but not the whole story. The real
physical feat wasn’t just the soldier who ran the twenty miles
or so back to Athens to warn the people. The entire army
ranged on the beach in heavy bronze armor, facing the enemy.
After the Persians landed, the Greeks charged them from more
than a mile away. The Persians were amazed at the line of
gleaming bronze running toward them and their war cry. These
men ran a mile in very heavy armor and also carried six-foot-
plus ashen spear-spike. They drove the invaders into the sea.
And right after this great effort they marched, still in armor, all
the way back to Athens without pause, to prevent the Persians
from making an opportune landing there. I don’t think any
special military units would be able to equal this feat today,
and these were the average citizens of Athens. Still more, they
exceeded us the same way in mind and spirit: their sophists
were able to remember fifty names, and more, upon hearing
them once. Some had the gift of remote vision, that the
Rosicrucians pine for, and that the Soviet and American
intelligence services have attempted to rediscover in vain.
Here we have life at its peak. You know about their great art,
science, and literature, or think you do. But these were men of
conquest, exploration and adventure first. Aeschylus had on

his tombstone engraved that he fought at Marathon, not that he
wrote his plays. The free man is a warrior, and only a man of
war is a real man. We must look to their lives and exploits for
inspiration and anticipate with great enthusiasm that such life
will return. I’m afraid that, in the end, the examples of ancient
men of strong hand, ancient men of power, will be very
discouraging to many of you. Because you can’t easily
replicate their achievements and power in our time, and also,
many of you are actually sissies compared to them, in your
blood. But I think it’s good for all of us to remember we’re
panty-wearers compared to them. Also, while you may not be
able to emulate them in every way, because the age we live in
is one of total repression, you can still take some inspiration
from their examples, and try to live the same in some way…
try to live according to a Bronze Age Mindset. You must not
misunderstand this. This is not self-help book and I can’t help
you with how to live—no one can. I am concerned with the
subjection of life and the suffocation of vitality. I hope to show
you that things don’t need to be this way, and that you don’t
need to limit yourself to small things. Above all you must
reach for the great aim, physical and military independence.
Only the warrior is a free man. The only right government is
military government, and every other form is both hypocritical
and destructive of true freedom. You must aim high! Band
with your friends on the way of power and know that nothing
has the right to stop you, and nothing can stop you! I say this
especially to the military men and those who will become.
Some time ago I spoke with another frog about Generalissimo
Alfredo Stroessner. He was dictator of Paraguay for forty
years. He went to sleep at one in the morning and got up at 4
AM; aside from this he took a two hour siesta in the afternoon
(this is before air conditioning, and siesta is a necessity in
tropical places). The entire day he worked relentlessly for his
country and to keep down the vicious and Satanic communist
sect that would have massacred his people—but he also did
this for his own glory! The frog says to me, yes this drive is
admirable but you have to be specific: You can’t encourage
people to strive like this to succeed at World of Warcraft, or at

their career as an interior designer, there’s no honor in that. I
agree! But when you look at those ages in which life is
ascending, the great vitality of their blood is the same as the
great aim for which they reach. And although we live in the
most debased of all ages, it’s still possible, as you will see, to
break this Babylon and have the eternal fire of youth surge you
to the heights of power. In your own life you can break their
power and ascend to a chaos of joy and destruction. And in our
future I already see like faint image far on horizon of vast
ocean in violet evening—I see the islands of Hyperborea, on
the edge of this Leviathan, where we will be able to establish
new outposts and subdue this great beast from the outside.
50
Imagine a Mitt Romney, but different…a Romney who
actually was capable of acting like he looks, and was worthy
of his looks. Imagine a younger Romney who rouses the
nation to a new war, against India, through power of charisma
and speech alone. Then he leave on ship to head the armies
conquering India. But then come rumors that Mitt ran a Black
Mass Satanist dinner in New York. Also, people awaken one
day and find that someone defaced the Holocaust Museum and
the Lincoln Memorial… rumors spread that it is Mitt and his
friends, in preparation to overthrow the government. So he is
recalled from his command to stand trial. Instead of returning,
Mitt runs to Russia where he becomes a major advisor to
Putin. Soon though, he finally has to leave in a great hurry
when it is discovered he’s been banging Putin’s wife in secret.
He runs to China where, again, he miraculously becomes a
major political force and advisor, adopting Chinese customs
and language with ease. After some time he leaves China and
ends up living in Afghanistan with the tribesmen as one of
them, in one of their mud fortresses, where he is finally found
by American special forces and he goes out fighting, charging
them repeatedly with machine gun in his glorious black-and-
gold armor and Dune-like headset. Exactly such, and more,
was the life of the ancient Alcibiades from Athens. How
inconceivable! Even as versatile and flashy a man as Trump is

very far from this possibility in our time, though he at least
makes such a type somehow believable. There’s nothing like it
in almost any other era of history. Someone like Talleyrand is
famous for switching from the monarchy, to the republic, to
Napoleon, and back, being somewhat successful under
different forms of government, and that’s rare enough to make
him famous. But that was all within one country. Alcibiades’
achievement is made all the more amazing by the fact that
different cultures at that time were actually different, their
ways of life entirely alien to one another, and yet he excelled
everywhere. I believe this is because in Athens, where he grew
up, he picked the god of erotic passion as his patron. He was
very beautiful youth, admired and pursued by all the men and
women. He rejected the advances of the Pelasgian pedo-
pervert Socrates, a story that Plato then inverted and twisted
like the lying cunt and Phoenician-asskisser that he was.
Alcibiades excelled in athletics and at skrewl he refused to
play the flute because it made your cheeks look puffed up and
ridiculous. Other boys followed him, considering that the harp
is noble, but playing the flute in music is something for slaves
and cocksuckers. As he grew in power, his shield had Eros
with a thunderbolt on it, and this scandalized the older men. In
such way he showed that he was a disciple of the irrepressible
life force, a devotee of the young god of sexual passion and
total destruction; he showed that no law or word of man would
stand in his way! In the beginning was the word?? NO! In the
beginning was the demonic fire that bursts out in men like
Alcibiades and lays low the cities of men and exposes all their
nonsense! Such men are sent by nature to chastise us and be
our Nemesis. They are the great cleansing. His story is told by
Thucydides and Plutarch, though you must know the latter is a
famous liar. But I think there must be someone as colorful as
Alcibiades among you.
51
The mystery of rigor mortis is very revealing! Why is dead
flesh rigid? But study was made where they put dead rigid
flesh into bath of ATP, the master of energy for cells, and the

muscles softened and relaxed. The physiologically energetic
state is the relaxed state. Flesh that is either rigid or loose is
spent, but energetic biomatter vibrates in a ready repose: you
see in the glowing skin of very healthy young people this
relaxed suppleness in flesh, like Pietro Boselli. I’ve written
letter to him, to ask him to allow dozens of nubile women to
touch his soft, glowing, full and rubbery-like vibrating skin, all
in public. The modern world exhausts and in doing so it makes
everything rigid or turns it into a diffuse blob. Physiologically
it promotes the stressors, estrogen, serotonin, hyperventilation,
over-excitation, the hallmarks of energetic exhaustion. Loss of
structure, form and differentiation follows, which was the
intention. There follows on this also a spiritual and intellectual
rigidity, the orientation of the ideologue, of the social activist,
but also of all our intellectual class right and left, as of those
who work in the corporate world and in most of the military.
They’re stiff and constrained because, in short, they live in
utter fear, fear that they will lose something. They have very
little to lose, but they live in this fear anyway and this is why
when there is a question of potential gain or, worse for them,
potential loss, they react with desperation, they freeze in terror
and hyperventilate. Our politicians are all like this, and quiver
in fear of the spanking hand. Everyone was already so tired of
their robotic platitudes, that they repeat out of timidity and
because they’re all owned; which is why a man like Trump,
who seems not to care, and to find joy in this flouting and
energy in this outrageous loosening—he seduces. The modern
world is a killjoy, in short. But the ancient Greeks were quite
different, and different also from the over-serious stuffy men
with English accents who play them in period dramas. What
they admired was a carelessness and freedom from constraint
that would shock us, and that upsets especially the dour leftist
and the conservative role-player. There was a Hippocleides
from Athens, said to be one of the most beautiful youths:
Herodotus tells this famous story of a man admired by all the
world of the time. He went, with dozens of other youths from
various Greek cities, to try to marry the daughter of a very
important and rich autocrat in Sicily. This man decided to test

out the suitors, to find which would be the best husband for his
daughter: he put them up for a time, treating them with lavish
parties while he tested them in feats of athletics, wit,
conversation, and other abilities. It’s a sign of this people’s
greatness that marriages weren’t conceived purely as political
or financial alliances, but that their aristocracy paid attention
to biological quality in pairings. Very few nations have the
freedom from the fear I speak of; only a few peoples have had
the sense to raise their snouts from the ground, look to the
stars, and consider something other than the utility of
immediate advantage in marriage and children. The way our
own elite today marries and pairs off, by the way, is anything
but “eugenic”: two over-the-hill spent people in their thirties
marrying for “practical” reasons…this doesn’t give rise to
strong children. The bodies of middle-aged people nauseate
me, and I assure you, they bring nausea to nature as well. In
any case, Hippocleides was becoming the favorite of the
father, for all his great qualities, his illustrious lineage, his
looks and his charm in conversation. At the last party,
however, Hippocleides got drunk and decided to start dancing
on the table. Then he started to dance upside down, on his
arms, moving his legs around! Well, you know that men then
didn’t wear the ridiculous constraining clothmo clothes we
wear today, such as pants, so the father was offended at the
show. He said, “Hippocleides you have just danced yourself
out of a marriage” …but the answer was “Hippocleides
doesn’t care.” In this one phrase you have the whole attitude of
this beautiful, reckless piratical aristocracy that colonized and
conquered their known world. It’s an attitude that upsets all the
moralfags of our time, of the left and right. Hippocleides went
there to have a good time, to display and use his powers and
excellences and biological superiority—but these two things
are the same! He didn’t care about the gain or loss of a wife.
He didn’t go to act like a meek, beaten male ready to dance to
some sclerotic’s tune. He was as careless of his own property
as of others’—this is what Tacitus says also about the most
noble men among the Germanic tribes, who lived only for the
joy of war and battle. This is what the great among the Greeks

admired. Another story shows you the same thing: it is also the
attitude of Diogenes the Cynic. When Alexander the Great
came before his bathtub and asked him what he would want
most of all in the world, Diogenes told him to get out of the
way, stop blocking the sun…he was just trying to catch some
rays! Now compare that to one of our slavish intellectuals and
philosophers, and how their meager spirits would huff and puff
at the approach of even a mid-level constipated bureaucrat—
how distinguished! The honor! Alexander said that if he had
not been Alexander, he would wish to have been Diogenes. I
don’t know if I can recommend for you to be like Diogenes or
Hippocleides. It’s hard, maybe you have to be born that way. I
can tell you it’s a better thing to aspire to, divine carelessness
that comes from embracing the life force, and that this is what
this great people loved. Anything truly great must have some
of this divine carelessness. Didn’t the Christians also believe
in “give us but our daily bread”—implying that this is enough
and you shouldn’t worry about anything else, even for the
week? Nietzsche say good things about poverty, independence,
and being of good cheer. And these were very poor men: but
the sons of God need nothing more!
52
Schopenhauer explains the carelessness and joyful frivolity
of women by the fact that they live in and for the genius of the
species. Although unconscious of it, they are full of its
boundless aims that reach far beyond the individual, with his
petty anxieties and cares: the coming of the next generation is
the most serious matter. They live in the species. In them the
species rejuvenates itself. It goes without saying I’m talking of
women in the best case, and most specimens are botched. Why
are they botched though? They’ve been taught to hate their
own natures and instincts, and in some cases these instincts
have been warped or BUTTHEXXED into something else:
they’ve been as a wit recently put it Bernankefied up the ass.
Modern women have given up this great advantage, so they
can become neurotic copies of gay desk-workers. They’ve
abandoned the great power endowed in their blood. If you

don’t believe me, remember a carrier pigeon that knows the
way…surely he would lose his way if he saw a map and had to
think about it. What comes from the blood is best. But it’s hard
to hear this call of instinct today, because you’re taught to
distrust it. Abandoning yourself to instinct, once one has a
discipline and practice through the body, a man can pass over
a chasm on a tightrope with a sure step: the left talks much
about letting loose, about no longer being repressed. If they
only understood what this really meant! I will show you men
who really didn’t have any hangups, who weren’t repressed at
all. One name was Clearchus, and he was a Spartan general.
He was sent by Sparta to city of Byzantium by mouth of Black
Sea. They had asked for help. He came there as military
advisor, but soon no longer answered to Sparta: he used his
power and contrived  to invite the prominent men, the senators
and the rich of the city to a meeting where they were then
hung by the neck. He took their property and took the prize of
sovereignty in this place! After Sparta sent an army to
dislodge him, he put up a great resistance in difficult battle but
was defeated. Then Clearchus managed to escape while the
city was besieged; by night he sneaked away in a ship with the
treasure, from a neighboring city that he had also taken over.
Eventually he fled to Persia. But in Persia he didn’t just enjoy
his riches, which he had won by the power of his hand. This
man was possessed by the passion for war and adventure. He
put out a call for many mercenaries from all over the Greek
world, and led this army through many bold enterprises in the
wilds of Thrace and the middle of the Persian Empire where,
however, he died because of treachery—here he was
careless…you must be careful and know how to use the fox as
well as the lion in you! I tell you of another man, praised by
Machiavelli as a guide for life, a kind of life coach. He talks
about a man, Agathocles, from the ancient city Syracuse, a
Greek city in Sicily. This man rose from humble beginnings,
through the ranks of the army, because of his great bravery in
battle and his astute mind planning stratagems and ambush.
Eventually he was appointed top general in the city where,
again, totally uninhibited and unencumbered, he invited the

full senate and all the notables to a meeting, where his soldiers
killed them all. He took the prize of power in this city. Then
with many struggles he defeated the Carthaginians who were
harassing the Greeks in Sicily, by landing in Africa and giving
them bloody nose. He ruled securely and in great glory. I tell
you these stories because they show the lives of two men who
were similar, who knew how to really let loose, who weren’t
held back by petty inhibitions. These are men who really knew
how to enjoy their freedom, and who weren’t limited by the
opinions of others. What was slogan of last decade in
America? Yes you can! This is slogan of last decade in
America, at least, and I see no reason why you shouldn’t take
this idea to its conclusions—after all, no one of the very moral
wise men who rule that country saw anything wrong with that
slogan. Surely they must want you to have “internalized” it.
Please remember that these small people like Bill Gates,
Zuckerface, and Bezos are entirely dependent men. They can’t
really do with their wealth what you think they can…for
example, they could never just kill a man and take his wife,
but even the ruler of the smallest African country has this
power, this true wealth. When your happiness and wealth
depends on the force of arms of another, you’re not really your
own man…nor can you enjoy the greatest delights in life.
Clearchus and Agathocles knew this: they show you one of the
ways out; they’re really authentic men who went their own
way! Yes you can!
53
The pirate and the fortress— “Work was never pleasure for
me, nor homekeeping thrift, which feeds good children. But to
me oared ships were pleasure, and war, and well-glinted spears
and arrow.” So speaks Odysseus, playing the pirate. This is
motto and life of the pirate. Do you understand what pirate is?
Many times I’m asked, why the Bronze Age? Because it’s the
heroic age you see in Iliad and Odyssey, yes, but don’t forget
what hero really means. Thucydides says the men of that time
enjoyed piracy, and saw nothing wrong with it, and this is true.
And what is the pirate but the original form of the free man

and of all ascending life! How pathetic, when you are told now
about “living life,” or “having a life”—these people know
nothing about what true life means. Compare the intensity of
Alcibiades, that super-pirate, or of what I am about to describe
here, to the “life” you’re encouraged to “have” today. How
worthless the vaunting of these anxious creatures who live on
pharmaceuticals, cheap wine, the rancid fart-fumes of status
and approval they beg from each other. Schopenhauer says
that at some point in the past all animals were herbivores, but
then some species decided to take its own life in its jaws, to
risk itself, and with great daring become a beast of prey, living
off the hunt. The predator is always the more intelligent
animal. In every decision to become a hunter or pirate, a man
or a people is showing great daring and embarking on great
freedom. Hero is not slave to the many, who sacrifices himself
for them; the common man is awed by this kind of “sacrifice,”
because they would never do this for themselves or others. But
this is hero reduced to faithful dog. Wolf seeks not to
“sacrifice” anything, but to discharge its powers over territory.
We take the wolves and lions and leopards from among us
when pups and break them with false ideas, vicious
conditioning, and lately, drugs that would have lobotomized a
da Vinci, an Alexander, a Frederick the Great out of existence
in his youth. Then the energy that remains to them is
channeled into mindless work for money. Labor and
commerce are the ways to subject you to mere life and its
preservation: when the superior are corrupted to a life of work
and finance, they slowly move for their own destruction in the
long run. I could say leisure is the source of all great things.
The preservation of life is tedious; freedom from its demands
is needed for all high science, art, and literature as well, and
also all beautiful living, all adventures, all development of
your body to the heights of beauty. One of the reasons the
modern world has no great culture is because the sons of the
rich have such bad conscience about not working, they all
strive the same as others to climb on top of each other in
normie jobs. Just fifty years ago most used to list “sportsman”
as their main profession; that was in a recent time with slightly

more beauty and more art. But…but…it is wrong to look at
this aspect of life, because it assumes we have more familiarity
with it than we do. It’s not just that we don’t “deserve” to have
a higher culture, although it’s that as well, but that the purpose
of such a thing is completely alien to us. From the point of
view of real culture and refinement we’re as barbaric as the
most obscure herd of the Khwarezm where the women scratch
their pubes in public…we’re just more tame and insipid than
they were. So when I mention leisure, don’t imagine I mean by
it what you mean by it. It’s not just leisure, you don’t need just
leisure for higher life, but specifically leisure for preparation
for war. To escape the subjection of our time, you can’t really
look to science or art any longer: you have forgotten their
purpose. They’ve been defanged and almost all participation in
these today amounts to a kind of cargo-cultism. Who can even
think of a true scientist or artist among us? I think there is
maybe a century since one existed. Just see how Cellini crafted
his Perseus, in what frame of mind he was, and how foreign
this is from our “artist” diddlers. Paglia says the artist is an
obsessive, with a mind close to that of a stalker or serial killer,
and she is right: look at monomania of Newton, or character of
people like Balzac or Baudelaire. Violent Spergs and
obsessives. Our diddlers are diddlers because they lack all
intensity and all faith in themselves and what they do. They’re
not even nihilists, they lack all conviction in nihilism too: they
just lack intensity, they’re pissed dry. This is why in this book
I don’t promote for you the life of the scientist, or artist, or
writer, because in our age these degenerate to hobbies and
ways to pass the time, and there’s no value in this. People who
promote these things, without really having a reason to, are
just doing this to make you harmless and to advertise to others
in media or elsewhere that, they too, are harmless. What past
ages understood by leisure is very different from what we
understand. Should robots relieve mankind of labor, there
won’t be any flowering of the intellect or the arts or sciences.
It’s not enough not be free from work, because the retired and
the NEET’s are like this, as well as most academics and many
others, but all do nothing that’s worthwhile. They’ve been

reduced to a constrained and dependent state, and this is the
problem. Constrained and dependent people don’t have real
thoughts: for same reason that nations without manufacturing
don’t really understand anymore what “innovation” and
invention was for in the first place. So our science and
technology too is just more diddling. Cervantes completed
Don Quixote while in jail, Spinoza was a lens-grinder,
Diogenes was homeless, and many other great things were
done by people who were poorer or in direr straits materially
than people today. And yet one can’t deny that the life of the
average American is that of an overworked, over-stressed
slave: but the rest that would come from relieving him of that
would be just that, simple rest, if it doesn’t also come with
manliness and sovereignty. There is no substitute for freedom
and power—not even the feeling of freedom of power is a
substitute for the real thing. The pirate, the true warrior—not
the modern soldier in subjection to a high brass eunuch—is the
only free man, and it is this freedom, the primal freedom of the
Bronze Age that some must recapture before anything else can
be done. Listen to what Tacitus says of the ancient Germans:
they preferred to win through battle the things of life, and
considered it mean and petty to work the land and sweat and
toil rather than to get their living by their spears and by risking
their blood. They otherwise spent much of their time in feasts
and idleness. The noblest youths among them, if their tribe
was at peace, would go to other tribes to seek out wars,
because lack of adventure was odious to their race, and only
through risking blood did they win distinction. This was also
attitude of the medieval knight, the chevalier, the Rittern, the
riders who considered the life of the serf, of the community, to
be mean and dirty, worthy of slaves and low-castes and
women: they were always ready to ride away to new things
and new adventures of glory and danger. So you see, it’s not
enough to say “such people were freed from caring for the
necessities of life; they had leisure.” It was leisure of a very
specific type. The Roman aristocracy, as Nietzsche says, had
the motto otium et bellum, leisure and war, these being the
only right ways of life for a man of power and freedom. In

Celine’s Journey to the End of the Night I think he says at one
point that his landlady, otherwise a modest woman, had an
aristocratic contempt for labor; this was but an idle vestige and
he makes fun of it. By his time, the last flower of the Aryan
aristocracy had been extinguished, as Nietzsche says: in
French Revolution, a mass revolt of racial slaves that remade
Europe and took it on the downward path. Then there was
another peripheral aboriginal revolt in 1917, that plunged
Europe into a civil war from which it still hasn’t recovered.
But in Celine’s book the main character, in his restless seeking
in this trash world…he was looking for that hidden key, the
true freedom into the expanse of open space that he could
conquer. Where to find the frontier? There are many places,
but path is not easy. In the nations, leisure from the slave state
must be secured, and this leisure must immediately be used in
preparation for war. In Greek city the man of power spent his
time in the hunt, at the gymnasium, in the study of military
history and strategy, in every way making himself ready for
war. Many think of the Greek age, when they think of its spirit,
they think of a kind of solidarity and soldierly order quite
different from what I talk about here…they think of the line of
hoplites, and their discipline. They think of this age as one
where the individual subsumed himself to the city and its laws,
to the discipline of the ranks: and they connect this seeming
egalitarianism to the practice of democracy in our time. In this
way they want to flatter themselves. Modern man is then
called on to make a similar “sacrifice,” and blamed for his
selfishness. This is confused. In beginning the hoplite, the man
who fought with heavy round shield, tall spike, and heavy
armor, he did not come as a “tool” of the republic or a
democracy, the way modern soldiers are tools of the slave
state. If you want to see what the spirit of the Bronze Age is,
you look to ancient drinking song, at the mess halls of Crete
and Sparta: “This is my wealth: my spear and my shield. With
this I trample sweet wine from the vine. With this I am called
master of serfs.  Those who do not dare to have spear and
sword, and fine leather shield to protect skin, all cower at my
knee and submit, calling me master and great king.” This was

real song: a popular drinking song among the ruling men. Such
formed small companies of adventurers who, early on, took
over the state away from the mounted aristocracy—themselves
equally piratical predators. Some time after they took over a
state and established themselves as its rulers, they then
“submitted” themselves to  the rigors and discipline of a strict
training program. But only in the sense that an athlete enters
training in a team, specifically for making himself strong and
ready for a task, and never losing sight of that specific task.
When we see the Greek cities at their heights in the classical
era for which we know this culture, ruled either by
aristocracies or in some cases democracies, we see cities
where such men have taken over and built a state for
themselves, and for the purposes of training for battle and
supremacy in battle. That same haughtiness and lust for
physical power that you see in the song, that never left them.
In the case of democracy the only difference is that the sailors
are added also to the ruling assembly of armed men. And you
can understand then the meaning of this ancient “public-
spiritedness,” which isn’t that at all, but free men accepting the
rigors of training together so they can preserve their freedom
by force against equally haughty and hostile outsiders and
against racial subordinates at home. Any “racial” unity of the
Greeks was therefore only the organic unity of culture or
language, but never became political: such people would never
tolerate losing the sovereignty in the states they and their
recent ancestors had established to protect their freedom and
space to move. But to draw any parallels to our time is absurd:
these men would have never submitted to abstractions like
“human rights,” or “equality,” or “the people” as some kind of
amorphous entity encompassing the inhabitants of the territory
or city in general. They would have rightly seen this as pure
slavery, which is our condition today: no real man would ever
accept the legitimacy of such an entity, which for all practical
purposes means you must, for entirely imaginary reasons,
defer to the opinion of slaves, aliens, fat childless women, and
others who have no share in the actual physical power. How is
it possible for all to have an equal share in the state and a full

demand on its resources, when they in fact possess no actual
physical force: and if you think this question through, you will
understand also the nature of our subjection in this time.
Because it is not these people who are at fault, but a hidden
power that uses them as a pretext. Modern “democracy” is
totalitarian and vicious, and tries to subject the best to the rule
of the heaps of biological refuse and most especially to the
rule of those who can stir them up. The military men who
constitute its external defense and its internal police forces
should in principle never accept this condition. That they do is
a great question mark: how is it possible? To what end, and
how did they agree to this? What’s in it for them? The ancient
life that I describe here, the Bronze Age mindset, is one of
complete freedom and power.
There is a hidden path for you also that remains…behind
the marketplace, it begins in the thickets of small woods….it
winds up many steep paths toward the high mountain air, to
life in the ascent, uncorrupted by the miasma of the yeast man
and the toilets in the river valleys….the life on Jason’s Argo
can be reclaimed…and by some few in the modern world, it
has been….
54
Greek Friendship—You think maybe I promote the
ruthlessness of a machine politician with tuna-stained brown
sportcoat, or a petty office intriguer, or catty interior designer
with upward lilting voice who backstabs his colleagues to get
contract. Fools, you think I’m here to promote a “way of life”
or morality! No principles or ideas are of any use today, all
will be retooled and taken over by people like these. Self-help
is completely useless, and not what this book is about: rather, I
would like most to go toward self-destruction and to be rid of
them. I only care about very few who, being constrained in
their predatory nature by this open-air zoo, must look to the
past to understand what is possible. I want to give
encouragement to some who are a certain way, in their blood,
and to encourage them to become the purifying hand of nature.
Among your instincts you will find the longing for strong

friendships, that the modern evil tries to snuff out. And they
have good reason to try this, because every great thing in the
past was done through strong friendships between two men, or
brotherhoods of men, and this includes all great political
things, all acts of political freedom and power. The modern
zoo wants you instead to be a weak and isolated “individual.”
In most Greek cities there were the aristocratic clubs or
fraternities, which were always places of great plans, great
ideas and spiritual ferment. Here were made great political
plans, plans of colonization and exploration of new lands and
new cities, plans of conquest, actions against the designs of
tyrants and plebs. Where is your bulwark today against
Babylon, when all this has been made illegal for you? In life of
Cellini you see how different is a real free man: when insulted,
or when one of his friends or family is hurt, he gathers fifty
bravos for a raid on the enemy, something impossible in our
states today, not only because of the immense power of the
evil that suffocates, but also because you have no such friends
who could or would help you. A brotherhood of men in this
form is the foundation of all higher life in general: there is a
certain madness, an enthusiasm that exists also in a
community of true scientists or artists, that follows this same
pattern. It is totally forbidden in our time: it’s totally absent in
universities, which is where science has been sequestered. But
what fate can science have here? Everything in corporate labs,
in universities, as in government labs, and at the military and
intelligence facilities that still carry out some scientific tasks…
everything militates to crush the spirit of science. The
dedication, severity, focus and enthusiasm necessary to sustain
true scientific enterprise are forbidden because they make
women and weaklings uncomfortable: the presence of
“lactation rooms,” and an environment where such rooms
could even be built…the suppression of vigorous debate, the
promotion of an “unhostile environment” of petty chitchat and
chumminess, the subjection of scientists to administrators,
human resources cunts with fibromyalgia, to the crushing
banality of everydayness, all of this reduces the young
scientist to domestic muck again and destroys his aspirations

and will. The assault is very heavy in Silicon Valley and other
holdouts of research as well where, however, there wasn’t any
serious innovation being done in the first place: already
technology had been reduced to the development of dick pic
apps for adolescents. Science has long ago ceased and been
castrated…  Will it be born again? The cleansing barbarism
that I talk about here must first sweep the world: no science is
possible any longer, nor anything else, in a place where all
spheres of life have been submerged into the great mother of
the Yeast. But this isn’t really about science or art, I say again,
you’re very far from understanding what those are even
supposed to do in the first place. Do you know how for Greek
all higher aspirations went into strong friendship between two
men who together dedicated themselves to a higher task? In
Thebes, Epaminondas and Pelopidas reformed the state, and
established a democracy based on the Pythagorean sect—that
last part not important. They believed in some peculiar things,
like reincarnation, the veneration of the “left side” and also of
beans and other legumes, which I don’t understand so well.
But it was they who established the famous “Sacred Band,”
the elite military unit that broke the power of Sparta. This
group was formed of close friends, and you will always have
too much love and compassion for a real friend to waiver in
courage in front of him—but I doubt you understand what
such friendship means or that you ever had such friend! In
Athens the two friends Harmodius and Aristogeiton put down
the tyranny through their schemes and their bravery: this is,
you know, why all tyrants and totalitarians are suspicious of
strong friendships between men. Most of all this is feared by
the middle-aged lesbos and defectives that are used as guards
by our prison-states. And yes, I know the rumors that these
friendships were sexual, but I believe this is misunderstanding
and exaggeration promoted by the homonerds of our time, for
reasons I will explain later. The model for all such friendships
was that between Achilles and Patroclus: Homer never hints
such friendship was sexual. It is only out of the poverty of our
imagination that we think it was, because we can’t conceive of
such intense love between friends without some carnal or

material benefit in play. It was out of his friendship for
Patroclus that Achilles embarked on his great rampage: it was
for the sake of his friend that he would not tolerate living a
long and inglorious life at home…he chose instead a short and
glorious one, and a violent death full of promise and beauty.
Friends can spur you to this! How shameful to drag out life
like a dog and die overseen by strangers in a hospital, who
hate you, rather than to die in the prime of your youth, for the
sake of your friend, and to leave behind a beautiful corpse!
The original form for all this was the divine pair of
charioteers: Castor and Pollux, or for the Aryans it was the
Ashvin twins, and for the Saxons it was Horst and Hengist, the
pair of the chariot driver and the archer—do you understand
this is the real root of all the higher aspirations of Europe? The
charioteers who took over Europe around 1500 BC depended
on this close bond between two men for its military
organization; and probably this people itself had its ultimate
origins in friendships of this kind. The Spartan state, in any
case, entirely depended in its education of youth on this
pairing of two friends, as knight and squire. It was this
conquering aristocracy that really made Europe stand out from
the morass that the rest of the world has always been stuck
in… And for the Greeks, and all great men of the Bronze Age
and not just the Greeks, friendship wasn’t just a way to
“temper” the lust for power and adventure that some of you
will surely embrace, but an absolute prerequisite for it. It is
most of all not a duty. Friendship is a social relation of a kind
that is beyond all “ethics,” you see, and if you ever think of it
in terms of ethics you misunderstand it. It is a great pleasure
between two, very different from sexual pleasure between man
and woman, but of the same species, in that it is pleasant, and
never feels like “ethics,” which is for cows. There have been a
few attempts in our age to replenish this form of friendship,
for example Montaigne’s famous essay. There have been other
attempts as well, you find some nice words on friendship in
Nietzsche in Zarathustra, and then most of all there are the
modern scouting movements, that come from Germany and
from this same spirit. The first movement like this was called

the Wandervogel, but there were various others, all based on
the experience of nature, the promotion of camaraderie and of
nationalism. This included the Jewish youth guard movements
that became Zionists, the Boy Scouts and others in America of
course. Among the Jews, the promotion of this kind of
camaraderie and friendship was a great miracle in the early
20th Century, because it so much went against their culture of
the cramped shtetl, of nerds dominated by women and old
people and by fear. It was a great act of self-overcoming for
them, and many are right that in some sense the creation of
Israel is the most “anti-Semitic” act ever conceived. It is, in
any case, a great model for others to show that reestablishment
of antiquity is fully possible, although there is no real reason
why Americans or Europeans should have any regard for the
welfare of this country. In their case too, however, by our time
that spirit of piracy is long gone, and they’ve gone so soft that
on the streets of Tel Aviv you have Yemeni “Jewish” bluegums
with Rasta style feeling up Ashkenazi girls, and in general a
feeling of torpor. The condition of other modern nations is
worse. In our time friendship is made illegal between boys in
school, real fraternities are for all purposes banned, and the
scouting movements are forced to accept women—and women
are destructive entirely of any great friendship. In private life,
friendship among isolated and defeated modern males is
unheard of. Men are deluded into thinking their wife can also
be their best friend (and this, of course, also makes their wives
lose respect for them). Then also so many are rightly afraid of
the way such relations have been sexualized between men and
are never sure if a prospective friend has sexual intentions…at
the same time as all this goes on, gays act out a domesticized
and castrated parody of friendship. Where to recover true
friendship then? In this case though, more than in others, how
could they stop you, if you only learned to listen to instinct
and follow the pleasure of desires? There’s nothing in
principle that the state can do to stop you, if you should give
yourself over to real friendship. All of the things I’ve said are
a kind of conditioning, a very strong conditioning, but it’s all a
form of psychological control that should in principle be easy

to break. All you need to do is give in to desire for great
things. The true foundation of the Bronze Age, of the age of
great adventures…such a thing is a matter of the blood and
spirit and for those few among you who are suited to it, it
should be as easy to recover as the carelessness that comes
from filling yourself with the fire of the life-force. You must
only embrace your own instincts with abandon and understand
that in common dedication to a higher cause, a great friend is
invaluable because you spur each other on and keep guard on
each other in the mission.
55
Superman mindset—inside every noble Greek was an
unquenchable lust for power, and this means power to become
lord over life and death in your state. It’s hard to understand
what this means from looking around today, because there’s
nothing like it from the big examples you might have heard.
Many of you might think of dictators in North Korea or some
public lavatory of the world, or of the great total states of the
last century, but you’d be wrong. These men weren’t really
free or powerful, in many ways they were hostage to their own
security services. Someone like Stalin was trapped in a stream
of events where his freedom to operate existed only in the
realm of murder, and murder alone, and any small step outside
of this would mean his doom. Ideology is so tiresome! These
are “systems” of control that call on the mobilization of the
entire society; and the demands of this control far outweigh
the capabilities of a single man. In a monarchy he could
delegate these tasks to ministers and concern himself with
other projects, but someone like Stalin or Mao can’t really do
that. You must understand that all true greatness is parasitic on
matter, for example the brain and nervous system are parasitic
on the body: for anything good to happen the capacity of the
hegemon must exceed the demands made on it for attention,
management and control. The analogy here would be a body
with the lower organs so large and powerful, their demands for
control so overwhelming, that the brain would be barely equal
to the task and would remain entirely in their service, although

ruling or tyrannizing over them. That is the kind of “modern
dictator” you know about. And the types of men that are
drawn into this today are also quite different, they are the kind
of ideological martinet you meet every day among those who
are “public spirited” and into “public service.” It’s a kind of
very aggressive schoolmarm type. This is a lower kind of
creature. What I’m talking about is entirely different from
public service, but seeks to live like a parasite on the state and
on the substance of its various factions, to pursue quite
different interests and desires. They have interests alien to
yours. In the modern world this condition isn’t approached by
dictators of totalitarian states, but certain others I will describe
soon. In fact the great totalitarian states you know about
weren’t that different from our own, or the “liberal
democracies”: we live in the same kind of state, only that it is
more prosperous and the viciousness of the power is indirect
and hidden. But it is no less monstrous. If anyone is free, it
certainly isn’t anyone you see or know about. No Greek that I
talk about, in any case, would have enjoyed being the gofer of
the national security and industrial state and its thousands of
demands. Such men saw the prize of sovereignty as a means…
a perch from where they could remain watchful over the state
and of territory far outside it, and swoop down like eagle for
the prize; in one swoop the king of birds catches its bloody
prey in fast talons. They were true artistes: take, for example,
Periander of Corinth. This man’s name means literally
“superman.” At no point in his life as king of Corinth did he
restrain his lust for the darkest paths: it is said he copulated
with his mother, that he violated his wife’s corpse, and much
worse. He had all the boys on the island Corcyra castrated.
And, having done all this, he was memorialized as one of the
Sages, or Geniuses of the ancient world. A philosopher and a
poet, he wrote an epic on the mysteries of nature… that
showed themselves to him alone on afternoons when the long
shadows make the blue-green shores of those seas whisper to
ears ready to hear. He supported also the art and philosophy of
others in the state, but only out of a careless generosity: I was
there at his court, I played the harp and he once threw a well-

used courtesan in my lap with a gesture of disdain. It is true
that he established his city as a great trading outpost, bringing
great wealth. He also built the first railroad in history—a kind
of way to transport goods across the isthmus of Corinth; at the
time a great innovation. He did many other such things…he
established colonies abroad, he built temples, he chastised the
nobles and raised up the middle classes, but you must forgive
these acts, or rather, not misunderstand them. He never did any
of this “for the good,” out of duty or necessity, but rather these
actions flowed from those we consider vices, as a kind of
excess. Everything came from his instincts to conquer and
expand the domain of his action. Born to power in his state, he
could have chosen a middle course. If he had excessively
enjoyed honors…or prestige…or security. These were his to
have, and easily. The great danger for a house passes once the
son is able to succeed the father in seat of king. But he gave all
this up, for really no reason. He chose a path of adventure, but
…he chose even a path of sorrow. In all he did, there was a
kind of artistic sorrow and grotesque misfortune, that he
seemed to want to bring on himself…to make life interesting,
or so he could overcome even this latest outrage. He killed his
own wife, and I know why. She was pregnant, and though he
had copulated with her, in a dream he received word that
during the act a small snake had become attached to his
member. And that a monster would be born. Then it’s said that
his son was murdered by those same people from Corcyra that
Periander had made the subjects of his weird experiments, but
that they did so because they loved the youth. But this is
absurd. The real reason was that he was trying to impregnate
all the women on the island. So Periander dreamt he would
become progenitor of a “brood of snakes.” He only ever saw
political office as a means to self-overcoming and self-
perfection, as a way to turn himself into a living work of art.
From this came for the citizens much good and also much bad.
It has to be expected that such men will appear as monsters to
others. In any case, the things he did were hardly the worst.
One other man I can think of, a tyrant or a king, have it what
you will, he married off the women of his state to slaves:

through this overturning of values, that he learned from Plato,
he secured his infamy and power. Do you understand what
Plato’s Republic means? It is a formula for such men to
unleash their complete madness on the world. It teaches them
certain tricks to expand the domain of their struggle for self-
perfection into every area of social life. Plato himself says that
the secret desire of every Greek was to become a tyrant, and
Nietzsche understands all the greatness of that people, their
exploration of the seas and limits of the world, their
foundation of the arts and sciences…all of this as just an
extension of this secret desire in the heart of every noble
Greek. It was the secret desire also in the heart of the great
French artists, and it is simply put, the unlearnable desire
behind all great things. If you have it you must by no means
restrain it. This is because human nature is feeble and easily
led astray, and only when driven by this kind of monstrous and
single-minded obsession for the heights of power can it find
the motivation to overcome the lying, dirty ape in us. A certain
distance too from oneself is necessary. A “clinical” eye in
regards to oneself, one’s faults, is required for this mindset. In
our time this can be achieved in part by embracing spirit of
true science, whereas for man of Bronze Age it was easy to
embrace because he saw things that happened to him,
including the great motions of the spirit, the feelings that
troubled him, as instantiations of various gods, for which he
was not responsible, and which he could therefore judge and
evaluate externally. His view was, however, correct. For this
reason when you see men like Periander you have to
understand their special quest wasn’t one where they try to
accomplish “the public good,” nor was it some worthless
desire to dominate others or exert will for petty satisfaction:
they see others instead as tools or objects on a mission of self-
overcoming. He was trying to turn himself into a work of art,
his life into a replay of the great motions of the stars, or the
secret passion plays of the gods. In the same way that the
Greek state in general was conceived as a work of art by the
citizens. Periander understood his position as king then as just
another means: here science, here art could be free from all

limits and could rule unhindered and embark on great
experiments. And yet from all this you see something very
strange…The secret desire of every Greek…the Bronze Age
mindset….was to be worshiped as a god! This is the secret
target to which that boundless lust for power aims! There are
many other examples. Among the Spartans you find the great
general Lysander. He turned the Spartans from a land power
into a great navy, defeated the Athenians and ended the
Peloponnesian War: then he went from city to city as a
liberator, on a great tour of self-glorification. He was the first
to be worshiped as a god at altars. He had searched for this his
entire life, and it was the prize of his victories. There was
another such unlikely man, Brasidas, a Spartan general of a
generation before Lysander, of very unusual character. He
liberated many cities by his force of personality and the
magical charisma that emanated from his body. A Spartan and
man of battle and the science of war, he nevertheless managed
to win by persuasion and speech: only such man, with disdain
for words, can really understand what speech is really for. He
was type of man who, when his back is against the wall, the
strong spirit in him rallies like wild boar who rages in his thick
chest when he is cornered by hunters, and charges for the kill.
In same way Brasidas performed best when he relieved many
cities of siege. He died the most glorious death, in the middle
of victorious battle, when he rushed into the thick of the
enemy with his elite guard. He was worshiped as a god
thereafter in the city of Amphipolis. It’s not a surprise that you
see men of this type of man come out of Sparta: the place that
made the sternest demands on itself produced also the most
brilliant men. They went rogue and easily imposed the
intensity of their magic charisma on foreigners. True power
needs no effort: it draws all around it like a force-field. Power
of character and body attracts others in orbit as if by magic.
56
In Iliad you see the greatest warriors rise up to fight even
the gods. When Diomedes is about to go on his great rampage,
Athena the white-eyed appears to him and whispers in his ear.

She reminds him of his father’s great feats and breathes
strength into his chest: she tells him to go fearlessly into the
throng of the enemy on his chariot and in this exalted
condition she draws back from his eyes the veil that had
previously hidden the gods. She tells him that if that harlot
Aphrodite appears, he has the power to harm her. And
Diomedes does this without any fear! Even the goddess of
love is laid low before the aroused might of a warrior on
rampage. Achilles too in his great moment chastises the river
god and makes him submit. This reflects one great truth, that
in this condition of aroused spirit the true man is given the gift
of heightened perception and can see things that others can’t.
This is what is meant by the fact that the genius sees this same
world we do, but sees in it things that we can’t, much like we
see things that dog or ant can’t. Indeed time itself entirely
changes when the will is raised up to this height: the warrior in
some way can be said to rise outside the stream of events in
which we are held like prisoners. In this condition he appears
magnified, anointed and others who are not privy to the same
things begin to orbit around him physically and spiritually: in
the Bible too you see in the middle of battle for Jerusalem,
“the House of David shall be as God, as the angel of the Lord”
before the many, who subject themselves in awe to this great
gift. In same way in their moments of great glory Athena
kindles on the neck and head and shoulders of the warriors a
great fire that can be seen from far away. She does this for
Diomedes and for Achilles as they let loose their strength on a
wild rampage, a great bonfire explodes on their body and
behind them. This is the irresistible power of charisma and
strength that draws all to it like magic: for man this is no less
true than it is for migratory birds on mission, for pack of
wolves on the hunt, for hives of bees, in all cases the many
begin to orbit around the anointed hegemon as if by magic. It’s
a biological compulsion, and a great good. And you must
understand one thing: the end of Achilles’ mission was the
total destruction of the city of Troy, the fire melting the brick
of its alleys, its men killed, its women and children sold into
slavery. This last was held to be the right of conquerors

throughout the history of the Greek world, or at least for its
vital period of ascent. Thus this most humane and refined of
ancient peoples found it absolutely necessary nevertheless to
have this out for the wolfish and predatory instinct in man.
War alone brought rejuvenation of their nature. When
Alexander drags the body of the rulers of Tyre outside the city
walls from his chariot, and circles around the city, he is
copying what Achilles did to Hector when the city of Troy was
annihilated. Nietzsche sees in this an excess, something
unfortunate…but I tell you, he means something else. When
city is destroyed its gods are destroyed: you must remember
that each city had its tutelary gods and spirits for protection.
The Romans, before they conquered a new city, promised the
gods of that city that they would honor and respect them
tenfold more than the inhabitants. When a city or culture is
destroyed, gods are destroyed with it. The destruction of the
cities in fire that the greatest warriors of antiquity took upon
themselves was a form of divine warfare. And it was only
possible because such men knew also how to listen to the voice
of the gods, and allowed themselves to be entirely possessed
by a divine madness. It imbued them with superhuman
strength, and drew others into their designs by instinct. This
abandon to nature and instinct—this is the Bronze Age way!
And you can learn to cultivate this exalted psychosis inside
you also.
57
I see no reason why, if there should be epidemics of all
kinds of diseases, the same can’t also be true for what we call
“mental disease.” And you see repetitions of this throughout
history and even now: among primitives in Sudan, when they
become possessed of fears that wandering Jews are spreading
penis-modifying bananas, or that shaking hands can destroy
your genitalia, or such things. This is funny but in all eruptions
of this kind of superstition I see a divine significance and great
potential. In Europe there used to be the mania called St.
Vitus’ Dance, and in ancient Greece the cults of Dionysus
spreading the madness of maenads and turning the women into

hungry, cannibalistic sluts. I say this in “sex-positive” way! I
believe any child born of such excesses is likely to be blessed,
because here the genius of the species is allowed to make the
choice without any interference. This is not endorsement of
anything in our time: there is nothing like this, it’s just
LARP’ing. You’ve been abandoned by the gods. Only a global
orgy of fire will whet their appetites for return.
58
You make fun of “decadent” Roman Emperors? In the
horror stories from Suetonius you have prototype of
“monarchy gone wild,” of mad emperors who use position
only to satisfy arcane and criminal lusts. I don’t write to
defend such things, but the condemnation isn’t moral—how
can it be, when my reaction at reading excesses of Caligula or
Nero or Tiberius is to feel a great sense of loss, or envy at
what they could do that I can’t? Caligula had the genius idea
to form a long line of ships on the sea, put platforms on top of
them, fill them with earth, so that he could fulfill a prophecy
of walking on water between two points. He gathered the army
on the seashore facing Britain and ordered them, instead of
invading, to collect seashells. He then called this a great booty
for the Roman People and the Senate and threw a few pennies
at the soldiers saying “Go Happy! Go Rich!” He captured two
Gauls but dressed them up in Ice-Nigger-Face to look like
Teutons and then enacted an obviously transparent “hunt” to
pretend he had captured them in front of the soldiers.
Everyone laughed and rolled their eyes, for sure. But he was
caught up in the story of his own godhood. At Rome he used
to lock down the Colosseum during the hottest hours and
withdraw the awnings so that the people would suffer in the
heat and pregnant women wouldn’t be able to leave.
Sometimes he replaced the regular gladiator shows with
pathetic fights between cripples and deformed animals; he
would lock down the granaries to let the people go hungry for
no reason at all. He was the greatest troll ever. When the Jews
of Alexandria came to complain about civil war simmering in
that city, he ignored their pleas and asked them why they don’t

eat pork. When you look at Elagabalus you see this tendency
taken to its logical conclusion: this man was a trap-Emperor,
and asked his doctors to give him a sex change operation. It is
believed he was a devotee of Cybele, and like the insane
priests of that cult…wanted to castrate himself. Instead of this,
he became a prostitute inside the palace, and used to publicly
give himself airs over how much he was making. Commodus
became a gladiator and found great pride in his swordplay,
although such things aren’t so strange to imagine in our time:
and they are to be welcomed! Nero was a pioneer of gay
marriage. The first time he did it as the groom, and the second
as the bride: he made the old senators listen as he mimicked
the sounds of a young wife getting deflowered behind the
doors. Of all his exploits I found most fascinating that he put
on the mask of a lion and, having tied up various men and
women naked in his mansion on the island, came at them with
the rage of a beast and in a frenzy bit at their bodies and
genitals. I don’t celebrate any of this, but I think when in our
age elites are accused of similar behavior…this isn’t right…I
think we flatter ourselves. We want to think they’re a lot more
interesting than they are…it’s easier to think we’re ruled by
demons than by defectives who would normally be running a
smoked-fish stand or running vodka parlors outside Minsk. We
don’t want to admit that we’re as lame in vice and deviance as
we are in greatness, and for the same reasons. You see these
old wet rags of an “elite” getting arrested, and in almost every
case it’s for something on the level of a Pee Wee monkey-
show, self-exposure in a porn cinema, masturbating
themselves in front of some frigid cinema whore with
leatherface and bugged out eyes, exposing their weapons of
mass destruction to a Dominican maid. It’s hard to understand
what even goes into this kind of “decadence,” but it’s of a
different kind from the excesses of the worst Roman
Emperors, who, even when they were trannies, seem more
manly and brave than our perverts. I wonder if it’s not possible
to think of history in entirely different way, I mean: all we
think now is from point of view of the people, and the story
goes about progress or regress with respect to how they fare;

or at best how something like science or hygiene advances, or
technology, or moral responsibility, or equality, or inequality,
or anything else you want….advances or not. But history
would look very different if pursued with eye of connoisseur
for superior specimens, judging them as you would prized
steers or stallions. In such case you would have to dismiss
these kinds of freaks like the emperors I mentioned, and judge
them defective…but for entirely different reasons. You would
learn to see history from view of life and biology… as great
bestiary…and learn what is necessary in our time also to make
way for the long-lost tropics and jungle…the abode of the
gods….that can return….and return……..
59
I always loved the statues of the kouroi. I can safely say
that upon viewing such statue by myself for three hours
(someone let me in to look alone in museum), I was able to
ejaculate without touching myself. But I had no dirty or
untoward thoughts the entire time. This experience made me
wonder…if it is possible to ejaculate without touching
yourself, is it possible also to will yourself to death just the
same, without doing anything? The kouroi have long story
behind them, you might have heard. At first these statues were
copied from Egyptian models, but they became much more
realistic in the hands of the craftsman of the Archaic Greeks,
also much brawnier and more muscular. The pose is still
stylized and the smile they have on their face is very
enigmatic, almost like you think they could crush big stone on
your head, or run iron blade through your sternum and have
that stoney, autistic smile unchanged while looking you in the
eye. Two brothers of this type had to carry their mother to a
religious feast. It is story of Kleobis and Biton, twins. She
couldn’t get there on her own, so they carried her on a kind of
palanquin, rushing with great force up the steps to the temple.
They presented her in time to the sacred procession, but both
died from the great exertion. Herodotus says Solon told this
story to Croesus of Lydia, who was one of the first self-made
kings we know from history. Croesus took his state by force,

with the help of a company of elite warriors. He was the one
who made the first coins, to pay his mercs. He ruled outside all
limits and pursued the way of power. In this he inspired many
to similar actions. But Solon, the wise founding father of
Athens you could say, a famous lawgiver, went to visit him.
He asked Solon to tell him about people who lived a happy life
and Solon told him this story of the brothers. The full story
says that after the twins performed this great athletic feat and
delivered their mother in time to the sacred feast, she asked the
goddess Hera, to which she was dear, for a great reward. And
the goddess gave this reward, that the twin sons would lie
down in the temple for a deep sleep, and never awake. This is
idea of a Greek…. of a happy life. This story confused
Croesus the king, and it probably confuses you. It’s strange to
see how far the Greeks took aesthetic understanding of life and
the world. There is no moral lesson in this story at all. Any
moral lesson that you could think of, for example of duty to
parents or to tradition, could have been made in different way.
What’s unusual here is the ending. There is just biology: it is
best for the end and the acme to coincide. A beautiful death at
the right time is the only key to understanding a life, its only
hidden “meaning.” It is a beautiful death to die after
accomplishing a great feat for the glory of one’s city, family
and for the gods, but it’s greater still to die in one’s prime, at
the height of your powers and at the acme of their discharge. A
beautiful death in youth is a great thing, to leave behind a
beautiful body, and the best study of this pursuit you find in
the novels of Mishima, a real connoisseur.
60
The most glamorous Christian prince for me was always
young Conradin, King of the Romans and King of Jerusalem.
He was unjustly killed in Italy by usurper Charles of Anjou
with the contrivance of a corrupt Pope. He came from an
illustrious family. His grandfather was the emperor Frederick
II Hohenstaufen, called Stupor Mundi and celebrated by
Nietzsche. His beauty was said to be resplendent, like that of
his half-brother Manfred who was holding much of Italy by

force of charisma and arms while Conradin was still a small
boy. Upon reaching age at thirteen or fourteen, Conradin
embarked with his few but powerful knights southward to
reclaim his rightful throne in Rome. He defeated the usurper
and then entered the city. Riding at the head of his column of
knights in all their full armor, with the imperial banners raised
high—this was a glorious day, all the people came to the
streets to welcome their beloved liberator and showered the
procession with many flowers. The outpouring of love for this
boy was like something that hadn’t been seen since the age of
the Empire, and this alarmed the Pope and all the sclerotic
prelates as much as this boy’s grandfather had, if not more.
Conradin was just thirteen or fourteen, but he refused all
orders to wait and never listened to the timid counsels of his
advisors who tried to hold him back from his acme. He entered
Rome as world-conqueror. Thereafter came a series of
disasters: his army lost a great battle in the south, despite a
successful first charge, and mostly through the inadequacy of
some of his auxiliaries. He was captured by treachery and then
Charles of Anjou, with the help of corrupt jurists, found a legal
pretext to put him on trial and behead him and a friend. You
might think this is very bad, and certainly it would have been
better to die in the middle of battle, but much can be excused
by his youth. And it must be said that he never compromised
or begged for his life.  His execution was so absurd and unjust
that it permanently discredited Charles of Anjou, the usurper.
It discredited too this kind of Papal “legalism” that must sound
very familiar to you now. Still more so, it permanently
discredited the aggressive Papacy that promoted a man the
people of Sicily and Italy—as well as most of the German
states—viewed as an arrogant, nearly-autistic, and unjust
upstart. This Charles was ever driven in his life by the hatred
that came from being slighted in his youth by his mother and
other relatives. He was a man driven by a sclerotic lust for
power and crude ambitions, where Conradin was carried by
the native charisma common in his family, by his beauty, his
careless courage. He was riding to seat of world-ruler purely
through naïve trust in his own glamor. Know that despite all

force and treachery and contrivance, all public sanctions and
honors, the people will not be fooled: they know the real man
of power, and can tell the difference from a deformed usurper.
Charles’ execution of Conradin was lamented by all Germany
and much of Italy. Now the robots who run our world also
want to be loved or feared, and are trembling because the
people don’t respect them. They too, the nations of our time,
seek the return of youth, of a Conradin. It seemed to the
peoples of that time a story of the promise of youth, the beauty
and purity of its intentions, extirpated by the old and ugly. So
that in the end the memory of the young prince was victorious.
Not long after this the peoples of Sicily conspired with the
House of Aragon, ruled by relatives of Conradin, and broke
the power of Charles in a revolt. This was the end of idea of
“universal monarchy” through the Papacy…and this was the
beginning of the national consciousness in Europe. The
memory of Conradin was prized as the promise of beauty and
youth, memorialized in epics and poetry, that rejuvenated the
peoples of Europe and awoke them. Though he died without
achieving his goal, he died as a martyr for Europe against
Asia, and inspired the birth of the new state—the springboard
of world conquest that was soon to come in the age of
exploration and colonization. Christianity is a versatile faith,
capable of many interpretations. I believe Conradin was the
most Christian prince but also might as well have been the
renewed avatar of Apollo in Europe, recalling very old
memories. It was the spirit of fire and youth renewing the
peoples through its magnetic power and then through the
sacrifice of its blood. In moments of torpor we can always
return to this spirit of the ancient Greeks as a tonic.
61
Crusaders like Cortes and Pizarro, Fernando de Soto,
Drake and Raleigh, Magellan and Balboa equal in daring,
intelligence, 
magnitude 
of 
spirit, 
resourcefulness 
and
achievement any of the great men of the Greeks and Romans.
The story of the heroic age of exploration remains to be told in
full, and maybe one of you one day will make big book or big

movies. I say also now: for those who seek to make a
difference and have some artistic or visual bent, movies are the
golden key to the minds of the many. What Mel Gibson does is
worth a thousand books or “activisms” for your side. Learn to
make movies, if you can, and you can start with video. In any
case, there is just one great epic that tells the story in its proper
form, the great poem of Camoes, a man born to piracy and
high adventure. This man lost an eye in war in Ceuta against
the Moor; he then lived as a brigand and vagabond in imperial
Lisbon, getting into one duel and fight after another,
composing poetry, getting drunk. His mother saved him from
prison, but he was pressed into service in the colonial navy
and army. He arrived in Goa and from there participated in
many adventures, military and diplomatic, as a man of low
rank but high spirits. All the while he was writing his great
poem the Lusiad, and when he was shipwrecked off the
Mekong with his Chinese girlfriend, he carried the text of this
timeless work above his head to save it from the water. No one
reads it anymore, and his life would make a great movie. But
he is right that the voyages of these new crusaders equal any
great expedition even from the myths and legends of the past.
Here we have Jason’s Argo made anew, and not just once, but
in every one of these nations of the West. England’s glory
during these years might never be equaled again by any
people. Even the kings of Portugal, who started the age of
colonization and exploration, had English blood. The Gothic
restlessness of the steppe shook in the lords of Iberia with a
Titanic energy. Before the great voyage to the Orient of Vasco
da Gama, spies—and I mean just one or two men—went alone
on expeditions in Egypt and down the Red Sea, into the heart
of Arabia, fearlessly, incognito, to collect information crucial
for the coming expedition. Perched on the beaches of the great
Eurasian mass, these men went, in just a hundred years, from
sailing a few almost-rafts that they barely knew how to
navigate, to explorers of new worlds and founders of global
empires that lasted for centuries. You must understand how
amazing this feat was: there was no tradition of seamanship in
Portugal or Spain, let alone France or England…it all had to

be done from scratch. Do you know at all to respect the sea? If
you’ve ever traveled a ferry on even a relatively calm sea like
the Adriatic, on a windy day a large modern ferry, as big as a
city block…it will swing right and left. You won’t be used to
it. The Atlantic has waves ten feet or more as a matter of
course and these men were traveling on wooden ships with
15th Century tech; you must be crazy to have no awe of this.
For romance of the sea you should read Melville. Columbus is
celebrated, yes, but there were others who were even greater
than him, or at least his equal, and few know about them. They
don’t receive the glory they deserve because, first, many of the
writers who could have done this were prejudiced against their
strong religious faith and their piety: you see, most of the
modern glorifiers of antiquity usually had an axe to grind
against Christianity or the Church, so they didn’t want to
promote these men, or admit that the champions of the faith
were the most shining exemplars of the classical man in our
time. Even Nietzsche stays away from them and, in a moment
of weakness, speaks nonsense about the “superiority” of the
Aztecs. On the other hand, the Church has been embarrassed
about these men. More than anyone else they spread its power
and gospel through the world, and even before that, they saved
Europe itself from the Moors and the other threats. They’re the
direct descendants of the crusaders who liberated Spain and
other parts of Europe. The Church doesn’t want to admit that
once Ferdinand and Isabella cleared Spain of the enemies of
Christ, God blessed that nation with a century of prosperity
and pre-eminence, and gave it the foundation of world-empire.
But the Church was embarrassed by them, by the
conquistadores, by their cruelty and their pagan love of vitality
and action, so it tried to disavow them while making use of
their strength. So their story remains largely untold, although
it’s one of the peaks of history and of manly achievement. Few
understand the voyages, for example, of even one of the most
famous among them, Vasco da Gama and how in many ways it
exceeded the feats of Columbus. This man circumnavigated
Africa and found the sea route to the Indies—what Columbus
had actually set out to do (or so the story goes…I believe

Columbus had some secret maps…) Such voyage was
attempted long before by the Phoenician Hanno, but no one
knows what really came of that. The travel was difficult. When
you reach a certain point of the West African coast you can’t
just continue to hug along it…you have to pull out to the west
and swoop around—this is likely how South America was
discovered. Do you know what starvation, scurvy, and tropical
disease is? Do you understand tropical heat? Sure, some of
you might, but know that off the West Africa coast, when a
wind blows in your face it’s not a relief: it’s like a hairdryer
going off in your face, nonstop. And yet he reached India, he
found spices, he found monkey, he made the Zamorin submit
with big guns. His investors made thousands of percent return.
Just seven years later another conquistador returned, Almeida,
with a great armada that tore a swathe of destruction along the
Indian 
Ocean. 
He 
burned 
down 
Mombasa, 
though
outnumbered, because of the arrogance of its Arab rulers—
imagine the stench that must have wafted as far as Japan! This
man defeated a huge armada of Ottomans, Arabs, Mamelukes
at the Battle of Diu, to avenge the death of his son: and this
was momentous time. Space itself on our world changed. The
great overland routes of trade were now outflanked by the
seafaring nations of western Europe, which from this moment
began to dominate the Indian Ocean and the Pacific. Do you
understand America had a great destiny in this design as well?
When the colonists founded Jamestown, let’s say there were
no more than two hundred or two hundred and fifty years from
that act to the time of Commodore Perry: the American people
had tamed the continent and pushed their way to Asia across
the seas in no time at all. It would have happened even faster if
they hadn’t been hampered by the domination of England…
once they gained their independence their expansion was very
fast (the Constitution, the ideology, the doctrine of rights, is all
so much nonsense and has nothing to do with any of this…it
barely all even lasted through the lifetimes of the founders of
America, who were seeking merely dominion and freedom of
space to expand). The great destiny of America had always
been the conquest of the Far East and the domination of China,

which obsessed the leading minds of that time. All of this has
now been forgotten and America’s great fate has been
thwarted—at least for now. What do you know then of men
like this, or of Afonso de Albuquerque who followed Almeida,
who captured Hormuz and Muscat with seven ships, who
opened the way to the Spice Islands of legend? I prefer as
usual not to talk of such men: they are so far from your
possibilities that the example is almost depressing. I want to
encourage you again with someone else from this age, a man
more to my taste, and more within the realm of what is
possible, of what is about to become possible again. This is the
brilliant right-hand-man of Cortes, Pedro de Alvarado. He was
a man of knightly family from southern Spain, but had fiery
red-blond hair, which amazed the Mexicas: they believed he
was a child of the Sun, and called him Tonatiuh, the mane of
the sun. He was of boundless courage, carelessness, and also
boundless cruelty. Cortes left him in charge briefly in
Tenochtitlan where he  massacred all the Aztec nobles in the
Great Temple during a banquet…for no reason at all. During
the battles he distinguished himself by insane charges into the
thick of the enemy by which he was outnumbered by hundreds
to one: yet he never lost heart, he went right for their garish
flower-decorated lieutenants and cut them down, striking fear
into the multitude. Don’t believe the lies about gunpowder.
Guns were very basic at this time, and on many occasions the
Spanish didn’t have guns at all. The armor, the pikes, the
Toledo steel blades, the discipline and know-how from
decades of fighting the Moor—all of this was far more
important. And above all, bravery and daring, the same that
led Pizarro to take down an empire with a retinue of thirteen
men. What I want to say about Alvarado, though, is this: once
conquests were made, he never stopped. His thirst for space,
for new worlds, for new conquests, was without end. In his
letters you see this is his only interest. Though made governor
of a huge area—the present-day states of Guatemala, of
Honduras, these are his creations—he nevertheless showed no
interest at all in ruling them. He squeezed them of whatever
money he could, never paying any taxes back to Spain, and

always planned new adventures and new conquests. This man
was a born pirate: right before his death he was planning a
great expedition for the conquest of China and the Spice
Islands. Alvarado was a nemesis to civilization, and this is
right and good. God sends such men to chastise mankind. I
want you to be like this: to listen to these instincts in you.
When he was put in charge of territory, Alvarado could have
very easily settled down to the life of a governor; most men
would. Enticed by the prestige and honor, they would play the
part: then also, their vanity would fool them into thinking that
they could govern well. Well, maybe you can govern well, or
maybe you can’t. But Alvarado knew what he was. And he
didn’t try to be more than one thing. Be one thing. Single-
minded purity of purpose is true manliness. He knew he was a
born beast of prey, and never pretended to be more or less than
this. This self-assured sense of who he was made him insanely
attractive even to the natives he oppressed and massacred:
despite his cruelty, they couldn’t help being drawn to his
charm, his lofty manner, his outrageous magnificence. They
worshiped him as a god. The other Spaniards were in awe as
well. You must see that nature blesses all men who have faith
in their own blood and in their instincts…nature blesses them
with such magnetism. Alvarado is the avatar of our new age,
and I predict this: within fifty years a hundred Alvarados will
bloom from deep in the tropical bestiary of the spirit. They
will sweep away the weakness of this world.
62
Bob Denard shows that the spirit of Bronze Age pirate can
exist also in our age. It can flower complete and unedited. You
have no excuse! This man may not be what you expect. How
different he is from the pretentious bureaucrats we see, the
politicians with their high-flown language, their tedious moral
preaching, their careful self-positioning, timidity, and the
drudgery to which they subject themselves. Men who embrace
high-flown moral principle in public are usually looked down
on by many regular people; they can smell the bullshit from
far away. He started out as a regular soldier with the French in

Vietnam, but he was court-martialed after he burned down a
bar—part of a dispute, you see. Some men chimp out by
writing a complaint, others by getting in a bar fight, others by
burning down the building. After this he wandered around
Africa, finding odd jobs in the employ of local nabobs and
potentates, all of them utterly corrupt and incompetent. He
said once something like, “It’s important never to be
‘ambitious.’ Men of ‘ambition’ are losers. Act and feel like a
winner and good things, friends, and victory will come.” He
took part in adventures all over Africa: coups in Benin, the
Congo, secessionist movements like in Biafra (the French
styling on English Nigeria) and so forth. His greatest feat was
to overthrow the government of the Comoros four times. Each
time France had to send special forces to the islands to
dislodge him. Otherwise he would have surely become a
hereditary ruler. He had many wives and won many properties
by the power of his hand. At the end of his life…well…this
life lasted too long. He should have died in defense of his
territory, younger, and without descending into the dementia
and pain that took him in old age. France repaid his service
with persecution; no longer needed to fight communists in
Africa, his vainglory and ferocity became a liability. Now, if
you need great moral elevation, if war must be in the service
of a good cause, you can consider his service in Congo, in
Katanga and then against the Simba rebels. At Stanleyville he,
along with only a handful of other white mercenaries, freed
thousands of hostages from rape and sure massacre at the
hands of the savage Simbas. In many ways he defended
whatever residues of civilization remained in Africa after
decolonization. In this last venture he was joined by a man of
similar temperament, the Colonel “Mad Mike” Hoare. This is
another great example of the modern rebirth of Bronze Age
vitalism. And another example of why you’re a fag. An Irish-
English dandy, he was a gentleman among soldiers, but a man
before being a gentleman: he remained throughout his life
single-minded, brutal and cool-headed in the middle of
conflicts where he was outnumbered thousands to one,
swamped by the demented zombi hordes of the tropics. This

man understood communism for what it was: the infestation of
vermin he was tasked to exterminate, a biological event, not an
ideological, political, or historical one. After the war in Burma
he made a living working on safaris and then, like Denard,
gaining experience in the service of various African
governments. He led an elite unit of mercs in the Congo, and
in the same operation with Denard, was responsible for
relieving Stanleyville and saving a hundred nuns and
missionaries from rape and torture. Thereafter he led many
missions in Africa, a new frontier. He was later involved in an
aborted coup on the Seychelles. Failure is not dishonorable, as
long as you are making a great gamble for great gains. It isn’t
right to judge such people by the “justice” of their cause.
Some of you spergs and almost all of the half-educated class
think when Nietzsche talks about “beyond good and evil” that
he’s making some grand proposition about there being no
possibility to evaluate men or events. Morality is absolute
necessity for the people. There is the other morality, that
reveals a biological hierarchy. Just the same, a different
standard applies to huemans, and a different one to the true
men who are willing to live in danger, and who don’t care for
their animal lives. Men like Denard and Hoare are a great
attempt on the part of nature itself: they show that even in our
age there are men who yearn inscribe their wills in bronze for
the ages, who want their terrible creations to endure for
centuries. They should be judged by what they were willing to
risk in their spirit—and also by the unequaled rush they all
must have had, inside them, as they pursued their high aims.
Even just a few years ago Margaret Thatcher’s son Mark was
given a sentence in South Africa in 2005 for an attempted
coup in Equatorial Guinea. He was ratted out and caught at the
airport. You must understand that the meddlesome little
cretinoids who run the West always put a stop to great plans
and great actions. They’ve ended many promising adventures
through their snooping…they’re tattletales, always watching,
never sleeping, always whispering. Gallant men, who live
under the sign of the lion are stopped before they can act. A
different way is necessary. But I mean to say, don’t be fooled:

in our age too men of adamantine character exist, who fight
like Capaneus before Thebes, ready nude with fire in arm to
burn down city. They appear now as villain, now as hero to the
people, but you must learn to forget just this desire of the
people and yearn rather to live dangerously and do great
deeds, for good or evil. The danger of our time is not that it
makes people bad, but that it makes everything small and
afraid. Neall Ellis in his trusty Mi-24 Hind helicopter held off
the rebels in the Sierra Leone civil war, singlehandedly, and
saved innumerable lives. There’s little glamor in his job, and
in the end it didn’t matter: but on his trusty flying Hind steed
he must have felt like a beast of prey swooping down on the
enemy. He worked for company, Executive Outcomes—a
name that might make you think of second-rate consulting
company in office park. But this was merc company that
ended the civil war in Sierra Leone and threatened to establish
a new order all over Africa. For this reason they were stopped
by the UN, by gangs of international lawyers and financiers
who fear the power of the new Sea Peoples. How long can
they hold off such men from their destiny? In the Rhodesian
war, you had companies of a few white farmers, raised in the
bush, who ambushed armies of Zambia and Mozambique
many thousands strong. They would attack with stealth,
stalking them, inflict frightful casualties, and escape
unharmed. Many such stories: look up Nyadzonya raid. The
potential for adventures and conquests like European man has
rarely experienced in the past still exists, and I have no doubt
that in the coming years such opportunities will become ever
more frequent. The great Leviathan will falter, sooner or later.
The coming age of barbarism will not be owned, as so many of
you urban cucks fear, by the gangbangers and the unwashed
hordes of the teeming cesspools of the world, but by clean-cut
middle-class and working-class vets, men of military
experience, who know something about how to shoot and how
to organize. The fools who think oligarchs will be able to
control these men for very long should look to the fortunes of
the Sforzas and many others, and remember that money is no
match for force of arms combined with charm.

When Theodore Roosevelt was I think close to seventy
years old, he went on expedition to the Amazon, then mostly
still unexplored: he called it one last chance to be a boy. This
expedition led to his death; and it was a good death. He
followed in footsteps of men of power like Lope de Aguirre…
and never lost the yearning in his heart for Eldorado.

Part Four: a Few Arrows
63
Giving “freedom” to women—an impossibility. With the
liberation of women in the 19th century, the West has given
itself an infection from which it can’t recover without the most
terrible convulsions and the most thorough purgative
measures. What the “freedom” of women means in practice is
the domination of mankind by the demagogues who can rally
the lower orders of the spirit. Because there is no world in
which “the women” can act as a political unit. Liberation of
women means freedom and power for financiers, lawyers,
purveyors of comforts in and outside government, employers
who whore out your wife and daughters. It has been the
greatest weakening and self-own a civilization has ever visited
on itself. But in the end is this so different from democracy as
such? Yes…because the “liberation” of women makes
democracy into a terminal disease…one that doesn’t just end a
particular government, but the civilization.
64
If you wonder how mankind fell from the high times of the
Renaissance and the age of exploration to our times of
mediocrity and repression…I can only tell you this, that our
age is the norm in history. It takes great efforts and much good
luck to be able to surpass the dirty ape and rat inside us all.
Most of mankind never left the regime of deformity, and it’s
no surprise that this morass is returning. It’s just a reversion to
the norm. That said, there does seem to be something
especially menacing about developments in our age: the
ubiquity of this Leviathan, the inability to escape it.
Everywhere you might become a hermit, you are reminded of
it, it intrudes everywhere. And so the very success of the great
men of four hundred years ago, their foundation of a new
world, the great expansion of human knowledge and know-
how…this ended up setting the stage for our trash-world. They
succeeded beyond what they could expect, and that success is
what allowed the profusion of the lower types of mankind. In

nature the vital part of mankind would rule and in the
beginnings of many societies it does: military brotherhoods of
men rule, and physical force as well as force of personality,
charisma, draw the rest in an orbit around those who possess
these in the highest degree. This is all by a natural and secret
pull, by instinct. There is a magic to charisma that does this,
and the military-monarchical organization, the rule of the
warlord, comes from desire for this in the nature of all, not
from reflection and abstraction. Unfortunately some things
conspire to end this original condition of mankind, which is
itself no paradise and is full of strife, suffering and problems.
These things are, first of all, the very success of these men in
securing the conditions of life and comfort for the rest of the
community. Second, the ascent, within this peacetime, of the
priest, the shaman, the schemer, and the matriarch, which
slowly usurp power away from the brotherhoods of young men
and their captains. Spinoza explains the corruption of the
Jewish people in just this way: the Hebrew “Republic” was in
fact a military regime of the type I say here, a rule of the
captains. But the priests took this power away and corrupted
the nation to weakness. In same way something happened to
the Aryans in India and in many other places. This state of
things doesn’t need to be so: the men of religion and those of
power have many interests in common, and can rule together.
But it often happens that the men of power become decadent
and let the state drift into the hands of those who can’t rule—
and who start to resent them for this abdication. Women
become also very aggressive, once real and relaxed manhood
atrophies. If you imagine that women in the Muslim world, for
example, are sweet and feminine…they are hungry viragos of
iron will. The feminist Muslima will be a figure of much
importance among them. The men in Arabia will turn gay. The
Vietnamese or Chinese grandmother has her knee on the neck
of the son-in-law. Thus everywhere we see that the very
comforts and safety produced by the best men leads to the
usurpation of society by those parts of the human spirit that are
oriented instead toward a different kind of life, that
everywhere that mode of the yeast wins out…and usually wins

out very quickly. And in the West, whose special fate has been
confused for History or Progress of the entire species, this
development has taken place through the promotion of logos
or reason and all the manifestations of this: the adulation of
empty words, of legalism as a guide for social and political
life, of the cult of science that is very far from real science. All
of this has been a cover for the ascent of the blob human, of
the lower orders of the spirit and is instead delivering not just
the West, but all of mankind, to a condition of domestic
brokenness and servility. Very concretely you see in feminism
the return of pre-Aryan matriarchy. The great “Earth Mother,”
originally some kind of half-hueman half-cockroach creature
resplendent with horrid eggs like big Amazon centipede….this
seeks to re-absorb you. Of all the things that you blame for the
decrepit times we live in, feminism and the “liberation” of
women is both the proximate and the ultimate cause. Nothing
so ridiculous as the liberation of women has ever been
attempted in the history of mankind. It is an act of complete
insanity, disguised as “logic,” “reason,” presented in the most
absurd legalisms about supposed “rights.” The modern
socialisms, the expansion of the power of the state that
squashes all initiative and all life, the hypocrisy of all political
life in our time—all of this is to be attributed to the
participation of women in political life. I don’t complain about
the “freedom” or “degeneracy” that supposedly comes from
this arrangement. That’s all misdirection and self-flattery. The
state we live in is as repressive as any oriental tyranny. But its
hypocrisy is that it hides its force under the delusion of
egalitarian ideals and legalistic procedures inconsistently
applied. It is not women actually being free, but their “legal
freedom,” a practical fiction, being used by a hidden power to
oppress, to dispossess, to intimidate and extort. It took one
hundred years of women in public life for them to almost
totally destroy a civilization.
But you would be a sperg to think that this problem can be
solved by taking away women’s voting power, “forcing” them
into the home, or some such thing. The presence of women in
public life is a spear with two tips, and can be turned on the

enemy with some ease. Women, after all, can still, even in the
most debased condition, be made to call on their deep passions
by a great leader. They voted for Hitler, Mussolini, and many
others, with some enthusiasm. The enemy who “freed” them
has made use of a great weapon: he has increased his power
immensely and introduced a war into the house and life of
every man. But this enemy also made a gamble and I believe,
ultimately, a mistake…because women more than others will
set their bodies on fire with passion for a savior and be willing
to abandon the fear and love of comfort on which the modern
state depends…them more than others, out of a wild and
stupid enthusiasm.
65
How was it possible for women to become “free” at some
point in the 19th century…how did this agitation come about?
From where comes the gynocracy that rules, not just as in
tribal societies covertly, but that now pretends also to be in the
public sphere and to demand “rights”? Who was there in the
first place to give rights…and of what use is a right if it’s not
also a privilege? The answer to all this is a little bit more
unpleasant. It’s only because women lost all respect for the
males of the time that there could be any pretext like feminism
or “women’s suffrage” in the first place. The loss of respect in
general marks the modern age since 1800 or so: the loss of
respect in authority, for example, that came when industrialists
and bankers replaced the warrior nobility. As “decadent” as
the latter had become, this class had never really lost its grace
of manner, its beauty and magnificence and glamor: this made
the common man more eager to submit, or to accept such
leadership. But who could accept the rule of the dour
economic creature that took the lead in the states at the end of
the 18th century? This is why Napoleon was such an enigma
for so many: he represented a man out of time, something
completely unexpected in the age of middle class mediocrity
and hypocritical “democracy” that was just then coming about.
For this reason all the higher spirits of the 19th century, all the
great artists, the writers, they threw themselves at the feet of

his memory: he seemed to represent the possibility of higher
aspirations in our time. You can read Stendhal for this spirit.
Napoleon was an escape from the domination of the bugman
that was just then beginning to take hold of the nations. Now,
don’t imagine I will attack “the bourgeois” …we’ve declined
so far even from the level of the bourgeois of that age…in our
time the desolation is almost complete. This is why it’s so
ridiculous to hear these “conservatives” yap on about honor, or
glory, or sacrifice, or any of this garbage. The respect in all
institutions and all leadership classes and all traditional
authority has already been lost long ago, and for good reason.
It’s impossible for the erased males to command any respect
from the people…and still less from their women. Feminism
then is the revolt of women against the outrage of democracy.
They have been in a revolt against the inability of the bugman
to command authority or respect. And you must understand
that there is no bottom to this “freedom” or revolution. There
won’t be any opportunity to say “I told you so”: they will
never “learn a lesson” from their foolishness. And they resent
the insecurity you have put them in. The calamity that will
surely follow from going down this path will not be a
“teachable moment” to anyone. They resent the “beta,” but
you’re wrong to think it was ever any different. No…great
civilizations and cultures were never founded nor kept alive by
“betas.” The nerdoids who have taken over much of the right
have brainwashed you to this view, but it’s wrong. Women
never loved the shopkeeper, the timid merchant with the nasal
voice, and no, not even the clockmaker or craftsman. They
have always loved the knight, the sailor in love with wild ideas
of the sea, the adventurer and pirate. And it is right that they
loved these men, and that, with the coming of the rule of the
bugman, they would try to seek their “liberation” from
unworthy men and the boring society they were building. That
this resentment was manipulated itself by the Satanic power
that rules our time, and that through this very drive for
freedom woman became enslaved more than she had been
before…is beside the point. You won’t be able to make women
“see reason” and love a “beta civilization”—a fabrication of

the HBD cuckold crowd of our time. Women will love you if
you are a warrior. And they will help, through the entirely
retarded mechanism of democracy, to elect men of glamor and
charisma who are our only immediate hope against the
machine that runs our garbage world. Trump, for all his
hesitations, is only the beginning. He has shown the path
insofar as woman is concerned. The mob also is a woman.
Now imagine a man of Trump’s charisma, but who is not
merely beholden to the generals, but one of them, and able to
rule and intimidate them as well as seduce the many. So far we
have only had Gracchi …but Caesars and Napoleons are sure
to follow.
66
A man of great charisma who can seduce the people with a
wild spirit and break through the rule of the pervasive
bureaucracy-media complex is our best hope for the
immediate problem…and maybe our only hope. Such a man
might be among you and, in any case, he will need help. Our
enemy has so much spread: he is everywhere. He’s in your
home even, and he’s inside you. The domain of the fight has
extended everywhere now. Therefore any answer must be on
multiple fronts, and each one calls for a different strategy and
different type of talent and man. I fear that many of you are
actually autists and spergs and don’t want to see this. There is
no one fight and no one solution, and what you want in the end
or as ideal may require different plan than facing imminent
threat. For the latter you can make alliance with people who
otherwise wouldn’t be your friends. I believe that democracy
is the final cause of all the political problems I describe here,
but in the short run democracy—the will of the people—is on
our side because the democracies have been hijacked by a
stupid and corrupt elite. The nations face extinction and an era
of permanent civil war because this elite wants to pillage and
pillage: and wants to flood them with the shit of the world.
This is the immediate threat, and on this you can be allied with
people who otherwise may not shoot for the same star you do.
If Ann Coulter or Pat Buchanan were in charge, you would get

99% of what you want. Therefore use them as models to solve
the problems that face you, and don’t scare the peoples with
crazy talk if you want to move things politically. Let the
normies have their normal lives, and paint our enemies as the
crazies…which they are…and as the corrupt vermin they are.
If you haven’t compromised yourself go into political life
maybe, and use Trump as a model for success. Those of you
who choose this path, if you like this book or the other things I
say, should denounce it and disavow me if ever asked about it,
and denounce also all other crazy ideas. You must have an
instinct for how much normies are able to take. It isn’t even a
question of getting them to where you want “gradually”—I
don’t think they’re able to get very far at all. But they can be
moved to defend themselves from the grip of the global slave
state, which I also hate, although for different reasons. If an
ethnostate is your ideal, or if it’s Renaissance Switzerland or
ancient Egypt—fine. If you intend to go public and try
something politically, work now instead so that America and
Europe don’t become Bosnia or South Africa. People who try
to mislead you from such things and try to encourage you to
talk in public instead about abstractions like “ethnostate,” dork
ideological constructs like “Eurasianism,” anachronistic
slogans like “blood and soil” that never had any historical
attraction to Anglos and Americans…these people are spergs
or very often federal informants, or manipulated by such. By
all means study such things, believe in them, troll with them,
let them guide your final aims; but know what is possible in
the normie political sphere and don’t become the clown of
ZOG like Nehlen and so many others did. If they were serious
people they would have never come in public and encouraged
young men to go on marches where they could be identified
and tracked for life. Know when the snake is defending itself
—don’t be a patsy. Your models must be those that have
worked: Trump, Orban, the Italian movements now ascendant,
Sebastian Kurz and his party in Austria. You don’t see these
people marching around in hotel bellboy’s uniforms with a
Sonnenrad and talking about the “Jewish Question” and this
other kind of role-play. It’s true that in the end, my aims here

and those of someone like Orban have little or nothing in
common. If they were successful, all they would be able to do
is reestablish the same world of sheep that existed a hundred
years ago, maybe inoculated against the latest degradations…
but nothing very great. Still, I think it’s better for the nations to
be well-tended, happy sheep than to be reduced to teeming
piles of starving rats. This, anyway, is my advice for those
who want to go into normie politics and have a relatively
normie life, and there’s nothing wrong with that—it’s even a
great necessity.
I’ve written this book, however, because this may not
satisfy some of us, and I wanted to talk about the world in the
coming decades, and what paths may open for a different way.
67
Too much is already said about the evils of suburbs, but I
think the danger of such places for modern civilized man is so
great that it must be repeated. On the other hand it’s important
not to take this too far: the Europeans live in the center of their
cities and are politically and socially in just as bad or worse
situations. Still, I think it’s easier for them to fix their
problems, and to avert the greatest dangers, should they arrive.
It’s easier because in these places the rightful citizens of the
nations still own their cities. I don’t see any evidence that the
tax base of America moved to the suburbs by choice. Their
inner cities were taken away from them not, as is imagined, by
blacks, but by the politicians—and their handlers—who found
it more profitable to replace middle class citizens with an
underclass. The space to which they’ve been segregated and to
which they have to “commute”  is I think a form of absolute
hell to raise children in, especially boys. There is no freedom
of motion except to regimented activities, they are always
watched by caretakers of some kind. The places are of
incredible ugliness, which takes away also from the will to
discover new things at all. There are no nooks and corners
where boys can form gangs, be away from prying eyes of
parents and others, and have the feeling that they are exploring
and owning territory, as there is in the city and in the

countryside. America has successfully portioned off its
historical population, its rightful citizens, and its tax base, in
work camps and dormitories. That is what the modern
American “city” is: an economic zone arranged much like a
work-camp, or concentration-camp if you want. It would be
trivial for the French security services to shut off access to the
banlieues infested by turds, and it would be just as trivial for
American security services to shut off access to the suburbs
and hold the middle class by the neck. I think the reason the
suburbs are hateful to the raising of boys is also the reason
they are most objectionable in general, namely that while in
the countryside or the city a restive population would be able
to hold their territory and challenge a power should the need
arise, such a thing is impossible in the suburbs. Suburbs are
living arrangement for slaves and subjects.
68
“Social justice”—disgusting parasitism, dressed up in rags
of words so worn-out and pee-stained even their defenders are
sick of the smell…they say it half-mouthed and pleading: just
look at them during the Occupy rallies, hoping to siphon off
respect. The need to be respected is sign of very low and
wormlike condition of spirit. The tantrums of the coddled and
domesticated, of no force… No force behind it, just the
opinions of the left-over, the prattling of guilt and begging: not
even the Marxist engine of the worker. What worker? They
have contempt for the worker…the force and confidence in his
labor, in the place of his labor in history that the Bolshevik had
is gone, now it’s the lumpen using his language,
unconvincingly. Dependent on the Leviathan, and therefore its
tool. “Social” justice…but why only “social”…why set your
sights so low…you mean just the opinions of the many? Who
cares. Here is my vision of the true justice, the justice of
nature: the zoos opened, predators unleashed by the dozens,
hundreds….four thousand hungry wolves rampaging on streets
of these hive cities, elephants and bison stampeding, the
buildings smashed to pieces, the cries of the human bug
shearing through the streets as the lord of beasts returns.

Manhattan, Moscow, Peking reduced to ruins overgrown by
vines and forest, the haunt of the lynx and coyote again. The
great cesspool slums, Calcutta, Nairobi, all the fetid latrines of
the world covered over by mudslides, overgrown with thick
jungle, this is justice. Lisbon to me always seemed city still
inhabited just out of vanity. Let loose hundreds of tigers,
companies of rhinoceros, with strong engine of spirit revving
in their deep chests, let them bring the justice of the volcano to
this world of trash! Bless the passing of the Shoggoth!
69
There is story from Heian period in Japanese history that I
always found amazing. Japan was still ruled by the Imperial
court and there were local administrators and so on, like any
Oriental centralized despotism. But there was also warrior
class. They inherited this from some steppe invasions that
changed their society a few centuries before. Anyway as
always happens, the Imperial bureaucrats grew useless and
weak and by the end of this age, all the actual physical power
was with the samurai. What I find amazing is how long it took
them to figure out they no longer had to listen to the weak
commands of the Imperial hierarchy, and that they were
actually the rulers. Words like “legitimacy,” “soft power,”
“rights,” or, in their time honor, duty, divine right and so on
are all delusions meant to distract and obscure men of power
from their own strength and aims, and put them in service to
someone else. Such men are more likely than others to be
driven by notions of honor and responsibility. And this sense is
therefore very easy to abuse…and such men can be
manipulated for some time. Eventually they do realize,
however, that they don’t have to listen, and that they are
actually the ones who rule. This moment, when “the game is
up,” the moment of revelation, is what I’ve always found very
amazing. In the modern world everything moves much
faster….I expect that not long from now such men will
awaken in the West and I suppose other parts of the world, and
wonder why for so long they had listened to complete cretins
give orders…and give orders too with such weak pretexts,

much weaker than the bureaucracy of Imperial Japan. In Fiji
the natives became relatively recently outnumbered because a
hundred years before the English imported their favorite cheap
labor, the Tamils. Eventually these outbred the natives and
became the majority. So under democracy rules, they took
over the state. The natives, however, still controlled the
military. They saw no reason  why they must follow this
“democracy” into giving their lands away to aliens brought in
by oppressors. So they took over the state, and did so very
easily. I think it’s inevitable that this will become the rule all
over the world, and very soon. Democracy and ethnic diversity
don’t mix, but the ethnic nationalists are wrong when they
think that the result of all this will be secession. Low-grade
ethnic warfare is a terrible thing, but to break up entire nations
into smaller pieces, as much as the city state is to my taste,
isn’t likely to happen. You must look to South Africa where
the whites and coloreds could have asked for their own state in
Cape Town, and agitated for this, but instead they wanted to
keep the country together. The reason for this is that any such
secession would have meant giving up all parts of the country
rich in gold, diamonds, and many other things. South Africa is
an extreme case and secession, where a minority is five or ten
percent of the population….here it might happen. But it’s a net
loss to have the Boers migrate out of the land their ancestors
tamed and built, and it would be a net loss in America if it had
to happen what some of you want, to cede the southwest to
Mexico, or whatever other schemes are discussed. If indeed
you do manage to get a white population that is as mobilized
and self-aware as you want, they won’t feel it a great victory
to give up land and resources their ancestors won by their
valor. The greatest president was Polk. But what’s likely to
happen long before any mobilization by white populations in
their home countries is military rule: democracy will go before
pure ethnostates are formed. I think this happened many times
in history in ages of national decline, not just because of ethnic
or religious diversity, but for many other reasons, and most of
all because the military form of government is natural to
human species. Those generals will be most successful who

mix power with personal flair, like Duterte or Peron did. This
is very difficult in America because of the types of men who
get promoted in the military. Some will be able to affect,
however, the charisma of Roman stern old man.
70
Given the inevitability of military government, I see
already how nationalists and many similar men, sympathetic to
the cause of freedom and high life, will join the armed forces
and rise through the ranks, and my guess is that many are
already doing this. In some way this had already happened,
and at the middle ranks the armed forces are still relatively full
of patriots throughout the western world. In France the
military and security services, including the CRS, support the
National Front of Le Pen, overwhelmingly. It’s only a matter
of time. In the Anglo world it’s somewhat more complicated.
The upper ranks have long been purged of men who could
offer resistance to the hidden hands that rule: it started with the
Tailhook “scandal,” and even before then, and only accelerated
after. Even at the level of captain or major, many men are
traditional conservatives and not exactly nationalists. I think
it’s unnecessary to address such men directly: events alone
will convince them. But many are being persecuted as it is,
and run out of the military, in the same way that police
departments are being purged. This process is very slow. It
won’t work out well in the end for the lords of lies: all the
technology in the world won’t save a “diverse” military if it
should ever be in a conflict: they’ll turn the missiles on
themselves by accident or run submarines into the ocean floor,
as has already happened in South Africa. Still, America is
pretty well isolated from danger, and you fool yourself if you
think they will “reform” anything even if they suffer disastrous
defeats abroad. They fear men of power within the country
more than they do any foreign army. It’s difficult to solve this
problem. The military is already so full of homofaggotry that it
will be very unpleasant for any man who is a man to join its
ranks at the moment. He might have a hard time advancing in
its hierarchy, even affecting the views of a traditional religious

conservative or a mainstream Trumpist which is, I suppose, as
far as you could go right now. I would hate also to see any free
man killed or maimed in the service of this military that’s been
turned into a Hessian merc force for Gulf nabobs, for various
ethnic groups, for the idiotic schemes of international
financiers and the benefit of machine politicians looking to
advance their families’ fortunes abroad. Then there is also the
extreme boredom you should expect from any kind of military
life, which even under the best circumstances consists in
busywork. That said, military training is very valuable. Even
in a situation—precisely in the case where men of any worth
will have a tough time becoming generals and such…then it
will be even more valuable. Military training and the
brotherhood with other men in battle that comes from it is a
lifelong advantage, and a great benefit to any cause. I can’t
give advice to anyone for how to live, but those who would be
willing to deal with the evils of the modern military and are
aware of all the drawbacks, but still find themselves suited for
it, would do a great good for themselves and for their peoples
if they joined. It goes without saying that they will have to
practice good judgment and discretion while in service; but the
military can’t simply be abandoned to mohawked Latinx traps
and neo-Leninist activists. Nationalists, I have no doubt, will
join and attempt to reform both the ranks and the academies in
the western world. Then there are also things like the French
Foreign legion, although the discipline they practice is terrible.
It lasts seven years, and they reserve the right to pursue you in
any country if you desert. Many ex-SS men and other
Germans from World War II joined the legion and fought in
Vietnam, and some committed suicide because of the rigors of
this unit. Although it’s possible now that they’ve relaxed
somewhat.
71
Everything that is said now about Russia is pure
projection. In fact it’s America and the western world that is
run by spooks and intel agencies. They’ve placed their assets
and compromised patsies in the corporate world no less than in

other government agencies and among elected politicians.
Many, like Obama for example, are entirely creations of this or
that faction inside the security system. These in turn are allied
to oligarchs and often to foreign interests and powers, so that
it’s hard to think many western nations have anything but a
parody of freedom and national sovereignty. “Representative
democracy” plus a bureaucratic state is often criticized by
conservatives as destructive of personal freedom and initiative,
which it is; but given that most people who go into public life
are poor and weak-minded, it also just means indirect rule by
spooks, oligarchs, and whatever foreign nation or interest can
funnel more money or influence or threat here or there. Many
of these people in the west screaming about Russia are puppets
of China or the Gulf States—even when they’re not directly on
the take or compromised, they expect sinecures and great
wealth that will come in the future. Most of the media is
similarly compromised, although the average schmuck
journalist is probably deluded by the platitudes of “free press”
and the humanitarian doxies that have been banged in their
heads. Inside head they have central vacuole full of fluid, no
brain. I have no doubt that things like “pizzagate” are real
simply because, if I was a spook, or a rich man with spooks
available, I’d find it very easy to compromise the officious,
status-hungry low people who have been attracted to
government in our time. These people arrive in the capital
cities with a hungry look in the eye and, being full of the
feeling that “they’re in on things” and that they’ve made it,
have a very tough time controlling their appetites or behavior.
Many are chosen and groomed precisely because they begin
with demented appetites to begin with. This isn’t to say there
aren’t patriotic factions within the security services that
actually run the west, or patriotic oligarchs who can’t offshore
their wealth, and whose interest is in some sense then tied to
the land and the people. I foresee a time anyway when
nationalists, those who are capable of it, will begin to join
these services. They will do themselves, their friends, and their
country a great good through this. Some who are suited to
math and technology will no doubt join those types of

agencies. Others are already learning foreign languages—
Tibetan has many uses! But there are other languages and area
studies for those who go to college, to study and do well in.
Arabic, 
Russian, 
Persian, 
Chinese, 
Indonesian—many
opportunities! Given the very low talent pool in government or
available for recruitment, they will be able to join those other
types of agencies, of which there are a few, with some ease.
Here it would be necessary more than in the military to hide
one’s power level, and even to affect the left-internationalist
doxy at times. Any nationalist or populist would be wise to
affect at most the style of a Mueller should he want to be “on
the right.” Not all are capable of this, and I think the strain will
be considerable. Such people will often have to work alone
and remain quite isolated for years, holding their aim and star
as a precious hidden possession, and never confuse the short-
term for the final goal. Few will be able to or want to deal with
the nonsense…this has been the problem of the Anglo
conservatives all along, though. They’ve always preferred to
get a tan, play tennis, and make money. They’ve wanted to be
left alone, so that the state was taken over by vermin. I expect
such things will change, regardless of what I or anyone else
says, simply because some people want to survive, and not to
die out. They will no doubt slowly, one way or another, join
and change the face of such agencies. The power of the
modern world remains, for the foreseeable future, in such
agencies. A fateful comet like a Caesar and Napoleon is a hard
thing to hope for. And such a man would need allies, anyway.
72
Government work can be too boring for men of adventure.
Some say that the CIA, for example, exaggerates its
incompetence in movies, or in known events—the failure of
9/11, of Iraq, their endless humiliations at the hands of the
Soviets—to hide its true power and appear weaker than it is.
But I think this isn’t true, and if you’ve met ex-CIA people
you’ll understand that the rumors about their disability aren’t
exaggerated at all. After James Jesus Angleton they were
thoroughly fucked in every hole by the Soviets and others. All

his warnings came true. He was a unique American, of rare
secretive character in a people that enjoys openness and
display; for this he is now maligned in mean-spirited movies.
He wasn’t very typical of his people, the Anglo-Saxon, and I
suppose it’s possible that through his Spanish blood there
came a strain of Habsburg court intrigue, or something like
this. The Russians and others are very good at intelligence
work, because they grow up in a world of secrecy and learn to
take great joy in subterfuge of this kind. Most Americans who
try this are just playing games, and affecting a manner. Full of
Mormons and various cripplettes who put on a high Wasp
manner, full also of soccer moms and neuters, the intelligence
services are in fact quite incompetent, despite their
considerable power. Both can be true. And you can see this in
their very clumsy attempts to affect public opinion inside
America. I won’t talk about speculation over false flag attacks
and such, which I’m sure happen. But it’s without a doubt that
they’ve tried to get into the “meme” business, and had units
dedicated to this kind of visual propaganda, especially during
the last election. We all saw their efforts and we laughed. I
think the biggest threat the right presented to this system came
from something like 4chan, which showed it can be an
intelligence agency of its own, and far superior to what the
formal spooks could do. How they located obscure objects,
places, and people from photos is something that formally-
trained agents couldn’t normally do. The memes put a spike of
fear in the hearts of all the constipated spooks. A couple of
images spread by Ricky Vaughn or some channers made the
news and were many times more effective than the
government’s own propaganda efforts, and you can see, in
shows like Homeland and others, the really titanic hatred these
people had for the army of right-wing autists that messed up
their plans. They work hard to dox, for this reason. You must
understand where your strengths lie. If government or military
work isn’t appropriate, learn this art of the visual
communication and share it with your friends, work with each
other to perfect it. Don’t be lame. Learn to make videos and
photos—there are various tools around, many editing

programs. You can start with cheap camera if you need. Work
in groups…in “labs” to develop, perfect, and target these
videos and images. I assure you this frightens them, and is
many, many times more effective than marching in public and
playing the clown they want you to play. The long game of
persuading the public is far from won. Keep the eye on the
task, far from accomplished: to discredit authorities, to mock
all public pieties, to show the leaders of government,
bureaucracy, finance, corporations, big tech, and media for the
pathetic ghouls they are. Many gains have been made lately,
but their dishonor in the eyes of the normies is  far from
accomplished. When they try to make you expose yourself and
to make positive claims, they win. Keep up the pressure of true
samizdat.
73
Some people like to meet and display in public, and I think
this can be done, if done well. But there are very few groups
that do this well. They exist all over the world—a couple in
America and Europe, some in South America and in Japan.
The few nationalist organizations that do it well have much
care for appearance and also don’t engage in ideologies,
symbols and behaviors that are bizarre or hostile to the
customs and wishes of the people. A Japanese nationalist can
invoke Shinto imagery and oppose this nationalist mode to the
“foreign” religion of Buddhism, but that’s because these two
traditions have been in a push-pull game throughout the
history of that country, and still are. But no independent pagan
tradition exists in the western world, and play-acting in that
way is going to fail. Offending Christians in political
movements is stupid, when they’re one of the last bastions
against a common enemy. If their beliefs are corrupted, they
can be reformed. Above all I believe that any public
movement will be most effective if it is not political at all, and
remains “implicit.” I think there can be much good done in
public, but should be promoted in the form of a social
movement, not a political one. Nationalists must present a
healthy alternative to the eternal rule of ugliness in our time:

promote nature, beauty, physical fitness, the preservation of
high traditions of literature and art. In regards to the latter, it’s
even a necessity because there’s no school or university that
will give you a worthwhile education. There are a variety of
ways to approach this but I think given the collapse of the Boy
Scouts, that a scouting and nature-preservation movement
would be one of the best. Hiking and the protection,
preservation, and admiration of public and national parks
would put youth in the wilderness and inspire a sense of
boundlessness and awe in them. It would teach them many
skills, build camaraderie, and emphasize the connection
between the people and the land both for the participants and
as a matter of image for others. It’s without a doubt that any
public organization will be infiltrated by feds, hostiles, and
agents provocateurs, and therefore it’s necessary to avoid and
condemn any imagery or message of violence, and to ostracize
people who exhibit tendencies in that direction or who try to
convince others to idiotic “action.” One can do this at the same
time that such groups can engage in self-defense martial arts
training and indeed, in an urban setting, work for the creation
of private boxing and wrestling clubs. The risks are
considerable either way, but it’s not out of the question that
through the path of the promotion of health and beauty you
will be able even to persuade feds to your side: they too can
self-improve! This would be a movement of peace. The right
can at the moment furthermore easily take over the doctrine of
peace—of nonintervention abroad—and of the protection of
nature, and these things would be great achievements…this
would go some way to convincing youth to your side. I would
also recommend that you don’t engage in outright racism of a
useless sort, for example, the deliberate exclusion of friendlies
from different races and so on; they would in any case be very
few. This can happen at the same time that you openly appeal
to white youths and defend them from racial attacks and teach
them the greatness of their history and their literary traditions.
Women, on the other hand, must be absolutely excluded from
such groups, and rather encouraged to have their own. The
presence of women in any group like this will totally destroy

its social function, by introducing sexual competition, and by
the fact that it’s in their blood to play on men’s misplaced
chivalry to cause friction for their own advantage. Such a
movement would be a living rebuke to the constrained and
low, anxious life promoted by the regime of the crippled. 
Once developed and with some reach, but maybe even in the
beginning, they can engage in local welfare projects of various
kinds, for example helping opiate addicts by providing them
with gyms and by breathing into them the desire for life,
helping old people who are alone, keeping the streets and
parks clean, and many other such things. I also think that
claiming public spaces in cities should eventually be tried, in
the same way that members of Generation Identity in Europe
often patrol the subways and streets to show they won’t be
intimidated. But for this to happen there must be good-will
built first for the public. There will of course be many attacks
made on such groups, but what matters is whether the majority
will believe them. If you remain firm as a social movement of
peace, of the promotion of natural beauty, healthy living, and
healthy nationalism, any attacks on such groups can be made
to appear for what they are, the fears of the paranoids and
hatreds of the resentful and ugly.
74
The equivalent of the “meme” in political action is the
prank. You really can’t underestimate the power of a good
prank…this can be as little as putting up a funny banner or a
witty slogan. Such things don’t need to be connected to any
formal group, but done in private by yourself or with your
friends. The pit bull ban campaign is a great example of real-
life trolling. The “It’s OK to be white” stickers were a good
idea, at least in the beginning: those who began to put
threatening fonts on them, or logos for weirdo organizations
ruined that troll very fast. The purpose of all such “political
action” should be the same as memetic samizdat, which is to
make the enemy look ridiculous. You must show them for
what they are, which is, dour, old, sclerotic, ugly, pedantic; it’s
good if you show yourself in the opposite light, although not

necessary. But in France the Hommen, a traditionalist and
manly response to the Femmen, have provided a good model
for attractive public action of this sort. They use masks, and
anonymity is often an absolute necessity for this kind of thing.
But the possibilities of this are boundless and, even in cases
like the “OK to be white” stickers, where the initial message
isn’t funny, it works because it forces the enemy to take a
public position that is widely and justly recognized as evil and
resentful. Trump has been very good at this, although it’s not
hard; he frequently forces his opponents to take the side of the
vilest murderers, gang members, of lawlessness and decrepit
viciousness. All such actions must be performed unannounced,
planned in secret, and carried out with a close group of friends,
to prevent the enemy from organizing a preemptive action.
Remember that they still own many of the cities and the police
forces in these cities, which can be induced to act illegally and
to put you in danger; for this reason, and many others, public
rallies announced well ahead of time are totally useless, as are
public “policy” speeches and other such wankery. You must of
course avoid all violence and all talk of violence as well, and
not fall into the trap they want you to fall into. In a small
group of friends you know yourself, it’s easier to police who
stays and who doesn’t, and easier to use your judgment about
whether this or that guy is nuts or worse. Remember always to
keep eyes on the prize in such action, which is to discredit the
enemy and expose his authoritarianism, his stupidity, his
slavishness, his corruption.
75
The friends you make are more important, far more
important, than the girlfriends or wives you’ll have. And
actually your girl will admire you for this—not that you
should do it for that reason, but it’s an added benefit: women
admire men with great personal projects, and who are not
beholden to them. If she’s your “everything” and your “best
friend,” she will likely lose respect for you. The greatest “in”
that nationalists and allies have against the enemy is the fact
that the enemy has sowed sexual chaos and has destroyed

romance. Our parents’ generations are largely responsible for
this, but the lords of lies and ugliness who rule our time
continue it and use it as their greatest tool of control. So this is
the best way to awaken men to the evil and subjection of our
time, and, I would say, also many women, who are very
unsatisfied. On the other hand, someone who is motivated
simply by this problem isn’t reliable. There won’t be any “beta
revolution,” and betas are unreliable, because they can be
easily bought off with a girlfriend, or even a shrew wife and
the parody of a good domestic life. I’ve seen many men,
intelligent and well-educated, but weak in their core and much
too concerned with women, who gave up all higher aspirations
once a half-decent girl came along. I find it disturbing that so
many think this kind of life is a great salvation for you
personally or “for your race.” This is ridiculous. By all means,
marry and have children if you want, but don’t do it as a
political statement or a form of action. Quite aside from the
fact that you yourself wouldn’t have wanted to be born as part
of a demographic war, this isn’t a kind of struggle that
civilized races, with a need for space and fresh air, can ever
win. The idea that whites or Japanese should start vomiting out
six or seven children to a vagina like the illiterate slave hordes
of Bangladesh or Niger is absurd. For one, it’s never going to
happen…and it shouldn’t. Throughout history we’ve almost
always been outnumbered, and it hasn’t been a problem.
Immigration restriction, combined with some judicious
deportation done gradually, would be enough to secure the
homelands of the civilized. If the situation worsens or a time
of crisis comes, the eventual abandonment of democracy and
other, far sterner measures, including, I expect, the
intervention of the military, will take place. Autists having a
family or not doesn’t matter in a world of billions; the
European nations have populations of hundreds of millions
and aren’t in danger of “dying out.” So by all means, have a
girlfriend and a family, but I fear that too much focus on this
as a “statement” against the program of the enemy is a
mistake. Usually a family is the end of a man. This can be both
good and bad. But the necessities of caring for a family, and

the emotional demands, usually blind him to anything higher.
In case you do have a family, have it because you have great
love and lust for a woman—and I would recommend the same
for women, abandonment to such instinct, if you are lucky
enough to have it. Choose by quality of biology and remember
that the intellect is inherited from the mother, the character
from the father. But once you have a family, don’t think this is
a “political” achievement, or that it would ever be enough.
Continue the mission you have set out for yourself, and
continue above all the friendships you have formed in service
to this higher cause. The friendships you have made meeting
each other, in person or online, are the greatest event of the
last few years, and source for the greatest promise. You must
never stop studying and working together or forget the
enthusiasm of this discovery. A friendship in struggle for war
and a higher cause is something that, more than anything else,
can lift you out of the dreadful gravity of this turgid world of
shades.
76
Caring too much about food, nutrition, and especially
health can be considered something unmanly…a kind of
neurotic, hypochondriac fretting more suited to spinsters. On
the other hand, in the past the world was not as full of poison
as it is now. Nearly all the food is centrally produced, stored in
warehouses, and poisoned with mycotoxins and many other
things that slowly destroy your essence. Therefore it’s
important to take measures to protect yourself against this as
far as you can. Although it’s expensive, the probiotic Gastrus
has been of great use to many of us. Something else I can
recommend is coconut oil, and staying in the sun. If you are
not a bogjig whose ancestors evolved under permanent cloud
cover in northwest Europe, you will usually be able to tan, and
the effects of sun are many and very good. You have no
excuse! (Those who can’t tan must supplement with vitamin
D3, but also some other things.) You begin with ten minutes in
mid-day sun, and work up from there. Usually thirty minutes a
day is enough, when you can get there. There’s much

propaganda about tanning, but once you live in tropical areas
you can see that even brown people begin to look sickly and
have a kind of sallow color if they avoid the sun. You’re meant
to worship the sun. Remember the song of New Order! It goes
without saying that you must lift weights, and for this there are
many different programs, all suited to a different body,
different biology, and different aims. In general it’s better to
lose fat and cut body fat before growing in muscle, but it
depends on many things. But a regime of sun and steel is
absolutely required, for your mood, your aesthetics, for getting
the attention of women and the respect of men, and above all
for preparation for struggle and war. In ancient Greek cities,
only the citizens were allowed to lift weights and work in the
gym: slaves were forbidden. It’s no wonder that the robots of
Babylon seek to ban gyms for men in our time. The pathetic
failure of the “swole-left,” an entirely artificial construct
promoted in a pre-planned and coordinated way by formal
organs of the left, all of this is very instructive: the occasional
exception aside, it’s not possible to be “swole-left” today. Any
man who improves his body through sun and steel will drift
away from the modern left, a program of decrepitude and
resentful monstrosity. They know this and are afraid.
I have to make this restatement now at the end of this brief
manifesto:
Many are domestic animals and happy that way. I speak
instead to the men who feel stifled by this bug world.
People at all times try to domesticate each other. Language
is used to clobber and deceive others into submission and
domestication. 
Ideas 
and 
arguments 
and 
stories 
are
manufactured for the same. The modern world is no different
in this regard from any wretched tribal society. I’m sure that
Europe prior to the Bronze Age, before the coming of the
Aryans, was similar to modern Europe. People lived in
communal longhouses and were likely browbeaten and ruled
by obese mammies who instilled in them socialism and
feminism.

Most of those so-called males of the longhouse age were
probably similar to the modern leftist “herb” who doesn’t lift.
Which is why those societies were so easily conquered.
The left realizes they look weak and lame—because they
are. They know they have nothing to offer youth but
submission and lectures. They know they’re unsexy and staid.
If indeed young leftist men will start lifting and worshiping
beauty, they will be forced to leave the left.
The bugman pretends to be motivated by compassion, but
is instead motivated by a titanic hatred of the well-turned-out
and beautiful. The bugman seeks to bury beauty under a
morass of ubiquitous ugliness and garbage. So much of the
Pacific and the pristine oceans are now full of garbage and
plastic. This garbage is flowing out of cities built on piles of
unimaginable filth. The waters are polluted with birth control
pills and mind-bending drugs emitted by obese high-fructose-
corn-syrup-guzzling beasts. Then of course there is the
ugliness of the people. And it’s only getting uglier with the
crowded, unhygienic new cities of our age, populated by
hordes of dwarf-like zombies that are imported for slave labor
and political agitation from the fly-swept latrines of the world.
People feel they can’t escape this, they know this is an
aggressive method to demoralize and oppress. When I post my
images of vitality in the clear sun of a long noon, they feel a
weight lifted off them. Many feel as if they’ve escaped the
gravity of this trash world and returned to a time when the
natural beauty of man could be displayed, indicating this is a
form of life free to develop its powers.
I believe in the right of nature. I’m bored by ideology and
by wordchopping. The images I post speak for themselves and
point to a primal order that is felt by all, in a physical sense.
When I or my followers post powerful, beautiful images of
male models of unbelievable vitality and youth, our enemies
gnash their teeth in envy and hatred, while we are exalted and
inspired.

The superior, like the handsome Alexander, exert an
almost magical effect that draws others to them. Some are
drawn to higher action, others to other tasks, but all petty cares
are forgotten. There is nothing that needs to be said or
elaborated, no need to intellectualize this any more than the
natural attraction wolves on the move have for their king, or
bees in a hive for their queen.
When I post images of godlike men like Pietro Boselli,
many are in awe and drawn to emulate. I have inspired many
to develop their bodies and physical and spiritual power.
I have nothing to say to the frivolous people who have
found themselves, maybe bewildered, in positions of influence
in media or government, or to the many superfluous who
follow them. In the next hundred years and even before,
barbaric piratical brotherhoods will wipe away this corrupt
civilization, as they did at the end of the Bronze Age.
77
The Star of the Covenant—
What is likely then to happen in the long run? I foresee a
time, not too far in the future, when the Leviathan will not be
able to hold itself together. I expect that the peoples will be
able to save themselves from the global slave project that is
now promoted. But what will come after is likely to be
unsatisfying as well. The nations will escape the danger, but
they will return to their peaceful and sheep-like existence.
They will need to be protected from getting themselves into
the same position as they are now. I believe that at some point,
before or after the troubles, the superior specimens are going
to find each other and leave this civilization. They will form
fortresses on the edge of the civilized world, in the tropics,
from where they will watch the seas. The era of high piracy
will return. Such men will develop above all their physical
powers and their ability to wage war. They will offer the
nations defense in exchange for a price. Occasionally they will
send a great demagogue into the peoples, when this becomes
necessary. Such men, perched atop these eagles’ nests, will

have the territory of a new frontier again, and a life that suits
them. Science will be liberated from the constraints of caring
for comfort or entertainment. Great projects in science, the
projects of private men, will once again begin. Such fortresses
will possess frightful weapons to defend themselves, and will
have penetrated deep into the nations their antennae and their
many emissaries and watchers.
I think that is a great dream, but it may happen sooner than
you think. With a few details off, it’s what Executive
Outcomes would have become, or Bob Denard would have
become, if the great states of Europe had been unable to stop
them. And I think soon they will be unable. But this great
opportunity is still some time away. Before then, there must be
a great work done. I see a time soon when a few men, maybe
no more than a few hundred in the whole nation, or spread out
over the whole world, will embark on the mission of the great
down-going. I have praised instinct many times in this book.
But life on the ascent can follow instinct, whereas if you feel
yourself to be a decadent, it’s very important to resist instincts
that lead to pointless self-destruction. Discipline and
excellence are best when they come from your own desires,
not from repression. But if your instincts lead you instead to
self-debasing behaviors that will hurt you, by all means resist.
Just understand that this path is at most a makeshift. We
should want to give birth to beings who follow the higher path
in life as a matter of innate blood and desire, not out of duty.
Having to spend time and spiritual energy trying to repress
destructive desires is difficult and expensive. Discipline is
most important, but it matters where it comes from.
Unfortunately many pay no attention at all to these two ways
of “discipline,” but instead are concerned only with the public
image of their virtue or goodness. There’s next to no good in
that. And the right has hurt itself considerably by the adoption
of this kind of Phariseeism. I give you an example of what I
mean: many of the intelligence agencies are populated with
Mormons. These men are chosen for their upright moral
character, the fact that they pass lie detector tests, that they’re
not easily compromised, and so on…all qualities that make for

bad spies. To be effective in this world you must be very well-
acquainted with the underworld, with criminal life, with
junkies, dealers, prostitutes, gamblers, with the perviest of
pervs. And this is what I mean by the great down-going. To
gain a true hold on the foundations of this trash-world, a
certain group among the right will have to descend in this
inferno. I am firmly convinced that this is the key to
overturning everything that is corrupt, and the path to the great
purgation. I imagine a network of brothels and gambling-
houses around the world, production of porn videos, and a
complete penetration of the world of vice. Yes, to ensnare, to
compromise, to corrupt, and above all to observe and to know
their secrets. To descend into a floating world of complete
vice, and even to engage in it—as you must if you are to thrive
in this world—while keeping your head and keeping in focus
the fire of your aim…isn’t this a great and very difficult
achievement? This path must be only for very few, very few
are suited to it. But these few are to be among the greatest of
the coming generation. This brotherhood will work instead to
intensify vice, to stir up demonic passions, to sow total
confusion in the heart of the beast. The increase of chaos,
confusion and pressure on the Leviathan will lay it low:
imagine even a world where the people, under relentless
assault of contradictory and wild claims, would lose all faith in
the media and government and doctors and believe nothing
they hear through official channels anymore. This would be an
order of knights of the spirit such as exists at most every
thousand years. Slowly, maybe over two generations, they will
work patiently, exploring and laying claims to all the sewers of
the underworld, all the effluences of the Leviathan, all the
joints of the lower skeleton that undergirds this world. They
will take over night clubs, bars, brothels, hotels, casinos,
pornography, and much worse, and rather than live to insulate
themselves from the vice promoted by this world, they will
intensify it and learn to wield it as a great weapon. It is the
greatest weapon in our age. Know that the Leviathan sustains
itself not by the promotion of vice, but by its normalization.
But in every normalization, a great deal must be edited out;

this is its great weakness. This order of knights will keep vice
true to itself. From underneath comes all the Satanic power of
the Babylon we are fighting. Some men, whose bond between
each other must be made of titanium, will surely come around
who can descend in that world…who have the mental and
spiritual resources to descend to the underworld and come
back with the prize. I am sure this covenant, this brotherhood
of the damned, when they are first taking steps to descend…
will feel like the great mystery of things will reveal itself in its
fullness to them…not the answer, ungraspable by the mind,
but just this X, the madness inherent behind things will show
itself as they are about to descend …it will be an amazing
rush, like when great pterodactyl cryptid bird of prey in Congo
is about to swoop down in the night on its target from canopy.
I know such men of bronze exist…I dream that, as they
descend they will keep their eyes above on the great North
Star, and I think about how they will feel…I imagine how they
will traverse the great labyrinth of shadows while their spirit
fixes itself with a great focus and obsession on that fateful star,
and that other one…the destroyer of nations… never
forgetting the way back….not forgetting its call and the eternal
task it whispers into those with ears to listen.

