Study of memory: processes and systems 
ENDEL TULVING 
A dozen or so years ago I wrote a paper under the title, 'How many memory sys- 
tems are there?' It consisted of three sections. In the first I presented some pre- 
theoretical reasons for hypothesizing the existence of multiple memory systems, 
in the second I described a ternary classification scheme of memory, and in the 
third I discussed the nature and logic of evidence for multiple systems (Tulving 
1985a, p.385). 
In the final section of the paper I observed that, 'The puzzle of memory systems 
is not and will not be an easy one to solve. Many difficulties have to be overcome 
before we can expect more rapid progress' (Tulving 1985a, p.395). 1 mentioned 
some of the sources of frustration there and then, and have discussed others else- 
where (Tulving 1986, 1993). One difficulty that I did not anticipate was the long- 
lasting vehement opposition to the simple idea of multiple memory systems. Had 
anyone predicted at the time that ten or fifteen years later we would still be arguing 
about the issue, or assembling opposite views under the heading of 'single versus 
multiple systems of memory', as witnessed by the present volume, I would not have 
believed it. I too know, of course, that we scientists love to hate new ideas (Barber 
1961), and that we routinely resist facts that do not fit into whatever comfortable 
framework we have managed to adopt or to construct. But time and time again the 
history of science shows that eventually all relevant facts and worthwhile ideas do 
get accepted. So, what is holding up the advent of multiple memory systems? 
Progress, of course, has occurred. More and more cognitive students of mem- 
ory seem to be willing to go as far as to accept the idea that perhaps there are indeed 
two different 'kinds' of memory. Then, faced with a number of differently labelled 
dichotomies-declarative versus procedural, episodic versus semantic, controlled 
versus automatic, conscious versus unconscious, intentional versus unintentional, 
explicit versus implicit, hippocampally based versus non-hippocampally based, 
and several others-many 
of them get cold feet and immediately seek safety again, 
this time in a dichotomy. They do it in one of two ways. Some try to figure out which 
of the many dichotomies is the 'right' one, on the interesting assumption that if 
one dichotomy is valid then all others are invalid. Others use the good old levelling 
treatment and force all the existing dichotomies into a single overarching dicho- 
tomy, and try to be happy with that. 
Going from a unitary system to two is progress, of course, but far too timid. Even 
if we did not have all the facts that point to more than two memory systems we 

should eagerly explore the possibility that the real number is larger. Although it is 
true that scientists frequently begin their efforts at classification by taking a whole 
and dividing into just two parts, everyone knows that Nature herself abhors di- 
chotomies as much as she abhors a vacuum. 
In this chapter, the term 'multiple' in the expression 'multiple memory systems' 
means 'an as yet unknown number that is probably larger than four', because 
we already have reasons to distinguish between at least four long-term systems 
(Schacter and Tulving 1994). Here I explain what I mean by the expression, how 
the view it represents differs from the 'unitarian'view of memory, and why I think 
it makes a better description of nature than the single-system view. 
First, however, we have to be very clear about what it is that we are debating in this 
volume. There happen to be two rather closely related issues, easy to confuse with 
each other. One of these is under scrutiny here whereas the other is not. The issue 
that is being discussed here has to do with single versus multiple memory systems. 
The related issue that is not being discussed has to do with memory processes versus 
memory systems. Unless we clearly distinguish between the two, we will be wasting 
a lot of time on an irrelevancy, perhaps even without realizing that we are doing so. 
The idea of the opposition between 'processes' and 'systems' is a false belief. It 
probably came about because process-oriented students of memory have tended 
to line up under the banner of unitary memory and the distinction between two dif- 
ferent issues became blurred. Thus the process-oriented unitary view of memory 
came to be contrasted with the multiple systems view, leading some observersinto 
thinking that there exists a conflict of 'processes versus systems (Foster and Jelicic, 
Chapter 1 this volume; Masson and Graf 1993, p.5). The idea was that there are two 
opposing camps: (i) one whose members explain phenomena of memory in terms 
of processes and their interactions within the general framework of unitary mem- 
ory, and (ii) another whose members eschew process-based explanations and ex- 
plain phenomena of memory in terms of the operations of multiple systems. I argue 
in thischapter that there is no controversy between process views and systems views 
of memory. The controversy is about unitary versus multiple memory systems. 
The remainder of this chapter is organized into three main parts. The first one 
spells out the differences between process-oriented versus systems-oriented ap- 
proaches to the study of memory, and explains why these approaches are not, and 
cannot be, in conflict. The second describes and illustrates the differences between 
unitary versus multiple memory theories, and shows why they necessarily must be 
in conflict. The third describes some critical empirical findings that converted me 
from being a faithful unitarian to a believer in multiplememory systems. The essay 
concludes with the prediction that the future belongs to multiple memory systems. 
COGNITIVE A N D  NEUROCOGNITIVE APPROACHES T O  
T H E  STUDY OF MEMORY 
For a long time there was only one general orientation to the study of learning and 
memory in psychology. Beginning with Ebbinghaus it went through various 

changes, some more substantial and some less so, but its essence stayed more or 
less the same for almost a hundred years. Gradually, however, the study of mem- 
ory expanded beyond its original boundaries, and today it is possible to think of 
at least two somewhat different approaches, or orientations, to the study of mem- 
ory. I refer to them as 'cognitive' and 'neurocognitive.'This section of the chapter 
describes the two, beginning with their working definitions. 
The cognitive approach is a psychologically inspired approach to the epistemo- 
logical explanation of the mechanisms underlying cognitive processes involved in 
a wide variety of memory tasks, on the basis of empirical evidence obtained from 
controlled experiments with normal human subjects interpreted in mentalistic 
(information processing) terms, all aimed at the construction of theories and 
models of memory. Researchers within the cognitive tradition tend to stay aloof 
from, and frequently do not approve of, the kinds of pursuits conducted under the 
neurocognitive orientation. 
The neurocognitive approach is a biologically inspired approach to the determina- 
tion of the ontology and organization of functioning neurocognitive structures 
that comprise memory, on the basis of a wide range of empirical evidence, includ- 
ing studies of cognitive consequences of brain damage interpreted in reductionist 
terms, all aimed at a natural classification of memory. The neurocognitive ap- 
proach embraces the fact of different memory processes. It also allows, and ap- 
proves of, the kinds of pursuits conducted under the cognitive orientation. 
These working definitions are presented in the form of two check lists in Table 
2.1. The key words in the table should not be taken terribly seriously, but they do 
convey the general flavour of the two approaches. 
Scientists who study memory from the cognitive perspective get their inspiration 
from watching people behave and from reading psychological accounts of behavi- 
our, whereas those who study memory from the neurocognitive perspective get 
their ideas from psychology and other branches of biology. Cognitive researchers 
typically begin with individual observations of effects of variables and their inter- 
relations on memory performance and then proceed to more comprehensive 
theories; neurocognitive researchers frequently begin with broad ideas about the 
Table 2.1 Two approaches to the study of memory 
Cognitive 
Neurocognitive 
Psychological 
Biological 
Epistemological 
Ontological 
Models; causes 
Organization; classification 
Explanatory 
Descriptive 
Predictions 
No predictions 
Human adults 
'Higher' animals 
Memory tasks 
Memory systems 
Mentalistic 
Reductionistic 
Cognitive processes 
Brainlmind correlations 
Behaviour 
Brain lesions; neuroimaging 

nature of memory and then check the validity of these ideas empirically. Cognit- 
ive research is epistemological in spirit: it seeks to understand the causes of the 
phenomena of interest. Conversely, neurocognitive research is ontological in spirit: 
it seeks to find out what memory is and how it functions. Cognitive researchers 
strive after explanation of phenomena in terms of mechanisms, and thrive on 
what are called 'predictions'; neurocognitive researchers attempt to describe what 
there is in nature and how it is organized, they are less keen on predictions. Like 
cognitive researchers, neurocognitive researchers are interested in the memory of 
healthy human adults, but they cast their nets much wider. In the activities of cog- 
nitive theorists memory tasks play a pivotal role; in the activities of neurocognit- 
ive theorists tasks are also important, but so are the origins, development, and the 
nature of the general brainlrnind capability that we call memory. The orientation 
of the cognitive research is largely mentalistic, and its practitioners want to under- 
stand their subject matter in terms of cognitive processes; the orientation of neuro- 
cognitive research goes beyond mentalism to reductionism, and its practitioners 
are equally interested in understanding their subject matter in terms of the relation 
between cognitive and brain processes?. While cognitive theorists are perfectly 
happy considering only behavioural indices of memory performance, neurocog- 
nitive theorists add to behavioural indices those of neural happenings, measures 
derived from electrophysiological recording and functional neuroimaging. 
Although the two orientations as described necessarily have fuzzy boundaries, 
it is not especially difficult to classify particular theorists or theories, and particu- 
lar research programmes, either over historical time or at present, in terms of the 
two orientations. Thus, a nice prototypical illustration of the cognitive approach 
is that taken by Bower (1996), who describes an extension of a 'traditional mem- 
ory theory' (p.27) that explains a variety of explicit and implicit memory pheno- 
mena, as well as global amnesia, without invoking multiple memory systems. A 
fine example of the neurocognitive approach is provided by Schacter (1992) who 
looks at many of the same issues as does Bower (1996). And an excellent example 
of an approach that fits somewhere between the two extremes is Johnson's (1 993) 
MEM model. 
Embeddedness and complementarity 
The relationship between the two orientations is one of 'embeddedness': the neuro- 
cognitive approach includes but transcends the cognitive approach. It accepts the 
tenets and practices of the cognitive approach, and then reaches out farther. Thus, 
neurocognitive researchers accept the idea that memory phenomena can be ex- 
plained in terms of psychologically conceived mechanisms or processes, and that 
t Because of the explosive reaction that the term 'reductionism' frequently causesin the souls of many 
cognitive psychologists, let me hasten to say here that the 'reductionism' in the present context is be- 
nign. It is best thought of as what Bunge and Ardila (1987, p.52) refer to as 'ontological reductionism,' 
that is, an acknowledgement of the fact that the mind exists by virtue of emergent properties of the 
brain. 'Mentalistic' in Table2.1 may also look suspicious, but should be taken in the sense of 'scientific 
mentalism' (Bunge and Ardila 1987, p.52). 

it is possible to construct purely psychological theories of memory. Neurocognit- 
ive researchers make a great deal use of the data collected by cognitive researchers, 
even if they sometimes use the data for different purposes. But neurocognitive 
'types'also believe that there is more to the study of memory than what the cognit- 
ive researchers are interested in. They take for granted that memory phenomena 
can be explained in a number of ways~ognitively, developmentally, in light of 
the evolution, and in terms of underlying physiological mechanisms-and 
that 
these different accounts are complementary rather than competing. They take it 
as a self-evident truth that useful lessons for understanding memory can be learned 
from work with children, or non-human animals, or brain-damaged neurological 
patients, or people under the influence of psychoactive drugs. Finally they believe 
that it is possible and worthwhile to construct theories, although they also ask 
whether the theories are true. 
The points I have made illustrate what I mean by the relation of embeddedness 
between the two approaches. In terms of the listing of the properties of the two in 
Table 2. l, we can say that whereas the cognitive approach can be sketched in terms 
of the key words in the left-hand column, the neurocognitive approach is char- 
acterized by the entries in both columns. 
Considering objectively the relationship between the two approaches, one should 
find it easy to conclude that they are complementary (Hayman and Tulving 1989; 
Schacter 1992). Either approach would be impoverished without the other, each 
adds value to the other, and the two orientations together point to a more power- 
ful and more promising direction in which to seek understanding of memory than 
either onecould accomplish alone. This is why eventually the two orientations can 
be expected to merge into one (Kelley and Lindsay 1996; Roediger and McDermott 
1993). 
If one accepts the idea that the two approaches complement each other, the 
conclusion naturally follows that there is no necessary conflict between them. If 
so, there is no room in the ongoing debates about memory, or at least there should 
not be, for expressions such as 'systems versus processes'. Earlier slips can be writ- 
ten off as simply reflecting the growing pains of our young discipline. 
UNITARY VERSUS MULTIPLE MEMORY SYSTEMS 
There does exist a real conflict, and a real controversy, and it has to do with unit- 
ary versus multiple systems. We turn to this side of the story next. 
Memory's unitarianism 
Memory's unitarianism (hence simply 'unitarianism') refers to a pretheoretical 
framework or orientation that holds memory to be an indivisible complex entity. 
It is one faculty, or capacity, or capability, or mode of information processing, or 
system. 

Unitarianism has had a long and illustrious history, having ruled unopposed 
from the very beginnings of the experimental study of learning and memory to the 
recent past. It evolved out of a perfectly reasonable and justifiable framework for 
the psychological study of learning, including verbal learning. The framework 
was initially created and shaped by the fact that in most languages there exists only 
a single term for a concept such as learning, and only a single term for memory. It 
was easy enough for early philosophers to raise questions about, and for early 
psychologists to do experiments on, something that has a label, such as 'memory', 
but difficult, or even impossible, to do so with unnamed and therefore non-existent 
entities. 
Whatever the reasons for the dogma of unitary learning, or unitary memory, the 
tacit assumption was so prevalent that it was seldom articulated, and, as is always 
the case with undifferentiated ubiquities, it had no name. It was smoothly passed 
from generation to generation of psychological students of memory by mental 
osmosis. 
Only seldom was the credo of unitary learning expressed, but whenever it was 
done, the assertion was succinct: 
All learning is essentially of a kind-the modification of behavior as the result of repeated 
stimulation under specified conditions. (Hunter 1934, p.497). 
The central tenet of unitarianism was widely accepted, seldom discussed, and 
almost never questioned. (For occasional, failed attempts at rebellion, see Schacter 
and Tulving (1994).) When it was put under 'official scrutiny', as happened on the 
rare occasion of a conference in 1962 that Arthur Melton had organized to con- 
sider the taxonomy of learning, unitarianism was reaffirmed in ringing terms: 
Are we to accept a conclusion that we will have different principles of learning for different 
species? Most of us would not accept this any more than we would accept the idea that we 
will have fundamentally different principles for different forms of human learning. (Under- 
wood 1964, p.74). 
When the field of verbal learning, under the impact of the 'cognitive revolu- 
tion', was transmuted into the field of memory, many practices, procedures, and 
assumptions changed, but the pretheoretical orientation of unitarianism did not. 
(For an eyewitness account of that transition see Tulving and Madigan (1970).) 
The reason for its survival presumably was simple: no good grounds existed for 
questioning the unity of (long-term) memory. Under these conditions it was 
difficult to even think of the idea of non-unitary memory in the abstract. 
Multiple systems 
The idea of multiple systems emerged slowly and initially imperceptibly. It is pos- 
sible to trace the idea as such back to the nineteenth century, although the appar- 
ently unstoppable onslaught of the current ideas had its origins in the recent past 
(Schacter and Tulving 1994.) 

What does 'multiple systems' mean? How does it differ from the view of a unit- 
ary system? Not surprisingly, there is as yet no perfect agreement among neurocog- 
nitive theorists as to the best way of characterizing systems. Tentative suggestions 
have been offered by a number of authors (Cohen 1984; Eichenbaum 1994; Nadel 
1994; Schacter and Tulving 1994; Sherry and Schacter 1987; Tulving 1985a; 
Weiskrantz 1987), but the search for a generally acceptable conceptualization of 
systems continues. 
Here I can only express my own understanding of the idea of multiple memory 
systems. It is closely related to what Bunge and Ardila (1987) have discussed under 
the label of the braidmind 'identity hypothesis'. The hypothesis comprises a pos- 
itive assertion-all 
mental events are brain events, or brain activities-and 
a neg- 
ative one-mental 
events are not 'represented' in the brain. Expressions such as 
'representation', or 'memory trace', or 'neural substrate', may be used, as long as 
we realize that they are metaphorical only. This basic 'psychobiological perspect- 
ive'-today 
Bunge and Ardila might have said 'neurocognitive perspective'- 
leads easily to the question of how the braidmind is organized, and to the idea 
that it is organized in the form of interacting systems. 
7 
The brain is a supersystem composed of numerous subsystems, every one of which is 
coupled to some other subsystems, but none of which is directly coupled with all the other 
brain subsystems. Every brain subsystem has its specific function, or peculiar activity, in 
addition to performing general 'household' functions. But it cannot discharge its function 
in a normal way without the support of a number of other systems. . . Given the postulated 
identity of mental function and specific brain function, the consequence of all that for 
psychology is obvious. The mind is neither a single homogeneous block nor a collection of 
independent modules B la Gall or Fodor (1983). Instead, the mind is a functional system. . . 
that is, a collection of distinct but interlocked brain processes. (Bunge and Ardila 1987, 
p. 164) 
Bunge and Ardila speak of the braidmind system in general, but their vision is 
l 
equally appropriate with respect to divisions of the mind, such as memory. We 
, I 
could readily adopt a statement such as, 'Memory is a collection of distinct but 
i 
interlocked brain processes', as a credo of both cognitive and neurocognitive per- 
1 
spectives of the study of memory. 
--a
Remembered events and acquired knowledge 
Let us contrast the multiple systems view with that of unitary memory, and do so 
in terms of a concrete laboratory analogue of a real-world happening. 
Imagine an intelligent, healthy, highly motivated test person participating in a 
laboratory experiment on memory. The experimenter shows the test person a 
printed sentence on the computer screen that says: 'AARDVARKS EAT ANTS', 
perhaps in a list of other similar kinds of statements, and later tests the test person's 
'memory' for the 'target' sentence, using different kinds of tests. The test person 
performs successfully on all the tests. (For the purpose of the exercise here we as- 
sume that one test does not change the outcome of any other.) 

The question we wish to ask is this: how do we conceptualize what happened? 
A generalized, theoretically neutral description of what happened is this: the test 
person witnessed an event, that is, a particular appearance of a particular set of 
printed words in a particular place at a particular time. The information about the 
event was encoded and 'stored', and subsequently used, in conjunction with relev- 
ant retrieval information, to perform the 'memory test'given by the experimenter. 
Most students of memory would accept this description of what happened and 
would not worry too much about the particular metaphors or the particular lan- 
guage used. They would probably also agree that such an initial description leads 
to obvious questions. Can we say anything more specific about the 'information 
encoded'? What is this 'information about the event'? Even a simple event, such as 
the appearance of a printed statement about the dietary habits of certain four- 
footed animals with long necks comprises many components. What was the state- 
ment (what were the words, what does each word refer to, what does the sentence 
mean)? What was the appearance of the statement (typefont, colours of the type, 
background)? Why was it presented (how does it fit into what I know about the 
world)? Where did it appear (what part of the world, what continent, what country, 
what city, what building, what room, what display device, what part of the moni- 
tor screen)?? When did it appear (how old was I at the time, what day of the week 
was the experiment, what list did the event appear in, how early or late in the list)? 
These kinds of questions can go on and on. Immediately after the occurrence of 
the AARDVARK event, the test person can answer all these questions, plus many 
more. This means that she has information available and accessible about a large 
number of different aspects of the event. Much of this information, presumably, 
is encoded and stored, making it possible for the test person to answer the same 
questions about the event even after a delay, relying on her secondary or long-term 
memory. 
So far the description of the event and its ramifications are presumably non- 
controversial. Apart frompossible squabbling about theexact terms used, it should 
be acceptable to most students of memory. The controversy materializes when we 
pose the next apparently innocent question: where is this information about the 
AARDVARK event stored? 
Unitarians would say, 'The information was stored as a representation of the 
event in the memory store', or something equivalent. Again, the actual terms used 
are less important here than is the singular form of the noun designating the mental 
aftereffects of the experienced episode. It is this assumed singularity that plays a 
pivotal role in unitarian thinking, and that leads to the quarrel with multiple sys- 
tems theorists. To understand its implications, we have to consider ~hat~happens 
at the time of retrieval. 
-- 
-~ 
-. .. -- 
Retrieval of information about the event, for the unitarians, can take many dif- 
ferent forms, depending upon particular retrieval queries and retrieval instructions. 
t The concern with the world, continent, country, and city may seem a bit far-fetched, but these as- 
pects of one'sexperience are exceedingly real, even if both the test person and theexperimenter are un- 
aware of them. 

Different instructions set off different processes that produce, as output from the 
memory store, different kinds of information about the event. The test person 
could consciously recollect the event of seeing the AARDVARK sentence on the 
monitor screen, she could recall a part of the sentence, she could recognize it as 
familiar, she could answer the question 'What do aardvarks eat?' (even if she did 
not know it before the experiment), she could include 'aardvark' as one of the re- 
sponses on a test in which she was asked to name animals, she could complete the 
word fragment A-D-AR- 
with 'aardvark' (even if she could not have done it be- 
fore the experiment), or she could show a galvanic skin response to the word aard- 
vark (even in the absence of any awareness of recollection or familiarity). All of 
these different 'measures of memory' would reflect 'memory for' the episode of 
seeing the AARDVARK sentence.? 
Here comes a simple test for the reader. Please read the last sentence of the pre- 
vious paragraph and make sure to fully process its meaning. (If you wish, you may 
re-read the whole paragraph.) After you have done so, answer the question: Does 
that last sentence ('All of these . . .') look reasonable to you? If you respond 'yes', 
and especially if you think that it looks perfectly reasonable, and if you cannot 
imagine how anyone could find something basically wrong with the statement, 
then you are a unitarian. Unitarians are people who talk about retrieval of (the in- 
formation about) the event or the episode. They frequently would make claims such 
as, 'Although effects of perceptual identification can be independent of recogni- 
tion memory, performance on both types of tests can apparently rely on memory 
forparticularprior episodes' (Jacoby 1984, p. 149, emphasis added), or such as, 'On 
an indirect test . . . memory for the target episode is inferred from its effect on task 
performance (e.g., facilitated fragment completion for previously studied words)' 
(Toth et al. 1992, p.46, emphasis added). Multiple memory theorists would never 
say anything like it, as we will see presently. 
In brief, then, unitarians postulate a single (even if complex) representation of 
the event, in one (large) memory system, and talk about different aspects of that 
representation being retrieved in different tasks, all such retrieval implying 'memory 
for' the event. In the unitarian approach, dissociations in performance on different 
tests come about because different retrieval cues, or different retrieval instructions, 
skrve to provide access to different features of one and the same representation of 
the event in the memory store. Unitarians believe that even when the event cannot 
be retrieved explicitly, it may be quite possible to retrieve it implicitly. People with 
memory impairment, too, may demonstrate their 'memory for' the experienced 
event through enhanced performance on tasks such as lexical decision, perceptual 
identification, or fragment completion. Because the source of such enhanced 
t The term 'memory for an event', or 'memory for' whatever, is widely used. I put it in quotation 
marks, because I try to avoid using it wherever possible. I think of 'memory'as a general capacity to ac- 
quire, retain, and use information, and 'memory for' an event would therefore mean 'general capacity 
to acquire, retain, and useinformation for an event'. This, of course, is not what is intended. Instead of 
using the colloquial expression, 'memory for an event', one could use more precise expressions, such 
as 'recollection of an event', 'remembering an event', or 'retrieval of information about an event', de- 
pending upon the desired intention. 

performance is the original study episode (an undisputed fact, of course), some 
writers have even referred to the retrieval manifested in such situations as 'episodic 
memory' (Light and La Voie 1993, p.220), a statement totally at odds with the 
meaning of episodic memory in the multiple-memory theory (Wheeler et al. 1997). 
Different memory systems 
How would amultiple-memory theorist answer the question, 'Where is the informa- 
tion about the AARDVARK event stored?' The answer is 'It depends entirely on 
what aspect of the event you are talking about.'This answer means that there is no 
'single'engram, or single memory trace, or single representation of the event. (By 
'single' I do not mean 'localized'. A 'single' representation may be 'distributed', ei- 
ther abstractly or neuroanatomically, yet act as a common unit.) The perceived 
event is 'assembled'by many interacting brain systems, many of wh~ch are changed 
in the process. As a result, different kinds of information, representing themany 
d~fferent aspects of the event,are stored at different inde~endent'torage sites'. 
T&sp_sites correspond to memory systems and their subsystems, although differ- 
ent systems and subsystems also vary in ways other thanjust the storage sites 
(Schacter and Tulving 1994). There is nothing resembling a 'single representation' 
(single trace, single engram) of the AARDVARK event anywhere in the braln. 
Different memory systems have evolved to serve special functions that cannot 
be readlly duplicated by other systems (Sherry and Schacter 1987). For example, 
\ one of the functions of primary memory, or working memory (Baddeley 1986), IS 
I - 
to make a neurocognitive 'sketch' of the perceived event. The properties of the 
,- 
sketch depend on theevent, its context, the nature of attentiona~processing of the 
b 
I input,andother variables. Parts of the sketch are accessible to the rimemberer in 
L the form of immediate conscious awareness, and the information it contains can 
be used in ongolng mental activity. While working memory operates on the in- 
coming information in this manner, other memory systems in the complex, mas- 
sively parallel computational machine that is the brain are also involved, separately 
from the processes of working memory (Pashler and Carrier 1996; Shallice and 
Warrington 1970, Tulving and Patterson 1968). Thus PRS, the perceptual repres- 
entation system (Schacter 1990; Tulving and Schacter 1990), encodes and stores 
information about the features of the visual objects represented by the letter strings 
AARDVARKS EAT ANTS. The semantic memory system, or a set of its (presum- 
ably) numerous subsystems, encodes and stores propositlonal information about 
the feeding habits of anlmals named aardvarks The episodic system integrates, 
registers, temporally dates, and spatially localizes the rememberer's experience of 
the experience of being present and witnessing the sentence appearing on and dis- 
appearing from the screen. 
For a multiple systems theorist there is no such thing as 'implicit retrieval'of the 
information about an event. Nor does any kind of implicit retrieval of informa- 
tion laid down at the time of the event constitute a 'memory for the event'. In- 
formation about an experienced event can be retrieved only explicitly, that is, with 

conscious awareness of the earlier experience. Such explicit retrieval is called 're- 
membering', or 'conscious recollection'. It is important to note, lest confusion 
reign, that what is remembered, or consciously recollected, is not the event, but the 
event as experienced (Perner and Ruffman 1995; Wheeler et al. 1997). 
A person serving as a subject in an experiment in which the AARDVARKS 
EAT ANTS display is presented for inspection can, later on, implicitly (that is, 
without conscious awareness of the source of the information) retrieve (that is, 
make use of) other kinds of information that were encoded and stored at the time 
when the original event occurred. Such implicit retrieval may be manifested in 
perceptual priming: the subject could demonstrate enhanced ability to identify 
and name any of the three presented letter strings. In the multiple systems view, 
such enhancement would be regarded as an 'expression' of the perceptual repres- 
entation system, PRS. 
Implicit retrieval may also be manifested in the subject's improved ability to an- 
swer questions such as 'Can you tell me something about the feeding habits of the 
animal whose name appears first in the dictionary?' In the multiple systems view, 
such an improvement in memory performance would be regarded as an unknown 
mixture of expression of semantic and episodic memory. When the subject no 
longer remembers the experienced AARDVARK event, but still knows the answer 
to the question, or when the subject is amnesic and cannot consciously recollect 
the study episode but knows the learned fact (Hayman et a!. 1993; Markowitsch et 
al. 1993), we can conclude that the expressed knowledge represents an output of 
the semantic memory system. In theory, one could expect perfectly normal per- 
ceptual or conceptual priming even if the respondent's episodic memory system 
were totally dysfunctional, or even if there were nothing left of the originally 
stored information about the event in the episodic memory system. 
7 
Thus, the multiple systems view of basic differences between the remembered 
experience, knowledge of a fact, and enhanced ability to identify an object, even if 
all of them originate in the 'same event', leads to the expectation that different 
areas of the brain are involved in these different achievements. We return to this 
issue later in the chapter. 
Implicit memory versus episodic remembering 
It also follows from what has been said that people who have suffered the kind of 
brain damage that causes amnesia do not and cannot demonstrate their 'memory 
for' the experienced event through enhanced performance on tasks such as lexical 
decision, perceptual identification, or fragment completion, because these tests 
do not address any questions about the remembering of the experienced event. 
The tests address the person's ability to perform a current task that need not, in 
any way, depend on information stored about the experienced event as such. Also, 
amnesics do not demonstrate their 'memory for' the event by being able to answer 
the question, 'What do aardvarks eat? There is no reason, in the multiple systems 
world, why anyone, whether amnesic or not, cannot make use of information 


time. I was one of them. I collected my first data in a learning experiment in 1957. 
If someone had asked me at that time how many different kinds of learning there 
were, I would not have understood the question. (The term 'memory' was still 
taboo at the time, and young beginners in the field did not dare to use it any more 
than they would dare to question what passes for political correctness in our more 
enlightened age.) How many different kinds of air are there? How many different 
kinds of water? Kinds of learning? What silly questions! 
I was a unitarian, not only because I did not know any better, but also because 
I too had been imprinted on Occam's razor and had learned about the inestimable 
virtues of parsimony. Science was a search for the general principles and universal 
concepts governing phenomena we were interested in, and splitting up what one 
was going to study was obviously not the way to begin. Therefore, for me learning 
was learning, and memory was memory. In my zeal I wielded Occam's razor wher- 
ever and whenever I thought I saw a chance. Thus, organization was organization, 
information was information, items were items, cues were cues, retrieval was re- 
trieval, and to top it all off I wrote several papers passionately defending the 'fact' 
that there is no difference between recall and recognition. At the time I had not yet 
heard of Einstein's dictum that it is the duty of scientists to simplify nature as much 
as possible but not more, and if I had, I might have thought that even Einstein had 
his limitations. 
Now that I have come to my senses I am a bit embarrassed about some of the 
things I said and wrote in my ardour for parsimony, even if I can rationalize it by 
attributing it to idealistic ignorance of the youth. Besides, I am glad that I experi- 
enced the faith, because I feel that it makes me more tolerant now of the views of 
those who have not yet seen the light. I am even more glad that I myself was lucky 
enough to realize the errors of my early ways before it was too late to do anything 
about them. I now think of unitarianism as something like measles, or puberty: an 
inevitable and necessary, but relatively painless and transitory, stage in one's life 
that most people get over in the normal course of maturation and development. 3 
What brought about my 'conversion'? Like all historical questions, this one too 
does not have an objective answer. About the best I can do is to imagine that my 
original faith was shaken by facts that kept piling up that were at variance with the 
theme of unity. In addition I can put my finger on specific instances that greatly 
helped me to shape my new convictions and, later, to keep them. In the last part of 
this chapter, which is even more personal than the rest of it, I mention four 'crit- 
ical incidents', although their actual number is considerably larger. 
Stochastic independence 
The first incident was an experiment we did in the summer of 1980 and published 
two years later (Tulving et al. 1982). Subjects were shown long lists of individual 
words and later tested for (i) their ability to recognize the words (old or new?), and (ii) 
their ability to complete the graphemic fragment of the word (e.g. say ASSASSIN 
when shown the fragment A-AS-N). 
The words that the subjects had studied 

24 Etzck.1 Tulving 
were, of course, recognized much more readily than non-studied words, and, not 
surprisingly, also more readily identified in the fragment completion test. 
What was totally unexpected was the fact that whether or not a subject remem- 
bered having seen a particular word in the study list, as judged by the recognition 
test, had no bearing whatsoever on whether or not the subject could complete or 
not complete the fragment of the same word. The two performances were stoch- 
astically independent. The finding was unexpected and novel, because no such 
independence between different measures of mnemonic consequences of study of 
a single set of items had ever been reported before. All previous experiments, in 
which different measures of memory of individual items had been subjected to a 
contingency analysis of the sort we used, had always shown at least positive even 
if not perfect association between the measures (e.g. Flexser and Tulving 1978; 
Ogilvie et al. 1980; Postman et al. 1948; Rabinowitz et al. 1977, 1979; Tulving and 
Wiseman 1975; Wallace 1978; Watkins and Tulving 1975). 
What was going on? A reasonable idea, fortified by the findings from amnesic 
patients (Warrington and Weiskrantz 1968,1974) was that we had bumped into a 
new kind of memory, one obeying different principles than those involved in the 
memory supporting oldhew recognition. Hence we surmised that 'priming effects 
in word-fragment completion may be mediated by a cognitive system other than 
episodic and semantic memory' (Tulving et al. 1982, p.336). 
Man without episodic memory 
A second eye-opening experience consisted in my meeting and studying a man 
(KC) who, as a result of traumatic brain damage that he had suffered in a motor- 
cycle accident in 1980, has completely lost the ability to remember any personally 
e-xperienced events although in most other respects he is quite normal (Tulving 
19856; Tulving et al. 19886). Especially interesting to me was the fact that he had 
retained a great deal of the knowledge that he had acquired during the years be- 
fore the critical injury. His language is intact, he can read and write and solve 
problems, he knows mathematics, geometry, history, and how to play chess and 
the organ. He knows who he is, where he lives, where he went to school, and has no 
difficulty locating the family summer cottage on the map of Ontario, where has 
spent a lot of time. He can even learn new factual information, albeit slowly, and 
shows more perceptual priming than an average college student (Hayman et al. 
1993; Tulving et al. 1988b, 1991). He has good manners, has a quiet sense of hu- 
mour, and never confabulates. Also important is the fact that as long as he stays 
inside the house, and goes for walks only in the immediate neighbourhood, which 
he knows, he is perfectly capable of looking after himself in every respect; he re- 
quires no supervision or caretaking of any kind. 
KC accomplishes all that, and much more, without being able to consciously 
recollect any experience he has ever had. His anterograde amnesia, especially for 
autobiographical events, is as dense as that of any other amnesic ever described in 
the literature, including HM (Corkin 1984), although, unlike HM, he can learn, 

slowly and laboriously, new factual verbally expressed information (Hayman et al. 
1993; Tulving et al. 1991). His retrograde amnesia for personal happenings ex- 
tends back to the earliest days of his life. Regardless of how precisely or specific- 
ally he is prompted and reminded of happenings in his past, and regardless of how 
hard he tries, he cannot remember, that is consciously bring to mind, any events, 
single or repeated, from any period of his life. Cases resembling that of KC have 
now been described by others (Hodges and McCarthy 1993; Markowitsch et al. 
1993; Calabrese et al. 1996; Van Der Linden et al. 1996). 
The striking dissociation between KC's totally dysfunctional episodic memory 
and his relatively functional semantic memory, as well as his excellent perceptual 
priming, suggests a separation of the corresponding processes at the neural level. 
His case represents an extreme illustration of the conclusion arrived at in an ex- 
tensive clinical neurological investigations of memory and amnesia almost half a 
century earlier (one that I did not know about at the time when I was spending 
time with KC): 
A study of pathways of memory formation has revealed a basic fact not suspected when 
this study began-there are two separate pathways for two kinds of memories. The one is 
memories of life experiences entering around the person himself and basically involving 
the element of time. The other is memories of intellectually acquired knowledge not experi- 
enced but learned by study and not personal. (Nielsen 1958, p.25) 
Brain imaging 
The thiid critical event supporting my growing convictions about multiple mem- 
ory systems occurred in 1987 in Lund, Sweden. David Ingvar and Jar1 Risberg, 
two well-known pioneers in the development of the technique of measuring re- 
gional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) in awake, alert people, kindly agreed to collab- 
orate with me in doing a pilot study comparing episodic and semantic memory 
retrieval. In this study we measured changes in cortical blood flow that signalled 
changes in neural activity. During some brain scans in our study, subjects were 
silently reminiscing about past personal happenings; during other scans, they 
were thinking of the facts they knew in a given category. We found three subjects 
who consistently produced strikingly uniform results: episodic remembering of 
past events was accompanied by relatively higher levels of blood flow in anterior 
cortical regions, whereas retrieval of semantic knowledge was associated with 
relatively higher activations of posterior cortical regions (Tulving et al. 1988a; 
Tulving 1989). 
Thus, as a result of our little study we had visible evidence that living brains dis- 
tinguish between thoughts involving 'self-in-the-past' and thoughts about less 
personal happenings of the world. Although the finer grain of the blood flow data 
was uninformative, and although we could not rule out alternative interpreta- 
tions, I found the data most encouraging: they fit surprisingly well into the de- 
veloping pattern. 

A fourth incident, or rather a series of incidents-I 
think of them as 'clinchers'- 
consisted in the confirmation, extension, and refinement of our Lund findings. In 
1993 we gained access to the newly established positron emission tomography 
(PET) facility at the Clarke Institute of Psychiatry at the University of Toronto, 
and could begin serious brain imaging studies of episodic and semantic memory. 
The results of the Toronto studies (Kapur et al. 1994; Moscovitch et al. 1995; 
Nyberg et al. 1996b, 1997; Tulving et al. 1994) as well as those reported by other 
laboratories (Andreasen et al. 1995; Fletcher et al. 1995a,b; Shallice et al. 1994) 
showed striking differences in the neuroanatomical sites that are involved in 
episodic and semantic retrieva1,jone of the most consistent findings is that re- 
trieval of semantic (general knowledge) information engages left prefrontal cor- 
tex more than right prefrontal cortex, whereas retrieval of episodic information 
1 
engages right prefrontal cortex more than the IefthThis pattern of brain activa- 
tion, labelled hemispheric encodinglretrieval asymmetry, or HERA, was un- 
expected in termcif existing Enowledge, but it has turned out to be remarkably 
robust (Buckner 1996; Haxby et al. 1996; Cabeza and Nyberg 1997; Nyberg et al. 
1996a, 1997). Other regions of the brain have been identified that show differen- 
tial activation in episodic versus semantic retrieval (Buckner and Tulving 1995; 
Shallice et al. 1994; Fletcher et al. 1995a,b; Cabeza and Nyberg 1997), and more 
will undoubtedly be found in the future. But the data already available have added 
powerful support to the biological reality of separate memory systems. 
With these kinds of experiences, it is easy, and fun, to be converted, even if it 
means that I have ambivalent feelings about the non-believers. Those students of 
memory who have not met people such as KC, and who have not done any PET or 
fMRI studies of memory, and who therefore can afford to think that 'perhaps 
there is something wrong there, somehow', may get away with thinking unitarian 
thoughts, but I suspect that it will not be for long. The whole Zeitgeist in our field 
is changing, rapidly. 
CONCLUSION 
The title of this chapter is 'Study of memory: processes and systems'. The crucial 
word in it is 'and'. Both processes and systems constitute the warp and the woof 
of the fabric of memory: we cannot have one without the other any more than we 
can havecontinents without oceans or heredity without environment. Onecan, and 
people usually do, approach the study of memory either from a cognitive (process 
oriented) or a neurocognitive (systems oriented) perspective, but on logical and 
rational grounds there is no conflict between them. The two approaches are com- 
plementary, and both are necessary for a fuller understanding of memory. Be- 
cause all memory systems operate in terms of processes-some 
shared with other 
systems, some unique-the 
issue of processes versus systems is a non-issue. There 
can be no conflict between process and systems orientations, and no controversy. 
There still exists what appears to be a real disagreement today between those 
who believe in a single system and those who believe in multiple systems. This dis- 

agreement, however, is more a tiff than a serious rift. Moreover, there is every 
reason to believe that the tiff is a passing phenomenon that will soon be behind us. 
The weight of evidence is relentlessly shifting in favour of multiple memory sys- 
tems, and there is no sign that the trend is going to stop or to reverse. This is why 
the future will belong to the idea of multiple memory systems. 
Because the eventual general acceptance of multiple memory views is no longer 
in doubt, it would be appropriate to invite all cognitive theorists to renounce their 
unitarian faith and to join the effort to contribute constructively to the solving of 
the many daunting problems that lie on our way to a fuller understanding of mem- 
ory with its multiple processes and multiple systems! 
A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S  
I thank Kathleen McDermott and Martin Lepage for constructive criticisms 
of this chapter. My research is supported by a foundation by Anne and Max 
Tanenbaum in support of research in cognitive neuroscience, and by the Natural 
and Engineering Research Council of Canada (grant A8632). 
R E F E R E N C E S  
Andreasen, N. C., O'Leary, D. S., Arndt, S., Cizadlo, T., Hurtig, R., Rezai, K., et al. (1 995). 
Short-term and long-term verbal memory: a positron emission tomography study. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 92,5 1 1 1-15. 
Baddeley, A. D. (1986). Working memory. Oxford University Press. 
Barber, B. (1961). Resistance of scientists to scientific discovery. Science, 134,59&602. 
Bower, G. H. (1996). Reactivating a reactivation theory of implicit memory. Consciousness 
and Cognition, 5,27-72. 
Buckner, R. (1996). Beyond HERA: contributions of specific prefrontal brain areas to 
long-term memory. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 3, 149-58. 
Buckner, R. and Tulving, E. (1995). Neuroimaging studies of memory: theory and recent 
PET results. In Handbook of Neuropsychology, Vol. 10 (ed. F. Boller and J. Grafman), 
pp.43946. Elsevier, Amsterdam. 
Bunge, M. and Ardila, R. (1987). Philosophy ofpsychology. Springer, New York. 
Cabeza, R. and Nyberg, L. (1997). Imaging cognition: an empirical review of PET studies 
with normal subjects. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9, 1-26. 
Cabeza, R., Kapur, S., Craik, F. I. M,, McIntosh, A. R., Houle, S., and Tulving, E. (1997). 
Functional neuroanatomy of recall and recognition: a PET study of episodic memory. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9,25445. 
Calabrese, P., Markowitsch, H. J., Durwen, H. F., Widlitzek, H., Haupts, M., Holika, B., et 
al. (1996). Right temporofrontal cortex as critical locus for the ecphory of old episodic 
memories. Journal ofNeurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 61,304-10. 
Cohen, N. J. (1984). Preserved learning capacity in amnesia: evidence for multiple memory 
systems. In The neuropsychology of memory, (ed. L. R. Squire and N. Butters), pp.83- 
103. Guilford Press, New York. 
Corkin, S. (1984). Lasting consequences of bilateral medial temporal lobectomy: clinical 
course and experimental findings. In H. M. Seminars in Nuerology, 4,249-59. 
Eichenbaum, H. (1994). The hippocampal system and declarative memory in humans and 

.IIIIIII.I~.. 
I ~ ~ W I I I I I ~ I I I ; ~ ~  
;~~~;~lysis 
a ~ i d  historical origins. In Memory systems 1994, (ed. 
l ). I.. Sch:tctcr and E. 'Tulving), pp. 147-201. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
I:lctchcr, l! C., Dolan, R. J., and Frith, C. D. (1995~). The functional anatomy of memory. 
Experientia, 51, 1 197-207. 
Fletcher, P. C., Frith, C. D., Grasby, P. M,, Shallice, T., Frackowiak, R. S. J., and Dolan, 
R. J. (19956). Brain systemsfor encoding and retrieval of auditory-verbal memory: an in 
vivo study in humans. Brain, 118,401-16. 
Flexser, A. J. and Tulving, E. (1978). Retrieval independence in recognition and recall. 
Psychological Review, 85, 153-7 1. 
Fodor, J. G. (1983). The modularity of mind. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Haxby, J. V., Ungerleider, L. G., Horwitz, B., Maisog, J. M., Rapoport, S. L., and Grady, 
C. L. (1996). Face encoding and recognition in the human brain. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 93,922-7. 
Hayman, C. A. G. and Tulving, E. (1989). Contingent dissociation between recognition 
and fragment completion: the method of triangulation. Journalof Experimental Psycho- 
logy: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15,228-40. 
Hayman, C. A. G., Macdonald, C. A., and Tulving, E. (1993). The role of repetition and as- 
sociative interference in new semantic learning in amnesia. Journal of Cognitive Neuro- 
science, 5,375-89. 
Hodges, J. R. and McCarthy, R. A. (1993) Autobiographical amnesia resulting from bilat- 
eral paramedian thalamic infarction. Brain, 116,92140. 
Hunter, W. S. (1934). Experimental studies of learning. In Handbookof generalexperimental 
psychology, (ed. C. Murchison), pp.497-570. Clark University Press, Worcester, MA. 
Jacoby, L. L. (1984). Incidental versus intentional retrieval: remembering and awareness as 
separate issues. In Neuropsychology of memory, (ed. L. R. Squire and N. Butters), pp. 
145-56. Guilford Press, New York. 
Johnson, M. K. (1993). MEM: memory subsystems as processes. In Theories of memory, 
(ed. A. F. Collins, S. E. Gathercole, M. A. Conway, and P. E. Morris), pp.241-86. 
Erlbaum, Hove. 
Kapur, S., Craik, F. I. M., Tulving, E., Wilson, A. A., Houle, S., and Brown, G. M. (1994). 
Neuroanatomical correlates of encoding in episodic memory: levels of processing effect. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the US. A., 91,2008-1 l. 
Kelley, C. M. and Lindsay, D. S. (1996). Conscious and unconscious forms of memory. In 
Memory, (ed. E. L. Bjork and R. A. Bjork), pp.31-63. Academic, San Diego. 
Light, L. L. and La Voie, D. (1993). Direct and indirect measures of memory in old age. In 
Implicit memory: new directions in cognition, development, and neuropsychology, (ed. 
M .  E. H. Masson and P. Graf), pp.207-30). Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ. 
Markowitsch, H. J., Calabrese, l?, Liess, J., Haupts, M,, Durwen, H. F,, and Gehlen, W. 
(1993). Retrograde amnesia after traumatic injury of the fronto-temporal cortex. 
Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 56,988-92. 
Masson, M. E. J. and Graf, P. (1993). Introduction: looking back and into the future. In 
Implicit memory: new directions in cognition, development, and neuropsychology, (ed. 
M. E. H. Masson and P. Graf), pp.1-11. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ. 
Moscovitch M., Kapur S., Kohler S., and Houle S. (1995). Distinct neural correlates of 
visual long-term memory for spatial location and object identity: a positron emission 
tomography (PET) study in humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the USA, 92,3721 -5. 
Nadel, L. (1994). Multiple memory systems: what and why, an update. In Memory systems 
1994, (ed. D. L. Schacter and E. Tulving), pp.39-63. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Nielsen, J. M. (1958). Memory andamnesia. San Lucas Press, Los Angeles. 
Nyberg, L. and Tulving, E. (1996). Classifying human long-term memory: evidence from 
converging dissociations. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 8, 163-83. 

Nyberg, L., Cabeza, R. and Tulving, E. (1996a). PET studies of encoding and retrieval: the 
HERA model. Psychonomic Bulletin and Revie~v, 3, 13548. 
Nyberg, L., McIntosh, A. R., Cabeza, R. Habib, R, Houle, S., and Tulving, E. (19966). 
General and specific brain regions involved in encoding and retrieval of events: what, 
where, and when. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 93, 
1 1280-5. 
Nyberg, L., McIntosh, A. R., and Tulving, E. (1997). Functional brain imaging of episodic 
and semantic memory. Journalof Molecular Medicine, 19,863-70. 
Ogilvie, J. C., Tulving, E., Paskowitz, S., and Jones, G. V. (1980). Three-dimensional mem- 
ory traces: a model and its application to forgetting. Journal of Verbal Learning and 
Verbal Behavior, 19,405-1 5. 
Pashler, H. and Carrier, M. (1996). Structures, processes, and the flow of information. In 
Memory, (ed. E. L. Bjork and R. A. Bjork), pp.3-29. Academic, San Diego. 
Perner J. and Ruffman T. (1995). Episodic memory an autonoetic consciousness: develop- 
mental evidence and a theory of childhood amnesia. Journal of Experimental Child 
Psychology, 59,5 1 W 8 .  
Postman, L, Jenkins, W. O., and Postman, D. L. (1948). American Journalof Psychology, 
61.51 1-19. 
Rabinowitz, J. C., Mandler, G., and Patterson, K. E. (1977). Determinants of recognition 
and recall: accessibility and generation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 
106,302-29. 
Rabinowitz, J. C., Mandler, G., and Barsalou, L. W. (1979). Generation-recognition as an 
auxiliary retrieval strategy. Journalof Verbalharningand Verbal Behavior, 18,57-72. 
Roediger, H. L. I11 and McDermott, K. B. (1993). Implicit memory in normal human sub- 
jects. In Handbook of neuropsychology, Vol. 8 (ed F. Boller and J. Grafman), pp.63-13 1. 
Elsevier, Amsterdam. 
Roediger, H. L. I11 and McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating false memories: remembering 
words not presented in lists. Journalof Experimentat Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 
Cognition, 21,803-14. 
Schacter, D. L. (1990). Perceptual representation systems and implicit memory: toward a 
resolution of the multiple memory systems debate. In Development and neural bases of 
higher cognitive functions, Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, Vol. 608, (ed. 
A. Diamond), pp.543-71. 
Schacter, D. L. (1992). Understanding implicit memory: a cognitive neuroscience ap- 
proach. American Psychologist, 47,559-69. 
Schacter, D. L. and Tulving, E. (1994). What are the memory systems of 1994? In Memory 
systems 1994, (ed. D. L. Schacter and E. Tulving, E.), pp. 1-38. MIT Press, Cambridge, 
MA. 
Schacter, D. L., Reiman, E., Curran, T., Yun, L. S., Bandy, D., McDermott, K. B., et at. 
(1 996). Neuroanatornical correlates of veridical and illusory recognition memory: evid- 
ence from positron emission tomography. Neuron, 17,267-74. 
Shallice, T. and Warrington, E. K. (1970). Independent functioning of the verbal memory 
stores: a neuropsychological study. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 22, 
261-73. 
Shallice, T., Fletcher, P,, Frith, C. D., Grasby, P., Frackowiak, R. S. J., and Dolan, R. J. 
(1994). Brain regions associated with acquisition and retrieval of verbal episodic mem- 
ory. Nature, 368,633-5. 
Sherry, D. F. and Schacter, D. L. (1987). The evolution of multiple memory systems. 
Psychological Review, 94,439-54. 
Toth, J. P,, Lindsay, D., and Jacoby, L. L. (1992). Awareness, automaticity, and memorydis- 
sociations. In The neuropsychoIogy of memory, (2nd edn), (ed. L. R. Squire and N. 
Butters), pp.46-57. Guilford Press, New York. 

Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of'episodicmemory. Clarendon, Oxford. 
Tulving, E. (1985~). How many memory systems are there? American Psychologist, 40, 
385-98. 
Tulving, E. (19856). Memory and consciousness. Canadian Psychology, 26, 1-12. 
Tulving, E. (1986). What kind of a hypothesis is the distinction between episodic and 
semantic memory? Journal of Experimental Psycholog.y: Lxarning, Memory, and Cogni- 
tion, 12,307-1 1. 
Tulving, E. (1989). Memory: performance, knowledge, and experience. European Jocrrnal 
of Cognitive Psychology, 1,3-26. 
Tulving, E. (1993). What is episodic memory? Current Perspectives in P.~ychological 
Science, 2,67-70. 
Tulving, E. (1995). Organization of memory: quo vadis? In The cognitive neurosciences, 
(ed. M .  S. Gazzaniga), pp.83947. MITPress, Cambridge, MA. 
Tulving, E. and Madigan, S. A. (1970). Memory and verbal learning. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 21,437-84. 
Tulving, E. and Patterson, R. D. (1968). Functional units and retrieval processes in free re- 
call. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 77,23948. 
Tulving, E. and Schacter, D. L. (1990). Priming and human memory systems. Science, 247, 
301-6. 
Tulving, E. and Wiseman, S. (1975). Relation between recognition and recognition failure 
of recallable words. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 6,79-82. 
Tulving, E., Schacter, D. L., and Stark, H. A. (1982). Priming effects in word-fragment 
completion are independent of recognition memory. Journal of Experimental Psycho- 
logy: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 8,33&42. 
Tulving, E., Risberg, J., and Ingvar, D. H. (1988~). Regional cerebral blood flow and 
episodic memory retrieval. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 26,522. 
Tulving, E., Schacter, D. L., McLachlan, D. R., and Moscovitch, M. (1988b). Priming of 
semantic autobiographical knowledge: a case study of retrograde amnesia. Brain and 
Cognition, 8,3-20. 
Tulving, E., Hayman, C. A. G., and Macdonald, C. A. (1991). Long-lasting perceptual 
priming and semantic learning in amnesia: a case experiment. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 17,595-6 17. 
Tulving, E., Kapur, S., Craik, F. I. M,, Moscovitsch, M,, and Houle, S. (1994) Hemispheric 
encodingtretrieval asymmetry in episodic memory: Positron emission tomography find- 
ings. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 91,2016-20. 
Underwood, B. J. (1964). In Categories of human learning, (ed. A. W. Melton) pp. 47-78. 
Academic Press, New York. 
Van Der Linden, M., Bredart, S., Depoorter, N., and Coyette, F. (1996). Semantic memory 
and amnesia: a case study. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 13,39141 3. 
Wallace, W. P. (1978). Recognition failure of recallable words and recognizable words. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 4,441-52. 
Warrington, E. K., and Weiskrantz, L. (1968). New method of testing long-term retention 
with special reference to amnesic patients. Nature, 217,972-4. 
Warrington, E. K. and Weiskrantz, L. (1974). The effect of prior learning on subsequent 
retention in amnesic patients. Neuropsychologia, 12,419-28. 
Watkins, M. J. and Tulving, E. (1975). Episodic memory: when recognition fails. Journalof 
Experimental Psychology: General, 104,5-29. 
Weiskrantz, L. (1987). Neuroanatomy of memory and amnesia: a case for multiple mem- 
ory systems. Human Neurobiology, 6,93-105. 
Wheeler, M., Stuss, D. T., and Tulving, E. Episodic memory, autonoetic consciousness, and 
the frontal lobes. (1997). Psychological Bulletin, 121,33 1-54. 

Memory: Systems, 
Process, or Function? 
Edited by 
JONATHAN K .  FOSTER 
. 
and 
M A R K 0  JELICIC 
OXFORD 
UNIVERSITY PRESS 
1999 

OXFORD 
UNNBRSITY PRESS 
Great Clarendon Sfreet, Oxfordoxz ~ D P  
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford 
andfurthers the University's aim of excellence in research, scholarship, 
and education by publishing worldwide in 
Oxford New York 
Athensduckland Bangkok Bogotd Buenos Aires Calcutta 
Cape Town Ch'ennai Dar es Salaam Delhi Florence Hong Kong Istanbul 
Karachi Kwla Lumpur Madrid Melbottrne Mexico City Mwnbai 
Paulo Singapore Taipei Tokyo Toronto Warsaw 
and associated companies in Berlin Ibadan 
a trademark of Oxford University Press 
Published in the United States 
Oxford University Press Inc, New York 
0 
Oxford University Press 1999 
The moral rights of the author have been asserted 
First published 1999 
AN rights reserved No part of thispublication may be 
reproduced, stored in a retrievalsystem, or transmitted, in any 
form or by any means, without the prior permission in writing of Oxford 
University Press. Within the WK. exceptions areallowed in respect of any 
fair dealing for the purpose of research or private study, or criticism or 
review, aspermit tedunder the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988, or 
in the case of reprographic reproduction in accordance with the terms of 
licences issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency. Enquiries concerning 
reproduction outside these terms and in other countries should be sent to 
the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above. 
This book is soldsubject to the condition that it shall not, 
by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hiredout, or otherwise 
circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any form of binding 
or cover other than that in which it ispublishedand without asimilar 
condition including this condition being imposed 
on the subsequen t purchaser. 
British Library Cataloguing Publication Data 
Data available 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Memory: systems, process, or fiction? I edited by 
Jonathan X Foster and Marko Jelicic. 
(Debates inpsychology) 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
1. Memory. 2. Cognitive neuroscience I. Foster, Jonathan K. 
I1 Jelicic, M. (Marko) 111. Series. 
QP406. M47 
1999 
612.8'26~21 98-34162 
ISBN 0 19 8524072 (Hbk) 
0 19 852406 4 (Pbk) 
l 3 5 7 9 1 0 8 6 4 2  
Typeset in Times New Roman 
by Alliance Phototypesetters, Pondicherry 
Printed in Great Britain 
on acid-free paper by 
Biddles Ltd. Guiqord and King's Lynn 

