
Praise for Steinberg and Kincheloe
Shirley Steinberg and Joe Kincheloe have changed the landscape of
education in the United States. They have done this through
their numerous groundbreaking publication series, through their
international collaborations with progressive educators around the
world, but most of all through their own brilliant and iconoclastic
work.
—Peter McLaren, Professor, University of California, 
Los Angeles, and author of Capitalists and Conquerors
Steinberg and Kincheloe provide readers with the very best of critical
pedagogy and cultural studies.
—Norman K. Denzin, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign
Steinberg and Kincheloe’s work sparkles with the critical and creative
energy of scholars and educators whose primary concern is with
education that serves students on their own grounds, and helps our
society realize the riches of diversity.
—Kenneth J. Gergen, Mustin Professor of Psychology, 
Swarthmore College
Steinberg and Kincheloe are must reading for all of those whose ethics
demand that they become agents of change in the difficult and
constant struggle toward social justice and democracy.
—Donaldo Macedo, Distinguished Professor of Liberal Arts and
Education, University of Massachusetts, Boston

In celebration of the lives of Brenda Jenkins and Rosa Parks, who 
both died on October 24, 2005—both sisters in the struggle for 
racial justice and human freedom
Our beloved Brenda made us better for having known her
Sister Rosa ignited a spark of hope in a world of racial hatred
It is fitting that they left together

What You Don’t Know about
Schools
Edited by
Shirley R. Steinberg
and
Joe L. Kincheloe

WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT SCHOOLS
© Shirley R. Steinberg and Joe L. Kincheloe, 2006.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any
manner whatsoever without written permission except in the case of brief
quotations embodied in critical articles or reviews.
First published in 2006 by
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN™
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10010 and 
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, England RG21 6XS
Companies and representatives throughout the world.
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN is the global academic imprint of the Palgrave
Macmillan division of St. Martin’s Press, LLC and of Palgrave Macmillan Ltd.
Macmillan® is a registered trademark in the United States, United Kingdom
and other countries. Palgrave is a registered trademark in the European
Union and other countries.
ISBN 1–4039–6344–4
ISBN 1–4039–6345–2 (pbk.)
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
What you don’t know about schools / edited by Shirley R. Steinberg
and Joe L. Kincheloe.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1–4039–6344–4––ISBN 1–4039–6345–2 (pbk.)
1. Politics and education—United States. 2. Public schools—Political
aspects—United States. I. Kincheloe, Joe L. II. Steinberg,
Shirley R., 1952–
LC89.W46 2005
379.73—dc22
2005048685
Design by Newgen Imaging Systems (P) Ltd., Chennai, India.
First edition: January 2006
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed in the United States of America.

Contents
List of Abbreviations
vii
Notes on Contributors
viii
Chapter 1
What You Don’t Know Is Hurting You and the Country 
1
Joe L. Kincheloe 
Chapter 2 
How Did this Happen? The Right-Wing Politics of 
Knowledge and Education 
31
Joe L. Kincheloe 
Chapter 3 
What You Don’t Know about Standards 
69
Raymond A. Horn, Jr. 
Chapter 4 
What You Don’t Know about Evaluation 
89
Philip M. Anderson and Judith P. Summerfield 
Chapter 5 
The Cult of Prescription—Or, A Student Ain’t No 
Slobbering Dog 
103
P. L. Thomas 
Chapter 6 
School Leaders, Marketers, Spin Doctors, or Military 
Recruiters?: Educational Administration in the 
New Economy 
115
Gary L. Anderson 
Chapter 7 
The Price for “Free” Market Capitalism in Public 
Schools—or How much is Democracy Worth on the 
Open Market? 
127
John Weaver 
Chapter 8 
Bad News for Kids: Where Schools Get Their News for Kids 
141
Carl Bybee 

Chapter 9 
Meritocratic Mythology: Constructing Success 
169
Benjamin Enoma 
Chapter 10 
What Is Not Known about Genius 
183
Ray McDermott 
Chapter 11 
What You Don’t Know about Diversity 
211
Elizabeth Quintero 
Chapter 12 
Hiding in the Bathroom: The Educational Struggle of 
Marginalized Students 
223
Danny Walsh 
Chapter 13 
When Ignorance and Deceit Come to Town: Preparing 
Yourself for the English-Only Movement’s Assault 
on Your Public Schools 
241
Pepi Leistyna 
Chapter 14 
Live from Hell’s Kitchen, NYC 
261
Regina Andrea Bernard 
Chapter 15 
Letting Them Eat Cake: What Else Don’t We Know 
about Schools? 
277
Shirley R. Steinberg 
Index
286
CONTENTS
vi

List of Abbreviations
ABCTE
American Board for Certification of Teacher Education
AES
American Eugenics Society
CEO
Chief Executive Officer
ELLs
English Language Learners
ETS
Educational testing Service
GAO
General Accounting Office
GMAT
Graduate Management Admissions Test
GRE
Graduate Record Examination
ISLLC
Interstate School Leaders Licensure Consortium
JROTC
Junior Reserve Officers Training Corps
LAD
Language Acquisition Devise
LEP
Limited English Proficient
LSAT
Law School Admissions Test
MCAS
Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System
MCAT
Medical College Admissions Test
NAEP
National Assessment of Educational Progress
NCATE
National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education
NCLB
No Child Left Behind
NCLR
National Council of La Raza
NIE
Newspapers in Education
NRC
National Research Council
NRP
National Reading Panel
SAT
Scholastic Aptitude Test
SES
Socioeconomic Status
TQM
Total Quality Management
TVA
Tennessee Valley Authority
WRC
Weekly Reader Corporation
ZPD
Zone of Proximal Development

Notes on Contributors
Gary L. Anderson is a professor in the Steinhardt School of
Education, New York University. His research interests include
educational leadership, critical ethnography, action research, and
the impact of neoliberalism on schools. Recent books include
Performance Theories and Education: Power, Pedagogy, and the Politics
of Identity (coedited with Bryant Alexander and Bernardo Gallegos),
and The Action Research Dissertation: A Guide for Students and
Faculty (coauthored with Kathryn Herr).
Philip M. Anderson is Professor of Secondary Education at Queens
College, and Professor of Urban Education and Executive Officer of
the PhD Program in Urban Education at the City University of New
York (CUNY) Graduate Center. He studies culture and curriculum in
schooling, in particular, as it relates to aesthetics and humanities edu-
cation.
Regina A. Bernard was born and raised in Hell's Kitchen. She received
her BS in Criminal Justice from John Jay College. In 2001, she was the
first student to graduate from Columbia University's MA program in
African American Studies. She will be the first graduate of the CUNY
Urban Education PhD program, completing her dissertation on
Critical Race Study.
Carl Bybee is the director of the Oregon Media Literacy Project and
an Associate Professor of Communication Study in the School of
Journalism and Communication at the University of Oregon. His cur-
rent research focus is on helping youth find a new vocabulary for
becoming engaged democratic citizens drawing on the connections
between news, entertainment, media literacy, and new models of
active democracy.
Benjamin Enoma codirects the recruitment and enrollment services
for the honors, flextime, and accelerated part-time MBA programs at

the Zicklin School of Business, Baruch College. His area of research is
educational policy.
Raymond A. Horn, Jr. is an assistant professor of education at Saint
Joseph's University and the director of the Interdisciplinary Doctor of
Education Program for Educational Leaders. He is the author of
Teacher Talk: A Post-Formal Inquiry into Educational Change. 
Joe L. Kincheloe is the Canada Research Chair at the McGill University
Faculty of Education. He is the author of numerous books and articles
about pedagogy, education and social justice, racism, class bias, and
sexism, issues of cognition and cultural context, and educational reform.
His books include Teachers as Researchers, Classroom Teaching: An
Introduction, Getting Beyond the Facts: Teaching Social Studies/Social
Sciences in the Twenty-First Century; The Sign of the Burger: McDonald's
and the Culture of Power; City Kids: Understanding Them, Appreciating
Them, and Teaching Them, and Changing Multiculturalism (with
Shirley Steinberg). His coedited works include White Reign: Deploying
Whiteness in America (with Shirley Steinberg et al.) and the Gustavus
Myers Human Rights award winner Measured Lies: The Bell Curve
Examined (with Shirley Steinberg). Along with his partner, Shirley
Steinberg, Kincheloe is an international speaker and lead singer/
keyboard player of Tony and the Hegemones.
Pepi Leistyna is an associate professor in the Applied Linguistics
Graduate Studies Program at the University of Massachusetts,
Boston. His books include Breaking Free: The Transformative Power
of Critical Pedagogy; Presence of Mind: Education and the Politics of
Deception; Defining and Designing Multiculturalism; Corpus
Analysis: Language Structure and Language Use; and Cultural
Studies: From Theory to Action.
Ray McDermott is a professor of education at the Stanford
University. He is interested in the analysis of human communication,
the organization of school success and failure, the history of literacy
and urban education. He has published numerous books and articles
in these areas. In 2001 he won the Council on Anthropology in
Education Spindler Award for anthropological research in education.
Elizabeth Quintero is Associate Professor in the Department of
Teaching and Learning at NYU. Her teaching, research, and service
involve working with multilingual families, students, and young chil-
dren. She uses critical literacy focusing on family stories and multicul-
tural literature to support students’ strengths and their journeys
toward school success. She is the coauthor of Becoming a Teacher in
NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS
ix

NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS
x
the New Society: Bringing Communities and Classrooms Together (with
Mary Kay Rummel) and the author of Problem-Posing with
Multicultural Children's Literature: Developing Critical, Early
Childhood Curricula.
Shirley R. Steinberg is an associate professor at McGill University
Faculty of Education. She is the author and editor of numerous books
and articles and coedits several book series. She is also the founding
editor of Taboo: The Journal of Culture and Education. Steinberg has
recently finished editing Teen Life in Europe, and with Priya Parmar
and Birgit Richard The Encyclopedia of Contemporary Youth Culture.
She is the editor of Multi/Intercultural Conversations: A Reader.
With Joe Kincheloe she has edited Kinderculture: The Corporate
Construction of Childhood and The Miseducation of the West: How
Schools and the Media Distort Our Understanding of the Islamic World.
She is coauthor of Changing Multiculturalism: New Times, New
Curriculum, and Contextualizing Teaching (with Joe Kincheloe). Her
areas of expertise and research are in critical media literacy, social
drama, and youth studies. She sends a shout-out to all her colleagues
and friends who have suffered the absurdity of U.S. national “accred-
itation” these past years.
Judith P. Summerfield works at the CUNY as University Dean for
Undergraduate Education, Professor of English at Queens College,
and Professor of Urban Education in the PhD Program at the
Graduate Center. Named the New York State Professor of the Year by
the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching in 1998,
her current research focuses on undergraduate education in urban
contexts.
P. L. Thomas is an assistant professor of Education at Furman University
in South Carolina. He is the author of Numbers Games, Teaching Writing
Primer, and Reading, Learning, Teaching Barbara Kingsolver.
Danny Walsh teaches English for the ninth and tenth grade in a new,
small high school in Brooklyn that is designed to serve recent immi-
grants. He is finishing a PhD in urban education at the CUNY
Graduate Center.
John A. Weaver is an associate professor of Curriculum Studies at
Georgia Southern University. He is the author or coeditor of Popular
Culture and Critical Pedagogy, (Post) Modern Science (Education),
and Science Fiction Curriculum, Cyborg Teachers, and Youth Cultures.

Chapter 1
What You Don’t Know Is Hurting You
and the Country
Joe L. Kincheloe
As a writer I strive to avoid overstatement—but in the middle of the
first decade of the twenty-first century, discussions about education
lend themselves to dramatic proclamations. Take this one, for example:
public education in the United States is facing the greatest threat to its
continued existence in its 150-year history. Right-wing groups enjoy-
ing more power than ever before are constructing a crisis in education
that can be solved, they argue, only by ridding ourselves of so-called
government schools. Because public education is deemed to be
“beyond hope,” only the creation of a system of corporate-run private
schools can assure quality education. As right-wing think tanks and
conservative composed governmental reports manipulate data to indi-
cate that thousands of schools are failing, “qualified” teachers are in
perilously short supply, and schools are indoctrinating students with
“radical” ideas, Americans are being convinced that government-
supported schools cannot deliver what the nation needs. Most
Americans do not know about such tactics and if such public unaware-
ness continues, we could soon witness the end of universal public
schooling for our young people.
Cooking the Books: Creating Chaos
The climate of deceit that has been created produces misinformation
and erases knowledge that might contradict such deception. For
example, the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) federal law’s mandated
“adequate yearly progress” formulas—how we measure the perform-
ance of schools—are so unclear and blurred that it seems to many
observers that their real goal is the construction of confusion and
failure. Under these accountability guidelines as many as three out of

four schools will be deemed to not be making sufficient progress.
Included in this group will be some of the best public schools in the
country. Such schools will be publicly embarrassed by government
censure of their inadequate performance, leading, hopefully, more
people to conclude that public schools are failing.
In the spirit of this censure and the climate of fear it produces,
right-wing promoted voucher plans have been passed by state legisla-
tures that provide parents with minimal tuition funds so they can take
students out of “failing” schools and enroll them in private or reli-
gious schools. Voucher supporters know that this removes money
from public school funds, thus making it more difficult for them to
operate. The point in many of these plans is not to improve education
but to create bad press for and punish public schools. After its capture
by conservative groups, the federal Department of Education has
covertly operated to reward organizations that are willing to provide
support for the right-wing privatization effort. Operating with a pre-
ordained ideological agenda, these groups produce data that “proves”
that even schools such as Virginia’s Langley High in Fairfax County—
more than 90 percent of its graduates go to college—are failing (Weil,
2001; Karp, 2002; Metcalf, 2002; Aratani, 2004; WEAC, 2004).
In spirit of the political strategizing of Karl Rove and the late Lee
Atwater, right-wing operatives understand the partisan value of priva-
tization—or school choice as it is labeled. Education has traditionally
been an issue that helps the political left—in the name of opportunity,
mobility, and the promotion of democratic values, left-leaning politi-
cians have promoted public education. If the public could be con-
vinced that most public schools are failing, conservatives reasoned,
then promises to fund public education would begin to ring hollow.
School choice could be promoted to the poor and the racially mar-
ginalized as an issue of justice and equality. Along with religion, the
privatization of education could be employed to subvert traditional
progressive political constituencies. In this context, school choice has
been deceptively promoted as the new front of the twenty-first cen-
tury civil rights movement. As the conservative Alliance for the
Separation of School and State puts it, we must end “government
involvement in education” (Miner, 2004).
In many ways, the privatization of public schooling—the end of
public education—is the big jackpot for the right. Such a victory, con-
servatives reason, will subvert one of the last mechanisms for possibly
producing knowledge that questions or conflicts with right-wing dis-
information. Admittedly, the willingness and ability of public educa-
tion to counter right-wing politics of knowledge over the last few
decades have declined precipitously. With the destruction of public
JOE L. KINCHELOE
2

schools, however, the “threat” of a space that offers a diversity of
knowledges and ideologies profoundly recedes. The language of
rigor, standards, and accountability resonates with the public, and too
few individuals have looked behind the words to the actual policies
implemented in the name of such concepts. In addition to dumbing
down schools by requiring them to teach to standardized tests empha-
sizing the memorization of meaningless, fragmented, and decontex-
tualized data, such policies exacerbate the gap between the rich and
the poor and white and nonwhite in U.S. society (Berkowitz, 2001;
Hartman, 2002).
Ideological Assumptions behind Right-Wing Education
Ideology is traditionally defined as a system of beliefs, but I use the
term in this context to denote something a little more complex.
Dominant ideological activity in the context of critical theory involves
the process of protecting unequal power relations between different
groups and individuals in society. For example, dominant ideology
sustains unequal power relations via the process of making meaning—
in a sense by “educating” and “reeducating” the public. Thus, the
way I use ideology here involves the progressive concern with the way
oppression takes place and the power disparity that accompanies it.
Applying the concept of ideology as we explore what many people do
not know about education in the current mediascape and electronic
information environment, we begin to understand how powerful
groups shape people’s consciousness in ways that will better serve the
interests of dominant power. In such an ideological environment with
its corporate-backed power to persuade people of the worth of the
privatization agenda, we can begin to see the interests such a policy
would serve—and not serve. With privatization, for example, oppor-
tunities would be created for new ways for business to make billions of
dollars of profit from for-profit schools and the child consumers who
attend them. Right-wing ideology makes such capital production
possible.
It is easier to wield power in a privatized society than in a public
one. Indeed, privatized power is accountable to very few, as most cit-
izens have no say over who does what in a corporate-run institution.
Right-wing ideology has successfully produced a political climate
where millions of people have come to believe that public ownership
of social organizations is a manifestation of oppression whereas private
ownership is the ultimate marker of freedom. Interestingly, such rep-
resentations of public ownership have been more successful in recent
decades than during the cold war when old conservatives equated
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW IS HURTING YOU
3

public ownership of institutions, such as the Tennessee Valley
Authority (TVA), to communism. Questions concerning accountabil-
ity of private organizations have been adeptly swept under the rug in
such ideological representations.
In the United States, such a right-wing ideological success has
helped to usher in a new political era. Some might call this success an
ideological reeducation of the American public. In this new political
era, the demands of the market always trump the needs of the larger
society as well as the perpetuation of democracy and democratic insti-
tutions. In the new cosmos, the government no longer intervenes to
promote equity and protect the needs of those treated unfairly
because of race, class, or gender. Indeed, in the brave new world of
education, traditional conservative values, such as local control of
schools, collapse in the face of dominant ideology of privatization.
The federal government’s role in twenty-first century education is to
protect market needs by promoting a national agenda of standardiza-
tion and privatization.
Thus, when President George W. Bush signed NCLB into law on
January 8, 2002, the federal government’s role in K-12 schooling
shifted from equity to guaranteeing simplistic and reductionistic
forms of accountability. Such an assertion should not be taken as a
rejection of school accountability; instead, it is an assertion that the
types of accountability mandated often reconstruct school purpose in a
way that promotes low-level thinking skills and reduces education to
the indoctrination of unchallenged “truths.” The law’s claim of
increased flexibility and local control is misleading doublespeak, and
its focus on teaching strategies that have been scientifically proven to
improve instruction raises profound issues about the nature of knowl-
edge production in a democratic society.
As for equity, the law does nothing to address the grotesquely
unequal funding that separates schools and school districts in well-to-
do and poor neighborhoods. In a public school system that gives lip
service to an ideology of equality, the neglect of such equity issues
shackles the progress of poor schools and the students who attend
them. Yet, the ideological refraction promoted by the right-wing rhet-
oric frames these ideological-driven reforms as the educational salva-
tion of the dispossessed. Indeed, contemporary educational politics is
best understood as a campaign of class disinformation. No wonder so
many Americans know so little about these issues.
The doublespeak is pervasive in the disinformation campaign.
Under the banner of “getting big government off our backs,” the
right-wing education program mandates new forms of control over
what can and cannot be taught in schools. Simultaneously, it
JOE L. KINCHELOE
4

unleashes a socially unregulated corporate power that oppresses the
lives of people in new and more insidious ways. The combination of
the two mechanisms of regulatory power places democracy and indi-
vidual freedom at risk. Existing government structures regulate edu-
cation, while working in the long run for corporate ownership of
schooling. In this ideological context, the U.S. General Accounting
Office (GAO) found that the corporate commercialization of public
schooling is expanding rapidly. In most public schools, one can now
find sale of corporate products, corporate advertising, and corporate
marketing studies of student consumption patterns. Through these
intrusive and exploitative activities, corporations have generated 150
billion dollars (and growing) in annual sales to teenagers alone
(Hursh, 2001; Hartman, 2002; Foley and Voithofer, 2003; Steinberg
and Kincheloe, 2004).
All of these activities are justified under the attack on the public
domain. As a traditional American marker of the public space, educa-
tion was first on the right-wing hit list. In the right-wing politics of
information of the twenty-first century with its talk radio, Fox News
Channel, and increasing corporate control of other broadcast and
print media, education is a central target but only one of many.
Publicly supported programs that address issues of public welfare and
support for the least affluent members of society, such as Social
Security, Medicare and Medicaid, and college aid to students in need,
have also been under attack. In the right-wing ideology of disinfor-
mation in education, for example, public schools are consistently posi-
tioned as being inferior to private schools. Private schools take the
same types of students that attend public schools, antipublic educa-
tion operatives proclaim, and for less money turn out better educated
graduates. I have rarely read in one of these private-beats-public stud-
ies that public schools are required by law to admit all students who
apply whereas private schools can choose whom to admit. Many
scholars (Bogle, 2003) of privatization conclude that despite this
advantage for private institutions, the difference in the performance of
public and private school students is negligible.
Following its narrow ideological agenda, the Bush administration
has sought to undermine public education one piece at a time—
always, of course, in the name of improving it. One of the major fronts
of attack has been directed toward public school teachers. Over the
last few years, antipublic education groups had worked for the depro-
fessionalization of teachers. Such a movement had made little
progress until the election of George W. Bush in 2000. As part of his
larger plan for public education, Bush funded these groups with mil-
lions of dollars, with new support at the highest levels and funding
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW IS HURTING YOU
5

proponents of deprofessionalization formed the American Board for
Certification of Teacher Education (ABCTE) to promote a simplistic
form of teacher certification characterized by few requirements. At
the same time it claims that schools and teachers are failing and need
higher standards to promote “educational excellence,” the right
throws its full weight behind efforts to undermine high standards in
the professional preparation and certification of teachers (WEAC,
2004). Such a schizophrenic scheme fits well the devise standards,
reduce funding and support, test and measure, proclaim failure, then
privatize grand strategy.
Once this privatization achieves success, the profound class differ-
ences that separate Americans in the middle of the first decade of the
twenty-first century will expand dramatically. Access to education for
the poor and racially marginalized will become harder and harder, for
there will be few incentives for private for-profit schools to admit such
students. A largely privileged, white corps of students will gain better
access to the scientific, technological, and information professions,
while the poor and the minority young people will be left with low-
pay, low-benefits service sector jobs. Such a bimodal distribution of
privileged and marginalized workers will not only cause suffering for
the marginalized but will also place great stresses on the American
social fabric in the coming years. Such an inegalitarian future is
dystopic as well as contrary to the social compact that the nation has
at least given lip service to in the past.
The ideological foundation on which right-wing education rests
has been articulated clearly by conservative think tanks. For example,
in the Heritage Foundation’s education manifesto, No Excuses: Lessons
from 21 High-Performing, High-Poverty Schools, the continuation of
high poverty rates is not viewed as a problem with which we should be
concerned. In addition to promoting tax cuts for the most wealthy
members of society, drastic reduction in spending for social programs,
and the end of the minimum wage, and other measures that exacer-
bate the growth of poverty, the Heritage Foundation claims that the
poor are generally immoral and criminally inclined, that is, not worth
helping in the first place. In fact, spokespeople for the institute con-
tinue, the so-called poor are not as bad off as many would have us
think. Many of them own numerous cars, expensive kitchen appli-
ances, and hot tubs (Coles, 2003). The logic of the welfare Cadillac is
alive and well at one (and there are more) of the leading scholarly
institutes in the country. In this right-wing ideology, poverty is the
fault of the poor, and as such why should we (white, upper-middle
class Americans) worry about educating the next generation of their
spawn?
JOE L. KINCHELOE
6

The Ideological Foundation: Crass Class Politics and
Corporate Rule
Such a class-biased ideology is nothing new in the history of American
education. The greatest difference is that it is being carried out so
insidiously as part of a campaign to improve education for everyone
especially the poor and the racially marginalized. The goals of this
twenty-first-century stealth campaign are little different from, say,
nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century efforts to discipline an indus-
trial workforce that would work in low-skill and boring factory jobs.
Then, as now, corporate and business leaders would have been reluc-
tant to support any educational plan that did not result in monetary
profit for themselves and other dominant power groups. Because of
the control of school boards and state departments of education by
the elites, there was little chance throughout the history of American
education for school policy to rarely run counter to the best interests
of dominant groups. To understand twenty-first-century tactics, ana-
lysts must view them in the context of the right-wing ideological goals
of the last 30 years.
In 1980, for example, the average business or corporate chief
executive officer (CEO) earned 38 times the salary of an average
schoolteacher and 42 times as much as an average factory worker. By
1990, after ten years of right-wing economic redistribution policies, the
average CEO earned 72 times as much as a teacher and 93 times as
much as a factory worker. In 2004, the average CEO earned more than
500 times than the average factory worker and more than 1,200 times
than a worker making the minimum wage (Coontz, 1992; Gonzalez,
2004). Crass class politics continues with little resistance and is chang-
ing the social landscape of the country. Americans have always placed
great value on hard work. People who work hard, it is commonly
believed, should be rewarded for their efforts. Most Americans would
be surprised to find out, therefore, that the redistribution of wealth over
the last 25 years has been accomplished in inverse relation to hard work.
Much of the wealth created in the contemporary United States did
not come from inventing a better mousetrap or long hours of study or
working overtime. Most new wealth befell those with enormous assets
who were able to reap “instant wealth” from rapidly fluctuating
return rates on their speculative investments. Dividends, tax shelters,
interest, and capital gains were at the center of the action—not hard
work. The right-wing ideological assertion that connects one’s class
position to one’s willingness to work hard may be less direct than
many Americans have assumed. The right’s attempt to dismiss class as
an American issue must be exposed for what it is—an instrumental
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW IS HURTING YOU
7

fiction designed to facilitate the perpetuation of the growing disparity
of wealth by pointing to the laziness and incompetence of the poor as
the cause of their poverty. When progressives raise class issues in rela-
tion to the educational policies promoted by conservatives in the last
three decades of the twentieth and the first decade of the twenty-first
centuries, it is consistently dismissed as an effort to excuse weak teach-
ers and failing students. Educational proposals such as the hidden
movement for corporate-run private schools and the deprofessional-
ization of teachers must be viewed in larger historical and class warfare
contexts. They contribute to a long-term right-wing effort to further
marginalize the poor and extend the privilege of the well to do.
Technology and mass communication corporations in the middle
of the twenty-first century exercise unprecedented power to control
information. Because of their control of more and more print and
broadcast media outlets, corporate power has never been more
entrenched. Recognizing that teachers and the public institution of
education could pose a threat to such an information monopoly, many
corporate leaders have led the privatization and teacher deprofession-
alization movements. Thus, education has been swept up in the same
ideological forces that have redefined freedom as the right of corpora-
tions to desecrate the public space in an effort to pursue private gain.
Data banks, radio and television transmissions, Internet, and other
forms of transnational communications systems all contribute to a net-
work that allows corporate leaders to regulate markets and manipulate
public opinion all over the world.
As these communications systems filter into cities, villages, and
rural areas globally, corporations present a view of the world that pro-
motes their interests. This privatized educational revolution and the
changes in ideological consciousness it produces takes place below the
radar of public awareness. It is rarely studied in elementary or second-
ary schools and is even hard to find in the curriculum of higher edu-
cation. It can be found, thankfully, in a few media literacy classes in
teacher education and in media studies departments in communica-
tions. With little fanfare, it implicitly promotes values such as compet-
itive individualism, the superiority of an unregulated market economy,
individual blame for poverty, the irrelevance of moral and philosophi-
cal types of knowledge, and the necessity of consumption as part of a
larger quest for social status. People’s identities—their sense of who
they are—begin to be formed less and less in their communities and
personal interactions and more and more by their televisions and
other corporatized information sources.
This corporatized politics of information profoundly affects an
individual’s perception of the world. This, many argue, is in the
JOE L. KINCHELOE
8

twenty-first century central to an understanding of the contemporary
state of democracy. While it is hard to spot in increasingly corpora-
tized public schools, it is impossible to find in for-profit corporate
schools. Teaching about the politics of information in such settings
would violate the prime directive in corporatized pedagogy: do not
call attention to the existence of power and the way it is wielded. In
this context, we begin to discern that the corporate control of schools
operated by deskilled, minimally educated teachers fits nicely with the
larger effort to control public information and regulate public con-
sciousness.
Make no mistake, the shaping of public opinion by way of corpo-
rate media and educational control is never simplistic and uncon-
tested. Often, efforts to manipulate opinion backfire, as people begin
to perceive what is happening to them and rebel. Furthermore, tech-
nologies such as computers and the Internet can be used to convey
alternative messages that challenge corporate control. Still, most indi-
viduals in the middle of the twenty-first century do not comprehend
the degree of influence that corporate leaders attain as they control
television and other media that bypass reason and focus directly on the
management of human feelings and emotions. Indeed, some of the
most important ideological tools in the politics of information involve
media presentations that are not overtly political.
Images of children as they open gifts on Christmas morning, for
example, have no overt political message. At a deeper level, however,
such images may be influential as they tell us that such happiness in our
children can be evoked only by the consumption of goods and services.
And where do we get these things? From businesses and corporations.
If we truly love our children and want to see them happy, then we must
support the interests of the companies that provide these valuable prod-
ucts. The production of ideological consciousness is not a linear,
rational procedure but one grounded on our emotional hopes and
fears. Thus, when Mattel Inc. calls for lower corporate taxes and a bet-
ter business climate in which to produce its toys, we accede to its wishes.
After all, this is the company that allows us to make our children happy
(Kincheloe and Steinberg, 2004; Steinberg and Kincheloe, 2004).
Thus, it is within the context of this crass class politics and corpo-
rate power that we begin to better understand the right-wing educa-
tional agenda. Just as corporations and conservative groups have
worked to control the politics of information in communications, the
same forces are at work
1. to regulate the subject matter of schools in the most efficient way
possible;
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW IS HURTING YOU
9

2. to control the work and academic freedom of teachers;
3. to subvert the possibility that a variety of knowledges might be
engaged in public spaces.
Right-wing advocacy of basic skills teaching accompanied by multiple-
choice standardized testing viewed in this context not only tends to
dumb down the curriculum, but it also keeps teachers and students
from exploring dangerous information—for example, the problems of
democracy as John Dewey put it so long ago. When the Heritage
Foundation encourages educational leaders to employ the “hiring and
firing of staff” to let them know what it is that a school is supposed to
accomplish, one senses how serious such political operatives take their
regulatory task.
What schools, especially high poverty schools, are supposed to
accomplish involves preparing a student to fit the needs of a competi-
tive workplace. Careful reading of what this means reveals that fitting
such needs involves learning to follow directions, respect authority,
eschew unions, and ask fewer questions. Such forms of oppressive
schooling are part of a larger corporate strategy to disempower and
control workers. Over the last 30 years, corporations have developed
new forms of worker surveillance to ensure that laborers are always
under supervision. Such surveillance includes computer tracking of
practically every move a worker makes. Tens of millions of people are
hired to police workers—about one monitor for every 2.3 workers.
Indeed, a key dimension of what schools should accomplish, accord-
ing to the Heritage Foundation and other right-wing groups, involves
the same forms of control. Rarely will students study the antisocial
behavior of corporations in the standardized curricula of right-wing
schools. Students will not be exposed to the growing disparity of
wealth between workers and managers. Indeed, much of their educa-
tion will involve simple-minded homilies promoting a corporation-is-
our-friend ideology (Coles, 2003; Kitts, 2004).
Science as Right-Wing Ideology: 
Understanding Positivism
A central and disturbing development in the right-wing educational
movement involves the deployment of science in circumscribed ways
guaranteed to validate the power-driven dominant cultural agenda.
This strategy is quite complex and it is easy to exclude the public from
an understanding of how it works. The use of such a science for anti-
democratic and antiegalitarian objectives has become extremely
important in the twenty-first century. In this context, it is imperative
JOE L. KINCHELOE
10

that the public understands this politics of knowledge in order to
defend democracy and access to public education. One of these com-
plex elements involves the ability to identify and trace the effects of
ethnocentrism within the positivist research tradition in education.
Positivism is an epistemological (having to do with the production of
knowledge) position that values objective, scientific knowledge pro-
duced in rigorous adherence to the scientific method. In this context,
knowledge is worthwhile to the extent that it describes objective data
that reflect the world. Over the past several decades, scholars of
research have discerned numerous problems with the positivist posi-
tion—problems that lead to the production of very misleading under-
standings of the world around us.
In this positivist view, “true knowledge” can only be produced by
a detached, disinterested, external observer who works to ignore
background (contextual) information by developing “objective”
research techniques. In the long course of human history, most of
great wisdom has not been constructed in this manner. At the center
of the things we do not know about the right-wing movement in edu-
cation is this attempt to recover and reinstate the positivist mode of
producing a narrow form of knowledge. A more global insight with
awareness of and respect for diverse ways of knowing, cultural humil-
ity, and an ecologically sustainable and ethical conception of progress
is not on the positivist conceptual map. Positivism in this context is a
monocultural way of seeing the world that emphasizes the knowl-
edges produced by patriarchy, white Europeans, and individuals from
the upper middle/upper classes. The standards movement of the last
couple of decades provides a case study of this phenomenon.
In 1994, when Lynne Cheney (wife of Vice-President Dick
Cheney) was attacking the National History Standards from her post
at the conservative think tank, the American Enterprise Institute, she
objected to their excessive coverage of women and minorities. The
professional historians, she argued, who wrote the “disastrous” stan-
dards were anti-American radicals out to destroy Western civilization
and the Enlightenment tradition. Even the most minor attempts to
include diverse voices in the history curriculum in the U.S. schools are
met with vicious objections. What is especially amazing in this situa-
tion is that the National History Standards was not calling for a major
overhaul of curriculum to include the study of global, non-Western,
and non-Christian information in the history curriculum in U.S.
schools. The call, by scholars such as myself and the authors included
in this book, for diverse global understanding, respect for the tradi-
tions of other cultures, and ways of producing knowledge are dis-
missed by the right as an assault on “all we hold dear.” It is essential
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW IS HURTING YOU
11

that progressives understand this arrogance, its numerous consequences
around the world and within Western societies, and develop the skills
to counter its expression and negate its unfortunate consequences
(Apple, 1993).
In this context, the call for positivistic research and curricular stan-
dardization takes on even more ideological baggage. Not only a man-
ifestation of hyper-rationalization, but also the standardization of
curriculum becomes a means of insuring ethnocentrism in the class-
room. Such an ethnocentrism is suspicious of concepts such as diver-
sity, multiple perspectives derived from multiple forms of research,
criticality, difference, and multiculturalism. Ideologically, it works
covertly to promote the interests of dominant culture over less pow-
erful minority cultures. Such interests involve the power of the privi-
leged to maintain their privilege, as students from economically
poorer families, those students whose families possess the least formal
education, are transformed into “test liabilities” (Ohanian, 1999;
Vinson and Ross, 2001). In such a category, their problems in school
can be blamed on their inferiority: “we tried to teach them the infor-
mation mandated by the standards but they just didn’t have the abil-
ity to get it. There’s nothing more we can do. Scientific analysis shows
these students just can’t learn. Look at their IQ scores.”
Positivism exerts a dramatic impact on education. It is grounded on
the faith that education like the physical and social worlds is founded
on universal and unchanging laws. Thus, the purpose of educational
research is to discover those laws. Educational laws would include
statements about how students learn and how they should be taught.
Positivist research tells us that there is one right way to teach and
one correct way to evaluate that teaching. Those who hold different
perspectives on these matters do not fit in the positivist universe. The
evidence-based research promoted by the Bush administration and
right-wing organizations fits the following categories of positivism:
(1) All legitimate knowledge is scientific knowledge—all scientific
knowledge is empirically verifiable. Empirically verified knowledge is
the information we gain through the senses. What the eye sees, what the
ear hears, what we can count, what we can express mathematically—
these constitute empirical knowledge. Of course, what I argue here
is that many dimensions of education, psychology, and social activity
in general are not discernible in such an empirical context. What is
the purpose of schools in a democratic society is not a question
that can be expressed empirically in the language of mathematics.
Many normative and affective dimensions of education cannot be
delineated in such a positivistic discourse. When the public encounters
JOE L. KINCHELOE
12

such positivistic knowledge—for example, school progress expressed
solely in test scores—it must understand that it presents a very limited
view of the teaching and learning process. Indeed, some of the most
important dimensions of education involving questions of equity, fair-
ness, justice, and even intellectual rigor are erased from such forms of
knowledge production. Knowledge about the world, and about the
educational domain in particular, is never objective and disinterested.
It is always based on a constellation of values and assumptions about
the ways the world operates and the nature of human beings. These
values and assumptions covertly shape the knowledge even an
“objective” researcher produces.
(2) Researchers must use the same research methods to study the world
of education that they use to study the physical universe. Profound prob-
lems emerge when researchers apply physical science methods to the
study of the social world or education. A key characteristic of posi-
tivistic research in the physical sciences involves the effort to predict
and control natural phenomena. When employed in education, posi-
tivistic physical science methods deploy knowledge as a tool to control
people. Thus, ability testing is used to control where particular stu-
dents can go, what programs they can pursue. Many a student of color
or an economically marginalized student has heard a guidance coun-
selor say on the basis of a positivistic aptitude test: “I’m sorry, Jamie,
you will have to go to the basic classes. The tests tell us that you are
not upper-track or college material.”
(3) The world is uniform and the object of study will always be con-
sistent in its existence and its behavior. Positivist researchers believe
that the phenomena they examine will remain constant over time.
Thus, they assume there is a natural order in the way both the physi-
cal and the social/educational/psychological worlds operate. These
regularities, or social laws, are best expressed through quantitative
analysis using propositional language and mathematics. The goal for
such evidence-based educational research in this context is to develop
theories that regularize human expression and make it predictable. In
this context, right-wing groups study which curricula and pedagogies
help raise test scores. If a particular teaching technique works in one
locale, then because of the alleged consistency across educational con-
texts, it will exist in another. Following such positivist logic, educators
should standardize their teaching in line with such research, and all
schools should operate in the same way. Of course, this is exactly what
NCLB is mandating in U.S. schools in the middle of the first decade
of the twenty-first century.
(4) The variables that cause things to take place are limited and know-
able, and, in positivist educational research, can be controlled. Positivists
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW IS HURTING YOU
13

assert that causal variables can be isolated and analyzed independently
to determine specific cause–effect relationships. Thus, positivist
research produces knowledge that is certain that direct inculcation of
data by the teachers directly leads to better learning. Of course, in
such a context, the ambiguity and complexity of what we might mean
by the words “better learning” is simply ignored. For the cause–effect
link to work in such research, we must not question the idea that stu-
dent compilation of numerous decontextualized and fragmented
“facts” is tantamount to being an educated person. In order to devise
studies that claim to discover cause–effect relationships in education,
researchers must reduce the factors studied to the point that the data
produced is meaningless. Thus, they ignore hundreds of variables
concerning particular value assumptions and the “noise” of everyday
classroom life—the very dynamics that shape and give meaning to
what education is all about.
(5) If researchers use rigorous quantitative methods carefully then
we can be certain about what is required in the reform of education—
eventually we will understand education well enough to preclude the
need for further educational research. Educational researchers who are
more aware of the different types of knowledge needed in educational
research, and the complexity of contextual difference with diverse stu-
dent needs, know that we can never control all the variables in an edu-
cational situation. Because the factors that help shape teacher and
student behaviors are unlimited, the quest for positivist certainty is
fatuous. Our understandings of the world in general and education in
particular change with new revelations and they will continue to
change. It is a naïve understanding of knowledge that assumes educa-
tional research will someday become unnecessary because we know all
the answers. One of the great failures of the mindset that promotes
right-wing educational reforms involves the arrogant assumption that
we know how to teach and we must impose this knowledge on all
teachers in all schools. In this framework, there is no room for teacher
prerogative and individual innovation.
(6) Objectivity is possible—facts and values in research about educa-
tion can always be kept separate. Evidence-based research is never a
value-free activity. When positivist researchers assume, for example,
that standardized test scores provide a valid measure of the quality of
teaching and learning, they are accepting on faith a particular value.
Test scores do not measure the ability to think at a higher order, make
wise decisions, conduct and evaluate research, construct compelling
interpretations of disparate information, discern validity, ad infinitum.
I would argue that all of these abilities—another value judgment—are
central qualities possessed by educated people. When teachers are
JOE L. KINCHELOE
14

forced to teach to the fragmented and decontextualized demands of
standardized tests, we observe a research instrument—the tests—
shaping the nature of the teaching and learning that takes place in the
classroom. The tail is wagging the dog.
(7) There is only one true reality—the one “discovered” by positivist
research—and the purpose of education consists of teachers conveying
that reality to students. Educational science grounded on this positivist
tenet assumes that the laws of society and knowledge about human
beings are certified and unchanging and, thus, ought to be inserted
directly into the minds of students. Operating on this assumption,
educational “engineers” devise curricula and teaching strategies for
schools as if no ambiguities or uncertainties in the socioeducational
world exist. The authoritarian voice of positivist educational science
silences our language of qualitative insight based on experience, aes-
thetics, historical context, interpretive analysis, and descriptive
processes. In such a context, a distanced, decontextualized, de-
emotionalized, dehumanized, simplistic, and highly misleading form
of knowledge is produced.
(8) Devalues the professional complexity of the teaching act—teachers
become information deliverers not highly skilled and respected scholar
practitioners. Here we can clearly discern the resonance between
right-wing educational proposals and the positivist politics of knowl-
edge. A positivist mode of educational research propels the deprofes-
sionalization agenda by making teacher deskilling technically necessary.
If teachers are merely delivering certain truths produced by experts,
then there is no need for a scholarly teacher corps. Indeed, we can hire
individuals who read on about the eighth or ninth grade level to read
scripted lessons to students. Such “teachers” should be large and
physically intimidating individuals who can frighten students into
staying on task. Of course, in the corporate, for-profit schools refer-
enced earlier in this chapter, these are exactly the teachers for whom
school leaders are looking. The scholarly, knowledge-producing
teachers advocated here are often viewed as undesirables, potential
troublemakers in the right-wing school of the contemporary era.
A Science of Dominant Power Accompanied by 
Corporate Cronyism
In 2002, NCLB specifically endorsed an educational research limited
to evidence-based scientific methods—positivist science—and insisted
that only teaching strategies “proven to work” by such methods be
used in schools. This “recovery” of a positivism that had been
discredited by numerous scholars over the past three decades is part of
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW IS HURTING YOU
15

a larger cultural movement. This global movement has attempted to
turn back a tide of anti-European colonialism, garner respect for
diverse cultural ways of understanding the world, promote a struggle
against patriarchy, and initiate a quest for multiple-research methods
that dig deeper into social, psychological, and educational realities.
Drawing upon the work of Aaron Gresson (1995, 2004), I have
referred to this “backlash” as the recovery movement. Such an effort
has typically involved Westerners, especially Americans, in an attempt
to recover forms of power perceived to have been lost in the anticolo-
nial insurrection of Africans, Asians, Latin Americans, and indigenous
peoples throughout the twentieth century, the Civil Rights Movement
in the United States, the worldwide Women’s Movement, and the
Gay Rights Movement.
The incursion of the federal government under the George W.
Bush administration into the legislative mandating of research meth-
ods marks the beginning of a new era in the politics of knowledge or
the so-called science wars. Indeed, we have now moved into an era
where research methodology has become a legal issue with right-wing
organizations attempting to exclude scientific methods attuned to the
diversity, specificity, and contextualized dimensions of human experi-
ence. In this situation, the government becomes an arbiter of what we
are allowed to know. After the signing of NCLB into law in January,
the Congress passed the Educational Sciences Reform Act in October
2002 to consolidate and expand the role of evidence-based research in
federal education policy.
Again, as the doublespeak of the right-wing agenda reveals itself, in
the name of small and unobtrusive government, the Bush administra-
tion mandates not only standardized curricula but also what methods
can be used to study schools. The nation has never witnessed such
restrictive forms of federal governmental control in the sphere of edu-
cation. Educators are truly witnessing a science of dominant power.
The right-wing educational strategy connected to this dominant
power covers all its bases. At the same time that it plots to create pri-
vatized corporate schools, it makes sure that the public ones also tow
the ideological line. No matter which way the struggle for privatiza-
tion works out, right-wing politicos know that they will dominate
schooling in America with authoritarian, antidemocratic policies that
strategically eliminate anyone or any knowledge that counters their
agenda (Fleischman et al., 2003; Foley and Voithofer, 2003; Lather,
2003).
The exclusive authoritarian nature of such science policies can be
clearly seen in the Bush administration’s Reading First Program.
Educational leaders and researchers who raise questions about the
JOE L. KINCHELOE
16

scientific methods used to study the reading process and the
performance of students and teachers in learning and teaching reading
are excluded from even presenting their opinions to the Congress or
the Department of Education. In the public conversation about read-
ing and the teaching of reading that has developed around Reading
First, ideological zealots have established a McCarthy-like blacklist.
Long-recognized experts on reading who use qualitative research
methods are no longer welcome in the community of reading schol-
ars. At the same time, particular journals, terms, and concepts are not
allowed in the conversation, as federal monies are provided only to
those who pledge allegiance to the flag of positivism and the exclusive
teaching of, in this case, phonics-based reading methods (Murray,
2002; Coles, 2003).
The origins of the contemporary federal educational policy that
deploys a science of dominant power can be observed in right-wing
educational movements of the last three decades (see Kincheloe,
1983). An immediate predecessor involves the then governor George
W. Bush’s educational policies in Texas in the 1990s. Numerous con-
sultants were brought to the governor’s mansion in Austin, most of
whom were authors of books published by McGraw-Hill. All of the
scholars and political operatives who participated in the Texas conver-
sation called for evidence-based research that led to standardized
teaching and evaluation methods in Texas schools. Since most of the
research pointed to the need for McGraw-Hill textbooks, the com-
pany made a fortune in the process producing phonics-based scripted
programs to be read by teachers to their classes (Trelease, 2003). In
the first and second Bush administrations, this positivistic, standard-
ized, financially lucrative process of educational research and reform
has transmigrated to the federal governmental level.
Thus, while operating in the name of objective science, the right-
wing educational agenda is profoundly influenced by corporate
money and power. Again, positivism, privatization, and corporate
influence join together in a sordid ideological ménage à trois. In fact,
the Bush administration’s educational proposals look like profit
enhancement plans for McGraw-Hill and other corporations. In
twenty-first-century education, dollars are being spent on testing,
teacher manuals, and textbooks, not on efforts to promote equity and
equal educational funding between rich and poor districts. The need
for such a shift in funding, of course, is promoted by an evidence-
based science that claims objectivity and intellectual rigor.
Indeed, such positivist research proclaims that because of the low
abilities of African American, Latinos, and poor whites from these
low-income districts, there is little that can be done to help them
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW IS HURTING YOU
17

(Kincheloe et al., 1996). Educators, the argument goes, might as well
forget trying to educate such students in such a way that they can
achieve socioeconomic mobility and instead focus their attention on
raising the test scores of those who are capable of learning. Thus,
NCLB mandates the creation of over 200 new tests. The federal gov-
ernment will spend 400 million dollars over a six-year period to
develop such tests and another 7 billion dollars to implement them in
all the states. The coffers of the corporate cronies runneth over.
The first day George W. Bush assumed presidency in 2001, he
invited a group of so-called educational leaders to the White House.
The leaders consisted mainly of Fortune 500 CEOs. A central player,
of course, was Harold McGraw III, chair of McGraw-Hill. So central
was McGraw to the educational reform process that he and his com-
pany had financial ties to the “objective” researchers producing the
data used to justify particular Bush educational policies. A cursory
reading of George W. Bush’s educational policies as governor of Texas
and as president always finds the McGraws at the center of decision
making. Even before Bush became governor of Texas, Harold
McGraw, Jr. was a board member of the Barbara Bush Foundation for
Family Literacy. Bush’s secretary of education, Rod Paige, was the
“Harold W. McGraw Jr. Educator of the Year” during his tenure as
superintendent of schools in Houston.
George W. Bush’s educational relationship with the McGraws and
McGraw-Hill is similar to his oil and gas relationship with Ken Lay and
Enron. Indeed, the relationship between the Bushes and McGraws goes
back three generations to the friendship that developed between grand-
fathers Sen. Prescott Bush and publishing tycoon James McGraw Jr.,
the uncle of Harold McGraw, Jr. The two meet in the 1930s on
Jupiter Island off the east coast of Florida, an exclusive vacation spot
for the northeast elite of the day. George H. W. Bush maintained the
relationship with Harold McGraw, Jr. and, of course, the relation
extended to the third generation with George W. Bush and Harold
McGraw III. The first president Bush in the early 1990s awarded
Harold McGraw, Jr. the highest award in the promotion of literacy for
his profound contributions to the cause of reading. Harold McGraw III
was appointed to the Bush transition advisory panel after the 2000
election. The connections between the two families go on and on as
numerous Bush administration officials go back and forth between
service to the president and lucrative positions at McGraw-Hill.
The influence of McGraw-Hill on the National Reading Panel’s
(NRP) report is a compelling example of the impact of corporate
power on knowledge production about education. The NRP was
commissioned by the Congress in the late 1990s to study the existing
JOE L. KINCHELOE
18

research on the teaching of reading in order to inform the contentious
debate over reading pedagogy in the United States. While there are
extensive problems with the report of the NRP around issues of
methodology, the panel’s dismissal of concerns with reading compre-
hension, and the panel’s lack of theoretical/philosophical diversity,
the most egregious problem involves the reporting of the panel’s find-
ings. The report was presented in three formats: (1) the report of the
subgroups—500 pages of data including the studies on reading ana-
lyzed and the findings of the panel; (2) a 15-min video that claims to
summarize the panel’s findings; (3) a 32-page pamphlet that “sum-
marizes” the larger report. Importantly, it is this pamphlet that has
been the source employed by legislators to mandate reading curricu-
lum and pedagogy.
The problem is that the short pamphlet presents recommendations
for teaching reading that do not match the conclusions put forward in
the report of the subgroups. The larger report warns that the teaching
of phonics does not affect reading comprehension; the pamphlet in
direct contradiction promotes phonics teaching maintaining that
phonics instruction is the scientifically proven best method for teach-
ing reading. It seems just a little suspicious that the NRP summary was
composed in part by Widmeyer-Baker, the public relations company
that McGraw-Hill employs to promote its phonics-based Open Court
Reading Program. When positivism and scientific objectivity are the
words of the day, such corporate influence is especially troubling.
The pamphlet, not the larger report of the NRP, has been used as
the basis for educational legislation at both state and federal levels
concerning the teaching of reading. In this context, the Bush admin-
istration in its first term provided 1 billion dollars a year for literacy
education (the Early Literacy Initiative) for a six-year period. To
administer the allocation of such monies, President Bush picked
McGraw-Hill DISTAR program promoter, Christopher Doherty—
DISTAR is McGraw-Hill’s scripted literacy program. In light of these
dynamics, McGraw-Hill has come to be known on Wall Street as a
Bush stock and is showing a profound increase in its valuation because
of the policies described here. Obviously, corporate-driven educa-
tional policies produce significant profits for those with political influ-
ence (California Educator, 2002; Karp, 2002; Yatvin 2002; Eisenhart
and Towne, 2003; Metcalf, 2002; Garan, 2004).
Repackaged Positivism: Problems with Bushian Science
Positivism mixed with cronyism makes a mean cocktail. The impact of
such a potent ideological potable is devastating. To make informed
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW IS HURTING YOU
19

decisions about these politics of education, the American public
simply has to better understand epistemological issues and the politics
of knowledge. Here we focus in a little more detail on the specifics of
Bushian educational science. A simple point grounds this analysis:
connecting educational practice to educational research is a compli-
cated and difficult task. This does not mean that it cannot be done—
it most certainly can. The point is that the nature of the relationship is
more complex than many—educational researchers included—realize.
In teacher education, it is not easy to determine what teachers need to
know about the body of research and knowledge produced in the field
of education, not to mention sociology, psychology, cultural studies,
history, economics, political science, literary studies, aesthetics, math,
physical science, and so on. Thus, what is the relationship connecting,
research, educational knowledge, and educational practice? The edu-
cational operatives in the Bush administration believe they know the
answer to this question, concurrently claiming that they do not
understand our warnings about its complexity.
Educational researcher Max Van Manen (1990) contends that
there is a profound disconnect between educational research and edu-
cational practice. Scientific educational knowledge is in no way tanta-
mount to pedagogical understanding. As important as I personally
believe social, cultural, political, and economic contextual knowledge
is to the process of teaching, I understand that simply presenting such
contextual insight to teachers is not enough. There is another step
that involves interpreting what such knowledge might imply for a
teacher in the everyday life of her classroom. Because of the innate
complexity of the knowledge and its relationship to pedagogy, I even
understand that there is not one simple answer to the question con-
cerning its implications for the classroom. However, I also know that
it is a question that needs to be asked by teachers and teacher educa-
tors. The important point here is that educational research of any type
does not dictate in any simple way the form educational practice
should take. This, however, is the very mistake that the evidence-
based research advocates of NCLB are making. Here is the research,
they tell us. Now that it has been produced, teachers should go do
exactly what it tells them.
Van Manen reminds us that no research “truth,” no validated
model of learning or “correct” teaching method can tell us what we
should do with this student in this particular situation. Pedagogical
decisions are always grounded on the specific contextual features a
teacher encounters in dealing with a particular child. An emotionally
sensitive child will require different approaches than one who is
confident and assertive. A child who is not socially and economically
JOE L. KINCHELOE
20

privileged may require different pedagogical approaches than one
who is. This list can go on and on. Positivistic evidence-based research
is not interested in questions such as the ones Van Manen raises. The
lived experience of students is amazingly complex and must be under-
stood by those who seek to teach them. Van Manen (1990) puts
it well:
A child’s learning experience usually is astonishingly mercurial and
transitional in terms of moods, emotions, energy and feelings of rela-
tionship and selfhood. Those who absorb themselves in their children’s
experiences of learning to read, to write, to play music, or to participate
in any kind of in or out of school activity whatsoever, are struck by the
staggering variability of delight and rancor, difficulty and ease, confu-
sion and clarity, risk and fear, abandon and stress, confidence and
doubt, interest and boredom, perseverance and defeat, trust and resent-
ment, children experience as common everyday occurrences. Parents
may know and understand this reality. Some teachers do.
How often are the meanings of such microlevel, lived world experi-
ences of children addressed by positivist researchers? The answer is
simple—never. At the very least, one dimension of educational
research involves exploring the intricacies of experience, the structures
of meaning, the interrelationships that help construct the basic com-
plexity of the pedagogical act.
Advocates of evidence-based research are certainly aware that sole
reliance upon neopositivist research blocks any inquiry that addresses
these everyday educational ambiguities. They are also aware that pos-
itivist research excludes any explorations focused on sociopolitical and
justice-related concerns. There is no place for such research in the
positivistic cosmos. Even prestigious groups such as the National
Research Council (NRC)—an organization that has served as a scien-
tific advisory agency to the government since 1863—discerned the
need to write only its fifth report on educational research in almost a
half century on the excesses of Bushian science. With the passage of
educational legislation grounded on positivist ways of approaching
pedagogy, the council warned of the dangerous effects of the “narrow
scientism” of the Bush administration. Any rigorous educational
research agenda, the NRC report asserted, should promote a wide
variety of research methodologies (Lather, 2003).
The naïve view of educational data promoted by positivism assumes
that the only way to determine whether knowledge produced about
education is true is via replication of findings in different settings.
Positivism has no mechanism to reflect or question the limitations of
these replicable forms of information. This epistemology assumes the
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW IS HURTING YOU
21

superiority of a particular type of educational knowledge that is based
on finding methods that increase standardized test scores in more
than one location. Of course, this makes yet another set of assump-
tions:
1. the knowledge included on a standardized test is neutral and
objective;
2. the purpose of education involves committing such knowledge to
memory;
3. educational research that does not assume the improvement of
standardized test scores to be the central goal of education is not
important;
4. the teaching act consists primarily of imparting this knowledge to
students;
5. the measure of good teaching involves how efficiently a teacher
imparts such knowledge to students;
6. being well educated is grounded on how much of this knowledge
one can recall at a moment’s notice;
7. the most appropriate educational format is a teacher-centered ped-
agogy;
8. the proper role of student is a passive knowledge receiver.
In the narrowness of what positivistic methods measure in relation
to standardized test scores, issues concerning student understanding
of data “learned,” use of information, attitude and disposition toward
learning, research skills, interpretive abilities, insight into the con-
struction of selfhood, worldviews, and future goals, and the develop-
ment of conceptual frameworks are simply irrelevant. In this context,
a case certainly can be made that each of these dimensions of learning
are at least as important as the “mastery” of particular content knowl-
edge. In light of these understandings, it is important that educators,
teacher educators, parents, and citizens in general make the politics of
educational research an important political issue. As long as Bushian
science is unchallenged, educational research will promote a right-
wing political agenda all the while traveling incognito wearing the
mask of objectivity (Hellstrom and Wenneberg, 2002; Coles, 2003;
Eisenhart and Towne, 2003; Foley and Voithofer, 2003).
Thus, right-wing operatives have turned research design and
methodology into a weapon against critically oriented teaching and
learning as well as any form of pedagogy that challenges the dominant
power wielders of the twenty-first century. Thus, research is trans-
formed into an antidemocratic activity, as with the Reading First
debacle described above. The “objective, disinterested science” of the
JOE L. KINCHELOE
22

Bush administration simply refuses to consider analyses—such as the
one presented here—of what positivism can and cannot do. We are back
to the “faith-based” dimension of Bushian science—evidence-based
scientific research tells us all we need to know about the educational
process.
While Bush educational scientists claim all educational decisions are
based on hard scientific data, they are curiously silent about the need
for rigorous scientific evaluation of their own assumptions about the
nature of educational science. Employing such double standards and
outright duplicity, Bushian science marches forward in its application
of ideological science moving from discipline to discipline in its effort
to control knowledge and the curriculum grounded upon it. Yet
another irony of such a politics of knowledge and educational policy is
that this authoritarian process takes place under the banner of the
recovery movement’s call for decreased government intervention in
our personal and institutional lives. Historically, there has never been
as much federal control of local education as in the second Bush pres-
idency (Lather, 2003; Street, 2003). Such authoritarianism is justified
by an appeal to the authority of neutral science: this is what the best
science tells what schools should be doing. How can we go against the
authority of evidence-based science?
I have written about the complexity of educational science in great
detail in other works (see Kincheloe, 2004a, 2004b). In these I call for
a richer, more scholarly and more practical form of understanding of
the types of knowledges that are needed by educators at all levels—
policy makers, administrators, and teachers. The important point here
is that there are many types of educational knowledge that educators
need to construct: rigorous, scholarly challenging, just, contextually
savvy, and humane schools. Such appreciation of the multiple knowl-
edges is a complex epistemological concept. Educators who possess
such a sophisticated understanding of knowledge recognize the fol-
lowing categories of educational information:
(1) Empirical knowledge comes from research based on data
derived from sense data and observation of diverse dimensions of edu-
cation. The positivist data of Bushian science falls under this category,
but it is just one of many forms of empirical knowledge. The type of
rigorous, critical education we propose insists on a far more savvy,
informed, multilogical notion of empirical knowledge than the posi-
tivist ones being deployed in contemporary education. Such a thicker
notion demands that researchers understand the assumptions on
which their methods and designs rests, both the assets and liabilities of
such methods and designs, and the multiple interpretations of the
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW IS HURTING YOU
23

data that are possible. Thus, a more rigorous form of empirical
research understands that it does not simply, directly, and unproblem-
atically tells us what to do in education.
(2) Normative knowledge concerns questions of what educators
should be doing in schools, and what is the purpose of education.
Such are the normative inquiries that are necessary to all pedagogical
activity in a democratic, egalitarian society. Such knowledge is con-
structed not arbitrarily but in relation to a rigorous analysis of certain
visions of a good society, questions of power and its relationship to
education, and the social, cultural, historical contexts in which we
operate. Normative knowledges are overtly erased in Bushian science.
All of these issues are dealt with but not in the way advocated here. In
positivism, such deliberations take place covertly and are tacitly
embedded in the choices of research design and application—for
example, a standardized test-driven curriculum contains the norma-
tive assumption that the purpose of school is to inculcate particular
validated truths to all students.
(3) Critical knowledge is closely connected to normative knowl-
edge as it involves the political and power-related dimensions of the
educational process and how they shape what educators do. All edu-
cational decisions are political in that they are implicated in particular
relationships to power. Curriculum simply cannot be constructed out-
side of a connection to sociopolitical power. In the knowledge we
confront, in the way we deal with it, we establish particular political
positions. Do we treat curricular knowledge as a final body of truth
that should never be challenged? Or do we position curricular knowl-
edge as information always open to scrutiny and rejection? Do we see
the curriculum not as a body of pregiven information or one to be
constructed by teachers and students in particular locations? All of
these curricular approaches assume a particular relationship with
power whether we want them to or not. Discerning the nature of
these power relations is a central concern of critical educational
knowledge producers.
(4) Ontological knowledge has to do with what it means to be a
teacher. Ontology is the branch of philosophy that studies what it
means to be in the world, what it means to be human. Thus, onto-
logical educational knowledge is concerned with the way teachers
come to see themselves as professional educators, how they develop
their teacher personas. In a critical education, such knowledge is pro-
foundly important because teachers with differing teacher personas
will hold diverse views of educational purpose, different interpreta-
tions of educational knowledges, different expectations of and rela-
tionships with students, different reasons for becoming a teacher and
JOE L. KINCHELOE
24

staying in the profession. Such ontological knowledge is produced as
researchers and teachers themselves explore their own and education’s
relationship to the social, cognitive, cultural, philosophical, political,
economic, and historical world around them.
(5) Experiential knowledge is often recognized as the most impor-
tant form of knowledge in craft-based views of the teaching profes-
sion. The mistake often made in such a framework is that experiential,
hands-on knowledge of the teaching act becomes the only knowledge
valued. A critical, democratic education profoundly values the impor-
tance of experiential knowledge, but understands that it must be
accompanied by empirical, normative, critical, ontological, and reflec-
tive synthetic educational knowledges. Experiential knowledges are
inherently complex because there is so much disagreement as to what
constitutes practice. In the spirit of our multilogicality, there are many
types of practices and thus many types of experiential knowledges that
emerge from them. Knowledge derived from practice, while neces-
sary, is never self-evident. Because of what Donald Schön describes as
“indeterminate zones of practice,” experiential knowledge—like
empirical knowledge—does not generalize well. Since professional
practice is always marked by surprises that force practitioners to
reshape their understandings of particular situations and ways of oper-
ating, teachers learn to use their experiential knowledge to devise not
rigid rules but improvisational orientations toward their professional
activity.
(6) Reflective-Synthetic knowledge is the knowledge base of educa-
tion that includes all of the forms mentioned here—and more.
Professional work in educational science demands reflection on their
multiple relations to practice, broadly defined, and a synthetic process
that studies the implications of the different forms of knowledge when
juxtaposed to one another. Here rests a key dimension of the type of
complex educational science that frees us from the failure of positivism
and the recovery of positivism in the evidence-based cosmos described
in this chapter. A complex educational science produces diverse forms
of knowledge and then takes on the difficult job of analyzing them in
relation to one another, discerning all the while their connection to
educational practice. Devising more rigorous, more beneficial, more
pragmatic ways of accomplishing this task is a central goal of my own
work and the authors in this collection of essays.
In light of the diverse forms of educational knowledges and
the need for educators to synthesize and apply them, the claims of
the Bush administration that invalidated teaching practices and
“unproven education theories” are the main reasons for school and
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW IS HURTING YOU
25

student failure are seen more clearly as ideologically driven doublespeak.
Such claims are a form of scientific mumbo jumbo that use a scientific
language to claim validity for particular political positions. On what
basis are particular teaching practices invalid? Using what criteria?
Employing what epistemology? What normative assumptions? What is
an unproven educational theory? Is an educational policy that bases
educational success in part on all students’ success in engaging in
sophisticated knowledge work and demonstrating the ability to conduct
primary research an unproven educational theory?
Such a normative form of knowledge is not empirically provable or
disprovable. When I argue that education should be overtly antiracist
how do we empirically prove that such an assertion is empirically true
or false? The answer—we cannot. An epistemologically informed edu-
cation scholar can make such knowledge-based distinctions. Such a
scholar knows that different educational questions demand different
forms of educational knowledge. In such a context this informed
scholar fights against the effort to privilege positivist experimental
research, evidence-based research, and randomized trials as superior
to all other forms of inquiry (Eisenhart and Towne, 2003; Foley and
Voithofer, 2003). Right-wing operatives bank on the belief that since
these questions are so complex and the use of the term, scientific,
holds such political capital, few people will study the details of the
issues in question. Such a position is not only cynical but also reveals
a political orientation that is inherently uncomfortable with democ-
racy and democratic institutions.
Conclusion: The Future of Democratic Education
The authoritarian educational and epistemological fundamentalism
aided and abetted by corporate cronyism in the Bush administration is
merely one dimension of a larger radical right-wing agenda including
market-driven, sociopolitical norms, redistribution of wealth from
poor to rich, globalized economic imperialism, religious zealotry, and
militaristic empire building around the globe. The control of educa-
tion and research is a central dimension of this larger agenda, as it
helps to repress the citizenry’s access to diverse perspectives about
these matters. In this context, such educational policies can subvert
the civic dimensions of schooling—the production of critical, analyti-
cal citizens who have knowledge of a wide variety of perspectives on
diverse topics and who are dedicated to participation in democratic
practices. These right-wing policies cannot be implemented without
an uninformed population, who can be frightened into supporting a
political and educational status quo that works against their interests.
JOE L. KINCHELOE
26

Indeed, Chester Finn, the president of the right-wing Fordham
Foundation, has produced research that “proves” that the American
public does not want schools to graduate students who engage in
these acts of democratic citizenship. Americans, Finn argues, want
schools that teach only what he calls “fundamental knowledge,”
meaning that which always supports dominant power as it works to
preclude dissent. With bills such as House Resolution 3077 passing in
the fall of 2003 mandating that the government monitor international
relations classrooms to detect those that are not operating in the
“national interest,” the effort to control knowledge in educational
institutions becomes even more outlandish (Doumani, 2004; WEAC,
2004). Of course, a critical politics of knowledge understands that no
knowledge—obviously, present knowledge included—is disinterested.
In this epistemological context, however, I am much more comfort-
able with knowledge producers who recognize this dimension of
inquiry than those who believe that what they produce is the
“objective truth.”
Education scholars who understand this dynamic are far more
likely to appreciate the need for multiple forms of knowledge in
policy-making contexts. To stack the deck with any monolithic theo-
retical perspective is misguided in public policy making. A central
dimension of a critical mode of public policy making involves the
interaction of diverse perspectives in the marketplace of ideas. This is
exactly what is not happening in the authoritarian knowledge produc-
tion operations of contemporary right-wing educational politics.
What Americans do not know is that the public availability of alternate
modes of knowledge production and outlets for diverse opinions are
fading in the long shadows of corporate controlled, privatized infor-
mation. The politics of knowledge must become a primary educa-
tional and political issue in the coming years if democracy, not to
mention a civic-minded education, is to survive.
References
Apple, M. (1993). The Politics of Official Knowledge: Does a National
Curriculum Make Sense? Teachers College Record, 95, 2, pp. 222–241.
Aratani, L. (2004). States Criticize Bush Education Plan. http://www.
mercurynews.com
Berkowitz, B. (2001). Public Schools Open for Business. http://www.
workingforchange.com/article.cfm
Bogle, C. (2003). Cuts in Education Funding Will Improve Academic
Performance. Honest. http://www.wsws.org/articles/2003/aug2003/
educ-a28.shtml
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW IS HURTING YOU
27

California Educator (2002). Scripted Learning: A Slap in the Face? 6, 7.
http://ww.cta.org/californiaeducator/v6:7feature_4.htm
Coles, G. (2003). Learning to Read and the “W Principle.” Rethinking
Schools, 
17, 
4. 
http://www.rethinkingschools.org/archive/17_04/
wpri174.shtml
Coontz, S. (1992). The Way We Never Were: American Families and the
Nostalgia Trap. New York: Basic Books.
Doumani, B. (2004). Personal Voices: The End of Academic Freedom.
AlterNet. http://www.alternet.org/story18426
Eisenhart, M. and L. Towne (2003). Contestation and Change in National
Policy on “Scientifically Based” Education Research. Educational
Researcher, 32, 7, pp. 31–38.
Fleischman, S., J. Kohlmoos, and A. Rotherham (2003). From Research to
Practice: Moving Beyond the Buzzwords. http://www.nekia.org/
pdf/ed_week_commentary.pdf
Foley, A. and R. Voithofer (2003). Bridging the Gap? Reading the No
Child Left Behind Act against Educational Technology Discourses.
http://www.coe.ohio-state.edu/rvoithofer/papers/nclb.pdf
Garan, E. (2004). In Defense of Our Children: When Politics, Profit, and
Education Collide. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Gonzalez, R. (ed.) (2004). Anthropologists in the Public Sphere. Austin, TX:
University of Texas Press.
Gresson, A. (1995). The Recovery of Race in America. Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.
Gresson, A. (2004). America’s Atonement: Racial Pain, Recovery Rhetoric,
and the Pedagogy of Healing. New York: Peter Lang.
Hartman, A. (2002). Envisioning Schools beyond Liberal and Market
Ideologies. Z Magazine, 15, 7. http://www.zmag.org/amag/articles/
julang02hartman.html
Hellstrom, T. and S. Wenneberg (2002). The “Discipline” of Post-Academic
Science: Reconstructing the Paradigmatic Foundations of a Virtual
Research Institute. http://www.cbs.dk/departments
Hursh, D. (2001). Standards and the Curriculum: The Commodification of
Knowledge and the End of Imagination. In J. Kincheloe and D. Weil
(eds.), Standards and Schooling in the United States: An Encyclopedia,
pp. 735–744. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-Clio.
Karp, S. (2002). Let Them Eat Tests. Rethinking Schools. http://
www.rethinkingschools.org/special_reports/bushplan/eat164.shtml
Kincheloe, J. (1983). Understanding the New Right and Its Impact on
Education. Bloomington, IN: Phi Delta Kappa.
Kincheloe, J. (2004a). The Knowledges of Teacher Education: Developing a
Critical Complex Epistemology. Teacher Education Quarterly, 31, 1,
pp. 49–66.
Kincheloe, J. (2004b). The Bizarre, Complex, and Misunderstood World of
Teacher Education. In J. Kincheloe, A. Bursztyn, and S. Steinberg (eds.),
Teaching Teachers: Building a Quality School of Urban Education.
pp. 1–50. New York: Peter Lang.
JOE L. KINCHELOE
28

Kincheloe, J. and S. Steinberg (eds.) (2004). The Miseducation of the West:
How Schools and the Media Distort Our Understanding of the Islamic
World. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Kincheloe, J., S. Steinberg, and A. Gresson (eds.) (1996). Measured Lies: The
Bell Curve Examined. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Kitts, L. (2004). Keep Special Interests out of America’s Classrooms.
http://www.hoodrivernews.com/lifestyle%20stories/067%20special%
20interest%20opinion.htm
Lather, P. (2003). This IS Your Father’s Paradigm: Government Intrusion
and the Case of Qualitative Research in Education. http://www.coe.ohio-
state.edu/plather/
Metcalf, S. (2002). Reading between the Lines. The Nation. http://www.
lindaho.yt.com/title%20I.htm
Miner, B. (2004). Why the Right Hates Public Education. The Progressive.
http://www.progressive.org/jan04/miner0104.html
Murray, A. E. (2002). Reading’s New Rules: ESEA Demands a Scientific
Approach. 
Education 
Update. 
http://www.ascd.org/publication/
ed_update/200208/murray.html
Ohanian, S. (1999). One Size Fits Few: The Folly of Educational Standards.
Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Steinberg, S. and J. Kincheloe (eds.) (2004). Kinderculture: The Corporate
Construction of Childhood. 2nd edn. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Street, B. (2003). What’s “New” in New Literacy Studies? Critical
Approaches to Literacy in Theory and Practice. Current Issues in
Comparative Education, 5, 2.
Trelease, J. (2003). All in the Family. http://www.trelease-on-reading.com/
whatsnu-bush-mcgraw.html
Van Manen, M. (1990). Researching Lived Experience: Human Science for an
Action Sensitive Pedagogy. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Vinson, K. and E. Ross (2001). Social Studies—Social Education and
Standards-Based Reform: A Critique. In J. Kincheloe and D. Weil (eds.),
Standards and Schooling in the United States: An Encyclopedia,
pp. 909–928. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-Clio.
Weil, D. (2001). Functionalism—From Functionalism to Neofunctionalism
and Neoliberalism: Developing a Dialectical Understanding of the
Standards Debate through Historical Awarenss. In J. Kincheloe and D.
Weil (eds.), Standards and Schooling in the U.S.: An Encyclopedia. Santa
Barbara, CA: ABC-Clio.
Wisconsin Education Association Council (WEAC) (2004). The American
Board and Fast Track Certification: An Attack on the Teaching Profession.
http://ww.weac.org/pdfs/2003–2004/certification_research.pdf
Yatvin, J. (2002). Babes in the Woods: The Wandering of the National
Reading Panel. Phi Delta Kappa, 8, 5, pp. 364–369.
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW IS HURTING YOU
29

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 2
How Did this Happen? The Right-Wing
Politics of Knowledge and Education
Joe L. Kincheloe
In chapter 1, I explored the contemporary right-wing threat to
democracy and to democratic education. Over the last few decades,
right-wing operatives have constructed a new view of the world where
right-wing principles, America, the basic tenets of Western civilization,
fundamentalist Christianity, positivist science, white supremacy, and
patriarchy are deemed to be under attack by foreign and domestic ene-
mies. In this configuration, the American Christian heterosexual white
male is the primary victim of the new world order. This construction of
the victimization of the American Christian white male plays a central
role in American electoral politics in the first decade of the twenty-first
century. In the “red states” of the 2000 and 2004 elections, Christian
white males voted overwhelmingly in favor of George W. Bush. The
Bush campaigns in these two elections plucked the heartstrings of this
constituency, as they promised protection from the assaults of affirma-
tive action, multicultural curricula, anti-American professors, gay
marriage, and anti-Christian values. In many ways the right-wing/
fundamentalist Christian rise to power in America over the last 30 years
can be viewed as an effort to defend the faith against the attacks against
the West (as embodied by America) and its God.
The defensive consciousness produced by such a perspective cat-
alyzes numerous social, cultural, educational, and even geopolitical
policies and actions. In an educational context, such a consciousness
shapes the nature of the classrooms we can envision and bring into
existence. The right-wing worldview driving contemporary school
policy in the first decade of the twenty-first century is characterized by
1. positivism;
2. indoctrination of Western/American superiority;

3. belief that intelligence is genitically determined;
4. universally valid knowledge; one “truth” that is universally valid;
5. standardized curricula;
6. an emphasis on low-level cognitive activities; rote memorization;
7. the reality of an isolated individual removed from social, historical,
and cultural context;
8. a fear of multiple points of view and dissent.
Developing a Historical Consciousness
A central task of this chapter (and the book) is to help us under-
stand in a historical context why so many Americans have bought
into these regressive, oppressive, and anti-democratic politics and
educational activities. One of the failures of the contemporary
political and educational conversation is that we don’t examine
pressing issues in larger contexts. Acceptance of the retrograde poli-
cies described in Chapter 1 can only be explained in light of one the
most dominant sociopolitical and philosophical dynamics of the last
500 years—European, and especially in the last 100 years, American
colonialism.
Though it is rarely discussed in relation to education, the sociopo-
litical, philosophical, psychological, and economic structures con-
structed by the last 500 years of Euro-American colonialism have a
dramatic, everyday affect on what goes on in classrooms. After several
centuries of exploitation, the early twentieth century began to wit-
ness a growing impatience of colonized peoples with their sociopolit-
ical, economic, and educational status. A half millennium of colonial
violence had convinced Africans, Asians, Latin Americans, and
indigenous peoples around the world that enough was enough.
Picking up steam after World War II, colonized peoples around the
world threw off colonial governmental strictures and set out on a
troubled journey toward independence. The European colonial pow-
ers, however, were not about to give up such lucrative socioeconomic
relationships so easily. With the United States leading the way,
Western societies developed a wide-array of neocolonial strategies for
maintaining the benefits of colonialism. This neo-colonial effort con-
tinues unabated and in many ways with a new intensity in an era of
transnational corporations and the “war on terror” in the twenty-first
century.
Understanding these historical power dynamics and their influence
is central to our metahistorical consciousness. Indeed, though most
Americans are not aware of it, the anticolonial rebellion initiated the
liberation movements of the 1960s and 1970s that shook the United
JOE L. KINCHELOE
32

States and other Western societies. The Civil Rights Movement, the
women’s movement, and the gay rights movement all took their cue
from the anticolonial struggles of individuals around the world. For
example, Martin Luther King wrote his dissertation on the anticolo-
nial rebellion against the British led by Mohandas Gandhi in India.
King focused his scholarly attention on Gandhi’s nonviolent colonial
resistance tactics, later drawing upon such strategies in the civil rights
movement.
By the mid-1970s, a conservative counterreaction—especially in
the United States—to these liberation movements was taking shape
with the goals of “recovering” what was perceived to be lost in these
movements (Gresson, 1995, 2004; Kincheloe et al., 1998; Rodriguez
and Villaverde, 2000). Thus, the politics, cultural wars, and educa-
tional and psychological debates, policies, and practices of the last
three decades cannot be understood outside of these efforts to
“recover” white supremacy, patriarchy, class privilege, heterosexual
“normality,” Christian dominance, and the European intellectual
canon. They are some of the most important defining macro-concerns
of our time, as every social and educational issue is refracted through
their lenses. Any view of education conceived outside of this frame-
work becomes a form of ideological mystification. This process of
ideological mystification operates to maintain present dominant–
subordinate power relations by promoting particular forms of meaning
making. In this colonial context, ideological mystification often involves
making meanings that assert that non-European peoples are incapable
of running their own political and economic affairs and that colonial
activity was a way of taking care of these incapable peoples.
Contemporary standardized, test-driven, psychologized education
is enjoying great support in the twenty-first century because, in part,
it plays such an important role in recovering what was perceived to
have been lost in the anticolonial liberation movements. One of the
educational dimensions of what was perceived to have been lost
involves the notion of Western or white intellectual supremacy. No
mechanism works better than intelligence/achievement testing and
school performance statistics to “prove” Western supremacy over the
peoples of the world. Positivistic psychometricians operating in their
ethnocentric domains routinely proclaim the intellectual superiority of
Western white people. Statistically, white students perform better in
schools than nonwhite students. Richard Herrnstein and Charles
Murray (1994), for example, write unabashedly that the average IQ of
African people is about 75.
The fact that the concept of an intelligence test is a Western con-
struct with embedded Western ways of understanding the world is
RIGHT-WING POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE
33

never mentioned in this brash assertion. Thus, the contemporary
educational obsession with labeling, measuring, and victim blaming
is concurrently a macro-historical, meso-institutional, and a micro-
individual matter. In this context, we can begin to understand the way
that this labeling and measuring works to justify the colonial and neo-
colonial process. Marginalized people do not do well in schools not
because of the social effects of their marginalization but because they
are inferior. We (American upper-middle/upper class white people)
are the superior beings who must “take care” of the rest of the world.
Getting oil concessions and other cheap natural resources necessary to
run our economy in the process is merely a well-deserved reward for
our selfless efforts to help those in need.
The Recovery Movement and Its 
Educational Consequences
By the 1970s, right-wing educational policy was directly connected to
the larger recovery movement, as it sought to eliminate the anticolo-
nial, antiracist, antipatriarchal, and diversity affirming dimensions of
progressive curriculum development. Understanding the way some
educators were using education to extend the goals of the worldwide
anticolonial movement and the American liberation movements in
particular, right-wing strategists sought to subvert the public and civic
dimensions of schooling. Instead of helping to prepare society for a
socially mobile and egalitarian democracy, education in the formula-
tion of the right-wing recovery redefined schooling as a private con-
cern. The goal of this private concern was not to graduate “good
citizens” but to provide abstract individuals the tools for socioeco-
nomic mobility.
The progressive idea of helping marginalized groups, such as
African Americans become socially mobile, was not the same goal as
facilitating individual mobility. In fact, the two attempts often came
into direct conflict. In the right-wing recovery project, the promotion
of the mobility of marginalized groups was a form of social engineer-
ing that perverted the basic goals of education. The promotion of the
mobility of abstract individuals in this conceptual context was a trib-
ute to the basic American value of meritocracy. Only the intelligent
and virtuous deserved mobility and such individuals according to the
recovery movement’s cognitive theorists, Richard Herrnstein and
Charles Murray (1994) of bell curve fame, tended to be white and
upper-middle class. Employing the rhetoric of loss, the promoters of
recovery spoke of the loss of standards, discipline, civility, and proper
English. Because of the pursuit of racial/cultural difference and
JOE L. KINCHELOE
34

diversity, America itself was in decline. In the rhetoric of recovery, the
notion of loss and falling standards was always accompanied by strate-
gically placed critiques of affirmative action, racial preferences, and
multiculturalism. Though the connection was obvious, plausible deni-
ability was maintained—“we are not racists, we only want to protect
our country from the destruction of its most treasured values.”
By the 1970s, with the emergence of this ideology of recovery, the
very concept of government with its “public” denotations began to
represent the victory of minorities and concerns the inequities of race,
class, gender, and colonialism. “Big government” began to become a
code phrase for antiwhite male social action in the recovery discourse.
Indeed, in this articulation, it was time to get it off “our” backs. Thus,
privatization became more than a strategy for organizing social insti-
tutions. Privatization was the ostensibly deracialized term that could
be deployed to signify the recovery of white, patriarchal supremacy. In
the same way, the word, choice, could be used to connote the right to
“opt out” of government mandated “liberal” policies. Like good con-
sumers, “we” (Americans with traditional values) choose life, priva-
tized schools, the most qualified job applicants, and Christian values
over other “products.”
Thus, in the grander sense, we choose the private space over the
diversity of the public space. In rejecting the public space, the right
wing rejected the political domain—a choice that resonated with
many conservative white Christians throughout the nation. Indeed,
any political action on our part, the advocates of recovery asserted,
will in effect be antipolitical. We will work to make sure that tradi-
tional “political types” be defeated by antigovernment agents who will
work to undermine the public space with its social programs, infra-
structures, and, of course, schools. Thus, we witness a decline in inter-
est in the political and the academic. Indeed, politicians who are not
born-again Christians working to dismantle the public space and aca-
demics who are not denouncing the academy are not our type of peo-
ple. In the recovery, the institutions of public government and
education must go. Both institutions, the right-wing argument goes,
display the tendency to undermine the best interests of fundamental-
ist white people—white males in particular.
Thus, in this historical context, we can better understand the right-
wing use of No Child Left Behind (NCLB) federal law as a legal tool
to reconfigure the federal government’s role as the promoter of equal-
ity and diversity in the educational domain. Though it was promoted
as a new way of helping economically marginalized and minority stu-
dents, such representations were smokescreens used to conceal its
mission of recovery of traditional forms of dominant power. In this
RIGHT-WING POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE
35

power context, NCLB is quite cavalier about the inequity between
poor and well-to-do school districts and even schools within particu-
lar districts. The right-wing public discourse about education has suc-
cessfully erased questions of race and class injustice from
consideration. The fact that 40 percent of children in the United
States live in poor or low-income conditions is simply not a part of an
educational conversation shaped by the rhetoric of recovery. The
understanding that students who are upper-middle class and live in
well-funded schools and/or school districts have much more oppor-
tunity for academic and socioeconomic success than students from
poor contexts is fading from the public consciousness in the twenty-
first century.
The realization that inequality is deemed irrelevant even when we
understand that socioeconomic factors are the most important pre-
dictor of how students perform on high stakes standardized tests, is
distressing. In this context, we begin to discern that in a system driven
by such high stakes tests, it is not hard to predict who is most likely to
succeed and fail. In the name of high standards and accountability, the
recovery project scores great victories. “We can’t let these ‘incompe-
tents’ get by with such bad performance,” right-wing ideologues
righteously proclaim, “it degrades the whole system.” As they cry
their crocodile tears for poor and marginalized students in their
attempt to hide their real agenda and garner support of naïve liberals
for their educational plans, they concurrently support deep cuts in any
program designed to help such students.
During the George W. Bush presidency, for example, Americans
have witnessed cuts in food stamps; Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families; nutrition programs for children; childcare; the enforcement
of laws for child support, child health insurance, childcare; and the
Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program. And this does not
include the education programs that help poor and marginalized stu-
dents targeted for termination in the coming years. The privatization-
based voucher programs proposed as a means of helping students
from poor families avoid failing schools and gain access to a higher
quality education do not work. The price of attending many private
schools, especially the elite ones, is more costly than the worth of the
meager voucher. Most students from poor families even with their
vouchers will still not be able to afford private education, not to men-
tion meeting the high standardized test score requirements such
schools require. Such issues are, of course, not typically a part of the
truncated public conversation about vouchers and private schooling.
None of the right-wing educational proposals deal honestly with
issues of inequality. With a wink and a nod, they offer suggestions that
JOE L. KINCHELOE
36

have little to do with the profound labor needed to help improve the
possibility of academic success for poor and racially marginalized stu-
dents. The Heritage Foundation, for example, responding to the
question, how do we improve marginalized student school perform-
ance and help get them out of poverty, suggests to
1. get rid of “progressive education” and in its stead demand basic skill
teaching—progressive education is defined here as any pedagogy
that starts “where students are” taking into account student needs
rather than imposing a standardized curriculum from outside;
2. promote high stakes testing;
3. replace principals who complain about not having enough funds
with ones who do not;
4. fire staff who do not believe in the mission of such traditional
forms of schooling.
Such suggestions serve the recovery ideology well, as they guarantee
the underfunding of poor schools, the use of failed pedagogies, and
the failure of marginalized students. With such policies in place, we
can scientifically “certify” the inferiority of students from disenfran-
chised backgrounds. The “naturally superior” will take their proper
places in the scientific, technological, academic, and professional mar-
ketplace. Meritocracy will have worked, right-wing ideologues will
proclaim (Hartman, 2002; Karp, 2002; Coles, 2003).
Such faux-meritocratic educational policies are designed to “fix”
the academic race. Standardized curricula and standards-based assess-
ments not only censor diverse perspectives (read, critical), but they
also make sure the culturally and socioeconomically privileged have
their privilege officially validated. Indeed, several researchers have
identified a tendency for poor and minority students to drop out at
higher rates as standardized test scores rise (McNeil, 2000; Horn and
Kincheloe, 2001). In the name of standards and quality education,
minor and easily addressed intellectual characteristics of students of
color take on monumental importance. Verb-ending usage by some
African American and Latino students becomes “empirical proof” of
their writing problems and even English language deficiency (Fox,
1999). No matter how brilliant other dimensions of their writing and
language usage may be, they are often described as not being
“academic material.”
I have known of or have taught scores of minority students who
brought such writing tendencies to school with them but quickly
dealt with them when given a chance. Understanding such tendencies
in larger socioeconomic and cultural context, they came to appreciate
RIGHT-WING POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE
37

how such cultural characteristics would be unfairly used against them
and other African American, Latino, and Native American students.
In recovery grounded educational contexts, existing forms of inequal-
ity are allowed to continue and with the implementation of NCLB
and standardization policies, new forms of inequity are developing.
Educators concerned with promoting rigorous academic work along
with understanding and help for economically and culturally margin-
alized students face institutionalized obstacles in the remaining years
of the first decade of the twenty-first century. The recovery of white
supremacy, patriarchy, and class elitism has entered a new educational
phase in the era of NCLB and other George W. Bush educational
policies.
The Recovery of the Supremacy of 
Western Knowledge
A central dimension of the right-wing recovery movement in the
United States involves the revalidation of Western ways of seeing the
world and producing knowledge. Such modes of scholarship were
criticized during the anticolonial movements and the academic
expression of such resistance in postcolonial and post-structuralist
forms of inquiry. Postcolonialism and post-structuralism consistently
challenged the universality of Western knowledge production and its
capacity to oppress those individuals who failed to fit the certified cri-
teria that emerged from such colonial scholarship. Those children, for
example, from African villages who did not fit Western psychology’s
universal stages of cognitive development and were deemed “slow” or
“developmentally challenged.” Such children were not deficient—just
different from the culture that produced the universal stages. Of
course, those who were culturally, racially, or linguistically different in
the United States have often faced these same dynamics. From my
perspective it is not hard to understand why many scholars and
educators rebelled against this oppressive regime of truth.
The central feature of the colonial knowledge we watch being re-
certified in the recovery movement involves the superiority of the
West. Right-wing operatives in the recovery of Western supremacy
have to wipe out all of the knowledge and memory that would under-
mine this West-is-best sentiment. Thus, attempts to include the study
of Western colonial interactions with the Islamic world after 9/11, for
example, have to be proclaimed “anti-American.” Efforts to study
power and the way it operates in the contemporary corporatized
mediascape have to be subverted by right-wing interest groups. In a
standardized or corporatized educational system, of course, we need
JOE L. KINCHELOE
38

not worry about such knowledges and teachings reaching our young.
In a corporatized media they will not reach our old people either.
Once we know these things about education, we can begin to point
out the values, the assumptions, the privileged and excluded voices,
the historical inscriptions found within all knowledge. Such a task
allows us to better understand the insights and limitations of Western
rationality and how they can work to both empower and disempower
those they encounter. These are the activities that constitute rigorous
scholarship. In the types of education being championed by the right
wing, they are erased. The Western worldview is beyond questioning
in the recovery movement. In addition to promoting particular per-
spectives on the nature of the physical world and society, worldviews
dictate what phenomena can be known as well as the process by which
they can be known.
Those of us who want to study the workings of power, for example,
via the deployment of signifiers and appeals to the unconscious know
that such subtle processes fall outside the parameters of dominant
ways of producing knowledge. As such complex modes of under-
standing are excluded from legitimate scientific inquiry, dominant
forms of power continue to work at a level invisible to most people. In
this way, dominant positivistic ways of seeing contributes to oppres-
sion of those who are “different” while allowing dominant science to
continue its journey down a colonial path. Such a trek illustrates an
intellectual and moral stagnation that is camouflaged by the recovery
movement (Grossberg, 1992; Keith and Keith, 1993; Hess, 1995;
Woodhouse, 1996).
It is in this stagnant context that I have proposed the notion of
bricolage (Kincheloe, 2001; Kincheloe and Berry, 2004). The French
word bricoleur describes a handyman or handywoman who makes use
of the tools available to complete a task. In the context of scientific
research, I use this term to denote the process of employing multiple
research methodological strategies and theoretical discourses as they
are needed in the unfolding context of the research situation. The
point is to get beyond the monological colonialistic perspective of
positivism and engage new ways of understanding from diverse intel-
lectual and cultural traditions. The bricoleur works diligently to
uncover the hidden artifacts of power and the way that shapes the
knowledge that researchers produce. Of course the diversity, of the
bricolage offers an alternative to the monocultural ways of perceiving
protected by the recovery movement.
Without the multiple perspectives of the bricolage or something
akin, it is doubtful whether the stagnant methods of positivism will
move us to new insights that appreciate the multiple diversities of the
RIGHT-WING POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE
39

planet. Without such forms of critique and action, the recovery
movement will operate to create institutions and modes of consciousness
that will protect the privilege of dominant groups while certifying the
“deficiencies” of marginalized peoples. Multiple perspectives on
knowledge as well as multiple sources of knowledge are needed to
overcome this cultural and political dominance of Western ways of
seeing. This is why it is so important in right-wing educational policy
to quash these types of epistemologies and curricula. In addition, this
is why such concepts as local knowledges, subjugated knowledges,
and indigenous knowledges—information produced outside the
boundaries of positivism and Western ways of seeing—are so threat-
ening to dominant power. From a critical multilogical position, valu-
ing such ways of knowing and the knowledges they produce is akin to
valuing biodiversity—awareness of this epistodiversity grants us new
insights into the world and our role in it.
Without this epistodiversity, we are tied to an “evidence-based”
positivist form of knowledge production riddled with harmful
assumptions that often undermine the possibility of sustainable
human life in sustainable environments socially grounded on demo-
cratic and egalitarian principles. As a colonial epistemology, positivism
has traditionally produced knowledges needed by administrators and
managers of political institutions, corporations, and the military. In
this context, positivistic knowledges have been deployed for the pur-
pose of maintaining the empire: economic hegemony, political domi-
nation, and patriarchal oppression (Harding, 1996). Understandings
that challenge these power relations are difficult to produce via the
epistemologies and conceptual frameworks constructed around impe-
rial administrative and managerial tasks.
Colonial Knowledge: Right-Wing Education as 
Recovery of Dominant Power
In such positivist frameworks, the natural world has been constructed
as a passive and inert entity that needed to be classified and ordered
for the purpose of domination. The right-wing educational reforms of
the contemporary era “recover” the domination impulse and reinsert
it into the sphere of teaching and learning. Indeed, in this context, all
teachers and learners must be classified as either effective/intelligent
or incompetent/slow. To preclude the possibility of teacher incompe-
tence, all teaching must be ordered—that is, standardized and
controlled. In this positivist framework, new forms of inequity are
produced, as educational research about inequality is brushed aside as
are forms of teaching and curriculum development that work to
JOE L. KINCHELOE
40

promote educational justice. The right-wing recovery creates an intel-
lectual climate where America has become uninterested in question-
ing itself. This allows for the growth of a conservative absolutism that
promotes the West-is-best—particularly the U.S.-is-best—mindset
devoted to free market economics, globalized economic imperialism,
geopolitical expansionism, and education as a celebration of U.S.
supremacy and moral superiority (Bogle, 2003; Foley and Voithofer,
2003; Kitts, 2004).
The idea that U.S. economic, geopolitical, and educational policies
are all interrelated and mutually supportive is something that many
Americans do not know. The goal of educating critical democratic cit-
izens who ask hard questions about the ethical dimensions of both
America’s role in the world and its global and domestic economic
policies simply does not fit the mission of the recovery. In fact, the
work of democratic citizens in general may not fit such a mission. In
the rhetorical universe of the recovery movement, asking hard ques-
tions of American actions is deemed an “anti-American activity.” The
recovery movement’s politics of knowledge are vicious and deadly
serious about subverting critique of contemporary U.S. actions at
home and in the world.
In spring 2002, for example, leaders of the Bush Department of
Education issued orders to delete material from the 30-year-old
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) database that
does not support the general philosophy of NCLB. Every assistant
secretary of education was directed to form a group of departmental
employees with a least one person who “understands the policy and
priorities of the administration” to scrub the ERIC web site. Such
action runs counter to the original intent of the web site established in
1993 to construct a permanent record of educational research for stu-
dents, teachers, citizens, educational researchers, and other scholars.
Concurrently, such information deletion raises the stakes of right-
wing knowledge politics to a new level, as individuals will only have
access to public data that supports particular ideological agendas.
Such actions are unacceptable in a democratic society (The Memory
Hole, 2002; OMB Watch, 2002; Lather, 2003).
In place of the “discredited” research found on the ERIC web site
and many other locales, the new Department of Education’s Institute
of Education Sciences in August 2002 created a web-based What
Works Clearinghouse project. The project is promoted as a one-stop
source of evidence-based teaching methods required by NCLB. Here
educators will gain access to exclusively positivistic data in an ideolog-
ical effort to shape the conversation about education as well as educa-
tional practice itself (Street, 2003). One will not find analyses of the
RIGHT-WING POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE
41

politics of knowledge or the relationship between larger geopolitical
policies and Bush administration’s educational agenda here. Indeed,
one will be hard pressed to find anything about the social, cultural, or
political context of education. Such analysis does not fall under the
category of scientific research about education.
Thus, returning to our discussion of positivism in chapter 1, the
Bush administration under the cover of the objectivity of scientific
research shapes and controls knowledge, keeps teachers disempow-
ered, and positions education as a source of right-wing indoctrination
for years to come (Hartman, 2002; Kitts, 2004). If such policies suc-
ceed, no one will use education as a means of assessing the status quo
or of questioning the geopolitical and domestic paths on which
America presently finds itself. Thus, the standardization and privatiza-
tion efforts referenced in chapter 1 are deployed as key weapons in the
right-wing politics of knowledge. Such efforts can help guarantee a
monolithic curriculum and subvert all forms of multilogicality and
epistodiversity from the educational process. Make no mistake, teach-
ers in this ideological configuration are distributors of prepackaged
information—not producers or interpreters of knowledge. They are
functionaries who are told how and what to teach—canon fodder in
the grand recovery movement.
Why Is the Rest of the World Reacting so Negatively 
to the Recovery Agenda?
The right-wing politics of knowledge operating in the United States
in the twenty-first century makes for a world where reality is perceived
across a great chasm of misconstruction (Sarder, 1999). Distorted pic-
tures of an irrational and barbaric people shape decision making in
areas of foreign policy, economics, and education. As discussed above
positivistic ways of seeing in the educational, geopolitical, economic,
and cultural spheres while claiming neutrality are profoundly shaped
by discursive, ideological, and historical contexts. In the Second
Gulf War and the public debate surrounding it, reporters for the
major U.S. television networks denied that their coverage was framed
by particular neo-conservative perspectives. American television was
objective and fair while Qatar’s Al-Jazeera was biased and character-
ized by low journalistic standards.
One of the lessons that scholars around the world learned in the last
third of the twentieth century was that no knowledge is disinterested.
All information is produced by individuals operating at a particular
place and a specific time—they see the world and employ methods for
viewing the world from a particular point in the complex web of reality.
JOE L. KINCHELOE
42

Yet, the right-wing politics of knowledge examined here refuses to
consider this epistemological concept. Individuals from around the
world are often shocked by the American right wing’s refusal to exam-
ine their own knowledge production, their perspectives on America,
and their view of the rest of the world. They are especially shocked by
the right-wing ignorance of the U.S. role in the world. When right wing
educator Chester Finn (2002) writes that 9/11 presented a chance for
Americans “to teach our daughters and sons about heroes and villains,
about freedom and repression, about hatred and nobility, democracy
and theocracy, about civic virtue and vice,” the American blindness to
colonial and neo-colonial atrocities around the world is revealed.
Indeed, Finn, George W. Bush, Dick and Lynne Cheney, and other
purveyors of the right-wing politics of knowledge simply refused to
recognize that 9/11 in part reflected the rage toward the United
States pulsing through the veins of many Muslims. The indifference
displayed by many U.S. policy makers toward the suffering of every-
day people around the Islamic world fanned the flames of this anti-
American fury. In Iraq, for example, the indifference of American
leaders to the effects of the post–First GulfWar sanctions put into
place in 1991 angered millions of Muslims around the world as well as
the Iraqi people (Sudetic, 2002). This is one of many reasons that
when U.S. and British forces invaded the country in March 2003,
they were not met with flowers and kisses of a grateful people that
George W. Bush promised Americans. Most Iraqis obviously did not
see the Second GulfWar as the War of Iraqi Liberation despite their
disdain for Saddam Hussein. The fires of the Iraqi insurgency were
fired by this anger toward American ways of seeing them, and the
subsequent actions such perspectives promoted.
The fundamentalism of the right-wing politics of knowledge is
central to our understanding of the growing hatred and mistrust of
the United States Fundamentalism as used in this context is defined as
the belief in the ultimate superiority of Americana, the American
political philosophy in particular as well as the Western scientific creed
and its methods for producing objective knowledge—positivism writ
large. The Fordham report well illustrates this fundamentalism albeit
in a manner that avoids unambiguous statement of its position. The
ideology and rhetoric of the report make it a document well worth the
analysis. 
Produced 
by 
Chester 
Finn’s 
right-wing 
Fordham
Foundation, the Fordham report was issued on the one-year anniver-
sary of 9/11. Entitled, “September 11: What Our Children Need to
Know,” assumes from the beginning that Americana and American
political philosophy are monolithic expressions of one culture’s social
and political values. The United States is not now nor has it ever been
RIGHT-WING POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE
43

monocultural and of one political mind. The effort to construct the
assumption that America has a common culture and politics is an
attempt to position particular ethnicities and specific political points
of view as existing outside the boundaries of true Americanism. When
educators focus on diversity and multilogicality, the right-wing logic
posits, they are misleading their students and pushing a relativistic
agenda where nothing is right or wrong. The epistemological naïveté
of such assertions is blatant, as Fordham authors ignore an entire body
of social theoretical work that moves far beyond the polar extremes of
pure objectivity on one end of the continuum and relativism on the
other (Gadamer, 1975; Madison, 1988; Van Manen, 1991; Kincheloe,
2001; Thayer-Bacon, 2003).
This fundamentalism of Finn and the right-wing leaders of the
United States in the first decade of the twenty-first century, frightens
the world in ways that many Americans are only beginning to under-
stand. People around the world are baffled that such scholars seem to
believe that there is only one objective history of the world and such
a chronicle is constructed from an American point of view. “Do they
not understand the arrogance and ethnocentrism of such a perspec-
tive?” scholars from Korea, Spain, Germany, Brazil, Turkey, Mexico,
and many other countries ask me as I travel around the world. They
are profoundly disturbed by where this recovery project may take
America and how it may shape U.S. relations with the rest of the
world. When Lynne Cheney (2002) argues in her chapter in the
Fordham report that in response to 9/11, American teachers need to
teach about traditional documents and great speeches of American
history—all of which should be in the social studies curriculum, we all
agree—she misses some important dimensions of such a pedagogy.
While it is necessary to teach about the historical ideals of the
United States it is also important to study the struggles to enact such
principles in both American domestic and foreign policy. The devil is
in the details of these struggles, endeavors marked by profound suc-
cesses and profound failures. Contrary to the party line of Finn and his
compatriots, the study of the failures is not anti-American but a cele-
bration of one of the central ideals of American democracy. As has
been argued by many since the emergence of democratic impulses in
a variety of cultures around the world, a society is democratic to the
degree that it allows for self-criticism. Self-criticism does not seem to
occupy a very high rung on the Fordham ladder of democratic values
or in the right-wing politics of knowledge in general. It is indoctrina-
tion that seems to be at odds with such democratic principles.
Thus, the recovery of positivism, its accompanying ethnocentrism,
and its certainty concerning its ability to produce universal truth
JOE L. KINCHELOE
44

harbor profound consequences for all inhabitants of the planet.
Positivism is one of many ways of seeing the world that achieved and
now is re-achieving a hegemonic position. Positivism’s reductionism
holds no intrinsic, transcultural claim to the truth. Numerous local
knowledges help us better understand the world and even ourselves.
As we know, however, right-wing education does not sanction a cur-
riculum that allows American students to view their country as others
around the world see it. In right-wing schools, students are left
unaware that many peoples around the world view American
academic knowledges about them as a form of violence.
Over the last century, American scholars have produced information
about diverse societies and peoples around the world for the purpose
of more effectively exploiting their land, labor, and natural resources—
for example, oil. In the Vietnam War, for example, the U.S. military
used anthropological studies of particular indigenous peoples in
Vietnam for the purpose of winning their trust so they could be manip-
ulated to support American political and military needs. Positivistic
knowledge speaks about the “culturally different” but not to the cul-
turally different. As millions of people around the world have come to
understand, the alleged neutrality of such knowledge works for
American interests—not the needs of the people under scrutiny
(Sponsel, 1992). Thus, positivistic objectivism wrapped in the flag of
hard science and intellectual rigor tends to exploit the less powerful, as
it separates researchers from the world and its people—especially
around issues of ethics, power, and emotion. Thus, rigor in a positivis-
tic context involves being separated from the world. The less we feel
the pain of the oppressed, smell death in a war zone, understand what
it’s like to be disempowered, are to be thought of as inferior and stu-
pid, positivism asserts, the better we become at producing the truth.
In this context, we fall into a logic of fragmentation. Such a logic
compels us in the name of objectivity to fragment content and con-
text, information and value questions, and knower and what is to be
known (Hayles, 1996). This fragmentation has profound concrete
consequences. When content is fragmented from context, researchers
assess students’ intelligence as if their background has nothing to do
with “how smart they are.” A student whose parents are both lawyers
has a profoundly different experience with, say, language than a stu-
dent whose parents dropped out of school in the first year of high
school. Such a difference—although it has nothing to do with native
intelligence—shows up on an IQ test. Without an understanding of
context, the student with uneducated parents is deemed “unintelli-
gent” and is advised not to continue academic pursuits. This is a grave
injustice.
RIGHT-WING POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE
45

Values and information are connected at numerous levels. One
example of this relationship might involve the knowledge we produce
as educational researchers about questions of racial inequality and its
relationship to education. If we do not value the effort to understand
racism and subvert its impact on students of color, then no informa-
tion is produced about the topic that can be used to help teachers and
educational leaders deal with it. The knower and the known are con-
nected as well. If we are examining a study of race and education, for
example, produced by researchers who use data produced by white
supremacist organizations to prove the intellectual inferiority of
Africans and Latin Americans, we can begin to see that the belief
structures of the individuals who produce data (the knowers) are inti-
mately connected to the information they produce (the known). If we
do not seek out this connection between the knower and the known,
we will probably be severely mislead by the knowledge we consume.
Indeed, we must be attuned to positivism’s logic of fragmentation.
One can quickly discern that people around the world could easily
be offended by the fragmented knowledge produced by positivism
that often operates to position them in an inferior status to white,
European people. In this context, we can see why the reassertion of
the superiority of positivist ways of producing knowledge is an impor-
tant aspect of the recovery movement. Central to positivist laboratory
methods is the isolation (fragmentation) of a phenomenon from the
environment in which it developed. Many indigenous peoples around
the globe take a very different approach to research. Many Native
Americans, Australian Aboriginals, African tribespeople, and the like
have viewed objects of inquiry in a larger holistic context, attempting
to understand their relationship to the environments that shaped
them. How can we remove them from their environments, many
indigenous peoples ask, when doing so would erase the multifaceted
forces that are involved in the complex processes at work? Only with
an understanding of context, process, and interrelationships can solu-
tions to problems be formulated that encourage the well-being of
both human beings and their environmental contexts.
Positivism overtly rejects these types of connections. The evidence-
based positivist science of NCLB scoffs at studies of the lived world of
student feelings and emotions—not only their intrinsic importance
but also their impact on educational performance. Numerous right-
wing educational spokespeople have pointed out that schools do not
exist to make students feel good, not realizing that the emotional
health of children and young people cannot be separated from the
learning process. There is no conflict between concern for student
well-being and a rigorous and challenging curriculum. In this domain
JOE L. KINCHELOE
46

it is important that Americans be sufficiently humble to learn from
diverse peoples around the world, to listen to the profound insights
they offer us about epistemological matters. Positivistically encultur-
ated Americans often laugh at many indigenous peoples’ descriptions
of their talking to the trees, the wind, the rocks, and the animals. Such
Americans have not been sufficiently sophisticated to understand the
complex metaphorical dimensions of such comments.
To converse with the world in this indigenous sense, an individual
has to be well educated in the “languages of nature.” Such an educa-
tion is grounded upon learning to view oneself as inseparable from the
physical world, to make sure the world of humans, diverse contexts,
processes, and natural phenomena are not fragmented. Positivism is
intentionally designed to render us oblivious to such subtle languages.
All entities of the earth, many Native Americans maintain, have their
own way of speaking. Human beings must learn how to listen to
them. In its condescension toward such brilliant ways of understand-
ing the world, ethnocentric positivism is guilty of a form of reduc-
tionism that dismisses context and interconnectedness.
Positivistic reductionism fails to discern the holographic nature of
reality. This holographic effect is grounded on the notion that all parts
contain dimensions of the whole. Many contemporary physicists, psy-
chologists, and sociologists speculate that the universe, the mind, and
the interaction between the society and the individual cannot be
understood outside of this holographic insight. In positivism, funda-
mental units of reality (or things-in-themselves) are not deemed to
contain data about the larger constructs of which they are parts. Not
realizing this dynamic, positivist researchers and educators see every-
thing from atoms, bodily organs, brains, individuals, languages, curric-
ula to television as isolated entities—not as things whose meanings can
only be appreciated when viewed as parts of larger wholes and higher
orders of reality (Woodhouse, 1996). Indeed, what I am concerned
with here is nothing less than the quality of the knowledge we produce
about the world and how we confront such information in educational
contexts. To counter the irrationality of right-wing knowledge work
and pedagogy, we must address both the reductionism of uninformed
research methods and the quest for new ways of seeing.
In the intersection of these concerns, we uncover new insights into
research and knowledge production, new forms of reason that are
directly connected to specific contexts, practical forms of analysis that
are informed by social theory and the concreteness of lived situations
(Fischer, 1998). Understanding non-Western ways of knowing and
the epistemologies of indigenous and other marginalized groups
within Western societies, we begin to transcend regressive forms of
RIGHT-WING POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE
47

reductionism. We figure out the epistemological shallowness of
reductionistic positivist notions that researchers simply produce facts
that correspond to external reality, information that is devoid of spe-
cific cultural values. Based on such insights, we begin to realize that
the right-wing politics of evidence-based knowledge is a house of
cards that collapses as we begin to understand these issues. As we
appreciate the historical and cultural dimensions of all knowledge,
positivistic proclamations of “how things really are” are exposed as the
social constructions they really are. With these understandings as valu-
able parts of our toolkits, we expand the envelope of research, of what
we can understand about the world. We are empowered to produce
multiple forms of knowledge that can change the world in democratic
and egalitarian ways.
We Have the Truth: The Universality of 
Positivist Knowledge
All knowledge is local. The Western scientific revolution catalyzed by
the work of Rene Descartes, Sir Isaac Newton, and Sir Francis Bacon
emerging in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries was a local phe-
nomenon producing particular forms of local knowledge. Initially,
what these great philosophers of science were often attempting to do
was to explain why craftworkers in a particular vocation could accom-
plish amazing tasks. Inexorably, the effort to explain such local phe-
nomena transmutated into a larger attempt to produce translocal
explanations. The epistemology that emerged from this grander effort
has been referred to as Cartesian reductionism. It is characterized by
breaking down a phenomenon into separate pieces, and then studying
these fragments in isolation from other parts of the process or even
the process as a whole. While this epistemological process has pro-
duced many innovations in the past, in the twenty-first century, many
scholars from around the world have come to see its flaws.
Such defects impede insight into new domains of reality that are
essential for movement to new domains of complexity, new insights in
physical and social science, cognition, the ethical domain, and educa-
tion in particular. Reductionistic approaches become less useful as the
complexity of physical and social phenomena increases. Because of the
innate complexity of the cognitive, ethical, and pedagogical spheres,
the usefulness of reductionistic approaches is immediately under-
mined. The successful application of positivist reductionism is possible
only in those physical and social domains amenable to its methods—
for example, questions that lend themselves to issues of frequency or
statistical relationship.
JOE L. KINCHELOE
48

There are, of course, an infinite number of profoundly important
questions of this type. But questions involving how schools or stu-
dents are performing are typically more complex that such questions
can answer satisfactorily. This is, of course, one of the reasons that
contemporary right-wing educational policy fails so severely—it is
grounded on a view of knowledge that is ill-equipped to deal with the
complex issues of education. The friends of a rigorous, humane, and
critical education must address the naïveté embedded in the positivis-
tic quest for universal certainty in knowledge production. The univer-
sal knowledge of positivism is the data produced by researchers who
use the assumptions of their history and culture—the legitimate his-
tory and culture that, too, have been universalized for everyone—to
produce “objective” categorizations of all that exists. It is in this con-
text that African peoples can be objectively deemed to have average
IQs of 75. In this way universal knowledge becomes colonialist, as it
assumes specific ways of seeing (Apffel-Marglin, 1995; Ashcroft et al.,
1995, Shankar, 1996).
As we think about this positivist tendency to produce universal
knowledges, we realize that our notions of multiple perspectives—
multilogicality and epistodiversity—become extremely important in
dealing with the colonial power such universalism asserts. The multi-
logicality and epistodiversity demanded in our attempt to counter the
ethnocentrism of positivism must always be critically grounded.
Critical grounding in this context means that they are constructed
with a power literacy that appreciates the unequal power relations
between positivist Western and other ways of producing knowledge
about social, political, cultural, philosophical, cognitive, and educa-
tional domains. In this context, so-called universal knowledges are
produced about education—ways of teaching, the purposes of educa-
tion, how to run a school, and the proper construction of a curricu-
lum. Teachers in a poor urban school, for example, with high
percentages of poor, culturally different, and non-English speaking
students, argue that the universal validated knowledges used to shape
what they should be doing are ineffective in their unique educational
setting.
Even though these teachers and other researchers have produced
their own knowledges about these concerns, their knowledges are dis-
missed as not evidence-based and rigorous. Of course, these teachers
know that the universal knowledges forced upon them fail to dignify
the special problems and the unique needs of students and educators
working in such contexts. Thus, the evidence-based science of the
right-wing recovery has little connection to the local needs and com-
plexities of particular educational settings. The asymmetrical power
RIGHT-WING POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE
49

relationship between universal positivist knowledge and other
methodologies and cultural ways of seeing is profoundly problematic.
The perspectives and actions emerging from universal knowledges too
often prove to be harmful for the marginalized and disempowered.
Students in the poor and culturally diverse urban schools referenced
above are many times positioned as incapable of succeeding in aca-
demic work by the universal science of education. Once again the
privilege of the privileged is justified and the marginalization of the
marginalized is confirmed. And the band played on.
Positivistic universal knowledge is quite remote from the school
and student environments about which it makes such grand pro-
nouncements—for example, the lowest quality of student academic
achievement is found in this school; that school is one of the “dirty
dozen” worst schools in New York City. On numerous occasions I
have visited one of New York City’s dirty dozen of bad schools. The
universal pronouncements of failure consistently fail to take into
account the brilliant pedagogical work of particular teachers and the
stellar academic performance of specific students. These dynamics are
swept away in the power of the epistemology of universal pronounce-
ments. This distance, this spatial/conceptual chasm between universal
pronouncements and the social, psychological, and educational activ-
ities being researched is irrational—a manifestation of the irrationality
of positivist rationalism.
This elevation of the positivist researcher’s “truth” over the
insights of teachers and other observers is a power play, an insight into
the power of positivist science. In this context, one of the most impor-
tant things that many people do not know about education becomes
clear: issues of research methods and their relation to the larger poli-
tics of knowledge are central dimensions of the twenty-first century
world of politics and education. Critical, democratic educators call for
methodological reform in this domain—a new critical complex poli-
tics of knowledge. Such methodologies in a power literate politics of
knowledge would insist on including the local experience of teachers
and students in any research design from the beginning. It would
insist on the centrality of normative questions throughout the inquiry
process (Hess, 1995; Ross, 1996). For example, how are the needs of
students, teachers, and communities being incorporated into the
design of educational research? Understanding an educational situa-
tion from the perspective of needs of such individuals operationalizes
the multilogicality and the epistodiversity discussed above.
What we are calling for here is a reconstruction of human and
educational science in our multilogical framework. Such a science
challenges and redraws the borders of the positivist educational
JOE L. KINCHELOE
50

science now being employed by right-wing reformers for their
ideological objectives. Multilogical forms of research drawing upon
the bricolage engage diverse forms of knowledge production and
combine them in synergistic ways to provide thicker and more ethical
forms of insight into social, cognitive, and educational activities and
their interaction. Just, for example, including diverse types of people
in educational research is a major step toward multilogicality and
thicker insight. Few positivist studies listen carefully to and take the
insights of students deemed by the school to be failures seriously.
Some of the most important ideas I have studied about schooling, its
problems and solutions to them have come from such individuals.
They often see dimensions of the school or curriculum hidden from
those who have succeeded in the institution. Yet, because of their
“degraded” status, positivist researchers assume they have nothing
important to tell us about education. Ideas obtained from such stu-
dents often stimulate alternate ways of conceptualizing the processes
of teaching and learning and lead educators to new levels of pedagog-
ical cognition.
Students, community members, and even teachers, contrary to pos-
itivist assumptions are not passive individuals but active agents capable
of amazing accomplishments and insight when given the opportunity
to speak (Kloppenburg, 1991). The right-wing politics of knowledge
relegates them to a passivity that eventuates in forms of pedagogy that
position students as receivers of certified information, community
members as consumers of the product of education, and teachers the
regurgitators of expert-produced knowledge to be delivered to stu-
dents. But positivist researchers find it repugnant to see practitioners
and clients (students) as knowledge producers. As a form of arrogant
knowledge production, positivism prepares its scientists to take their
rightful place at the top of the intellectual food chain. How dare such
plebeians infringe on the territory of the expert. This power hierarchy
works to regulate and discipline those plebs at the bottom of the status
ladder. In the positivist matrix, experts tell the functionaries what to do
and how to do it. Watch as Dr Slavin and the school supervisors hand
Ms Diaz, the third grade teacher, her script for her reading lesson. This
script was constructed on the basis of the universal pedagogical knowl-
edge produced by positivist experts—how can she go wrong?
Robert Slavin, a positivist researcher and founder of the highly
scripted “Success for All” program used in numerous U.S. school sys-
tems, tells us that we now have knowledge about teaching strategies
and educational programs that are replicable in all settings—another
way of saying, universal knowledge. In this epistemological context,
innovative teaching strategies and knowledges of practice developed
RIGHT-WING POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE
51

by brilliant individual teachers are diversions on our path to our larger
goals. Such practitioner insights blur our view of the correct knowl-
edge gained from experimental studies that tell us once and for all
what really works in education. Debate about these studies is not pos-
sible in the positivist universe—the knowledge they present is verified
and thus beyond reproach. For those readers who have taught for
30 years and beg to differ with some of these findings, in the words
of Bill O’Reilly of Fox News fame—just shut up. The truth is now
“out there”; just get over your differences with Dr Slavin and his
intrepid band of infallibles.
Thus, the universal truths of the positivists make the world in the
image of how Western/American dominant groups “know” it. In the
contemporary metahistorical context laid out in these first two chap-
ters, they recover a world of hierarchies that were perceived to be in
danger of destruction by the liberation movements of the last century.
As it seeks to sweep the cultural inscriptions on all knowledge under
the epistemological rug, universalist positivism produces educational
data that is just as much a reflection of the real world as is a scientific
description of a lightning bolt. In the faux-humble expression of this
monologicality, positivist researchers tell us that they are just describ-
ing “nature”—this is the natural state of what we call education. Of
course, what they describe as nature is a construction shaped by unan-
alyzed cultural assumptions and the tacit conceptual frameworks of
the present historical moment.
The Transcultural, Transhistorical Knowledge 
of Positivism: White Data
As I have written elsewhere, knowledge does not age well. If we want
a sense of what such an observation means, all we have to do is to look
at any medical, sociological, psychological, or educational knowledge
produced a century ago. The assumptions and conceptual frameworks
on which such information was based being so different that the con-
temporary ones we are accustomed to are no longer hidden. The
expert researchers who produced such universal, transcultural, and
transhistorical data are revealed for the fallible mortals that they were.
What was offered as universal seems peculiarly local and parochial.
Schools of education—not unlike schools of liberal arts and sciences—
have to do a better job of preparing researchers to deal with these
epistemological issues. Like researchers in all fields, educational
researchers can go through a PhD program and never address the
epistemological domain (Hellstrom and Wenneberg, 2002; Fleischman
et al., 2003; Street, 2003).
JOE L. KINCHELOE
52

Of course, if the proponents of NCLB get their way such
researchers will not have to study these issues. In the United States,
and the United Kingdom in particular, one who does not employ uni-
versalistic positivist methods is unlikely to obtain funding from gov-
ernment grants. Thus, conversation about the civic dimensions of
education—its purpose in a democratic society, questions of justice
and mobility, the relationship between curriculum and dominant
power, and so on—is further undermined. Such a politics of knowl-
edge renders democratic engagement less and less important in both
the educational space and in the corporatized mediascape. The ideol-
ogy of the free market merges with a bizarre partnership of religious
fundamentalism—an interesting phenomenon—and positivism to cre-
ate an explosive right-wing ideology of knowledge that supports
dominant power relationships.
A knowledge politics of unabashed self-interest reshapes the episte-
mological landscape, as indigenous, subjugated, and transgressive
forms of information are positioned as a violation of the dominant
culture’s right to be free of such disturbing perspectives. For example,
many conservative white students in college now insist that they have
the right to be protected from diverse points of view in their academic
experience, especially around issues of race and ethnicity. Television
news programs become more and more a form of infotainment that
refuses to question dominant power wielders as it pathologizes dis-
sent. The needs of the new American empire are sacrosanct and
beyond interrogation in both infotainment and education. The idea
that the world presented on television and in education is a particular
perspective out of many worldviews is not a part of the public dis-
course in the middle of the first decade of the twenty-first century.
The notion that such a world is a dominant power-inscribed social
construction is taboo in the new knowledge order.
The idea that individuals’ location in the web of reality helps shape
the knowledges they produce or their view of the world is not a part
of the culture of positivism. Such a concept is easier for the dominant
culture to digest when we discover it in a context of cultural difference
than when we encounter it in our own culture or in ourselves. When
many Muslim peoples from around the planet, for example, view the
American presence in the Islamic world as a form of occupation, the
dominant culture dismisses such a notion as an ethnic point of view.
Since dominant culture’s typically white ethnicity is erased, American
proclamations about the good the United States does in the world is
positioned simply as the objective truth by the corporatized purveyors
of information. This ethnicity-minus-one orientation—everyone is
ethnic except the White Anglo-Saxon Protestants (WASPs)—is a key
RIGHT-WING POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE
53

socioepistemological concept in the right-wing politics of knowledge
(Sollors, 1995). When ethnicity is otherness, the African American
way of seeing cannot be trusted as much as white people’s. Whiteness
in this context exists in a state of transethnicity and is thus not limited
by ethnicity’s blinders.
All epistemologies and all research methods emerge from specific
historical and cultural contexts. This is why the pursuit of objectivity
is a Sisyphean enterprise—we always read the world through glasses
cut by our Zeitgeist, language, and culture. The conservative schol-
ars and educators of dominant WASP culture—obviously, many
WASPs understand these epistemological dynamics and work hard to
address them in a just and fair way—are the grandchildren, children,
brothers and sisters, or parents of the agents of colonialism and neo-
colonialism. Neither do they nor their families have a set of stories
about the ravages and indignities of being colonized. Indeed, many of
these scholars and educators are overtly antiracist and would never
intentionally discriminate against a person of color in any situation. In
the epistemological context described here, however, good intentions
are not sufficient to deal with the insidious ideological forces at work
in the contemporary context. And in an era of John Silbers, Chester
Finns, Lynne Cheneys, Rush Limbaughs, Rick Santorums, G. Gordon
Liddys, ad infinitum, we cannot count on good intentions.
Even with good intentions white people must make a concerted,
thoughtful effort to produce and evaluate knowledges within the
frameworks of other knowledge traditions. Admittedly, this is a
dangerous act in any field in twenty-first century America. Such a
courageous task demands that any rigorous education examine the
omnipresent connection between knowledge and its producer—the
connection between knower and knower as we have previously labeled
it. The commonsensical positivist notion that truth has nothing to do
with who produced it can no longer go unchallenged. A central
dynamic of a curriculum that purports to be rigorous always revolves
around the complex relationship between the knower and the known
(Aronowitz, 1996; Scheurich and Young, 1997; Street, 2003). One
can easily discern how much more insightful a curriculum grounded
on this concept would be, how much better equipped its graduates
would be to deal with the diverse world around them than those
“regulated” in the ethnocentric, universalistic curriculum of the
right-wing politics of knowledge.
In a nation dominated by such a politics of knowledge, it is difficult
for well-intentioned people to know from outside this dominant
epistemological context. After more than 30 years of teaching, I can
testify that I have never encountered young students more devoid of
JOE L. KINCHELOE
54

multilogical perspectives on the world around them. Some of the
white students who are oppositional in their identities and seek a form
of countercultural countenance embrace an extreme right-wing posi-
tion. Such students have been drawn to white supremacist orienta-
tions that are not uncomfortable with fascism. Living and operating
within this specific knowledge culture, many students have no idea
that school could be structured differently, that different worldviews
exist. I have to remind my brilliant doctoral students who are dedi-
cated to teaching an antiracist, anticlass-biased, antisexist, and power
literate form of teacher education that they should not be surprised by
the cold reaction of many white students. “Your course,” I tell them,
“may be their first encounter with alternate knowledge forms. Why
would they not be suspicious and uncomfortable?”
New forms of science are needed that address the problems of a
universalist positivist form of knowledge production. Science is first
and foremost a social construction. Even in the realm of physical
science, biological being is also a social process. Human beings are
connected to the world around them, the universe itself via our math-
ematical, physical, chemical, and biological structures and none of
these dynamics are disconnected in any way from the social, cultural,
and historical dimensions of who we are. A science and a curriculum
that refuse to integrate these domains fail their intellectual and ethical
obligations to their societies. Yet, the rhetoric of NCLB and evidence-
based research is grounded on the denial of these social realities. The
story they tell is a simple one. Real science is produced by pure reason
outside the boundaries of society and culture. It must be this way, the
story goes, because any sociocultural infringement on the scientific
process corrupts the validity of the research.
It does not seem to disturb positivism that its methods induce it to
focus on those dimensions of a phenomenon that best lend themselves
to its form of measurement. Those dimensions that are hard for posi-
tivists to measure are summarily excluded. Thus, undue emphasis and
importance is placed on particular items not because they are so cen-
tral to making sense of the object of study, but because they fit the
research methods so well. Again, we find irrationality in this feature of
positivism—a domain that claims to hold the scepter of reason. In
educational research, for example, evidence-based research requires
some form of standardized testing to function. We can only tell what
works if certain “objective” measuring instruments tell us so.
Yet, many people now understand that there is no such thing as an
objective instrument of measurement. While there are many, many
dimensions of their subjectivity, one in particular involves what they
determine to be important outcomes of a learning exercise. When I
RIGHT-WING POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE
55

study particular tests that are used to measure a student’s knowledge
of, say, American history, what I typically find is that the instrument
focuses on rote memorization of particular historical events. The very
qualities that make for sophisticated historical thinking are not a part
of the test. For example, positivist research instruments on historical
learning rarely measure the ability to
1. evaluate the worthiness of historical sources;
2. deal with conflicting sources;
3. interpret and make meaning of raw historical data;
4. construct a historical narrative;
5. understand the discrepancy between the cultural logics of different
historical eras and how this complicates our efforts to make sense
of the past;
6. appreciate the purposes of historical study;
7. delineate the complexity of the relationship between the past and
the present;
8. understand how social change constantly reshapes the way we view
the past.
Of course these are just a few of the types of skills needed by scholars
of history. Positivist instruments do not measure these abilities
because they are complex and do not lend themselves to simple, quan-
tifiable answers. Thus, in an evidence-based curriculum, these impor-
tant skills are dropped and replaced by lower level, more easily
measured historical skills. Such low-level skills typically have to do
with regurgitating unproblematized, subjective historical information
that glorifies the status quo, the dominant culture. The positivist sci-
ence of educational measurement in this context does not engage with
what many historians would put forth as important forms of historical
thinking. Instead, it perpetuates its tendency for detachment, devising
external, reductionistic formulas for determining competence (Hess,
1995; Aronowitz, 1996; Scheurich and Young, 1997). In this way
positivism shapes the curriculum—epistemology determines what is
important about history. What makes it worse is that it is an unexam-
ined epistemology.
What Can We Do about this Knowledge Climate?
Obviously, any understanding of universalist positivism and its impact on
politics and education is complex. Concurrently, any effort to address
the right-wing politics of knowledge that shapes education in the
twenty-first century demands an understanding of such epistemological
JOE L. KINCHELOE
56

dynamics. Contrary to many elitists in the academy, I believe everyday
people can negotiate and act on the complicated theoretical dimensions
of these issues—indeed, many already have. No truly universal way of
producing knowledge exists. In this context, what we can do is develop
new and productive ways of using multiple ways of seeing, from research
methodologies, academic disciplines, social theories, epistemologies,
cultural perspectives, ancient historical perspectives to subjugated and
indigenous forms of knowledge. This multilogical form of knowledge
seeking understands that because of their unique circumstances some
groups of people know things that others do not, scholars of particular
disciplines understand phenomena that other scholars do not, ad
infinitum.
When I was a child my Uncle Paul was a county agricultural agent
in rural Virginia who would sometimes take me with him in his visits
to local farmers in the hills of southwestern Virginia. One thing that
struck me during these visits to the small farms of these unschooled
“redneck” farmers was just how much they knew about their land—its
growing and grazing conditions in particular. I listened with fascina-
tion as the farmers laughed as they told stories about what the agri-
cultural scientists told them to do and how it did not work on their
farms. Their ingenious ways of coping with farming problems that
failed to fit the universal scientific models of the experts alerted me to
their indigenous genius and, though I could not articulate it at the
time, the complexity of scientific knowledge and its local application.
These wizened farmers knew things that the agricultural scientists did
not know—and no doubt the agricultural scientists knew much that
the farmers did not.
The lesson I learned about epistemology in reflecting on this child-
hood experience in relation to my epistemological understandings is
not that one form of knowledge is in some simple way superior to the
other. The point was that the scientists and the farmers had much to
learn from one another. Multilogicality, as I am employing the word
in this context, would involve establishing mutually respectful dialog
between the scientists and the farmers. The knowledge produced in
such a dialog would not be magically true or universal. Instead, the
dialogical process would be mutually beneficial as each group came to
understand the frames of reference of the other. Informed by these
frames of reference, they would better understand how different indi-
viduals came to their conclusions about how best to grow corn.
Multilogicality would not provide a perfect synthesis or a choice
between one body of knowledge or another. It would construct a
dialogical context where respective interpretive frameworks were
brought into focus. Such enhanced focus would help farmers become
RIGHT-WING POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE
57

smarter farmers and agricultural scientists become smarter agricultural
scientists.
Thus, in an educational context, I am not arguing that either the
farmers or the agricultural scientists take over agricultural education.
The multilogicality I am promoting allows for a wider debate in U.S.
schools about the nature of history, science, literacy, mathematics, and
many other disciplines. In arguing for such diversity, I am not retreating
from particular commitments to racial, class, and gender justice and the
need for a literacy of power to help students better assume their roles as
agents of democracy. But as I have maintained in these first two chap-
ters, the call for diverse perspectives of multilogicality constitutes a slap
in the face to monological right-wing universalism. Critique and an
analysis of diverse perspectives is exactly what they do not want in U.S.
schools. Any epistemological position that fears synergistic dialog
should be questioned about its commitment to democracy.
Positivist universalism, however, rejects such democratic appeals to
dialog simply because it produces the truth. This truth, the positivist
story goes, will eventually replace all other claims to truth, putting to
rest all these fatuous calls for multilogicality. Such a colonialist view of
knowledge is a form of epistemological imperialism that catalyzes the
work of military, geopolitical, economic, and educational imperialism.
Indeed, it is an epistemology for the empire. Local knowledges pro-
duced in the confrontation with difference and the synergistic dialog
that emerges are the blood enemies of the right-wing politics of
knowledge. The individual interpretations and the communities of
knowledge and practice that come out of such knowledge work
threaten the information hegemony that now exists. This hegemonic
knowledge forms the foundation for the standardized schools of the
Bush era. Students learn to be learners who get the “correct” answer
to all questions and then take on the “correct” social role in corpora-
tized workplaces (Hartman, 2002). Thankfully, many students will
resist such a Stepford education. Such resistance, unfortunately, will
be viewed as a manifestation of a lack of proper social adjustment and
will be positioned as pathological behavior. Resisting blocs of unac-
countable power cannot be tolerated in the recovered order.
Thus, contemporary education avoids forms teaching and learning
that address the most urgent cultural, economic, political, epistemo-
logical, social, and environmental problems that confront us. Such a
reductionist education seems uninterested in exploring the frontiers
of intelligence, in the process, producing students who possess multi-
ple forms of knowledge and can evaluate the strengths and weaknesses
of the information that confronts them. A democratic education that
is interested in the frontiers of intelligence values highly educated
JOE L. KINCHELOE
58

teachers who can evaluate multiple knowledges and the complex, con-
flicting requirements of everyday schooling in relation to the needs of
their students and the exigencies of the larger society. From such
deliberations is great teaching generated—brilliant practice is not
generated in the parroting of scripted lessons. In such a rigorous
analysis, new forms of consciousness are constructed—higher orders
of thinking are not cultivated in test-driven, rote memory pedagogies.
In this critical context, teachers and students learn new ways of
engaging subject matter (Novick, 1996; Fleury, 2004). They learn
that knowledge is more than simply true or false, as they begin to
discern the conditions of its construction. In this context, they
are engaging in a form of critical constructivist (Kincheloe, 2005)
thinking—a way of seeing that values a rigorous understanding of
how knowledge is produced and the role that power plays in such pro-
duction. Such thinking empowers teachers and students to connect
academic knowledges, subjugated knowledges, and a literacy of power
to the development of their worldviews, ethical sensibilities, civic
activities, and an understanding of their selfhoods. Such profoundly
important abilities emerge in their exploration of the origins of the
knowledges they encounter. This is the power of such pedagogy—its
importance transcends the particular knowledges engaged. It is in the
relationship between self and a rigorous understanding of knowledge
and its production that life-affirming and life-changing education
takes shape. What is going on in the minds of learners, in the teacher’s
consciousness, and in the interaction of the community of learners as
this relationship takes shape? Compare this process with the rote
memory work of the right-wing curriculum.
The right-wing pedagogy provides students with really no reason
outside of a standardized test to learn anything. School in such a
context is just a silly hoop through which kids must jump on the road
to adulthood. Obviously, I empathize with bored students sitting
through drill-and-test type classes. Concurrently, I empathize with
teachers who feel pressured to teach in such a scripted and proscribed
way. What constitutes education is a decision made in a community of
learners, around the types of issues raised here—the quest for com-
pelling worldviews, ethical sensibilities that lead to courageous civic
actions, and new insights into who we are, how we became that way,
and what we want to become. Thus, in the critical pedagogy delin-
eated here, the job of the teacher is to create conditions that let stu-
dents become learners and researchers. Sometimes such a task
demands a brilliant and inspirational lecture about a topic on which
the teacher is well informed. At other times it means keeping one’s
mouth shut for 45 min—some of us more verbose teacher types find
RIGHT-WING POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE
59

the latter undertaking quite taxing. As John Lennon put it, “whatever
gets you through the night”—or in this case, through the class.
The notion of multilogicality developed here involves diverse
approaches in many domains. There are many teaching methods that
can be used to create the conditions that let students become learners
and researchers. The last thing that teachers and students need in
these pursuits is more rules and regulations from outside politicos.
Scholar, researcher teachers who understand these epistemological,
political, and pedagogical dynamics can accomplish great things in
classrooms that respect their diagnostic and prescriptive abilities.
These teachers can construct curricula that address the needs of their
particular students in their specific locations. The effort to make all
students march in lockstep to the same reductionistic drummer,
chanting monological forms of covertly politicized knowledge is an
educational future better designed for an authoritarian state than a
democratic one. It rests beneath the dignity of the principles
employed in the development of American democracy.
Democracy and democratic education are founded on a spirit of
inquiry—not on political conditioning. In the convoluted rhetoric of
the recovery movement, however, the progressive call for teachers and
students as researchers, an inquiry-grounded education, is repre-
sented as a form of political indoctrination. Moreover, the right-wing
curriculum’s inculcation of support for traditional forms of power
inequalities and injustice is represented in this pretzel logic as a form
of liberation from the “oppression” of multilogicality. Pray with me
now the right-wing prayer for a righteous pedagogy: “Lord, deliver us
from overbearing educators who offer diverse points of view and allow
us to make up our own mind about social, scientific, political, eco-
nomic, and ethical matters. Deliver them from this democratic evil
and bless us with an education that requires that we learn the final
truth once and for all. Enable us to smite all forms of multilogicality
and those relativistic evildoers who propose that we learn to explore
complex questions for ourselves.”
Thus, we “evildoers” in the name of multilogicality assert that all
curricular content knowledge be offered in the spirit of inquiry.
Students in this context are expected to learn how to teach themselves
and self-evaluate their progress. This does not mean that the teacher
becomes less involved in such student self-management—in fact, the
contrary is usually the case. It merely means that teachers develop a
new type of relationship with students; teachers become co-learners,
co-researchers with them; to be sure the knowledges produced will
not be value-free—although the data produced by some teachers
and some students will be grounded on different values than other
JOE L. KINCHELOE
60

teachers and students. One of the analytical tasks of teachers and
students in such a pedagogical context will involve being capable of
identifying the value structures that shape knowledges—their own
and that of others. Here students and teachers become savvy knowl-
edge workers who use their understanding of the production of
knowledge to obtain more power over their lives, more insight into
the construction of their own consciousness, and to engage in civic
action to democratize the politics of knowledge.
In the right-wing politics of knowledge, schools exist to distribute
knowledge. Should not savvy democratic get a little suspicious of an
educational effort to distribute information that studiously avoids the
production and ideological dimensions of knowledge? I would think
that democratic citizens would have several questions about such an
effort. Whose knowledge is it? What are its ideological consequences?
Who gets to choose it? One of the right-wing criticisms of progressive
pedagogies that emphasize analytical abilities similar to the ones pro-
moted here involves the accusation that such educational approaches
never teach “content.” Such accusations are bogus in the critical ori-
entation championed here, for they assume a binarism between
knowledge and analytical skills. Indeed, in our pedagogy, there is no
analysis without subject matter and no subject matter without analy-
sis. As stated earlier in this chapter, all curricular knowledge is
approached and/or produced in the spirit of inquiry. There is no a
priori assumption of its veracity.
Movin’ Out: On to a New World of 
Teaching and Learning
Thus, we are advocating a form of meta-learning, defined simply as a
process of always monitoring the assumptions, hidden rules, and
expectations of the learning process. In this form of learning, teachers
and students stand back from the process and evaluate the benefits
and liabilities of engaging in particular forms of learning.
Concurrently, they imagine new and better ways of constructing the
learning process. Teachers and students work hard to develop criteria
for judging the value and usefulness of their learning. Using such cri-
teria, they explore diverse disciplines of knowledge and, of course,
subjugated knowledges that can be used to vivify and enhance certain
learning projects on which they are focused. Even in a repressive
right-wing curriculum, critical teachers can turn such indoctrination
pedagogies on themselves, simply by bringing these questions about
knowledge production and meta-learning into the classroom. It is
amazing what can happen when a teacher helps students research the
RIGHT-WING POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE
61

official curriculum being forced upon them (Schubert, 1998;
Ohanian, 1999; Lester, 2001).
As students become more sophisticated in this meta-learning, they
become rigorous students of disciplines. In the right-wing politics of
knowledge, such efforts are irrelevant—just give the teachers and stu-
dents information, then monitor how well they teach it and learn it.
Teachers and students become analysts of the discourses of disciplines.
A discourse is defined as a constellation of hidden historical rules that
govern what can be and cannot be said and who can speak and who
must listen. Discursive practices are present in technical processes,
institutions, modes of behavior, and, of course, disciplines of knowl-
edge. Discourses shape how we operate in the world as human agents,
construct our consciousness, and what we consider true. Teachers and
students who study disciplines of knowledge in this meta-analytical
context identify the discourses that have shaped the discipline’s dom-
inant ways of collecting data, interpreting (both consciously and
unconsciously) information, constructing narratives, and evaluating
and critiquing scholarship.
An awareness of these dynamics creates a meta-consciousness of the
ways unexamined assumptions shape both research in the discipline in
general and the validated knowledges that emerge in this process
(Madison, 1988; Gee et al., 1996). This is the type of rigorous learn-
ing that needs to be taking place in our schools. Teachers and students
with this historically informed discursive understanding of a discipline
know a field in the context of how it has been used in the world and
who used it and for what purposes. In such a context, learners under-
stand diverse aspects of a discipline, in the process coming to under-
stand the cognitive, epistemological, political, and pedagogical
limitations of a field of study.
Such learning constitutes a profound act of rigor in the struggle for
intellectual development. Indeed, what teachers and students are
studying here involves a discipline’s rules of construction. Always
aware of the complexity permeating knowledge production, our criti-
cal pedagogy understands that in order to survive, disciplines had to
embrace particular features and structures at specific historical points
in their development. Often such dimensions live on in new epochs of
disciplinary history, serving no pragmatic purpose other than to fulfill
the demands of unconscious tradition. When the teachers’ and stu-
dents’ historical discursive study uncovers such anachronistic dynam-
ics, they can be challenged as part of the effort to facilitate more
rigorous and pragmatic scholarship, pedagogy, and learning. In this
context, critical teachers and students come to understand how
certain moral positions, particular modes of public behavior, specific
JOE L. KINCHELOE
62

systems of belief, and dominant ideologies were produced by certain
disciplinary discourses and knowledge traditions. Such insights are
profoundly liberating to teachers and students as they enable such
scholars to make better-informed decisions about how they fashion
their personal, moral, vocational, and civic lives. So often it is in these
ignored discursive practices of disciplines that scholars come to grasp
the way power operates to oppress and regulate. Learning to engage
in such forms of analysis is a central ingredient of the antidote needed
to subvert the right-wing educational agenda.
Such meta-understandings of how knowledge is produced, cultural
ways of seeing are constructed, and the status quo is molded are cen-
tral dimensions of becoming an educated person. Moreover, such
insights are keys to our ability to move beyond the oppressive present,
to escape the ghosts of history that undermine our efforts for just and
humane action. In this educational context, the value of such an edu-
cation depends on what it empowers us to do. Teachers and students
in a critical education create a form of conceptual distance between
themselves and their learning that allows them to evaluate how their
learning does or does not empower them. Does the learning help
them shape worthy personal goals and then facilitate their accom-
plishment? Does it enable them to work better with other people in
collective efforts for personal and social change?
Thus, learning in the critical sense offered here causes us to experi-
ence the world in qualitatively different ways. In such an education we
discern a change in our relationship to the world—a change that holds
profound social, epistemological, political, ethical, aesthetic, and
ontological (having to do with our being in the world, who we are)
consequences. Thus, critical teachers do not simply deliver knowledge
to students but reflect on the types of situations in which students
encounter knowledge. If all knowledge is situated—meaning that it
emerges in particular contexts and is intimately connected to these
contexts—then the context in which teachers and students work with
and produce knowledge is an important aspect of the acts of teaching
and learning (Hoban and Erickson, 1998).
For example, do we encounter knowledge in a way that is con-
nected primarily to preparation for a standardized test or in an effort
to better understand a phenomenon that has a profound impact on
our life? In my life as a scholar, my situatedness as a rural Tennesseean
from the mountains of southern Appalachia has had a profound
impact on my relationship to the knowledges I have encountered. In
my choice of studies, I choose to write a history thesis and a doctoral
dissertation on fundamentalist Christianity and its social, political, and
educational effects. My study and research are intimately related to my
RIGHT-WING POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE
63

identity and the deepest realms of my consciousness given my
personal interactions with fundamentalism in my childhood. Such
situatedness provided me not only profound motivation to study the
topic, but also a conceptual matrix, a mattering map on which to posi-
tion what I was learning. The critical education promoted here seeks
to find such dynamics in the lives of all students in the pedagogical
effort to make learning meaningful and a source of passion and
commitment. This is the central task of a progressive pedagogy.
Thus, learners are ultimately responsible in a critical education for
teaching themselves, interpreting, and producing their own knowl-
edges. Regressive critics of progressive pedagogies have been quick to
scoff at this proposition, resorting in the process to a misleading rep-
resentation of what such self-directed learning actually involves. To set
the record straight, such a form of learning takes far more work and a
higher level of expertise on the part of the teacher than traditional
transmission pedagogies. To engage the student in such a process,
adept teachers must not only develop deep understandings of students
but must also possess high-level scholarly/research skills and a wide
body of diverse knowledges. The teacher must be able to exercise
profound pedagogical skills that cultivate the student’s disposition to
develop such self-directed abilities.
In this complex process, such teachers must not only spend count-
less hours helping students to connect their personal histories to
diverse knowledges but also engage the student in developing con-
ceptual frameworks in which to make sense of such connections (Barr
and Tagg, 1995). Such frameworks are central to this learning
process, for it is around them that the purpose for learning and, for
that matter, living takes shape. Without a sense of purpose, the goals
of a critical pedagogy cannot be achieved. Indeed, everything in the
critical curriculum leads down the yellow brick road to the Emerald
City of purpose. When learners act with the benefits of this ever evolv-
ing, elastic sense of purpose, they begin to discern the whole of the
forest rather than simply the isolated trees. It is an amazing moment
in the lives of teachers and students when the epiphany of purpose
grabs a student and shakes her very soul. This is the money shot of a
critical pedagogy.
Deprofessionalized teachers and a dumbed down curriculum—to
employ the device of understatement—do not contribute to the com-
plex requirements of a successful critical pedagogy. The multiple abil-
ities, the multilogical insights required for such a pedagogy demand a
rigorous mode of professional education where the expectations are
high and the demands are challenging. Learning in this context is not
simply an individual activity that takes place inside the head of an
JOE L. KINCHELOE
64

isolated student. Instead, it is a nuanced and situated form of interac-
tion that produces knowledges that change who we are. Learning in
this critical situated context cannot be separated from ontology—our
being. Our identity always exists in relationship to our learning—
knowledge and identity are inseparable. After engaging in certain acts
of learning, therefore, I can never be the same. With this in mind we
come to appreciate that knowledge is not a thing. It is, instead, a rela-
tional process that emerges in the intersection of a wide variety of
forces. It is a relationship connecting self, other people, power, and
the world with particular conceptual frameworks.
Thus, knowledge is more complex, than we originally thought
(Larson, 1995; Fenwick, 2000; Reason and Bradbury, 2000;
Thomson, 2001). And because it is so complex, it requires a new
mode of pedagogy and new understandings of teaching and learning.
Such new understandings help us understand the role of knowledge in
our individual lives and in the larger social order. We talk about
knowledge, build institutions for transmitting it, but rarely pause to
consider the impact it makes in the world. These are the substantive
dimensions of education in a democratic society. Once we have asked
and attempted to answer them, we simply cannot return to the horses
and duckies of the right-wing politics of knowledge and the education
it constructs. The universe implicit within these regressive and
presently dominant forms of epistemology and pedagogy is a simple-
minded place. Such a conception, I believe, insults the complexity and
even the sanctity of creation. It certainly degrades the human beings
that inhabit it. The effort to get beyond such reductionist, libidinally
repressed, parochial, unjust, and anti-intellectual orientations is an
objective worth fighting for in this bizarre new century.
References
Apffel-Marglin, F. (1995). Development or Decolonization in the Andes?
Interculture: International Journal of Intercultural and Transdisciplinary
Research, 28, 1, pp. 3–17.
Aronowitz, S. (1996). The Politics of the Science Wars. In A. Ross (ed.),
Science Wars. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Ashcroft, B., G. Griffiths, and H. Tiffin, (eds.) (1995). The Post-Colonial
Studies Reader. New York: Routledge.
Barr, R. and J. Tagg (1995). From Teaching to Learning: A New Paradigm
for Undergraduate Education. Change, 27, 6.
Bogle, C. (2003). Cuts in Education Funding Will Improve Academic
Performance. Honest. http://www.wsws.org/articles/2003/aug2003/
educ-a28.shtml (accessed on April 12, 2004).
RIGHT-WING POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE
65

Cheney, L. (2002). Protecting Our Precious Liberty. Thomas B. Fordham
Foundation. September 11: What Our Children Need to Know. http://
www.edexcellence.net/sept11/september11.pdf (accessed on March 10,
2003).
Coles, G. (2003). Learning to Read and the “W Principle.” Rethinking
Schools, 
17, 
4. 
http://www.rethinkingschools.org/archive/17_04/
wpri174.shtml (accessed on April 12, 2004).
Fenwick, T. (2000). Experiential Learning in Adult Education: A Comparative
Framework. http://www.ualberta.ca/~tfenwick/ext/aeq.htm (accessed on
March 10, 2003).
Finn, C. (2002). Introduction. Thomas B. Fordham Foundation. September 11:
What Our Children Need to Know. http://www.edexcellence.net/ sept11/
september11.pdf (accessed on March 10, 2003).
Fischer, F. (1998). Beyond Empiricism: Policy Inquiry in Postpositivist
Perspective. Policy Studies Journal, 26, 1, pp. 129–146.
Fleischman, S., J. Kohlmoos, and A. Rotherham (2003). From Research to
Practice: Moving Beyond the Buzzwords. http://www.nekia.org/pdf/
ed_week_commentary.pdf (accessed on April 2, 2004).
Fleury, S. (2004). Critical Consciousness through a Critical Constructivist
Pedagogy. In J. Kincheloe and D. Weil (eds.), Critical Thinking and
Learning: An Encyclopedia for Parents and Teachers, pp. 185–189.
Westport, CT: Greenwood.
Foley, A. and R. Voithofer (2003). Bridging the Gap? Reading the No Child
Left Behind Act against Educational Technology Discourses. http://
www.coe.ohio-state.edu/rvoithofer/papers/nclb.pdf (accessed on July 14,
2005).
Fox, T. (1999). Defending Access: A Critique of Standards in Higher
Education. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton.
Gadamer, H. (1975). Truth and Method. New York: Seabury Press.
Gee, J., G. Hull, and C. Lankshear (1996). The New Work Order: Behind the
Language of the New Captalism. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Gresson, A. (1995). The Recovery of Race in America. Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.
Gresson, A. (2004). America’s Atonement: Racial Pain, Recovery Rhetoric,
and the Pedagogy of Healing. New York: Peter Lang.
Grossberg, L. (1992). We Gotta Get Out of this Place: Popular Conservatism
and Postmodern Culture. New York: Routledge.
Harding, S. (1996). Science Is “Good to Think with.” In A. Ross (ed.),
Science Wars. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Hartman, A. (2002). Envisioning Schools beyond Liberal and Market
Ideologies. Z Magazine, 15, 7. http://www.zmag.org/amag/articles/
julang02hartman.html (accessed on July 14, 2005).
Hayles, N. (1996). Consolidating the Canon. In A. Ross (ed.), Science Wars.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Hellstrom, T. and S. Wenneberg (2002). The “Discipline” of Post-Academic
Science: Reconstructing the Paradigmatic Foundations of a Virtual
JOE L. KINCHELOE
66

Research Institute. http://www.cbs.dk/departments (accessed on July 14,
2005).
Herrnstein, R. and C. Murray (1994). The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class
Structure in American Life. New York: Free Press.
Hess, D. (1995). Science and Technology in a Multicultural World: The
Cultural Politics of Facts and Artifacts. New York: Columbia University
Press.
Hoban, G. and G. Erickson (1998). Frameworks for Sustaining Professional
Learning. Paper Presented at the Australasian Science Education Research
Association, Darwin, Australia.
Horn, R. and J. Kincheloe (eds.) (2001). American Standards: Quality
Education in a Complex World—the Texas Case. New York: Peter Lang.
Karp, S. (2002). Let Them Eat Tests. Rethinking Schools. http://
www.rethinkingschools.org/special_reports/bushplan/eat164.shtml
(accessed on August 2, 2003).
Keith, N. and N. Keith (1993). Education Development and the Rebuilding
of Urban Community. Paper Presented to the Annual Conference of the
Association for the Advancement of Research, Policy, and Development in
the Third World. Cairo, Egypt.
Kincheloe, J. (2001). Describing the Bricolage: Conceptualizing a New Rigor
in Qualitative Research. Qualitative Inquiry, 7, 6, pp. 679–692.
Kincheloe, J. (2005). Critical Constructivism. New York: Peter Lang.
Kincheloe, J. and K. Berry (2004). Rigour and Complexity in Educational
Research: Conceptualizing the Bricolage. London: Open University 
Press.
Kincheloe, J., S. Steinberg, N. Rodriguez, and R. Chennault (1998). White
Reign: Deploying Whiteness in America. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Kitts, L. (2004). Keep Special Interests out of America’s Classrooms.
http://www.hoodrivernews.com/lifestyle%20stories/067%20special%20i
nterest%20opinion.htm (accessed on August 2, 2003).
Kloppenburg, J. (1991). Social Theory and the De/reconstruction of
Agricultural Science: Local Knowledge for an Alternative Agriculture.
Rural Sociology, 56, 4, pp. 519–548.
Larson, A. (1995). Technology Education in Teacher Preparation:
Perspectives from a Teacher Education Program. Paper Presented at
American Educational Studies Association, Cleveland, Ohio.
Lather, P. (2003). This IS Your Father’s Paradigm: Government Intrusion
and the Case of Qualitative Research in Education. http://www.coe.
ohio-state.edu/plather/ (accessed on July 14, 2005).
Lester, S. (2001). Learning for the Twenty-First Century. In J. Kincheloe and
D. Weil (eds.), Standards and Schooling in the U.S.: An Encyclopedia, 3
vols. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-Clio.
Madison, G. (1988). The Hermeneutics of Postmodernity: Figures and Themes.
Bloomington, IN: University of Indiana Press.
McNeil, L. (2000). Contradictions of School Reform: Educational Costs of
Standardized Testing. New York: Routledge.
RIGHT-WING POLITICS OF KNOWLEDGE
67

The Memory Hole (2002). Department of Education to Delete Years of
Research from Its Website. http://www.thememoryhole.org/index.htm
(accessed on July 14, 2005).
Novick, R. (1996). Actual Schools, Possible Practices: New Directions in
Professional Development. Education Policy Analysis Archives, 4, 14.
Ohanian, S. (1999). One Size Fits Few: The Folly of Educational Standards.
Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
OMB Watch (2002). U.S. Department of Education Website Drops Record
Number 
of 
Electronic 
Files. 
http://www.ombwatch.org/article/
articleview/1130/1/96?topicid  1 (accessed on July 14, 2005).
Reason, P. and H. Bradbury (eds.) (2000). Introduction: Inquiry and
Participation in Search of a World Worthy of Human Aspiration.
Handbook of Action Research: Participative Inquiry and Practice.
Thousand Oakes, CA: Sage.
Rodriguez, N. and L. Villaverde (eds.) (2000). Dismantling White Privilege.
New York: Peter Lang.
Ross, A. (1996). Introduction. In A. Ross (ed.), Science Wars. Durham, NC:
Duke University Press.
Sarder, Z. (1999). Orientalism. Philadelphia: Open University Press.
Scheurich, J. and M. Young (1997). Coloring Epistemologies: Are Our
Research Epistemologies Racially Biased? Educational Researcher, 26, 4,
pp. 4–16.
Schubert, W. (1998). Toward Constructivist Teacher Education for
Elementary Schools in the Twenty-First Century: A Framework for
Decision-Making. my.netian.com/~yhhknue/coned19.htm (accessed on
January 7, 1998).
Shankar, D. (1996). The Epistemology of the Indigenous Medical
Knowledge Systems of India. Indigenous Knowledge and Development
Monitor, 4, 3, pp. 13–14.
Sollors, W. (1995). Who Is Ethnic? In B. Ashcroft, G. Griffiths, and H. Tiffin
(eds.), The Post-Colonial Studies Reader. New York: Routledge.
Sponsel, L. (1992). Information and Asymmetry and the Democratization of
Anthropology. Human Organization, 51, 3, pp. 299–301.
Street, B. (2003). What’s “New” in New Literacy Studies? Critical
Approaches to Literacy in Theory and Practice. Current Issues in
Comparative Education, 5, 2.
Sudetic, C. (2002). The Betrayal of Basra. Utne Reader, 110, pp. 45–49.
Thayer-Bacon, B. (2003). Relational “(E)pistemologies.” New York: Peter
Lang.
Thomson, C. (2001). Massification, Distance Learning and Quality in INSET
Teacher Education: A Challenging Relationship. http://www.ru.ac.za/
academic/adc/papers/Thomson.htm (accessed on January 10, 2001).
Van Manen, M. (1991). Researching Lived Experience. Albany, NY: State
University Press of New York.
Woodhouse, M. (1996). Paradigm Wars: Worldviews for a New Age. Berkeley,
CA: Frog.
JOE L. KINCHELOE
68

Chapter 3
What You Don’t Know about 
Standards
Raymond A. Horn, Jr.
Surprisingly, many parents, teachers, and other individuals are not
aware of the great impact and deep implications of educational stan-
dards, and the evaluation of those standards on individual children
and on society in general. This lack of awareness is surprising because
of the constant and pervasive evaluation that all members of a school
community experience, and because of the short-term and long-term
effects of this evaluation on individuals and on the community.
Perhaps one reason for this lack of awareness and understanding of
the implications of standards and evaluations is the simplistic and
superficial presentation of standards and evaluations by those in
control of educational policy. In other words, what appears to be a cut
and dried aspect of educational policy is actually a very complex and
political issue. The political and complex nature of educational stan-
dards and evaluations becomes apparent when questions such as the
following are asked:
1. What are the different types of standards that can be used to
measure student progress?
2. What are the different types of evaluations that can be used to
measure the attainment of the standards?
3. What are the purposes to be achieved by the different types of
standards and evaluations, and how do these purposes align with
the purpose of schooling that we want to foster?
4. What are the consequences of the different types of standards and
evaluations for children, parents, community, business and indus-
try, and our country?
5. How should we define student progress in achieving the
standards?

6. How much of our children’s total learning experience in their
school environment should be evaluated against predetermined
standards?
7. Who should decide which aspects of our children’s total learning
experience are more important than others?
8. Who should determine the nature of the standards and evalua-
tions?
9. What is the relationship between the different types of standards
and evaluations and their effect on the formation of our children’s
identity?
Questions such as these require us to go beyond our superficial under-
standing of standards and evaluations and engage in the deep and
hidden consequences of the kind of standards and evaluations that we
use and of the specific aspects of our children’s school experience that
we desire to measure. To explore these deep and hidden conse-
quences, this chapter identifies and discusses the different types of
standards and evaluations, and how these types align with different
views on the purposes of American education.
Types of Standards
Due to the way standards are presented to the public by the federal
and state governments, much of the public believes that there is a
political and professional consensus on what should be used as stan-
dards for each discipline. In reality, this is not the case. Currently, the
standards that are being mandated by many states are technical stan-
dards rather than standards of complexity. All standards are simply
someone’s expectation of what students are to learn. The important
point in the recognition that there are different types of standards lies
in the phrase “someone’s expectations.” Expectations of student
learning are viewed differently by business people, politicians, educa-
tional traditionalists, and educational reconceptualists, as well as by
people of different races, cultures, social classes, and places. Each of
these different individuals and groups desire to promote their own
values and beliefs through the education process. In order to under-
stand the effects of different types of standards, it is necessary to know
the values and beliefs of the “someone” who created the standards
because those same values and beliefs will be contained within the
standards. Knowing these values and beliefs is critical because all
types of standards affect the meaning of knowledge, the process of
obtaining knowledge, the complexity of knowledge, and the author-
ity of various types of knowledge. Also, they affect teaching as well as
RAYMOND A. HORN, JR.
70

learning, and the values, attitudes, and beliefs of the students.
Standards and how they are evaluated are, like all things, of a political
nature designed to achieve political purposes.
There are many terms used to label standards. Content standards
refer to what a student should know at the end of a course, and are
usually focused on the factual information of a discipline. Performance
standards identify what a student should be able to do by the completion
of the course or activity, and usually involves the development of skills.
Also, benchmarks are standards that are samples of what a student
should be able to do at a specific level of development. All of these
types of standards can be found within two very different general
categories of standards—technical standards and standards of com-
plexity. To what purpose content standards, performance standards,
and benchmarks are employed is the distinction between technical
standards and standards of complexity.
Technical Standards
Basically, technical standards are reductionist, fragmented, and indi-
vidualistic expectations of student learning (Kincheloe, 2001a,
2001b). What this means is that the holistic and interconnectedness of
knowledge is broken apart into isolated segments or fragments.
Breaking apart the whole changes the meaning of the parts and
destroys the more complex synergetic understanding of a situation or
event. The complexity of meaning that is attained through an analysis
of the whole context of a situation or event is lost when the knowl-
edge to be learned or the analytical process used in the learning is
restricted to specific information. In technical standards, facts stand
alone in meaning or are tightly connected with other facts in order to
produce a predetermined meaning that becomes the only correct
answer on the test. Other possible meanings or answers that may also
be correct in an expanded or different context are positioned as
incorrect answers.
One benefit of this control of meaning by reducing knowledge to
discrete fragments is the ease in comparing students’ abilities in pro-
ducing the correct answers. The most important attribute of technical
standards is the ease in which they can be standardized, objectively
tested, converted to statistical data, and used to rank and sort stu-
dents. An additional benefit of technical standards is that when com-
bined with a standardized test, the full responsibility for learning can
be focused on specific individuals such as students, teachers, and
administrators. This focus on individual responsibility rather than on
shared collective responsibility may provide a smokescreen that hides
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT STANDARDS
71

the more powerful influences on student achievement such as
inequitable and inadequate funding, poverty, lack of preschool pro-
grams, class size, the scarcity of minority educators, and the political
agendas of self-interest groups. Interest groups whose goals are to
channel public tax money into parochial schools, private schools, and
schools turned over to businesses are aided in their efforts when indi-
vidual students and schools fail to achieve the test scores mandated by
these interests.
In a technical standards environment, students obtain knowledge
through transmissional pedagogy, and, within this type of pedagogy or
instruction, the skills that students use to acquire and process knowl-
edge are tightly controlled. Transmissional pedagogy is a form of
teaching in which the teacher passes or transmits knowledge directly to
the student who in turn passively receives the correct and appropriate
knowledge. Paulo Freire (1996) called this type of instruction, bank-
ing education in this analogy, the teacher has control of the correct,
and therefore valuable, knowledge and deposits this knowledge in the
minds of the students. The most efficient transmissional instructional
strategies include direct instruction techniques such as teacher lecture,
reliance on textbook information, worksheets, audio-visual presenta-
tions, repetition, and tightly controlled student–student interaction
activities. One of the most important roles of the teacher is to make
sure that the correct knowledge is not corrupted during the transmis-
sion to the student. In technical standard environments in which a
standardized test is used to assess student learning, the most efficient
instructional technique is to teach to the test.
Also, in relation to the process of students obtaining knowledge,
technical standards can utilize all levels of thinking skills, such as
recalling, comprehending, applying, analyzing, synthesizing, and eval-
uating knowledge. However, because the end result of the students’
critical thinking must fall within the boundaries of a predetermined
correct answer, these thinking skills are designed to be controlled and
restricted activities that will result in attainment of the correct answer.
Control of these thinking skills is achieved by controlling the condi-
tions of the problem, and by requiring students to follow a specific
procedure for the thinking skill that is being utilized.
Concerning the complexity of knowledge, technical standards
require the categorization of knowledge into simple binaries of correct/
incorrect, right/wrong, appropriate/inappropriate, and authoritative/
nonauthoritative classifications. This categorization of knowledge
assigns different degrees of value to the knowledge within the
categories. One example of this differentiation of value is the
identification of appropriate knowledge for students as listed in
RAYMOND A. HORN, JR.
72

E. D. Hirsch’s Cultural Literacy (1988). Consequently, knowledge
that is not listed by Hirsch or that disagrees with Hirsch’s interpreta-
tion is valued as incorrect, inappropriate, or irrelevant. In technical
standards, student discovery and interrogation of the deep and hidden
patterns found in a more complex representation of knowledge are
de-emphasized in favor of the rote learning of predetermined inter-
pretations constructed by those who control the standards. In fact,
student discovery and critical interrogation of the broader contexts in
which all knowledge is nested is viewed as a threat to the proposed
correctness and authority of the technical standards.
The often-used phrase that knowledge is power not only implies that
the attainment and control of knowledge is important but also that
some knowledge speaks with more authority than other knowledge.
Technical standards are based upon the supposition that knowledge
deemed as official or formal carries more weight or authority than unof-
ficial or informal knowledge. The knowledge contained in technical
standards is posed as fixed, unchanging, and stable knowledge that
exists separately from human interpretation. In other words, a fact is
simply a fact and cannot be contested. In this case, knowledge is seen as
value-neutral, or as information that is unaffected by human social,
economic, cultural, and political conditions and desires. In this case,
officially determined knowledge cannot be contested. The correct
answer is, indeed, always the correct answer. Often, the information
contained in technical standards is posed as scientifically derived knowl-
edge instead of as knowledge that actually represents the mainstream
interpretations of the dominant culture. Conversely, knowledge that
does not conform to the mainstream interpretation is deemed unscien-
tific and, therefore, lacks the authority that is attached to the main-
stream interpretation. Indigenous knowledge, or the knowledge that
comes from minority (such as racial, ethnic, or lifestyle) and subordinate
cultures (in an educational context such as teachers), is devalued.
As previously mentioned, certain modes of teaching and learning
are more appropriate for technical standards. Teacher-centered direct
instruction facilitates student learning of the information included
within the technical standards. This type of pedagogy directly affects
the role of the teacher and the student in the learning process. In a
technical standards environment, teaching as a technical and mechan-
ical process is more appropriate than teaching as an art and as a craft.
In this context, teachers become deskilled technicians. Deskilling is
when the autonomy of the teacher to make decisions is restricted
resulting in a loss of general pedagogical and interdisciplinary skills.
Instead of being an educational generalist who has a diversity of
skills and knowledge, the deskilled teacher is a specialist with few very
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT STANDARDS
73

well-defined and narrow skills and knowledge. Deskilling takes place
when teachers are when required to follow prescribed standardized
lessons, and when required to use “teacher proof” instructional mate-
rials. The deskilling of teachers guarantees that the correct knowledge
will be efficiently transmitted to the students. Teacher creativity and
responsiveness to individual student needs, abilities, and individual
interpretations of knowledge are viewed as uncontrolled variables that
may subvert or corrupt the official interpretation and ultimately the
correct answer required by the standardized test.
Since all knowledge is connected to values, beliefs, and opinions, all
types of standards promote different views about what is to be valued,
what is to be believed, and what opinions individuals should hold.
Technical standards represent the values, beliefs, and opinions of the
individuals or special interests that constructed the standards.
Teachers who employ a creative diversity of instructional techniques
open the door to student constructions of values, beliefs, and opinions
that may not align with the canon, or the official values, beliefs, and
opinions that are intended to be reproduced by the required stan-
dards. All standards are part of a socialization process that attempts to
perpetuate or construct a specific type of citizen and subsequently a
specific type of society. Technical standards that tightly control how
knowledge is produced are designed to reproduce a society that mir-
rors the values of those who constructed the technical standards. The
current standards and accountability reforms seek to reproduce a soci-
ety that is characterized by the values and needs of a white, Western
European and male, dominated market economy.
Standards of Complexity
Technical standards are in sharp contrast to standards of complexity
(Kincheloe, 2001a, 2001b). The only commonalities between the two
are that both affect the meaning of knowledge, the process of obtain-
ing knowledge, the complexity of knowledge, and the authority of
various types of knowledge. And, they also affect teaching as well as
learning, and the values, attitudes, and beliefs of students.
Basically, standards of complexity are holistic, interconnected, and
recognize the social, cultural, and historical context of all knowledge,
teaching, and human relationships. What this means is that standards
of complexity recognize that the individuals within a culture, sub-
group, or society construct knowledge socially. In order to understand
the broader and deeper meanings of situations, events, and ideas, this
recognition then requires the inclusion of the social, economic, politi-
cal, cultural, and historical influences and interpretations on this
RAYMOND A. HORN, JR.
74

knowledge in the learning of the knowledge. Consequently, standards
of complexity are not isolated facts but an interconnected body of
information whose meaning changes as the sociocultural environment
changes. In this case, standards for any discipline represent information
that is not reduced to parts but always part of a whole. In contrast to
technical standards, meaning is not fixed but is relative to the context
in which it currently resides. As context changes, the meaning of the
knowledge changes. In highly restricted learning scenarios (such as
2  2  4, who was the first president of the United States, and the
like), meaning is stable and fixed for all students. However, when the
learning scenario becomes part of a real life context, how the fact is
used, the purpose of that use, and the sociocultural implications of its
use present the possibility of conflicting interpretations and conclu-
sions. In history, one person’s freedom to act may well be interpreted
by another as an act of oppression. As contextual complexity increases,
the ability to insist on one correct meaning becomes arduous. This lack
of control over meaning (such as not being able to insist that there is
one correct answer) negates the benefit that technical standards
enjoy—the ability to compare students based on their ability to arrive
at one correct answer. Consequently, standards of complexity do not
easily lend themselves to standardized objective tests that can generate
statistical data that can be used to rank and sort students.
In a standards-of-complexity learning environment, students
obtain knowledge through a transformational pedagogy. In contrast
to a transmissional pedagogy, transformational teaching and learning
facilitates student construction of knowledge rather than student
reception of knowledge constructed by others. Also, since transfor-
mational pedagogy recognizes the sociocultural nature of teaching
and learning, students learn to work with others to acquire a critical
understanding of the effects of knowledge on all individuals. To
accomplish transformational learning, efficiency of instruction is rede-
fined because of the diversity of instructional methods that must be
employed. Teachers efficiently utilize a plethora of teacher-centered
and student-centered techniques so that knowledge can be examined
and constructed within its broader sociocultural context. Because of
the awareness of the social construction of knowledge and the desire
to create transformational learners, the instructional foundation of
transformational pedagogy includes cooperative, collaborative, and
team problem posing and problem solving. Student initiative and
creativity is valued and encouraged.
Like technical standards, standards of complexity utilize all levels of
thinking skills, such as recalling, comprehending, applying, analyzing,
synthesizing, and evaluating knowledge. However, higher order
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT STANDARDS
75

thinking required by standards of complexity is different in significant
ways. How Lauren Resnick (1987) captures the characteristics of
higher order thinking resonates with its use in standards of complex-
ity. Resnick proposes that higher order thinking is complex, often
results in multiple solutions, involves individual judgment and inter-
pretation, involves uncertainty about the process employed and the
conditions of the problem, involves the student to be self-regulated
instead of directed by a teacher or a procedure, and involves consider-
able effort on the part of the student. Standards of complexity require
students to use thinking skills within this complex cognitive context.
Also, because of the sociocultural context in which all knowledge is
embedded, a critical component must be added to these thinking
skills. This additional criticality requires students to include in their
thinking about knowledge additional factors, such as race, gender,
social class, and any other human contexts that may be involved with
the knowledge under investigation. The inclusion of criticality in the
teaching of disciplines such as math, science, English, the social sci-
ences, art, music, and others requires students to recall and compre-
hend basic knowledge. However, when students analyze, synthesize,
and evaluate, they are required to go beyond the mere mechanical
application of these skills and see more deeply and broadly how situa-
tions, events, and ideas affect individuals of different races, gender,
and social classes. In addition, student analysis must include recogni-
tion of how the historical context of the situation, event, or idea
affects the analysis of the situation. The inclusion of criticality in edu-
cational standards increases the complexity of student learning.
Therefore, when standards of complexity are the basis for curriculum,
the teaching of science, math, social studies, language arts, and other
disciplines goes beyond the mere presentation and regurgitation
of factual knowledge to a critical exploration of this knowledge in
relation to other disciplines. In other words, factual knowledge is not
separated from its sociocultural contexts. Students not only learn fac-
tual information but also at the same time in the same activity learn
about the critical implications and consequences of the information
within its sociocultural context. One implication of this type of learn-
ing is that since all learning is individually and socially constructed,
multiple forms of these thinking skills need to be taught to students.
The ability to use different analytical techniques allows students to
engage the broader context of situations, events, and ideas. Therefore,
there is no one correct way to analyze, but many correct ways to ana-
lyze the different parts of an idea’s context.
Concerning the complexity of knowledge, standards of complexity
are different from technical standards in their contextual complexity
RAYMOND A. HORN, JR.
76

and in their cognitive complexity. As described, the standards to be
learned include not only the factual and foundational information of
the discipline under study, but also the additional layers of sociocultu-
ral and historical influence that are actually connected to the informa-
tion in real life. Standards of complexity are cognitively complex
because, to learn this information, students must learn and use multi-
ple techniques of each critical thinking skill, and employ their use with
an awareness of criticality. Therefore, standards of complexity are
complex because their inherent contextual and cognitive complexities
require students to go beyond the superficial understanding of infor-
mation to an understanding of the deep and hidden aspects of infor-
mation. Another reason why they are called standards of complexity is
because the meanings that students construct, or the constructed
meanings that students critically interrogate, are not simple or cut and
dried because of the diverse and multiple interpretations that arise.
This increased complexity problematizes the assignment of author-
ity to knowledge. If multiple contexts create multiple interpretations,
can there be one correct answer? Can one body of knowledge be the
correct or appropriate one? Can knowledge be proposed as value-
neutral? In a standards-of-complexity environment, the answer to all
of these questions is no. Therefore, all knowledge bases have a relative
or situational ability to speak with authority. For instance, the author-
ity of scientific and nonscientific knowledge bases is related to the
sociocultural and historical contexts in which they are embedded. For
example, scientifically determined agricultural techniques may be
more appropriate for the locale in which they were developed, but
indigenous techniques developed in other areas may be more effective
in those areas even though they are not considered scientific.
Recognition of the relativity of authority requires students to critically
interrogate what is posed as official or formal knowledge. In learning
standards of complexity, students learn that authority changes as
contexts change.
Concerning what constitutes as appropriate modes of teaching and
learning, standards of complexity require teachers and students to
expand their capacity as teachers and learners. For teachers, expanded
capacity refers to the acquisition of a broad range of pedagogical tech-
niques and diverse knowledge. Instead of losing skills through the
deskilling process, teachers must continuously expand their instruc-
tional toolbox. To attain the level of complexity required in standards-
of-complexity learning environments, teachers need to know more
not less, and to know more diverse teaching strategies rather than be
restricted to standardized teaching formulas. Likewise, through their
years of schooling, students need to continuously acquire a diversity
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT STANDARDS
77

of learning strategies and skills so that they can graduate with a full
toolbox that will accommodate the unforeseen learning situations they
will encounter in later life. In this respect, both teachers and students
are required to be transformational learners who can transform
knowledge into useful and critically appropriate applications. Unlike
technical standards, teacher creativity and responsiveness to the needs,
abilities, and different interpretations of individual students cannot be
contained by official interpretations of knowledge or effectively
evaluated by standardized tests.
Since all knowledge is connected to values, beliefs, and opinions, all
types of standards promote different views about what is to be valued,
what is to be believed, and what opinions individuals should hold.
Standards of complexity accept the fact that values, beliefs, and opin-
ions will differ among individuals. However, above all, the critical
nature of standards of complexity requires individuals to engage in
ongoing critical interrogation of their beliefs and those of others.
Simply, critical interrogation implies that when individuals construct
knowledge, they must fully understand the sociocultural implications
of that knowledge. Sociocultural implications include the effect of
that knowledge on different human characteristics such as race, gen-
der, social class, and other characteristics that contribute to human
diversity. Standards of complexity are part of a socialization process
that attempts to develop individuals who recognize and promote
social and cultural diversity through responsible and responsive par-
ticipation in our democracy. Unlike technical standards that adhere to
a melting pot theory that strives to reproduce the values of a domi-
nant culture, standards of complexity adhere to the theory that strives
to construct a just, equitable, and caring society that values difference
and diversity.
Types of Evaluation
There are many ways to evaluate student progress in attaining
educational standards, but the educational purpose and philosophy
represented by the different types of standards requires evaluation
methods that align with their specific purpose and philosophy. Before
discussing how different types of standards align with different types
of evaluation, there are some general points that can be made regard-
ing all types of evaluation. For the purposes of this discussion, the
terms evaluation and assessment will be synonymous.
The first point involves the purpose of evaluation. When educators
talk about the purpose of evaluation, two initial purposes are expressed
as formative and summative assessment. Formative assessment involves
RAYMOND A. HORN, JR.
78

the appraisal of student knowledge or skills prior to instruction.
Though formative assessments can be in many different forms (such as
pretests, interviews, review of previous work), they are all used by the
teacher in planning instruction, and in gaining a better understanding
of the student’s current level of development or learning. Summative
assessments are those that are conducted after instruction and assess
student achievement of the standards. Both formative and summative
assessments may occur within all types of evaluation plans.
However, historically, educational evaluation has served other pur-
poses than just diagnosis of student progress. Many educators have
written about the ranking and sorting function of evaluation. The
purpose of using evaluation as a ranking and sorting mechanism is to
aid in the decisions about which students can enter certain grade sec-
tions, course tracks, elitist courses and programs, and eventually col-
leges and universities. Of course, the ranking and sorting of students
not only affects the students’ positionalities within a school but also
their eventual position or social class within the larger society. Ranking
and sorting evaluation is a holdover from the factory/industrial influ-
ence on education that was prominent in the late 1800s and 1900s.
The idea was that education should be run like businesses and indus-
trial organizations. Therefore, since businesses needed to rank and
sort human resources into management and labor, schools should also
sort students into similar social categories. With the tracks determined
through educational evaluation, college track students would become
professionals, business track students would become business man-
agers and clerics, vocational students would become skilled workers,
and the general track would become unskilled or semiskilled labor.
Another purpose of evaluation is to reward and punish students,
teachers, and administrators for deficient levels of student achieve-
ment. An example of this is the various plans promoted by the federal
government and states to reward schools who perform well on stan-
dardized tests and to sanction those that do not. This purpose of eval-
uation is justified by the alleged need for accountability. How do we
know if individual educators, students, and schools have or have not
been accountable in their teaching and learning? The answer is by
their performance on a standardized test.
This purpose of promoting accountability through rewards and
punishments is related to another purpose of evaluation—motivating
educators, students, and schools to do what they are supposed to be
doing. States that led the initial development of standards and
accountability models soon found that merely requiring a standard-
ized test did not sufficiently motivate students to take the test
seriously. The answer was to add a high stakes component to the tests.
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT STANDARDS
79

High stakes tests are standardized tests that have a serious conse-
quence for those who fail. The most common consequences for test
failure are not allowing students to graduate regardless of other evi-
dence of academic achievement, not allowing students to pass from
one grade to another, closing schools, allowing parents to withdraw
their children from the school with deficient test scores, disbanding
the school boards and contracting the schools to private companies,
or disbanding the school boards and placing the schools under the
control of a mayor, council, or some other agency. These are indeed
high stakes for individual and collective failure on a standardized test.
An additional purpose of standardized tests is to guarantee the
reproduction of specific content, skills, values, attitudes, and beliefs in
all students. The term reproduction is used because those who make
the tests infuse the test material with their own interpretation of what
constitutes appropriate knowledge, values, beliefs, attitudes, and the
proper use of skills, and want to see their interpretations continued in
the next generation. In this case, the purpose of educational evalua-
tion is to firmly entrench one view of knowledge and values in all
students.
Another general point about evaluation deals with the psychological
aspects of educational evaluation. Types of evaluations and their out-
comes affect the identity formation that occurs in all students. Student
performance on educational evaluations informs and mediates the
development of a student’s identity. Success and failure both affect
how students see themselves. Student expectations of their future capa-
bility for success as an individual and in future professions are greatly
shaped by their performance on educational evaluations. Of course,
this influence on the formation of student identity is the fundamental
purpose of ranking and sorting evaluations. In addition, students learn
other things about life from how they are evaluated in their formative
years. If educational evaluation is highly competitive, resulting in win-
ners and losers, the probability is great that students in this kind of
environment will transfer this competitiveness to other parts of their
lives. Also, those who fear and hate their educational experience
because of this competitive punish/reward evaluation system will con-
tinue to view education and learning with these emotions in later life.
Conversely, educational evaluation systems that are positive and facili-
tate student growth will foster positive feelings toward education and
promote the development of students as lifelong learners.
Related to the points concerning competitive and facilitative evalu-
ation systems and to psychological effects of these systems is the issue
of educational equity. Some types of evaluation systems, such as stan-
dardized testing systems, are characterized by excessive dropout rates
RAYMOND A. HORN, JR.
80

among certain demographic groups. In many states, African American,
Hispanics, and economically disadvantaged individuals experience very
high dropout rates due to language and cultural biases of the tests. In
addition, the individuals in these groups who require long-term and
intensive remediation in order to pass the tests acquire only basic skills
applicable to the service sector of our economy, and miss out on the
educational experiences that can enrich their lives and prepare them to
compete on an equal basis with others in their future lives. Many schol-
ars have documented how this intensive focus on basic knowledge and
skills perpetuates the current social class hierarchy.
A final general point deals with the false perceptions held by the
public about educational evaluation. An example is the issue of grade
inflation. Grade inflation is a condition in which too many students
attain good grades because of a lack of evaluative rigor on the part of
the teachers. Grade inflation has become one of the foundational rea-
sons for instituting technical standards and standardized evaluations.
While this is a legitimate concern, other types of standards and
authentic assessment systems have produced high levels of achieve-
ment in most students. For instance, in a mastery learning and con-
tinuous progress system, students are required to incrementally
master content and skills at a high level of competence before pro-
ceeding to the next level of mastery. High levels of competency are set
as goals and, therefore, when mastered by students, result in high lev-
els of success by all students. However, this philosophy is problematic
to a ranking and sorting purpose, and to a system that promotes com-
petition among students. If all can achieve, then it is difficult to rank
and sort them, and instead of competing with others, students
become focused on their own development and are more receptive in
cooperating with others. In this example, grade inflation becomes a
political tool to promote one purpose and philosophy of education
over others.
Evaluating Technical Standards
The inherent nature and purpose of technical standards require
standardized tests that are essentially objective and invariably involve
high stakes. Objective tests consist of multiple choice questions and,
in some cases, open response or essay questions. The need to statisti-
cally calculate student scores for comparative purposes requires cor-
rect answers that cannot allow individual interpretation. Therefore,
essay questions are structured so that individuals who correct the test
can consistently determine a correct answer. For purposes of compar-
ison, cut scores are arbitrarily set that determine who passes or fails the
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT STANDARDS
81

test. If too many students pass the test, then rather than upgrading the
difficulty of the test, cut scores can be raised to ensure a more
balanced pass/fail ratio.
Standardized tests are indeed standardized in that they are the
same test for all students and are scored the same. However, students
are not standardized and represent different developmental levels and
cultural backgrounds. If the test represents the language and culture
of a dominant middle class, white culture, students from other cul-
tures will struggle with the test questions. This raises the concern
about the validity of the tests. Test validity simply means, does the test
measure what it is supposed to measure? If the test is to measure his-
torical, scientific, or mathematical knowledge and if the students can-
not understand the questions either because of language or because of
culture, is the students’ failure a result of the their lack of knowledge
in that discipline or a result of their cultural difference? If it is because
of cultural difference, or not sleeping well the night before, or not
having had breakfast, or not being motivated to take the test seriously,
then the test fails to measure content or skill knowledge even if it
measures other variables.
In addition, the alleged main strength of standardized tests is their
objectivity. An objective test is one that is valid, or measures what it is
supposed to measure. First, the objectivity of many standardized tests
used by states is not substantiated by rigorous statistical analysis. To
claim objectivity, each test question needs to be statistically analyzed
to determine its validity and reliability (reliability means that the ques-
tion will consistently result in the same answer by all who answer the
question). Also, it is the objectivity of a test that allows for a compar-
ison of test results among students from year to year. Test results from
one year to another are used to determine improvement in students
over time. This comparison becomes problematic when test content,
format, and cut scores are changed from year to year. Also, many
scholars have argued that objectivity is an illusion because what is
included in the test and how the test results are interpreted are the
subjective interpretations of the test makers and test result inter-
preters. Also, objectivity is compromised when the test makers must
decide what mathematical, scientific, or other disciplinary knowledge
is included in the test. Since not all disciplinary knowledge can be
tested, only selected information is included in the test. Test makers
subjectively decide what information is important enough to be
tested. Because standardized tests are designed to measure specific
facts and skills, other equally or more important aspects of education
are often sacrificed. William Ayers (1993) points out that those
aspects that are not measured by standardized tests include “initiative,
RAYMOND A. HORN, JR.
82

creativity, imagination, conceptual thinking, curiosity, effort, irony,
judgment, commitment, nuance, goodwill, ethical reflection” (p. 116).
This is a short list that could be greatly expanded, especially to include
more complex use of thinking skills and knowledge.
Another important aspect about the evaluation of technical stan-
dards is curriculum alignment. This refers to the adage that the writ-
ten curriculum must be the same as the taught curriculum, which, in
turn, must be the tested curriculum. Curriculum alignment also refers
to the coordination of what is taught within and between disciplines
from one grade level to another. However, curriculum alignment
becomes ethically problematic when instruction is focused solely on
the test content. This practice is commonly known as “teaching to the
test.” This practice is the most efficient way to ensure acceptable pass
rates on standardized tests. The problem is that teachers can focus all
of their classroom assessments on the type of questions that will be on
the test. Also, information that is not tested loses value, and when
time is an issue, this information is discarded or displaced from the
curriculum. This is an ethical problem in that the test becomes the
focus of education instead of the needs of the student and the needs
of society. The typical response to the pressures of the test are to lessen
or eliminate “nonessential” subjects, such as art, music, physical edu-
cation, health education, and other non-tested subjects. From an eth-
ical perspective, are students best served by not experiencing these
other aspects of life? Also, what are the consequences for students
whose abilities are strong in these areas?
In conclusion, three basic questions come to mind when evaluating
the effectiveness of the standardized evaluation of technical standards.
What have the students learned? Will what they have learned benefit
them in their future lives? What purpose and philosophy does this type
of evaluation promote?
Evaluating Standards of Complexity
The inherent nature and purpose of standards of complexity requires
authentic and multiple assessments within a mastery learning and con-
tinuous progress framework. Authentic assessment is evaluation of a
student’s knowledge and skills within a real-world setting. In contrast,
by reducing knowledge and skills to multiple choice and contextually
restrictive open response questions, objective testing creates an inau-
thentic and artificial testing situation that requires the student to
merely recall information or perform a skill that is detached from the
student’s current or future real-world context. Because of the close
connection between authentic assessment and the real world, the
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT STANDARDS
83

potential for the student’s transfer and use of the knowledge and skill
to nonacademic real-world situations is greatly increased. In addition,
authentic assessment creates the potential to positively motivate
students to learn—resulting in lifelong learners.
Authentic assessments are also called performance tests because
students must correctly perform the skill or demonstrate knowledge
attainment before moving on to other standards. This sounds similar
to students performing on an objective test by providing the correct
answer. However, besides the requirement of situating the perform-
ance within a real-world context, there are other significant differ-
ences. In the real world, demonstrations of knowledge and skill
involve the multiple use of skills, the use of different types of knowl-
edge at the same time, problem posing, problem solving, and the
involvement of other individuals in the collective solution of the prob-
lem. Seldom is an authentic problem resolved by the use of informa-
tion and skills from one discipline such as mathematics. More often,
knowledge and skills from math, science, social studies, language arts,
and other disciplines are required to solve the problem because
aspects of all of these disciplines are part of the expanded context of
the real world problem. Even though performance tests restricted to
specific disciplines are appropriate within the learning process,
standards of complexity, which reflect the complexity of real-world
problems, require equally complex performance tests. In a standards-
of-complexity learning environment, more disciplinary restrictive per-
formance tests can be used to shape student learning. However, the
interdisciplinary nature and complexity of the evaluations must increase
as student capabilities increase and move to a final performance.
Because involvement with others in real-world problem solving
invariably occurs, authentic assessments require students to work with
others in different capacities in problem solving and in evaluation sit-
uations. Authentic assessment involves multiple assessments not only
to capture this interpersonal complexity but also to capture a holistic
view of student achievement of the standards. The use of individual
and group written and oral evaluations are important characteristics of
authentic assessment. Grading rubrics are used to better define stan-
dards and to more accurately measure student performance. To
ensure a detailed and accurate determination of student progress over
time, various kinds of portfolios are used. Valid and reliable standard-
ized tests are also appropriate for periodic diagnosis and comparison
of students with other students nationwide. And, an attitude is
required in which all types of evaluations are viewed as positive feed-
back in the promotion of student learning. Authentic assessment
requires various degrees of a continuous progress view of student
RAYMOND A. HORN, JR.
84

evaluation. Simply, continuous progress implies that within a period
of time, students progress at their own rate of learning in the mastery
of all standards.
Continuous progress is a problematic strategy in schools that emu-
late a factory system type of education because this strategy requires a
flexible school schedule that allows students to progress at their own
pace and to receive the appropriately complex remediation that is nec-
essary to achieve at a mastery level. Another problem is that teachers
need the knowledge and time flexibility to create additional resources
and assessments for each level of performance. Current definitions of
the role of the teacher (such as requiring teachers to be technicians
instead of high-level professionals), teacher–student ratios, current
demands to rank and sort students, and additional educational fund-
ing are all impediments to the use of authentic assessments.
Lev Vygotsky proposed the idea that educational evaluation must
be designed to understand two aspects of student learning—whether
the student learned the knowledge, and the student’s potential for
further learning. Authentic assessment accomplishes both of these
goals because, when done correctly, a wealth of evidence is acquired
concerning what the student has learned, the nature of the student’s
potential for further learning, and precisely, what the student needs to
learn next. Also, the authentic and multiple nature of this kind of
assessment facilitates an understanding of each student’s learning
regardless of developmental levels and cultural backgrounds. What
students from diverse backgrounds learn can be accepted as valid and
objective results because of the precise definitions of the knowledge
and skills to be learned, and also because of the diversity and quantity
of evaluative evidence that is collected over time. Like objective test-
ing, authentic assessment can provide snapshots of student progress
and can be used to compare students, but unlike objective testing, it
provides an ongoing informed view of the student’s continuing
progress in mastering the standards of complexity. In an ethical con-
text, student needs are being met, student evaluation is more accurate
and therefore fairer, and the needs of a democratic society are being
met by the development of an epistemologically and socially compe-
tent and critically thinking individual.
Conclusion
Historically, standards and evaluations have functioned as controlling
mechanisms through which certain knowledge has been promoted as
appropriate and through which students have been ranked, sorted,
and moved into different categories, jobs, and subsequently social
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT STANDARDS
85

classes. Many individuals have argued that those who wish to repro-
duce their own way of life, values, and beliefs have utilized standards
and evaluations as a social control mechanism to achieve this repro-
duction. However, in this new millennium of changing demographics
and more complex social, economic, cultural, and political problems,
will this instrumental use of education promote or diminish American
democracy? The need for standards and evaluations of student learn-
ing is a given. However, what we need to address are these questions.
When our children graduate, what knowledge, skills, and capacity do
we want them to have to engage in future learning? What kind of soci-
ety will our children construct because of their knowledge, skills, and
capacity for future learning? How will we define American democracy?
The answers to these questions relate directly to the type of standards
and evaluations that are used in American education. Does the educa-
tion of children for their participation in a complex society require an
education guided by standards of complexity and equally complex
evaluations of student achievement?
References
Ayers, W. (1993). To Teach: The Journey of a Teacher. New York: Teachers
College Press.
Freire, P. (1996). Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York: Continuum.
Hirsch Jr., E. D. (1988). Cultural Literacy: What Every American Needs to
Know. New York: Vintage Books.
Kincheloe, J. L. (2001a). “Goin’ home to the Armadillo”; Making Sense of
Texas Educational Standards. In R. A. Horn and J. L. Kincheloe (eds.),
American Standards: Quality Education in a Complex World—The Texas
Case, pp. 3–44. New York: Peter Lang.
Kincheloe, J. L. (2001b). See Your Standards and Raise You: Standards
of Complexity and the New Rigor in Education. In R. A. Horn and 
J. L. Kincheloe (eds.), American Standards: Quality Education in a
Complex World—The Texas Case, pp. 347–368. New York: Peter Lang.
Resnick, L. B. (1987). Education and Learning to Think. Washington DC:
National Academy Press.
Additional Sources on Standards and Evaluations
Bracey, G. W. (1998). Put to the Test: An Educator’s and Consumer’s Guide to
Standardized Testing. Bloomington, IN: Phi Delta Kappa International.
Horn, R. A. (2002). Understanding Educational Reform: A Reference
Handbook. Denver, CO: ABC-CLIO.
Kincheloe, J. and D. Weil, (eds.) (2001). Standards and Schooling in the
United States: An Encyclopedia Vols. 1, 2, 3. Denver, CO: ABC-CLIO.
RAYMOND A. HORN, JR.
86

Kohn, A. (2000). The Case against Standardized Testing: Raising the Scores,
ruining the Schools. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
McNeil, Linda M. (2000). Contradictions of School Reform: Educational Costs
of Standardized Testing. New York: Routledge.
Meier, D. (2000). Will Standards Save Public Education? Boston: Beacon
Press.
Wilde, S. (2002). Testing and Standards: A Brief Encyclopedia. Portsmouth,
NH: Heinemann.
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT STANDARDS
87

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 4
What You Don’t Know about 
Evaluation
Philip M. Anderson and Judith P. Summerfield
What most of us do not know about evaluation could take a book,
a series, or an entire library to remedy. Even most evaluation experts,
and we ourselves are not experts in evaluation, will tell you that they
do not know everything there is to know about evaluation. But, even
the few experts who claim to know everything about evaluation are
either fooling themselves or limiting evaluation to a limited set of def-
initions or formulae. In any case, evaluation is a topic where ignorance
and foolishness rule the court. Those of us who teach feel increasingly
frustrated and, as a result, end up ceding large areas of assessment to
school officials, testing “experts” and the companies who make
fortunes out of our students’ failures and achievements.
The central problem with knowledge about evaluation is the
assumption that statistical and methodological knowledge, that is,
technical knowledge, is what we need to be better teachers. Instead, we
would argue that fundamental misunderstandings about evaluation lie
in social and cultural assumptions, and that many of our everyday class-
room assumptions (i.e., our tacit knowledge) about evaluation are
imbedded in the history of large-scale standardized testing. The dis-
cussion we intend in this chapter takes us to the larger historical and
sociocultural picture required for reading or interpreting evaluation as
it is currently pursued. It is the human and social foundations of eval-
uation, not the mathematical and methodological, that is central to
employing student-centered evaluation in our classrooms.
We begin with the current trend toward limited, content-based
testing, the so-called content standards movement, with its focus on
curriculum defined as “essential” knowledge. The emphasis on stu-
dent achievement through these tests, coupled with the threats of No
Child Left Behind to close our schools and “re-assign” the teachers,

has gotten our attention. Large-scale content standards testing has
moved teaching and learning away from teachers teaching and chil-
dren learning to teachers being held accountable and the children
meeting “rigorous” standards. You can see the problem here. You can
observe the problem in classrooms where the evaluation is driven by
the test of essential knowledge. Teachers teach to the test—students
“learn” information—tests determine whether the students have
“learned” anything. Here the harm is the greatest because testing
shapes evaluation and evaluation shapes and even determines the
curriculum and pedagogy of a classroom.
The current scene is complex, confusing, and troubling: there is an
enormous gap between the standardization of curriculum and evalua-
tion and the everyday (every minute?) evaluation that we need to
accomplish in our classrooms. Classroom evaluation may appear to be
different from standardized tests in important ways, but there must be
a relationship between classroom evaluation and the evaluation done
through objective testing and large-scale testing (“objective” in this
case does not just mean reducing subjective factors to a minimum, but
limited to choices of fixed alternatives, e.g., multiple choice ques-
tions). Large-scale testing provides a context (or in current corporate
education-speak, “benchmark”) for our individual work of evaluating
students. But clearly, the relationship between the two is not simple
or, in some cases, even productive.
The current situation takes us to the great American school
debates, the persistent battle over the curriculum—what is to be
taught. The current imperative is for the curriculum to represent
“essential” or “core” knowledge. The notion that tests must test all
students on similar, if not the same, knowledge is central to the con-
tent standards testing methodology. This search for essential knowl-
edge (or core curriculum) relies on answering the “what knowledge is
of the most worth?” question. The question deals with values, that is,
a belief that certain knowledge is more valuable than others. In a
pluralistic society, this means that some groups’ knowledge becomes
privileged, that is, gains more official status. The indigenous knowl-
edge of this group, the group members’ tacit knowledge (intuitive
knowledge), then becomes the most important knowledge. The
assumptions of this specific knowledge become the “norm” in the cul-
ture. In colonial settings, the knowledge of the less privileged groups
is either destroyed (e.g., the Spanish Jesuits burning the Mayan
codices) or neglected into marginalized status (see Apple, 1991).
The “what knowledge is of the most worth” question is a charac-
teristic of conservative reform (actually, reactionary) movements. This
question is usually asked as a means to reign in change (or progress)
PHILIP M. ANDERSON AND JUDITH P. SUMMERFIELD
90

within curriculum structures and content. This current essentialist
(one culture) movement can be seen as a reaction against multi
(many) cultural curriculum—and against a progressive or liberal ide-
ology. The current essential knowledge curriculum appears to be a
power play by conservative forces in the society who believe that
schools have “strayed” from their purposes of teaching the “basics”
and good citizenship. The implications are enormous, since evalua-
tion in this model is intended to drive curriculum and pedagogy.
Not surprisingly, the proponents of the essentialist movement tend
to be the same as those who believe that the Supreme Court has
strayed from the intention of the original framers of the Constitution
in its various court decisions and constitutional amendments over the
years. For us to acquiesce to the essentialist curriculum, to adopt the
idea that “basics” are the key to knowledge, is to relinquish our jobs
as teachers. Which knowledge is of the most worth cannot be taken for
granted—it requires a prior question about what beliefs we hold not
only about curriculum and assessment but also about how we value
students and teachers.
What is interesting about most of the current rhetoric is that it is
part of a much larger cultural debate that has been raging for over a
hundred years. There are several dimensions to the discussion, some
focused on political and cultural issues, while others filtered through
technical and methodological matters. And, like all the issues sur-
rounding evaluation, there is a set of questions related to the class-
room and a set of questions related to the society. As we said before,
the larger social questions have a direct impact on classroom curricu-
lum and evaluation.
The societal questions, as they relate to schools, can be equated
functionally with college entrance requirements. College entrance
examinations in the nineteenth century were based on a restricted
reading list (core knowledge) developed by individual colleges located
primarily in the east. As schools cropped up in the new states and ter-
ritories of the west, they complained that the schools in the regions
where the elite eastern college resided enjoyed an unfair advantage
over the schools from outside these communities. The schools asked
the colleges to provide a list of expectations for the students to
meet that were uniform, in other words, a list that was open and
public, and that gave their students a fair chance to compete. By the
last quarter of the nineteenth century, students expecting to go to col-
lege took an examination on the readings from the Uniform Lists
(Applebee, 1974).
Over the years, the Uniform Lists provided a common cultural
content for school knowledge. Students in Michigan could be
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT EVALUATION
91

expected to read the same books as students in Massachusetts,
provided each had the goal of taking the admissions test for Harvard.
But, as the country grew and expanded, some argued that the cultural
expectations of the eastern colleges should not define the school cur-
riculum. One of the ironies here is that the colleges apparently never
intended that the list define core knowledge, but merely be represen-
tative in its suggestions for book titles. This is one of the unhappy
secrets of recommended lists—they almost always become the
required list.
The first decades of the twentieth century were a time of social and
cultural transformation—the implicit assumptions of the specified cul-
tural tests as a means to define preparation for college started to seem
a bit quaint. Tycoons had established great colleges based on the per-
ceived demands of the new machine age and dedicated to the new
industrial world (Carnegie, Stanford, et al.). This was a new world dic-
tated not by the gentlemen’s classical education of the past but by the
scientific and technical education for the future. The assumptions
about what knowledge is of the most worth changed in fundamental
ways. The added value of scientific and mathematic knowledge was
only part of the change; the new states even questioned the common
cultural content of a curriculum dominated by New England authors
(Kliebard, 1995).
Several important changes took place in educational thinking dur-
ing the early twentieth century along with these various cultural
changes: William James and various American pragmatist philoso-
phers asserted the primacy of experience in learning and knowing;
American psychologists oversaw the development of scientific testing,
first used for sorting recruits in World War II; and the U.S. Congress
legislated, after pressure from unions and social reformers, the
requirement of compulsory schooling, with an emphasis on vocational
and technical education for the working classes. The focus on experi-
ence shifted the emphasis on students as passive recipients of knowl-
edge, which was meant to provide and arrange the “furniture of their
minds,” to students who actively learned by doing. The challenge was
to engage the whole child in the process of learning.
Scientific testing was essential to scientific management, the grand
new way of managing society after the fall of the old monarchies.
Scientific testing assumed certain biological or genetic traits that
could be measured at an early age to discover the capable future lead-
ers among the population. One finds various critiques of this approach
in celebrated novels such as Brave New World by Aldous Huxley and
disastrous political experiments during the twentieth century. More
recently, the genetic arguments have been seriously reasserted by
PHILIP M. ANDERSON AND JUDITH P. SUMMERFIELD
92

Herrnstein and Murray (1994), and forcefully resisted (see Kincheloe
et al., 1995). Scientific testing, though, is not the problem—the mis-
use of scientific testing to oppress difference and to legitimate an
unfair system is the problem. IQ became part of our vocabulary, and
most of our tests for the meritocracy grow out of the same assump-
tions about testing that underlie the IQ (a alleged relationship
between “mental age” and chronological age). It is part of our uncrit-
ical discourse on schooling to accept such constructs as above or
below “grade level” based on results garnered from standardized tests
that grew out of intelligence and aptitude testing.
Scientific testing also solved the common cultural content problem
inherent in the restricted reading list. Scientific testing argued that
real potential was not in the content of one’s current knowledge, but
in one’s mental abilities. Mental abilities in these testing situations
were generally defined as problem solving, a key skill in a pragmatic
society. The tests purportedly tested your skills, rather than your cul-
tural knowledge. Out of this trend—and several experiments showing
that the new Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) was a better predictor of
college success—came the dominance of the SAT (and its Western sib-
ling the ACT) for college admission. Education would not be about
possessing specific knowledge, but rather about possessing certain
mental skills. Since we were living in a brave new world, a world of dis-
covery and new knowledge, why would a cultural knowledge of the
past serve as the basis for schooling?
Compulsory schooling solidified the changes. Suddenly, you could
not opt out of the official curriculum any more (unless you could
afford a private education). Apprenticeships and other ways into the
employment sector were increasingly being regulated, and regulations
not only meant tests but also academic credentials. One had to pass
tests to get a high school diploma, to be promoted, even to get to
graduation. If one hoped to go to college, one needed to pass the col-
lege examinations. The scientifically managed society needed a mech-
anism by which to identify the successful and simultaneously to
reward them with additional opportunity.
As we indicated above, the history of schooling in the twentieth
century is a continuing debate between the content standards sup-
porters, those who see knowledge as a product to be acquired, and the
performance standards supporters, those who see knowledge as a set
of skills and demonstrated competencies. The former tend to look at
school as separate from the surrounding culture and school knowl-
edge as something to be gotten only in school. The latter see learning
and knowledge connected to the lived experience of the students and
gained and demonstrated through activity. The former tend to
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT EVALUATION
93

support memorization or “recall” as a measure of understanding
where as the latter tend to value strategies and skills as indicators of
competence.
All of the crisis points in U.S. education can be played out as a tug
of war between these two positions. The early educational psycholo-
gists and progressives (performance advocates) were rebelling against
the mental disciplinarians (content advocates); the post-Sputnik battle
against the progressives resulted in the academic resurgence in the late
1950s and early 1960s; the humanistic revolution of the 1960s and
1970s was a reassertion of humanistic values, and a short attempt at
returning to the basics (skills performance) in the 1970s. The current
trend in evaluation, active for 20 years, is a result of a reassertion of
the content focus.
The most obvious evidence of this trend is in the reports and books
of the mid-1980s that announced the principal neoconservative
agenda. The A Nation at Risk report railed against the “smorgas-
bord” curriculum, that is, the elective curriculum that had originated
in the “liberal” reforms of the late 1960s, and favored a core curricu-
lum of reduced choices and breadth. E. D. Hirsch’s Cultural Literacy
(1986), a highly influential book, was subtitled What Every American
Needs to Know, and argued strenuously for a defined, and enforced,
“common” knowledge. Hirsch attacked the progressive ideal of per-
formance curriculum and testing by arguing that specific cultural con-
tent was necessary for educational attainment—he was simultaneously
asserting what knowledge was of the most worth. Following shortly
thereafter, while both were officials in the U.S. Department of
Education, Diane Ravitch and Chester Finn (1988) published the
results of their first “national test of humanities knowledge” in What
Do Our 17-Year-Olds Know? One can see the clear content standards
focus even in the title.
The reason that there has been no second national test of students’
humanities knowledge was that the other ideology of the neoconser-
vative movement, the reduction of the federal role in state matters
(such as education), took precedence over a national curriculum and
a national test. (We should note here that all the countries of Western
Europe have national curriculums and national testing systems that
sort the students as early as age 11.) Instead, the U.S. Department of
Education offered major funded grants to develop “state frameworks”
that would serve as templates for state officials to develop curricula
appropriate to their states and state-level testing systems. As all teach-
ers and parents know, this work has been accomplished with a
vengeance; all U.S. states now have new content standards-based cur-
ricula and state-testing apparatuses in place. NCLB has used these
PHILIP M. ANDERSON AND JUDITH P. SUMMERFIELD
94

testing mechanisms, along with federal benchmarks, to determine the
success of schools, and their futures, in those states.
These state tests represent the victory of the content model over
the performance model. Even during the development of state frame-
works, there was considerable discussion of content standards versus
performance standards, with Lauren Resnick’s performance-based
models at the University of Pittsburgh having considerable influence.
At one point, the New York City public school system was using
Resnick’s performance standards to develop a local curriculum out of
the New York State Department of Education content standards
frameworks. Needless to say, the effort was conflicted in its purposes
and aims, though, to be fair, the New York State curriculum com-
bined content and performance standards in a complex manner.
Probably more troubling, in our current situation, is the use of
tests meant to evaluate student learning (learning outcomes) to eval-
uate teachers and schools. If one reduces all the functions of school-
ing to student test scores, this makes sense. After all, goes this logic, if
teachers and schools are designed to teach students, then the student
scores are a measure of the success of the teachers and the school.
Then again, if one sees schools and schooling as providing something
more than a restricted academic education measured as recall, then
the logic is not so obvious. And, as we all know, factors affecting
performance on “objective” tests include matters the schools cannot
control.
We raise this problem because it opens up the question that is most
important here: Testing for what? There are other tests than those
represented by the content standards of the schools, each serving a
different purpose. There are tests that are meant to make statements
about the nation at large, like the National Assessment of Education
Progress. There are also tests that carry on the great tradition of psy-
chological testing, the best known being the SAT and ACT test for
college admission.
There are various distinctions in evaluation discussions that are
quite important, one being the distinction between admissions exam-
inations and exit examinations. The SAT and ACT are admissions
tests; they claim to predict success in the first year of college (and
nothing else). The SAT leans more toward performance-based testing
while the ACT is more content-based, though both basically serve
similar purposes based on standardized measures. The tests are also
norm-referenced, that is, test-takers are measured against one another
and recent populations who have taken the examination.
If you take the SAT and do not perform well, you can still graduate
from school—only your choices for college are limited. The state tests
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT EVALUATION
95

are school exit examinations—if you do not pass, you do not receive a
high school diploma. State tests are criterion-referenced, that is, you
are measured against a predetermined passing score. The state tests
are “high stakes” tests for the entire student population; the
SAT/ACT scores are only “high stakes” for those hoping to get into
a selective college. NCLB has set standards for each specific category
of student (race, class, gender, and other categories) and schools must
meet the standards. If one layers the NCLB standards onto the state
scores, then the scores are high stakes for teachers and schools as well.
Until recently, some states had different examinations for the col-
lege-bound, and another for the noncollege-bound. In New York, for
example, the Regents Examination reflects a long history of college
admissions testing, but there was also a failed experiment in the 1980s
and 1990s with a Regents Competency Test for high school exit test-
ing. Part of the new content standards movement is the assertion of a
single academic curriculum for all students, with a single measure of
achievement to go with the single curriculum. In other words, there is
no longer a college track and a noncollege track; ergo, all students are
college-bound. New York has kept a modified version of the Regents
Examination for its state examination, and all students are being
taught the Regents curriculum. (We can report hearing that some of
the students who had traditionally been in the non-Regents track in
New York High Schools are now tracked into the non-Regents
Regents track, but that may only be a rumor.)
One needs to remember that all achievement tests are designed to
measure the individual achievement of students. Each student is to be
measured against the criterion for knowledge established by the state-
testing apparatus. These are achievement tests that measure whether
one has successfully navigated the knowledge (and skills and attitudes)
dictated by the state in which one attends public school. The norm is
not a national norm; one is not measured relative to others’ perform-
ance, and passing the test is necessary to be credentialed as a high
school graduate.
This model has been moved down into the elementary and middle
grades as well. Formerly, elementary testing tended to be of the per-
formance type, measured against national norms. Tests such as the
Iowa Test of Basic Skills or the California Achievement Tests were the
norm. Until recently, no states had developed content-based tests to
measure individual elementary student achievement in high stakes
fashion. Now, the chancellor of New York City Public Schools
(a lawyer by actual training and experience) holds third graders back if
they do not pass the third grade test, and is planning to do the same
to fifth graders. This is the plan in many states at the fourth and eighth
PHILIP M. ANDERSON AND JUDITH P. SUMMERFIELD
96

grade levels as well. In every instance, the tests are criterion-referenced,
content-based tests. The state tests are based on teaching specific
content, not on various skills like critical thinking. The tests test the
specified curriculum; in every case the test defines the curriculum.
Another type of test, the National Assessment of Educational
Progress (NAEP), situated in the grand tradition of mass, norm-
referenced testing, is a descriptive test. The NAEP was developed when
President Nixon decided he wanted an assessment system in place
before he would sign the renewal of the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act. The NAEP attempts to measure how U.S. children
and adolescents are performing as a group, relative to previous groups
of students of the same age. Every several years a representative group
of students (several thousand out of a potential several million), cho-
sen on all the factors that distinguish students by region and charac-
teristic, take this test of skills in a range of intellectual domains. When
one hears that U.S. eighth graders are doing better, or about the same
as past counterparts, this is usually reporting from the latest NAEP
results. This type of test, a large-scale sample assessment, was one of
the approaches considered by the National Educational Goals Panel,
created by the National Governor’s Association and the National
Council on Educational Standards and Testing (charged by Congress)
in July 1990, for national standards. Headed by former Colorado gov-
ernor and recent Los Angeles superintendent Roy Romer, the council
recommended “two components, individual assessment and large-
scale sample assessment, such as the National Assessment of
Educational Progress” (Romer and Fitzgerald, 1996, p. 237). The
NAEP is still used as a de facto national test of educational achieve-
ment, though it does not appear to carry the weight of the state tests.
The whole business of reporting the results of tests is probably the
biggest confusion within the recent fights over testing and assessment.
When Ravitch and Finn reported the results of the test that became
What Do Our 17-Year-Olds Know, they got the most media attention
from claiming that a majority of 17 year olds (in 1986) could not name
the dates of the American Civil War within 50 years. On the surface, this
finding, especially the spread of 50 years, appears shocking. Unreported
in the news release, but clear from the published report, was that the
question, asking what years the U.S. Civil War was fought, was a multi-
ple choice question with the following choices: (1) 1750–1800,
(2) 1800–1850, (3) 1850–1900, (4) 1900–1950. To claim that any one
who chose (2) did not know the dates within 50 years strains credulity.
The form of the test is central to what we can conclude from it. If a
test is all multiple choice, how can we say anything about the student’s
writing ability? Similarly, if the test only tests memory and facts, what
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT EVALUATION
97

can we conclude about a student’s ability to generate creative thought?
If the test is of an individual, how can we conclude anything about that
individual’s ability to work in the world with others? The battle over
curriculum is played out in these areas as well, with the content stan-
dards people arguing that content knowledge is a prior condition
(e.g., Hirsch’s (1986) cultural literacy argument) to other forms of
understanding and learning. But learning is much more complex than
a linear, logical model of step-by-step acquisition of information.
Given new attempts to define the complexity of learning, there
have been several well-documented attempts to both redefine what
tests evaluate and introduce changes in the form of tests to reflect dif-
ferent evaluation priorities. Howard Gardner’s work (1993) on multi-
ple intelligences questions traditional intelligence (and achievement)
tests as merely testing verbal ability, and insists that there are other
measures of intelligence that should be part of the cultural imperatives
of school testing. Another recent trend, the use of portfolio assess-
ment, in which student-produced and chosen work is evaluated as a
whole, has been used for statewide assessment in Vermont. Portfolio
assessment provides a way to assess students individually, but with the
claim that the assessment is more authentic than standardized testing.
Portfolio assessment is, on the surface, more valid than multiple
choice objective tests, but probably not as reliable.
“Validity” and “reliability” are important concepts, as well as sta-
tistical constructs, that every teacher should be able to manage.
Reliability refers to how accurately an instrument measures whatever
it is supposed to measure; validity refers to how well an instrument
measures whatever it measures. There are some excellent books for
teachers on testing and assessment; Michael Lorber’s Objectives,
Methods, and Evaluation for Secondary Teaching (1996) is one of the
best-written and most sympathetic to teachers’ needs (the extensive
evaluation discussion is useful for elementary and college teachers as
well). In the case of the portfolio, one can see that the validity of the
portfolio is its attraction: one is measuring actual student work, and,
in most cases, work that the student has chosen to represent his or her
best work. The reliability of such a measure is tricky because one is
supposed to evaluate each individual on his “authentic” production of
work. A standardized, norm-referenced objective test, on the other
hand, measures students all performing the same task or knowing the
same information. Reliability is enhanced in this setting, but the valid-
ity becomes problematic.
Another classic example of the validity/reliability conundrum is
the case of the SAT test of grammar and usage being used as a test of
writing ability—the test may be quite reliable in testing grammar
PHILIP M. ANDERSON AND JUDITH P. SUMMERFIELD
98

knowledge, but it is barely a measure of the ability to write (it does
not even ask the student to write, that is, perform the writing task).
Changes in the SAT over the past decade reflect these debates about
measurement and evaluation: “The ‘new’ SAT, introduced in
1993/94, reflects technical and philosophical changes as well as what
students experience in today’s classrooms” (Stewart and Johanek,
1996, p. 267). The SAT I is the norm-referenced measurement of rea-
soning skills, essentially a multiple choice examination testing critical
thinking skills. The SAT II is a subject matter test, a test of subject
knowledge, and includes a test of writing where the student actually
writes an essay. The ACT examination is basically a combination of
SAT I and II. Now comes word that one of our most influential psy-
chologists, Robert Sternberg (2004), is working on the equivalent of
the SAT III, an instrument to test intelligence more broadly, both in
subject and skill, account for “creativity,” and, eventually, influence
college admissions criteria (Simon, 2004; Sternberg, 2004).
Throughout the century, curricular and evaluation debates have
swung between two opposing positions: one knowledge-based, the
other performance-based. Knowledge-based testing proponents
argue, in the extreme, for a privileging of the subject or content, and
are often trying to “conserve” the hegemonic (one) culture.
Performance-based proponents argue, in the extreme, for privileging
of the student’s experience as a learner, and are often associated with
a progressive/liberal ideology. In each case, assessment apparatus is
shaped by profound differences in emphasis and value.
Where does this leave us, the teacher? When large-scale assessments
are being used to predetermine not only what teachers teach, but also
how they are to measure student learning and therefore, the forms in
which students are taught, how can we attend to the day-to-day
evaluation of student work? More disturbing, most of the current
assessment policies and models actually remove the teacher and teach-
ing from the equation. “Curriculum and instruction” have been
replaced by “curriculum and assessment” in educational discourse
during the past 20 years. We do not think this is a coincidence. When
one adds in the attempts by neoconservatives to deny the value of
teaching expertise in the attacks on professional licensing (and the
support of various children’s crusade programs like Teach for
America), our profession has been diminished. Teachers are not asked
to set goals, but to meet “benchmarks”—teachers are asked to teach
to more “rigorous standards,” not to help students become learners.
Assessment is driving the education goals of the teachers and the local
needs of the students. Wherever we look, teachers are under attack
and denied agency (Apple, 1991).
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT EVALUATION
99

But teachers deal with real students, not abstractions, and teaching
is not adding information to a memory machine (E. D. Hirsch (1986)
equates the brain to a computer hard drive). And though there are
standardized tests, we are not trying to produce standardized stu-
dents. But, in the end, much of school assessment mimics standard-
ized assessment in its form and purpose. And, assessment for teachers
is not merely about the attainment of some final state of education,
but needs to account for evaluation that assists the teacher in making
better judgments about teaching individuals.
In order to move from the hegemony of standardization, we as
teachers need to move from “standardized” thinking to “situated”
thinking. This change should even improve scores on standardized
tests if done judiciously, because test taking is a situated activity. Most
of the new knowledge about cognition (thinking) suggests that
knowledge is situational. One knows things in relation to the enacting
of this knowledge within particular situations or contexts. In other
words, knowledge is as knowledge does. You can see the perform-
ance-based assumption here. In fact, in some instances, our tacit
knowledge, the knowledge we act upon even if we cannot articulate it,
is the most functional. Those of us, for example, who can ride a
bicycle, would be hard pressed to explain how it happens.
Situated learning tells us that we do not learn by doing, but learn in
doing (Lave and Wenger, 1991). Therefore, evaluation cannot be a
measure of the result of learning but must be part and parcel of learn-
ing. Evaluation that is situated is an evaluation that not only repre-
sents the student’s knowledge but also provides opportunities for the
student to learn in performing the activity. Knowledge learned in
doing suggests that learning is not the thing we do until the test, but
what we do even while we are taking the test. Evaluation is not simply
test taking but a process firmly embedded into the reflective teaching
that we do in our daily professional lives.
As teachers, we need to work to change the conversation. The cur-
rent content-based testing teaches students that knowledge is trivial, a
sort of high stakes Jeopardy! (we choose this game and word deliber-
ately). They do not see themselves as learners who engage in mean-
ingful work with some sensible outcome, but as machine hard drives
who will be punished (or suffer “consequences”—a key word in neo-
conservative discourse) if they do not memorize the appropriate infor-
mation. We need to put the complexities of student learning at the
center and to insist that students be engaged in intellectual activity—
as participants in communities of practice—that calls upon their
knowledge and experience. Our classrooms should provide adult
teaching and direction while asking students to produce something of
PHILIP M. ANDERSON AND JUDITH P. SUMMERFIELD
100

value to them as well as their peers, the school, and the community.
Then evaluation—not just testing or assessment—flows in and out of
the daily life of our work.
References
Apple, Michael (1991). Ideology and Curriculum, 2nd edn. New York:
Routledge.
Applebee, Arthur (1974). Tradition and Reform in the Teaching of English.
Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.
Gardner, Howard (1993). Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple
Intelligences, 10th edn. New York: Basic Books.
Herrnstein, Richard and Charles Murray (1994). The Bell Curve: Intelligence
and Class Structure in American Life. New York: The Free Press.
Hirsch, E. D., Jr. (1986). Cultural Literacy: What Every American Needs to
Know. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Kincheloe, Joe, Shirley Steinberg, and Aaron Gresson (1995). Measured Lies;
The Bell Curve Examined. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Kliebard, Herbert (1995). The Struggle for the American Curriculum:
1893–1958, 2nd edn. New York: Routledge.
Lave, Jean and Etienne Wenger (1991). Situated Cognition: Legitimate
Peripheral Participation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Lorber, Michael (1996). Objectives, Methods, and Evaluation for Secondary
Teaching, 4th edn. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Ravitch, Diane and Chester Finn, Jr. (1988). What Do Our 17-Year-Olds
Know?: A Report on the First National Assessment of History and
Literature. New York: Harper & Row/Perennial Library.
Romer, Roy and Joy Fitzgerald (1996). A Vision for the Role of New
Assessments in Standards-Based Reform. In Joan Boykoff, Baron and
Dennie Palmer Wolf (eds.), Performance-Based Student Assessment:
Challenges and Possibilities. Ninety-Fifth Yearbook of the National Society
for the Study of Education, Part I. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Simon, Cecilia Capuzzi (2004). The SAT III? New York Times, Education
Life (Section 4A), p. 15.
Sternberg, Robert (2004). Wisdom, Intelligence, and Creativity Synthesized.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Stewart, Donald M. and Michael Johanek (1996). The Evolution of College
Entrance Examinations. In Joan Boykoff, Baron and Dennie Palmer Wolf
(eds.), Performance-Based Student Assessment: Challenges and Possibilities.
Ninety-Fifth Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education,
Part I. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT EVALUATION
101

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 5
The Cult of Prescription––Or, A Student
Ain’t No Slobbering Dog
P. L. Thomas
This is a true story, but it is one most people never see—a story that
reveals what is behind the things we do in our schools:
I recently sat talking about the teaching of writing with a principal I
have known for nearly thirty years; the principal is one of the most ded-
icated educators you can find, and she was an outstanding teacher for
many years before moving to administration. I was explaining to her
the inherent problems with teaching writing through prescription—
forcing students to write from templates similar to the traditional five-
paragraph essay. Her response? The principal replied something like
this—“Why, Paul, if students can’t even do exactly what they are told to
do, how are those students going to write papers on their own?”
Everything that is wrong with our public schools, everything that
keeps our public schools from fulfilling its role in a free society—as
Thomas Jefferson envisioned—is captured in this scene. This principal
personifies the cult of prescription that lurks just under the surface of
our schools; ironically, our free society trains students in America to
do as they are told before they somehow earn the right to make their
own course through this life.
Currently, our public schools are under attack; critics from politi-
cians to radio pundits to newspaper journalists are telling us what is
wrong with our schools—and how to improve them. These criticisms
and silver-bullet solutions soon seep into the daily thoughts and
beliefs of all of us. Yet, most who have these discussions about educa-
tion simply do not know about or fully understand the many assump-
tions and agendas that drive this thing we call public schools.
Are our public schools failing us in some way? Yes. Do our schools
need reform? Yes. But the problem we are facing is that the great

majority of criticisms and solutions are resting squarely on false
assumptions and noneducational agendas that make both the criti-
cisms and the solutions misleading and harmful. Here is one thing you
will almost never hear: A troubling dynamic has haunted fruitful
school reform for decades—those without the training or the expert-
ise to reform education manipulate the misconceptions and inaccurate
perceptions of the average citizen for political or financial gain. I
attempt to uncover in this chapter those assumptions and agendas that
most of us never see—even though criticisms and discussions of edu-
cation remain on our lips almost daily.
I have written elsewhere about the Frankenstein nature of the
American psyche (Thomas, 2004)—Americans have a near obsessive
love for and complete misunderstanding of numbers and all things
scientific—and I have warned before about the manipulation of politi-
cians who are more and more using schools, standards, and high
stakes testing for political gain (Thomas, 1999). The blunt truth is
that most people who speak about public schooling are victims of false
assumptions concerning behavioral learning theory, capitalistic ideol-
ogy, and testing. When the assumptions are misguided, the criticisms
and subsequent solutions are misguided as well. Although public edu-
cation is possibly the greatest commonality among the American peo-
ple, most of us simply do not know much about the theories and
beliefs that dictate how our schools function on a daily basis.
Just because Pavlov was successful in conditioning a dog to salivate
over a bell instead of food does not mean that our students should be
treated like canines in our big experiment called school. You see, a
student ain’t a slobbering dog. Let us first look at the false assumptions,
those things that for the most part are simply never clearly stated
when we debate education—where the assumptions come from and
how they impact our schools. Then we can begin to have a frank and
honest discussion of where our schools are failing and how we might
begin to create the kind of schools our students and our free society
deserve. It turns out that when we are talking about schools, what we
do not know will hurt us.
The Cult of Prescription
Paulo Freire (1993) makes this charge:
One of the basic elements of the relationship between oppressor and
oppressed is prescription. Every prescription represents the imposition
of one individual’s choice upon another, transforming the conscious-
ness of the person prescribed to into one that conforms with the pre-
scriber’s consciousness. (p. 28; italic in original)
P. L. THOMAS
104

Freire’s broad and philosophically grounded complaint is not
removed at all from other concerns voiced now and more directly on
the state of education and educational reform in America; Osborn and
Gayle (2004) make this observation about the most recent educa-
tional reform mandated by the federal government: “The No Child
Left Behind Act, for instance, encourages rote learning by aligning
highly specified lessons with mechanized tests.” What many fail to rec-
ognize is that most educational reform initiatives are prescriptions,
and for this very reason, we should reject them.
From politicians and pundits to administrators and classroom practi-
tioners, our schools are steeped heavily in the cult of prescription—a way
of thinking that grows from our embracing behavioral learning theory,
our capitalistic zeal, and our mindless allegiance to standardized testing.
Each of these must be exposed and explored closely, and then aban-
doned if our schools are to prepare young Americans to become a con-
tributing part of a free and democratic society. If our goal is otherwise,
or if we are content to allow education to happen uncritically to our
children, then we should keep along this traditional imposing course.
Behavioral Assumptions
In Barbara Kingsolver’s Prodigal Summer, the main character recalls
her father telling her, “There’s always a reason for what people say, but
usually it’s not the reason they think” (2000, p. 362; emphasis in origi-
nal). I would extend this idea to what people do as well.
Americans tend to be a pragmatic people; we scoff at theory, we
scoff at those things merely academic. Yet, whether we are conscious
of the fact or not, all things we say and do are grounded in theory. We
say and do things that reflect what we believe to be true, whether it is
true or not, whether we can express those beliefs or not.
This is disturbingly true in public schools. The reasons behind what
we do, say, and think in education are primarily driven by our alle-
giance to behavioral psychology—assumptions about human nature
and the acts of teaching and learning. The profound impact that
behavioral assumptions have on teaching and assessment in our
schools—along with its impact on the ways in which we manage the
classroom, including discipline procedures and policies—directly con-
flicts with our expressed reason for public schooling: To support a free
democracy. When classroom practices steeped in behavioral assump-
tions are exposed, we see that those behaviors are both morally and
educationally suspect.
Brooks and Brooks (1999) identify the essential contrasts between
the traditional classroom grounded in behaviorism and the progressive
THE CULT OF PRESCRIPTION
105

classroom grounded in constructivist learning theory. What many sim-
ply do not know is that the vast majority of teachers have been trained
as if behavioral psychology is not only the best explanation for teaching
and learning, but also the only valid theoretical grounding for educat-
ing children. However, at least one well-supported and legitimate
alternative to behaviorism exists: constructivism. This alternative
proves to be better suited to public schooling in a free democracy, but
as we will see, those who control public schools have many different
goals, least of which is supporting our democracy. When exposed for
what it is, the traditional classroom guided by behavioristic principles
functions under a few intellectually paralyzing assumptions, ones that
contribute to many things other than individual empowerment and
democratic principles:
1. Material to be learned is constant and easily identified, thus
irrefutable.
2. Learning comes from teaching that is imposed from without.
Teachers dispense knowledge into students as if those students are
simply receptacles.
3. Human nature requires that learning and behavior be controlled by
a system of rewards and punishments (stimulus–response); good
classwork deserves high grades, and poor behavior deserves swift
and strict punishment.
4. The content of learning is best learned in small pieces and in a lin-
ear fashion. Parts are more easily learned than wholes, especially if
they are sequenced.
5. Being wrong or making mistakes must be avoided by learners.
Proper rewards and punishments can help teach learners to avoid
being wrong or making mistakes.
6. The learner is essentially a blank disk drive waiting to have infor-
mation saved in neat files and folders by a knowledgeable and
benevolent (adult) computer programmer.
The list of highly esteemed behavioral psychologists is long, and the
history of our support for their theories is rich. How then can we
refute the value of such assumptions in our schooling of children?
Easily.
First, let us look at why behavioral psychology has such a power
over our schools. Though this appears not to be common knowledge,
behaviorally grounded practices in schools dominate because they
are easily standardized, easily managed, and easily measured—not
because they are morally superior, not because they are sensitive to the
humanity of children, not because they support the needs of a free
P. L. THOMAS
106

democratic people. In fact, teaching and learning driven by behavioral
assumptions are morally questionable, prone to dehumanizing effects,
and contradictory to democracy and individual freedom. Let us look
at the assumptions of behaviorism from above and see why they are
counter to the potential our schools could offer a free people:
(1) The content of learning is easily identified and essentially fixed.
This assumption is the most telling of the tendency of behavioral
assumptions to foster indoctrination, not learning. The truth about
the content of learning is that knowledge is ever-shifting and—as is
the nature of intellectual discourse—debatable. In fact, it is the nature
of learning to debate ideas—not to memorize information simply to
regurgitate it later for the approval of some authority.
(2) “To teach” means to dispense information to learners. Possibly
the most damaging assumption of behaviorally based education is the
idea that the teacher is the sole source of what one should know, that
the teacher’s job is to distribute that knowledge that he embodies. All
of us know that the things we have learned most dearly are things that
we somehow embraced as active learners; what people have merely
told us has generally rolled off our backs like so much water. The
effective teacher is much more like a supportive coach than a judg-
mental preacher.
(3) Human nature requires that learning and behavior be con-
trolled by a system of rewards and punishments (stimulus–response). As
Kohn (1996) asserts, behavioristically grounded classrooms are driven
by a very dark view of human nature; the assumption is that all
humans must have extrinsic rewards and punishments or nothing can
be accomplished—or worse yet, there will be chaos! As I discuss later,
I believe most of children’s need for rewards has been learned in a
society that has sold its soul to capitalism. Learning, striving, strug-
gling, and living are all both the act itself and the reward simultane-
ously. And humans by nature are actually eager learners and active
participants in life. School—with its relentless system of punishments
and rewards—drains the life out of learning and out of children to the
point that children seem able to function only within a system of
rewards and punishments. Schools actually create a self-fulfilling
prophesy. The sad irony is that the behavioristic assumptions of school
practices have conditioned students to be that which behaviorism
claims they are!
(4) Parts are more easily learned than wholes, especially if they are
sequenced. It seems so obvious that this assumption has to be true that
I am always nervous to refute it. But I do refute it. This aspect of
learning is counterintuitive. Brain research is confirming over and
THE CULT OF PRESCRIPTION
107

over again that most people (some say as much as 80 percent) actually
learn from whole to part. More students learn best dealing with the
big picture first; they actually grasp the essential concept before they
are able to explain the process, before they are able to analyze the con-
cept. The rare person is analytic by nature. Brain research is also
showing that we are quite chaotic learners as well. It does seem likely
that learning things in an organized sequence would be what is best
for initial learning, but, again, this appears not to be true. Schools
function under the assumption that all students are analytic and linear
learners. In fact, most are global learners who grasp ideas and infor-
mation in a chaotic manner. Analytic and linear teaching is more man-
ageable, not better supported by research, not better suited to support
our democracy (though it has some benefit to creating more pliable
workers).
(5) Mistakes and errors should be avoided by learners. From our red
pens and our verbal reprimands, we teachers teach children daily that
good students should not make mistakes. Constructivistic learning the-
ory, however, embraces the value of error in learning (Brooks and
Brooks, 1999). Mistakes are actually a first step toward rich understand-
ing. As well, risk taking is a key to deep learning. If children are paralyzed
by the fear of doing wrong (and of the subsequent punishment—thus
supplanting any concern by the learner for that act that has been deemed
“wrong”), they are highly unlikely to take risks; as a result, they are
unlikely to come to understand anything in a real and deep way.
(6) The learning brain is a blank slate. Again, as brain research
expands, we know that this is a deeply flawed assumption. As one
example, linguists are fairly certain that even language and grammati-
cal competence are pre-wired in the brain (Pinker, 1994). All new
learning is in some way measured against or merged with prior knowl-
edge when students learn. It is a great mistake to believe that learning
occurs in a vacuum.
The behavioristically grounded classroom, the traditional classroom,
values a passive learner and embraces indoctrination and rote memo-
rization as valuable and even desirable learning. As I discuss further in
the last section of this chapter, the passive learner is the least desirable
student for our classrooms and ultimately our society. Behavioristic
assumptions create an incredibly low expectation for children—they
must be trained—and determines the lowest path for most students in
their living. The passive learner is no learner at all, having had her
humanity stripped from her by a series of punishments and rewards
over more than a decade of her most impressionable years on this
planet.
P. L. THOMAS
108

Capitalistic Ideology
While our schools are essentially behavioristic psychology in practice, our
larger American society is primarily capitalism in action. It is difficult, I
admit, to clearly separate the impact behaviorism and capitalism have on
how Americans do everything, from advertising our products to training
our dogs to educating our children. Actually, I believe that our bigger
commitment to capitalism contributes to our somewhat mindless alle-
giance to behaviorism. It is not a far leap from stimulus–response in the
classroom to the 40-hr workweek that ends with a pay check.
My criticisms of our public school system grow from my belief that
our schools are failing our democracy and the humanity of all children.
Most criticism, most popular and political criticism springs from a
belief that our schools are failing our businesses, and our economy.
Those are drastically differing charges. Engel (2000) makes a
Deweyan claim that Americans value capitalism more than democracy—
and nowhere is it shown more vividly than in our schools. He believes,
“A democratic school is one that . . . tries to enable people to create
their own world collectively rather than fit into one that is created for
them” (p. 65). But our schools practice the prescriptive tendencies of
behaviorism and bend to the political and business forces that charge
schools with reinforcing the economic interests of our society; we
need workers who will fit the corporate mold, they argue, or America
is doomed! We are not being told that most criticisms and reforms of
schools are driven by political and business interests—agendas that
grow from how schools can best support someone’s wealth or some-
one’s power base. Is the call by some to end public schooling and
open education to the free market a move to improve learning or to
create a new market where money can be made?
Combined with the behavioristic assumptions, capitalism fails our
schools and our students in these ways:
1. Faith in free market ideology—the competition model—as a
panacea for any social ill casts a misguided cloud over our public
school system, which appears to be a monopoly, but only in a simplis-
tic view of monopolies. Political and business criticisms of schools
often spring from the claim that public schools can never work since
they are monopolies and since monopolies are anathema in a capital-
istic society. Yes, in the business world, a monopoly fails capitalism.
But schools are not providing a sole service for inflated financial gain
or for the unfair concentration of power; in other words, public schools
are not a monopoly (no more so than the military, the police force, or
the judicial system, that is). Simply being the only source of a service
is not a monopoly; being the sole source for inflated financial gain or
THE CULT OF PRESCRIPTION
109

for unfair power is or there is no harm in being the sole provider. Even
in a capitalistic society, a few social entities must exist for the ultimate
good of the entire society; public schools is one such entity.
2. Capitalism and the American Dream written as becoming rich rein-
force two weaknesses in our society—the valuing of extrinsic rewards
and the inflated trust we place in numbers. That things can be quantified
and are quantified means a great deal to Americans. The business world
learned quickly that products sell if they are scientific, if there are num-
bers to support why a product is the best. If something is valued, it is
quantified, is what we Americans believe. The bigger the number, the
more it matters. Teachers make relatively little money so they do not
really matter—especially when compared with professional athletes or
movie stars. Worse still, public education is often called “free” (though it
certainly is not); thus, how can anything free be of any value?
3. Capitalism suggests that ends matter more than means; for many
Americans, whether in school or at work, what comes at the end justi-
fies, or at least overshadows getting to that end, the means. In school,
the grade comes to be more valuable than the learning; at work, the
paycheck matters more than the working. Learning, the kind that
empowers each individual and enriches any community, is a journey
and not a destination. Capitalistic zeal for the finish line poisons real
learning, and destroys any appreciation for the journey.
That we are a people more deeply committed to capitalism and our
own ideologies than to democracy and free society is tremendously
significant in the way we run our schools. “We have factory-based
schools in an Information Age—and no factories. . . . This factory-
based approach, however, is locked in by political gridlock . . .
[which] encourages rote learning by aligning highly specified lessons
with mechanized tests,” observes Osborne and Gayle (2004).
In educational jargon, schools are referred to as “plants.” This is no
simple metaphor. The business paradigm has been neatly placed over
the behavioristic skeleton of our schools to create a powerful being
few people face or question.
Standardized High Stakes Testing
The assumptions of behaviorism and capitalism are both emboldened
by and productive of numbers; we love numbers in the United States.
For our schools, the numbers are increasing exponentially as the
standards movement and the high stakes testing bonanza have
mushroomed, fertilized as they have been by the fecund criticisms
heaped on our public schools by politicians, pundits, and business
leaders during the last two decades.
P. L. THOMAS
110

The only thing that can match America’s trust in behaviorism as
how we should teach children is our unwavering faith in standardized
testing. From IQ to the SAT to GPA, Americans rely on tests and the
numbers from these tests to label our students as smart—or not.
Here is what few people know: The big tests of our society—the SAT,
for example, which is designed to predict college success but is only the
third best indicator of this success, behind GPA and courses taken, both
of which cost the student nothing (Thomas, 1999)—do not prove what
we think they prove, and they are draining our schools of valuable time
and money. Popham (2003), himself an expert in educational assessment
and high stakes testing, stands as one of many who are quick to warn that
standardized testing is not all that most believe it to be. Often, mass pro-
duced and scored tests do not adequately measure the things that matter,
but like behaviorism, certain types of machine-scorable testing have an
upper hand in education because it is easier to manage and cheaper to
implement—neither of which has much to do with being educationally
sound or productive. As well, testing has the added veneer of being easily
quantified, thus feeding the American belief in numbers as truth.
The computer boom has helped to exacerbate the high stakes test-
ing movement. Many states and even the SAT are moving toward not
only scoring multiple-choice tests by computer, but also grading stu-
dent compositions by computer. These moves have and will continue
to increase computer-aided instruction and assessment in classrooms
and for high stakes testing. Both the use of computers and the trust
we place in tests will simply increase all that is wrong with schools—
paralyzed as they are with the cult of prescription.
Standardized, high stakes tests fail students and society for many,
many reason, but let me offer a few simple but relevant examples of
how they fail us:
1. Many, if not all, universities offer degrees in areas such as art and
music. What have the type of verbal and mathematical questions
on the SAT got to do with ceramics or playing the cello? Nothing.
Why then must an aspiring artist make a certain score to enter col-
lege to major in ceramics and sculpture? It makes no sense.
2. How does our society accept the settling of the best high school or
professional football teams? State championship games and the
Super Bowl, right? Why do these events—mere entertainment—
not settle matters with multiple-choice tests than we can easily run
through a machine for a score? We have computers involved in the
determination of college football’s champion, and no one is happy
about that! But we are somehow content to have a computer grade
a student essay and then allow that score to determine whether that
student can graduate high school or attend college?
THE CULT OF PRESCRIPTION
111

To be honest, the flaws with the current state of high stakes testing are
far more severe than my simple examples; better people than I am are
beginning to make that case. Here, I simply want to state flatly that
our blind trust in testing in the traditional sense is harming our
schools, our students, and our society, but from the loudest critics of
our schools you will hear just the opposite. For them, we need higher
standards and more testing—not just of students but of teachers too.
The current mentality on testing is captured well in an apt Southern
expression: Weighing the pig won’t make it fatter.
New Paradigms, New Schools, New Honesty
Several years ago, I called for a new honesty in education (Thomas,
1999), but only recently have I come to realize what I really meant by
that call. You see, the most fervent behaviorists, capitalists, and
positivists—those who already control our schools—have been leading
an assault on public education because the schools are not entrenched
enough in these areas. Those of us who are educators because we love
the humanity of children and the righteousness of individual freedom
and democratic values have unwittingly coalesced to defend the
current system, though it is in contrast to all that we hold sacred.
Recently, I witnessed first-hand how pervasive the cult of prescription
is even within the educational establishment. One of the hot ideas and
subsequent books and materials of the year is the concept of backward
design, embodied by the work of Wiggins and McTighe (1998),
Understanding by Design. To me, this concept of backward design is
simply prescription light, and it indirectly reinforces all of the problems I
have detailed above. This is difficult to state bluntly, but few have looked
closely enough at the concept of backward design. Determining for a
learner what is to be learned or performed and then offering that learner a
template to fulfill those expectations is a highly manageable and efficient
process but it is not education; it is training. Educators—mainly adminis-
trators—have fallen prey to trying to outdo the critics, without consid-
ering the flaws in the political and commercial calls for school reform.
Our schools need neither the current political criticisms and
solutions nor the defense of practitioners; schools especially do not
need the materials and programs to fulfill those political demands.
Our schools need a new and honest unveiling of those things that are
wrong and how we can steer this educational ship onto a course that
is true and good. The truth is, public schools in America do many
wonderful things, but fail in some truly serious ways as well—but not
the ways in which George W. Bush, fundamentalist Christians, the
business lobby, or textbook publishers claim.
P. L. THOMAS
112

Let us leave this discussion with a serious skepticism for the cult of
prescription that permeates our schools and with words from two
educators who express honestly the schooling that could be, the
schooling that should be: “Education will unfit anyone to be a
slave. . . . Education tears down walls; training is all barbed wire”
(Ayers, 2001, p. 132), and “At his or her best, the hungry student is
the constructively skeptical student” (Sizer, 1992, p. 54).
Students should not be slaves to rewards and punishments, should
not be slaves to a pay check, and should not be slaves to the score on
a high stakes test. Teachers and students should not be slaves to mate-
rials, textbooks, worksheets, and computer programs that prepare stu-
dents for the test. That is all barbed wire. The promise of a free
democracy lies in the hands of young minds, hungry and skeptical—
free of schooling that is mere indoctrination.
References
Ayers, W. (2001). To Teach: The Journey of a Teacher, 2nd edn. New York:
Teachers College Press.
Brooks, J. G. and M. G. Brooks (1999). In Search of Understanding: The Case
for Constructivist Classrooms. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision
and Curriculum Development.
Engel, M. (2000). The Struggle for Control of Public Education: Market
Ideology vs. Democratic Values. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Freire, P. (1993). Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York: Continuum.
Kingsolver, B. (2000). Prodigal Summer. New York: Perennial.
Kohn, A. (1996). Beyond Discipline: From Compliance to Community.
Alexandria, 
VA: 
Association 
for 
Supervision 
and 
Curriculum
Development.
Osborn, H. and M. Gayle (June 1, 2004). Let’s Get Rid of Learning
Factories. Los Angeles Time. Retrieved June 4, 2004, from: http://
www.charlotte.com.
Pinker, S. (1994). The Language Instinct. New York: Harper Perennial.
Popham, W. J. (2003). Test Better, Teach Better: The Instructional Role of
Assessment. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum
Development.
Sizer, T. R. (1992). Horace’s Compromise: The Dilemma of the American High
School. New York: Mariner Books.
Thomas, P. L. (1999). A New Honesty in Education—Positivist Measures in
a Post-Modern World. Contemporary Education, 71, 1, 51–55.
Thomas, P. L. (2004). Numbers Games: Measuring and Mandating American
Education. New York: Peter Lang.
Wiggins, G. and J. McTighe (1998). Understanding by Design. Alexandria,
VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
THE CULT OF PRESCRIPTION
113

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 6
School Leaders, Marketers, Spin
Doctors, or Military Recruiters?:
Educational Administration in the 
New Economy
Gary L. Anderson
The recent No Child Left Behind (NCLB) legislation is the
culmination of a series of commissioned reports and policy initiatives
that have created a new policy environment for principals and super-
intendents. Major components of these policies include high stakes
testing, increased competition for students, and recruitment of stu-
dents for the military. Never before have policies so consistently
bypassed the professional judgment of administrators and teachers.
This is not by accident. A mixture of business models and free-market
ideology have descended on education, threatening the very ideas of
leadership and public education.
Sergiovanni (2000) describes the current dilemma for administra-
tors as an encroachment of the systemworld on the lifeworld of the
school. The systemworld consists of the management designs, policies,
rules, and schedules that provide a framework for students and teach-
ers to engage in teaching and learning. The lifeworld is the culture of
the school and is represented by the values, norms, and beliefs that
determine the social interactions among students, teachers, and
administrators. Both the lifeworld and the systemworld are essential
to the school organization. When the two are in balance, they func-
tion symbiotically to create schools and classrooms in which system
efficiency is in harmony with the lifeworld where teaching and learn-
ing takes place. However, in many schools, the systemworld domi-
nates the lifeworld. A dominant systemworld destroys the fabric of the
school culture creating isolation, alienation, and a loss of a sense of
professionalism.

This describes the current standards movement in education.
Because in the past teachers could close the classroom door and
ignore reforms that failed to understand their local context and
because administrators had considerable autonomy, the lifeworld of
schools was often buffered from the constant demands of reforms that
came and went. In the new context of high stakes testing, instruc-
tional “coaches,” administrative “walk throughs,” and school report
cards published in local papers, the systemworld has begun to “colo-
nize” the lifeworld of schools. In a system that forces the classroom
door open and is obsessed with high standardized test scores, leader-
ship becomes so circumscribed that it can be exercised by neither
administrators nor teachers. In this way, the new reform movement is
essentially replacing leadership with standards and standardization.
So the decline of leadership is the decline of the lifeworld of the
school in the face of a resurgence of Taylorist forms of bureaucracy,
scientific management, standardization, social engineering, and com-
petition that steers the system by exerting pressure from the top, while
allowing limited local “autonomy” over (mostly trivial) decisions at
the bottom. Thus, site-based management becomes a form of deci-
sion making about the preferred means to achieve the ends deter-
mined elsewhere. Currently, in many school districts, such as Los
Angeles Unified, where the Open Court Reading Program is required
in all schools, even the instructional means are taken out of the hands
of the educators. Principals are left with managing their school culture
and, as I discuss in more detail below, managing the image of their
schools or, in the case of superintendents, their school districts.
However, stripping teachers and principals of professional auton-
omy is taking place through a moral discourse of “Leave no child
behind.” In this sense, teachers, principals, and superintendents, who
are now referred to as “the educational establishment,” can no longer
be entrusted professionally with the education of America’s youth.
Thus, the systemworld exerts its considerable pressure on the life-
world, shaping a more fearful and docile school culture in which
school professionals tow the line or take the increasingly popular
options of early retirement or leaving the profession altogether.
Nevertheless, while most educators find this tendency troubling, it
is true that schools in the past have not done a very good job of
empowering students and their communities, and administrators and
teachers have often been implicated in practices that keep schools
tracked by socioeconomics and race and closed off from the
surrounding communities, particularly in low-income areas. Therefore,
from an equity perspective, providing greater autonomy for
GARY L. ANDERSON
116

administrators and teachers is no guarantee that they will “do the
right thing” or even know what “the right thing” to do is.
One thing is certain: The constant pressure on administrators is
causing many to engage in extreme forms of impression management.
Engaging in public relations has always been part of a school adminis-
trator’s job, and in this age of public school bashing, highlighting the
positive things about one’s school is a necessary counter to the sensa-
tionalist news that frames minority youth as criminals and urban
schools as on the verge of collapse.
There is also nothing wrong with pressuring administrators to
make sure that all students in their schools are getting the best educa-
tion that can be provided with the resources these schools are allo-
cated. Good administrators have always had a low tolerance for low
expectations and mediocre teaching. However, this new reform, led
primarily by business leaders and politicians, has upped the ante, lead-
ing to the creation of what Murray Edelman calls the creation of a
“political spectacle.” In his book Constructing the Political Spectacle,
Edelman (1988) argued that elites constructed the political spectacle
through their manipulation of language and media, the evocation of
enemies, the use of rational language to hide political interests, the
creation of a sense of crisis, and the conversion of active citizens to
passive spectators. This has led to what Berliner and Biddle (1995)
have called “a manufactured crises” in education that is attempting to
undermine the public’s faith in public education. In many ways,
administrators are taking their lines from a national script that has
turned traditional notions of public relations into a new ethos that
allows for the outright manipulation of information with the goal of
deceiving the public.
Public Relations on Steroids: Deceiving the Public
At the national level, Edelman’s political spectacle has become so
obvious as to be self-evident. Before the U.S. entry into the First
Gulf War in 1991, a tearful 15-year-old Kuwaiti girl named Nayirah
testified before Congress, with news cameras rolling, that she had wit-
nessed Iraqi soldiers stealing babies out of incubators in a Kuwait city
hospital. Later it was revealed that the girl was the daughter of a
Kuwaiti diplomat in Washington, and that the Kuwaiti government
had hired the American public relations firm of Hill and Knowlton to
stage the testimony in Congress (MacArthur and Bagdikian, 1993;
Kelly, 2002). This vilification of Iraqis signaled the construction of a
new enemy and was a turning point in the U.S. public’s support for
EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION IN THE NEW ECONOMY
117

the war. In the more recent conflict in Iraq, a dramatic rescue of a
courageous young American female soldier, Jessica Lynch, who had
allegedly been captured in a blaze of gunfire and later mistreated by
her Iraqi captors was miraculously captured on film. Back in the
United States, this “war hero” immediately became front-page news
and the subject of a television movie. It later turned out that her
injuries were due to a vehicle accident, that an Iraqi medical team had
nursed her back to health and had tried to deliver her to the U.S.
troops. Although some facts are still in dispute, the U.S. troops appar-
ently fired on the vehicle, which returned to the hospital so the rescue
could be staged (Neuman, 2003). The notion of a “theater of war”
has taken on a more literal meaning in this age of political spectacle.
While the current school reform spectacle is perhaps less dramatic,
it is becoming equally evident. Rod Paige, the secretary of education
who was brought to Washington by George Bush, was the superin-
tendent of the Houston Independent School district from 1994 to
2001. This district had been touted as a jewel in the crown of the
“Texas miracle” in school reform circles and in 2002 won a 1 million
dollar prize as best urban school district in the country from the
Los Angeles–based Broad foundation. An article on the front page of
the New York Times, July 11, 2003 reported that “the results of a state
audit found that more than half of the 5,500 students who left their
schools in the 2000–2001 school year should have been declared
dropouts but were not. That year, Houston schools reported that only
1.5 percent of its students had dropped out” (Schemo, 2003, p. 1).
The audit recommended lowering the ranking of 14 of the 16 audited
schools from the best to the worst.
Just as teachers know how to “perform” for evaluators, administra-
tors know how to “perform” for politicians and business leaders who
have crafted an accountability system that is mostly stick and very little
carrot. Punishment, humiliation, and loss of jobs await those adminis-
trators whose schools fail to “perform” up to standards. The recent
Annual Yearly Progress requirement of NCLB is pitched at such an
unrealistic level that it is likely to provide even more incentive for
administrators to manipulate data. This mixture of pressure from
above and semiautonomous “learning communities” or “teams” is a
model borrowed from the corporate world.
The Corporate Influence on Educational 
Administration
Much of the new language that has entered the lexicon of educational
administration came from an army of workshop leaders and professors
GARY L. ANDERSON
118

who taught the principals of total quality management (TQM), which
became popular in the 1980s and 1990s. In reality, TQM had already
been critiqued within the corporate world, when educators picked it
up. Terms like “continuous improvement,” “teaming,” “customer,”
“quality,” and the like became in this period part of the vocabulary of
administrators. TQM principles were even promoted in classrooms
through the Baldridge approach to instruction.
TQM devolved decision making to workers, promoting teaming
and site-based decision making. However, as Harley (1999) and many
others have pointed out, “while strategic decisions continue to rest
with management, there is a devolution of responsibility for tactics to
the core workers” (p. 316). This essentially becomes a new more
sophisticated motivation theory in which workers—or teachers—have
the illusion of control over their workplace, while real control is con-
solidated at higher levels of the system. Thus teachers, according to
this business model, are encouraged to “take ownership” and “buy
into” someone else’s agenda. In the corporate world, workers are
becoming increasingly aware that while they are being “empowered”
on the shop floor through participation in selected work-related deci-
sions, their unions are being busted, their companies downsized, their
jobs moved overseas, and their salaries and benefits slashed. A similar
trend can be seen in education where funding is slashed and top-down
testing regimes coexist with teacher “empowerment” and “auton-
omy” through group decision making and teams. Edelman (1978)
put it more bluntly,
Participation in group meetings has often been obligatory: in China, in
Russia, and in Nazi Germany, just as it usually is in mental hospitals, in
prisons, and in high schools that emphasize student self-government;
for it helps evoke popular acquiescence in rules that would be resisted if
authorities imposed them by fiat. (p. 121)
The other aspect of TQM that has infused educational administra-
tion is the notion of statistical control and the elimination of variance.
In most businesses it makes sense to want to produce products that
eliminate variance. A quality product is one that does not vary, such as
a McDonald’s hamburger or an air filter for an automobile. Any vari-
ation is viewed as a defect and the use of statistical control helps to
eliminate variation. This notion has essentially been lifted from busi-
ness and applied wholesale to education through current testing
regimes that exert statistical control over student achievement. The
problem is that the core technologies of business and education are
fundamentally different. Successful student achievement depends on
EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION IN THE NEW ECONOMY
119

addressing variation in students and the essence of education is help-
ing students find their own individual and unique self-actualization.
Corporate influence in education, while not new, is stronger today
than at any time in our history. Goals of schooling, such as building
democratic citizens or providing opportunity, have been replaced by a
concern for forming human capital for a global economy. Corporations
have given us much that is good. Business as a social enterprise is a
cherished foundation of our economy and society. Few economists
today would argue that any country can prosper without a vibrant pri-
vate sector. However, humans are not merely homo economicus and
our schools were never meant to merely serve the needs of business.
Corporations have a place in our society, but sovereignty belongs to
the public. Without a government and public spaces independent of
corporate control, the notion of “public” in public schooling is called
into question.
Testing the Testers: An Exam for Administrators
After years of testing teachers and students, school leaders are now the
targets of the testing industry. Educational Testing Service (ETS) has
developed an examination based on the Interstate School Leaders
Licensure Consortium (ISLLC) national standards for school admin-
istrators, which are replacing state standards across the United States.
The ETS exam is required for school administrator certification in sev-
eral states. These new standards and the exam that enforces them are
driving the preparation of future school administrators.
While the new standards themselves are not that different from the
previous ones, the ETS exam is another story. The Registration Bulletin
for the School Leaders Licensure Assessment (1999) that is published
by the ETS provides examples of test items and exemplary responses. I
have documented elsewhere in more detail the ways this exam encour-
ages a narrow public relations view of school administration (Anderson,
2001, 2002). The language of the standards themselves is a utilitarian
language linked to business and the economy. The ISLLC standards
contain a largely noneducation vocabulary with terms like “alignment,”
“strategic planning,” “operational procedures,” “core technology,”
“entrepreneurally,” and “marketing strategies” predominating. How
words and metaphors come to orient professional practice is a research
agenda that is still in its infancy in education.
The exam reinforces a practice devoid of critical thought and is
focused largely on smoothing over conflict and contradictions with
public relations techniques. The following is an answer in the exam
bulletin that was considered exemplary.
GARY L. ANDERSON
120

The broad based issues the school must resolve are in the areas of
communication and public relations, . . .
There is a need for communication and p.r . . .
Whenever there is a letter writing campaign, this issue as a public
relations concern must be addressed . . . or a domino effect will likely
occur. (A single letter from a parent concerned about the school’s use
of cooperative learning was included in the sample exercise.)
The public at large also needs to be educated. Although the PTA is an
effective arm of the school, there needs to be budgetary line items allot-
ted to parent training. (p. 13)
Exemplary answers are generally defensive, reactive, and have a deficit
view of low-income communities.
Learning to Put the Right “Spin” on Answers
The notion that professionals have espoused theories and theories-in-
use that are seldom isomorphic is not news. This is a basic premise
behind why many professional education programs teach reflective
approaches to professional practice. However, as I have described else-
where, a major role of administrators is to legitimate their organiza-
tions to multiple constituencies (Anderson, 1990). In the case of
educational administrators, they must legitimate not only their own
organization, but also an institution—public education—that is cur-
rently in crisis. This legitimation role, which requires different dis-
courses of legitimation for different constituencies (central office,
faculty, parents, community, media, etc.) produces a discourse similar
to that of presidential candidates who use language in such a way as to
not offend any particular constituency.
Thus, administration programs increasingly are in the business of
providing future administrators with “safe” discourses that will not
offend pluralist interest groups. However, as Schattschneider (1975)
has pointed out, “the flaw in the pluralist heaven is that the heavenly
chorus sings with a strong upper-class accent” (p. 35). Some con-
stituencies within a pluralist political framework have more power
than others, and expanding participation to wider groups, such as stu-
dents and communities, threatens the force field of power that main-
tains a particular status quo and often leads to a greater recognition of
interests that are in conflict (Schattschneider, 1975). Administrators
are seldom rewarded for expanding the scope of participation, unless
it can be done in such a way that it does not result in a significant shift
in power relations. At the same time, the legitimacy of public schools
requires discourses of democracy and equity, just as they require
EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION IN THE NEW ECONOMY
121

discourses that reflect scientific, research-based practices and reforms
that can socially engineer increased student outcomes.
Given the nature of these demands on educational administrators,
the gap between rhetoric and practice is viewed as necessary. With
their fingers in the political wind, administrators are taught to seek the
path of least resistance, rather than take risks. The ambiguities,
ambivalences, and contradictions that run through the standards also
run through the exemplary responses to the exam questions. Thus, it
is acceptable to espouse an explicit public relations approach to com-
munity “buy in” for decisions largely made elsewhere, while simulta-
neously calling for community participation in decision making.
None of the answers throughout all of the sample questions in the
bulletin, including those that were exemplary, showed any indication
that any respondent had read any professional literature. Not a single
author was alluded to, much less cited in the responses. Occasional
references are made to specific instructional programs like Reading
Recovery or general approaches like cooperative learning, but there is
little indication that there are important conceptual debates over
instructional methods, approaches to school governance, or the role
of schools in society. There is no indication that any of these future
educational leaders read anything beyond technical manuals and
highly condensed administrative textbooks. One of the respondents
lost points because the scorer felt that “throughout, responses are
weakened by suggestions for solutions that are outside the principal’s
control (emphasis added), specifically the suggestions to redistrict and
to increase the staff ” (p. 48). Clearly, reading reports by the
Children’s Defense Fund on how the national budget neglects chil-
dren would be a waste of time for aspiring principals, or seeing one’s
self as an advocate for policies outside the narrow confines of one’s
school would be overstepping the limits of one’s role. The implica-
tions for certification and graduate degrees in educational administra-
tion, if these exams drive the curriculum, are depressing. The notion
that well-educated individuals with a commitment to democratic val-
ues should lead our schools is replaced by the notion of cohorts of glib
technocrats who have a brief, clear, and “convincing” answer to any
problem.
From Public Relations to School–Community Alliances
Most research and writing in educational administration today adopt,
either explicitly or implicitly, the image of the business CEO as the
prototype of the effective educational leader. However, other proto-
types exist. For instance, Martin Luther King drew on the social
GARY L. ANDERSON
122

organization that existed among African Americans in churches and
other community organizations where they congregated. Educational
administrators have no problem with school–community “partner-
ships” defined as local businesses, but tend to shy away from partner-
ships with local communities. Crowson and Boyd (1999) are eloquent
on this point:
The need to preserve strong norms of professional discretion against
private-regarding parents and narrow-minded communities was a theme
as early as 1932, in the work of Willard Waller. Generations of school
administrators in the U.S. have been trained around the dangers of los-
ing managerial control to the “politics of their communities.” (p. 11)
However, recent scholarship is documenting a growing alliance between
school administrators and community organizing groups, such as
ACORN, the Industrial Areas Foundation, and other Inter-Faith
groups (Gold et al., forthcoming; Shirley, 1997, 2002). Administrators
obviously cannot work outside the system as King did, but they can
build alliances with communities.
This new scholarship on community organizing for school reform
distinguishes what Shirley (1997) calls accomodationist forms of
parental involvement from transformational forms of parent engagement.
Most current approaches to school–community relations are school cen-
tered and accommodate parents through involvement rather than using
them as a resource that can challenge and transform schools through
authentic engagement that can lead to long-term improvement.
Unfortunately the current paradigm of school administration sees
the surrounding community as a threat rather than as a resource and
ally. Community organizing groups are aimed at building community
capacity so that low-income communities can advocate for what they
need. This can be a powerful network for school administrators to tap
into. Organized communities that are linked to schools have helped
schools get the attention of local political leaders to get access to addi-
tional resources and infrastructure improvements such as bond initia-
tives, after-school programs, more crossing guards, and improved
traffic patterns in school areas. Once administrators realize that local
communities have concerns that overlap with theirs, they are more
willing to take the necessary risks that democratic participation always
entails, such as increased conflict and some loss of power. Schools with
intimate connections to local communities are also in a better position
to build on community “funds of knowledge” (Moll et al., 1992).
In their study of 19 community organizing groups supporting
school reform Gold et al. (2004) found that authentic community
EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION IN THE NEW ECONOMY
123

involvement in the leadership of the school helped to sustain positive
changes in the face of administrative turnover.
In several of the sites we studied, teachers who were working with com-
munity organizing groups became principals in other schools and were
instrumental in developing the next generation of reform educators.
Even when they remained as teachers in the school setting, they would
often play an important role in keeping up strong school/community
connections by “socializing” incoming principals and teachers. In both
cases, the assumptions and practice of these teachers and administrators
changed as they began to value the community/school connection. In
one instance, professionals who considered themselves part of the com-
munity organizing effort moved up to central office positions, bringing
a community-oriented perspective to the district level. (p. 28)
Alliances with community organizations can not only bring benefits to a
school or district, but also bring a form of public accountability lacking
in current reforms directed by distant politicians and business leaders. In
the absence of real influence on their local schools, poor communities
logically turn to the kinds of quick fixes, such as vouchers, that seem to
promise a short-term escape from nonresponsive urban schools.
Conclusion
It is increasingly important that school administrators begin to see them-
selves as advocates for low-income communities rather than paternalistic
leaders with a deficit model of urban children and their parents. In the
current deindustrialized society that fails to provide a living wage for mil-
lions of Americans, low-income parents see fewer options for their chil-
dren. Two options that loom large in poor communities are incarceration
and the military. Zero-tolerance policies in schools and society are viewed
as getting tough without having to do the difficult work of building rela-
tions and trust with communities. Meanwhile our prisons warehouse
2 million Americans who are disproportionately poor and non-white.
Moreover, the Junior Reserve Officers Training Corps (JROTC)
maintains an imposing and growing presence in low-income high
schools. Since a decade ago, the military has experienced a well-
publicized, post-conscription “recruiting crisis.” This crisis has resulted
in an attempt to reach young men and women at a younger age—the
first and second year of high school. During the past decade, the JROTC
budget has more than doubled from $76 million to $156 million.
The number of JROTC high schools has risen from 1,464 to 2,267,
with a 32% increase in enrollment, bringing the number of adolescents
enrolled to 310,358. The most recent defense authorization bill (June
5th 2001) called for the lifting of all caps on JROTC expansion, giving
GARY L. ANDERSON
124

the Corps a green light for expansion into the secondary school system.
(Berlowitz and Long, 2003, p. 169)
The post 9/11 patriotic fervor promoted by the government and
press has added to the recruitment efforts, and the recent No Child
Left Behind legislation contained a little known provision (Section
9528) that requires schools to grant military recruiters access to stu-
dent information and to school grounds and activities. Schools are
threatened with loss of federal funding if they fail to comply.
During the recent Iraq invasion military liaisons and JROTC com-
manders in some schools were complaining to high school principals
about teachers who they felt were not backing the war, leading to sus-
pensions in many cases. At Rio Rancho High School in New Mexico,
a student read an antiwar poem that she had written over the closed
circuit TV system as part of a regular program promoting the high
school’s poetry slam team led by English teacher Bill Nevins. The prin-
cipal received a complaint from the high school Military Liaison who is
also a guidance counselor at the high school and the English teacher
was suspended, ultimately losing his job. The good news is that the
local community, led by active poetry slam supporters and a group of
teachers and community members who call themselves the Alliance for
Academic Freedom, organized a major poetry event in downtown
Albuquerque to raise money for the teacher’s legal defense. The event
was titled “Poetic Justice: Committing Poetry in Times of War.”
As our society becomes more militarized, school administrators’
roles will be increasingly defined as enforcers of policies made over the
heads of local communities. This principal could have defended this
teacher’s academic freedom under Tinker v. Des Moines which protects
the rights of both students and teachers, but chose not to. The pres-
sures on educational administrators to be marketers of schools, image
managers, enforcers of testing regimes, and, at the secondary level, mil-
itary recruiters are profoundly changing their role. Administrator cre-
dentialing programs are still teaching a narrow and depoliticized
curriculum enforced by new national standards that have little to say
about education, much less the pressures on administrators described
above. Only through a reconceptualization of the role as one of advo-
cacy and alliance with local community organizing groups can adminis-
trators amass some authentic power to counter some of these pressures.
References
Anderson, G. L. (1990). Toward a Critical Constructivist Approach to School
Administration: Invisibility, Legitimation, and the Study of Non-Events.
Educational Administration Quarterly, 26, 1, 38–59.
EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION IN THE NEW ECONOMY
125

Anderson, G. L. (2001). Disciplining Leaders. A Critical Discourse Analysis
of the ISLLC National Examination and Performance Standards in
Educational Administration. International Journal of Leadership in
Education 4, 3, 199–216.
Anderson, G. L. (2002). A Critique of the Test for School Leaders.
Educational Leadership, 59, 8, 67–70.
Berliner, D. and B. Biddle (1995). The Manufactured Crisis: Myths, Fraud,
and the Attack On America’s Public Schools. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Berlowitz, M. and N. Long (2003). The Proliferation of JROTC:
Educational Reform or Militarization. In K. Saltman and D. Gabbard
(eds.), Education as Enforcement: The Militarization and Corporatization
of Schools, pp. 163–176. New York: RoutledgeFalmer.
Crowson, R. and W. L. Boyd (1999). Coordinated Services for Children:
Designing Arks for Storms and Seas Unknown. American Educational
Research Journal, 101, 2, 140–179.
Edelman, M. (1978). Political Language: Words that Succeed and Policies that
Fail. New York: Academic Press.
Edelman, M. (1988). Constructing the Political Spectacle. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Gold, E., E. Simon, and C. Brown (forthcoming). A New Conception of
Parent Engagement: Community Organizing for School Reform. In
G. Anderson (ed.), Policy and Politics, Vol. 3. In F. English (ed.),
Handbook of Educational Leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Harley, B. (1999). The myth of Empowerment: Work Organisation,
Hierarchy and Employee Autonomy in Contemporary Australian
Workplaces, Work Employment and Society, 13, 1, March, pp. 41–66.
Kelly, K. (2002). What about the Incubators? www.emperors-clothes.com
MacArthur, J. R. and B. Bagdikian (1993). Second Front: Censorship 
and Propaganda in the Gulf War. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Moll, L. C., C. Amanti, D. Neff, and N. Gonzalez (1992). Funds of
Knowledge for Teaching: Using a Qualitative Approach to Connect
Homes and Classrooms. Theory into Practice, 31, 2, 132–141.
Neuman, S. (June 22, 2003). Lynch Now Networks’ Objective: The
Disputed Facts Don’t Matter. The Hype of the Private’s Rescue Makes
Her Story Rights a Prize. The Los Angeles Times, p. 22.
Schattschneider, E. E. (1975). The Semisovereign People: A Realist’s View of
Democracy in America. Hinsdale, IL: The Dryden Press.
Schemo, D. (July 11, 2003). Questions On Data Cloud Luster of Houston
Schools. The New York Times, p. 1.
School Leaders Licensure Assessment: 1999–2000 Registration Bulletin (1999).
Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service.
Sergiovanni, T. (2000). The Lifeworld of Leadership: Creating Culture,
Community, and Personal Meaning in Our Schools. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Shirley, D. (1997). Community Organizing for Urban School Reform. Austin,
TX: University of Texas.
Shirley, D. (2002). Valley Interfaith and School Reform. Austin, TX:
University of Texas.
GARY L. ANDERSON
126

Chapter 7
The Price for “Free” Market 
Capitalism in Public Schools––or 
How much is Democracy Worth on 
the Open Market?
John Weaver
Ever since the Reagan administration published its report A Nation
At Risk in 1983, the assumption has been that public schools are not
performing at an acceptable economic or intellectual level. What is
needed, the argument goes, is a good old “healthy” dose of competi-
tion that we see in the corporate sector. Parents need choices since
public schools are a monopoly and have no incentive to improve the
services they render to young people. Since the early 1980s, few peo-
ple have questioned this conventional dogma. Why do people in the
United States immediately assume that the public sector is corrupt
while the private, corporate sector is pristine and naturally better? In
this chapter, I want to suggest that the first and foremost reason why
schools have been declining in quality is the ideology of “free” market
capitalism. This ideology has undermined democracy in the United
States, reduced the idea of public schooling to job training, limited
the intellectual development of young people to economic forecasts,
fostered cynicism toward the public sector, and eroded a common
sense of community. All of this has been done in the name of poten-
tial profit and the growing commodification of humans.
Another premise I want to stress in this chapter is highlighted by the
quotation marks I place around the word “free.” The reality of the
“free” market ideology is very different from any theory about capital-
ism. For instance, I accept in theory Joseph Schumpater’s classic asser-
tion that capitalism is a form of creative destruction. That is, capitalism is
constantly rejuvenating itself through the creation of new ways of
“doing business” or new ways to create commodities. This creative

destruction has enabled corporations to transform themselves from a
primarily industrial-based order to one based on global and information
technology services. However, make no mistake: the price of transfor-
mation has not been free. There is nothing free about capitalism when it
pertains to most individuals. The majority of people pay the price of
“free” market capitalism through job displacement, economic insecurity,
and unfair tax policies. Corporations are the only entities that can pro-
claim that the market is free. It is corporations that enjoy tax free years,
hundreds of millions of dollars in incentives from the federal and state
governments, and control of the legal and political systems to make sure
they continue to reap the benefits of a “free” economic system.
The unequal distribution of opportunities under the banner of a
“free” market economy suggests that when the term “free” is used, it
is very limited in scope. “Free” under these terms applies only to the
freedom to sell anything (and in some cases anyone). For those enti-
ties or individuals who find themselves as the seller, the term “free”
implies that they are free from most responsibilities. Under these
terms, only the buyer or the person being commodified is responsible.
If a person finds himself a victim of unethical business practices (which
seems redundant) in a “free” market economy, it is his responsibility
to take action. Usually when a person is a victim of an unethical trans-
action, the traditional response is “buyer beware” or “you should have
known it was a scam.” These replies assume that the seller has no
responsibility to fulfill his or her promise or to meet certain ethical
obligations in a rational, free market economy. The “free” market
economy is by its nature a predatory culture.
In spite of these socially destructive effects of “free” market capital-
ism, public schools accept it out of blind faith, intellectual laziness, and
financial desperation, without asking at what price the public must pay.
A sick dependency has been created between public schools and the
“free” market ideology in which public schools continue to adopt the
corporate ideology only to create deeper and more serious problems.
Public schools, according to Ron Scapp (2003), have accepted the
premise that even though the private sector has created many of the
problems that public schools face, schools must turn to the corpora-
tions for help because “only the . . . corporations can transform educa-
tion, only they can bring back discipline, accountability, and efficiency,
only they can save us (from what they created)” (2003, p. 218).
“Free” Market Capitalism and Predatory Cultures
Peter McLaren coined the phrase “predatory culture” in 1995. A
predatory culture, according to McLaren, is “a field of invisibility—of
JOHN WEAVER
128

stalkers and victims” that is “fashioned mainly and often violently
around the excesses of marketing and consumption” (1995, p. 2).
Predatory culture is a new salvation founded on the principles of con-
sumerism. If you possess the means to purchase whatever your heart
desires in order to achieve happiness, then you are one of the winners
in a predatory culture. However, if you do not possess the means to
purchase things or power, then you are a victim. With the power to
purchase you can appear on Extreme Makeover and remake your life
into the fairy tale you have always dreamed of. Without purchasing
power, the best you can hope for is to be a famous victim, perhaps
making an appearance on Cops or any of the other reality television
shows that exploit the poor to make millions. No matter where we
stand within the predatory culture “food chain,” Martin Heidegger’s
warning, just before he died in 1977, that we are becoming “human
resources” is coming true (1977, p. 18).
A predatory culture views everything and everyone as a potential
commodity to be sold. As cruel as this may sound, it is important to
realize that a predatory culture is not based on coercion but on a will-
ingness to be exploited and used. It is a willful ignorance of dignity
and values beyond one’s market value. Contestants on Survivor are
not coerced into participating on the show. Donald Trump did not go
up to some unwilling souls and proclaim “You’re fired.” No one at
the networks who produce these predatory shows force people to
watch them, although they do spend hundreds of millions of dollars
to entice viewers. In a predatory culture, people volunteer to be
exploited because in the end their exploitation may be exchanged for
riches. Survivor survivors get a million dollars, and even the “losers”
get to appear on David Letterman’s show and all of the morning pro-
grams, while “contestants” get other opportunities such as movie
contracts, television and commercial appearances, and music con-
tracts. The contestants know they are human resources but they
become household, commodified name brands that can earn them
thousands, maybe even millions.
Predatory culture is also about a willful ignorance of more impor-
tant issues that challenge the stability and vitality of democracy. Kobe
Bryant was a prime participant in a predatory culture. The only thing
that sports commentators and legal pundits on Fox News and ESPN
could discuss was who would replace Bryant as the NBA’s marquee
player. Would it be Melo or Bron? There has not been any serious dis-
cussion about allegations of rape or the seriousness of falsely accusing
someone. The only discussion was who would step up and be the
next NBA star to peddle Nike’s latest, sweat-shop made, over-priced
sneakers?
PRICE FOR “FREE” MARKET CAPITALISM
129

Predatory culture is alive and too well. Unfortunately, it is thriving
in schools as well. Corporations have flooded the schools with adver-
tising dollars. Contemporary schools appear in a predatory culture
like a scene straight out of Minority Report where billboards use sen-
sors and lasers to read your eye images and speak directly to you.
Students enter schools and see advertisements in the hallways, sports
facilities, cafeterias, curricula, and on “educational” television pro-
grams. Wherever their eyes focus, there is an advertisement or corpo-
ration speaking directly at them: telling them that they are the future
of capitalism.
Predatory culture is just as overt in schools as it is in the world of
entertainment and official commerce. One does not have to look far
to see how corporations are stalking young people. Eric Schlosser cites
Kids Power Marketing as proclaiming to those corporate predators
interested in the young buyers that they can “discover [their] own
river of revenue at the schoolhouse gates . . . Whether it’s first graders
learning to read or teenagers shopping for their first car, we can guar-
antee an introduction of your product and your company to these
students” (2002, p. 52). If this does not provide you with an oppor-
tunity to pause and think what the future of teaching looks like, then
listen to W. Rossiter, who publishes the Kids Marketing Report, when
he reveals the desires of corporations within schools: “A successful
scheme must have educational value which will help teachers do their
jobs, save the schools money, get the children excited, and make par-
ents happy while still achieving the brand’s strategic objectives”
(Kenway and Bullen, 2001, p. 105; emphasis added). Students, teach-
ers, and parents are prey and the predators are more than willing to
say and do anything to achieve their brand objectives.
Why do corporations want to solicit so early in a person’s life?
Research has shown that a person as young as 6 months old can
identify a logo, and by the age of two brand loyalties can be created
that last a lifetime. Moreover, young people today have a disposable
income of anywhere between 6 and 11 billion dollars each year and
influence the spending of another 130–160 billion dollars each
year. Marketers more than anyone are keenly aware of this spending
power and they want as much of that money as they can get. Schools
simply have become the site where this competition for this income is
played out. Corporations will do anything to get this income even if it
means undermining the basic principles of education. The discourag-
ing part of corporations preying on schools is that school leaders,
teachers, parents, and young people have not resisted these efforts and
assume that anything corporations do for schools is a goodwill
gesture.
JOHN WEAVER
130

“Do You Want Fries with That?” Corporate Curriculum 
Efforts and the End of Thinking in Public Schools
Although it is often not a reality in public schools, there is a long
tradition beginning with John Dewey, George Counts, William Harris,
and other progressives that one of the main purposes of schooling
should be the development of every individual’s intellectual potential.
Dewey believed that this was best achieved by building on the inter-
ests of the child and then connecting those interests to pressing social
issues and needs of the day. If schools would develop the intellectual
faculties of the child, then young people would be prepared to
become active citizens who asked critical questions in a democracy.
Other intellectual traditions also believe in the development of the
critical faculties of all citizens. The Frankfurt tradition, founded in
Germany in the 1920s, is another example. Founded by sociologists
like Max Horkheimer, philosophers like Theodor Adorno, and cul-
tural critics such as Walter Benjamin, the Frankfurt School was con-
vinced that if a democracy were to thrive in the world, it had to
cultivate critical thinking citizens who demanded justice, created
equality, and elevated the intellectual potential of all people. Out of
the efforts of the progressives and the Frankfurt School emerged a
contemporary movement often referred to as critical pedagogy.
Starting with the works of Brazilian educator and activist Paulo Freire
and continuing with the efforts of Henry Giroux, Peter McLaren, Joe
Kincheloe, and Kathleen Weiler, critical pedagogues believe that a
democracy cannot thrive unless public schools encourage students to
become actively involved in issues of justice and equality. The connec-
tions between critical thinking, democracy, and public schools are
threatened by corporations trying to take over the school curriculum
and reduce the opportunities of students to create critical thinking pow-
ers that permit young people to question the inequities of the world and
the many ways in which corporations undermine democracy.
On March 24, 1989, the Exxon oil tanker, Valdez, hit the Bligh
Reef spilling its contents into Prince William Sound destroying the
natural habitat and the economic livelihood of the residents of the
Alaskan coastal region. The residents of Prince William Sound suc-
cessfully litigated against Exxon but have yet to see any of the com-
pensation due to them. Instead of honoring its legal obligations,
Exxon continues to appeal the decision hoping to find a sympathetic
judge or jury. In the meantime, Exxon has found it within its corpo-
rate heart to create a new public  curriculum to help students under-
stand environmental issues. Eric Schlosser reports that within this
curriculum, students can learn that “fossil fuels created few
PRICE FOR “FREE” MARKET CAPITALISM
131

environmental problems and that alternative sources of energy were
too expensive” (2002, p. 55). Of course, one would be hard pressed
to convince the residents of Prince William Sound that fossil fuels
were not an environmental problem. The goal of this new curriculum
is to reconstruct the image of Exxon from a company that is environ-
mentally reckless and uncooperative to one that is environmentally
friendly. If students are fed such outrageous claims as fossil fuels are
harmless, alternative energy sources are expensive, and teachers do
not demand that their students develop critical thinking faculties, then
Exxon will never have to worry about paying the damages done to the
Alaskan people because it will be easy to find a dim-witted judge or
ignorant jury pool who can be convinced that oil slicks really do help
the natural habitat, and in the long run, oil spills are beneficial to the
economy.
Overt efforts to strip the public school curriculum of any serious
intellectual content is not limited to Exxon, now ExxonMobil. Donna
Haraway in her book Primate Visions (1989) notes that after “years of
intense media focus on the system of international oil profits and pol-
itics and on the ‘energy crisis,’ ” Gulf Oil company decided to hit the
Public Relations tour and associate itself to environmental issues. In
its new found support of environmental causes, Gulf concluded that
“no thinking person can share in the destruction of anything whose
value he understands . . . [Gulf’s a]ssociation with the National
Geographic Society . . . is only one aspect of [its] lively concern for
the environment” (1989, p. 135). Not to be outdone, the American
Coal Foundation produced a curriculum that suggested to students
that “the earth could benefit rather than be harmed by increased car-
bon dioxide” (Schlosser, 2002, p. 55). While young people are learn-
ing about the benevolence and benefits of oil and coal companies, and
learning to evolve because there is less oxygen and more carbon diox-
ide in the air, teachers need to begin to ask how public schools can
overcome the growing crisis of thinking. How can teachers overcome
the overt efforts to control how young people think. Corporations are
all for critical thinking skills when it comes to calculating how much
change a customer gets if they give you $5.32 when their bill is $4.82,
or when a customer asks a perplexing question and the employee is
able to answer correctly without summoning a manager. However,
when it comes to such critical issues as labor rights, livable wages, or
general questions of equality in a democracy, corporations much
rather feed young people propaganda about the benefits of fossil fuels
and carbon dioxide. It is imperative that school leaders, parents,
teachers, and students begin to take back the curriculum and revital-
ize the dreams of Dewey, Adorno, and Freire in order to ensure that a
JOHN WEAVER
132

democracy is left in good, active hands as each new generation
graduates. Without critically thinking young people, this world will
not be for the people, by the people, and of the people but will
remain for the corporations, by the corporations, and of the corporations,
and individuals will be reduced to “employees” whose most pressing
issue in life will be to ask whether a customer “wants fries with that”
or not.
“Taco Bell again for Lunch? Cool!” Fast Food 
Goes to School
I suppose I should start this section with a disclaimer. I grew up out-
side of Philadelphia which means I love greasy, fatty cheesesteaks and
New York–style pizza. Living in Georgia now, I have traveled two and
half hours to eat a real Philly cheesesteak in Jacksonville, Florida. I am
also a Mountain Dew drinker and have never been on a diet nor will
ever become a vegetarian. In spite of these culinary habits, I believe
school cafeteria menus are becoming dangerous health risks for young
people.
The American School Food Service Association reports “that about
30 percent of the public high schools in the United States offer
branded fast food” (Schlosser, 2002, p. 56). Leading the way in this
onslaught of the taste buds of the young are Taco Bell, Pizza Hut, and
Burger King. Eating at these restaurants once in a while represents no
health problems; however, if students eat this food three or five times
a week, there are obvious health concerns. Recently, the major news
outlets ran a story about a man who ate nothing but McDonald’s food
for a month. The doctors monitoring his health during that month
noted that he gained 25 lb, his cholesterol increased 35 points, and his
general health was in complete decline. What are the health risks for
young people if fast food is available to them five days a week, one
hundred and eighty days a year? Even if you are a conscientious par-
ent, forbid them to eat the fast food, and pack them a lunch, what
safeguards are there that young people will not take their own money,
dump the packed lunch, and eat Taco Bell everyday? If you are a
young person and fast food restaurants target young people with hip,
new wave advertising making their food look like the key to being
accepted by other young people, what food would you select everyday
or most days in your school cafeteria?
The health risks do not stop at fast food. Coke and Pepsi are in
almost every school either in machines or at the lunch line. A recent
report from the U.S. Department of Agriculture suggested that “con-
sumption of carbonated drinks rose by more than 450 percent, from
PRICE FOR “FREE” MARKET CAPITALISM
133

10.8 gallons . . . on average in 1946 to 49.2 gallons . . . in 2000”
(Reuters News Service, 2004, p. 1). In the same Reuters news report,
doctors suggested that there is a connection between this rise of car-
bonated drink intake and the rise of esophageal cancer.
How are fast food restaurants and soda companies able to gain such
a dominant presence in public schools? Other cafeteria food served in
public schools are required to meet the federal dietary standards, but
fast food restaurants skirt these standards because they are served à la
carte. As a result, fast food is not held to the same standards as other
cafeteria food. If a school administrator is strapped for funds and can
save money by serving fast food, what will the administrator do?
Obviously, they would cut corners and skirt the dietary standards of
the U.S. government. Fast food restaurants are interested in serving
to young people as soon as possible because they are interested in cre-
ating loyal lifelong customers. Once again we see how the desires and
profits of corporations are placed above the well-being of individuals.
Not only does this issue present a serious health concern for young
people if they are eating this food more than once a week, but it also
serves as a primary case of how corporations are eroding democracy.
By finding loop holes around federal dietary standards, fast food
restaurants undermine the ability of the U.S. government to enforce
the laws, thereby, eroding trust in the ability of a democracy to func-
tion in an effective and equitable manner.
Do as I Say Not as I Do: Corporate Irresponsibility and 
the Lack of Character Education
Character education is very popular in elementary schools throughout
the United States. It teaches children about the need to be honest,
patriotic, and responsible. Many corporations are involved in develop-
ing character education curriculum, but in reality it is not America’s
children who need character education. It is American corporations.
American corporations are the most irresponsible and deceptive
organizations in our society. Harsh words indeed, but let me provide
some examples to argue the case.
There is a general lack of responsibility of corporations to the com-
mon good. While more and more is being demanded of the individ-
ual in the United States, corporations are walking away from any
obligation to the public. According to Joe Kincheloe, corporations in
1950 paid 26 percent of the income tax in this nation; by the early
twenty-first century, this number is down to 8 percent (2002, p. 110).
David Cay Johnston in his book Perfectly Legal (2003) suggests that
this percentage is even as low as 7.4 percent. To make matters even
JOHN WEAVER
134

clearer, from 1996 to 2000, 60 percent of American corporations
did not pay taxes at all. How do corporations skirt responsibility
while democracy pays the price? One way was revealed on National
Public Radio’s Market Place in March 2004. Corporations conduct
phony purchasing scams that on paper look like they are not making
profits when they are. One American company recently leased the
trolley cars from Dortmund, Germany for 150 million dollars while
another leased the sewer pipes from Bochum, Germany for over
100 million dollars. How does one lease sewer pipes? On paper it is
easy. The company transferred 150 million to Dortmund officials
one day, and the same officials wired the money back the next day
earning a hefty 10 million dollar transaction fee for the city of
Dortmund. On paper it appears that the American corporation spent
150 million on trolley cars, and therefore, it is not considered part of
the profits of the company and is not taxable income. In reality,
the company only spent 10 million dollars, making essentially a
140 million, nontaxable profit.
There are other ways by which corporations avoid monetary
responsibility for the well-being of communities. In the Cleveland
area, city schools lose millions of dollars each year because of tax
abatements given out to corporations. Corporations go to the leaders
of Cleveland and threaten to move to suburban areas like Berea,
Solon, or Cleveland Heights if the city does not grant them tax abate-
ments. In Georgia, the Boeing corporation was thinking of building a
new plant near Savannah. Within a few days, the governor’s office was
willing to provide an incentive plan of approximately 480 million dol-
lars to Boeing. Within weeks of the announcement of this plan, the
governor announced that major changes had to be made in the
HOPE scholarship program that helps thousands of Georgians to go
a state university for free. When it comes to finding money for a cor-
poration, the money is available, but when it comes to the education
of young people, the money disappears.
Corporations are excellent at constructing images detailing their
benevolence and commitment to people but in reality corporations
are irresponsible in their actions. Take R. J. Reynolds as a prime exam-
ple. In the recent past, R. J. Reynolds ran a commercial in which an
employee from one of its subsidiaries, Kraft Food, is highlighted. This
good Samaritan works in Milwaukee but commutes to Chicago once
a week to help an urban high school student who tries to learn in a
school that is underfunded. The student proclaims that he wants to be
a teacher so he can do the same thing that his tutor is doing for
him. No one would disparage the efforts of this Kraft employee, but
one must ask why R. J. Reynolds is putting out such commercials
PRICE FOR “FREE” MARKET CAPITALISM
135

at this time. While R. J. Reynolds is trying to cultivate the image that
they really care about social issues and are good “corporate citizens,”
they are undermining the very things they proclaim to uphold. 
R. J. Reynolds has spent millions of dollars in research and advertising
campaigns to deny that there is a direct causal link between cigarette
smoking and cancer. They have not done this because they are good
Samaritans but rather because they have spent the last three decades
trying to avoid responsibility for their reckless actions in creating an
addictive product. Through the Tobacco Institute, R. J. Reynolds and
other cigarette makers have conducted their own research not to dis-
miss the connection between smoking and cancer but to create “sci-
entific evidence” to cast a reasonable doubt that there is a clear
connection. Recently, this claim has not been accepted in courts, but
to this date corporations are yet to admit that there is a causal link
between smoking and cancer. Is this an act of responsibility? Hardly.
It is the act of a corporation trying to survive no matter how many
people it puts at risk.
R. J. Reynolds is hardly the only company that prefers image mak-
ing over responsibility. In 2000, it was discovered that Firestone tires
on Ford Explorers could explode under certain conditions causing
serious harm and death. Because of the potentially faulty tires, there
were reported deaths in Venezuela and numerous states in America.
In Venezuela, some Firestone executives faced jail time; in the United
States, Firestone simply blamed Ford. The shirking of responsibility
did not stop there. Instead of taking any responsibility, Firestone did
what most American corporations do in a scandal—create a new
image. Firestone Tires, a Japanese-owned company, is now called
Bridgestone-Firestone.
What do these scandals and cases of irresponsibility have to do with
schools? Each time a corporation is able to skirt responsibility for pay-
ing local and state taxes, it limits the amount of dollars that govern-
ments can spend on public schools and higher education. These cases
of corporate irresponsibility also have to do with all citizens, not just
teachers and students in public schools. While schools are under-
funded, programs for the poor are cut, and troops risk their lives in
Afghanistan and Iraq, who is being held responsible? It is easy to make
a commercial suggesting a corporation supports public education or
supports “our” troops, but when it comes to making a real commit-
ment to individuals, corporations are no where to be found. In a
democracy everyone has to be responsible for the common good. If
one entity is able to avoid responsibility, then we no longer live in a
democracy but in a plutocracy where the interests of a few dominate
that of the many.
JOHN WEAVER
136

The Amorality of Corporate America
American corporations are neither moral nor immoral. They are
amoral. If lying or creating a new image will earn a corporation more
profits, the corporation will do it. If telling the truth will earn the trust
of people, corporations will tell the truth as long as it remains prof-
itable. Whatever it takes to earn more profits, corporations will do it.
Morality is not the issue. Another reason why corporations are amoral
is because they are things. Often the term corporate “citizen” is used
to describe the corporate role in society. However, a corporation is a
thing: it has no individual rights, it is not an organic being. Given the
amorality of corporations, it is important to ask if, we as parents,
teachers, and school leaders, want to give corporations any opportu-
nity to influence our children. It is important that young people have
a moral foundation to navigate in a world that can be disheartening.
It is equally important to recognize that corporations are unable to
provide this foundation. The only foundation that corporations can
provide is one based on consumption.
There are plenty of examples from the corporate world to make this
case. When I have free time from reading and teaching, I usually spend
time on the computer playing games, keeping up to date with the lat-
est news about West Virginia University football, or communicating
with my friends. Every time I enter one of the various Internet sites, a
pop-up ad appears. Most of these advertisements are harmless: “Pick
which one is Catherine Zeta–Jones and be a winner.” I usually pick the
wrong one on purpose, and still win. Imagine that. But there are a few
pop-up ads that demonstrate the amorality of Internet corporations.
There is one pop-up ad that asks whether George Bush should be
elected or not and there is this most offensive one that asks whether or
not we should pull our troops out of Iraq. It does not matter which
one you select, you always “win.” That is, you win the opportunity to
spend your money on something you do not necessarily need. The
amoral dimension is that corporations take these serious issues and
make money off of them. Kenneth Saltman (2003) demonstrates that
these pop-up advertisements are not the only examples of amoral cor-
porations. Read the words from this Alta Vista advertisement:
Who needs elves when you have AltaVista Shopping.com? At AltaVista
Shopping.com you can research products you know nothing about:
stereos, . . . Pokemon toys, for example. There are 126 different
Pokeman characters and over 2,000 licensed Pokeman toys on the mar-
ket. Only one of them is going to win you most-favored parent status
for the coming year. We can help you find out which. (Saltman, 2003,
pp. 12–13)
PRICE FOR “FREE” MARKET CAPITALISM
137

AltaVista has found a way to reduce parenting to a competition to win
the hearts of their children. They have turned love into a competition
that is no longer unconditional but rather predicated on how well the
parents shop for the children. Are these the values we want to teach
our young people? Teach young people that Pokemon is the pathway
to familial love, and saving 50 dollars is more important than the lives
of Iraqis and marines and soldiers? As parents, teachers, school lead-
ers, and students, we need to reevaluate the presence of corporations
in our schools. The foundations of our democracy and the values of
our young people depend on it.
Re-Creating Public Schools beyond the Corporate Image
If we are to take the encroachments of corporations into public
schools seriously, there are at least four things we can do to limit their
influence. The first is to recognize that corporations are not evil or
corrupt by nature. Rather, corporations have become accustomed to
citizens who demand nothing from them. As citizens in a democracy
and participants in public schools, we need to rearticulate certain
demands and expectations that we expect from corporations. If cor-
porations do not meet these demands, then it has to be known that
they will not be permitted to function in our schools or even in our
society. Corporations only have the rights that we the citizens grant
them. Originally, corporations were granted charters by the colonial
powers and later the states. We need to return to this way of “doing
business” and revoke the charters of those corporations that do not
comply.
Second, there is a need for every school to develop a curriculum
that incorporates critical media literacy. Corporations understand the
power and persuasiveness of popular culture, and they use it to their
advantage to suggest that whatever they peddle is cool and a necessary
component in life. Few public schools, however, see the importance in
developing a curriculum that permits students the opportunity to cri-
tique and understand the impact of the media on their lives. Critical
media literacy not only has to give students an opportunity to critique
what they see and hear in the media, but also to learn how to use the
technology of media to develop their own images and identities.
Schools need to incorporate projects into their curriculum that range
from the use of video cameras, television cameras, radios, and adver-
tising techniques.
Third, teachers, students, and parents need to reclaim the public
sector. Public schools, especially, should not be an area where corpo-
rations can take advantage of their financial desperation in order to
JOHN WEAVER
138

use public space as a proving ground to create future consumers. The
public sector needs to reclaim its legacy as a space where people come
to express ideas and participate in a democracy. Corporations should
not be invited into this space because they are not citizens of a com-
munity; only the owners, managers, and employees of a corporation
should be permitted in this space as equal members of a democracy.
The public sector should also be reclaimed as a space where individu-
als can turn to in times of need and come to depend on basic social
services that guarantee that our society will remain a humane society.
Fourth, in her brilliant book Failure to Hold, Julie Webber has
made the case that schools are no longer a place where students can
create experiences that prepare them for a life in a democracy. Instead,
schools have become targets for containment and consumption.
Young people are labeled as potential killers and as a result schools
have become more like prisons than democratic incubators. Students
are probed, tested, searched, frisked, locked down, and interrogated.
When they are treated as humans with individual rights, it is usually as
consumers. Corporations are permitted to enter into the schools, train
the students on how to become good consumers, and prepare them
for a life of satisfying consumption. Consumption is an inevitable part
of American life, but when it becomes the driving force that defines a
person’s identity, there is something missing in the way young people
grow up. Schools need to become places where students learn to live
in a democracy. Their freedoms need to be restored and the current
policies of containment need to be abandoned before another rash of
violent reactions surface. If schools do not reclaim their space from
corporations and end policies of containment and enforcement, we
may be witnessing the creation of a generation of young people who
do not know what it means to live a democracy. As teachers and par-
ents, we need to ask what is more important: corporate profits or
democratic ideals? Hopefully we will begin to restore our democratic
ideals again and end the rise of oligarchic forces.
References
Haraway, D. (1989). Primate Visions: Gender, Race, and Nature in the World
of Modern Science. New York: Routledge.
Heidegger, M. (1977). The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays.
New York: Harper Torchbooks.
Johnston, D. (2003). Perfectly Legal: The Covert Campaign to Rig Our Tax
System to Benefit the Super Rich and Cheat Everybody Else. New York:
Portfolio.
Kenway, J. and E. Bullen (2001). Consuming Children: Education–
Entertainment– Advertising. Buckingham, England: Open University Press.
PRICE FOR “FREE” MARKET CAPITALISM
139

Kincheloe, J. (2002). The Sign of the Burger: McDonald’s and the Culture of
Power. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
McLaren, P. (1995). Critical Pedagogy and Predatory Culture: Oppositional
Politics in a Postmodern Era. New York: Routledge.
Reuters News Service (May 18, 2004). Too Much Soda may Raise Cancer
Risk. MSNBC.com, pp. 1–2.
Saltman, K. (2003). Introduction. In K. Saltman and D. Gabbard (eds.)
Education as Enforcement: The Militarization and Corporatization of
Schools, pp. 1–23, New York: RoutledgeFalmer.
Scapp, R. (2003). Taking Command: The Pathology of Identity and Agency
in Predatory Culture. In K. Saltman and D. Gabbard (eds.), Education
as Enforcement: The Militarization and Corporatization of Schools,
pp. 213–221, New York: RoutledgeFalmer.
Schlosser, E. (2002). Fast Food Nation: The Dark Side of the All-American
Meal. New York: Perennial.
Webber, Julie (2003). Failure to Hold: The Politics of School Violence. Boulder:
Rowman and Littlefield.
JOHN WEAVER
140

Chapter 8
Bad News for Kids: Where Schools 
Get Their News for Kids
Carl Bybee
The test of the morality of a society is what it does for its children. 
Dietrich Bonhoeffer (1906–1945), German theologian
As parents, teachers, civic leaders, and citizens, we all want the
children we work with, as well as our own children, to grow up to be
responsible adults engaged with the future of our nation and govern-
ment. We want them to be good citizens, as well as good parents and
good neighbors. And we do not want them to be poor. We want them
to be at least economically comfortable, if not financially successful.
And these are all the reasons why we send them to school, to the
best schools we can find and create. We believe that learning—
the acquisition of knowledge—is one of the greatest stepping-stones
that make all of these hopes possible.
When it comes to raising citizens, we expect that our schools will
provide our children with the knowledge of our government’s ideals,
its workings, its formative documents, and its history, good and some-
times not so good, as we have struggled for freedom, justice, and lib-
erty for all. And we also expect that our schools will help our children
grow in their awareness of how all of this knowledge connects up with
the events of the day—current events—or as most of us adults call it,
“the news.” What good is a democracy, where the people rule, if the
people have little idea about what is going on in their city, their state,
their nation, or the world around them?
But there is a great mixed message at work in these hopes. Where
once many parents and educators saw the job of raising responsible,
engaged citizens and well-trained and innovative employees as
compatible efforts, these two goals are increasing viewed as in
conflict.

After more than two decades of economic turmoil, declining for-
tunes for the middle class and the working poor, a fear has been
unleashed, a fear backed up by reams of statistics, that the link
between getting a good education and getting a good job, or any job
at all, is falling apart.
Communities, after being battered throughout the 1990s by the
aftermath of NAFTA, GATT, the WTO, FTAA, and other interna-
tional “free-trade” agreements, have seen high-quality manufacturing
shipped out of the United States and low-paying service jobs being
offered as the primary replacement. Wal-Mart, temporary employ-
ment agencies, and the prison/security industry are emerging as the
largest private sector employers in the nation. And then these same
communities have had yet another economic shock. After a decade of
trying to adjust to the “realities” of the new “global” economy by
joining the stampede to seduce high-quality, family-wage technology
industries to relocate into their industrial parks, often through massive
tax breaks and job-training subsidies, these communities have learned
a new word in the “global economy” vocabulary: “outsourcing.”
Now not only has the United States been hemorrhaging manufac-
turing jobs, but service jobs and even professional jobs in the technology
sector are also being “outsourced.” These are jobs that corporations
and a now heavily corporate-influenced national government had told
Americans were their ace in the hole in the new worldwide game of
cowboy capitalism. Our advantage would be in our unique position
to hold onto the jobs at the top of the job food chain—the jobs
in technology and research—the jobs of the information age. We
were told.
With a growing fear about being able to put food on the table and
pay medical bills, much less afford rising tuition rates or pay for the
basics of K-12 education, parents and educators have become much
more susceptible to the arguments being advanced that we must
rethink the mission of schools—seeing them less as concerned with
citizenship, and more concerned with training our children to be
survivors in a world of cutthroat economic competition.
The long-running Survivor television series can be thought of as a
bellwether, a cultural indicator, of the widespread character of this
fear, turning fear into a strange new form of entertainment that preys
upon our social and economic insecurity while encouraging us to
accept and even cheer on, or at least accept, the return of a new age of
social Darwinism. Programs like The Apprentice play to this same fear,
except that instead of normalizing this brave new world from the
point of view of every man and every woman struggling to be the last
“man” standing, they invite the audience to identify with the sadistic
CARL BYBEE
142

power of the corporation. For the millions of Americans whose own
jobs teeter on the brink of extinction, it allows them to identify with
Donald Trump, the corporate lord, tycoon, and entrepreneur extraor-
dinaire whose signature line has become “You’re fired!”
The fact is that the message calling for turning our schools more
into corporate job-training centers than institutions concerned with
promoting and preserving engaged democratic citizens is being deliv-
ered by the same corporations that have been involved in or supported
sending quality jobs overseas. And these are the same corporations
that have managed to reduce their own tax support of our states and
federal government, forcing governments to raise taxes on the middle
class and working poor or slash education and social services. Yet this
vital link has been and continues, for the most part, to be a neglected
message in the mainstream news media—a news media that, not sur-
prisingly, is also increasingly dominated by more and more concen-
trated corporate ownership.
And so as schools refocus, out of fear and corporate pressure, on
vocational education (consider my daughter in third grade doing
math assignments based on making change at a fast food restaurant),
the idea of democracy as people power in the interest of the people is
withering away and is discussed less and less, if at all, in the news
media and in schools themselves.
At the same time, even as many parents, educators, and civic leaders
cling to the dual responsibility of schools to raise democratic citizens
and contributing workers in our society, there is a small but important
hypocrisy at work.
Still clinging to our belief in the basic goodness of our nation and
the moral power of democratic society, we want our children to be
informed about the current events of the day and the impact of these
events in our neighborhoods and around the world. After the
of September 11 attacks, it was a heartfelt cry across the country,
when the news media asked, speaking for many Americans, “Why?”
“Why us?” “How could these attackers, these countries hate us with
such a deadly passion?” Yet these are questions that neither our
schools nor our news media had given us any way of answering.
And this is the hypocrisy that we must also confront when we begin
to question what our children are learning about current events in our
schools. The mainstream media have been failing our country in their
coverage of issues and events that impact our daily lives in critical
ways. This includes their declining coverage of world events at exactly
the same time we are being told we live in a global economy to the
lack of coverage of the growing divide in the United States between
the rich and the poor, to the degradation of work, to the rising tide of
WHERE SCHOOLS GET THEIR NEWS FOR KIDS
143

poverty, to declining access to health care and shelter, to the with-
drawal of funds from states and federal government, to responsibly
foster the humane social and economic development of all citizens,
and to the continuing rise of unchecked corporate power. Business
Week is more likely to run a cover story on “Class Warfare” or “Do
Corporations Have too Much Power?”—cover stories than they have
run recently—than our local or regional newspapers, much less our
local, regional, or national television news programs.
Our hypocrisy is that, as adults, we are following the news, “cur-
rent events,” less and less every year and we are not demanding that
the news industry cover the stories that shape our daily lives in critical
ways. Even a growing number of journalists not only admit to the
problems but also accept responsibility for what they see as a failure of
the press as a democratic institution.
Consider the “Statement of Concern” signed by hundreds of jour-
nalists, academics, and media professionals from around the world as
members of the Committee of Concerned Journalists:
This is a critical moment for journalism in America. While the craft in
many respects has never been better—consider the supply of information
or the skill of reporters—there is a paradox to our communications age.
Revolutionary changes in technology, in our economic structure and in
our relationship with the public, are pulling journalism from its traditional
moorings. As audiences’ fragment and our companies diversify, there is a
growing debate within news organizations about our responsibilities as
businesses and our responsibilities as journalists. Many journalists feel a
sense of lost purpose. There is even doubt about the meaning of news,
doubt evident when serious journalistic organizations drift toward opin-
ion, infotainment and sensation out of balance with the news.
The cost of the media and the schools in not raising citizens is not
just a decline in the level of “civility” in public meetings, debates, and
lines at grocery stores, but that the idea of democracy will become
more and more of an empty rhetorical term than an active vision of
self-governance that places human rights and social justice at the top
of its list of moral priorities. North Korea, as well as the United States,
considers itself a “democratic” society.
This chapter is about what happens to our children after the school
bus picks them up, or they ride or walk to school, or we drop them off
at school on our way to work. It is a chapter about the state of current
events education in our schools. It is not a chapter about individual
stories they might see or read, but more of an essay about where the
“news for kids” comes from and the chances they have of making
sense of the world they actually live in from this news.
CARL BYBEE
144

In the first section of this chapter, I take up what we might call the
first generation of news products for children, primarily The Weekly
Reader and Scholastic Magazine. The second section addresses the
newer players in the news for kids game, primarily television news
programs, including the now famous or infamous, depending on your
point of view: Channel One, owned and operated by the media giant
Primedia.
The question I attempt to answer throughout this chapter is “Is
this what we need?” Is this introduction to the news of the day in
schools enough? Enough to counterbalance their 24/7 exposure to
media images, information, and ideas from programs calling
themselves everything from “news,” to “entertainment,” to “reality
shows,” to “docu-dramas” and “sit-coms,” not to mention computer
games, based on “real” world events. Especially when the same cor-
porations are involved in producing and integrating their news
programs, they are also involved in producing the 24/7 engulfing of
children with entertainment media and marketing.
In the summer of 2004, The Television Critics Association voted
The Daily Show with Jon Stewart the fake news show aired on Comedy
Central, for the Outstanding Achievement in News and Information
for providing something that the critics felt mainstream news was
missing—“a core of truth.”
Given the sources of news for children and youth in school and the
overt and covert mission of those news sources, what are the chances
they are delivering a similar “core of truth” capable of engaging our
children in a participatory as opposed to a corporate democratic
culture?
The Producers of News for Kids: The First Generation
Up until a little over ten years ago, providing “current events” or
“news” for kids was primarily of interest to only two corporate players.
For the educational publishing industry, it was clearly seen as a
small niche market and was dominated by The Weekly Reader
Corporation (WRC), now a subsidiary of WRC Media, Inc. and
Scholastic, Inc.
The WRC traces its history back to over a hundred years to its first
publication of Current Events in 1902 viewed as a newspaper for mid-
dle and high school students. Their Weekly Reader newspaper was
added in 1928, gradually expanding to seven grade-specific editions.
First incorporated as the Education Press Company in 1907, it
was reincorporated under various names and sold to various owners,
including Wesleyan University, in the 1960s to Xerox, in the early 1990s
WHERE SCHOOLS GET THEIR NEWS FOR KIDS
145

to K-III (now known as Primedia), and sold as part of WRC Media,
Inc. to Ripplewood Holdings in 1999.
During the 1991–1999 period when the WRC was owned by 
K-III, it gained national attention over a study published in the 1995
American Journal of Public Health. The study compared the number
of antitobacco articles published in The Weekly Reader before and after
the sale to K-III, which at the time was also the parent company of
tobacco giant RJR Nabisco. The results revealed a dramatic decrease
(62–24 percent) in anti-tobacco articles and the publication of articles
such as “Do Cigarettes Have a Future?” that focused on, without
acknowledging it, the tobacco industries’ “Freedom of Choice”
campaign.
Ripplewood, according to Hoovers Online Business Profiles, is a
private equity investment firm established in 1995 with managing
“more than $2.5 billion in capital, and invests in automotive retail,
food manufacturing, industrial manufacturing, banking, entertain-
ment, and technology. Ripplewood entered the chemical industry
when it bought Kraton, the polymers business of Shell Chemicals
(part of Shell Oil). In an effort to expand operations in Japan, the
company bought Shinsei Bank (formerly Long-Term Credit Bank of
Japan) and ailing recording label Nippon Columbia.” Ripplewood is
making headlines for its success in executing leveraged buyouts in the
Japanese market. Ripplewood Holdings, through its ownership of WRC
Media, claims to reach over 8,000,000 students, 300,000 teachers,
and 60 percent of all public schools in the United States.
Ripplewood appears to epitomize a new vision of what democracy
means, a vision born in the 1980s and perhaps most usefully labeled a
“neoliberal” model of democracy. Neoliberal democracy is defined
primarily by its core belief that “real” democracy is best achieved
through the free-market rather than in the messy process of political
participation. In this neoliberal vision, the media are no longer con-
sidered institutions of public knowledge and debate. Better, in the
1980s FCC Chairman Mark Fowler’s view, to consider television as
just another appliance. In a statement that shocked citizens’ groups
fighting to preserve the responsibility of broadcasters using the public
airwaves to serve the public interest, Fowler said television was just 
“a toaster with pictures.”
In addition, WRC Media also claims to reach 80 percent of schools
with its assessment test division, which has benefited greatly from the
neoliberal mantra of accountability for public but not corporate insti-
tutions, and 52 million school children through its Lifetime Learning
division that specializes in creating sponsored educational materials
distributed “free” to teachers. According to Lifetime Learning, they
CARL BYBEE
146

know “how to link a sponsor’s message to curriculum standards and
create a powerful presence for your message in America’s classrooms
with informative and engaging materials.” WRC Media holdings also
include FACTS.com, a Facts on File news service, and Gareth Stevens
Publishing, a leading publisher of nonfiction books for K-6 libraries.
The Weekly Reader division has recently entered into a joint venture
with The Washington Post to publish Teen Newsweek, the teen version
of the grownup Newsweek with a modest circulation of about
180,000. It is also trying to make the move into television with its
partnership with Kids News in the production of the weekly
Eyewitness News for Kids syndicated program launched in the fall
of 2004.
The other long-time player in the classroom has been Scholastic,
Inc. The Scholastic Publishing Company was founded in 1920 with
the primary purpose of covering high school sports in western
Pennsylvania. The Scholastic was launched in 1922 to focus on litera-
ture and social commentary and targeted at high school English and
history classes. Over the next 80 years, Scholastic added specialty
magazine after specialty magazine, along with grade-appropriate
editions of The Scholastic. By 2003, Scholastic was publishing over
35 classroom magazines with a readership, claimed by corporate
reports, of almost 23 million students in K-12. During the years the
corporation added a national writing awards contest, an arts awards
contest, and moved into the book publishing industry, where it now
ranks among the top ten publishers and distributors of children’s
books in the world, including the wildly profitable Harry Potter series
marketed through nearly every division of the Scholastic corporation.
In the 1940s, Scholastic moved into the school book club business,
at first providing a unique distribution outlet for books published by
other corporations and later serving as enormously powerful distribu-
tion system for its own titles. The various school book clubs, now
numbering 11, were coupled with fund-raising efforts by schools,
which enhanced the value of the Scholastic brand in the schools, and
netted the Scholastic corporation an enormous army of parents and
teachers, working as volunteers, to aggressively market Scholastic
titles.
In the 1950s, Scholastic began to go international, first Scholastic
Canada and then following with the United Kingdom, New Zealand,
Australia, Mexico, India, and Hong Kong.
In the 1960s, Scholastic’s “Lucky Book Club” offered Norman
Bridwell’s Clifford the Big Red Dog, a book that has launched a brand
empire for Scholastic, which now includes books, television series, and
licensed merchandise. In 1997 there were more than 68 Clifford titles
WHERE SCHOOLS GET THEIR NEWS FOR KIDS
147

with 70 million copies in print. The corporation also began moving
into the core curriculum market in the 1960s, which followed with
the development of television, feature film, video, computer software,
and online services.
In the 1970s, Scholastic Productions was created to “extend com-
pany franchises across multiple media.” Scholastic Productions was
renamed Scholastic Entertainment in 1998, producing children’s pro-
gramming and multimedia materials and serves as a worldwide
licenser and marketer of children’s entertainment properties.
In the 1980s, Scholastic moved into the book fair business, even-
tually acquiring Great American Book Fairs, and emerging today as,
according to the corporation, “the largest children’s book fair opera-
tion in the United States,” creating itself a formidable gatekeeper to
entry into children’s book publishing. The corporation also began to
move more aggressively into producing teacher resources, promoting
new technology in the classroom, and establishing its own New Media
division to produce educational software. The Magic School Bus book
series and brand was launched, along with the Baby-Sitters Club book
series and brand. By 1995, Scholastic had partnered with Columbia’s
Tri-Star Home Video to produce a Baby-Sitters Club movie.
The corporation continued its move in the 1980s into specialized
magazines and books for teachers on educational practice and into
core curriculum development. In 1992, Scholastic released the first in
the series of Goosebumps books by R. L. Stine. By 2003, its marketing,
promotion, and distribution system had moved the series, according
to Scholastic, into “the number one children’s book series of all time,
with over 167 titles and 215 million books in print.” In 1993,
Scholastic launched its first web site on AOL and relaunched it as a
stand-alone site in 1996.
In 1994, the Scholastic produced The Magic School Bus premiered
as a weekly series on the Public Broadcasting System. In 1998,
Scholastic sold the series to Fox Kids Network, stepping up their
expansion out of the classrooms and public broadcasting sector into
private sector partnerships.
For Fox it was an opportunity to buy a cheap set of children’s
reruns that would help them meet the letter, if not the spirit, of the
Children’s Television Act of 1990, then receiving some regulatory
attention from Reed Hundt, President Clinton’s appointed FCC
chairman. Over the next few years, Scholastic partnered with
Microsoft, Warner Home Video, DreamWorks Interactive, Fox Home
Video, Paramount Pictures, Oprah’s Book Club, Miramax,
Nickelodeon, HBO, The New York Times, NBC, John F. Kennedy
Center for the Performing Arts, New Line Cinema, New Video,
CARL BYBEE
148

The National Institute on Drug Abuse, The History Channel,
UPS, The Advertising Council, The Declaration of Independence Road
Trip, DreamWorks, The Learning Channel, PBS, MSNBC.COM, and
the National Football League. In the summer of 2003, Scholastic Inc.
launched a 1 million dollar marketing venture for the McDonald’s
Corporation to specifically reach children under the age of 6 through
a mailing to the nation’s largest 22,000 preschool and kindergarten
classrooms. Scholastic’s vice president of business development said,
“Programs like this help us refine the Scholastic database because we
get feedback from the teachers. The feedback tells us that here’s a
teacher open to receiving custom programs from us.” According to
Direct Marketing Business Intelligence, “McDonald’s intent is to
associate its mascot, the clown Ronald McDonald, with preschoolers’
emotions toward learning to read, and to raise awareness of Ronald as
a brand icon among kids.”
Scholastic’s unique marketing system works furiously to maintain
its “educational” brand identity and to solidify its marketing and pro-
motion stronghold in the schools. This is done through the continued
production and distribution of educational materials for students,
teachers, and administrators as well as continuing to link these
in-school promotions to school fund-raising at a time when declining
school operating revenues are increasing schools’ needs for external
funds. And what more pro-education way to raise funds for schools
than to sell books to students and parents and encourage the latter to
buy books (Scholastic distributed books) for their school libraries.
Scholastic also continues to maintain its “educational” brand identity
by sponsoring pro-education, pro-literacy events, such as becoming a
continuing sponsor of The National Teacher of the Year Award
beginning in 1995.
Launching shows like The Magic School Bus on PBS also helped
build its “education” brand identity while garnering awards from
parent and industry groups alike. The PBS “educational seal of approval”
and the low entry costs to airing a program on PBS, then set up
opportunities for moving into much more lucrative commercial slots,
like on the Fox Kids Network. By 1997, Scholastic was well aware of
its powerful position in the in-school marketing world and established
its Scholastic School Group, “a sales, marketing and promotions unit
that combines IPG, Magazines, and Supplementary Publishing . . .
divisions into an unified group that sells to the institutional market.”
In the same year, the marketing world was beginning to take note
of the Scholastic integrated marketing machine. Scholastic
Productions received the 1997 Licensing Industry Merchandizing
Association Award for “Licensing Agency of the Year,” naming
WHERE SCHOOLS GET THEIR NEWS FOR KIDS
149

Goosebumps the “License of the Year.” Scholastic Entertainment
was “awarded the Reggie Award by the Promotion Marketing
Association 
for 
the 
innovative 
Goosebumps/Pepsi/Frito-Lay
Consumer Promotion.” The Goosebumps license also extended to
include other fast food and junk food vendors such as Taco Bell and
Hershey’s chocolate in their “Reading is a Scream” promotion. The
growing childhood obesity epidemic had not quite made it on to front
pages across the nation.
Scholastic continued to win awards for quality children’s products,
such as the 1998 recognition by the NAACP for their I have a Dream
children’s book while acquiring companies like QED, which special-
izes in marketing to schools, selling, according to their promotional
material, “exclusive school databases, school demographic data, and
research and database marketing services.” Scholastic, in 2001, also
moved into the retail store business where Scholastic products can be
seen, promoted, and sold. In 2002, Nelson B. Heller and Associates,
a “leading business-to-business publisher of educational market
newsletters and market research,” formed a partnership with
Scholastic under their Marketing Partners division.
While clearly not a megamedia corporation on the scale of Disney
or Time Warner, Scholastic with annual revenues in the 2-billion-
dollars-a-year range shares many similarities with the operating system
of the Disney Corporation: synergistically linked divisions, cross-
promotions, careful maximization of licensing opportunities, multiple
outlets for single products and brands, and careful attention to man-
aging brand identities, from the corporate name to the vast array of
corporate products. Of course, the key difference is that where
Disney’s original base was in children’s entertainment, Scholastic’s
base has been and continues to be in children’s “educational” products—
particularly spearheaded by its “news for kids” division, although both
corporations have dramatically blurred the boundaries between
education and entertainment.
However, given Disney’s entertainment base, when it signs a cross-
promotional marketing deal with McDonald’s, for instance, it stands
to draw much less critical attention than when, say, Scholastic served
as a key sponsor of the Golden Marble Awards, a marketing industry
award ceremony celebrating marketers who have found the latest and
most innovative methods for selling to children. Or when Scholastic
produced Geoffrey’s Reading Railroad, a program to “encourage
children and families to spend more time reading together,” for Toys
“R” Us.
In the Consumer Unions’ 1998 Report, “Captive Kids: A Report
on the Commercial Pressures on Kids at School,” they gave the
CARL BYBEE
150

program its worst rating, labeling it “highly commercial.” While stu-
dents can earn points for class prizes, the prize for reaching the book
goal was a free book to be picked up at Toys “R” Us and the oppor-
tunity to enter a sweepstakes to meet Toys “R” Us’s branded charac-
ters. As the Consumer Union reported, the sponsor’s name and
trademark were on all the materials and the Toys “R” Us branded
character was incorporated into the title. In addition, materials con-
tained coupons only redeemable at Toys “R” Us, prize points could
only be redeemed at the store, and the entire program was organized
around launching a new Toys “R” Us marketing line, Books “R” Us.
Most of this criticism, however, did not make it into the mainstream
media and, for the most part, has done little to alter Scholastic’s over-
all “edutainment” marketing strategy.
Before we consider the implications of this first generation of
“news for kids” providers, we need to briefly consider a third,
although somewhat different player in the classroom: Newspapers in
Education (NIE). What makes the NIE program different from the
WRC and Scholastic, Inc. is that it is an association and not a single
corporation and that it is not engaged in direct marketing in the
schools. The use of newspapers in the schools had been encouraged
and supported by a number of individual news organizations through-
out the 1930s and the 1940s both as a civic contribution to the
community and as a training ground for raising new generations of
newspaper readers. In the aftermath of World War II, the beginning of
the cold war and the Commission on the Freedom of the Press’ 1947
report, “A Free and Responsible Press,” these concerns, and particu-
larly the idea of the democratic responsibility of the press, were taken
more seriously.
In 1957, a “National Newspaper in the Classroom” program was
initiated that eventually was renamed the NIE Program and brought
under the umbrella of the Newspaper Association of America. The
program provided support for newspapers in organizing their own
local programs and conferences and seminars showcasing exemplary
efforts. The program grew throughout the last decades, establishing a
service-based web site, and providing support to over 700 NIE pro-
grams around the country. In the last 20 years as newspaper reader-
ship has continued its slow decline with adult audiences and its
precipitous decline with young adults, the program has become more
oriented to a news marketing dimension of its mission, introducing
marketing vocabulary such as “news as product” and “brand build-
ing.” And newspapers have become much more interested in moving
out of simply providing newspapers and lesson plans to schools, into
more systematic marketing strategies. As one newspaper industry
WHERE SCHOOLS GET THEIR NEWS FOR KIDS
151

analysis puts it:
NIE is a good first step, but relying on it exclusively has its risks. Can you
imagine Coke, Pepsi or General Mills entrusting product introduction,
promotion and support to teachers who have no stake in its success?
Would periodic meetings with advisory councils of 10–12 prospective
customers be enough for their product development programs?
Reuters and cable giant TCI did not think so when they joined forces
to create Ingenious, a new 70-person company that is trying to build
on TCI’s base of providing an educational service to 25,000 schools
and homes. The new venture committed 25 people and 6 months to
developing What On Earth?, a daily multimedia news journal that was
eventually beta tested by 300 schools and evaluated by 500 more.
Available for 149 dollars per year, plus network fees for each computer
site, What on Earth? is produced by four, three-person teams of jour-
nalists, teachers, and multimedia authors. . . . And for interactivity
there’s a web page and carriage on the Microsoft Network.
Although Reuters expects Ingenious to be only a modest business,
its goals are clear: to gain immediate access to the growing educa-
tional market plus increased brand recognition that can be transferred
to the consumer market. Most important, we believe, is its serious
commitment to achieve those goals—which is more than you can say
for most of those 700 newspapers that do not even bother to partici-
pate in the NIE program.
While the What on Earth? series never took off, it did reveal the
desperation of the news industry that is left with only “news” as product,
a niche product that is continuing to lose its appeal.
The subject of the “future of news” is a hot topic across the
spectrum of news media industry outlets, from television news, to
newspaper news, to magazines and cable. The newspaper industry is
currently the most shaken up because they have lost the most ground
in audience size and are technologically the most distant from becom-
ing part of the digital media revolution.
From the University of Southern California’s Annenberg’s Online
Journalism Review with its “Future of News” initiative to the media
think tanks ranging from the Poynter Institute to the Project for
Excellence in Journalism, discussions of what is in store for the news
industry are hot. However, most of the discussions taking place are
about economic survival, not the place of a free press and an informed
citizenry in a democratic society—and certainly not about the very
meaning of “democracy” being transformed from “people power” to
“marketplace power.”
CARL BYBEE
152

The debates that are taking place about youth and news are more
focused on hooking kids on the importance of following the existing
news product (be good, bad, or useless) and instilling in them a sense
of news brand loyalty. Issues like the relationship between informa-
tion, critical understanding, political awareness, and self-governance
are almost nonexistent. In a recent interview, kid anchor Haley Cohen
of the Weekly Reader/Kids News Eyewitness News for Kids, daughter
of celebrity mother CNN anchor Paula Zahn, was asked if she liked
watching the news. “Well, I find it interesting to watch,” she said,
“but sometimes you just have to turn it off, because it’s very harsh,
very blunt and to the point, and it’s all, I don’t know—I turn on the
news sometimes and it’s really sad sometimes because there’s practi-
cally no good news anymore, and that can get depressing, and we’re
trying to balance the hard news with the fun stuff so it’s easier to
watch.”
Where does this leave us in this quick review of the first generation
of producers of news for kids? What becomes clear is that this is not an
unfolding story of ever-more kid-friendly and civic-minded initiatives
for raising democratic citizens. It is not a story of carefully reviewing
the growing body of knowledge about the necessary skills of citizen-
ship and their relationship to developing an appropriate political con-
sciousness among young people. It is not a story about the quest to
help young people understand the changing meaning of democracy
and its relationship to the press, much less to themselves. It is certainly
not about challenging the ideology of consumerism over caring or the
connection between social justice and free speech and media accessi-
ble to all people and views.
It is the story of small-time educational marketers, the WRC and
the Scholastic, Inc., that have grown into large, diversified media cor-
porations. These were media corporations that began primarily as ven-
dors of a product that was seen as relatively unique in the educational
realm, “news for kids,” but without the historical appreciation of the
link between democracy and the press. The question of “news” for
kids was as likely, if not more, to be understood in connection with
the development of literacy skills than civic skills. It is also a story of
two corporations that held near monopolies within the educational
realm over the production and distribution of this product and were
able to build successfully on their unique product and foothold to
expand their corporate presence in the schools and classrooms. In a
sense the story can be read as one of the first instances of corporate
“cause marketing,” using the link to a valued and socially positive
action, in this case bringing current events to children, with ever more
sophisticated educational marketing integration.
WHERE SCHOOLS GET THEIR NEWS FOR KIDS
153

Scholastic, in particular, recognized the value of its positive
branding in the educational sector to bring a wide range of additional
educational and quasi-educational products through its school distri-
bution pipeline into the classrooms and homes of students. With the
rise of the neoliberal vision of democracy in the 1980s and the conse-
quent attack on the public schools as examples of the failures of the
public sector in terms of management and results, corporations like
Scholastic and WRC Inc. were well positioned to move into a market
that had been historically off limits. The “news” arm of these corpo-
rations that had been modestly successful in economic terms were
now able to continue to serve, along with calls for expanding literacy,
as both products and covers for diversifying educational marketing,
developing testing, and assessment systems as corporate products, and
providing educational marketing services to other corporations looking
to break into the classroom market.
The business models driving these corporations, the ideology of
glorifying technology over teachers and pedagogy they celebrate and
sell, the leadership roles they play in the growing commercialization of
the classroom, the blurring of the line between education and enter-
tainment marketing through their licensing efforts, and their ability to
exploit not just schools but also publicly funded public broadcasting
in subsiding consumer recognition of their corporate brands, all draw
on and serve the growing acceptance of the equation of neoliberal
economics with neoliberal democracy. In their corporate practices,
they gave concrete practice to the promise that deregulated market-
place efficiencies joined with science and technology, privatization and
unleashed individual choice would accomplish what the cumbersome
institutions and processes of democracy could not.
The news industry, increasingly a smaller and smaller part of the
growing media industry, was also choosing or being forced in the
interest of economic survival to accept the new neoliberal vision of
consumer-based citizenship.
By the middle of the 1990s, for both Weekly Reader, now a sub-
sidiary of WRC Inc., which became a subsidiary of Ripplewood
Holdings, and for Scholastic, Inc., their web sites have become portals
for linking student readers of their no-advertising news magazines, to
advertising and marketing rich environments. For instance, in
November 2003, Weekly Readers’ home page for kids contained links
ranging from sponsored programs tying students into QVC, the
home shopping cable network, Nike, IBM, Kleenex, Charles Schwab,
General Motors, Polaroid, KidsSmart Educational Technology, and
Six Flags Theme Parks. In addition, students could enter the
“Operation Tribute to Freedom” essay contest, a tie-in with the
CARL BYBEE
154

Defense Department’s “Operation Tribute to Freedom Program”
encouraging “Americans to show appreciation and support for mili-
tary personnel fighting the war on terrorism in Iraq and Afghanistan.”
The grand prize would be a trip to Washington, DC to be “a kid cor-
respondent and report from the Pentagon.”
Scholastic, Inc.’s November 2003 web site home page for kids,
promoted its full range of products from Harry Potter to Captain
Underpants. At the same time, it included a range of activities from
contests to quizzes that implement the goals of their Scholastic
InSchool Marketing Division. The division specializes in “the devel-
opment and distribution of branded in-school and consumer market-
ing programs. Programs include: Brand Awareness, Direct to Home
Marketing, Retail Tie-In, Consumer Loyalty, QSR Programs, One-
to-One Marketing, Public Relations Tie-Ins, and More.”
The Producers of News for Kids: 
The Second Generation
Channel One
The early efforts of the WRC, Scholastic, Inc., and the NIE programs
were at best, low to invisible, efforts on the part of corporations to
bring news to young people. Even while the efforts of WRC Inc. and
Scholastic, Inc. became more aggressive and diversified throughout
the 1980s, and the NIE stepped up their efforts to stop the hemor-
rhaging of the youth news audience, overall they had done outstand-
ing jobs of maintaining their brand identities as primarily small-time,
educational do-gooders.
In 1989, Chris Whittle blew the top off this corporate news game in
the schools with the launch of his ambitious daily in-school video news
program Channel One. Over a decade later, of waxing and waning con-
troversy, claiming to reach 40 percent of all middle school and high
schools across the United States and 8 million teenagers, Channel One,
currently owned by megamedia giant Primedia, is still in operation.
Most parents, most adults, have never heard of the program. At a recent
local school board meeting in my university hometown, a community
that prides itself on its commitment to education and children, I asked
the school board members if Channel One was operating in any of the
district’s schools. Not one board member knew. Several had never
heard of Channel One. The superintendent of schools said authorita-
tively it was not operating in the district although he was wrong.
In 1989, Chris Whittle had thoughtfully read the intersections of a
number of key forces that made for an outstanding business plan.
WHERE SCHOOLS GET THEIR NEWS FOR KIDS
155

Schools had been under neoliberal attack for nearly a decade endlessly
described as inefficient, wasteful bureaucratic dinosaurs harboring
lazy, do-nothing, unaccountable public employees. At the same time,
the combination of tax cuts for corporations and for the wealthy and
a historically unprecedented peacetime military buildup had coalesced
into the “starve government” neoliberal politics of the 1980s forcing
cutbacks in social programs making up the nation’s “safety net” and
decreasing tax revenues for schools and all levels of government. The
Reagan administration preached fiscal austerity and tripled the
national deficit. At the same time, the new industrialization of
information—computer technology was exploding—with its atten-
dant ideology that whatever the problem was, technology, not equi-
table public policy, smaller class sizes or social justice, was the answer.
Media deregulation was in full swing. The call for privatization of all
things public was also being pushed with increasing stridency by the
newly founded collection of neoliberal think tanks, from the Heritage
Foundation to the Enterprise Institute. Simultaneously, corporations
were just beginning to appreciate the dazzlingly successful “cradle to
consumer” marketing strategies of the McDonald’s and Disney cor-
porations. And their own research divisions were just beginning to
crunch the numbers on how quickly the purchasing power of children
and their ability to influence family purchases were growing. Youth
between the ages of 12 and 19 spent 155 billion dollars of their own
money in 2001 and influenced family purchases of nearly 200 billion
dollars.
Chris Whittle, who founded Whittle Communications in 1970,
had already discovered the growing importance of niche marketing—
finding those small, but enticing, advertising-free zones overlooked
by the major media, but increasingly lucrative. Lucrative, first, because
they were untapped advertising territory, and second, because they
had the potential to offer high-quality viewer demographics—for
instance, producing specialty magazines at no charge for physicians’
offices, in order to sell advertising space, and advertising posed as
editorial content to bored patients.
In the case of Channel One, Whittle also had the extremely suc-
cessful print prototypes offered by Scholastic, Inc. and WRC Inc.—
getting one’s marketing foot in the door with what appeared to be an
obviously positive educational product: the news. Why not offer cash-
strapped schools a free daily video newscast, produced specifically for
the middle and high school market? And to make it a deal that most
poor schools literally could not refuse—provide all of the technology,
the television sets for every classroom, the video recorders for every
classroom, and the satellite receiving stations for free. Principals were
CARL BYBEE
156

merely required to sign contracts committing their schools to air the
12-min program at least 90 percent of the regular school days, to
90 percent of the classes. A school, for allowing 12-min of high-quality,
kid friendly news to be piped into their school could receive, on loan,
as much as 50,000 dollars worth of perhaps otherwise unaffordable
video equipment. The only catch was that each daily newscast would
contain 2 min of television commercials that the Whittle Corporation
could sell to advertisers desperate to address this precious but notori-
ously difficult to reach demographic group.
As Ed Winters, one of the co-founders of Channel One with
Whittle put it in 1997, “Marketers have come to realize that all roads
eventually lead to the schools.” Whittle would be there waiting for
them when they showed up.
The story of Channel One and the continuing battle over its presence
in classrooms has been well documented in a number of articles and
books. The importance of the Channel One story to our discussion
comes from three related lessons it can teach us about the complexity of
the kids, corporate news, and citizenship question. First, the Channel
One story tends to be framed by critics as the leading example of the
commercial invasion of public schools, confusing and breaking down
the border between private enterprise and the public sphere. Second,
while there some considerations of the quality of Channel One news, as
opposed to its blatant commercialism, the question of what is appropri-
ate news, both for children and adults tends to be neglected. The third
lesson is the implication that the problem of Channel One could be
solved by its removal or its replacement with a commercial-free alterna-
tive youth news program. This neglects the deep integration of struc-
ture, content, and marketing in the construction of these programs.
Let us take each of these lessons in turn and consider them in more
detail. The public sphere versus privatization argument is clearly
critical, yet the very idea of a public sphere is an extremely abstract
concept, even for public employees such as schoolteachers. Publicness
at its best is most likely to be associated with public spaces like parks,
which tend to be used for private consumption and enjoyment, not
as meeting grounds for forming associations. More often, public spaces
are likely to be perceived as threatening and lacking security. Malls are
safe. Public parks are not. And none of this even remotely connects to
the idea of “publicness” as a means by which individuals form a sense
of themselves as a group with collective interests. All of which is to say
that the key distinction between privatization versus public sphere
may best be recast and linked to understanding different models of
democratic life, since the concept of democracy, while dangerously
emptied of meaning, still maintains a positive resonance.
WHERE SCHOOLS GET THEIR NEWS FOR KIDS
157

The second lesson of Channel One, the focus on its commercialism
in the schools rather than on its commercialism in relationship to its
news product creates a different kind of problem. Most of the concern
about Channel One has come from the critical educational community
and the growing critical media literacy community and not from the
press community, although exceptions exist.
The mainstream press may be willing to do an occasional story on
Channel One and the resistance directed against it, but these stories
will tend to be framed largely from an educational point of reference.
To question the intersection of advertising and news would be to
question the very foundation of their own industry. Critically oriented
news media scholars have tended to neglect the significant political
socialization work taking place in this world, nearly invisible to adults.
The result is that when we see organizations or institutions address
the problems of youth political apathy and cynicism, and the issue of
civic re-engagement, there is almost no attention given to the politi-
cal and ideological crisis of meaning taking place in mainstream jour-
nalism, much less “news for kids.” These reports call for bringing
more “current events” into the classroom with what seems to be no
clue as to what exists in the landscape of “current events” available to
young people.
This brings us to the third lesson we can learn from Channel One.
For many educators and media activists concerned about the impact
of Channel One in the schools, the most common solution advocated
is to drop Channel One, now owned by media megagiant Primedia,
and replace it with the commercial-free option of CNN Student News
offered by Turner Learning, the Education Division of CNN and
Turner Broadcasting, a Time Warner subsidiary. But as indicated
above, this simple strategy has its own problems.
Nineteen eighty-nine was also the year in which the Cable in the
Classroom initiative was launched by the cable industry to offer free
cable access and commercial-free cable programming to schools.
CNN Student News (then called CNN Newsroom) was developed and
offered under this program. In this interesting liberal turn of neolib-
eral thinking, one can see both a recognition that there might be
something valuable to offer children by excluding commercials, but at
the same time a failure to consider that if the programming were ini-
tially developed for commercial purposes, or to explicitly carry com-
mercial messages, that the logic of this motive might be imprinted on
the programming itself. Further, in considering that the Cable in the
Classroom initiative was more than just civic generosity, it must also
be taken into account that it served as a critical dimension of market-
ing through the creation of brand awareness and positive brand
CARL BYBEE
158

associations. Further still, it needs to be considered that the Cable in
the Classroom initiative grew out of, in part, strategic efforts on the
part of the cable industry to ensure that there was no regulatory back-
lash to the 1984 Cable Act that largely expanded the scope of private
enterprise in the field of cable. By the late 1980s, with rising cable
rates and failed programming promises, this had been a distinct
possibility.
A Brief Survey of the Newcomers to U.S. 
Kids’ News Production: More Bad News and Some 
Glimmers of Hope
How does one even begin to look for sources of news specifically
produced for kids? One can “Google it” or “Yahoo! it,” for that
matter. Yahoo! actually provides a subcategory “News for Kids”
organized under “Society and Culture—Cultures and Groups—
Children” with 13 highlighted sites out of 66 overall listings. The
13 highlighted sites included children’s news sites from Canada,
Britain, and Australia. Weekly Reader and its magazine produced in
partnership with The Washington Post Company, Teen Newsweek, did
not make the list. The Washington Post’s web site for kids, KidPost,
did. Scholastic, Inc. and the New York Times made the list, Time for
Kids and Channel One did not. Yahoo!’s own “Yahooligans! News”
claiming to feature “top stories, popular news, photos, and weird
news,” not surprisingly made the list. ABC News Network’s ABC
News 4 Kids made the list, even though the site had not been updated
in two years.
Overall, as an entry point to “news for kids,” the Yahoo! site or
even a Google search is a librarian’s nightmares. No evidence of selec-
tion criteria, no indications of age-level appropriateness, and in many
sites and linked sites, such as Kidsnewsroom.org and PencilNews—
News for Kids, there was no evidence of who the operators or sponsors
of the organizations were. For instance, on the Kidsnewsroom.org site,
the only clue as to who was behind the site was a mention in their
“About Us” section that “One of our premier sponsors, Top Centre
Tickets, deals in premium sporting tickets, such as Super Bowl
Tickets.” Click on “Super Bowl Tickets” and one is immediately con-
nected to the Top Centre Ticket site. Although no identifying infor-
mation is provided, PencilNews is a production of the MSNBC cable
channel that is a subsidiary of General Electric.
If one seeks to create an inventory of “News for Kids” sources from
organizations or institutions that make visible their funding sources,
their boards of directors, their organizational structures, and their
WHERE SCHOOLS GET THEIR NEWS FOR KIDS
159

operating systems that are “transparent,” in the neoliberal jargon of
the day, the options are few. The only press-related organization pro-
viding recommendations is Cyberjournalist.net that is a project of the
Media Center at the American Press Institute. Its mission is to help
build “a better informed society in a connected world.” The Media
Center is funded by a range of foundations, major media corporations
(including The New York Times, the Wall Street Journal, CNN, Time
Warner), corporations (including the Rand Corp., IBM, Microsoft,
and Ford), a number of media institutes, and several major universi-
ties. Their list roughly mirrors the Yahoo! list, including Yahooligans!
News, Scholastic News Zone, Weekly Reader, Time for Kids,
KidsPost, and Britain’s CBBC Newsround.
The American Library Association, in their “Great Web Sites for
Kids,” features a “News and Current Events Section.” Eleven sites are
featured. Four are for standard adult news web sites: ABC, CNN,
MSNBC, and PBS’s the Online News Hour. The only news site that was
specifically listed as designed for kids was Time for Kids. Apparently they
were unaware that CNN offered CNN Student News, and the Online
News Hour has created a special section called “Extra” for students. The
National Council for the Social Studies provides no evident guidance to
teachers seeking sources of age-appropriate news for their students.
Apparently the only child advocacy organization making recom-
mendations for “news for kids” is Children Now. Children Now,
founded by a Stanford law professor in 1993, recognized early on that
to meet the challenges being faced by children in terms of health, edu-
cation, and creating healthy families would also require a focus on the
media dimensions of raising children including the images consumed
both by children and policy makers about the status of children in the
United States. The Children Now list of recommended kids’ news
sources contains again the familiar New York Times Learning
Connection, Yahooligans! News, Scholastic News Zone and Scholastic
newsmagazines, Pencil News, Time for Kids, and Canada’s CBC4Kids.
Interestingly enough, it also mentions Nickelodeon’s Nick News and
Sports Illustrated for Kids as top choices. The Children Now list comes
as a resource guide at the end of an extensive downloadable guide-
book titled “Talking With Kids About the News,” part of their
“Talking With Kids About Tough Issues” series.
Once we complete our inventory of “new sources for kids” list rec-
ommended by organizations or generated through popular web
search engines, we first notice that it’s a short list, then we notice that
they are almost all products of the media megagiants, and finally we
notice that even on this short list, there is a remarkable degree of joint
corporate ventures.
CARL BYBEE
160

From the recommended lists mentioned, Time Warner accounts
for CNN Student News, Time for Kids, and Sports Illustrated for Kids.
Time Warner has also partnered with Weekly Reader to produce a
weekly children’s news program Eyewitness Kids News that carries
advertisements and is syndicated to over 150 broadcast and cable
channels around the country. Viacom owns and produces Nick News.
Primedia owns and produces Channel One and, until 1999, owned
the WRC Inc. When Primedia owned WRC Inc., it created a joint
venture with the Washington Post Company and its subsidiary
Newsweek to produce Teen Newsweek, still in publication, but now, as
mentioned above, owned by Ripplewood Holdings. The New York
Times Company produces the New York Times Learning Connection
web site and has a joint venture with Scholastic, Inc. producing the
New York Times Upfront, a newsmagazine for teens as well as a com-
panion web site. In 2003, Scholastic.com has also signed a joint agree-
ment with General Electric’s MSNC.com. This agreement features
Scholastic.com on the MSNBC.com web site and created a
“co-branded” web site scholastic.msnbc.com. “The agreement
between Scholastic.com and MSNBC.com creates an exciting, robust
and comprehensive news resource speaking to a broad audience, from
kids in the classroom to adults in the global consumer space,” said
Donna Iucolano, president of Scholastic. As part of the agreement,
Scholastic.com will receive a vast set of interactive features “on
numerous topics, including science, technology, space exploration,
and social studies. These will appear on Scholastic.com’s ‘Online
Activities’ and be used by teachers and students in schools.” Parent
corporation General Electric, heavily involved in science, technology,
space technology, and military research and production should be
pleased with this arrangement. The Disney corporation has for the
most part stayed out of the news for kids business with the exception
of the now defunct ABC News 4 Kids web site venture.
We can also round out our list of top mainstream sites by looking
at what the PBS has to offer. It took the U.S. government nearly
40 years longer than any Western European country to launch a pub-
lic broadcasting system. Almost as soon as the Public Broadcasting
Act was passed in 1967, it was entangled in political and economic
wars, ranging from unstable funding, underfunding, to the efforts of
the Nixon administration in the early 1970s to slash funding and
increase White House control over the system, and the successful
efforts by the Reagan administration to severely cut federal funding
for public broadcasting in the early 1980s. All of which is to say that
one’s meager expectations regarding the support of current affairs
programming for youth are well met.
WHERE SCHOOLS GET THEIR NEWS FOR KIDS
161

The Public Broadcasting Corporation, under constant defunding
threats from the federal government, under constant attacks from
conservative groups for their supposed left-wing biases, and under the
growing need to win corporate sponsorship has continued to move to
the right and has been exceptionally timid, with a few exceptions, in
its efforts to produce hard-hitting, critical, and contextual news cov-
erage for adults, much less for youth. PBS currently does not produce
any “current events” programs specifically for young people, unless
one would want to count PBS’s efforts at “reality” shows such as
Pioneer House. However, PBS has supported web site development of
teacher support materials, and student resources for three of their
news or documentary programs: The News Hour with Jim Lehrer, and
Frontline. The web sites associated with each of these three series pro-
vide in-depth teaching materials and resources for teachers and stu-
dents unlikely to be found anywhere else in the world of corporate
produced kids’ news. The audiences for these programs and materials
are of course, tiny in contrast to say Channel One, CNN Student
News, or Scholastic, Inc. news products.
To summarize and to fill in a few blanks, the main terrain of news
for kids contains a short list of video news, news magazines, and web
sites typically tied to either the same video news programs or the same
magazines.
In the area of video news for youth, there are currently six regular
programs, Channel One, CNN Student News, CNN Presents
Classroom Edition, Nick News, Nick News Special Edition, and
Eyewitness Kids News. Channel One is the only program being directly
distributed into the schools.
Time Warner produces CNN Student News that is cablecast 5 days
a week and CNN Presents Classroom Edition that cablecast as an occa-
sional special feature series. Both, while intended for classroom use,
are cablecast in the early hours of the morning for teachers to prere-
cord and bring to their classes. Each 10-min daily episode of CNN
Student News is also available through video streaming on the CNN
Student News web site. At the web site, teaching resources to be used
in conjunction with the programming are provided, along with a
range of Time Warner tie-ins and advertisements. Turner Learning
claims that its Student News program is being used in 18,000 class-
rooms on a daily basis across the nation. If this is true, the audience
base is somewhere between 300,000 and 600,000 students each
day—considerably fewer than the 8 million claimed by Channel One.
An attempt in the spring of 2002 to include advertising in the pro-
gramming, in order to turn what Time Warner says is a money losing
operation into a more profitable division, generated an intense wave
CARL BYBEE
162

of national protest. The protest, organized largely by the same groups
and individuals that have been fighting Channel One ranging from
Ralph Nader to Phyllis Schlafly, Consumer Reports to the Eagle
Forum, succeeded in having Time Warner (then AOL-Time Warner)
withdraw its plans. In many ways, the small flurry of controversy over
such a potentially minor revenue flow and Time Warner’s response
probably had the effect of enhancing the “prestige, non-commercial”
brand for the Time Warner product and helped maintain the myth
that the audience can play an important role in programming
decisions—the industry mantra of “we just give the people what they
want.”
There are two video news programs for youth produced for general
distribution. Nick News is an occasional production of Viacom’s MTV
Network Services under the Nickelodeon division—sometimes pro-
ducing only one new episode per month that is then repeated and
repeated. Viacom also produces Nick News Special Editions on occa-
sional basis and cablecasts them in the early morning for prerecording.
The Weekly Reader/Time Warner Eyewitness Kids News is produced
and aired weekly as of fall 2003. All three of these video news
programs, like Channel One, carry conventional advertising.
The five major kids’ news magazines (and matching web sites)
include The Weekly Reader group for K-8 readers, The Weekly
Reader/Washington Post’s Teen Newsweek for sixth to eighth grade
readers, the Scholastic Inc. group for K-8 readers, and the Scholastic
Inc./New York Times joint venture Upfront for teens (presumably in
the 12–18-year-old age range).
This survey could never be complete since there are a number of
smaller, even harder to find sources of news for kids. To go any further
would take us into terrain even further from the general public con-
sciousness of the world of news for kids. This does not means that
these sites are not important and that they do not deserve mention-
ing. In fact, it is just the opposite, and in the conclusion several impor-
tant ones are mentioned.
Conclusion
As the 2004 election year was starting to heat up, Urban Outfitters
released a new t-shirt in its “street-wise” fashion collection with the
slogan “Voting is for Old People.” The release raised a ruckus from a
wide range of civic and activists groups working to get the youth to
vote. One group, Punkvoter.com, wrote to Republican supporter and
CEO Richard Hayne claiming that the effort was “a disgusting effort
to reap profit from cynicism while suppressing civic involvement, and
WHERE SCHOOLS GET THEIR NEWS FOR KIDS
163

encouraging apathy.” While the company complained that critics
could not see the humorous irony of the t-shirt, it was pulled from
their stores and online catalog.
Urban Outfitters Inc., like an increasing number of corporations
marketing to youth, makes an aggressive effort to promote an
antiadult world message through irony and messages of pseudorebel-
lion. The company profile that includes its other “hot” fashion lines,
“Anthropologie” and “Free People” states:
Our established ability to understand our customers and connect with
them on an emotional level is the reason for our success.
The reason for this success is that our brands—Urban Outfitters,
Anthropologie and Free People—are both compelling and distinct.
Each brand chooses a particular customer segment, and once chosen,
sets out to create sustainable points of distinction with that segment. In
the retail brands we design innovative stores that resonate with the tar-
get audience; offer an eclectic mix of merchandise in which hard and
soft goods are cross merchandised; and construct unique product dis-
plays that incorporate found objects into creative selling vignettes. The
emphasis is on creativity. Our goal is to offer a product assortment and
an environment so compelling and distinctive that the customer feels an
empathetic connection to the brand and is persuaded to buy.
The corporation also received a significant amount of free press in late
2003 as the major distributor of “Ghettopoly,” a Monopoly take off
that outraged Black leaders, where “playas” became pimps and could
draw game cards such as “You got yo whole neighborhood addicted
to crack. Collect $50.”
Their fall 2004 line up of t-shirts included slogans such as “You say
tomato, I say fuck you” and “Everything’s Dirtier in the South” and
“Beer, it’s what’s for dinner!” and, perhaps in an effort to counter the
bad publicity from its earlier anti-vote t-shirt, Urban Outfitters
released its “I like to get it on with boys who vote” t-shirt. At the
same time, third quarter earnings reports for Urban Outfitters Inc.
were dazzling fashion industry investors with an 85 percent increase.
Civic education groups continue to be the primary organizations
interested in the growing political apathy and political disenfranchise-
ment of youth from our political system. While there was a slight
increase in voter turnout among young voters in the 2004 presiden-
tial election, the increase turned out to mirror the proportionate
increase in the overall electorate. It did not appear to be the “slacker
uprising” that documentary producer and author Michael Moore
campaigned for and other get-out-the-youth-vote organizations had
worked toward.
CARL BYBEE
164

When youth appear on the radar screens of U.S. corporations, it is
most likely to be in the cross-hairs of their marketing departments
than in corporate conversations about growing the enfranchisement
of the youth vote. And this attitude appears to hold nearly as true for
the news industry as well as the producers of more general products
targeted toward youth. If anything, the news industry and the kids
news industry appear to be more hypocritical about their intentions
than mainstream manufacturers. Urban Outfitters Inc., unlike
Scholastic or Weekly Reader, make no claims to be in the business of
raising citizens. In fact they are quite pleased to be clear about selling
a vague kind of rebellion against responsible adulthood and in favor of
parodying adult culture and celebrating adolescent sensuality.
While studies conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation have
found that youth who follow the news are more likely to be more
politically knowledgeable and have more civic engagement skills, for
the most part kids, like their parents, continue to turn away, for the
most part, from following the news, a trend that accelerated between
the 2000 and 2004 national elections. The exceptions were cable
news that has held onto a relatively constant audience of young people
for news, and alternative sources such as the Internet, television news
magazines, and television comedy shows that have shown dramatic
gains.
The argument can be made that turning off mainstream corporate
news, which has become increasingly sensational, distracting, superfi-
cial, and more in line with the corporate values of their owners and the
unexamined statements of politicians, might not be a bad thing. This
would depend, of course, on how that gap in knowledge about how
the real politics of money and government were affecting our every-
day life. Tuning into whatever shows up first on a Google search, or a
television news magazine, or a television comedy show is probably not
the answer.
What news should our children be seeing and hearing and dis-
cussing in schools and at home? This is an enormously difficult ques-
tion because it demands of educators, parents, and civic leaders to
own up to the democratic values we believe are important and that
our children should be engaged with not just in the news but built
into our educational priorities. Do we want to be educating young
citizens in the knowledge and skills to figuratively and literally take
government into their own hands in not only their own interest but
also in the interest of the greater good of their communities, of the
public? That is of course the idea of participatory democracy.
Or do we want them to learn primarily the begrudging formal
responsibilities of being a citizen? Vote, do but not engage in organized
WHERE SCHOOLS GET THEIR NEWS FOR KIDS
165

dissent. Pay taxes but see this as a kind of government-sponsored rob-
bery. Obey laws but do not raise questions about the economic or social
justice of those laws. And trust that real freedom and liberty are best
found in the “free” market. This is where freedom of choice takes on its
truest form, where our deepest desires are expressed through the goods
and services we buy or charge, without the interference of government
regulation or oversight. This is, of course, the reigning neoconservative
vision of democracy of our times, sometimes called corporate or free-
market democracy. This is the vision of democracy that political scien-
tist Richard Merelman contained within what he called “symbolic” civic
education, where political, business, and civic leaders identify the grow-
ing decay of citizenship, but then offer only symbolic solutions to the
problem, designed to make everyone feel better, but largely leave the
real problem untouched.
If it is participatory democracy we want for ourselves and for our
children, then we have to ask hard questions about the values built
into the news they see and hear, not to mention the textbooks they
study and are tested on. We have to ask questions about the lack of
school funding as corporations and wealthy individuals successfully
lobby federal, state, and local government to have their taxes cut, and
then show up at the school doors offering new educational products
and services that are supposed to help make up in efficient instruction
what has been lost in funding and donations and grants with endless
marketing strings attached. Is rewarding, in the midst of a youth obe-
sity epidemic, our struggling young readers with Pizza Hut pizza
parties and Nickelodeon Game Lab events what we really want? Or
asking our teenagers to consume ever greater amounts of soft drinks
on our school campuses in order to buy textbooks and athletic
equipment?
Or do we want to be educating our children to ask the hard ques-
tions of democratic culture, like “where did the money for our schools
go?” If they log onto Scholastic Incorporated’s senior news site, do
we want them to read only the unfiltered rhetoric of administration
spokesmen and women about the triumph of the No Child Left
Behind act, spearheaded by our “education” president, or also about
the concern expressed by governors and educators about the failure to
fully fund the legislation, leaving it a tangled web of new financial bur-
dens on already overextended school districts and staffs?
The press is the handmaiden of democracy. As James Madison put it,
“A popular government without popular information, or the means of
acquiring it, is but a prologue to a farce or a tragedy, or perhaps both.”
Kids need age-appropriate news—but this does not mean just
news about hamsters for fifth graders or White House propaganda
CARL BYBEE
166

celebrating a mindless, unquestioning patriotism (see whitehouse.gov).
Our youth need to be taught that democracy is an ever-changing idea
with many faces and many names. They need to be taught about the
struggles to widen and deepen the idea of democracy in the United
States and to be taught that these achievements were often won
through dissent and political activism, through challenging existing
ideas of democracy, and imagining and fighting for a more inclusive,
more equitable vision of democracy.
Returning to the central theme of this chapter, “Bad News for
Kids,” can mega-corporations be the willing messengers of news that
empowers our children in the understanding of a “people power”
vision of democracy as opposed to corporate democracy?
Parents and educators and civic leaders must get straight the ver-
sion of democracy they want to promote and encourage our children
to understand and embrace. Youth see news in school and are sur-
rounded by it outside of school, whether that news comes from adult
news venues like the networks’ evening news broadcasts or the news
contained in youth popular culture including reality video games.
Games like “KumaWar: The War on Terror” game that, according
to Pacific News service, “allows players to re-enact scenes of actual
battles. . . . the game includes clips of actual video news footage,
satellite pictures of Iraq and publicly available reports from the mili-
tary, including the killing of U.S. soldiers” re-creating real war news
events within weeks after they occur.
Once parents, educators, and civic leaders get clear about the vision
of democracy they want to promote, they can begin to ask what sto-
ries about democracy, citizenship, and patriotism are being told in
corporate-produced news for kids and corporate-produced learning
materials and textbooks. Do we really want to be helping to sell to our
children a vision of democracy that views the “public” in public edu-
cation as anti-American and antidemocratic because it challenges the
unregulated expansion of “free” market values to more and more
aspects of our lives and our children’s lives?
Bad news for kids is news that adults do not view as part of larger
curriculum of civic education, at the same time defining the core
values of democracy while delivering the disconnected facts of current
events. More than 50 years ago, the Hutchins Commission, convened
when the press was first beginning to encounter the crisis of democ-
racy versus for-profit journalism, made a series of recommendations
for the operation of the press. It articulated a code of social responsi-
bility for the press that began with the need for the press to deliver “a
truthful, comprehensive, and intelligent account of the day’s events in
a context which gives them meaning.” Giving new urgency to this
WHERE SCHOOLS GET THEIR NEWS FOR KIDS
167

concern is the “State of the News Media” published in 2004 by the
Project for Excellence in Journalism that warned “Those who would
manipulate the press and public appear to be gaining leverage over the
journalists who cover them.”
For now, perhaps the best news sites for our youth are the web sites
connected with the PBS programs mentioned above: Frontline, The
News Hour with Jim Lehrer, and Now with Bill Moyers. The New York
Times/Scholastic joint venture magazine “Upfront” and its compan-
ion web site are valuable and has not been overly contaminated by the
Scholastic marketing machine. This is most likely due to the credibil-
ity value the New York Times needs to maintain to preserve its status
as the nation’s “newspaper of record.” The publicly funded Canadian
Broadcasting Company has excellent youth news centers for kids and
teens at its web site (see [http://www.cbc.ca/]). This is also true of
the publicly funded British Broadcasting Service with its Newsround
news service for youth (see [http://news.bbc.co.uk/cbbcnews/]).
Our children must understand that democracy is not an achieve-
ment, but an unfinished journey and a struggle that pits the values of
the marketplace against the values of community and collective, inclu-
sive decision making. Our public schools must be supported to serve
up the good news for kids that strengthens their commitment to a
participatory democratic culture.
CARL BYBEE
168

Chapter 9
Meritocratic Mythology: Constructing
Success
Benjamin Enoma
Historically the notion of success in the United States has been
largely attributed to individual responsibility and the arduous applica-
tion of one’s mind and physical energies to the completion of an activ-
ity or the attainment of a goal. The forgoing notwithstanding, there
are factors other than individual efforts and commitment that mitigate
success, and these factors are socially constructed. “One such factor is
a belief that is deeply rooted in the American ideology of individual-
ism, a belief that each individual determines his or her own situation”
(Farley, 2000).
The social inscriptions of the notion of success make it susceptible
to multiple interpretations. Success can be viewed as the accumulation
of capital in a variety of forms: economic, social, cultural, and
symbolic capital. It can be seen as a mark of distinction, the accom-
plishment of an individual goal measured vis-à-vis others. This meas-
urement usually takes into account the variations in speed, quality, and
mechanical accuracies involved in the completion of an activity. Lastly,
success can be viewed as meritocratic, that is, the sum of individual
intelligence plus effort. The common denominator in these divergent
views of success is that it is always viewed or measured in relation to
someone or something else.
Schooling introduces the meritocracy to most young people today.
Success in school is measured by tests—standardized tests. The meri-
tocracy is a formal system by which advancement is based upon ability
and achievement. This system began with the Civil Service Reform in
England in the 1870s. The idea that status should be achieved by
merit, not ascribed by birth, replaced “nepotism” as the system
governing the greater part of English society, and meritocracy soon
transcended the European continent and quickly became established

as part of the American academic tradition. Thus, the historical
assumption that success is achieved by the meritocracy ideology sank
its roots in the American psyche. The harder one works, the greater
the chances of success. “You reap what you sow,” hard work equals
success to the exclusion of any salient systemic factor that works for or
against some people in a given social context. Johnstone (1992)
believes that in the present academic meritocracy, especially at the
high and low extremes, measured merit is linked to circumstances of
birth such as socioeconomic status, race, and religion. Ironically these
are the circumstances that the meritocracy is supposed to stamp out.
He suggests that the “university” find ways and means of selection
other than mere measured merit; ways and means that better tran-
scend the status of birth, that is, social and cultural capital (Johnstone,
1992).
Zink asked these pertinent questions in her 1997 article:
Should not the student who has struggled to get to the doors of acad-
eme be given the same chance as the student who finds it an easy step
to take? For is not education in itself an unending struggle to seek the
truth and is it not in the struggle that one learns? The meritocracy
sometimes sends an old, but negative message to those that struggle,
saying that the doors are not open. As we near the twenty-first century,
is this not a wrong and vacuous message to send, at least initially?
(Zink, 1997)
When people believe that the system is fair and that the playing field is
level, they usually do two things: First, they blame the unsuccessful for
any disadvantages that they may experience rather than blaming the
oppressive aspects of the system. Second, they oppose inter alia, poli-
cies aimed at leveling gaps (which are often conceived in terms of
deficits) between the successful and the unsuccessful.
Perceptions
There are often differences of opinions in the perceptions of success
by the individuals being measured and those measuring. Individual
wealth is not the only indicator of success. Thomas J. Stanley in his
book The Millionaire Mind looked at 733 self-reported millionaires.
As part of his study, the author tabulated a survey that looked at 30
“success factors” and the results showed that “being honest with all
people” was ranked as the forty-first factor. “Being well disciplined”
was second, and “works harder than most people” was ranked fifth. At
the other end of the list, “attending a top-rated college” was ranked
BENJAMIN ENOMA
170

twenty-third, and “graduating near the top of one’s class” was last
(Stanley, 2001).
In the same vein, a Gallup poll conducted on the “haves and the
have-nots” and published on July 6, 1998 revealed that about one-
fourth of those polled by Gallup said they were “have-nots,” which is
twice the rate reported as living in poverty by the federal government.
More blacks than whites classify themselves as have-nots (38 percent
versus 22 percent), and 43 percent of Hispanics classify themselves as
such. But this disparity in self-assessment is clearest at the lower
income ranges. When matched for income, blacks and Latinos with
incomes of under 50,000 dollars are more likely than whites to say
they are the have-nots. But blacks, Hispanics, and whites all had the
same responses when their incomes were above 50,000 dollars
(Gallup, 1998). One can infer from this survey that the barometer for
measuring success by income is fraught with polysemous interpreta-
tions in different cross-sections of the population. Free enterprise and
free market economies work under the unspoken assumption that all
its citizens and/or participants will not succeed equitably. This
assumption is akin to that of the social Darwinists “Survival of the
fittest of the specie.”
Assessment and Testing
Students’ success can be defined from multiple theoretical perspec-
tives, with each definition evoking dynamic discourses on associated
concepts and facts. Consequently, students’ success has to be defined
“sui generis.” In the context of this study, it means admission into a
postsecondary institution, enrollment in a program of study, and
timely graduation from the course of study. The road to success in
school is paved with measures and methods of assessment.
Psychologists like Alfred Binet and Lewis Terman amongst others led
the field of psychometrics in the development of IQ tests; these mile-
stone tests were designed to relate the mental development of a child
to the child’s chronological age: IQ  (MA/CA) * 100. The IQ was
equal to 100 times the mental age divided by the chronological age.
This test is the precursor of the now popular battery of standardized
tests, like the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT)—developed by Carl
Brigham—and many more, for example, Law School Admissions Test
(LSAT), Medical College Admissions Test (MCAT), Business-
Schools: Graduate Management Admissions Test (GMAT), Graduate
Schools: Graduate Record Examination (GRE), all of which guard the
gates and entrances into most U.S. postsecondary institutions. The
SAT was born from the initial IQ tests, written by French psychologist
MERITOCRATIC MYTHOLOGY: CONSTRUCTING SUCCESS
171

Alfred Binet. In the United States, Lewis Terman and Robert Yerkes
promoted the IQ test and made it a popular instrument to determine
who should be an officer, in a segregated military, during World War I.
Their IQ test was designed to prove the genetic advantage of races
they had already identified as superior. Terman and Yerkes were exec-
utives in the American Eugenics Society (AES). This method of
assessment is fraught with long-standing controversies such as What is
intelligence? Is it a biological endowment or the product of the indi-
vidual’s “zone of proximal development à la Vygotsky?”
Tracking Historicity
Politics and economics have always shaped U.S. public policies. The
Conservatives (traditionalists) worked to maintain the preexisting
social order, which meant very remote possibilities of upward mobil-
ity or social elevation for cultures other than the dominant, and races
other than the majority. The issue of racial segregation, population
growth among minority groups, influx of immigrants, and the affir-
mation of cultural pluralism spelt new and complex challenges to a
common school system. Whereas the focus at the beginning of the
century was on Americanizing every school child, a shift of recogniz-
ing ethnocultural differences and a move toward multiculturalism
began to emerge in the latter part of the century. Liberals and radicals
(progressives) alike focused on bridging the ever-widening gap
between the majority and the minority/poor students. Some progres-
sives clamored for schools to assume the role of effectuating social jus-
tice, fostering equal opportunity for all school children and
accommodating the special needs of individual children. International
events (such as World War II, Sputnik, Vietnam, and the Cold War,
etc.) had reverberating effects on national educational policies and cit-
izenship. Testing and standardized testing assumed preeminence in
the school system and offered a solution of sorts to the age-long con-
troversy “Whose call is it in the school system to determine the des-
tiny of students?” What are the bases for making that call? As early as
1892, the Committee of Ten chaired by Charles Elliot, then president
of Harvard, convened to discuss uniform college entrance require-
ments. The Committee of Ten concluded that education for life was
the same as education for college and thus denounced segregated cur-
riculum and tracking. There were others who believed that the costs
of not tracking were too great; it retarded the progress of the brighter
students to wait on the slower students to catch on. It presented
the teachers with the Herculean task of teaching an incongruent
group of learners. Testing in the elementary schools led to segregated
BENJAMIN ENOMA
172

curricula. The high scorers were placed on the college track and the
low scorer on less challenging vocational/life adjustment curriculum.
Tracking and testing are chiefly “administrative progressives”
reforms. Advocates of social efficiency in education believed that since
natural endowment of intelligence varied considerably across diverse
groups, the best way forward is to design standard aptitude tests based
on a body of knowledge that children should possess at a certain stage
of development and from the results, track those who should pursue
the academic or college bound curriculum and those who should opt
for the life adjustment curriculum, thereby creating differentiated
curriculum within an integrated system.
On a side note and contrary to popular belief, African Americans’
lot in life was not ameliorated by integration. “The ink on the Brown v.
Board of Education landmark decision 1954 to desegregate schools
was not dry, when backlash policies such as federally aided housing
programs and restricted covenants, precipitated the white flight from
the inner cities in the north to the suburbs” creating in effect “de
facto” segregation. Segregated housing meant, in reality, segregated
schools: Citizens settled in segregated housing developments in segre-
gated neighborhoods and de facto segregation in schools occurred as
“de jure” segregation was lying in state for interment as ordered by the
U.S. supreme court “with all deliberate speed.”
The schools in the inner city were ill equipped and badly run, and
consequently the performance levels were below predicted expecta-
tions and this unfortunately continues to date. There is an established
connection between race, class, and location. Kantor and Brenzel
(1992) observe that
Urban poverty was not limited exclusively to African Americans and
other people of color, but the concentration of poverty populations in
central cities was strongly linked to the changing racial composition of
urban areas. Poor African Americans and Hispanics were more likely
than poor whites to live in low-income neighborhoods. Although
nationwide and overall African Americans and immigrants populations
succeeded in greater numbers than in the past, in the inner city schools,
educational outcomes consistently lagged behind the outcomes in the
suburbs. (Kantor and Brenzel, 1992)
Democratic Education
The underlying purpose of schooling in a democracy such as the
United States is to serve as a public good helping to build sociocultu-
ral relationships between the student and his or her community. This
charge presupposes that there is no discrimination and that there is
MERITOCRATIC MYTHOLOGY: CONSTRUCTING SUCCESS
173

equality of access and unfettered ascent through the classes in the
school system. The reality, however, is that schools are as fragmented
as the society at large; every learner arrives wearing his or her
“Habitus”: social and cultural capital. With reference to capital, main-
stream students characteristically bear a comparative advantage over
minority students, a headstart so to speak. This disparity notwith-
standing, both groups are measured for success by the same battery of
standardized tests, along age groups and class levels.
Predictably there emerges noticeable achievement gaps stratified
along racial and socioeconomic lines; the purpose of schooling in this
democracy is thus compelled to respond in the face of these glaring
inequalities. How does egalitarianism coexist with the meritocracy?
Who will bear the costs of reforming this public good?
The responses to this matter are steeped in politics and power rela-
tions and the fault lines are drawn along epistemological and ontolog-
ical positions. The conservatives, the liberals, and the radicals all etch
their arguments for school reforms from their political convictions.
The conservative viewpoint is the position that seeks to preserve the
dominant culture or the established order. Attempts to revamp the
status quo pose a threat to the conservative position. The liberal posi-
tion is accepting of the dominant culture yet broad minded; in that it
is also open to reform or propositions for change. Finally, the radical
position is often critical of or dissatisfied with the status quo. This
viewpoint proposes alternate solutions and denounces the conserva-
tive viewpoint. The radical is often touted as an extremist standpoint
because of its preoccupation with denouncing the established order.
All of these positions represent separate ideologies, informed by
different logics and schools of thought.
The struggle with school reforms has not only focused on testing
and tracking but also on the very purpose of schooling. A watershed
event in the arena of curricular reforms is John Dewey’s significant,
much-maligned, and often misinterpreted treatise: The School and
Society. This work was pivotal on many fronts. First, Dewey was advo-
cating the higher ideal of democratic education; since the “child’s life
is an integral, total one,” the school should reflect the completeness
and unity of the child’s own world. Dewey advocated active learning,
starting with the needs and interests of the child; he emphasized the
role of experience in education and introduced the notion of teacher
as a facilitator of learning as opposed to the “font from whom all
knowledge flowed” (Sadovnik and Semel, 1998). Enter the progres-
sives, “Learning by doing.” Child centered progressives spun off
Dewey’s treatise and wanted to achieve the lofty goal of democratiz-
ing education but in implementation, progressive education
BENJAMIN ENOMA
174

(pedagogical progressives) became feverish pursuits of the elusive
democratic education. Progressive education in practice became
essentially democratic education for the elite.
Under the current framework, there is still a search for the com-
mon school, uniform curriculum, uniform assessment, standardized
testing, and the like. What should be taught, at what level, and to
whom? The social melorists and other progressives argued whether it
was more democratic to teach all students the same subjects or to tai-
lor curriculum to individuals.
Tyack (1974) on the subject of the curriculum reforms proffers a
radical point of view that I agree with. Talks about keeping the school
out of politics have often served to obscure the actual alignment of
power and patterns of privilege. “He declares that in sum the search
for the ‘One best system’ in the area of curriculum and instruction has
ill-served the pluralistic character of the American society. Americans
have often perpetuated social injustice by blaming the victim, particu-
larly in the case of institutionalized racism” (Tyack, 1974).
These reforms have also made their mark on the administration of
schools, moving them from the traditional organization management
styles to problem-solving, corporate efficiency models. The “social
efficiency group” emerges as the expert here, making the case for run-
ning schools as businesses for improved efficacies. While there is a
good case for waste and mismanagement of funds in school adminis-
tration, this approach reduces the public good dimension of the pur-
pose of schooling to a line item budget that will be approved or
discarded based on costs–benefits analysis.
Critical Discourses
Student success can be looked at panoramically as a sociocultural
construct; Pierre Bourdieu in the Forms of Capital expands capital
beyond its economic perspective, which accentuates material exchanges,
to include noneconomic and immaterial forms of capital. He favors a
nurture-rather-than-nature argument throughout his discussion on
the forms of capital. He argues that an individual’s talent and ability
are primarily determined by the time and cultural capital invested
in them by their parents. Similarly, he posits than an individual’s
scholastic yield from educational action depends on previously
invested cultural capital by the family. One can infer from this as in his
notion of habitus that students’ success can be regulated, reproduced,
and predestined with the investments in cultural capital made by the
families of the students in question. Cultural capital exists in three
forms: (1) embodied within the individual; (2) objectified in artifacts
MERITOCRATIC MYTHOLOGY: CONSTRUCTING SUCCESS
175

and resources, which can be appropriated materially via economic cap-
ital or symbolically via the embodied capital; and (3) the institutional-
ized form that refers to various instruments of legitimization,
academic credentials, and professional licenses. In this viewpoint, the
die is not necessarily cast in favor of the wealthy. Although it helps
indubitably to possess material and economic means, access to cultural
capital can be made through noneconomic means such as social net-
works.
Success can also be viewed dichotomously via the subparts of aca-
demic achievement and on the job performance or formal academic
knowledge and practical intelligence (tacit knowledge). Sternberg
et al. (1995) argue that practical intelligence and tacit knowledge par-
allel academic intelligence and formal academic intelligence, respec-
tively. An academically intelligent person is deemed to be so because
he or she has acquired formal academic knowledge and has been
tested through a wide range of intelligence and aptitude tests. By con-
trast, the practical intelligent person has acquired tacit knowledge that
has been tested through various real-world events but is not predicted
through conventional intelligence testing.
As Michael Polanyi (1967, p. 4), a precursor in this field, posits in
his work, Tacit Dimension, we should start from the fact that “we can
know more than we can tell.” He termed this prelogical phase of
knowing as tacit knowledge: it comprises a range of conceptual and
sensory information and images that can be brought to bear in an
attempt to make meaning. Although importance is ascribed to this
notion of tacit knowledge, the voices of dissent should also be
acknowledged. Jensen (1993) asserted, “tacit knowledge seems an
exceedingly mysterious variable, theoretically and empirically.”
According to Jensen, it is neither a personality measure nor a predic-
tor of scholastic performance. More empirical support is needed on
how best to measure tacit knowledge for the concept to become the-
oretically grounded.
Somesh and Bogler (1999) scrutinized the main themes of tacit
knowledge; “informal and implicit knowledge used to achieve one’s
goals.” Undergraduate students were scrutinized: students’ socioeco-
nomic status (SES) and gender were also examined for variance in
tacit knowledge and how it relates to academic achievement.
Employing a questionnaire consisting of biographical information and
a tacit knowledge scale that they developed, they found that students
with low SES made more use of tacit knowledge than students with
high SES. This finding, if validated, is particularly interesting to my
study because low SES is usually associated in a lot of studies with
deficiency; here, however, what is usually referred to as “street smart”
BENJAMIN ENOMA
176

or tacit knowledge is appropriated more by students with low SES.
Tacit knowledge is not an unconscious possession but a subconscious,
latent ability that is appropriated on the basis of needs.
What difference would it make if tacit knowledge were valued in
the admission process? What if ways were explored of assessing differ-
ent discursive knowledges in the admissions decisions? Furthermore
in the study, it was revealed that students with high tacit knowledge
achieved higher academic grades than students who had low tacit
knowledge. The significant inference drawn here concerns the impor-
tance of tacit knowledge to student success in learning institutions.
The nature of tacit knowledge is intrinsic to the individual, that is,
action-oriented knowledge acquired without direction or help from
others, yet it allows individuals to appropriate resources to achieve the
goals that they personally value. They are able to utilize resources like
the reference library, tutorial services, and academic advisors and
discover the “hidden curriculum.”
An area of study that will be of great interest will be to evaluate
factors that surround the acquisition of tacit knowledge. Is the acqui-
sition propelled by hardship and the instinct to survive? The answer
will shed some light on why low SES students rank higher in tacit
knowledge than high SES students.
On the other hand, meritocracy is a formal system by which social
advancement or attainment is based upon cognitive ability and
achievement, which began with the Civil Service Reform in England
in the 1870s. When Michael Young, the British sociologist, coined the
word meritocracy in his celebrated essay, “The Rise of the
Meritocracy” in 1958, it had a negative connotation. In this futuristic
exposition, the social place or status of the individual would be deter-
mined by IQ plus effort (I  E  M). There are many criticisms of
the notion of meritocracy akin to Young’s original position. Some
critical theorists posit that the power elite subscribe to merit simply to
legitimize a system where social position is really determined by class,
birth, and wealth. I agree with the foregoing argument to the extent
that the pursuits of and reliance on merit in a society like the United
States, where race is inextricably linked to class and social standing
serves to reify the “status quo.”
Seligman (1994) draws a comparison between Young’s 2034 futur-
istic setting to Richard Herrnstein and Charles Murray’s (1994) “The
Bell Curve,” praising the prescient Young for painting a realistic pic-
ture of what life has become in present-day America. Is cognitive abil-
ity central to social mobility and economic success? Robert Hauser
offers a response of sorts in his working paper: “Meritocracy,
Cognitive Ability, and the Sources of Occupational Success.” Much of
MERITOCRATIC MYTHOLOGY: CONSTRUCTING SUCCESS
177

the standard psychometric evidence is weak, but ability does play a
significant role in social stratification, primarily by way of its influence
on schooling. There is no clear evidence of trend in the role of cogni-
tive ability in the stratification process, and other social psychological
variables may be equally important. There is no evidence that cogni-
tive ability is the central variable in the process of stratification, but there
is ample reason for concern that recent and prospective changes in the
structure of American education will raise its importance (Hauser,
2002). Much of the controversy over meritocracy and it relationship
to success lies on the issue of fairness and equal opportunity.
Employing cognitive ability as the launch pad for merit is historically
situated in the Ivory Tower’s social engineering efforts.
James Bryant Conant, who on becoming the president of Harvard
in 1933 encouraged one of his deans, Henry Chauncey, to embark on
an ambitious program of educational testing are two looming figures
in this account. The goal was lofty, that is, the future of American
democracy crucially depended on opening up its elite educational
institutions to a much wider constituency than the rich and the
famous. The aim was to create, as Lemann (1999) puts it, “a scientized
social utopia” by applying a standard gauge to people.
There is a body of literature showing that IQ tests are not culture
free or guarantors of educational attainment. Thus, the lofty goals of
Conant and Chauncey were quickly sabotaged by the aristocracy and
the meritocratic recruits; they had learned how to play by the new
rules and found ways to get their children into the best universities via
preparatory programs like “crammers” in New York that coached stu-
dents on how to excel at the college boards. Thus, the original drive
of moral education and inclusion of the poor and minority took a back
seat to the search for merit, which in this experiment meant total
reliance on academic testing ability.
Cognition Discourses
The notion that intelligence is not an intrinsic quality that a human
being possesses rather than a social and material distribution that peo-
ple accomplish via interaction and activity is quite revolutionary. This
claim takes proponents of eugenics and social Darwinists to task on
the issue of intrinsic, individual, intellectual endowment and gene
superiority. Pea (1993) posits that cognition is something a human
does and not the acts of designed objects. His point delineates
between solitary intelligence and distributed intelligence. The former
is the largely held view in the field of education. It invokes intelligence
as a property of the individual mind, its capacity to absorb new
BENJAMIN ENOMA
178

information, retain, recall, and apply its store of information in various
circumstances. The humanists basically see the mind as muscle to
be furnished, flexed, and disciplined through a systematic study of
stru tured curriculum. This is what standardized testing and school
assessments are based on.
Pea’s premise is sound in that the mind rarely works alone when
doing or practicing cognition. It always works in conjunction and
consortium with artifacts, persons, and environments, natural or arti-
ficial. Meaning making is a confluence of activity enabled by the indi-
vidual agent and the surrounding resources. How individuals
appropriate the resources in the environment is of considerable inter-
est. The notion that an individual is unable to learn because he or she
is mentally weak by default of race or social class finds a new explanation.
The presence or absence, and the appropriation or the lack thereof, of
the “cultural capital” and “artifactual” resources necessary to accom-
plish intelligence in their respective environments or activities becomes
pertinent.
Summation
The relationship between student success and the meritocracy is
profoundly ironical; the pretext of the meritocracy is to produce a
classless society through the use of competitive standardized tests in
schools. The idea that “meritocrats” (high scorers) in the tests would
emerge from various strata of the society, thereby redistributing social
order and expanding the patterns of privilege has turned on its ear.
The reality is that meritocracy over time degenerates into aristocracy.
The emerging high scorers and every one in position of privilege
begin to use their power and sophistication to turn the odds in their
favor and assure certain rites of passage for their forebears; the so-called
legacy candidates in postsecondary institutions applicant pool.
The essential flaw in the meritocracy is that it is not altruistic;
meritocrats or the successful students assume the responsibility of
paving the way of easier access for their kith and kin by investing their
newly acquired social and cultural capital. This responsibility ultimately
circumvents the range and strata of society where high scorers come
from. They create, in Vygotskian terms, a robust zone of proximal
development (ZPD), where the vocabulary of the tests and prepara-
tory regimen are appropriated around the dinner tables or in exclusive
prep programs.
Student success is not the exclusive preserve of the privileged and
the wealthy; the odds are stacked in their favor, the privileged hold a
comparative advantage over the commoners. Sadly in this meritocracy,
MERITOCRATIC MYTHOLOGY: CONSTRUCTING SUCCESS
179

every time a commoner crosses the great divide and succeeds, he or
she by default morphs into a privileged person and may become the
ferry across the gulf that separates his or her poor from the privileged.
On the surface there seems to be little that is wrong with this pic-
ture because assuredly there is a chance every once in a while that the
poor can get over this great divide and in time ferry some or all of
their own across, except that the privileged are who they are by the
dimension of control. The privilege control access, control the tests,
control the funding, control the curriculum and the administration,
and have a huge say in the morphing or transformation process.
Have we essentially crossed the Rubicon in this matter? Or is there
any hope for a change? My response is an emphatic yes to hope.
Critical theorists underscore the importance of agency; individuals can
liberate themselves from the oppression of power and shape and
assume control over their own lives; the answer lies in a revolutionary
epistemology and ontology of knowledge production. Kincheloe
speaks of this leitmotif for critical teachers and the allure of Freire’s
impassioned spirit and radical love, “Critical pedagogy is an ambitious
entity that seeks nothing less than a form of educational adventurism
that takes us where nobody’s gone before” (Kincheloe, 2004).
Reeducating the world in tandem, in groups, or at the very least one
mind at a time is progressive.
References
Farley, J. (2000). Majority–Minority Relations, 4th Edn. Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice Hall.
The Gallup Poll (1998). Have and Have-Nots: Perceptions of Fairness and
Opportunity. A study based on a survey of 5,001 American adults, con-
ducted between April 23 and May 31, 1998.
Hauser, R. M. (2002). Meritocracy, Cognitive Ability, and the Sources of
Occupational Success. Center for Demography and Ecology, Department
of Sociology, Madison: University of Wisconsin.
Hernstein, R. and C. Murray (1994). The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class
Structure in American Life. New York: The Free Press.
Jensen, A. R. (1993). Test Validity: g versus “tacit Knowledge.” Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 2, 1, pp. 9–10.
Johnstone, D. B. (1992). The University, Democracy, and the Challenge to
Meritocracy. Interchange, 23, 1–2, pp. 19–23.
Kantor, H. and B. Brenzel (1992). Urban Education and the “Truly
Disadvantaged”: The Historical Roots of the Contemporary Crisis
1945–1990. Teachers College Record, 94, 2, pp. 278–314.
Kincheloe, J. L. (2004) Critical Pedagogy Primer. New York: Peter Lang.
BENJAMIN ENOMA
180

Pea, R. D. (1993). Practices of Distributed Intelligence and Designs for
Education. In G. Salomon (ed.), Distributed Cognitions, pp. 47–87. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Polanyi, M. (1967). The Tacit Dimension. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.
Sadovnik, A. R. and S. F. Semel (1998). “Schools of Tomorrow,” Schools of
Today: What Happened to Progressive Education. New York: Lang.
Seligman, D. (1994). Foretelling the Bell Curve. The Rise of the Meritocracy.
National Review, 46, 12, p. 55.
Somesh, A. and R. Bogler (1999). Tacit Knowledge in Academia; Its Effect
on Student Learning and Achievement. Journal of Psychology, 133, 6,
pp. 605–617.
Stanley, T. J. (2001). The Millionaire Mind, pp. 31–35. Kansas, MO: McMeel
Publishers.
Sternberg, R. J., R. K. Wagner, W. M. Williams and J. A. Horvath (1995).
Testing Common Sense. American Psychologist, 50, 11, pp. 912–927.
Tyack, David B. (1974). The One Best System: A History of American Urban
Education, pp. 11, 180. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Zink, L. (Fall 1997). Is the Meritocracy Necessary Even at the Doors of
Academe? Journal of College Admission 157, pp. 22–29.
MERITOCRATIC MYTHOLOGY: CONSTRUCTING SUCCESS
181

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 10
What Is Not Known about Genius
Ray McDermott
Lawgivers, statesmen, religious leaders, discoverers, inventors, therefore
only seem to shape civilization. The deep-seated, blind, and intricate forces
that shape culture, also mold the so-called creative leaders of society as
essentially as they mold the mass of humanity. Progress . . . is something
that makes itself. We do not make it.
Alfred Louis Kroeber, 
Configurations of Culture Growth, 1944
As for attributing “genius” to men who have “changed the course of his-
tory,” we have seen that an idiot or a goose can accomplish it just as well.
It is not high or low levels of ability that is significant in such contexts; it is
being strategically situated in a moving constellation of events.
Leslie A. White, The Science of Culture, 1949
Contrary to the anthropological opinions of Kroeber and White
during the mid-century, genius is taken by current practice to be a
kind of person with extraordinary intelligence who gets used to
accomplish great things. If the difference between a normal person
and a talented one is that of degree, then the difference between a
talented person and a genius is that of kind. By this logic, Solieri was
talented and Mozart a genius. New generations define genius by
matching seeming solutions to apparent problems, and exemplars of
genius—a new Newton, Balzac, Joyce, or Einstein—is identified,
explained, and celebrated. Every generation also worries about lost
possible geniuses. Sometimes a forgotten or ignored genius is remem-
bered. Only rarely is the very idea of genius confronted. The genius
drama needs a new analysis.
The first section of this chapter offers a skeleton history of the term
genius from 1650 to 1900 and identifies a transition from a renais-
sance genius as a momentary medium for inspiration to a particular
kind of special person with an established position in society. By 1750,

says Kenneth Frieden, “a craze of theoretical writings urges that the
inspired need not have a genius; instead, the inspired author has genius
or is a genius” (1985, p. 66; emphasis added). By 1750, the genius
was a position in European society. Once the throne was built, it had
to be filled. When there were no geniuses available, the throne had to
be filled nonetheless; if there were a plethora of geniuses available, one
person had to be put on the throne nonethemore. As the category
genius was ill defined, the attribution of genius was an opportunity for
political mischief. A genius should be more intelligent than less, yes,
and more accomplished than less, yes again, but these slippery words
had a direction: The genius list was composed of white males from
powerful European states. Whatever the categories, however applied,
the results were exclusive. By 1750, genius was located only in an
occasional, white, male, individual mind. Genius thereafter has been
often in the service of unjust hierarchy. Inherent genius has been
conducting business—literally business—in a niche that delivers a
hierarchy of the smart over the seemingly less inventive and less
creative.
The second section of this chapter gathers confrontations with
genius as a kind of person with high intelligence. Centuries of coun-
ters easily expose the political mayhem invited by conceptions of
genius as an inherently gifted and worthy person. The chapter also cri-
tiques institutionalized uses of inherent intelligence as a category that
mocks the complex lives of children. Anthropologists have tried to
disrupt learning categories that acquire people near the bottom of the
social order—the illiterate, the inarticulate, the learning disabled (e.g.,
McDermott, 1988, 1993; Varenne and McDermott, 1998). This
chapter does the same for a kind of person in the luxury seats.
Confrontations with genius between 1650 and 1900 are resources for
current struggles—Kroeber, White, and then some—against the easy
use of inherent ability as an apology for inequalities in opportunity
and achievement across gender, race, and class borders. Named posi-
tions in a hierarchy usually have more precise borders—arbitrary, yes,
but replicably so—than the complex persons they acquire or exclude.
The precise mismeasure of intelligence has been institutionalized in
schools and popular media as a tool for ignoring the complexity of
children. Genius has the top position in a hierarchy of intelligence
types that supports a theory of the mind often used to keep everyone
in place.
Section three points to ties between the attribution of intelligence
and already established inequalities. The genius figure has been used
to erase women, racial minorities, and school children of all kinds.
Name ten women geniuses. It is possible, but only after research and
RAY MCDERMOTT
184

argument. Now name ten recognized African American geniuses. The
next one seems easier: Name ten Jewish geniuses. Now it gets diffi-
cult: Name ten Jewish geniuses in Europe in the 1930s and check
their fate in the 1940s. Whether in naming or maiming, there are
inequalities in genius sighting. Inherent genius might be a bad idea
with bad consequences. As an invitation to justify and/or degrade the
cognitive best over the rest, naming a genius can be an occasion of
social violence.
The news offered in this chapter is old—and unfortunately forgot-
ten. For the past 50 years, anthropologists have been writing critiques
of what happens to children in American schools, and many have cri-
tiqued psychology for supplying an easy mentalistic language for
describing, diagnosing, and explaining differential ability and intelli-
gence. Cognitive and psychometric psychology have become so insti-
tutionalized in commonsense that they are part of what any
ethnographer interested in thinking and learning must reject. How
nice it is to find that genius—a key category in psychological accounts
of what makes people special—has been held in suspicion and dramat-
ically critiqued for hundreds of years before current biases took root.
This chapter tries to recover the critical tradition.
Genius, Position Of
In 1711, Joseph Addison1 announced a new object for public
scrutiny: those few who “draw the Admiration of all the World upon
them, and stand up as the Prodigies of Mankind, who by mere
Strength of natural Parts, and without any assistance of Art or
Learning, have produced Works that were the Delight of their own
Times and the Wonder of Prosperity” (p. 282). He listed first
Old Testament poets, Homer, and Virgil. Next came Pindar and
Shakespeare. There were no scientists on his list, although Newton’s
genius was in the air, what with him standing rarified on the shoulders
of others (Koyré, 1952). Everyone had an opinion on genius. Along
with an Enlightenment commitment to reason, Denis Diderot, from
1750 on, celebrated the imagination of individual genius. Herbert
Dieckmann makes the strong case: “The transition from the concep-
tion of genius as mere talent to the conception of the genius as an
individual was accomplished through a specific act of thought . . .
Diderot accomplished this act of thought” (1941, p. 152; see also
Jaffe, 1980). For Diderot, even government must cater to the
inspired—encourage them, yes, and put up with their foibles. If
forced to choose between Racine, a great person without poetry, and
Racine, a jerk with poetry, society must settle for and celebrate the
WHAT IS NOT KNOWN ABOUT GENIUS
185

poet—“De Racine méchant que reste-t-il? Rien. De Racine homme de
genie? L’ouvrage est éternal” (cited in Dieckmann, 1941, pp. 181–182).
There must be a place for the eternal work of genius. Racine “was of
use only to people he didn’t know, at a time when he ceased to live”
(Diderot, 1964, p. 15). Diderot’s point is embodied by Romanticism
for the next 50 years, and the genius becomes not only a kind of per-
son who/that exists, but also one that/who is easy to see. By 1832,
Honoré de Balzac reports that “to most biographers the head of a
man of genius rises above the herd as some noble plant in the fields
attracts the eye of a botanist in its splendor” (2002, p. 2). Getting
seen by the right people became the only problem. Genius had
become a goal, something to strive for, to be discovered as—ahhh, to
be seen rising “above the herd.”
Through the twentieth century, framing genius as a kind of person
became unremarkable. It is now commonsense. Popular movies and
plays feast on the tensions of being smart, smarter, and smartest (e.g.,
A Beautiful Mind, Searching for Bobby Fischer, Good Will Hunting,
Finding Forrester, Genius, Proof ); newspapers print top-ten genius
lists; hundreds of books advise how to unlock individual genius; hun-
dreds more celebrate a specific genius; psychologists measure both
genius and the potential for genius; social scientists explain individual
genius, why this person and not that, why more from one group than
another; university admissions seek potential geniuses; and genius
clubs sponsor shared activities from math problems and puzzles to
dating.
How did the shift take place, and why does it now make easy com-
monsense to talk about genius in individualistic terms? One answer
comes from seeing genius in the context of co-occurring political and
economic events: the rise of capitalism, colonialism, democracy,
racism, and individualism. Struggles with genius by three thinkers a
century apart from each other illustrate the changing contexts of their
ideas. Blaise Pascal (1623–1662), Adam Smith (1723–1790), and
Francis Galton (1822–1911) make a continuum on genius from ill-
placed praise for a man of science in the service of God (Pascal),
through irrelevant praise for a successful participant in a reasonable
and productive economy (Smith), to rightful praise for a person natu-
rally gifted with a propensity for great achievement (Galton). Two
hundred years of radical economic change after Pascal, Galton marks
the start of a commodified genius: quantified intelligence on sale as a
product that promises breakthroughs and still more production. For
Galton, Pascal’s God becomes nature’s loaded dice box that keeps
coming up with great intelligence for English males, and Smith’s
rational economy is made into a display board for the grandeur of
RAY MCDERMOTT
186

great minds, operationalized by Galton as “men of eminence.” As
Pascal is shockingly and Smith surprisingly different from the present
mindset, I offer Pascal, then Smith, and finally Galton as contrasting
moves along the way to current biases.
A comment on sources: Histories of genius and related ideas do
not typically feature Pascal’s resistance or Smith’s dismissal and are
limited to more enthusiastic theories of artistic and scientific genius
(Nahm, 1965; Engell, 1981; Murray, 1989). A usual lineup starts
with Addison in 1711 and continues with a French Enlightenment
figure (say, Diderot), a Scottish Enlightenment celebration of genius
(Duff, Gerard), Kant, a Romantic vision (early Goethe, Coleridge),
often Thomas Carlyle, and finally a Darwinian and Freudian theory.
This chapter’s list—Pascal, Smith, and Galton in this section, Henry
Fielding, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and George Plekhanov in the next—
roughly follows the same outline, but with more complaints about
the injustices of genius touting. To Addison and Diderot, I have
added the earlier views of Pascal, Smith represents the Scottish
Enlightenment, Emerson is the more profound partner in dialog with
Carlyle, Galton develops a Darwinian thesis, and in Plekhanov, I offer
not a Freudian, but a Marxist critique of the hero and genius figure.
Together these sources offer forgotten critiques from a wide range of
disciplines (science, philosophy, economics, literature, and psychol-
ogy) and nationalities (English, French, Scottish, Russian, and
American; the last rarely figures in mainstream histories of genius
theory).
In 1652, Pascal was becoming the toast of Europe for his scientific
work on the geometry of conic sections and the vacuum (and more to
come with early versions of calculus and probability theory). After he
sent his new calculating machine to Queen Christina of Sweden, she
said she admired Pascal for his clarity and commitment to proof over
appearances. A friend reported that the Queen thought Pascal was
“one of those geniuses for whom the Queen had been searching”
(Cailliet, 1961, p. 96). Pascal was taken aback. He had two public
loves, science and God—or in a more secular or operational vein,
inquiry and humility—and he felt a conflict between them.
Knowledge and fame were both the means and end of science, and the
humble acknowledgement of ignorance performed the same dual
service for his theology. To be “one of those geniuses for whom the
Queen had been searching” is difficult to do with humility? Let us call
this Pascal’s problem: As an invitation to self-pride, being called a
genius is an occasion of sin.
Pascal tried to give up science to save his humility, but soon
found that he was so proud of being humble, he might as well be a
WHAT IS NOT KNOWN ABOUT GENIUS
187

practicing genius. He sounded a warning:
Discourses on humility give occasion of pride to conceited persons and
of humility to the humble. Even so, those on skepticism lead dogma-
tists to dogmatize. Few men speak humbly of humility, chastely of
chastity, or skeptically of skepticism. (Fragment 255; I cite the Pensées
of 1670 by Fragment number only)
A healthy tie between knowledge and humility is difficult to maintain
in the face of adoration. Pascal said little about genius—only that
great intellect is much better than power and riches, but infinitely less
worthy than charity (Fragment 852)—but he did offer a social theory
of authorship:
Certain authors, speaking of their works, say: “My book,” “My com-
mentary,” “My history,” etc. They resemble middle-class people who
have a house of their own and always have “My house” on their tongue.
They would do better to say: “Our book,” “Our commentary,” “Our
history,” etc., because there is in them usually more of other people’s
than their own. (Fragment 43)
The assault of pride on humility is softened if others are acknowl-
edged, although award ceremonies show how individually royal a
“we” or an “our” can be. Humility that brings pride to the proud
reveals a deeper problem. For Pascal, “we are nothing but falsehood,
duplicity, contradiction: we both conceal and disguise ourselves from
ourselves” (Fragment 255). Neither rejecting science nor embracing
humility could release him from bad faith. Genius and humility are
not paired opposites, but each is an occasion for defining and con-
trasting the other in an unending sequence of concealment and dis-
guise. Pascal used grandeur and wretchedness to illustrate his case:
Wretchedness being deduced from grandeur, and grandeur from
wretchedness, some have inferred man’s wretchedness all the more
because they have taken his grandeur as proof thereof, while others have
deduced his grandeur with all the more force because they have inferred
it from his very wretchedness. All that the one side has been able to say
in proof of his grandeur has only served the other side as an argument of
his wretchedness, for the greater a man’s fall, the more wretched he is;
and vice-versa. The one side tends toward the other in an endless circle,
certain as it is that in proportion as men are enlightened they discover
both grandeur and wretchedness in man. (Fragment 237)
Ditto Pascal on genius and humility, or science and ignorance: “The
one side tends toward the other in an endless circle.” Here is a
RAY MCDERMOTT
188

translation from the English of grandeur to the English of genius:
Stupidity being deduced from genius, and genius from stupidity, some
have inferred man’s stupidity all the more because they have taken his
genius as proof thereof, while others have deduced his genius with all
the more force because they have inferred it from his very stupidity. All
that the one side has been able to say in proof of his genius has only
served the other side as an argument of his stupidity, for the greater a
man’s fall, the dumber he is; and vice-versa. The one side tends toward
the other in an endless circle, certain as it is that in proportion as men
are enlightened they discover both genius and stupidity in man.
(adapted from Fragment 237; emphasis added)
It is a mistake to freeze either grandeur or wretchedness into place
without regard for how they together infer, require, and even create
each other. The same is true for genius and stupidity. How could
Pascal be a man of knowledge when the very label depended on a
denial of his ignorance? How could he be a man of knowledge when
the very label implied that a gift from God was his possession? How
could he be a genius without confusing something borrowed with
something owned? No wonder two recent books (Rogers, 1999;
Bourdieu, 2000) have joined an older one (Goldmann, 1964) claim-
ing in Pascal a social theory celebrating people on the bottom and
confronting those on the top.
The term genius does not acknowledge the reticular ties between
grandeur and ignorance, not in 1652 and much less today. For almost
2,000 years, the term had a stable history in Latin as a guardian spirit.
The renaissance genius took a second referent as a person who,
momentarily inspired by God, could perform a great task (Screech,
1983). Pascal could live with either definition, but by 1650, genius
was developing the personal property meaning that would become
commonsense a century later and lead cumulatively to its current
sense as a person with a naturally brilliant intelligence. Humility was
absented as personal pride became valued. Ignorance was hidden as
pure intelligence became valued. The ascription of genius shifted from
moments and their minds to minds and their moments.
That Pascal doubted the genius that heads of state might seek was
not apparent in his letter of appreciation to Queen Christina. From
one scientist to another, from one with no formal power to a royal
leader, Pascal invoked a world that has existed for only moments in
the centuries since:
It is Your Majesty, Madame, who furnishes to the universe this unique
example of which it was lacking. It is You in whom power is dispensed
WHAT IS NOT KNOWN ABOUT GENIUS
189

by the life of knowledge, and knowledge exalted by the luster of
authority. (Pascal, 1989a, p. 31)
What a good idea: Science and authority working together, bringing
about a more lustrous world. In the kingdom of the smart, the large-
brained man should be king. We should have a democracy of the mind.
Make that a monarchy for Pascal, but he was formulating a coming
world that would claim to have a democracy of intelligence based on
merit and achievement. Even as he wrote to the queen, Pascal likely
doubted his own dream (as he would doubt the grounds of any self-
celebration). If all achievements are borrowed from the moment, if they
are gifts from God, how can they be a source of a moral order run by
individuals arranged in a hierarchy of ascribed genius? Are the light of
science and the luster of authority to shine only through special indi-
viduals who are mentally fast, complex, articulate, and demonstrably
correct? We should all have, says Pascal, “a double conception . . . if you
act outwardly with men in accordance to your rank, you ought to rec-
ognize, by a more hidden, but more genuine conception, that you have
nothing naturally that is superior to them. If the public conception ele-
vates you in a perfect equality with all mankind, let the other humble
you and keep you in a perfect equality with all mankind; for that is your
natural state” (1989b, p. 74). Many contemporary societies are placing
their bets on a version of nature that delivers an inherent best, and
measures of intelligence and aptitude—academic degrees along with
IQ, SAT, GRE scores—now dominate access to positions of eminence.
Are minds—the modern kinds of minds that process information and
solve problems—to be the units of social order and responsibility?
A century after Pascal, Adam Smith gave a second reason to eschew
a kingdom of the smart:
Moralists exhort us to charity and compassion. They warn us against the
fascination of greatness. This fascination, indeed, is so powerful, that the
rich and the great are too often preferred to the wise and the virtuous.
Nature has widely judged that the distinction of ranks, the peace and
order of society, would rest more securely upon the plain and palpable
difference of birth and fortune, than upon the invisible and uncertain
difference of wisdom and virtue. The undistinguishing eyes of the great
mob of mankind can well enough perceive the former; it is with diffi-
culty that the nice discernment of the wise and the virtuous can some-
times distinguish the latter. In the order of all those recommendations,
the benevolent wisdom of nature is equally evident. (1976, p. 226)
For Pascal, reliance on wisdom and virtue leads to arrogance. For
Smith, it leads to misperception and mayhem. Smith was not a fan of
RAY MCDERMOTT
190

the “nature” that delivers rank by birth and fortune. He preferred
market arrangements that could deliver prosperity to all. A new order
would develop with the new economy, not by a celebration of indi-
vidual creativity or wisdom. Better to argue for a hierarchy based on
birth and wealth than to rely on the illusive subtlety and finesse
required of a hierarchy based on creativity.
If capitalism is to work full steam ahead, self-interest, ambition, and
even greed must supply the motivational impetus. For Smith, the raw
energy of self-interest distributed across a population can lead to
increased prosperity. Smith also stated limits. Contemporary right-
wing apologists stress Smith’s objections to state intervention in free
trade, but he had a wider range of concerns. He hated monopolies
most of all, and, yes, for the ways they interrupted free trade. He
hated poverty too, and his texts consistently resolved conflicts
between the freedoms of the rich and the suffering of the poor in
favor of helping the poor (Rothschild, 2001). In a proper economy,
everyone, including the poor, moves forward. What then of genius?
For Smith, the eighteenth-century genius exists only as a consequence
of training and, more importantly, of training delivered in a division of
labor:
The difference in natural talents in different men is, in reality, much
less than we are aware of; and the very different genius which appears
to distinguish men of different professions, when grown up to maturity,
is not upon many occasions so much the cause as the effect of the
division of labor . . . the most dissimilar geniuses are of use to each
other; the different produces of their respective talents, by the general
disposition to truck, barter, and exchange, being brought, as it were,
into a common stock, where every man may purchase whatever part of
the produce of other men’s talents he has occasion for. (Smith, 1988,
pp. 14–15)
In a proper economy, there would be no need for genius. Everyone’s
labor, “by the general disposition to truck, barter, and exchange,”
would be “brought, as it were, into a common stock,” and so too
would everyone’s mental labor. “In great social questions,” said
Bernard Shaw much later, “we are dealing with the abilities of
ordinary citizens; that is, the abilities we can depend on everyone
except invalids and idiots possessing, and not with what one man or
woman in ten thousand can do” (1928, p. 172). The genius is a
monopoly of intelligence that holds back full participation in the mar-
ket of ideas, just as industrial monopoly limits participation in the
market of goods. The result, in both cases, is an improper division of
labor. The poor must be educated, said Smith, in order to participate,
WHAT IS NOT KNOWN ABOUT GENIUS
191

and the smart state foots the bill (1994). The more people know,
the greater the possibility labor will expand production and general
prosperity.
Without contrasting Pascal and Smith,2 we can use them as a view-
ing platform for what we have since produced: a kingdom of the
seemingly smart, located arbitrarily, and serving a hierarchy of meas-
ured intelligence in ways consistent with and legitimizing the same
class and race divisions once brought about, only more obviously, by
wealth, color, and fortune. To Pascal’s horror, we have advanced ties
between knowledge and arrogance. To Smith’s horror, we have
advanced ties between success and an arbitrary categorization of wis-
dom and virtue. Worse than arrogance or misjudgment, we have com-
bined them in the service of elites. We have allowed school and test
results to stand for wisdom and virtue. The measure of the new per-
son is hard cold scores and the currency that follows in their wake, and
what a wake it has been: arbitrary demoralizing facts, legally binding,
politically blinding. The term genius has been part of this trend. In
Pascal’s terms, genius has become an occasion of sin.
The term genius did not change on its own, but with a set of
related terms: creativity, individual, imagination, progress, knowledge,
science, insanity, race, intelligence, and human nature. Together they
pointed to an emerging theory of mind well fitted to the emerging
capitalism that has been the context for the institutionalization of
genius. An advanced capitalist state does not have to develop an exclu-
sively cognitive, individualistic account of the mind, but it often does.
When everyone in a society is pitted against everyone else in the pur-
suit of riches, an apparatus that measures every intelligence against
every other in arbitrary ways that correlate with already existing class
and race borders is likely a growth industry. The genius under capital-
ism has an efficient mind: less has to go in, more comes out, the less
to be worried about, the more to be sold. It is a capitalist’s dream
factory transferred to the mind.
In 1869, Galton introduced inherent genius in men of great
eminence while controlling for education. He wanted to show that
psychological characteristics worked by the same rules of inheritance
as physical traits, that “out of two varieties of any race of animal who
are equally endowed in other respects, the most intelligent variety is
sure to prevail in the battle of life” (Galton, 1962, p. 292). He was an
inventive researcher, his methods still influential. For genius, he gath-
ered achievement data on the adopted sons of Catholic popes and
bishops and found that the young men, despite an abundance of edu-
cation and good connections, did not achieve anything like their men-
tors. He used related techniques to show the inefficacy of prayer
RAY MCDERMOTT
192

(Galton, 1872), but these results, controversial at the time, have
dropped comparatively from view. (He did not test every possibility: If
celibacy were as ineffective as prayer, the adopted sons of bishops
might have had a full line inheritance from their mentors.) He
presided over a marriage of Adam Smith and Charles Darwin, of self-
interest and natural selection, together in an Inquiry into the Nature
and Causes of the Wealth of Creations among upper class
Englishmen. Eminence was male, muscular, and moneyed. Eminence
was a top-draw power broker and cutthroat capitalist. Of the 13 kinds
of genius he investigated, most (Judges, Statesmen, Peerages,
Commanders, Literary Men, Men of Science, Divines, Senior Classics
at Cambridge, Oarsmen, and Wrestlers) were categorically limited to
his classmates (although he listed 4 women among his 47 Literary
Men), and only the Poet, Musician, and Painter categories could eas-
ily admit women or persons of lower birth. Where Pascal feared arro-
gance and Smith feared the celebration of irrelevant knowledge,
Galton showed no fear at all. Arbitrary hierarchy was not forsaken, but
celebrated, and arrogantly so. Nature made upper class Englishmen
this way. They own it. Genius is their property, and naturally so.
Most social theory could explain Galton’s results better than he
did, but, by adding science to the biases of the day, he captured the
public imaginary. His psychological studies of genius have been cru-
cial to bell curve theories of individual differences that have turned
schools into the early socialization and measurement arm of class and
race structures in the United States (Henry, 1963; Bowles and Gintis,
1974; Gould, 1995). There were alternatives then, as now, but the
bell curve mentality did not and does not go away. Galton’s
Hereditary Genius was published in 1869, the same year John Stuart
Mill, in the Subjection of Women, ruled out biological constraints on
the achievements of women, and Leo Tolstoy, in War and Peace,
showed that the genius of military generals was best found in those
who cowered in the right place at the right time before claiming vic-
tory (Latour, 1988). Alternatives available to Galton and his readers
then, as now, were excellent, and for the last 40 years, every new toll
of the bell curve of individual differences—with geniuses at one end
and people of color at the other—has been devastated by empirical
critique. What is left out at first is obvious: the environment in which
organisms grow, the nurture that brings nature to bloom. What is less
obviously left out is more crucial: It’s us. It’s Galton’s readers, not his
breeders, who are at fault. Genius is an attractive position at the top of
a hierarchy of positions in which we must take our place. Genius sells,
and we buy. Genius creates stupidity and, somewhere between, the
rest are put into place. There is enough injustice in this intelligence
WHAT IS NOT KNOWN ABOUT GENIUS
193

game for many3 to call for a new society that makes better use of the
wisdom of its people.
Genius, Confrontations With
Addison identified the heroic, individual genius in the tensions of his
times, and the same tensions soon spurred critiques. While the genius
figure was still being hammered into shape, Henry Fielding
(1707–1754) laughed at how much reality had to be ignored to make
believe that genius is a constant, that a genius is always a genius,
morally and intellectually so. While facing a new nation in search of an
intellectual agenda, Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–1882) formulated
what a genius might be in a democratic society. With George
Plekhanov (1857–1918), we are afforded less luxury and asked to put
individual grandeur and genius back into the flow of the history that
made achievement possible. These three points of view continue as
alternatives to present arrangements.
Laughing at genius: To a growing list of who is a genius, Fielding
added Jonathan Wild for contrast. Wild was a real person about whom
Fielding wrote a fiction. The real Wild was a prominent criminal who
had been hanged in 1725. The novel’s Wild is no less a rogue, but an
ingenious one:
He was scarce settled at school before he gave marks of his lofty and
aspiring temper; and was regarded by all his schoolfellows with that def-
erence which men generally pay to those superior geniuses who will
exact it of them. (1947, p. 9)
Fielding shows that being one step ahead of others should not be con-
fused with wisdom or virtue:
We must endeavor to remove some errors of opinion which mankind
have, by the disingenuity of writers, contracted: for these, from their
fear of contradicting the obsolete and absurd doctrines of a set of sim-
ple fellows, called in derision, sages or philosophers, have endeavored,
as much as possible, to confound the two ideas of greatness and
goodness: whereas no two things can possibly be more distinct from
each other, for greatness consists in bringing all manner of mischief on
mankind, and goodness removing it from them. (1947, p. 2; emphasis
added)
Wild was supported by both the great mental agility required of a suc-
cessful con man and a cast of supporters waiting for the spoils of his arts.
RAY MCDERMOTT
194

Fielding makes full fun of Wild’s capacities:
He was wonderfully ready at creating by means of those great arts
which the vulgar call treachery, dissembling, promising, lying, false-
hood, etc., but which are by great men summed up in the collective
name of policy, or politics, or rather pollitrics; an art of which, as is the
highest excellence of human nature, perhaps our great man was the
most eminent master. (1947, p. 76)
Frieden reports that Fielding also allows, in Tom Jones, for genius as
“ ‘a quick and sagacious Penetration into the true Essence of all the
Objects of our Contemplation’ ” (1985, pp. 71–72). And why should
not he? We could use more such moments—if only we could recog-
nize them for sure, if only we were organized to make good use of
them, if only we had an institutional program for their leading to the
enhancement of all. Too bad Fielding did not offer a theory that con-
fronts genius, or the position of genius, as an incomplete and some-
times dangerous idea. Others have since given it a try.
Democratizing genius: Can the word genius be used to help build
a world in which genius might flourish? Let us call this Emerson’s
problem. He had read Smith, but his ideas on genius came from
Plutarch, Goethe, and, half by contrast, from his long-term corre-
spondent, Thomas Carlyle. Emerson’s genius is a fully attractive char-
acter that celebrates less the individual bearer of genius and more the
people who delegate a representative for the secret wonders of their
minds. The term fully allows how much the genius takes from those
around, not as in fully stuffed by their biases, but as in fully represen-
tative of their wisdom: “the greatest genius is the most indebted man”
(Emerson, 1995; p. 127). Attractive allows how useful a genius might
be to all around: the great poet gets praise for “appraising us not of his
wealth but of the common wealth” (1990, p. 204). Representative is
the appropriate political term for Emerson’s genius. He was writing
for a new democracy promising individuals conditions of growth that
would in turn allow further growth for all (Dewey, 1903; J. McDermott,
1986; Shklar, 1990). Emerson’s genius, as representative, seeks new
connections, not to stand above others, but to go deeper into what
joins them.4 Self-reliance, however much a flag for the conformist
individualism of today’s consumer, is, for Emerson, an aversion to
conformity:
Society is a joint-stock company, in which the members agree, for the
better securing of his bread to each share holder, to surrender the lib-
erty and culture of the eater. The virtue in most request is conformity.
Self-reliance is its aversion. (1990, p. 151)
WHAT IS NOT KNOWN ABOUT GENIUS
195

Genius has an aversion to the artificial, the arbitrary, and the imitated.
It must be tuned to the cultural surround, for “life lies behind us as
the quarry from whence we get tiles and copestones for the masonry
of to-day” (1990, p. 91). But genius must also move on and in, into
the labor and dignity of life: “The mind now thinks, now acts, and
each fit reproduces the other. When the artist has exhausted his mate-
rials, when the fancy no longer paints, when thoughts are no longer
apprehended and books are a weariness—he has always resource to
live . . . Thinking is a partial act.” In the living, genius can “compre-
hendeth the particular natures of all men. Each philosopher, each
bard, each actor has only done for me, as by a delegate, what one day
I can do for myself . . . The man has never lived that can feed us ever.
The human mind cannot be enshrined in a person who shall set a bar-
rier on any one side to this unbounded, unboundable empire” (1990,
p. 96).5
In Representative Men, Emerson takes from the usual pantheon
(Plato, Shakespeare, Montaigne, Goethe), but surprises with two new
genius entries: Swedenborg and Napoleon. Later, he complained
about his choices, that he should have included “the common farmer
and laborer”:
Many after thoughts as usual, . . . and my book seems to lose all value
from their omission. Plainly one is the justice that should have been
done to the unexpressed greatness of the common farmer and laborer.
A hundred times have I felt the superiority of George and Edmund and
Barrows, and yet I continue the parrot echoes of the names of literary
notabilities and mediocrities. (Emerson, 1982, p. 406)
The entry on Napoleon—albeit biographically bumpy6—shows
genius as representative and delegate, as a moment among minds.
Take these two examples of Napoleon: first, the man of the people:
though there is in particulars this identity between Napoleon and the
mass of the people, his real strength lay in their conviction that he was
their representative in his genius and aims, not only when he courted,
but when he controlled. (Emerson, 1995, p. 162)
and then the man of democracy:
I call Napoleon the agent or attorney of the middle class of modern
society; of the throng . . . He was the agitator, the destroyer of pre-
scription, the internal improver, the liberal, the radical, the inventor of
means, the opener of doors and markets, the subverter of monopoly
and abuse. (Emerson, 1995, p. 169)
RAY MCDERMOTT
196

For Emerson, Napoleon’s genius fed “the native appetite for truth.”
Genius is close to the desires and knowledge of the people.
“Bonaparte knew better than society; and moreover, knew that he
knew better.” Bonaparte knew better only what the people already
knew: “I think all men know better than they do; know that the insti-
tutions we so volubly commend are go-carts and baubles; but they do
not trust their presentments” (Emerson, 1995, p. 166). And again:
“As to what we call the masses and the common men;—there are no
common men” (1995, p. 22). Emerson’s genius is of the people.
Revolutionizing genius: It is not easy to make a world safe for
genius—or from genius. Within 50 years of Emerson’s great “opener
of doors and markets,” a new Bonaparte, a nephew, also claiming the
will of the people, ascended to a renewed throne of France.
Descendents of the heroes of the French Revolution and the liberat-
ing armies of Emerson’s Napoleon conspired to refurbish the throne
their predecessors had destroyed, a situation ironic enough for Marx’s
famous diagnosis:
Hegel remarks somewhere that facts and personages of great impor-
tance in world history occur, as it were twice. He forgot to add: the first
time as tragedy, and the second as farce . . . The same caricature occurs
in the circumstances attending to the second edition of the eighteenth
Brumaire! Men make their own history, but they do not make just as
they please; they do not make it out of circumstances chosen by them-
selves, but under circumstances directly encountered, given, and trans-
mitted from the past. The tradition of all the dead generations weighs
like a nightmare on the brain of the living. (Marx, 1963, p. 15)
Just when a genius can make a difference, people can close ranks. Just
when monopoly and abuse can be subverted, people can create a
counter force. The conditions, as they say, were not ripe. The usual def-
inition of genius has him or her—nah, just him in the usual definition—
enough ahead of his, uhhm, or her, time to ripen the conditions of
participation. The genius should run ahead of society, but must come
from that same society. How to think about a genius raised by the times,
running ahead of the times, and reinserting advances into the evolution
of the times? As phrased, this is the stuff of heroism. Only a great man
can do it as phrased. As phrased is key. Plekhanov rephrases:
A great man is great not because his personal qualities give individual
features to great historical events, but because he possesses qualities
which make him most capable of serving the great social needs of his
time, needs which arose as a result of general and particular causes.
(Plekhanov, 1969, p. 176)
WHAT IS NOT KNOWN ABOUT GENIUS
197

For Plekhanov, the great person—the heroic genius—is a great beginner
who reports inevitably to the most pressing local constraints and
possibilities. Most beginnings end before their time; some go beyond
expectations. Plekhanov had likely read Marx and Engles’s account of
the painter, Raphael: whether he “succeeds in developing his talent
depends wholly on demand, which in turn depends on the division of
labour and the conditions of human culture resulting from it.” It is
not as important to track the persons who made the first effort as to
keep it moving, to capture the flow of history and to ride it powerfully
to where it is inevitably going. Like other forms of labor, learning
does not happen in a vacuum. Learning does not go to market alone
(Lave and McDermott, 2002). Freedom requires doing as much as
possible with/for inevitability:
Everything depends upon whether my activities constitute an inevitable
link in the chain of inevitable events. If they do, then I waver less and
the more resolute are my actions . . . This is precisely the psychological
mood that can be expressed in the celebrated words of Luther: “Here I
stand, I can do no other,” and thanks to which men display the most
indomitable energy, perform the most astonishing feats. Hamlet never
knew this mood; that is why he was only capable of moaning and
reflecting. And that is why Hamlet would never have accepted a philos-
ophy according to which freedom is merely necessity transformed into
mind. (1969, p. 142)
This phrasing deserves play: Intelligence “is merely necessity trans-
formed into mind.” Revolutionary ideas are “merely necessity trans-
formed into mind.” Genius “is merely necessity transformed into
mind.” This is no laughing matter. Fielding would not laugh at a
genius so tightly tied to reality. Working genius in an Emersonian
democracy articulates “necessity transformed into mind.” Plekhanov
has a demanding sense of genius, one that stands, by necessity, against
itself, against its own conditions. Genius has to make a difference in
the flow of history. It has no time for rewards. The term genius can-
not refer to what kids do on a test, nor academics in a book, nor sci-
entists in a lab. Genius must grow from harsh realities it in turn
transforms. Plekhanov would like Emerson’s remark: “Genius is not a
lazy angel contemplating itself and things. It is insatiable for expres-
sion. Thought must take the stupendous step of passing into realiza-
tion” (Emerson, 1894, p. 40). Intellect is not the whole assignment.
For Plekhanov, genius must change the world faster than the world
can recover, before tragedy gets turned into farce by ignoring the
inevitable.
RAY MCDERMOTT
198

Genius, Abuses Of
Confrontations with genius have not taken center stage with their
enemy. Subtle calls for building a society that can take advantage of
genius usually come in second to easier tasks like selling potential
genius in the marketplace. A friend critiqued the idea of creativity by
showing me a page in a phonebook listing companies under the word
Creative. Her question: If it makes good business to sell blinds by call-
ing the company “Creative Blinds,” can creativity be an interesting
analytic category? Her answer: Nah!. Emerson’s answer: “We have a
juvenile love of smartness, of showy speech. We like faculty that can
rapidly be coined into money, and society seems to be in conspiracy to
utilize every gift prematurely, and pull down genius to lucrative tal-
ent” (1894, p. 52). My answer: Better to treat received theories of
creativity and genius as phonebook advertisements.
If the genius figure has been more about marketing than learning,
what is the harm? It seems a gentle fiction: some get more celebrated
than they should, others less than they deserve. The numbers are small
and it puts learning—not gender, skin color, or wealth—at the door
to institutional access. Why should we worry about genius? Answer:
Measured calibrations of the mind are crucial to how gender, race,
and class borders get maintained. How various groups align with
genius shows an invidious relation to the distribution of rewards. Who
gets left out or hurt by the category? The most obvious and best-
researched example is the exclusion of people of African descent. The
three cases that follow are comparatively minor, but perhaps in that
way more revealing: women geniuses are suppressed, the Jews of
Europe are celebrated and cursed for their genius, and American
schoolchildren encounter genius as the measure of what they are not.
Gender and genius: Madam Curie is on everyone’s genius list. Jane
Austen has made it of late. I insist on Hildegaard of Bingen and Toni
Morrison, Gertrude Stein perhaps, many of my friends, my daughters,
and Yosano Akiko (early twentieth-century Japanese poet). Dinner
conversations have brought names I would not have thought of: Anne
Frank and Helen Keller, for example. And why not, but where is
everyone else? The distribution is unfair, but how does it work?
Two critiques have emerged. One is that women have been strate-
gically kept from participation in the arts and sciences, and inherent
potential geniuses were suppressed. Another is that women have been
producing works of genius, but men have refused, or did not know
how, to recognize them. Evidence abounds for either case, for women
have often had small public lives, and reduced access to genius games,
because of institutional barriers. The invention of a special kind of
WHAT IS NOT KNOWN ABOUT GENIUS
199

genius (Alaya, 1977) for women only made things worse as men
quickly claimed mastery of the new characteristics as well. Christine
Battersby (1988, p. 113) offers Otto Weininger’s early twentieth-
century version of the feminine and intuitive male genius that had
developed across the nineteenth century:
The man of genius possess, like everything else, the complete female in
himself; but woman herself is only a part of the Universe, and the part
never can be the whole; femaleness can never include genius.
Women authors had to deal with this as they developed characters in
their books—or in their own lives; Mary Wollstonecraft, Germaine de
Stael, Mary Shelley, and Elizabeth Barrett had to fashion a vision with
such conceptual tools. Genius is a competitive issue on which men
have been combative. Whatever means developed for women to take
their place, men have countered. Silly arguments have kept the genius
inside the men’s clubhouse. The following are borrowed from
Battersby:
G “my coarse imagination has never been able to imagine a creative
genius without genitals”—Johann Georg Hamann, 1760 (make
that male genitals, says Battersby);
G “woman, in short, has an unconscious life, man a conscious life, and
the genius the most conscious life”—Thomas Carlyle, 1840;
G “every genius born a woman is lost to humanity”—Stendhal;
G “with woman the powers of intuition, of rapid perception, and per-
haps of imitation, are more strongly marked than in man; but some,
at least, of these faculties are characteristic of the lower races”—
Charles Darwin, 1871;
G “woman attains perfection in everything that is not a work: in let-
ters, in memoirs, even in the most delicate handiwork, in short in
everything that is not a métier”—Nietzsche, 1883.
To laugh at this foolishness cannot end the critique. To double the
number of geniuses by including women, while an essential first step,
cannot end the critique either. The critiques leave genius intact—
suppressed or ignored in women, but intact. This is not the right choice.
The kind of hyper-intellectual acrobatics that Weininger or Carlyle
engaged in to negate the genius of women will not go away. In calling
for female geniuses, we need more than numerical parity, more than
more of the genius varieties males have been producing. The problem
is that any confrontation with genius is a confrontation with male-
defined genius. Battersby identifies five strands of meaning that have
RAY MCDERMOTT
200

run through modern genius. The first four are loaded with male
essentials, but the fifth is useful. The four are genius as personality,
mode of consciousness, concentration of energy, and intelligence. The
fifth is genius as a social activity. It confronts the first four and answers
the question of how to think about genius as a moment more than a
position, as an event more than a person:
A female genius is not some kind of elite being, different from other
(ordinary) women, nor one with a great “potential for eminence.” A
female “genius” is, instead, a woman who is judged to occupy a strate-
gic position in the matrilineal and patrilineal patterns that make up cul-
ture. Her work must be seen to have a worth and importance that
extends beyond mere popularity or influence. (Battersby, 1989, p. 157)
Women kept from genius games can be joined by cultural and racial
groups accused of not being smart. Cultural anthropology is a long
defense of the capacities of Others erased by dumb theories of intelli-
gence. Battersby wants more women to be cited as geniuses, and she
wants them to change the criteria of genius. A look at a minority
people celebrated for genius shows she is onto something.
Race and genius: There are two ways to be hurt by theories of
exceptional intelligence: one is to be thought lacking, the other to be
caught having too much. The first insult has fallen on “primitive”
societies in general, and people of African descent in particular. This
has led to the cry of ethnographers pointing to intelligence where
others—usually psychologists—had not seen it. The second insult
has fallen on people of Jewish descent in Europe and, presently,
Asian Americans. These are old story forms, retold with new tools.
Confrontations with genius differ by theoretical trend and economic
circumstance. The physical anthropology changes and so do the psy-
chological measures of behavioral tendencies, but the results are con-
sistent. If karma is a name for conditions always already there,
anti-Semitism is karma to Europeans, and color racism is karma to
Americans. A study of “smart Jews” shows how theories of genius fit
a racial karma.
Having recently built a category for a genius and long before a neg-
ative position for Jews in Christianity, Europe was ripe to combine
them.7 High-profile Jewish success in the arts and sciences had to be
explained. The first step was easy: Jews were smarter. This fit the
eugenic logic of nineteenth-century evolutionary theory: Cleansed by
centuries of persecution, Jews should be the most adaptive and
intelligent people. With Jewish genius on a pedestal, what of the
forces that made anti-Semitism? Cultural categories give, and they
WHAT IS NOT KNOWN ABOUT GENIUS
201

take away. Celebration turned into degradation reveals the original
function of a category. Jews were lifted onto a pedestal by one read-
ing, and taken off by a next. Gilman (1995) shows the European “yes,
but” hand-wringing over Jewish genius: “Yes, they are” and “No,
they’re not.” Or “they are a little, but not . . .” Consider some
claims/counterclaims:
G genius, yes, but more in poetry and self-expression than in drama,
which demands a reciprocity of perspective (Russian semiticist
Daniel Abromovich Khvol’son, 1870s);
G genius, yes, but in practical activity, not in higher quality pursuits
(Italian Jewish forensic psychiatrist Cesare Lombroso, 1894);
G genius, yes, but at the price of great nervousness and mental insta-
bility (French historian Anatole Leroy-Beaulieu, 1893);
G genius, yes, but at the price of avoiding physical labor (German his-
torian Werner Sombart, turn of the century);
G genius, yes, but with more variability in the population; more
geniuses perhaps, but lower average intelligence (Canadian psychol-
ogist Carl Brigham, 1923).
For every myth is a counter myth. For every distinction made, is
another distinction unmaking it. The myth of genius makes individu-
als special, and, once special, new distinctions can counter the spe-
cialty. A list of people theorizing Jewish genius overlaps significantly
with a list of people theorizing female genius. Genius distinctions
were everywhere from 1860 to 1940, each one fodder for a next com-
pulsion of the political order. Battersby tells a genius story with a pos-
itive outcome pulled from misery. Hannah Hoch was an artist in the
Dadaist movement in the 1920s. Years later, the Nazis were destroy-
ing “degenerate” artists with the same relish they were arresting Jews.
Hoch hid a stockpile of Dadaist mate rials around her home near
Berlin. She was investigated by authorities and dismissed. Because she
was neither a man nor a Jew, went the account, she could not have
been enough of a genius to require extermination:
Not an “Outsider”—only an “Other” that disrupts Kultur from the
margins within—she seemed insignificant. Neither Jew nor genius, this
female otherness allowed her to merge into the scenery . . . in much the
same way as she later blended into the background in the histories of
art. (1989, p. 144; emphasis in original)
Under the worst conditions, systematic inequalities in genius sighting
can make things better.
RAY MCDERMOTT
202

Schoolchildren and genius: If genius has been a political issue in
Europe since 1700, it did not became a political staging ground in the
United States, until the twentieth century, when it was tied to theories
of individual differences, IQ scores, school policy, and eugenics. The
source was Galton, not Emerson, and the nexus was Louis Terman,
who thought social progress could be quickened by using psycholog-
ical tests to get the right persons for the right jobs. The influence of
Termanal genius stretches to the present: Jews and Asians are statisti-
cally significant smart groups, and African Americans are a constant
source of bell-curved reasons for whites to have the best jobs. The cul-
tural fabrication of differential intelligence requires always two ends;
both smart and dumb must be visible. The violence invited by the
American theory of genius is not yet tallied. Geniuses are not trapped
in ghettoes, and their counterparts at the bottom of the bell curve are
so cleverly kept from mobility that problems are easily ignored,
silenced, and muted (Pollock, 2004). The attribution of genius makes
possible the attribution of stupidity. The genius figure helps to hold
the system together.
The image of a lockstep stairway to cognitive excellence is strong in
American blaming practices. If a child seems unable, school personnel
can be heard saying, “The child isn’t smart enough. Everyone has
limits.” Parents report the other side of the coin, saying, “My child is
smart, but doesn’t get help in school.” Smart is the acknowledged
key. All roads return to it. Life trajectories are explained by it, and
there is a label for everyone. From gifted and talented to LD and
retarded, the system rarely gets questioned. The person who objects is
met with Einstein as if to challenge the use of “smartness” in grade
schools is to deny individual differences. How could anyone deny
individual differences? Not denying that everyone is different enough
to be interesting does not mean we know how to identify individual
differences fairly, or which ones count the most, or how to build insti-
tutions for making the most of them. Individual differences on arbi-
trary tasks often unconnected to what has to happen in life should not be
the measure of any new generation.
As one end of an ill-conceived and badly applied theory of individ-
ual differences, genius silently aids inequality in American schools by
delivering success and failure correlated with race and class. No one
has to be a genius, or even to be called a genius, for the system to
work. A nice idea, genius—Diderot thought so—but it has not kept
good friends. It seems grounds for good things: individual achieve-
ment, room for new ideas, rewards for those most able to help. A
good idea, but it has also encouraged arrogance, sexism, racism,
class hierarchy, crass individualism, and static ideas of inherited
WHAT IS NOT KNOWN ABOUT GENIUS
203

intelligence. We need new ways to engage genius, to rediscover the
promise of vision and creativity across a community. Pascal, Emerson,
and Plekhanov have shown the dangers of locating genius in the lone
person. They ask instead that we build societies that would allow a
kind of genius we might want to get behind, the kind of genius who
could represent us.
Summary
An inquiry into genius is not about how one person gets better ideas
than others, nor about how one person jockeys for position better
than others (although biographies attest that most acclaimed geniuses
have pulled every social structural trick imaginable to help others to
the illusion8—maybe even Pascal before he sought humility). These
two questions are initial to a wider account of how genius positions
are concertedly made possible and formed in a historical setting.
Analytically and politically, genius is an opportunity in a set of oppor-
tunities set in a daily round of celebration, degradation, and interpo-
lation, all performed by real people in systems of well-structured and
irremediably emergent positions. It is not enough to describe the
mental world of any genius, nor enough to show that the mental
world of genius is quite ordinary. It is more exciting to show how
every kind of person—every kind of sensuous, engaged, hoping, wish-
ing, thinking, and conniving person—is also a calibration in a moving
system of positions made up of materials gathered from here and there
in the service of forces often unseen and unnamed (Holland and Lave,
2002). Any inquiry into living and learning in America must offer an
account of the organization of desires, languages, budget lines, and
institutional necessities that together arrange for so many to get
tagged as illiterate, disabled, slow, inarticulate, at risk, failing, and all
that as a contrast case for the smart, gifted, successful and ingenious
(Mehan, 1996; Varenne and McDermott, 1998; Rapp and Ginsberg,
2001).
Kinds of person described by presumed mental states are the
calibration of moment. Poised between a rhetoric of democracy and
the demands of a competitive capitalism, the genius, the mentally ill,
the dumb, the autistic, and the hyperactive are in the service of a
hierarchic political order. Sub rosa, they sort people by gender, race,
and class. Whatever else they might be, named mental kinds of per-
son, genius and all its counterparts, are irrevocably calibrations in the
ups and downs of advantage and the ins and outs of access.9 People
were not always forced to look smart as the only way to gain access
to society. Looking smart is offensive in most cultures (Mitchell,
RAY MCDERMOTT
204

1988; Hori, 1994; Basso, 1996). Intelligence, if noticed at all,
should be more used than displayed. Gradations of intelligence do
not have to serve the competitive demands of the market, but
degradations of intelligence are made for the job. Crude measures of
the mind have been given purchase power. Genius has become too
expensive.
Acknowledgments
Grey Gundaker is the friend who taught me to read the NYC phone-
book. Vicky Webber showed me Battersby (1988) and Elisabeth
Hansot pointed to Valéry (1973). Shelley Goldman, Dottie
Holland, Nate Klemp, and Jean Lave offered a critical reading, and
audiences at Stanford and Teachers College made suggestions. An
abbreviated version of the first half of this chapter appeared in
McDermott (2004a).
Notes
1. Addison is often cited as the first analytic take on genius. There is also
Juan Huarte from 1594 (1946), but his work does not move forward
to eighteenth-century discussions.
2. Smith on Pascal: a “whining and melancholy moralist . . . perpetually
reproaching us with our happiness, while so many of our brethren are
in misery, who regard as impious the natural joy of prosperity . . .”
(1976, p. 139).
3. In 1808, Henri Grégoire (1996) issued a manifesto we should not
ignore: “Irishmen, Jews, and Negroes, your virtues and talents are your
own; your vices are the work of nations who call themselves Christian.
The more you are maligned, the more these nations are indicted for
their guilt” (1996, p. 39). Replace the words “Irishmen, Jews, and
Negroes” with any pariah group, and replace “nations who call them-
selves Christian” with the self-assessed smart. There it is: The more
those left out are maligned as stupid, the more the intelligent should be
indicted for their part—Galton be damned.
4. Emerson directly influenced Nietzsche’s genius. Compare his gentle,
“Genius is always sufficiently the enemy of genius by over-influence”
(1990, p. 87), with Nietzsche’s edgy, “A people is the detour made by
nature to arrive at six or seven great men. Yes, and then to get around
them” (1997, p. 66)—the same point, to a variant purpose. Past genius
can be today’s burden, but Nietzsche’s genius lords over people until
pushed aside. Emerson’s is more integral and worth recovering.
5. Gertrude Hughes (1984, p. 82) captures the reflex between bounded
and boundless in Emerson’s genius: “The sublimely apt yet utterly
homely ratio whereby landscape is to sight as the psyche’s terrain is to
WHAT IS NOT KNOWN ABOUT GENIUS
205

genius’ insight works this way, for it makes us re-evaluate the ordinary
fact that landscape surrounds us. The simile not only compares the
achievements of genius to something we experience every day, but also
reminds us that we do not realize we experience it every day. Thus
Emerson is not just using the known to make the unknown accessible.
In the same stroke by which he does that he also manages to ‘make the
visible a little hard/To see’ as Wallace Stevens was later to write that the
worthy poet must do.”
6. Emerson put quotation marks around what Napoleon had said—and
around what he might have said, could have said, or, to Emerson,
should have said. Schirmeister (1993, p. 223) says Napoleon likely
never said: “ ‘My son cannot replace me. I could not replace myself.
I am the creature of circumstances’ ” (Emerson, 1995, p. 155). The
less accurate Emerson is on Napoleon, the more he reveals of him-
self.
7. This summary of Gilman (1995) is adapted from McDermott
(2004b).
8. Paul Valéry noted a tie between self-celebration and genius: “What
they call a superior man is a man who has deceived himself. To be
astonished at him, one must see him—and to be seen, he must show
himself . . . In exchange for the public’s dime, he gives the time
required to make himself noticeable, the energy spent in conveying
himself, preparing to satisfy someone else. He goes so far as to
compare the crude sport of fame with the joy of feeling unique”
(1973, p. 9).
9. In 1892, about midway between Adam Smith’s warning and the pres-
ent fetish for displays of intelligence, Charles Sanders Peirce summa-
rized the coming use of intelligence in a twentieth-century democracy
under capitalism:
Political economy has its formula of redemption, too. It is this:
Intelligence in the service of greed ensures the justest prices, the
fairest contracts, the most enlightened conduct of all the dealings
between men, and leads to the summum bonum, food in plenty and
perfect comfort. Food for whom? Why for the greedy master of
intelligence. (1996, p. 271)
In 1868, Peirce (1955) critiqued easy psychologizing, intelligence
being a latter-day token of type. In 1938, John Dewey, heir to
Emerson and Peirce, complained that twentieth-century theories of
human nature are psychological in ways that support the “intrinsic
and necessary connection between democracy and capitalism . . . for
it is only because of a belief in a certain theory of human nature [of the
self-involved, strategic consumer] that the two are said to be Siamese
twins, so that the attack upon one is a threat directed at the life of the
other” (2001, p. 160).
RAY MCDERMOTT
206

References
Addison, Joseph (1711). [no title] Spectator 160 (September 3, 1711).
Alaya, Flavia (1977). Victorian Science and the “Genius” of Woman. Journal
of the History of Ideas, 38, pp. 261–280.
Balzac, Honoré de (2002/1832). Louis Lambert. McLean: IndyPublish.com.
Basso, Keith (1996). Wisdom Sits in Place. Albuquerque: University of New
Mexico Press.
Battersby, Christine (1988). Gender and Genius. Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
Bourdieu, Pierre (2000). Pascalian Meditations. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Bowles, Samuel and Herbert Gintis (1974). Schooling in Capitalist America.
New York: Basic Books.
Cailliet, Emile (1961). Pascal: The Emergence of Genius. 2nd edn. New York:
Greenwood Press.
Dewey, John (1903). Emerson, the Philosopher of Democracy. International
Journal of Ethics, 13, pp. 405–413.
Dewey, John (2001/1938). Democracy and Human Nature. In Stephen J.
Goodlad (ed.), The Last Best Hope: A Democracy Reader, pp. 159–175. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Diderot, Denis (1964). Rameau’s Nephew and Other Works. Indianapolis:
Bobbs-Merrill.
Dieckmann, Herbert (1941). Diderot’s Conception of Genius. Journal of the
History of Ideas, 2, pp. 151–182.
Emerson, Ralph Waldo (1894). Natural History of Intellect and Other Papers.
Boston: Houghton, Mifflin, and Company.
Emerson, Ralph Waldo (1982/November–December 1849). In Joel Porte
(ed.), Emerson in His Journals, pp. 405–406. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Emerson, Ralph Waldo (1990). In Robert Richardson (ed.), Selected Essays,
Lectures, and Poems. New York: Bantam.
Emerson, Ralph Waldo (1995/1850). Representative Men. New York:
Marsilio Publishers.
Engell, James (1981). The Creative Imagination. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Fielding, Henry (1947/1743). The History of the Life of the Late Mr. Jonathan
Wild, the Great. London: Hamish Hamilton.
Frieden, Ken (1985). Genius and Monologue. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press.
Galton, Francis (1872). Statistical Inquiries into the Efficacy of Prayer.
Fortnightly Review, 12, pp. 125–135.
Galton, Francis (1962/1892). Hereditary Genius, 2nd edn. New York: Peter
Smith.
Gilman, S. (1996). Smart Jews in Fin-de-Siecle Vienna: Hybrids and the
Anxiety 
about 
Jewish 
Superior 
Intelligence—Hofmannsthal 
and
Wittgenstein. Modernism and Identity, 3, 2, April, pp. 45–58.
WHAT IS NOT KNOWN ABOUT GENIUS
207

Goldmann, Lucien (1964/1952). The Hidden God. New York: Routledge
and Kegan Paul.
Gould, Stephan J. (1995). The Mismeasure of Man. 2nd edn. New York:
Norton.
Grégoire, Henri (1996/1808). In Thomas Cassirer and Jean-Francois Briere
(eds.), The Cultural Achievements of Negroes. Amherst, MA: University of
Massachusetts Press.
Henry, Jules (1963). Culture against Man. New York: Vintage.
Holland, Dorothy and Jean Lave (2002). History in Person: Introduction. In
Dorothy Holland and Jean Lave (eds.), History in Person, pp. 3–32.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hori, Victor (1994). Learning in a Rinzai Zen Monastery. Journal of Japanese
Studies, 20, pp. 5–36.
Huarte, Juan de San Juan (1946/1594). Examen de Ingenios para las
Ciencias. Buenos Aires: Espasa-Calpe Argentina.
Hughes, Gertrude (1984). Emerson’s Demanding Optimism. Baton Rouge,
LA: Louisiana State University Press.
Jaffe, Kineret (1980). The Concept of Genius: Its Changing Role in
Eighteenth-Century French Aesthetics. Journal of the History of Ideas, 41,
pp. 579–599.
Koyré, Alexander (1952). An Unpublished Letter of Robert Hooke to Isaac
Newton. Isis, 43, pp. 312–337.
Kroeber, A. L. (1944). Configurations of Culture Growth. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Latour, Bruno (1988). The Pasteurization of France. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Lave, Jean and Ray McDermott (2002). Estranged Learning. Outlines, 4,
pp. 19–48.
Marx, Karl (1963/1852). The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. New
York: International.
McDermott, John (1986). Streams of Experience. Amherst, MA: University of
Massachusetts Press.
McDermott, Ray (1988). Inarticulateness. In Deborah Tannen (ed.),
Linguistics in Context, pp. 37–68. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
McDermott, Ray (2004a). Materials for a Confrontation with Genius as a
Personal Identity. Ethos, 32, pp. xx–xx.
McDermott, Ray (2006). Situating Genius, in press.
Mehan, Hugh (1996).The Construction of an LD Student. In Michael
Silverstein and Greg Urban (eds.), Natural History of Discourse,
pp. 253–276. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mitchell, Timothy (1988). Colonizing Egypt. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Murray, Penelope (ed.) (1989). Genius: The History of an Idea. London:
Blackwells.
Nahm, Milton (1965/1956). Genius and Creativity: An Essay in the History
of Ideas. New York: Harper.
RAY MCDERMOTT
208

Nietzsche, Friedrich (1997/1884). Beyond Good and Evil. London: Oxford
University Press.
Oakley, A. (1994). Classical Economic Man: Human Agency and the
Methodology in the Political Economy of Adam Smith and J.S. Mill. London:
Edward Elgar Publishing.
Pascal, Blaise (1960/1670). Pensées. London: J.M. Dent & Sons.
Pascal, Blaise (1989a/1652). Letter to Queen Christina. In Richard H.
Popkin (ed.), Pascal: Selections, pp. 30–32. New York: Macmillan.
Pascal, Blaise (1989b/1660). Three Treatises on the Condition of the Great.
In Richard H. Popkin (ed.), Pascal: Selections, pp. 74–78. New York:
Macmillan.
Peirce, Charles Sanders (1955/1868). Four Incapacities and Their
Consequences. In Justus Buchler (ed.), Philosophical Writings of Peirce,
pp. 228–250. New York: Dover.
Peirce, Charles Sanders (1996/1893). Evolutionary Love. In Morris Cohen
(ed.), Charles Sanders Peirce, Chance, Love, and Logic, pp. 267–300.
Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Plekhanov, George (ed.), (1969/1898). The Role of the Individual in
History. Fundamental Problems in Marxism, pp. 139–177. New York:
International Publishers.
Pollock, Mica (2004). Colormute: Race Talk Dilemmas in an American
School. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rapp, Renya and Faye Ginsberg (2001). Enabling Disability: Rewriting
Kinship, Reimagining Citizenship. Public Culture, 13, pp. 533–556.
Rogers, Ben (1999). Pascal. London: Routledge.
Rothschild, Emma (2001). Economic Sentiments: Adam Smith, Condorcet,
and the Enlightenment. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Schirmeister, Pamela (ed.) (1993). Introduction. In Representative Men.
New York: Marsilio Publishers.
Screech, M. A. (1981). Montaigne and Melancholy. London: Penguin.
Shaw, Bernard (1928). The Intelligent Woman’s Guide to Socialism. New York:
Brentano’s.
Shklar, Judith (1990). Emerson and the Inhibitions of Democracy. Political
Theory, 18, pp. 601–614.
Smith, Adam (1976/1759). The Theory of Moral Sentiments. London: Oxford
University Press.
Smith, Adam (1988/1776). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the
Wealth of Nations. New York: Modern Library.
Valéry, Paul (1973/1896–1925). Monsieur Teste. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Varenne, Hervé, and Ray McDermott (1998). Successful Failure: The Schools
America Builds. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
White, Leslie (1949). The Science of Culture. New York: Free Press.
WHAT IS NOT KNOWN ABOUT GENIUS
209

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 11
What You Don’t Know about 
Diversity
Elizabeth Quintero
Diversity. What has it got to do with learning in twenty-first century
schools? What does it have to do with all the pressures of standards,
accountability, and budgets? Everything.
What you may not know is that diversity in education is much more
than court cases on affirmative action and much more than multicul-
tural literature and history. And those too. It’s more than the fact that
since the 1990s, many more communities in the United States have
become home to people from all over the planet. And it is that too.
Diversity is personal. Diversity is communal. Schools and curricula
are a composite of personal learning and teaching that occurs among
students and their teachers. So what? I invite the reader to think about
this “so what?” as the chapter continues. There, of course, is no easy
or simple answer to the “so what?” question. The only nonanswer is
not to think about it and not to do anything.
The Personal
In 2003, a teacher education student in a graduate program in New York
City wrote about her personal memories of diversity as a young child:
I came from India when I was four and started kindergarten when I
was five. Neither one of my parents spoke English, so when I started
school it was a difficult experience for me. I felt so different from the
other children and wanted to quickly learn English so that I can be a
part of their world. I would run home after school so that I could finally
be in a world that was familiar to me, with language and customs I was
an expert of. However, at the same time I was angry with my parents
for not knowing and therefore not being able to teach me English. I felt
very alone in my experience. When my mother would pick me up after

school I would beg her to not speak to me in Hindi. I was embarrassed
about who I was.
What a shame for a child to be embarrassed about who they are
because of the fear of rejection and because of the pressure to assimilate
and build a new, acceptable identity for the new world they are a part of.
I am glad that I quickly realized the gifts of being different. And it is
sad to say that it wasn’t the teachers that helped me, nor my parents. It was
the other kids at school. You will meet kids who will reject you right away
because you’re different and then there are those kids who are intrigued
and want to learn from you and about you. That makes you feel special.
Another teacher education student in New York City, after going
through a series of activities relating to family history and the influ-
ence of culture and language on literacy, wrote about her personal
diversity perspectives:
I’m Chinese-American and in the Chinese community, I would be
described as a jook-sing, in other words, a child born in America that
has adopted many American customs and characteristics. Being Chinese
was not something I was proud of when I was younger and because of
that I failed to learn as much of the language as I could have, which I
feel is a big part of being Chinese. Through this language I am able to
have conversations with people who can fill me in on what being
Chinese is all about. But because my ability is limited I am often shy
with my relatives who only speak Chinese. I don’t want to be branded
a jook-sing although I feel I am one. I am proud to be Chinese but
when people ask me to tell them details about Chinese culture I’m
afraid that I may fall short in explaining the complexity of it all. This
aspect of me is important; it connects me to my family and their values.
I am the way I am because of my ethnicity. I have accepted some of
these beliefs and values as my own but I have also rebelled against some
values that clash with my understanding of the world. I feel the latter
aspect of myself can be attributed to my Americanized side.
I don’t tie my ethnicity to a particular place. I bring it wherever I go.
However, I will say this, I feel my Chinese-ness the most if I am the
only Chinese person in a particular place. I rarely feel this way in New
York because of its diversity. Mostly I carry both plates in my hands
wherever I go but the people and the place will determine which one
will be heavier.
Another student in the same class wrote about the complexity of her
family:
When I think of my ethnic identity, honestly I think of so many things
I don’t know where to start. My family members come from all over the
place actually, so I don’t really know which ethnic group I identify
ELIZABETH QUINTERO
212

myself with most. My mother is American by birth, as is her mother.
But, my grandmother grew up in Mexico, as did my grandfather. My
grandmother’s family was from Mexico. My grandfather’s father was
from Greece, his mother from Mexico. My father, born in Mexico, is of
European descent. His father was born in Stockholm, his mother in San
Antonio, right next to the Alamo. My grandmother also has Swedish
and German ancestry. And while he is not Latino, my father grew up in
Venezuela. These are all of the things I think of when I think of my eth-
nic background. I tend to relate more to the Hispanic side of my fam-
ily, because I grew up in San Antonio where there is such a large
Hispanic population. I guess that would be the place my ethnic identity
is tied to. Everyone in my family speaks Spanish; all my grandparents,
aunts, uncles, etc. While the history of Mexican people has not played
a large role in my upbringing, I know some of it, mostly what I learned
in school and from my surroundings. People in San Antonio are very
aware of the Mexican culture and this is shown in various ways
throughout the city. Even though I am American, I relate to the
Mexican culture most out of all of my backgrounds because it plays
such a vital role in my everyday life. There is not a large Swedish or
Greek community in San Antonio. The earliest things I remember
about my cultural background and ethnicity are the traditions of my
family. I did not know much about Swedish people, but I knew what
they ate at Christmas time. I knew some of their manners from stories
told to me by my father’s parents. I knew about the Greeks and what
kinds of things they did at Easter. My mother’s parents would take us
to the Greek Festival held each year at St. Sophia’s Greek Orthodox
Church downtown. This is how I was introduced to my ethnic
background.
When I think of race and ethnicity, I realize how complex of an issue
it is. Because of my background, I look white to most people who meet
me. Many people are surprised to learn that I am Hispanic. While many
Hispanics that I know have encountered racism before, I have not
because I do not appear to be Hispanic. I have a hard time saying that
I am either white or Hispanic. Both ethnicities are part of me, so I can-
not say which I identify with more.
I hope this all makes sense to you. It seems like it all fits in my head.
When I have thought about it before, I never thought I was confused
about this. It seems like I am a bit, though. I think part of it is what I
have learned about race and ethnicity and culture over the past few
years. They are not things that are so easily defined, I guess.
Yes, diversity is complex for almost all of us. Carl Grant, at a small
early childhood conference in Madison in 1991, asked me if I would
tell my story for a book he was preparing (Educating for Diversity, a
book I eventually used in some classes). He needed a Cuban American
perspective of struggle and success. “I can’t,” I said. “Why not?” He
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT DIVERSITY
213

was surprised. Astute observer, he was probably thinking of our 
10-min conversation there in front of the fireplace after Lourdes
introduced us. Florida, Texas, Mexico, the surname. The names of your
boys. Your underlying family focus in your work. “No, I can’t,” I apol-
ogized. “I wasn’t raised Cuban American. I wasn’t raised anything.”
Other than one of two sisters raised by a single mother, dark skinned with
green eyes and curly hair, who was often silenced in her life.
I told Carl Grant, “I’m a mongrel who is clearly different from the
mainstream, but with only gotas (drops) of Latina, maybe Muscogee
Creek, maybe black. I don’t know. My family is one characterized by
silences and not much historical memory. I can really not claim any
identity other than me.” He looked at me. “You could pass for sev-
eral,” he said with a twinkle in his eye. “There are more and more
mixed ones like you coming up these days.”
Diversity, the Personal Becoming Communal
So in what ways does this acknowledgment that diversity is personal
relate to the community of the classroom, the community of a school,
a neighborhood, and ultimately, the world community? The simple
answer is that because diversity is personal, it is right there, up front
and on the table, in most (if not all) human relationships. And frankly,
with the exception of a hermit meditating on a hillside, a medical
researcher in quarantine, and the rare human who has determined
that he has no need for any communion with others, relationships are
relevant to all learners, all humans.
What can I do about diversity in the communal sense? My issues of
conviction and work revolve around paying attention to the strengths
of parents and children. I believe educators and leaders in all arenas can
learn more about how culture, language, and varying concepts of fam-
ily affect child development, community development. I believe that
this will ultimately improve our ability to live with each other with
respect and peace. By briefly going back in time, I will highlight a few
instances relating to why these issues became so important to me.
I grew up in Florida in the 1950s when it was okay to speak Spanish
only at dance classes (in Tampa) in the weekends. When I was 16, I
worked for Project Head Start in the summer of 1966 as an assistant
teacher. We visited rural Black families in central Florida. After all
these years, one of my most vivid memories is of the homes where the
family members of various ages gathered on their front porches telling
stories and “acting them out.” I did not know then that one day I
would learn that that was a classic example of both art and literacy.
Later, I decided early childhood education was what I would do.
ELIZABETH QUINTERO
214

Yet, I had had friends in teacher education programs who told me
about classes of boring texts and superficial memorizing of various
“methods” of teaching and “recipes” for discipline. I guess, as a result
of the combination of life experiences and personal philosophy, I
wanted to study early childhood education from an alternative per-
spective. I went to visit the British Infant Schools and the Summerhill
School in England. Fairly soon after arriving in London, I learned
about a training program for preschool teachers that involved much
practical experience in various inner-city neighborhood preschools. I
plunged in and to my delight I was placed in a school in a Middle
Eastern immigrant neighborhood.
Later, back in north Florida, I found work in a small preschool for
3- and 4-year-old children. After I finished my masters in education in
early childhood studies, I extended my work to kindergarten teaching
and literacy and science teaching at the elementary level. It was dur-
ing this chapter of my life that I became very involved in asking the
question, “What’s left out . . . of my personal experience, of my edu-
cation, and ultimately, my teaching?” This was the beginning of the
conviction about which I talk now when I tell students to always ask
questions about whose stories and opinions are left out of every text-
book, every research study, and every news report. Diversity is often
shadowed between the lines.
I was still learning about culture, language, teaching, and learning
during the next decade when I lived in Mexico. After a few years, I went
to New Mexico to work on a doctorate in early childhood/
bilingual education. This was when Yetta Goodman and others—during
the beginnings of the whole language movement—spoke of young chil-
dren’s play and communication as exemplifying the “roots of literacy.” I
realized that I had been studying and observing firsthand these roots of
literacy in the children I had been working with for years, wherever they
were, monolingual English-speaking children, African American chil-
dren both in rural schools and in inner city schools, monolingual
Spanish-speaking children in Mexico, Spanish–English bilingual children
in Texas and New Mexico, or the Middle Eastern children in London. I
had seen the “roots of literacy” as an integral part of what children do as
they understand and take part in their world. Ironically, when families do
not speak English, this “world” of language and literacy is often consid-
ered less than adequate and even deviant because it is different.
As I worked with children and parents in a variety of programs, I saw
that every parent I met—from a diversity of circumstances, from diffi-
cult to comfortable—cared deeply about his or her child who was being
entrusted to my care. I was developing the perspectives and commit-
ments that would lead me in the directions that guide my work today.
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT DIVERSITY
215

All societies, as reflected in their schools, are a collage of strengths
and barriers, voices seldom heard, and voices more often heard. When
schools bring in the strengths of the families and their communities,
in all their pluralistic complexities, the educational experiences are
more effective. The strengths of the families and students may be val-
ued and used by the schools or they can be ignored and wasted.
Schools can reflect the strengths of families. Unfortunately, they
can also mirror reflection of public perceptions of the poor, thus per-
petuating the tragic misconception of minority and poor children.
Yet, schools can also be a place for change. As teachers learn to read
children’s texts more critically, they will help children learn to be dis-
cerning readers and writers of their own and other texts and explore
through language new metaphors and structures that are challenging.
Now I know it is evident that I am a teacher and a qualitative
researcher with a perspective about learning that frames the way I work
and conduct research with all ages of learners from many different
backgrounds. I research issues of education, families “at promise,” lan-
guage and critical literacy in the context of home culture and culture of
learners’ new learning environments in both schools and communities.
A student I am working with, who is studying to become a teacher,
wrote about ways her history and ongoing personal experiences with
diversity had the potential to provide some meaningful bridges for stu-
dents and families in the community of a school. She wrote at the
beginning of her student teaching experience in Chinatown:
On the first day of class, most of the parents and all the students in the
entire elementary school gathered in the cafeteria on the first floor. As
I waited for our class to arrive, a father approached me and began
speaking in a Chinese dialect I regretfully could not understand. I
explained that I could not understand and he apologized. Thinking
back, I should’ve asked him in Mandarin if he spoke Mandarin because
it is a fairly universal dialect. We could have made that important instant
connection instead of creating distance.
On another day, I walked a student down alone because he was the
last one to copy down his homework. As we approached our meeting
ground on the playground, the student’s father asked me if I spoke
Mandarin. I smiled and replied, “Yes!” The father continued on to
express his concern about his son and homework. Basically, he never saw
his son do homework; his son just played video games all the time. Last
year, he found his son’s desk drawer stuffed with papers and thought he
might be doing the same this year. To sum up our conversation, I
informed the father that we did indeed assign homework every day and
I would make sure to check to see he had completed it each and every
day. We discussed other topics and concerns but his main worry was his
ELIZABETH QUINTERO
216

son’s homework. As they departed, the father asked me what my sur-
name was (I’m not sure how to translate, but when you ask this ques-
tion, it implies that you have a Chinese surname). I told him that I was
mixed blood, but my mom’s name is Lin. He then asked me if he should
call me Lin Xiao Jie (Miss Lin) and I said, “of course.” It felt really
amazing to feel his trust in me and to have established this connection.
So when my cooperating teacher invited me to the parent–teacher con-
ference, I excitedly looked forward to meeting the other parents.
At the early morning meeting, I helped one of the parents translate my
cooperating teacher’s concerns, thoughts and answers to questions. By the
end of the conference, . . . I was able to calm some of their fears and assure
them their son or daughter was doing great and would excel. One mother
was worried about her daughter needing speech therapy, so we visited the
speech therapist together and I helped her translate that her daughter
improved so much last year, therapy wasn’t necessary this year. Needless to
say she was very pleased. It made a big difference being able to speak their
native tongue and I’m really glad I was placed in a bilingual school.
Another student, who is very knowledgeable about diversity issues,
acknowledged that we always have more to learn. She reported to
the class:
I had a chance to speak with my mother’s hairdresser this weekend. Her
name is N. and she is from Senegal. N. lived in Senegal most of her life.
She has been in the United States for only two years. I was actually fasci-
nated with her story, because she accomplished so much in just two years.
Learning a different language as an adult is difficult and N. speaks Sengali
and English. She works as a hairdresser and she is a student at the local
community college. She says she is taking math and English courses. She
said she’s good in math but she’s struggling with English. She said, “I get
all A’s in math, but English is too hard.” N. works in Flatbush; many
people from Africa work and live in this area. N. said she used to be
embarrassed by her accent when she’s speaking English. Now she says
she is more confident. I feel confidence is an important factor when
acquiring different languages. Schools and teachers have to support and
encourage ESL students just like English speaking students. ESL students
should be a part of the classroom community and not isolated from it.
Diversity in the Classroom
A friend and I studied effective literacy teachers (Rummel and
Quintero, 1997) and found that teachers bring their past experiences,
present values, and priorities into the schools. Their beliefs and life
experiences cannot be separated from what they do in the classroom.
Outstanding educators show an interest in and acceptance of many
students’ families, cultures, and differences.
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT DIVERSITY
217

We (Rummel and Quintero, 1997) found that teachers who sup-
port children and their cultural, linguistic context in school have some
common approaches to pedagogy. They all exhibit a belief that it is
their responsibility to find ways of engaging all their students in learn-
ing activity. They accept responsibility for making the classroom an
interesting, engaging place. They persist in trying to meet the indi-
vidual needs of the children in their classes, searching for what works
best for each student. Their basic stance is a continual search for better
ways of doing things.
A teacher in Brooklyn, New York, in a class studying curriculum,
wrote in her response journal:
Our cultural history is tied to literature. All aspects of history are incor-
porated into stories. These stories have been told over time and written
down. Stories explore a multitude of perspectives about life and truth.
Through these perspectives we gain a greater understanding of being
part of a culture. As educators, we must present a wide variety of books
to stimulate thinking. We must use books from each genre: poetry, tra-
ditional, fantasy, realistic fiction, informational, picture books, humor,
predictable and multicultural. Teachers must follow the child’s interests
and present a collection of books that are intriguing.
Another student teacher suggested:
Using literature and music are other ways that can expose children to
educational material. Instead of reading the Disney’s Cinderella, why
not pick up a copy of the Korean version? Not only does it create a
chance to expose children to different types of literature, but it can also
lead to other topics like different foods, celebrations, music, clothing,
and so on. In order to create well-rounded, critical thinkers we need to
expose children to more than just chalk on a blackboard.
Yet another student teacher commented, “Within our use of language
is our value system . . . if English is the only language accepted in
school, this implies other languages are not as valued.”
Finally, a group of teacher educations students were read the story-
book Madlenka by Peter Sis. The story is about a little girl named
Madlenka whose tooth is loose. She visits her friends and neighbors
around her block to let them know. The book introduces each of
them and shows a little about their culture, language, and customs.
The illustrations display different symbols, monuments, and geographic
locations that are representative of the countries mentioned in the
book. In the beginning of the book there is a map of Manhattan that
shows exactly where Madlenka lives, and at the end of the book is a
ELIZABETH QUINTERO
218

map of the world, showing the locations of countries of the people
that she interacts with without even leaving her city. After the read-
ing, the assignment was to go out into a community near their current
teaching placement and bring back information that could stimulate a
tangible learning experience for various ages of students.
One student wrote after the experience:
While on my Madlenka journey, it was almost impossible to escape
visual art. I collected a huge collection of menus from all the restaurants
in this neighborhood. I was attracted to all the drawings and small
sketches on the covers. It isn’t the type of art that will make it into a
museum, but it does represent a small piece of the community. Graffiti
seems to be the most abundant form of art in this neighborhood, and
although it can be a nuisance at times, some of it is lovely and shows
that someone took a lot of time and energy to put it there.
A student in another neighborhood in New York City wrote that she
went on a walk around the block and wrote, “How amazing is it that
all the ideas are right before our eyes and we don’t see them unless we
are asked a specific question exploration?” She then listed the ideas
she got on her walk that would be useful in the classroom:
1. Go on a class scavenger hunt for different languages printed
throughout your neighborhood.
2. Go on a class scavenger hunt for colors of the rainbows. Take pho-
tos and enlarge to create a “Class Rainbow” for the wall.
3. As part of a shape unit, dispense disposable cameras to groups of
2–3 children. Go on a shape hunt through the neighborhood.
Develop and assemble shape books.
4. Go on a “sounds of the city” scavenger hunt. Use a recorder to
amass a montage of the sounds of our neighborhood.
5. Invite parents and family members to come in to school with an
artifact of cloth from their native culture. After spending some
time discussing values of colors, hues, textures, and shapes use a
variety of mediums to assemble a mosaic representing the many
cultures in one small room. The result—“our Class Quilt”
Then she added:
While I was walking, I stopped for a cup of coffee. I sat down at the
counter and immediately took note of two young Asian children who
were ripping up construction paper. I waited a few minutes and
watched them with interest. Then, I asked them what they were doing.
They told me that it was their great-grandmother’s birthday and
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT DIVERSITY
219

“because she’s old” she likes these kinds of old things. I asked them
what they meant and they explained that you couldn’t always go in to a
store and buy cards or even writing paper, and the people in Tokyo
invented a way to make paper, and that every year that is what they
make their great-grandmother as a gift. One of the children pointed above
the counter and showed me another card that they had made. Right
there before my very eyes was a culturally rich history/geography/art
lesson with a practical product!
Collective Learning about Diversity from the 
Real Experts—Families and Children
At a teacher development seminar for Head Start teachers with multi-
cultural, multilingual programs in Minnesota, issues about making the
early learning curriculum responsive to children’s real lives, their
strengths, and needs were addressed. There was much discussion and
many suggestions were made in the groups about activities supporting
Hmong, Lao, and Vietnamese children because these refugee groups
had been in Minnesota for a number of years. When families devel-
oped trust in the programs, many of the parents had learned enough
English to be able to assist the staff in curriculum development.
Furthermore, storybooks and historical accounts of these groups had
recently become available to educators.
Then, the refugees began arriving from Somalia. The teachers and
staff talked about the number of vibrant, curious children and their
respectful and quiet parents. The refugees came from a terrible war-
torn reality and few knew just more than two or three words of
English. One Head Start teacher stood up and said, “I have a story
about what I learned from the Somali children about curriculum.”
She explained that in her class of twenty 3- and 4 year olds that year,
twelve of them were from Somalia. She related her attempts to gain the
trust of the children, to include them in the regular activities of the pro-
gram, and to talk with the mothers when they brought their children to
school. She said that through gestures and human nonverbal kindness,
she thought the children were feeling safe. But they seldom played with
children other than those from their group of Somali friends and
seemed to be picking up very little English. Hence other than by just
observing them, she could not learn about their family stories, their
interests, or their needs. She tried to ask for help from the mothers, but
the language barrier prevented almost any communication.
One Sunday evening, in desperation about what she was going to
provide for the children on Monday, she took a large garbage bag and
went to her own children and her neighbors’ children to ask for
donations—of stuffed animal toys. The next morning, she entered the
ELIZABETH QUINTERO
220

classroom and after greeting the children, she dumped the contents of
the bag on the rug in the middle of the room.
There happened to be a stuffed camel among the animals, and the
Somali kids jumped on it and started talking animatedly about the ani-
mal. Some went immediately to the sand table and started making
what seemed to be a desert scene with dunes and troughs for water for
animals and tents for the tiny plastic “people.” Some other children
went immediately to the art center and began drawing camels and
their own versions of camel activities. Others went to the house cen-
ter and began using the props available to prepare for some sort of
feast.
The teacher was thrilled and immediately was able to ascertain
from the children, with small bits of information from the mothers,
that camels had been an integral part of these families’ lives. They used
camels for transportation, they raised them carefully and of course,
became very attached to their family animals as American children do
to house pets. They used the products of the camel for cooking and
other life-maintaining needs. A study of camels, the teacher reported,
ensued for at least 6 weeks. The events were important for the Somali
children in that they could become the “experts” and teach the teach-
ers and other children. In this method of teaching, they began to learn
and use more English (and Spanish) in order to get their messages
across. The information also was invaluable to the other children and
the staff.
So What?
Dr Winsome Gordon of UNESCO spoke at an international Early
Childhood Education conference in March 2002. She told of count-
less school visits to schools in many African and Asian countries. She
spoke of the 6- and 7-year-old children coming to school with much
real-world knowledge and then being handed a watered-down, inap-
propriate curriculum that treats them as immature innocents. She
called for early years educators to acknowledge the experiences these
students come to school with. Maybe it is the experience of caring for
younger and elder family members, the experience of daily shopping
and negotiating the family’s food supply, the experience of coopera-
tive survival in a refugee camp, the experience of survival during or
cleaning up after war. While these students, of course, need the
knowledge and skills taught in school curricula, their “funds of knowl-
edge” (Moll, 1994) must be recognized and built upon. To begin to
understand a culture, teachers must study its folk tales, legends, his-
tory, and the current culture of a group of people. It is not adequate
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW ABOUT DIVERSITY
221

to study only the ancestry of a culture and ignore how that culture has
evolved through the ages.
Another student who participated in the Madlenka storybook and
follow-up activity visited her grandmother’s neighborhood and
learned from some experts. She wrote about her experience:
I visited two hair-braiding shops in Brooklyn. I gathered some infor-
mation and background knowledge. I thought about history, science,
much and art, building community and relationships. Not only did I
learn more about people, their customs, and history, I learned more
about myself as well. I was born here in America, I am of African
descent with roots from the West Indies. In school I never really
learned much about multiculturalism. I never learned a great deal
about African civilizations, art, history, etc. African/black history is in
fact very important in American history . . . Schools help shape one’s
identity and culture and vice versa. Self-concept has everything to do
with how one views her/himself and how others view that person. How
can one possibly go through life with marginal knowledge or misrepre-
sentation of who they are and where they come from?
Schooling in these times is an experience in dissonance between two
forces: on the one hand, a trend toward a global homogenization that
brings people and countries closer than ever, and, on the other hand,
the affirmation of what is specific and particular. This tension obviously
has implications for decisions about teaching: are we concerned with
the education of the citizen for a globally patterned culture or for a par-
ticular cultural identity? Why are we not concerned with both?
Mary Oliver (1984) asks in one of her poems, “Tell me, what is it
you plan to do/with your one wild and precious life?” (p. 22). It is a
challenge to us as learners and as educators. None of us lives or works
in isolation and we draw our inspiration from a world community. A
friend says with commitment that “The classroom is not an entity
removed from the global moment, but is an expression of it” (Shome
and Hegde, 2002, p. 184). There is hope.
References
Moll, L. (1994). Funds of Knowledge: A Look at Luis Moll’s Research into
Hidden Family Resources. CITYSCHOOLS, 1, 1, pp. 19–21.
Oliver, M. (1984). American Primitive. New York: Little Brown.
Rummel, M. K. and E. P. Quintero (1997). Teachers’ Reading/Teachers’
Lives. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Shome, R. and R. S. Hegde (2002). Culture, Communication, and the
Challenge of Globalization. Critical Studies in Media Communication,
19, 2, pp. 172–189.
ELIZABETH QUINTERO
222

Chapter 12
Hiding in the Bathroom: The 
Educational Struggle of 
Marginalized Students
Danny Walsh
We were reading three books and they all dealt with houses. We were
reading Vladimir Nabakov’s Speak Memory, Isak Dinesen’s Out of
Africa, and Gaston Bachelard’s Poetics of Space. When we got to the third
book I was terribly confused and I couldn’t make sense of what they were
talking about. So I thought, it must be because I’m not smart enough. So
I’ll go to class and I won’t say anything. But then it suddenly occurred to
me when they started talking about the attic that they weren’t talking
about my house. We didn’t have an attic in our house. You don’t usually
have an attic when you live in a third floor front. . . . Then I thought
about all the books I ever had, all the way back to Dick and Jane and Sally
and Spot. We never talked about my house. It was a horrific moment. . . .
I remember going home and getting so frightened that at that moment I
think I could have given up my education. I felt I don’t belong here.
Sandra Cisneros as cited in Menkart (1993, p. 4)
While researching multicultural education as a graduate student
about a decade ago, I stumbled upon the above story recounted by
Sandra Cisneros and felt profound reverberations with my own life;
reverberations that compelled me to investigate the impact schooling
has had and continues to have on me. Since reading Cisneros’s words,
I have engaged in a continuous peeling back of often resistant layers
of my own history and identity to reveal my narrative and the disjunc-
tion I have experienced between schooling and my lived world. Above
all, Cisneros’s narrative brilliantly captures the feelings of those who
have been rendered invisible and voiceless in schools through tradi-
tional curricula and teaching and learning processes. It is this voice-
lessness and invisibility, as imposed by the dominant culture and its
grand narratives (the stories of the way that our lives should be) that

often cause the psychological detachment that subsequently results in
“poor performance” in school. Deemphasizing, dismissing, and/or
ignorance of the complex connection between schooling and identity
cause society to focus more readily—and simplistically—on the attrib-
utes of individual students that preclude them from academic success
rather than analyzing the manner in which the power embedded in
the teaching and learning processes renders some students more
voiceless and invisible, and more susceptible to failure, than others.
Visualizing the above scenario, I cannot help but imagine that
Cisneros’s well-intentioned teacher wanted to expose her to “the
great works,” but ultimately taught her more through what was
absent and implied in the course syllabus than about anything related
to the metaphorical representation of houses in literature. As a poor,
young person of Mexican descent growing up in Chicago, Cisneros
may have never seen herself represented in school. Like many people
of color, poor and working-class people, women, immigrants, and
queers (to name a few) subject to the dominant culture’s metanarra-
tive of stable, middle class, white, heterosexual, and patriarchal
homes, Cisneros felt confused, horrified, and even unintelligent
because of the disjunction among her everyday life and curricula and
pedagogy. Despite obvious divergence in our positionalities, I, as a gay
person from a large working-class family, have also been and continue
to be subject to such disjunction. With few exceptions have I ever felt
truly represented in schooling. However, it has been during those
moments of representation that I remember feeling most intellectu-
ally engaged and developing the most profound insights.
It is important to note here that I am not claiming the discrimina-
tion associated with racism and sexism experienced by women of color
like Cisneros. Nor will I engage in the “oppression game.” The
aspects of my positionality that delineate me as “other” may not be
immediately apparent; in addition to “otherness,” I, as a white male,
also occupy positions of power and privilege. Those who engage in
the oppression game would surely locate Cisneros’s positionality
higher on the oppression scale; however, such rank ordering easily dis-
misses genuine feelings of disempowerment and exclusion and hinders
movement toward solidarity on various fronts, a solidarity that “allows
us to overcome impediments to self-direction together” (Kincheloe,
2001, p. 123).
With Cisneros’s houses serving a springboard, I embark on an
exploration of how my own school/life disjunction has impacted my
understanding of knowledge (the epistemological), educational
processes (the pedagogical), and what it means to be human (the
ontological). In the words of Maxine Greene (1995), in an attempt to
DANNY WALSH
224

determine what my relationship is to some idea of the good, I “must
inescapably understand [my] life in narrative form, as a ‘quest’
(Taylor, 1989, p. 52)” (p. 1). My narrative quest, as white gay man, as
teacher, as working class, as brother and son, as New Yorker, attempts
to reveal the reasons I seek out dangerous memories and a deeper
understanding of the relationship between knowledge and power;
appreciate different points of view and tolerate chaos, ambiguity, and
not finding the right answers; and seem to pay attention to “the
noise” in the background. Additionally, I hope to uncover why I have
few memories of believing in the discourse of harmony, that we all
bleed the same color blood and this blood automatically serves as the
tie that binds. How has a history of feeling different, excluded, and
voiceless in schools and within the dominant culture, yet not always
possessing the language or conceptual framework to express such
exclusion, contributed to my current state of being in the world?
It is not my intention to present myself as a self-actualized person
who does not continually strive to hear “the noise,” for example.
However, there may be something about my location in the “web of
reality” that predisposes me to the epistemological, ontological, and
educational view briefly described above. Francisco Varela (1992)
asserts, in his post-Cartesian view of cognitive science that challenges
the traditional input-processing-output model, that knowledge is
essentially about this situatedness; “and that the uniqueness of knowl-
edge, its historicity and context is not a ‘noise’ concealing an abstract
configuration in its true essence” (p. 7). The situatedness, the context,
the historicity, the “noise” is the essence. My “moving, touching,
breathing, and eating” (p. 8) in the world constitutes my being; I am
not simply recovering a pregiven world but building knowledge from
my microworld and microidentity (pp. 17–18). The world is not sim-
ply an “out there” thing waiting to be discovered; rather, the world is
a construction of our complex interactions with it based upon the
standpoint from which we view it.
In this endeavor to research my own life, I engage the emerging
qualitative practice of critical hermeneutics, that is, “the art . . . [of]
grappling with the text to be understood, telling its story in relation
to its contextual dynamics and other texts, first to . . . [myself] and
then to public audiences” (Kincheloe, 2001, p. 300). Criticality (the
search for the always and already inscribed power) enters the scene as
I strive to expose the power relations that have constructed my being.
Such a methodology finds a partnership with the cognitive theory
described above in that the architecture of the brain most likely sup-
ports an operation in which signals move back and forth, gradually
becoming more coherent and thereby constituting the microworld,
EDUCATIONAL STRUGGLE OF MARGINALIZED STUDENTS
225

the world as we live it (Varela, 1992, pp. 48–49). Moving back and
forth among texts while searching for inscribed power serves as the
foundation of my narrative. Furthermore, I am attempting to under-
stand the essence of a phenomenon, that of the disjunction between
my everyday life and knowledge production in school and society. As
with Sandra Cisneros, I rarely, if ever, saw my sometimes violent,
almost-never-clean, crowded, financially insecure house represented
in school. In this exploration, my narrative “. . . is not unlike an
artistic endeavor, a creative attempt to somehow capture a certain
phenomenon of life in a linguistic description that is both holistic and
analytical, evocative and precise, unique and universal, powerful and
sensitive” (van Manen, 1990, p. 39).
Maxine Greene (1995) utilizes the arts, particularly literature and
painting, to recover and remember. Here, I follow suit defining texts
broadly by including lived experiences. Greene believes, as do I, that
“a reflective grasp of our life stories and of our ongoing quests, that
reaches beyond where we have been, depends on our ability to
remember things past” and we make sense of these things based upon
where we stand in the web of reality (p. 20). My recovering and
remembering include “texts” of experiences in school as both a
teacher and a student; literature and other forms of artistic expression;
and memories of my large working-class family, particularly my
mother. Like Greene, “I cannot truly say [that this is] ‘my life story.’
That would imply that, spiderlike, I have somehow spun a web solely
from the stuff of my own being, . . . I am not so ‘individual’ that I can
claim to be free from the shaping influence of contexts. Nor can I for-
get that, conscious as I have tried to be, I have lived inside a whole
variety of ideologies and discursive practices, in spite of trying—
through resistance and critique—to liberate myself” (Greene, 1995,
p. 74). Ultimately, this narrative quest is a form of liberation through
self-disclosure and an effort to struggle for the transformation of
schools through the constant work of transformation of self. I
searched my story for epiphanies—life experiences that radically
altered the meaning I give to myself—and discovered that my 
awakenings were often associated with interruptions of aspects of the
dominant ideology that I have internalized, particularly those
concerning race, class, gender, and sexual orientation.
Conscious examination of my own ideology, indeed searching for a
sense of freedom, changes my way of being with others and thus
teaching and researching. I have grown to welcome painful and dan-
gerous memories, for such memories are not harmful as they remove
me from the inertia and safety of the status quo and permit greater
insight into “otherness.” My quest for this insight begins with my
DANNY WALSH
226

mother. As with many re-memory narratives, I jump back and forth
in time, at times mixing past events with present knowledge.
Additionally, this narrative quest was not clearly mapped and
inevitably led me down unforeseen paths. These “crooked paths,” in
contrast to the “straight roads of rationality” and “superhighways of
positivism,” allow me “to explore particularity, intuition, emotion,
rage, cognition, desire, interpretation, experience, positionality, pas-
sion, social theory and knowledge in relation to one another”
(Kincheloe, 2003, p. 195).
As cancer ravaged and eventually overcame my mother’s body,
images of her working herself to death crept into my mind. Today,
several years after her burial, I am overwhelmingly convinced that, in
addition to some environmental factors, my mother, as a working-
class woman of her historical and cultural era, was relegated to a class
and gender positionality that contributed to her premature death. An
analysis of the gender, patriarchy, and class issues in my family not only
helps to shed light on my dying mother, but also illuminates my epis-
temological, ontological, and pedagogical orientations. Essentially,
memories of my working-class family and schooling experienced
through this location write my counternarrative to the “. . . coercive
and deforming effect of the dominant culture’s official story, the
metanarrative of secure suburban family life” (Greene, 1995, p. 164).
In addition to Cisneros’s houses, memories of my mother serve as the
wellspring for interpreting my class location and how my feelings of
socioeconomic “otherness” due to the devaluation of my lived experi-
ences have consequently resulted in a search for windows into the
worlds—the counternarratives—of “others.”
In memory of my mother, my sister read the following at her funeral
service: “I think back on my mom working 12-hour shifts, 7pm to
7am, and then coming home in the morning to make Christmas and
Easter so special for all of us. She had to have been exhausted, but she
never complained once” (personal communication, 2004). I believe
that I am primarily aware of class and gender issues in my family and
society because of the knowledge imparted by experiences reflected in
my sister’s writing. When I was about 12 years old, my mother, after
raising nine children, returned to work out of economic necessity. Like
many women who left home to return to work, my mother suffered
double exploitation as she returned to a “feminized” job that required
nurturing and taking care of others’ bodies.
It was no accident that my mother was a nurse; as a woman first
entering a profession at the end of the 1950s there were few alterna-
tives. She would spend the last 20 years of her life working three or
four 12-h shifts per week and doing odd jobs to supplement this
EDUCATIONAL STRUGGLE OF MARGINALIZED STUDENTS
227

income while continuing to manage a physically and emotionally
demanding household. This double exploitation contributed to my
mother’s death as she cared for others, at work and home, but not
herself. “As professional healers, midwives, and nurses, women have
been repositories for and developers of knowledge about every one
else’s bodies” (Harding, 1998, p. 106). The surgeon general did not
issue a health warning regarding the self-sacrifice associated with tra-
ditional notions of femininity (Kincheloe and Steinberg, 1997, p. 147)
and if (s)he had I do not think my mother would have heard. When
my mother needed a hysterectomy about five years before her cancer
was diagnosed, she insisted, unsuccessfully, that she take the bus to
the hospital so that others would not have to disrupt their lives to
assist her. Later, as she suffered through chemotherapy, discussion
of her illness was not an option, so much so that she never really came
to terms with the fact that she might die.
As with many other women, my mother’s reentering the workforce
at the time of declining Western economies was accompanied by little
change in the social dynamics and responsibilities at home (Weis,
1987). Here, patriarchy enters the picture as my father possessed, and
my brothers and I inherited, the “. . . power men gain by birthright to
define reality and enjoy the rewards by way of their domination of
subordinates” (as cited in Kincheloe and Steinberg, 1997, p. 138). In
the house of my youth, this power manifested itself in my father hav-
ing few domestic obligations and more opportunities for relaxation at
home. Cynthia Cockburn and Susan Ormerod (1993) have argued
that while men view the home as a site of personal relations and recu-
peration from work, working women see it primarily as a site of
domestic labor. In retrospect, my father was the victim of “male self-
identity in patriarchal societies . . . grounded on the repression of
affect, the disruption of connection. . . . [and the] lack of interper-
sonal connection . . . creating severe social dysfunctionality, especially
in the areas of family, child care and women’s issues” (Kincheloe and
Steinberg, 1997, p. 138). I clearly remember arguing forcefully with
my mother about my father’s role in our house and saying that the
only time I saw him help with domestic chores was when she was in
the hospital having a baby. Moreover, I rarely saw or felt affection
from him. The results of this patriarchy led two of my brothers,
on separate occasions, without previously discussing the issue, to con-
front my father and blame him for my mother’s death. I was not the
only one to see my mother working herself to death, nor to recognize
how patriarchy contributed to it.
Also at work here is the gendered separation of public and private
domains in which the public world of work clearly takes precedence
DANNY WALSH
228

over the feminized home. Patriarchal ideology devalued the work my
mother performed at home; in fact, it was not considered work at all.
Christa Wolf (1989) “lists to herself the activities which the men of
science and technology presumably do not pursue or which, if forced
upon them, they would consider a waste of time: Changing a baby’s
diaper. Cooking, shopping with a child in one’s arm or in the baby
carriage. Doing the laundry, hanging it up to dry, taking it
down, . . . Dusting. Sewing . . . Doing the dishes . . . Singing songs”
(p. 31). I remember helping my mother with many of these waste-of-
time tasks. This devaluation of my mother’s private and public life
ultimately contributed to her declining health. My mother saw herself
and others saw her, using a naturalistic metaphor, as “endlessly boun-
tiful . . . [and] in medical discourses, women’s bodies have been mod-
eled on a factory; when the machinery no longer functions, as in
menopause, the factory has lost all of its value” (Harding, 1998,
p. 100). Was it an accident that my mother had both a hysterectomy
and breast removed in the last five years of her life?
I have few recollections of discussion of my mother’s or father’s
work life. What I do remember is that my mother, being in a shortage
area, enjoyed greater job stability and became better compensated for
her work after years of experience, eventually almost doubling my
father’s salary. My father, as an airline mechanic, was subject to the
economic tides of that industry. Before losing work completely with
the decline of Pan American Airlines, the only company he had ever
worked for, he was laid off during times of crisis and I remember him
delivering newspapers and driving a school bus when it was unclear
how long the layoff would last. I imagine his traditional notions of
masculinity felt very threatened by job insecurity, possessing fewer
opportunities for economic advancement than my mother, and
the overall indignities associated with an unstable worklife. “One of
the few domains of male workers’ lives over which they can
exert power and exercise control involves their relationships with
women. . . . Scarred by the indignity of the workplace, many such
husbands seek to re-establish their dignity through the domination of
their wives in the domestic sphere” (Kincheloe and Steinberg, 1997,
pp. 155–156). To this I would also add the domination of children.
The physical abuse and emotional neglect inflicted by my father
clearly had connections to patriarchal notions that rendered violence
against women and children acceptable in the private domain. Enter
schooling, the dominant culture, and the disjunction between home
and academic life.
Joe Kincheloe and Shirley Steinberg (1997) define pedagogy as
“. . . the production of identity—the way we learn to see ourselves in
EDUCATIONAL STRUGGLE OF MARGINALIZED STUDENTS
229

relation to the world” (p. 27), and cultural pedagogy as “the way
individuals receive dominant representations and encoding of the
world—are they assimilated, internalized, resisted, or transformed?”
(p. 87). Such definitions depart dramatically from pedagogy’s etymo-
logical roots that would more simply define it as the leading of chil-
dren. A more complex interpretation of pedagogy sanctions the role
that power plays in, and necessarily broadens the sources of, identity
formation. For Henry Giroux (1997), pedagogy “involves the pro-
duction and transmission of knowledge, the construction of subjectiv-
ity, and the learning of values and beliefs . . . Examining how people
learn, make emotional investments, and negotiate the world around
them, pedagogy is central to any discipline that studies educational
and cultural processes vis-à-vis the making of meaning” (p. xiii).
Cultural imperialism, a pedagogical process securely in place in
schools, serves the normative function of centering one social group’s
experience while marginalizing and deeming deficient those groups
located on the periphery.
This process also makes the marginalized groups’ perspective invis-
ible, stereotypes them, and designates them the other. With this com-
plex pedagogical process in mind, I received innumerable messages
about my family life, including the value of how we spoke, what we
ate, and how we spent leisure time. I spent much of my adolescence
separating myself from family because of these messages. Also, as part
of the cultural imperialism process mentioned above, “. . . family val-
ues become whatever best reflects the preferred familial structure of
the dominant group; marginalized family structures, no matter how
well they might work for those living within them are deemed patho-
logical by the power bloc” (Kincheloe and Steinberg, 1997, p. 85).
Despite its limitations, there were times when my family structure
worked; we were cared for and loved in many ways. However, I would
rarely see the worldview emanating from my family and everyday life
represented in school structures or curricula.
Although the disjunction between my school and family life was
always present, it became most visible to me when I was 9 years old
and we moved from urban Catholic schools to suburban public
schools. Here, issues of class and race were more pronounced as the
segregation of a small Long Island city made me more conscious of
hostility toward whites and race and class distinction based upon
imposed physical boundaries—very different from my experience in a
racially diverse working-class neighborhood in Queens. We moved
into the oceanfront city at a time when many storefronts on its main
street were boarded up, with my father’s realtor friend promising the
place would take off in the next ten years. It was the late 1970s, and
DANNY WALSH
230

the city’s school system seemed to still be feeling the impact of its inte-
gration efforts. The four elementary schools were located in distinct
racial and class neighborhoods and we would be bussed to the school
in the white working-class section from our house located just a few
blocks from the city’s housing projects.
Our school bus was a site of profound racial contestation among
5- to 10-year olds. The bus first passed through the housing projects
picking up mostly black children who would, not incidentally I
believe, occupy the back of the bus. We, noticing the segregation on
the bus as it proceeded west, sat up front. Occasionally these self-
imposed boundaries would be crossed and violence erupted with
chants of “a fight, a fight, a nigger and white, if the __________ (nigger
or white, depending upon who initiated the chant) don’t win then we
all jump in.” This was my initiation into race and class consciousness—
the political conflict between poor blacks and working-class whites
embodied in children riding a yellow school bus.
This move from Queens to Long Island also brought with it a
fourth-grade IQ test that identified me as “gifted.” From this undeni-
ably ability-grouped third and fourth grade class, I would be pulled
out and bussed once a week to a district-wide enrichment program
administered by Teachers College. The black students who occupied
the seats at the back of the bus were in struggling readers’ groups and
pulled out for support services. In this program, I met for the first
time my peers who attended the two elementary schools at the east-
ern, more affluent end of town. This would actually serve as a preview
to what I would encounter throughout junior and senior high school
where I would even more markedly feel the difference between the
haves and the have nots as I was exposed to economic privilege and
the academic success that often accompanies it.
While writing this, I suddenly remembered a few incidents during
which I resisted this gifted program and thereby an academically tal-
ented identification: I clearly picture myself leaving my fifth-grade
classroom under the guise of catching the bus waiting to deliver me to
the program, yet I hid in the bathroom until I was sure the bus had
left. A few years later I was threatened with removal from the program
if I did not start showing some initiative. I was experiencing conflict
and political struggle vis-à-vis my identity formation. I believe I was at
some level attempting to emancipate myself from a situation in which
I felt devalued and invisible, a situation in which everyone seemed to
have more and therefore be more capable. My resistance, some of
which would manifest itself in other ways throughout high school,
also served to limit my access to knowledge that might elevate me
from the working class. However, I was striving to protect my
EDUCATIONAL STRUGGLE OF MARGINALIZED STUDENTS
231

working-class worldview from a school that viewed me as lacking class
and proper breeding.
If a random person on the street could state to my mother, sur-
rounded by her many young children, “Don’t you believe in abor-
tion,” it is not difficult to imagine the ideological constructions that
influence how a kid from a large, Irish Catholic family might subcon-
sciously be treated in school. “Students from subjugated groups typi-
cally feel that they are not a part of the school community, that they
don’t possess the secret knowledge that will let them into that club”
(Kincheloe and Steinberg, 1997, p. 134). I was not part of that club;
I had vastly different everyday experiences from the majority of my
peers and I did not have the resources or academic support to partic-
ipate in the social or intellectual networks. Like other marginalized
students, I eventually concluded that schooling rewards those who
already possess the dominant forms of cultural capital and I had to
figure out how to negotiate this realization.
The dominant culture erased race and class from my schooling. It
erased class through the four myths of equal opportunity, meritocracy,
equality as conformity, and power neutrality in order to suppress any
protestation to the maldistribution of wealth in society (Kincheloe
and Steinberg, 1997, pp. 118–119). Like other dangerous topics,
race and class are banished from the curriculum because of their divi-
sive and demoralizing effects—the inclusion of racism and classism as
an object of school study, would provide nonwhite and poor students
with an excuse not to try (Kincheloe and Steinberg, 1997, p. 205).
Moreover, a history of race and class conflict, domination and subor-
dination, and cultural struggle might be revealed. Schools are rarely
seen as appropriate sites for such revelation. Here, Giroux (1997)
would contend that it is the culture of positivism that excludes such
topics from the curriculum. Positivist educational practices emphasize
objective, rational knowledge that separates the knower from the
known thereby rendering it value free and neutral. Positivism presents
such knowledge as “suprahistorical” and “supracultural.” Within such
an epistemological orientation, people are taught to believe that all
things exist in isolation and problems are therefore detached from the
social and political forces that give them meaning (pp. 11–13).
It was interpersonal difficulties and attitudes that caused violence
to erupt on the yellow school bus and my family was to blame for
what it lacked but it seemed that everyone else had. Moreover, such
positivistic educational practice “excludes the role of values, feeling,
and subjectively defined meanings in its paradigms” (Giroux, 1997,
p. 19). The opportunity to discuss, literally and metaphorically speak-
ing, my working-class family and school bus political struggles
DANNY WALSH
232

between working-class whites and poor blacks would not present
itself. Discussion of less than harmonious relationships are dangerous
and therefore disallowed. I was subject to ideologies that “generally
fail to engage the politics of voice and representation—the forms of
narrative and dialogue—around which students make sense of their
lives and schools” (Giroux, 1997, p. 120). I would have to find a way
to make sense and meaning and to negotiate the conflict between
identification as both a member of the working class and an academic
achiever. A positivistic educational system would never allow me a
voice.
“Many of the alienated or marginalized are made to feel distrustful
of their own voices, their own ways of making sense, yet they are not
provided alternatives that allow them to tell their stories or shape their
narratives or ground new learning in what they already know”
(Greene, 1995, pp. 110–111). Like Greene, I felt alienated yet found
a voice through texts that reveal the experiences of the “other.” I par-
ticularly remember feeling a developing voice in a tenth-grade high
school course entitled “Literature and Social Problems,” an elective
course taught by Ms. Vitale in which we not only read alternatives to
the Western canon but also experienced an accompanying change in
teaching style. While reading novels like Native Son by Richard
Wright and discussing topics like environmental conservation and
teenage suicide, we sat in a semicircle and actually spoke to other stu-
dents. It is somewhat ironic, but not surprising, that I would have to
diverge from my advanced placement track in order to more pro-
foundly connect to academic life.
Later, I often wondered why it was that I could so clearly remem-
ber the horror of Bigger Thomas’s transgression in Native Son and
our discussions around the race and class issues presented in the novel.
On what grounds could I possibly connect to a young black man
living in abject poverty?
Words like “nobodyness” and metaphors like “invisibility” were invented
by black writers like James Baldwin and Ralph Ellison to describe their
existence—helpless and unseen under the iron, an iron often moved back
and forth by righteous men and women. I am not suggesting that I could
claim kindred suffering, but at the same time . . . new meanings have fed
into my own past shudderings and fears, and my present encounters with
power, with force, with irrational pieties, with irons are extended some-
how, and they are grounded in my lived world, my first landscapes, my
“rememory.” (Greene, 1995, p. 82)
Yes, there were outside forces at work, “the iron,” the dominant
ideology, that prevented me from seeing my own oppression and the
EDUCATIONAL STRUGGLE OF MARGINALIZED STUDENTS
233

oppression of others. Other people and their stories did matter and
consequently my story mattered. I was angry, yet relieved. I encoun-
tered “. . . a pedagogy in which occurs a critical questioning of the
omissions and tensions that exist between the master narratives and
hegemonic discourses that make up the official curriculum and the
self-representations of subordinate groups as they might appear in
‘forgotten’ or erased histories, texts, memories, experiences, and com-
munity narratives” (Giroux, 1997, pp. 156–157). In retrospect, it was
no accident that I chose a class entitled “Literature and Social
Problems”; I was on a search for lost narratives, particularly my own.
I was “awestruck by truth-telling, motivated by the desire to get the
whole story and moved by the vision of what education can be”
(Kincheloe and Steinberg, 1997, p. 130). Much of the truth-telling in
this class challenged notions of racial equity and the discourse of har-
mony. I was intellectually and emotionally intrigued by the subtlety
with which racism manifests itself.
Kincheloe and Steinberg (1997) refer to these mutated, no longer
overt forms of racism as crypto-racism, that is, racism that is “. . . con-
cealed, secret, and not visible to the naked eye. Often, such a racist
form employs thinly veiled racialized code words that evoke images of
white superiority” (p. 195). To this day, I am still somewhat taken
aback, perhaps naively, by the “codes” used by teachers when speak-
ing about students of color. Once I was discussing with another
teacher some challenging behavior problems that I was having with a
student, with the intent of problem solving, and she ended the con-
versation by stating, “Some of them are straight from the jungle.”
Being new in the school building, I did not know how to react. I was
shocked. I was complicit and allowed that talk to pass uninterrupted.
She did not even realize the connotations of her words. Perhaps a
more subtle incident involved the same teacher who thought that the
solution to many students’ academic deficiencies was “good dinner
time conversation.” I recently read a response to this that asked what
Abner Louima’s (a man sodomized by the New York City Police
Department) family would discuss around their dinner table that
might be incorporated into a literacy lesson. Again, this teacher failed
to hear the biases in her words. I often wondered what this woman’s
classroom, filled with mostly poor students of color, felt like to them.
“As it engages in the language of denial, crypto-racism aligns itself
with notions of: (a) a common culture, i.e. all solid citizens hold par-
ticular, sacred values and understanding (implicit in the assertion is
that many non-whites do not share these values and understanding)”
(Kincheloe and Steinberg, 1997, p. 195). These students did not
know how to respond to authority, were therefore less than human,
DANNY WALSH
234

did not have white middle-class cultural and political conversations
around the dinner table, and they were therefore ignorant. With such
an ethos established by a teacher, is it any wonder that students
“act out”?
I was also not a holder of the sacred values. I acted out. I protested.
I resisted. As briefly mentioned above, my acts of resisting academi-
cally talented identification, and subsequently school, emanated from
the conflict I felt between dual identification as working class and
“gifted.” As also mentioned, I attempted to separate myself from my
family because I perceived I needed to be more like those who suc-
ceeded in school, the economically privileged, so that I could become
a member of the club. “School is sometimes like a jealous lover who
demands that marginalized students must choose between their peers
or school—if school is chosen then one must give up one’s culture
and adopt the identity of a school achiever” (Kincheloe and Steinberg,
1997, p. 127). I alternately chose school and my family. I achieved
and did not achieve in school. I achieved to say “hey, look at me, I’m
doin’ this anyway” and I did not achieve because I felt disconnected
and hopeless about future possibilities.
In many ways, I was a compliant and well-behaved student.
Perhaps this is why I was allowed to pass by the gatekeepers who
would have been more inclined to chose a more privileged peer for
participation in any enrichment programs. Perhaps I was admitted
into the gifted program without meeting its criteria because a teacher
thought that a student from a large working-class family deserved a
chance. Obviously, at this point, this is mere speculation on my part.
Whatever caused me to hide in the bathroom so as not to participate
in a gifted program, at least on that one day, was the result of internal
conflict and a sense of “otherness.” Olugbemiro Jegede (1999) uses
collateral learning theory to explain how non-Western learners cope
with learning science in a classroom that is hostile to their indigenous
knowledge. Ultimately, they learn to separate indigenous and Western
ways of knowing as they “grapple with the need to resolve under-
standing from two domains on an everyday basis” (p. 131). Collateral
learning reminds me of a recent speaker at the CUNY Graduate
Center who discussed the distance, epistemological and emotional,
that students “travel” to arrive at school. I sometimes felt as if I had
walked miles to get to school.
School was an emotionally draining experience from which I often
could not wait to escape. In junior high and high school, I resisted
social identification as an academic achiever by smoking cigarettes,
drinking alcohol, and later using drugs because I thought these things
might inscribe an alternate identity. I also resisted school knowledge.
EDUCATIONAL STRUGGLE OF MARGINALIZED STUDENTS
235

“Marginalized student resistance to mainstream norms often expresses
itself in terms of a cultivated ignorance of information deemed impor-
tant by the so called ‘cultured’ ” (Kincheloe and Steinberg, 1997,
p. 100). I remember feeling more and more alienated from school as
the years progressed and spending more time working a part-time
job than doing homework, primarily to have things and to be able to
do things. In school, of all places, I was developing anti-intellectual
tendencies and becoming an accomplice to my own subjugation
(Benjamin, 1977, p. 22, as cited in Giroux, 1997, p. 57).
The removed-from-my-everyday “advanced” knowledge and
“higher” culture of secondary school became more foreign to me.
Master narratives seemed to become more commonplace. On more
than one occasion, Greene (1995) refers to Toni Morrison’s character
Pecola Breedlove in The Bluest Eye and the “way in which [she] is
destroyed by two of the dominant culture’s master narratives: the
Dick and Jane readers and the mythic image made of Shirley Temple
with her blue eyes” (p. 118). As with Sandra Cisneros, we see the
destructiveness of the dismissing of the “other’s” narrative—other
than white, middle-class, stable homes. Again, I am not claiming the
impact of racism and sexism, but I undoubtedly felt the jolt as the cul-
tural and socioeconomic “other.”
Here I visit the notion of the dominant culture’s determination of
what constitutes “high” versus “low” or popular culture, and, as men-
tioned above, the alienation I have felt from dominant cultural narra-
tives in literature and other forms of artistic expression. There was
“classic” literature that spoke to me; however, it seemed that the
“high” cultural world of classical music, painting, sculpture, muse-
ums, and the theater as well as the food and drink that accompanied
such activities was the secret knowledge of others. It was a world into
which I was not invited, with the exception of an occasional school
trip, and I feel the repercussions even today as evidenced through my
discomfort in museums, galleries, and yes, even restaurants. The dis-
positions and preferences evident in my sense of appropriateness and
validity of taste for cultural goods, which not only operate at the level
of everyday knowledge but are also inscribed on my body, might
reveal me in these venues (du Gay et al., 1997, p. 97). My discomfort
emanates from a fear of being found out, perhaps being viewed as
“uncultured” or “unintelligent” because I would not recognize art
work or food, or know how to talk about it, or know how to act in
these settings.
In the words of Tillie Olsen (1978), this world of high culture
was “ ‘dark with silences,’ the ‘unnatural silences’ of women who
worked too hard [like my mother] or were too embarrassed to express
DANNY WALSH
236

themselves (p. 6) and of others who did not have the words or had not
mastered the proper way of knowing” (as cited in Greene, 1995,
p. 160). The proper way of knowing was withheld from me. I have
recently found solace in the “low” or popular culture of quilts stitched
from rags by poor Alabaman African American women displayed at
the Whitney Museum; the choreography of Arthur Aviles performed
in a dance studio converted from an old warehouse in the South
Bronx; drag queens working the stage in Tompkins Square Park; the
Great Migration paintings of Jacob Lawrence; the poetry of Emanuel
Xavier, a former queer hustler, who worked the West Side Highway
piers; and the pulsating dance beats spun at Body & Soul, a now
defunct club, sold to the highest bidder as Tribeca further gentrified,
that was filled with gay men and lesbians of every color. Obviously, my
attraction to such cultural productions is about much more than class
status. Where are there spaces to discuss the pedagogical processes
involved in such art forms?
Seeking out art and culture such as this is my postmodern critique,
my challenge to the master narrative, and my opposition to the
Western canon and the common culture it attempts to develop.
“Postmodern thinkers challenge hierarchical structures of knowledge
and power which promote ‘experts’ above the ‘masses,’ as they seek
new ways of knowing that transcend empirically verified facts and ‘rea-
sonable,’ linear arguments deployed in the quest for certainty”
(Kincheloe and Steinberg, 1997, p. 38). A critique such as this is “the
explosion of reification, a breaking through of mystifications and a
recognition of how certain forms of ideology serve the logic of dom-
ination” and determine what is included and what is excluded
(Giroux, 1997, p. 85). While many would consider painter Jacob
Lawrence worthy of appreciation and investigation, few would attrib-
ute such status to a former queer hustler’s poetry or to a queer chore-
ographer who lives and performs in the economically depressed South
Bronx. “Knowledge that emerges from and serves the purposes of the
subjugated is often erased by making it appear dangerous and patho-
logical to other citizens” (Semali and Kincheloe, 1999, p. 32). In fact,
the people themselves who produce these knowledges are rendered
dangerous and pathological by the dominant culture’s ideological
standards; the subjugated are portrayed as witches, heretics, demons,
savages, and faggots, and are summarily dismissed.
Like Sandra Cisneros, despite being dismissed and feeling like I
did not belong, I did not give up my education. I emerged from the
bathroom that protected me from further insult and continued to
attend the “gifted” program. Even as a doctoral student, I sometimes
return to this metaphorical place of refuge when my vocabulary and
EDUCATIONAL STRUGGLE OF MARGINALIZED STUDENTS
237

experiences seem limited, when I miss the punchline of jokes with ref-
erences to “high” culture, when I do not know what others around
me seem to know, and when heterosexual assumptions render me
invisible. Unlike many marginalized students, I have found consola-
tion in the academy. With the help of teachers like Ms. Vitale in classes
with titles like “Literature and Social Problems” as well as my own
counter-cultural explorations, I have encountered voices that told sto-
ries both like and unlike mine, but always different from the dominant
culture’s narratives of what and how I/we should be. Schooling, as a
reflection of these narratives, too often fails to recognize alternative
ways of being in and seeing the world and subsequently fails students
marginalized because of race, class, gender, and sexual orientation.
My argument here is primarily one for the inclusion of dangerous
memories in the curriculum for such memories centralize the periph-
ery and provide schooling with the meaning so desperately needed
and desired by marginalized students. We are all too familiar with
what happens to students who do not find such meaning, who do not
emerge from their place of hiding.
References
Cockburn, C. and S. Ormerod (1993). Gender and Technology in the Making.
London: Sage.
du Gay, P., S. Hall, L. Janes, H. Mackay, and K. Negus (1997). Doing
Cultural Studies: The Story of the Sony Walkman. London: Sage.
Giroux, H. (1997). Pedagogy and the Politics of Hope: Theory, Culture, and
Schooling. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Greene, M. (1995). Releasing the Imagination: Essays on Education, the Arts,
and Social Change. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Harding, S. (1998). Is Science Multicultural?: Postcolonialisms, Feminisms,
and Epistemologies. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Jegede, O. (1999). Science Education in Nonwestern Cultures: Towards a
Theory of Collateral Learning. In L. Semali and J. Kincheloe (eds.), What
is Indigenous Knowledge?: Voices from the Academy. New York and
London: Falmer Press.
Kincheloe, J. (2001). Getting beyond the Facts: Teaching Social Studies/Social
Sciences in the Twenty-First Century. New York: Peter Lang Publishing, Inc.
Kincheloe, J. (2003). Teachers as Researchers: Qualitative Inquiry as a Path to
Empowerment (2nd edn). London and New York: RoutledgeFalmer.
Kincheloe, J. and S. Steinberg (1997). Changing Multiculturalism.
Buckingham and Philadelphia: Open University Press.
Menkart, D. (1993). Multicultural Education: Strategies for Linguistically
Diverse Schools and Classrooms. Washington, DC: National Clearinghouse
for Bilingual Education (ERIC Document Reproduction Services No. ED
364 106).
DANNY WALSH
238

Semali, L. and J. Kincheloe (eds.) (1999). What is Indigenous Knowledge?:
Voices from the Academy. New York and London: Falmer Press.
van Manen, M. (1990). Researching Lived Experience: Human Science for an
Action Sensitive Pedagogy. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Varela, F. (1992). Ethical Know-How: Action, Wisdom, and Cognition.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Weis, L. (1987). High School Girls in a De-Industrializing Economy. In L.
Weis (ed.), Class, Race, and Gender in American Education. Albany, NY:
SUNY Press.
Wolf, C. (1989). Accident: A Day’s News (H. Schwarzbauer and R. Fakrorian,
trans.) New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux.y
EDUCATIONAL STRUGGLE OF MARGINALIZED STUDENTS
239

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 13
When Ignorance and Deceit Come 
to Town: Preparing Yourself for the
English-Only Movement’s Assault 
on Your Public Schools
Pepi Leistyna
There is a fierce battle being waged over language policy and
practice in public schools in the United States. Both proponents and
opponents have focused their arguments on which language of
instruction will linguistically diverse students learn best.
On the one hand, antibilingual advocates have argued that in order
to promote effective nationwide communications and meet the
demands of modern technology and the economy, the United States
is compelled to use a linguistic standard. These political voices thus
call for a mandatory English-only approach for all children in public
schools throughout the country. At the forefront of this cause is Ron
Unz the chairman of the national advocacy organization English for
the Children, and the originator of California’s Proposition 227,
which in 1998 effectively outlawed bilingual education in that state.
After a similar victory in Arizona in 2000, he also attempted to win
over Colorado. However, a wealthy parent spent a mountain of her
own personal money on a press campaign to convince the middle-class
white population not to support Unz’s initiative because if bilingual
programs are dismantled, then “those kids will be in class with your
kids.” This well-funded, racist plea worked and Colorado voted no on
the English-only referendum. Unz is currently focusing on New York
and Oregon.
Unz demands that the United States replace bilingual education
(which he describes as “a disastrous experiment”) with a one-year

Structured English Immersion Program. As the English for the
Children publicity pamphlet states
Under this learning technique, youngsters not fluent in English are
placed in a separate classroom in which they are taught English over a
period of several months. Once they have become fluent in English,
they are moved into regular classes.
When asked by a reporter, “Won’t immigrant kids fall behind in other
subjects besides English if they aren’t taught in their own languages?,”
Unz (1997) replied, “The vast majority of the students involved [in
linguistic transition] enter school when they’re just 5 or 6, and at that
age, it takes just a few months to learn English.” Without reference to
any specific theory or research to back up this claim, he asserts that
human brains at a young age are designed or wired up for language
acquisition. And that’s what all the neurological science indicates. It’s
what every ordinary person in the world believes, but it’s contrary to
the theory of bilingual academics.
As no specific research literature is cited, it is unclear if Unz is attest-
ing to the validity of Noam Chomsky’s notion of the Language
Acquisition Devise (LAD), or if he is laying claims to Steven Pinker’s
idea that language is a human instinct that is wired into the brain by
evolution. Unz could also be referring to the most recent research
that identifies FOXP2—a specific human gene that affects the brain
circuitry that makes possible language and speech.
There is strong evidence to suggest that human beings are biolog-
ically predisposed with certain cognitive structures that facilitate lan-
guage growth and logical thought. It is probable that, as Chomsky has
argued, there is a language-specific organ of the mind that provides an
in-house abstract blueprint known as universal grammar, against
which language acquirers can test hypotheses and develop surface lan-
guage syntax. If Unz is situating himself in this Innatist school of
thought, he neglects to elaborate on the details of the theory that
informs his political motivations toward English-only. The fact that he
does not offer up recognition that such psycholinguistic tools do not
predispose humans to knowledge, using language in social contexts,
body language, literacy, or critical inquiry, is evidence of his lack of
expertise in this area. English-only advocates do not detail their expla-
nations of how children actually acquire language or develop literacy
skills, or how to assess such growth. Unz’s diatribes do not even
differentiate speaking from reading and writing—two interrelated but
PEPI LEISTYNA
242

very different abilities. To make the English-only political position
vaguer, advocates, while staking their claims to mandatory English lan-
guage instruction, offer no pedagogical detailing of such classrooms.
Worlds apart from Unz’s claim that “It’s what every ordinary per-
son in the world believes, but is contrary to the theory of bilingual
academics,” I find that it is very easy to introduce Innatist concepts to
language educators in my Applied Linguistics Graduate Studies/
teacher education program, but very difficult to explain to the general
population. Most people unknowingly subscribe to a behavioristic
stimulus–response–reward explanation of language development.
That is, they readily believe that children learn language by mimicking
the people around them. In addition, in my experiences, the public
easily falls prey to the logic that the more time on task, in other words,
the more English you speak the more you will learn. Within this
realm, there is little patience for the counterintuitive and research-
backed logic that quality education in the first language facilitates the
growth of the target language—that is, what is more understandable
in the first language will be easier to make sense of in the second.
Many Republicans, and Democrats alike, embrace the national
movement toward English-only language and literacy policies and
practices. In Massachusetts, where Unz’s initiative recently passed in a
state-wide referendum, teachers are desperately looking for guidance
in how to go about infusing this new approach to language learning,
and teacher education programs are scrambling to restructure their
bilingual education services in order to prepare teachers to work in
sanctioned, Structured English Immersion classrooms.
The Assault on Massachusetts: The Spoils 
of Propaganda
In November 2002, after being bombarded with misinformation, the
Massachusetts voters decided the fate of bilingual education in K-12
public schools. English for the Children came to Boston in order to
work to replace Transitional Bilingual Education, a three-year
program, with one year of Structured English Immersion. Unz,
the outspoken leader of this anti-bilingual initiative, drafted the
Massachusetts proposal. What are the claims made by Unz and his
followers, and what facts contradict this agenda?
In Unz’s view, linguistic-minority students require only one year of
Structured Immersion in an English-only context in order to join
native speakers in mainstream classes. However, research clearly shows
that it can take children from five to seven years to become fluent and
literate, able to learn sophisticated content in the second language,
ENGLISH-ONLY MOVEMENT’S ASSAULT ON PUBLIC SCHOOLS
243

and thus able to handle the demands of standardized testing like the
Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS). This
should come as no surprise as that is how long it took all of us in our
first language experience. Effective immersion and bilingual programs
take this fact into account and they work from the basic premise that
if knowledge is comprehensible in the first language (e.g., the lan-
guage of math), then it will be easier to understand in the second lan-
guage. The catch-up process in bilingual education consequently
includes grade-appropriate content in the native language while the
English improves.
Countering the criticism that one year of Structured English
Immersion and subsequent mainstreaming will lead to certain failure
of so many students, Unz’s promotional pamphlet states, “It [the
organization] will NOT throw children who can’t speak English into
regular classes where they would have to ‘sink or swim.’ ” So, rather
than supporting bilingual education’s simultaneous development of
knowledge, language, and literacy skills, students will remain in a
segregated and mixed-age holding tank in English where they will
be served watered-down curricula in other content areas. It is ironic
that support for stifling any real advancement in Math, Science, Social
Studies, and the Language Arts comes from a movement that is
supposedly seeking to make education more rigorous.
There is no defensible theory or body of research to support the
claim that students need only one year (about 180 school days) to
become fully fluent, literate, and capable of learning content in another
language. Imagine yourself going to another country where you did
not speak the language and pulling off this massive feat in such a short
period of time. Those of us who have actually studied overseas can fully
appreciate the time and support necessary for this process.
Regardless of Unz’s rhetorical claims, the majority of students in
California in Structured English Immersion did not achieve even
intermediate fluency after one year. Take, for example, the Orange
Unified School District that is so often used to support Unz’s argu-
ment: after the first year, 6 out of 3,549 students were mainstreamed;
more than half of the students were not ready for his specially
designed classrooms. A more recent progress report in California
reveals the extent of the disaster:
In 2002–2003, it [Ron Unz’s Structured English Immersion] failed at
least 1,479,420 children who remained limited in English. Only
42 percent of California students whose English was limited in 1998,
when Proposition 227 passed, have since been redesignated as fluent in
English—five years later! (Crawford, 2003, p. 1)
PEPI LEISTYNA
244

With five years of watered-down content, rather than intensive
subject-matter instruction in the primary language, these students will
certainly be ill-prepared for high stakes standardized tests. In states
like Massachusetts, students who do not pass the state’s standardized
test in high school will not graduate. Instead, they will be shown to
the door and handed a Certificate of Attendance on their way out;
that is, if they manage to stay in school under such conditions.
English-only advocates claim that bilingual education causes high
dropout rates, especially among Latino/a students. The reality is that
only a minority of Limited English Proficient (LEP) students around
the country are in bilingual programs. The real issue at hand is that
75 percent of all linguistic-minority students reside in low-income,
urban areas that have schools that are highly segregated and in rough
shape. These students so often face harsh racist and material condi-
tions, incessant harassment, segregated school activities, limited class-
room materials, ill-prepared teachers, poorly designed and unenforced
policies, and indifferent leadership that dramatically disrupt their per-
sonal, cultural, and academic lives. Unz disregards these political and
ethical issues and simply calls for “structured mixing,” when possible,
of mainstream and Structured English Immersion students. Not only
does his plan avoid confronting the discrimination that takes place in
public educational institutions—that in fact leads to high dropout
rates—but it is also unclear how such a strategy for integration is
going to work in schools that are segregated because of economic/
housing demographics.
Unz maintained that his legislative intent is only an extension of
Latino/a parents’ discontent with bilingual education. Contradicting
this stance, according to the National Council of La Raza (NCLR),
which is one of the nation’s leading Latino/a advocacy groups,
80 percent of registered Latino/a voters across the country are in
favor of bilingual education.
Unz told the people of Massachusetts that the standardized test
scores of over 1 million students have improved in California as a
result of Proposition 227. However, as correlation does not necessar-
ily speak to causality, he failed to inform the public about the likeli-
hood of test inflation caused by teaching to the test, special test
preparation, selective testing in terms of who gets to participate, class
size reductions, political and financial incentives for those administra-
tors who comply, and eliminating most school activities that are unre-
lated to the test. In fact, the scores of all the students improved,
including those from bilingual programs—what little remains of
them. In some cases, students in bilingual education scored higher
overall. What has not significantly decreased in states that have already
ENGLISH-ONLY MOVEMENT’S ASSAULT ON PUBLIC SCHOOLS
245

adopted English-only programs is the gap between the LEP students
and the mainstream. Of course, Unz said nothing of this during his
Massachusetts campaign.
Unz insisted that linguistic-minority students are trapped in bilin-
gual programs for most, if not all, of their public school careers—
programs that he emphatically argues are supported by faulty
educational theories rather than empirical data. Contrary to Unz’s
assertion, the average stay in bilingual classrooms in Massachusetts is
2.8 years. In exceptional programs in cities like Framingham and
Cambridge, the average is 2.3 years. In addition, there are over 150
studies that show how, when properly implemented, including the
native tongue is beneficial for linguistic, psychological, cognitive, and
academic development.
Unlike Unz’s one-size-fits-all approach, students from diverse age
groups and backgrounds have different needs. When these needs are
addressed, and parents are allowed to be part of the assessment
process and are given an informed choice as to what is best for their
children, the results are outstanding. But bilingual education’s success
or failure depends entirely on the people and institutions that bring
such programs to life. Unz ignores successful examples such as
Framingham’s: in 2001, out of the 1,500 students that are in one of
the five language programs that are offered, 92 percent of the third
graders passed the state’s standardized test (the MCAS) in English.
The teachers responsible for such success, under the Unz initiative,
can be sued and banned from working for five years if they use any
language other than English in the classroom.
Unz calls his campaign English for the Children, but the evidence
suggests that it will not achieve such benign ends. If we truly want to
raise the English-speaking skills of nonnative speakers, we can surely
find more reliable guidance than this draconian solution championed
by a monolingual, multimillionaire with no children, and with no
background in education or linguistics. But such guidance is difficult
when set up against big money and corporate media. While Unz and
his spokespersons got open access to newspapers and other media, it
was very difficult to get alternative perspectives out to the public.
Believe me, I tried! Even with a Masters and Doctorate in language
and literacy from the Harvard Graduate School of Education, dozens
of journal articles on language and education, five books with major
publishing houses, years of experience teaching English as a second
language and in a teacher education program in Applied Linguistics,
I was virtually unable to put forth a counterargument to Unz’s assault
on bilingual education. After dozens of attempts with the major local
newspapers, it was only the Cambridge Chronicle that took any
PEPI LEISTYNA
246

interest in publishing one of my op-eds. Likewise, when major
scholars like Jim Cummins and James Crawford came to the University
of Massachusetts, Boston to speak on the issue, the press, though
invited, was nowhere to be found. This was particularly telling and
disturbing given that the Boston Globe is laterally right across the street
from campus.
Playing with Patriotism, Demonizing Difference
Capitalizing on the public’s general discontent with K-12 schools,
proponents of English-only have worked tirelessly and effectively to
scapegoat bilingual education, creating legal constraints on the daily
lives of educators by ensuring that languages other than English (with
the exception of “foreign language instruction”) are stomped out of
school life entirely. In an effort to do so, anti-bilingual forces have capi-
talized on public fears over national unity. The U.S. English Foundation,
Inc. believes “that a shared language provides a cultural guidepost
that we must maintain for the sake of our country’s unity, prosperity
and democracy . . .” The English for the Children pamphlet adds,
“Children who leave school without knowing how to read English,
write English, and speak English are injured for life economically and
socially.” Beyond the ethnocentric assumption that literacy and eco-
nomic and technological effectiveness can only take place in English,
proponents of the English-only movement assume that the fundamen-
tal reason that the country potentially faces internal turmoil is because
of the failure and/or unwillingness of linguistic minorities to assimilate.
Not only does this dehistoricized position presuppose that the country
has at some point been united, but its ideologues also strategically say
nothing about a system within which people are relegated, and not by
choice, to live on the margins of economic, social, and political power.
The leading voices of English-only say virtually nothing about the
socially sanctioned and systemic practices that discriminate against
certain groups of people and that generate antagonistic social relations
and economic exploitation and abuse. For example, there is no
detailed critique of the recent anti-immigrant and anti-Affirmative
Action conflicts and racial strife that is embodied in California’s
Propositions 187 and 209. While Unz proclaimed to be an opponent
of Proposition 187, it was unclear if he simply needed an opposing
platform to Pete Wilson’s as they were competing for the governor-
ship, or if he was in no hurry to rid his state of a cheap labor force—
after all, he is the owner of a software company. Nor is there adequate
public concern for, or media coverage of, the fact that schools
throughout the country remain profoundly racially segregated. In
ENGLISH-ONLY MOVEMENT’S ASSAULT ON PUBLIC SCHOOLS
247

addition, there is little to no discussion of the hidden agenda (or not
so hidden in the case of Colorado) of conservative support for bilin-
gual education that embraces improper implementation so as to
ensure that racially subordinated children are segregated from privi-
leged whites. Only when put on the spot, during an interview, does
Unz himself admit to this reality:
Although this is a touchy point, there does seem to be some anecdotal
evidence that it’s sometimes true. . . . Under this analysis, bilingual
education represents mandatory racial segregation, which makes it even
stranger that it’s become part of liberal orthodoxy.
In the first half of his statement, Unz makes no effort to excoriate the
racist implications of such actions; in fact, he shows no distress at all.
The logic in the second half of his response implies that simply
because racists work to misuse a program (which is not designed to be
about segregation during the entire school day), then supporters
should simply give up on it. That’s the equivalent of saying, because
corporations such as Enron, WorldCom, and Tyco abuse democracy,
then we should all abandon such a governmental process.
Ironically, some anti-bilingual advocates, such as former president
Ronald Reagan, insist that instruction in languages other than English
is un-American. This paradoxical twist disregards that the Constitution
of the United States protects linguistic pluralism, and that the U.S.
Supreme Court’s 1974 Lau v. Nichols decision was intended to protect
the rights of linguistic minorities in public schools. States like Alaska
and Oklahoma found English-only practices in government to be
unconstitutional. It also seems more unpatriotic for a democracy
to exclude (or mark as “foreign”) languages that are now indigenous to
the United States: the native tongues of Puerto Rico, Native America,
Hawaiians, African Americans, and Mexican Americans.
It is also curious that so many mainstream politicians concerned
with public education work so hard to eradicate multilingualism
among racially and economically oppressed students, while simultane-
ously working to make certain that upper-middle class and wealthy
youth are able to speak international languages. Multilingualism,
which is embraced in all the finest private schools in the country,
worldwide for that matter, is great for elite children but somehow bad
for, and unpatriotic of, the poor.
In addition, as democracy and commonality are a contradiction in
terms (i.e., democracy requires difference, participation, and dissent,
rather than conformity through coercion), it is the proponents of
English-only and common cultural literacy that in fact embrace social
PEPI LEISTYNA
248

fragmentation. In other words, their academic canons and linguistic
standards exclude by their very nature. From a self-professed oppo-
nent of bilingual education, Affirmative Action, multiculturalism, and
multicultural education, and most other movements and policies that
support a more participatory democracy, we hear statements from
Unz (2000) such as:
First and foremost, our public schools and educational institutions
must be restored as engines of assimilation they once were. . . . In his-
tory and social studies classrooms, “multicultural education” is now
widespread, placing an extreme and unrealistic emphasis on ethnic
diversity instead of passing on the traditional knowledge of Western civ-
ilization, our Founding Fathers, and the Civil and World Wars . . .
current public school curricula which glorify obscure ethnic figures
at the expense of the giants of American history have no place in a
melting pot framework. (Unz, 2000, pp. 3–4).
In a cover story in Commentary (1999), with the shock value title
of “California and the End of White America,” Unz is able to main-
tain the existing and balkanizing fear in many whites that they are
being overrun, while at the same time scaring racially and ethnically
diverse peoples with the “inevitability” that there will be white back-
lash against them in the form of “White Nationalism.” He warns:
Our political leaders should approach these ethnic issues by reaffirming
America’s traditional support for immigration, but couple that with a
return to the assimilative policies which America has emphasized in the
past. Otherwise, whites as a group will inevitably begin to display the
same ethnic-minority-group politics as other minority groups, and
this could break our nation. We face the choice of either supporting
“the New American Melting Pot” or accepting “the Coming of White
Nationalism.” (Unz, 1999, p. 1)
What is particularly interesting about this rhetorical strategy that calls
for “assimilative policies” is that the mainstream that supports U.S.
English-only is not the least bit interested in the assimilation of racially
subordinated groups into their neighborhoods, places of work, edu-
cational institutions, clubs, and communities, that is, in equal rights
and universal access. As a person said to me today when he learned
that I had to go home after the football game to finish writing this
article on language policy and practice in the United States:
Those people need to learn English and be taught only in English. You
and that multicultural stuff . . . keep it up and they’ll be living right
next to you!
ENGLISH-ONLY MOVEMENT’S ASSAULT ON PUBLIC SCHOOLS
249

As has been the case historically, under a xenophobic climate clouded
with anti-immigrant sentiments, the main concern of local folks is
with “unwelcomed outsiders” taking over of jobs and affordable
housing, and flooding public schools and other social services.
The harsh reality is that beyond the concocted hype about the
usurping of quality employment by “outsiders,” the job opportunities
that are intended for migrant workers, the majority of immigrants,
and the nation’s own down-trodden, consist of manual labor, cleaning
crews, the monotony of the assembly-line, and farm jobs that require
little to no English—as with the Bracero Program (1942–1964) when
more than 4 million Mexican farm laborers were “legally brought”
into the United States to work the fields and orchards. These workers
spoke little to no English, signed contracts that were controlled by
independent farmers associations and the Farm Bureau, and were
immediately put to work without an understanding of their rights. In
1964, when the Bracero Program was finally dismantled, the U.S.
Department of Labor officer heading the operation, Lee G. Williams,
described it as “legalized slavery.”
There is a new scramble by big business and politicians, both
Republicans and Democrats, to “legalize” undocumented workers. In
response to a demand and shortage of low-wage, low-skill jobs, George W.
Bush’s administration is looking into another guest worker program.
Thus, being pro-immigrant, as Unz claims “Nearly all the people
involved in the effort [English-only] have a strong pro-immigrant
background,” does not necessarily mean being pro social justice.
As the founder and chairman of a Silicon Valley financial services
software firm and the 1994 GOP nomination for governor of
California, Unz’s insistence that an English-only approach will ensure
“better jobs for their [linguistic-minority children’s] parents” does not
seem to ring in solidarity with organized labors’ concerns with the sys-
tematic exploitation of workers, both documented and undocu-
mented. Simply shifting to a one-year sink or swim Structured English
Immersion Program for what would now be “legal” workers (who by
the way will not be going to school as they will be working long hours)
will not eradicate the problems of economic abuse and subjugation.
On the contrary, such conservative programs provide limited access to
language and learning and prevent most linguistic-minority children
from attaining academic fluency in either their native language or in
English. A one-year Structured English Immersion Program is surely
designed to fail in developing both fluency and literacy. Instead, these
kinds of state and federal educational policies and practices reflect an
implicit economic need to socialize immigrants and members of
oppressed groups to fill necessary, but undesirable, low-status jobs.
PEPI LEISTYNA
250

The Colonial Language Trap
Taking away the native tongue, while never really giving access to the
discourse of power, is a common practice in any colonial model of
education. Such a deskilling process creates what I refer to as bridge
people: people who are miseducated in a way that connects them to
two worlds but works vigilantly to make certain that they belong to
neither. This strategy effectively works to deny their access to the
mainstream while simultaneously taking away any tools that can be
used to build the cultural solidarity necessary to resist exploitation and
transform society. It is thus clear that assimilationist agendas are really
about segregation. Homi Bhabha’s (1994) concepts of “ambivalence”
and “mimicry” shed light on how the myth of assimilation works.
In the operations of colonial discourses, Bhabha (1994) theorized
a process of identity construction that was built on a constant ideo-
logical pulling by a central force from contrary directions in which the
“other” (the colonized) is positioned as both alien and yet knowable;
that is, deviant and yet capable of being assimilated. In order to keep
the colonial subject at a necessary distance—unable to participate
in the rights of full citizenship, stereotypes are used to dehumanize the
oppressed, while benevolence and kind gestures are superimposed to
rehumanize them. To use a current example, Latino/as in the United
States are represented as lazy, shiftless, violent, and unintelligent—
dehumanized by the press as “illegal aliens” and “non-white hordes.”
The language of popular culture embraces more blatant racist lan-
guage: “border rats,” “wet backs,” “spicks,” and so on. A popular
joke reveals this deeply embedded racism and callousness: “What do
you call a Mexican with eight arms? I don’t know, but you should see
it pick tomatoes.” And yet, these same people are simultaneously
deemed by English-only advocates as worthy of good education,
standard language skills, employment, and advancement. From
Bhabha’s perspective, it begins to make sense why conservative politi-
cians and organizations such as the U.S. English Foundation, Inc.
make claims to disseminating “a vehicle of opportunity [English] for
new Americans.”
As an essential part of this process of maintaining ambivalence,
colonizers need members of the subordinated classes that can speak
the dominant tongue, and express its values and beliefs as superior and
benevolent “gifts.” This is exemplified in the United States in the
work of Richard Rodriguez, Dinesh D’Souza, and Jaime Escalante
who served as the honorary chairman of Proposition 227. Bhabha
refers to these agents as “mimic men,” but adds (referring to the
British in colonial India), “to be Anglicized is emphatically not to be
ENGLISH-ONLY MOVEMENT’S ASSAULT ON PUBLIC SCHOOLS
251

English” (p. 87); in the case of the United States—to be
Americanized but never really accepted as American.
The position of flux that ambivalence invokes could lead to politi-
cal resistance inside the ranks of the colonized. These “mimic men”
(and women) can be a menace to the colonizers as they have access to
the cultural capital and strategies used by the colonizer to maintain
the material and symbolic system of oppression. As John McLeod
(2000) explains, “Hearing their language returning through the
mouths of the colonized, the colonizers are faced with the worrying
threat of resemblance between colonizer and colonized” (p. 55).
Unlike the bridge people described earlier, these forces of resistance
that are able to effectively navigate both worlds can work to transform
the inhumane symbolic and material conditions that so many people
are forced to live in on a daily basis.
Not surprisingly, anti-bilingual proponents tell the public virtually
nothing about that horrific material and symbolic conditions that so
many children and young adults face in this discriminatory society
and in the schools that reflect this larger social order; they are not
told about the one-in-five children—one-in-four racially subordinated
youth(s), who grow up below the national poverty level. Instead,
when poverty is acknowledged, bilingual education is identified as one
of the culprits. Unz states that bilingual education is a place where
children “remain imprisoned” and thus is about “guaranteeing that
few would ever gain the proficiency in English they need to get ahead
in America.” Unz neglects to recognize the fact that even in the cases
where English is one’s primary language, it does not guarantee eco-
nomic, political, and integrative success. For example, Native
Americans, Native Hawaiians, Chicano/as, and African Americans
have been speaking English for generations in this country, and yet
the majority of the members of these groups still remain socially, eco-
nomically, and politically subordinated. Thus, the issue is not simply
about language. White supremacy, classism, and other forms of dis-
crimination play a much larger role in limiting one’s access to social,
economic, institutional, and legal power. Instead of seriously address-
ing such issues, the English-only coalition serves up myths of meri-
tocracy and life in a melting pot where the patterns of a “common
culture” and economic success miraculously emerge if one is willing to
submit to their agenda.
What should be particularly disturbing to people is that the
national “debates” over bilingual education have very little to do with
language (the reason that the word “debate” is questionable here is
because virtually all critical voices are either excluded from main-
stream national discussions, or forced to find cracks of expression in
PEPI LEISTYNA
252

fringe journals). The general public, that Unz (1999) claims has such
a profound grasp of language acquisition theory, seems much more
inclined to talk about the people that speak particular languages,
rather than the languages that they speak. As witnessed in the contro-
versy over Ebonics, the mainstream discourse has focused on images
of African Americans rather than the historical, cultural, and linguistic
developments of black English(s). The popular debates thus have
more to do with dominant representations of the pros and cons of
particular groups, especially blacks and Latino/as. Such a focus not
only disregards the multiplicity of other linguistically diverse groups
that are at the mercy of powerful anti-bilingual proponents, but it also
reveals what is in fact a racialized debate. For example, the English for
the Children publicity pamphlet poses the question, “What is ‘bilin-
gual education?’ ” To which it eagerly responds,
Although “bilingual education” may mean many things in theory, in
the overwhelming majority of American schools, “bilingual education”
is actually Spanish-almost-only instruction . . .
The word “Spanish” is often strategically used as a code word for the
largest, and demographically growing, political force in the country—
Latino groups. This racialized marker creates fear among the whites
that English-only advocates not only perpetuate but also play on their
fears. There is a not-so-subtle play on public fears that the unwashed
brown masses from impoverished countries like Mexico and Haiti are
on their way to the States. This is particularly dangerous in the hyste-
ria and hatred that has been generated in this country post-9/11.
Unz’s own racism can be clearly heard in his comment to the
Los Angeles Times (1997) when he stated about his Jewish grandpar-
ents who were poor and emigrated to California in the 1920s and
1930s: “They came to WORK and become successful . . . not to sit
back and be a burden on those who were already here!” (p. 1). Within
this racist climate, the appalling conditions faced by both bilingual
and English as a second language teachers and their children are by no
means conducive to assimilation, let alone selective acculturation, and
by no stretch of the imagination, to social transformation.
The Limits of Liberal Advocacy
There are a great many supporters of bilingual education, who have
made important contributions in the theory, research, and practice
necessary to clearly establish multilingualism as the road to democ-
racy. Many pro-bilingual academics have focused on the importance
ENGLISH-ONLY MOVEMENT’S ASSAULT ON PUBLIC SCHOOLS
253

of understanding the neuropsychological aspects of bilinguality,
cognitive models of processing and storing information, assessment,
codeswitching, phonemic awareness, and conceptual representations
of words. Some supportive researchers have concentrated their ener-
gies on the variety of programmatic approaches to bilingual education
and the importance of community outreach efforts. Other educators
and organizations have set forth research agendas for improving
schooling for language-minority children. In addition, such scholars
have worked to humanize pedagogical and methodological consider-
ations when teaching linguistically diverse students.
It is certainly important for educators to understand and explore
psycholinguistic and sociolinguistic aspects of language acquisition
and cultural identity, and to infuse culturally responsive approaches
that can accommodate the diversity of students in their classrooms.
However, such explorations and responses to the problems of lan-
guage instruction and learning in the United States also need to name
and interrogate the economic, material, and ideological forces and
those that create poverty, hunger, discrimination, low self-esteem, and
resistance to learning. Well-intentioned studies of reading styles, for
example, will not mitigate the antagonistic social relations within
which reading takes place in public schools and the society at large.
No Child Left Behind’s Monolingual 
and Phonics Agenda
Since President George W. Bush signed into law the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act of 2001, better known as No Child Left
Behind (NCLB), high stakes testing has been officially embraced and
positioned to be the panacea of academic underachievement in public
schools in the United States. The Act engenders a hitherto unheard of
transfer of power to federal and state governments, granting them the
rights to largely determine the goals and outcomes of these educa-
tional institutions. It is ironic, to say the least, that this social move-
ment has emanated from a political party that in the not so distant past
called for dismantling the federal Department of Education alto-
gether. As a direct result of this new conservative agenda, school
administrators, teachers, communities, and parents are stripped of any
substantive decision-making power in the nation’s public schools.
Under pressure to produce results on these standardized tests, or
face the consequences of cuts in federal resources and funding, school
closure, and in some cases law suits, many school administrators have
been forced to drastically narrow their curriculum and cut back on
anything and everything that is perceived as not contributing to
PEPI LEISTYNA
254

raising test scores. In many cases, this includes the elimination of
two-way bilingual education, creative reading, interdisciplinary studies,
music and art, community, and athletics programs. Within this “one
size fits all” standards approach to schooling, the multifarious voices
and needs of culturally diverse, low-income, racially subordinated, and
linguistic-minority students are simply ignored or discarded.
Embracing what is in fact an old neoliberal approach dressed up as
innovative reform, proponents of this market-driven educational
model make use of words and phrases like equity, efficiency, and the
enhancement of global competitiveness, to continue to sell its agenda
to the public. However, this same political machinery—this synergy
between government and the corporate sector—shrouds, in the name
of “choice,” conservative efforts to privatize public schools and dis-
mantle the nation’s teachers unions. Devoted advocates of current
legislation also effectively disguise the motivations of a profit-driven
testing industry led by publishing power houses like McGraw-Hill,
which is the largest producer of standardized tests in the country. In
the end, corporate elites of the likes of Harold McGraw III, CEO of
McGraw-Hill, who was appointed by President Bush to the Transition
Advisory Committee on Trade, will be the only ones to gain from this
national obsession with standardized assessment. Speaking at the
White House, as part of a group of “education leaders” invited by
George W. Bush on his first day in office, McGraw III stated:
It’s a great day for education, because we now have substantial align-
ment among all the key constituents—the public, the education com-
munity, business and political leaders—that results matter.
The results that matter are that corporations like McGraw-Hill gain
financially both by selling their materials on a grand scale—a 7 billion
dollar take, and by the ways that schools will now guarantee the pro-
duction of a low and semiskilled labor force that is in high demand in
our now postindustrial, service-oriented economy; especially since
millions of more lucrative industrial and white collar jobs are being
exported by U.S. corporations to nations that pay below a living wage
and that ensure that workers have no protection under labor unions
and laws that regulate corporate interests and power.
A key characteristic of the new “highly qualified teacher,” accord-
ing to NCLB, is their ability to pass a subject matter test administered
by the state. Reducing teacher expertise to a fixed body of content
knowledge, middle and high school teachers are expected to meet an
extremely narrow range of skill requirements under the new policy.
Any concern with pedagogy—not what we learn, but how we learn
ENGLISH-ONLY MOVEMENT’S ASSAULT ON PUBLIC SCHOOLS
255

it—has virtually disappeared. As a direct consequence of this political
climate, public schools are being inundated with prepackaged and
teacher-proof curricula, standardized tests, and accountability schemes.
Conservatives insist, ad nauseam, that scientifically based research
inform and sustain the nation’s educational practices, policies, and
goals. However, the empirical studies that are used to buttress the
Bush agenda, under close scrutiny, are easily stripped of any legiti-
macy. The well-funded think tanks that produce much of the
research and literature to support conservative causes have an
obvious, ideologically specific take on these issues, one that is widely
supported by mainstream corporate media whose ownership have
similar interests.
Perhaps the most strikingly fraudulent use of “scientific research” is
the official report signed and circulated by the Congressionally
appointed National Reading Panel (NRP), which informs Bush’s
Reading First literacy campaign replete as it is with inconsistencies,
methodological flaws, and blatant biases. For starters, Bush’s educa-
tional advisor when he was the governor of Texas, G. Reid Lyon,
headed the NRP. A staunch phonics advocate, Lyon hand selected
the panel and made certain that virtually all of the participants shared
his views. Curiously, there was only one reading teacher on the
NRP. However, by the end of the group’s investigation into effective
literacy practices, she refused to sign the panel’s final report, main-
taining that it was a manipulation of data, and that the cohort failed
to examine important research that did not corroborate its desired
findings.
In the guise of benevolent reform, programs like Reading First
feed into ultra-conservative hands by limiting federal Title 1 funds to
programs and practices that are accepted by the power structure as
being grounded in “scientifically based research.” This enables con-
servatives to push forward English-only mandates and a strictly phon-
ics agenda. In other words, if the research that supports multilingual
education and whole language instruction has been dismissed by these
ideologically stacked panels as “un-scientific,” then only nonbilingual
and phonics-centered programs will receive federal funding. While
there are over 150 studies that clearly support the effectiveness of
bilingual education, including the government’s own National
Research Council Report, and likewise, there is a mountain of work
that attests to the limits of a rigid phonics approach to literacy devel-
opment, this empirical work is rejected by those in power with a mere
wave of the hand. In fact, the concept “bilingual education” no longer
appears in the Bush education legislation. Students are now referred
to as English Language Learners (ELLs).
PEPI LEISTYNA
256

While the titles No Child Left Behind and English for the Children
connote fairness, compassion, and equity, these political campaigns
virtually disregard why inequities exist in the first place. If and when
fingers are pointed at the causes of poverty and discrimination, these
political forces readily blame progressive educational programs and
democratic social policies for the country’s plethora of problems: aca-
demic underachievement, high student “dropout” rates, crime and
violence, unemployment, a failing economy, and so forth.
As advocates of the corporate model of schooling hide behind
notions of science, objectivity, neutrality, and “universal” knowledge,
what is largely missing from national debates and federal and state
policies regarding public education is a recognition and analysis of the
social and historical conditions within which teachers teach and learn-
ers learn; that is, how racism and other oppressive and malignant ide-
ologies that inform actual educational practices and institutional
conditions play a much more significant role in students’ academic
achievement than whether or not they have access to abstract content,
a monolingual setting, and constant evaluation.
Rather than addressing these serious issues, conservative educators
like Diane Ravitch, Lynne Cheney, and William Bennett—omnipresent
spokespersons for the Republican Party—have and continue to argue
that attempts to reveal the underlying values, interests, and power
relationships that structure educational policies and practices have
corrupted the academic environment. Such efforts to depoliticize
the public’s understanding of social institutions, especially schools,
in the name of neutrality are obviously a reactionary ploy to main-
tain the status quo. It is precisely this lack of inquiry, analysis, and
agency that a critical philosophy of learning and teaching should
work to reverse.
As the well-publicized, anti-bilingual camp talks little about
language acquisition in any edifying depth, it is no wonder that the
general population is ill informed. As a teacher told Ron Unz at one
of his presentations in the battle over Massachusetts, “You have to win
by ignorance!” She also explained that the English-only petition that
was required for the referendum to take place was being dishonestly
presented to the public by paid solicitors working for English for the
Children: outside of a major department store, the representative was
saying to passers-by, “Please sign this petition, it will enhance
Bilingual Education.” Other people have also expressed their disgust
after being manipulated by Unz’s hired solicitors. There have been
endless stories of people outside of stores asking, for example, “Do
you want to stop sales tax in the state?”; then stating immediately
after, “Also, if you want to enhance bilingual education, please sign
ENGLISH-ONLY MOVEMENT’S ASSAULT ON PUBLIC SCHOOLS
257

here.” In California, many people thought that they were simply
voting for English when they cast their support for Unz’s initiative. In
Colorado, the Supreme Court initially invalidated the English for the
Children ballot because the language used to explain parents’ rights
was “misleading.” Massachusetts should have done the same thing
given the incredibly misleading ballot question that glorified the
English-only approach and gave a brief and inaccurate depiction of
bilingual education. It should have been legally contested as it claimed
that programs that were in fact being radically overhauled by state
government would not change at all. The ballot should be honest in
what is being suggested—an extremely limited approach to language
instruction that does not make use at all of the native tongue, that
usurps parents/caregivers’ rights to select what is best for their chil-
dren, and that if teachers are caught using native-language instruction
at all to help students through a very difficult process, such educators
can be sued and banned from teaching for five years.
Instead of looking to the plethora of scholarship in the area of
language acquisition, and encouraging people to do so, Unz’s anti-
intellectual demeanor invoked the following response to a reporter’s
question of, “Do young children learn English faster?”:
In fact, it seems to me that if you ask voters that question, I’d guess that
probably about 98 percent would say that children learn faster than
adults. The only people who would say otherwise are the ones who
have read the bilingual textbooks. (Unz 2000)
In order to counter this outright dismissal of any scholarship that sup-
ports multilingualism, the debate over bilingual education should not
be left in the hands of a savvy politician who is strategically vying for
misinformed populous clout through unanswered questions, theoret-
ical ambiguities, and representational manipulations of what is best for
children. Educators need to work tirelessly to get substantive infor-
mation out to the public so that people can in turn protect themselves
and their children when ignorance and deceit come, and it will, to
your town.
References
Bhabha, H. (1994). The Location of Culture. New York: Routledge.
Crawford, J. (2003). A Few Things Ron Unz Would Prefer You Didn’t Know
About:English Learners in California. http://ourworld.compuserve.com/
homepages/JWCRAWFORD/castats.htm
McLeod, J. (2000). Beginning Postcolonialism. Manchester: Manchester
University Press.
PEPI LEISTYNA
258

Unz, R. (August 31, 1997). As cited in Barabak, M. (1997). GOP Bid to
Mend Rift with Latinos Still Strained. The Los Angeles Times, Sunday, p. 1.
Unz, R. (November 1999). California and the End of White America.
Commentary. http://www.onenation.org/9911/110199.html
Unz, R. (April/May 2000). The Right Way for Republicans to Handle
Ethnicity in Politics. American Enterprise. www.onenation.org/
0004/0400.html
ENGLISH-ONLY MOVEMENT’S ASSAULT ON PUBLIC SCHOOLS
259

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 14
Live from Hell’s Kitchen, NYC
Regina Andrea Bernard
You walk into a classroom full of your new students. You see faces,
and multiple bodies, but through quick glances you cannot recognize
race or gender, unless there are “tokens” of each, which makes it hard
to forget their individual names later during the course of the semes-
ter. The difficulty may arise if there are two tokens among waves of the
same. Meaning two faces of color among several white faces. During
the hordes of your teaching sessions, you begin a bond with the
homogenous group except for the two “tokens.” During the semester
you keep confusing the names of the two tokens. One would think it
is easy to confuse the two. They share the same skin color to you,
although one is lighter than the other, what appears to you as the
same hair texture, they could both be racially “mixed,” but the fact is,
that while they look alike to you they together look nothing like the
rest of the class.
The personalities of the two tokens are so separately distinct. One
has fit into your stereotype of the “House Negro” and the other is the
“Field Negro.” The House Negro responds kindly to your comments
and questions, and do not make too much of an academic fuss when
objecting. In fact, they often agree with racist statements made about
their own group in an attempt to assimilate into the culture of the
class’s dialog. The Field Negro of the two is a verbal vigilante. She
awaits dialog, commentary, and questions like a jaguar awaiting her
prey. She takes offense to most of what has been said by the homoge-
nous group, and visually stalks the House Negro. Every time you call
her by the House Negro’s name, she looks at the House Negro and
awaits the answer. When you apologize for calling her by the name of
the other student of color, you have isolated her more so than her
individual isolation from the homogenous group. The ideas of the
two tokens are so contrastingly different, the fact that you could

continuously mix them up is no longer a subconscious error, it is a
practice of forcing the “other” to remain as such. This act of academic
isolation forces the organic intellectual within the Field Negro to
come alive and to shine brightly.
The above case example has been an experience of mine during my
years as a master’s degree student and a doctoral student sitting in
classrooms where I am the only or one of two people of color. While
some would call the experience “traumatic,” it was and is always dan-
gerous and helpful to my own intellectual development process.
What you do not know about school is that these experiences with
racial classifications and “subconscious” racist mistakes are an aid in
creating a carved-out intellectual space for the “other.” Thus, it helps
to strengthen the development of the organic intellectual, who brings
to the discussion table experience, and social dynamics that are not
always negative ones not simply academic references, and statements
that remind the lived, and experienced “I read that somewhere.”
For those who have experienced the “mix up” of names because of
race, or color, assimilation is never an option. It is never a reason to
want to fit in or become part of the group. It helps to isolate one from
mainstream practices of learning and teaching. However, the burden
of hard work is continuous and oftentimes depressing. If you are of
color, in order to successfully prove yourself as a “traditional intellec-
tual,” one who learned all they know through the efforts of being
formally schooled, you must go above and beyond the call of duty. I
personally have been called to duty since my days as a junior high
school student. I still perform my duties to date, as an adjunct, as a
student, as a sibling, as two people’s children, and as a critical thinker.
Always referencing Hell’s Kitchen as the place where I was born and
raised back in the 1970s, the traditional intellectuals, have always cre-
ated a dim picture of what my life “must have” been like. I am tok-
enized by both race and gender. Traditional intellectuals in thinking of
Hell’s Kitchen envision rampant drug use and sale, reckless sex, prosti-
tution, loud blacks and Latinos, dirty and unsafe streets, and tons upon
tons of welfare recipients. The traditional intellectual envisions these
pictures because of what they have read, or what they have heard, or
what they have studied. Being a Hell’s Kitchen native did show pictures
of the above, but only in small vignettes. In fact, my life had never been
so good and so educational as the days I spent growing up in the same
neighborhood for over 20 years. In the way I have come to make sense
of the world, the realities and the fictitious resemblances of what people
think they know are the only ways I would only be able to rationalize
my own intellectualism by having grown up in Hell’s Kitchen, when it
was not a trendy place to live, but rather, just my home.
REGINA ANDREA BERNARD
262

Whether I wanted to become an organic intellectual or not, it was
not a choice when combating traditional intellectualism and within its
institutions that celebrate it. Unfortunately for the tradition intellec-
tual, the organic intellectual can now find several celebratory instances
in that there are clearly several types of intellectualism.
“Organic Intellectualism”: the phrase itself can be and has been
applied to many individuals possessing its attributes by varying defini-
tions. Coined by Antonio Gramsci, in 1971, his definition was based
on organic intellectuals being the rulers of their own organized
thought. For Gramsci, organic intellectualism was a refute to the
hegemony that shaped most of societal and political thought of his
time. While this is a broad definition, many have gone on to further
define it, namely Edward Said, W. E. B. DuBois, and others.
One could use many human examples to strengthen the definition
of the organic intellectual. Malcolm X who gained a particular knowl-
edge through his prison experience is seen as an organic intellectual as
opposed to his counterpart Dr Martin Luther King, who received his
education traditionally through institutions that “produce” knowl-
edge. Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi traditionally earned his educa-
tion at the University College of London. There he learned French,
Latin, and mastered English. His political “nonviolent” movement
toward liberation was birthed through his readings of Henry David
Thoreau and John Ruskin.1 A female counterpart who worked
through liberation for women subjected to violence, crimes against
humanity, and child-bride arranged marriages, Phoolan Devi, was
born and died illiterate. Despite her illiteracy she helped to save many
young female children from being forced into arranged marriages,
and near her death was inducted into Parliament (Anand, 2002).
While all of these people have contributed to the world what was and
is still necessary for human liberation and a somewhat balanced
humanity, it is rare to find a note on an organic intellectual who served
the world through the arts, whether poetry, music, art, writing, or
some other form of the humanities.
An Organic Kitchen
In 2004, the “organic intellectuals” perhaps in Hell’s Kitchen, as it
has come to reshape itself, can be found drinking a half-caf, venti,
caramel latte with extra foam in a Starbuck’s Coffee Bar, having a draft
beer or a Sex in the City drink, purchasing their groceries at organic
foods shops or farmer’s markets, or in front of a “poetry club” smok-
ing clove cigarette after cigarette, beneath stage lights of Broadway
with head-attached microphones, signing copies of their book at
LIVE FROM HELL’S KITCHEN, NYC
263

Barnes and Noble bookstores, barefoot and afro, or shoed and dread-
locked into their own rehearsed oblivion, that which is trendy.
Looking back toward the 1970s into the mid-1980s, the organic
intellectual could be found on his or her fire escape of his or her ten-
ement or apartment building, gathering air conditioning from natural
breezes for lack of affording an air conditioner or fan that works.
These intellectuals can be found sitting in chairs lined up side by side
in front of apartment buildings without stoops, or they can be found
collectively appropriating stoops all throughout one block in Hell’s
Kitchen, El Barrio, Loisaida, and similar neighborhoods. They can be
found drinking Pilon or Bustelo or Greek-cupped coffee on those
same stoops, where it appears more “ghetto” than the coffee drinker
who sips his espresso in an outdoor café. They can be found sitting on
the steps of entrances to New York City’s subways, writing, reading,
while “passing” for homeless. My own grandmother, a Hindu from
British Guyana, who died at 95 years of age, could be found telling
time but not being able to recognize her own name on paper for
being illiterate.
While the construction of experience for the organic intellectual is
revered as “ghetto,”2 many of their trends have been picked up and
mainstreamed as part of several new trends. From the wave of sneak-
ers without laces, and sagging/oversized pants without belts (mod-
eled after prison attire) to the continuous reappearance of bell-bottom
and flared pants that now cost $95–$118.00),3 the organic intellec-
tual who could not read patterns but made their own clothing, helped
to push trends into mainstream fashion without receiving reparations
for their creations of poverty.
Traditional dishes, of curry and rice, rice and beans, platanos dulce
or mas duro are still included as part of the “Caribbean Restaurant”
cuisine for Zagat’s diners, and will run between $15–$25 for a plate of
the pauper’s dish.4 While these trends have picked up the pace toward
mainstreaming and appropriation, the impoverished organic intellec-
tual is still surprised that their cultural “naturals”5 are being unsuc-
cessfully, but expensively, mimicked. Starbucks offers the option of
various milks and condiments to adorn various coffees. The organic
intellectuals boils their canned coffees in a “greca” (Spanish term for
coffee pot that sits on the stove rather than in a machine) and is some-
times consumed black or countered with the cheaper condensed milk
(sweet milk) or half-half that is half milk and half cream but a whole of
saturated fat. Farmer’s markets and gourmet or organic food stores
are replaced by bodegas, which sell 40 ounces of varying malt liquor,
hosiery, and sandwiches all in the same shop, or small grocery
stores that sell neighborhood-specific products all of which are highly
REGINA ANDREA BERNARD
264

saturated in fat or just unhealthy. It is not due to a lack of knowledge,
it is due to a lack of access. If healthy foods are not stocked in various
neighborhoods, it would take a good amount of access in order to
achieve a well-balanced diet.
For example, on the strip from 114th Street and 95th Street in
Corona, New York (the south side of Queens), there are three super-
markets and several bodegas. At any given time, the products in any of
these supermarkets are stale. Meats are redated and repackaged to get
them off the shelves, breads are moldy, but the alcohol aisle is always
overstocked, and whatever is skim on the shelves, a helpful stock clerk
will retrieve your request from the stockroom. At any of these super-
markets, elderly Latino/as await your change in their plastic contain-
ers as they overpack your shopping bags. On the same strip between
114th and 95th streets, there are multiple gas stations adjacent to
people’s homes, apartment buildings, day care centers, and schools.
The smell of toxins is unbearable during the summer months. There
are also multiple car dealerships all of which house vicious guard dogs
that often become loose through the neighborhood because of faulty
gates.
Where I grew up in Hell’s Kitchen and lived for over 20 years,
restaurant were somewhat affordable, and now 20 odd years later, it is
geared for tourists who can afford to eat and pay in their choice of cur-
rency. Botanicas also termed as “folk pharmacies” (Neal, 2002) and
candy stores have been replaced with quaint boutique-like restaurants
and coffee shops. The Laundromats have been replaced by patrons of
color to white yuppies who “drop off” their wash rather than wash
their clothing themselves. A French restaurant offering unpronounce-
able dishes replaced greasy spoon Chinese restaurants that were my
favorite because of its price, and its neighborhood friendliness.
Handball courts have turned into dog runs. “Hooker Hang-Outs”
are now wineries and lofts for tasting sessions. Everything healthy, and
in the summer, everything outdoor.
During the summers in Hell’s Kitchen, my childhood friends and
I knew to keep away from the ladies who practiced Santeria. Now I
wonder where they are? Recently, I took a drive past their apartment
building in the Kitchen, and saw markings of the “rosita” still on
their walls outside of their buildings, but got wind that they had
moved several years before my return. Even Red Apple supermarket
has been changed to an upscale Gristedes that is home to what seems
like hundreds of young white couples and singles who shop for gour-
met products. Growing up, we knew we were in our supermarket
since the odor of sour milk or a dirty mop that cleaned up the sour
milk assaulted us.
LIVE FROM HELL’S KITCHEN, NYC
265

During one of my returns to the Kitchen, all the organic intellec-
tuals seemed to have been replaced. Without dismissing the notion
that many of them perhaps have passed away (they were the elders of
the block when I was a child), it was clear that a wave of traditional
intellectualism had replaced them. There were no longer domino
tables set up with four old Latino men, with their hats and cabana
shirts, slamming pieces down yelling “cohelo alli! (take it there!)”
Kids were not running up and down the streets in sweat-filled cloth-
ing with sun-matted hair. No one was on my stoop. There were no
hungry tons of children of color flooding Saccos Pizzeria for ices and
slices. Instead, I was able to immerse myself into a 360-degree view of
young white men and women eating in the outdoor option of
“Mangia y Bevi.” There were no children anywhere. No teenagers
anywhere, unless they were working in the supermarkets. No candy
stores, no loose-ies6 for sale. The neighborhoods that were “off lim-
its” to my adolescent and teenage cohort was now flooded with peo-
ple walking alone or jogging their “Atkins”7 off.
The parking lot where my father parked his car on a monthly basis
was jammed in every corner with BMWs, Porsches, Lexuses,
Cadillacs, and Jaguars. I looked for the old maroon Cadillac that my
parents owned, and realized even they replaced their Hell’s Kitchen
mobile with the latest Toyota Camrys. Walking with a friend who is
not from the Kitchen, I stopped the car several times and gave him an
overview of what I “used to do there” and “what I did here.” I asked
him if he could imagine about 20 adolescent girls of color singing
slow jams on the top of their stoop on a hot August night. The mem-
ory connected directly to the organic intellectualism that I speak of
here. None of the girls was good in math. In fact, it was the class we
struggled with the most. There was no sense of us memorizing the
numbers and where they fit in a problem, but we knew each word in
every song, and when to use our child-like vibratos, and when to pitch
it high or low. We knew how to lace our sneakers straight across
instead of crisscrossed, we knew how to read Right On! magazine, we
knew how much the magazine would cost the group, and how much
each person would need to chip in to buy it, but we could not add to
save our academic lives.
As mentioned in the previous section, all of us had academic night-
mares that we could not beat during the day or at night when it was
time to attack the homework. I for one had the toughest time learn-
ing how to tell time. My mother bought me a cardboard clock with
two giant red hands, and she worked with me everyday and every free
moment she had. I still could not get it right. Yet, I was never late. My
handwriting was atrocious all throughout elementary school. I never
REGINA ANDREA BERNARD
266

crossed my ts dotted my is. I did well in Science, but no one ever
knew, because I never raised my hand to answer a question. I was
deathly afraid of my science teacher, and my math teacher. They
seemed more like drill instructors or correction officers than they did
teachers. I detested gym. Every other kid loves gym. My purpose in
laying the academic framework here is to accentuate the intellectual-
ism that took place on my block more than it did between the walls of
public school, where my teachers adored my “little body” and my “lit-
tle face” and my “beautiful dresses.”
As a backdrop (I was never put up front) member of the National
Dance Institute for seven years, I brought my traditional-orchestrated
dance steps to my block. After a few minutes, my girlfriends and I had
re-choreographed the same sequence, but this time it was in a hip-hop
style. My ear was now professionally trained to count the beats in each
song in connection to each move I made with my body. The tradi-
tional ballet summer camps I attended were nothing like my teenage
years spent learning West African dance. I still could not do my math
assignments, but I mastered the art of grocery shopping for my
mother—always the right amounts of every purchase, followed by the
return of exact change. We all (my childhood friends and I) struggled
with math and other various academic quests, but we read letters for
illiterate elderly neighbors, we served as accurate language translators
at various city/state agencies for the parents of friends who did
not speak English. We learned how to negotiate adult spaces in our
childhoods.
Although our organic intellectualism got us through life in the
Kitchen, and helped to create a rich childhood, one that could not be
compared with nor replaced by anyone else’s suburban or wealthy
experiences, it caught a bad rap. With the likes of early teenage preg-
nancies, juvenile detention halls for some of the boys, drug use and
abuse, prostitution, and the era of disappearing, all that we knew
organically is what was traditionally studied in our contemporary
world of academia. Just as organic intellectualism caught a bad rap
because of the end results of not being traditional, organic intellectu-
als ourselves and/or themselves also received the negative effects of a
double consciousness. Academic voyeurs have taken a lifestyle of cir-
cumstance and have created a space where organic intellectuals are
now and have been for a long time viewed as perhaps trendy to emu-
late but never attached to any cultural history.
At my Dominican babysitter’s (also known best as my Abuela,
Spanish translation for grandmother) home, I remember dancing with
her at the age of 5 to Tito Puente’s Salsa Caliente and Ran Kan Kan.
At 5 while I spoke English only at home, and knew Guyanese terms
LIVE FROM HELL’S KITCHEN, NYC
267

fluidly, I also knew how to salsa and merengue myself all around my
abuela’s house, especially to Ran Kan Kan. She speaks only Spanish,
and thus, I spoke only Spanish at her house, and around my
Dominican family. I knew the distinctions between Boricuas and
Dominicanos, from their language differences, to their dishes to the
symbolism of their colored flags, to their native struggles.
In elementary school, the only story that was read to us written by
a Latino/a author was Perez and Martina (1991) by Pura Belpre.
Belpre, the first Latina librarian of the New York Public Library, wrote
in Perez and Martina about the love life regarding Perez the cock-
roach and Martina the mouse. It is my only childhood memory of a
Latino tale or folklore being read to me as an elementary school
student. In junior high school there was none. In high school I suf-
fered through Shakespeare, and in my undergraduate days, there was
none that I can really say spoke of the Latino experience that I became
aware of in connection to my shared ontology in the Kitchen.
I have not mentioned Guyanese or West Indian/Caribbean writers,
because school did not give me any of those options to delve into.
It was not until I came into the ongoing process of self-awareness that
I did seek out my own cultural roots and ties within literatures of
the same.
Elementary, junior high, high school, and, even more scarily, col-
leges are used to determining what students should read and even write
about, which restricts what students are allowed to think about.
Professors and teachers in traditional-intellectual settings are often the
sole creators of what one learns, but organic intellectuals help to decide
what is retained. While structure is important, it is oftentimes used as a
way to constrict the minds of students in that they are gaining one per-
spective of a particular topic or subject, and therefore not finding a per-
sonal connection to the material. So focused are students on “class
aims” and a “do now” enveloped in time management that they are
conditioned to pack their bags even before they hear the bell, as teach-
ers remind students of their “assigned” readings for the next class. By
the time some students have reached their next class, their minds and
concentrations have shifted from one context to the next; how many
times does that context place the students themselves at the center and
in relation to what they have learned or read? Are these lessons that they
can share amongst the girls and boys on their neighborhood block?
As a child I remember seeing a beat up 1960s copy of Down these
Mean Streets or the Spanish version Por Esta Calles Bravas sitting on
my bookshelf at home. The book belonged either to my sister or to
my brother both of whom were attending high school at the time. As
an adolescent and a teenager, I tried to get into the book several
REGINA ANDREA BERNARD
268

times. It was not until my sophomore year in high school that I read
the entire book and had to take a deep breath after reading it. Now, it
is one of the books that I have been teaching to my students for the
past three years, both in the Education department at Hunter College
(City University of New York) and the Black and Hispanic Studies
department at Baruch College, also a member of the City University
of New York.
Down these Mean Streets gave me images of people I had known
throughout the Kitchen’s roster. In the text, I envisioned people who
looked like my neighbors and places that resembled my neighbor-
hood. Although I had a fond affection for Medea, I felt she never cap-
tured any physical similarities to anyone I had ever known or was
bound to come into contact with. Texts like Medea were more of an
abstract affection that I developed.
During my early years of educational training, I was lucky enough
to already have a love of reading prior to the intensity of reading
assignments that school demanded of me. I spent a lot of leisure time
reading for nonschool assignment purposes. I read everything, but I
had a particular affection for Stephen King, R. L. Stine, Judy Blume,
Cynthia Voigt, Archie, and Betty & Veronica comic books, and other
readings that did not represent me in any way. Although they did not
represent me, these readings were accessible both in the school library
and in “young adult” sections of various bookstores. Even if my
imagination attempted to place me in the main character’s role or set-
ting, it was not possible because of the pictures on the book cover.
Each of these books at the time and still now are beautifully illustrated
with white teenage girls and boys. During my postschool hours, I
oftentimes shopped around bookstores for texts that related more or
represented me in closer proximities. Perhaps someone in some
novel looked like me, or lived in a neighborhood like I did, or did the
things that I, and my friends from my neighborhood, did. By jun-
ior high school I had fallen into a relationship with Zora Neale
Hurston, Langston Hughes, Wallace Thurman, and the works of Piri
Thomas, Nicholasa Mohr, and Nuyorican poetry. The authors
reflected something that previous books had not. They reflected
images and experiences I saw in myself, and better still, they also
reflected people I saw on a regular basis in my neighborhood. Being
born and raised in Hell’s Kitchen between the 1970s and the 2000s
reading became my partner because of the low-excitement levels of
activities that were available to young people growing up on my
block. From my window in Hell’s Kitchen I watched as almost all
of my girlfriends became mothers before they were old enough to
vote. I watched as populations of adults developed some type of
LIVE FROM HELL’S KITCHEN, NYC
269

drug or alcohol problem. While I was not on my stoop with my
friends playing all types of games, or boy-watching, or smack-talking,
I was reading, professionally dancing, learning dispute resolution in
after-school programs, and by the time I was 14, I was working at the
New York Public Library.
By the time I reached high school, I had read everything that Zora
Neale Hurston and Langston Hughes had ever written. Rarely their
texts would be taught in school(s), but somehow it always felt as part
of a departmental requirement that professors and teachers would
assign their texts. Just as a World Literature course would assign the
Bible, and sections of the Bhagavad Gita as part of its global perspec-
tive. There was no prefix to these texts, they were just “dumped” into
the curriculum, and we as students were to come to our own conclu-
sion. I was utterly disgusted by the likes of Gulliver’s Travels, and
ended up with an “F” in a college Western Literature class because of
failing a final exam that was based on Swift’s text.
There are several voices and perspectives missing from the world of
literature courses as part of various college requirements. In repre-
senting my own cultural ontology, I could simply ask of the literature
required courses, where is the Guyanese, Nuyorican, Dominican, and
other people of color voice? It is no doubt that this project will con-
sume political spaces, and hold several institutions responsible for the
continuous silencing of people of color, and thus the continuous for-
mation of a silenced student of color. During my first year of doctoral
study, I turned in a final paper in which the professor responded “it
seems that you are yelling at people from your paper!” I was shocked.
Not at her response, but at her surprise. While people of color, in par-
ticular, women of color, have been yelping from their literary pages
for decades, why is it that mine is not acceptable? Although I kept my
original draft as a trophy of “rage on the page,” I was asked to rewrite
my paper and authorized to resubmit it for a better grade. One of the
conditions regarding a better grade was for me to insert the writings
of three white women education specialists. These women repre-
sented the white traditional intellectual, and their perspectives on peo-
ple like me. I had lost a sense of self-representation.
Through my teaching experience at the college level at two City
University of New York colleges, and one private institution in
Washington Heights, I have used the example of “rage on the page”
to formulate a writing style that includes self-representation and
expression for my students to feel comfortable in composing. I have
developed this method and used outlaw poetry to constantly guide
my work, regardless of the focus. The mission is to be blatant in what-
ever form I choose to compose.
REGINA ANDREA BERNARD
270

Why does school not reflect the personal and learned experiences of
youth of color? Thus, why does the traditional form of intellectualism
refuse to inculcate the organic intellectualism that students may bring
with them? Research has shown that teenagers are more likely to be
victims and perpetrators of crimes during the 3 hr postschool day. It is
obvious that these youth prefer to look to their norms and social
spaces once school is over because of the lack of connection between
the hours of school being in session and the hours of when it is over.
The traditional intellectual model of teaching and learning asks that
students learn to read, write, and work through mathematical prob-
lems regardless of their backgrounds and their social situations. While
it may seem a fair request of students who do attend school, one has
to also think about how students should be able or encouraged to use
their organic methods of reading, writing, and working on math
problems in connection to what is required of them. Some may say
that after-school programs supply the remedy for this connection of
organic intellectualism and traditional intellectualism.
However, students have to see the potential in what after-school
programs can have for them, and essentially have to want to be there.
Many teens have jobs that require them to begin working directly
after school; thus, these students cannot partake in after-school func-
tions. A few hours on the weekend is used as spare time for working
youth to engage in their organic and social spaces. From this small
amount of time for youth to experience themselves outside of work
and school, they are forced to conform and constrict themselves in
various mindsets. Homework becomes directly related to school, and
school becomes directly related to going to work once school is over.
In this framework, youth tend to outgrow their organic intellectual-
ism and social spaces when they are not at school or at work. If school
and employment opportunities are not places where youth can offer
their organic skills, experience, and ideas, what is left of the young
organic intellectual? Young organic intellectuals begins to shed their
homemade intellectualism and opt for something a bit more tradi-
tional in style. For example, he or she may become embarrassed by an
illiterate grandparent, rather than explore the depths of that illiteracy
juxtaposed to how the grandparent cannot read, but can tell time, or
count money.
Schools have incorporated dialogs about multiculturalism and
diversity as a bridge that connects young students of color to curricula
that represents them. However, no one asks the students who repre-
sent this population the simplest set of questions: “Who are you?
What makes you you? What do you know? What did you know before
you came to school and what do you know now?” Academics for
LIVE FROM HELL’S KITCHEN, NYC
271

many New York City youth is built on intimate relationships and
friendships within the school, but when it comes to personal connec-
tions to what they are learning, oftentimes they must wait until col-
lege to experience this. I remember how, when I attended Norman
Thomas High School, my love of reading began to grow outside of
the school hours because of the impact my English teacher had on me.
We read literature fit for Puritans and anyone else that was not of
color.
I longed to hear or tell my own story. I wanted so desperately to
write an essay on what my friends and I did on our apartment build-
ing stoop. We knew much about Hell’s Kitchen as opposed to the
people who now live there, who at that time were fearful of us when
we lived there. I wanted to tell of the laundromats, the fire escapes,
the break-dancing we competed to master on our block, or our base-
ment of the building. I wanted to tell my English teacher that the
drinking scenes in his assigned readings were viewed as social for the
characters in the text; however, the reality of my neighborhood would
have academicians view those same drinking scenes among people of
color as “alcoholism.” Wanting to share my experiences, I asked my
English teacher, “why can’t we maybe do something different but still
within the requirements of the reading?” His response, “If you don’t
like it, you can go play in heavy traffic.” I was crushed. My love for
reading became resentful of ideas that did not represent any of my
experiences. Out of this resentment I began to develop researching
skills by seeking texts that spoke directly to my experiences. At one
point, my researching resulted in finding nothing, so I began to write
my own narrative and organic experiences in poetic forms. I refused to
do his assignments after that, and I pretty much refused to attend his
class altogether.
Young organic intellectualism, developed in New York City, seems
to be so feared by the general public, both visitors of New York and
natives. The fear seems derived from the lack of the general public
being exposed to this type of knowledge expression. Academics and
traditional students are used to reading about these particular places,
and may find shame in speaking out if their own neighborhood ends
up on a syllabus or reading list. Many do not take the time to under-
stand how it is that young people organize themselves and express
what they know and how they have come to know it. Another exam-
ple from Norman Thomas High School was the issue of “captive
lunch.” The high school, which is located on Park Avenue in
Manhattan, is home to many corporate businesses and corporate
Americans. The school was populated with over 90 percent students
of color. During lunch, we, for two years, were allowed to eat our
REGINA ANDREA BERNARD
272

lunch outside of the building if we did not wish to eat at the school
cafeteria. As New York City police officers watched our every move on
the outside of the school during lunch, we still managed to digest
whatever we could in our 45-min sprint to the nearest deli or pizzeria.
When residents and businesses of the Park Avenue community began
to get “nervous” about our presence, which to them appeared in
droves, we were forced to eat lunch in the cafeteria from their time of
complaint until we graduated.
Imagine thousands of students in one cafeteria at the same time.
The absence of our activist and political voices juxtaposed with every
other social dynamic (race, age, gender, and our socioeconomic sta-
tus) lent itself to another birthing of the organic intellectual. Many of
the “captive” lunch-eaters worked on rap songs and competed in the
cafeteria to a wide audience of listeners and cafeteria employees. Other
students learned how to braid each other’s hair in various African
styles, some wrote poetry and read it to others, and some shared tips
on how to beat the system—the parental system through the develop-
ment of youth-language, also known as “gibberish,” which some stu-
dents spoke more fluently than their requirements of Spanish or
French. Mostly all of us were engaging in the steady development of
our organic intellectual spaces. The things we could not learn from
the classes before or after lunch were being constructed, taught, and
memorized in the cafeteria. Those were the lessons we took back to
our block for all the rest of the kids to learn.
I look back at my most memorable experiences having to do with
learning something. My brother teaching me how to ride a bike, me
teaching myself how to roller skate and wanting to become a “roller
derby girl,” my sister teaching me how to memorize lyrics to songs
she would sing to me, me learning how to color-coordinate my 1970s
dress code, my mother teaching me how to multiply numbers like
eight and nine and tell time on a clock, my father teaching me to cross
every t and dot every i and how to be bold to ask teachers questions
about lessons without fear. My grandmother teaching me the art of
caring for the elderly and the constant process of self-reflection that
one must engage in, in order to see one’s center, my “abuela” for
teaching me Spanish and never having learned English herself. My
family for being multicultural and engaging me in the exploration that
makes me multicultural as well, so that by the time academia got hip
to “multiculturalism” it was already deeply sewn into the fabrics of my
life. It was not until graduate school that I again felt the same way
about learning things the way I had learned them organically and
from my environment and those who shared spaces in that environment
as well. Graduate school has taught me the traditionally intellectual
LIVE FROM HELL’S KITCHEN, NYC
273

terminologies to words and definitions of experiences that I have
always had, but never knew that organically acquiring them was an
applicable concept in school.
Schools and other traditional institutions of intellectualism have
failed youth in their attempt to create a bridge between the two forms
of intellectual development. Instead of teaching from tools (experi-
ences) that youth already have, traditional institutions of intellectual-
ism have used what they think they know about what youth have.
Take the spoken word for example. Spoken word in the Nuyorican
tradition has always been about writing and reciting from what you
feel and have experienced. Spoken word has now taken on the tradi-
tion of mass marketing popularity, such that it is available on HBO,
beneath Broadway lights, and it is also being “taught” to many
New York City youth by way of after-school organizations. How does
one teach not from experience, but about experience? Is that even a
concept that one can package and sell?
What happens to the organic intellectual of color that he or she dies
so early without ever fully being recognized by the traditionalists? Is it
their access to the world or lack thereof? Is it what consumes them
during their lives? Is it we, their audience that forces them out of their
self-sponsorship? What about their production of knowledge, and our
responsibility to help consume what they have produced? While oth-
ers pick and choose for us as to what we read, write, listen and dance
to, and internalize as entertainment, what about the intellectuals
whose organic qualities are misused in life and utterly misappropriated
in their death? Are they left without any choices but to become tradi-
tional intellectuals or die unbeknownst to the world that subcon-
sciously inherits and celebrates their inventions and/or practices?
What you don’t know about school is everything you have to find
out on your own.
Notes
1. http://www.ccds.charlotte.nc.us/History/India/save/mclanahan/
mclanahan.html, Online: August 2, 2004.
2. The term “ghetto” in this section refers to the colloquial definition of
those who live “uncivilized” and in “uncivilized places.” For example,
not having enough money to eat a single meal, but abusing gathered
funds to purchase rims for a hatchback automobile.
3. See web sites for stores such as BeBe and Diesel: www.bebe.com and
www.diesel.com, retrieved August 22, 2004.
4. See www.citysearch (Cabana Restaurant link), retrieved August 22,
2004.
5. The term “Naturals” is used here to denote everyday life experiences.
REGINA ANDREA BERNARD
274

6. The term “loosey” is used to denote a single cigarette sold for $0.25
rather than the obligation of purchasing a whole pack of cigarettes.
7. “Atkins” refers to the Atkins diet that consists of low carbohydrates and
soaring cholesterol.
References
Anand, V. (2002). Poolan Devi, a Martyr in the Fight against Caste, Race, and
Gender Oppression. http://www.ambedkar.org/news/phoolandevi.htm
Belpre, P. (1991). Perez and Martina. New York: Viking.
Gramsci, A. (1998). In D. Forgacs (ed.), An Antonio Gramsci Reader.
New York: Schocken Books.
Neal, M. (2002). Nuyorican Nostalgia. http://www.popmatters.com/
columns/criticalnoire/020423.shtml
LIVE FROM HELL’S KITCHEN, NYC
275

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 15
Letting Them Eat Cake: What Else 
Don’t We Know about Schools?
Shirley R. Steinberg
What is being covered up in America’s public schools? Perhaps the
question should be: what is not being covered up? Readers have been
given glimpses into conditions, ideologies, policies, and inadequacies
in the previous chapters. But what is it that is plainly set in front of us
as parents, teachers, and citizens that we are not seeing? Not hearing?
Since the Reagan years, the American public has been indoctri-
nated into a manufactured notion of safety, family values, back to
basics, and scientifically based research. The language of American
educational politics has reassured the public that our children are
being taken care of and that our educational system (the best in the
world), is tirelessly engaged in creating good schools. The Orwellian
discourse we have been fed is direct, yet meaningless, in determining
exactly what it is our schools are doing. What is happening in our
schools is hidden right in front of us. We see it, we just do not see it.
Trotted out en mass, experts, statisticians, and politicos tell us what
our children need. Smothered in positivistic and condescending
words, bills are passed and more rights are lost. No Child Left Behind
never tells us exactly where the children are left behind from and more
importantly, where they are going. The bill leaves teachers, parents,
and school districts behind—behind piles of bureaucratic measure-
ments that basically blackmail schools into adopting simplistic
standards and benchmarks that only ensure that no child gets ahead.
Our school administrators, regional and district offices, and schools
of education are complicit in the plainspeech of governmental inter-
ference in education. Spinning around with new dictates to measure
performance, any social, contextual, or qualitative observations are
lost. Humanistic curriculums, ethical school administration, and
scholarly teachers are replaced by the need for national recognition,

certification, and performance scores. Ironically, the only things not
being measured and certified are test creators, textbook publishers,
district and regional school offices, administrators of higher education
providers, and authors of governmentally sanctioned scientifically
based research. Just because something is called scientific, it does not
mean that it is. Whose science? Whose research?
Sadly, this country (one that proclaims its integrity through a system
of checks and balances) has no accountability at the top. Consequently,
the top administrators often ignorantly erase what good has been
accomplished. And we must ask: Quis custodiet ipsos custodies? (Who is
guarding the guards?) When those in power intimidate and proclaim
mandates, who is there to challenge the origin of these changes?
And when these changes are challenged (which is seldom), how
easily is evidence changed and data skewed? When Czarina Catherine
the Great of Russia would travel into the countryside and see her sub-
jects, main streets of villages were cleaned, fronts of houses and stores
were repainted, and citizens were dressed in new clothes. Her
entourage would pass through town and she was assured that her peo-
ple were living in beautiful towns, well fed, and prosperous. As an
educator of graduate students who are teachers in public schools, I am
inundated by new coat of paint stories. Weekly, my students come to
class with tales of mandates from their principals to prepare classrooms
for regional or district visits. In classrooms that have not had a budget
for paper or books for months, money suddenly appears to replenish
tattered books, polish filthy floors, and to fix stopped up toilets.
Bulletin boards become the focus as students’ work is placed with a
grading rubric attached. State and local standards are plastered
around the rooms, and students are told to come dressed in their best.
Colleges of education do not fare any better. Recently an urban
school of education became victim to the need for national recogni-
tion. Determined to acquire a legitimating stamp for teacher educa-
tion, an entire university system mandated that each school of
education had to apply for recognition through the National Council
for Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE). In a college that
has no budget for photocopying, text materials, few full-time faculty
lines, and over-cramped classrooms, hundreds of thousands of dollars
miraculously appeared to create the illusion that the school of educa-
tion was, indeed, in compliance with NCATE’s standards. There was
never a discussion as to whether or not this university already had a
good school of education, no investigation, no data collected. No one
seemed to care what the quality of education for teachers was, only if
correct measurements were applied and the right answers given in
order to acquire national recognition. Witnessed were two solid years
SHIRLEY R. STEINBERG
278

of scurrying—administrators, faculty, and students—-concerned with
one thing: National Accreditation. Discussions of good teaching,
smart curriculums, students with needs, good scholarship, and
research were halted. Meetings were replaced with forms to fill out,
benchmarks to make, rubrics to create, syllabi to alter to comply with
NCATE’s standards. The competent faculty of this school became
witness to the dissolution of competent departments, the exhaustion
of fine professors, and the mystified queries of students who were told
that the 17-page syllabus was not really the course syllabus, just some-
thing to comply with the NCATE standards. The time and money spent
on national recognition did not go unnoticed by the faculty, but it did
go unchallenged. And so it goes in many schools of education.
Ironically, schools of education (Madison, Wisconsin; NYU;
UCLA, and Berkley, among others) that consistently rank the best in
the nation, are not NCATE accredited. They have clearly stated that
they believe the time and money spent on a certification by a for-profit
organization is not what good teacher education is about. Or is it
ironic? Perhaps the pressure from NCATE contributes to the inability
to rank highly due to the time and money spent on bureaucratic mark-
ing and accounting sheets.
What exactly is “national accreditation?” What is it we do not know
about it? The web site fills us in:
Teaching children—to recognize letters, to read for the first time, to
understand how a tree grows—is one of the most important jobs in
America. The nation’s future depends, in large part, on how well it
is done.
NCATE is the profession’s mechanism to help establish high-quality
teacher preparation. Through the process of professional accredita-
tion of schools, colleges, and departments of education, NCATE
works to make a difference in the quality of teaching and teacher
preparation today, tomorrow, and for the next century. NCATE’s
performance-based system of accreditation fosters competent class-
room teachers and other educators who work to improve the education
of all P-12 students. NCATE believes every student deserves a caring,
competent, and highly qualified teacher.
NCATE currently accredits 588 colleges of education with over
100 more seeking NCATE accreditation.
NCATE is a coalition of 33 member organizations of teachers,
teacher educators, content specialists, and local and state policy mak-
ers. All are committed to quality teaching, and together, the coalition
represents over 3 million individuals.
WHAT ELSE DON’T WE KNOW ABOUT SCHOOLS?
279

The U.S. Department of Education and the Council for Higher
Education Accreditation recognize NCATE as a professional accredit-
ing body for teacher preparation (http://www.ncate.org/public/
aboutNCATE.asp).
Naturally we are not told that it is the only game in town. Other
organizations have made a run at competition, but this multimillion
dollar for-profit group has intimidated the teacher education profes-
sion into compliance. This is not a regulatory agency, one that answers
to the parents, students, and teachers (the obvious constituents),
rather, it is an agency that charges schools hundreds of thousands of
dollars to become nationally recognized. By whom? By them. (Each
state has its own teacher certification and accreditation, NCATE
recognition is not required.)
“Fixing” teacher education in the United States consists of
“expert” agencies coming in to evaluate programs and then applying
their stamp of approval or disapproval upon the school. When the
expert agencies or regional/divisional board members come to visit
our public schools, the walls have been painted, the students and
teachers prepped, and all appears well.
In the context of writing this chapter, I have been informally speak-
ing to teachers and asking them what they feel the public does not
know about schools. Here is a summary of comments I heard:
G I was hired to work in an Academic Intervention Program as a push-
in teacher for reading. I was used and abused as a substitute teacher.
The day the Regional Supervisor visited the school it was announced
that I was the Academic Intervention Team Leader! I was mortified.
The program was a façade and I hated being part of it. The next day
I was back to my substitute position. The injustice of being held
accountable for things of which you had no control.
G Administrators want their students’ work and classrooms to be
“pretty.” They’re only concerned with how the room and walls look.
There is no concern for the validity of a child’s education or the
process in creating his or her work.
G Schedules aren’t altered to suit the needs of teachers in regard to class-
room management. There are no smart transitions between subjects.
G Our region pays a fortune for a consultant program {Australian edu-
cators brought to New York to mentor teachers]. They don’t receive
the training we do, they are not even certified to teach our students
and cannot be left alone in the classroom.
G Parents are not informed that they can demand that their child can be
tested for special services, and once the testing is done, the students
must be taught to meet their needs. When they are tested, the tests
and placements can drag on for months.
SHIRLEY R. STEINBERG
280

G Children are not as safe as the schools want the parents to think.
There are violent children being allowed to remain in classrooms
even after they have hurt another student or even a teacher. The
region is too afraid of lawsuits to remove seriously troubled and dan-
gerous kids from the classroom. Naturally, all children have rights,
but it becomes difficult to teach when the teacher is afraid of a stu-
dent, and the student has free reign to cause injuries.
G In our school, the reading specialist was laid off as the school deter-
mined it needed to invest in new bookcases and furniture for the
school. Our low-achieving school now has no reading specialist, but
lots of new bookcases!
G I work with autistic children. My students have the right to have a one-
on-one paraprofessional in order to stay in my classroom. However, if
the parents don’t request one, or sign off on not needing one, the
school saves money. My principal encouraged a parent to disallow a
para to help their autistic child. The child manifested very difficult
behavioral problems, I called the parents and they told me they had
signed off on the para because they were not told it was their right to
keep one with their child. When I brought it up to the administration,
I was disciplined as I had told the mother about her son’s rights.
G What don’t people know about schools? Do you want a list?
G No gym or recess (even though gym is state-mandated)
G None of the computers work—and if they get fixed, we still wait to
get an Internet hook-up—I mean wait—like three years
G We have no city or state-leveled libraries (they are city-mandated)
G We are forced to use Columbia Teachers’ College-generated curricu-
lum, indeed our school pays dearly for them, but, we have no
resources to purchase the materials needed to use this curriculum
G When a teacher is sick or absent, we cannot ask for a substitute, the
class is split-up and kids are placed in other classes.
G Teachers are expected to conduct workshops with no preparation, no
notice, and no resources
G We have rugs in our classrooms, dirty, torn, hazardous rugs
G We are told we can’t use the chalkboards, yet no dry erase boards
have ever been installed, they are “coming.”
G Our dirty little secret is that in grades 3–5 the children are tracked.
The principal sorts the classes based on their standardized exams.
Those children who scored well are placed in the “top” class. These
children are labeled “gifted.” Some children are placed in the “top”
class because they are well-behaved. The favored teachers get these
classes. New or unpopular teachers get the “low” classes.
G Our school paid $130,000.00 for a playground, and $10,000.00 for
a mural on the wall. But we have no paper in our school for the year,
no erasers, nor markers for the dry erase boards.
G In our school supplies are hoarded and not given out to the students
(pencils, paper, twine, soap . . .).
WHAT ELSE DON’T WE KNOW ABOUT SCHOOLS?
281

G Students do not have any extracurricular activities.
G Teachers are expected to do work before and after class in order to
function during the day. Taking a lunch period is frowned upon.
G I have no books for my classroom library. But my principal has
brought in two staff developers. We also have new painted walls in
the hallway and laminated charts for the halls.
G We cannot duplicate anything. One teacher was given a used copy
machine to keep in her room and use, but no one else was supposed
to know. We are not allowed to make overheads as there are no
materials.
G We have clean floors, bathrooms, and classrooms—only when visitors
come.
G Some teachers are being paid per session to take attendance for test-
prep classes after school. They do not have a class, they are paid a
salary just to gather attendance sheets.
G I teach in a SUR school (school under review), we are considered one
of the worst schools in the city. Our ______ team just came in first
place in all of New York City, out of over 75 other schools. They are
eligible to go to the world championship this year. These kids have
never won anything, gone anywhere, never been told they could be
successful. Now they won this amazing competition and there is no
money to send them to the worlds. However we pay a fortune for
Columbia Teachers’ College to come in twice a week to tell us how
to teach. The kids are scrambling around trying to raise money—do
you know how hard it is to make money when the kids are from such
a poor school? Who can donate? Who can buy baked goods? They
probably won’t go.
G I have been told to hang at least twelve efficacy posters in my class-
room, these promote happiness, hard work, and the goals of the
school. I teach first grade and the kids can’t read these posters. Yet
four people have come to visit my room to make sure they were
posted.
G I have been given a digital camera and software, but I have no work-
ing computer. I got lots of handouts on paper about the camera and
the software—yet we have no paper to use for our classwork.
G I teach in a class for emotionally-disturbed students. It is a small class
and I manage it with a paraprofessional. Recently two non-English
speaking students and one learning-disabled student were placed in
the class as there was no other place to put them. Within days they
were manifesting behavioral problems—I believe it was because they
were placed in a class with children with serious mental problems,
some of whom are violent—they shouldn’t be in my class.
G I have always taught third grade. I prepared my classroom all summer
for my new class. On the first day of school I was told that I would-
n’t have third grade. I removed my things from my classroom, was
moved to sixth grade. I have never taught sixth. After three weeks, I
was moved again, and then again. In the winter I announced that I
SHIRLEY R. STEINBERG
282

was pregnant, I was removed from my classroom and assigned to
“float” and cover classes.
G I have taught English for ten years in this school. I have had the same
textbooks that entire time. I attended this school myself and we used
these texts in my English class seventeen years ago. The books talk
about the fact that “someday, computers will be used even in the
home”; and that “people will be able to carry portable phones with-
out wires with them.” My students think the books are a joke. And I
am supposed to prepare them for graduation and college?
G Our school has paid a fortune for Australian consultants. The prob-
lem is that we are in the hood, no joke—our students are from the
projects, they are from different cultures, races, and the one thing
they have in common is that they are truly urban. I was assigned a
consultant for reading, she came in, denounced all my library books
as inappropriate, told me that my needs for multiculturalism were
incorrect—she told me she was from a rural area of Australia, and had
never been to a city until she came to New York. Is this a joke?
Unfortunately, none of this is a joke. Blame is squarely fixed on
teachers in the United States, and administrators and school boards
remain unaccountable and paranoid. No one guards the guards. In
1983, the Commission on Excellence was formed by the Department
of Education. Members of the commission were charged with deter-
mining the state of America’s public schools. A document, A Nation
at Risk, was created as a result of this inquiry. Bottom line, the com-
mission led by Republican William Bennett, announced that the
problem with America’s schools is . . . America’s teachers. It
becomes the ultimate example of blaming the victim. The women and
men who work over 6 hr a day in difficult conditions were the bad
guys, not the administrators or politicians who controlled the teach-
ers. This report allowed an organization such as the NCATE to
become the big brother to schools of education, and with a top-
down assessment style, teacher certification has continued to emulate
the obsession with measurement, numerical accountability, and a
skewed version of scientifically based research. As one can see by the
summary of statements by public school teachers, even the basic
needs of a classroom are not being met. How can one begin to meas-
ure students accurately, if learning conditions are not even minimal?
Themes of abuse and the purposeful ignorance of administrators
emerge through my notes from the comments of teachers. Money
and funding become a groundwire for many of the illnesses that per-
vade our schools. Where is the money? Teachers speak of mis-
managed funds, and funds spent through cronyism—money that
they never see.
WHAT ELSE DON’T WE KNOW ABOUT SCHOOLS?
283

Make no mistake, no one in this book is advocating a lack of stan-
dards. Rather, we are arguing for stronger standards. Instead of bas-
ing our public schools’ needs on positivistic and disconnected
observations and measurements, we must demand to have accounta-
bility on every level. We must start with search for political advocacy
that recognizes the complex and diverse needs of students and teach-
ers. We must join grassroots efforts to keep administrators account-
able. And most importantly, we must make sure that parents and
teachers, alike, understand their rights and the rights of students.
It is amazing how a small voice of inquiry can reach to high levels.
I recall our daughter Bronwyn coming home with a sheet of paper
that gave instructions to parents on how to prepare our children for
standardized tests. The paper instructed us to:
Make sure children went to bed early to be well-rested
Make sure children were given a full breakfast
Make sure children were at school on time
It was not lost on either Bronwyn or her parents that the school had
never made these admonitions before. She noted that: “The school
only cares that I am well-fed and rested when they have achievement
tests to give. The higher the score, the better our school looks.” We
sent a note to the school requesting that our daughter be exempted
from the exams. The school kicked up a fuss; however, upon investi-
gating our parental rights, they found that we, indeed, had the right
to disallow her from taking exams, and that the school must provide
alternative pedagogical supervision. She was able to attend school and
occupied herself doing projects in the library. We immediately saw a
change in her affect and lack of nervousness that traditionally accom-
panied her when she had to take standardized exams. We informed
other parents about what we learned, some followed suit, but many
others were scared (their words) to exempt their children. Perhaps it is
time that parents recognize that they do have a say in their sons’ and
daughters’ education. And perhaps it is time that teachers recognized
that they also have rights. Teachers’ unions do exist, but very little
investigation has been done into the ties between union elite and
those that receive contracts. Again and again, the teachers I spoke to
mentioned that their union rep was absolutely not interested in their
issues. Just how deep do the wells of nepotism, manufactured
expenses, and hidden resources go?
Stringent penalties should be enacted when an administrator or
region denies teachers the right to speak to parents and the public
about schools. Districts and regions should be encouraged to visit
SHIRLEY R. STEINBERG
284

schools without prior announcement. Schools should be observed as
they are, not as they are painted for a particular visit. We must become
informed and observant participants in the education of our children
and youth.
What is it that we do not know about schools? A hell of a lot. Quis
custodiet ipsos custodies? It is time that we begin to guard our guards.
WHAT ELSE DON’T WE KNOW ABOUT SCHOOLS?
285

1984 Cable Act, 159
9/11 (September 11, 2001), 125, 143,
253
ABC, 160
ABCTE (American Board for Certification
of Teacher Education), 6
A Beautiful Mind, 186
Accountability, 3, 79
Achievement tests, 96
ACORN, 123
ACT, 95–96
Addison, Joseph, 185, 187
Adorno, Theodor, 131–132
AES (American Eugenics Society), 172
Aesthetics, 15
Akiko, Yosano, 199
Alliance for Academic Freedom, 125
Alliance for the Separation of School and
State, 2
Alta Vista, 137–138
American Coal Foundation, 132
American dream, 110
American Enterprise Institute, 11
American Journal of Public Health, 146
American Library Association, 160
American Press Institute, 160
American psyche, 104
Analytical techniques, 76
A Nation at Risk, 94, 127, 283
Anthropologie, 164
Anti-Semitism, 201
Archie, 269
Assessment, 99
Assimilation, 262
Assimilative policies, 249
Atwater, Lee, 2
Austen, Jane, 199
Authentic assessment, 81, 83–85
Aviles, Arthur, 237
Ayers, William, 82
Baby-Sitter’s Club, 148
Balzac, Henri, 183
Banking education, 71
Barbara Bush Foundation for Family
Literacy, 18
Barnes and Noble, 263
Barrett, Elizabeth, 200
Battersby, Christine, 200
Behavioral psychology, 106, 109
Behaviorism, 105, 107–108, 110
Belpre, Pura, 268
Bennett, William, 257, 283
Betty and Veronica, 269
Bhabha, Homi, 251
Bhagavad Gita, 270
Bilingual education, 258
Binet, Alfred, 171–172
Blume, Judy, 269
BMW, 266
Bourdieu, Pierre, 175
Bracero Program, 250
Brave New World, 92
Briant, Kobe, 129
Bridgestone-Firestone, 136
Bridwell, Norman, 147
Brigham, Carl, 171
British Broadcasting Service, 168
British Infant Schools, 215
Brown v. Board of Education, 173
Burger King, 133
Bush administration, 12, 16, 20
Bush, George W., 4–5, 16–19, 112, 118,
137, 254–256
Bush, Prescott, 18
Bushian educational science, 20, 
22–23
Business Week, 144
Cable in the Classroom, 159
Cadillac, 266
California Achievement Test, 96
Index

Canadian Broadcasting Company, 168
Capitalism, 109–110, 127–128
Captain Underpants, 154
Caryle, Thomas, 187, 195, 200
Catherine the Great, 278
CEO, 18, 122, 163, 255
Channel One, 145, 155–159, 161–163
Character education, 134
Charles Schwab, 154
Chauncey, Henry, 178
Cheney, Dick, 11
Cheney, Lynne, 11, 257
Children Now, 160
Children’s Defense Fund, 122
Children’s Television Act of 1990, 148
Chomsky, Noam, 242
Cisneros, Sandra, 223–224, 226–227,
236–237
Citizenship, 167
Civic skills, 153
Civil Rights Movement, 16
Civil Service, 177
Civil Service Reform (England), 169
Civil War, 97
Class-biased ideology, 7
Class politics/issues, 7–8
Classroom evaluation, 90
Clifford The Big Red Dog, 147
Clinton, Bill, 148
CNN, 158, 160
CNN Presents Classroom Edition, 162
CNN Student News, 158, 160, 162
Cockburn, Cynthia, 228
Cognition discourses, 178
Cognitive complexity, 77
Cognitive and psychometric psychology,
185
Coke, 133
Cold War, 172
Collateral learning theory, 235
Colorado Supreme Court, 258
Columbia Tri-Star Home Video, 148
Comedy Central, 145
Commercialism, 157
Commission on Excellence, 283
Committee of Concerned Journalists, 142
Committee of Ten, 172
Commonality, 248–249
Communications systems, 8
Communism, 4
Competency, 81
Complexity, 70
Complexity of knowledge, 76
Conant, James Bryant, 178
Concentration of energy, 201
Congress, 16–18, 92, 97, 117
Conservatives, 172
Constructing the Political Spectacle, 117
Constructivist learning theory, 106
Consumption, 139
Content-based knowledge, 89
Content model, 95
Content standards, 95
Cops, 129
Core knowledge, 90–92
Corporate influence in education, 120
Corporations, 128, 136–138
Council for Higher Education
Accreditation, 280
Counts, George, 131
Crawford, James, 247
Creative diversity, 74
Critical knowledge, 24
Critical literacy, 216
Critical media literacy, 138
Critical pedagogy, 180
Critical theory, 3, 179
Critical thinking, 77
Critical thought, 120
Cronyism, 19
Cultural anthropology, 201
Cultural capital, 175
Cultural literacy, 94, 98
Cultural Literacy: What Every American
Needs to Know, 73, 94
Cummins, Jim, 247
Current Events, 145
Curricular standardization, 12
Curriculum, 89, 132, 138
Curriculum alignment, 83
Cyberjournalist.net, 160
Darwin, Charles, 193, 200
D’Souza, Dinesh, 251
Darwinian Theory, 187
Data, 23
De Stael, Germaine, 200
Democracy, 9, 27, 86, 105, 109, 113,
131–132, 138–139, 141, 146, 152,
166–167, 173, 196, 204, 248
Democratic education, 173
Democratic society, 152
Department of Education, 17
Deprofessionalization, 6
INDEX
287

Descriptive processes, 15
Deskilling, 73–74
Devi, Phoolan, 263
Dewey, John, 10, 109, 131–132, 174
Diderot, Denis, 185–186, 203
Dieckmann, Herbert, 185
Disney, 150, 156
DISTAR program, 19
Diverse teaching strategies, 77
Diversity, 211, 213–216, 220, 271
Doherty, Christopher, 19
Dominant culture, 223, 236
Dominant ideological activity, 3
Down These Mean Streets, 268, 269
DreamWorks Interactive, 148–149
DuBois, W.E.B., 263
Ebonics, 253
Economic capital, 176
Edelman, Murray, 117
Educating for Diversity, 213
Educational data, 21
Educational evaluation, 81
Educational researchers, 14
Educational science, 15, 23, 25
Educational Sciences Reform Act, 16
Education Press, 145
Einstein, Albert, 183
Elementary and Secondary Education
Act of, 2001, 254
Elliot, Charles, 172
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 187, 194–199,
203–204
Empirical knowledge, 23
Engles, Frederick, 198
English for the Children, 241, 243, 246,
258
English Language Learners, 256
Enron, 18
Enterprise Institute, 156
Entertainment media, 145
Epistemology, 26
Equity, 4
Escalante, Jaime, 251
ESPN, 129
Essentialist movement, 91
Essential knowledge, 90
Ethnocentrism, 11
ETS (Educational Testing Service), 120
Eugenics, 178
Evaluation(s), 28–29, 70, 78, 80, 85,
89, 100
Evaluation experts, 89
Evaluation plans, 79
Evidence-based research, 26
Evolutionary theory, 201
Experience, 15, 92
Experiential knowledge, 25
Extreme Makeover, 129
Exxon, 131–132
ExxonMobil, 132
Eyewitness Kids News, 147, 
161–162
FACTS.com, 147
Failure to Hold, 139
Fast food restaurants, 134
FCC, 148
Fielding, Henry, 187, 194–195
Finding Forrester, 186
Finn, Chester, 27, 94, 97
Firestone tires, 136
First Gulf War, 117
Ford, 136, 160
Ford Explorers, 136
Fordham Foundation, 27
Formative assessment, 78–79
Forms of Capital, 175
Fortune 500 CEOs, 18
Fowler, Mark, 146
Fox Kids Network, 148–149
Fox News, 5, 129
Frank, Anne, 199
Frankfurt School, 131
Free market ideology, 109
Free People, 164
Freire, Paulo, 71, 104–105, 131–132,
180
French Enlightenment, 187
French Revolution, 197
Freudian Theory, 187
Frieden, Kenneth, 184
Frontline, 162, 168
FTAA, 142
Fundamentalist Christians, 112
Fundamental knowledge, 27
Galton, Francis, 186–187, 192, 203
GAO (U.S. General Accounting 
Office), 5
Gardner, Howard, 98
GATT, 142
Gay Rights Movement, 16
General Electric, 159, 161
INDEX
288

General Motors, 154
Genius, 186
Geoffrey’s Reading Railroad, 150
Ghandi, Mohandas Karamchand, 263
Ghettopoly, 164
Global economy, 120, 142
GMAT (Graduate Management
Admissions Test), 171
Goethe, 195–196
Golden Marble Awards, 150
Goodman, Yetta, 215
Good Will Hunting, 186
Google, 159
Goosebumps, 148, 150
Gordon, Winsome, 221
GPA (Grade Point Average), 111
Grade inflation, 81
Gramsci, Antonio, 263
Grant, Carl, 213–214
GRE (Graduate Record Examination),
171, 190
Great American Book Fairs, 148
Greene, Maxine, 224, 226, 233
Gresson, Aaron, 16
Gulf Oil, 132
Gulliver’s Travels, 270
Habitus, 175
Hamann, Johann Georg, 200
Haraway, Donna, 132
Harris, William, 131
Harry Potter, 154
Hauser, Robert, 177
Hayne, Richard, 163
HBO, 148, 274
Heidegger, Martin, 129
Heritage Foundation, 6, 10, 156
Herrnstein, Richard, 93, 177
High culture, 236
Higher order thinking, 76
High poverty schools, 10
Hildegaard of Bingen, 199
Hirsch, E. D., 73, 94, 98, 100
Historical context, 15
Hoch, Hannah, 202
Homer, 185
Horkheimer, Max, 131
House Resolution 3077, 27
Hughes, Langston, 269–270
Humanity, 109
Hundt, Reed, 148
Hurston, Zora Neale, 269–270
Hutchins Commission, 167
Huxley, Aldous, 92
IBM, 154, 160
Ideology, 3
I Have a Dream, 150
Indigenous knowledge, 73, 90
Individualism, 169
Industrial Areas Foundation, 123
Information Age, 110
Ingenius, 152
Inherent intelligence, 184
Institutionalized racism, 175
Intelligence, 178, 201
Interfaith groups, 123
Interpretive analysis, 15
Iowa Test of Basic Skills, 96
IQ scores, 12, 93, 111, 171–172,
177–178, 190, 203, 231
Iraq invasion, 125
ISLLC (Interstate School 
Leaders Licensure Consortium), 120
Jaguar, 266
James, William, 92
Jefferson, Thomas, 103
Jegede, Olugbemiro, 235
Jeopardy!, 100
John F. Kennedy Center for the
Performing Arts, 148
Johnston, David Cay, 134
Joyce, James, 183
JROTC (Junior Reserve Officers
Training Corps), 124–125
Kaiser Family Foundation, 165
Keller, Helen, 199
Kidsnewsroom.org, 159
Kids Power Marketing, 130
KidsSmart Educational Technology, 
154
King, Martin Luther, 122, 263
Kingsolver, Barbara, 105
King, Stephen, 269
Kleenex, 154
Knowledge, 21, 71, 73–75, 84, 92, 96
Kraft Food, 135
Kraton, 146
KumaWar: The War on 
Terror, 167
INDEX
289

LAD (Language Acquisition Device), 242
Langley High, 2
Lau v. Nichols, 248
Lawrence, Jacob, 237
Lay, Ken, 18
Leadership, 116
Left-leaning politicians, 2
Letterman, David, 129
Lexus, 266
Liberal ideology, 91
Licensing Industry Merchandizing
Association, 149
Lifetime Learning, 146
Lifeworld, 115
Literacy, 18
Literacy skills, 153
Lorber, Michael, 98
LSAT (Law School Admissions Test), 171
Lucky Book Club, 147
Lynch, Jessica, 118
Lyon, G. Reid, 256
Madam Curie, 199
Madison, James, 166
Madlenka, 218
Malcolm X, 263
Manufactured crisis, 117
Marketers, 130
Market Place, 135
Marketplace power, 152
Marxist critique, 187
Marx, Karl, 198
Mass communication corporations, 8
Mattel Inc., 9
Mayan codices, 90
MCAS (Massachusetts Comprehensive
Assessment System), 244
MCAT (Medical College Admissions
Test), 171
McDonald’s, 119, 133, 150, 156
McDonald’s Corporation, 149
McGraw, III, Harold, 18
McGraw-Hill, 17–19, 255
McGraw, Jr., Harold, 18
McLaren, Peter, 128, 131
McLeod, John, 252
Medea, 269
Media, 138, 143
Media literacy, 8
Medicaid, 5
Medicare, 5
Merelman, Richard, 166
Meritocracy, 177, 179
Microsoft, 148, 160
Mill, John Stuart, 193
Minority Report, 130
Miramax, 148
Mode of consciousness, 200
Mohr, Nicholasa, 269
Monopoly, 164
Montaigne, 196
Moore, Michael, 164
Morrison, Toni, 199, 236
Mountain Dew, 133
Moyers, Bill, 168
MSNBC, 159–161
MSNBC.COM, 149
MTV, 163
Multiculturalism, 271
Multilingualism, 248, 258
Multiple contexts, 77
Murray, Charles, 93, 177
NAACP, 150
Nader, Ralph, 163
NAEP (National Assessment of
Educational Progress), 97
NAFTA, 142
Napoleon, 196–197
National accreditation, 279
National Council on Educational
Standards and Testing, 97
National Educational Goals Panel, 97
National Football League, 149
National Geographic Society, 132
National Governor’s Association, 97
National History Standards, 11
National Public Radio, 135
National Reading Panel, 256
National Research Council, 21, 256
National Teacher of the Year Award, 149
Native Son, 233
Nazis, 202
NBA, 129
NBC, 148
NCATE (National Council for
Accreditation of Teacher
Education), 278–280
NCLB (No Child Left Behind), 1, 4, 13,
15–16, 18, 20, 89, 94, 96, 105,
115, 118, 125, 166, 253, 257, 277
NCLR (National Council of La Raza), 245
INDEX
290

Nelson B. Heller and Associates, 150
Nepotism, 169
New Line Cinema, 148
New Video, 148
Newspaper Association of America, 151
Newsweek, 147, 161
Newton, Issac, 183
New York State curriculum, 95
Nick News, 162–163
Nickelodeon, 148
Nickelodeon Game Lab, 166
Nick News Special Editions, 163
NIE (Newspapers in Education), 151–152
Nike, 129, 154
Nixon administration, 161
Nixon, Richard, 97
No Excuses: Lessons from 21 High-
Performing, High-Poverty Schools, 6
Normative assumptions, 26
Normative knowledge, 24
NCR, 21
NRP (National Reading Panel), 18–19
Nuyorican poetry, 269, 274
Objectives, Methods, and Evaluation for
Secondary Teaching, 98
Objective testing, 85, 90
Objectivity, 14
Oliver, Mary, 222
Olsen, Tillie, 236
Ontological knowledge, 24
Open Court Reading Program, 19, 116
Oprah’s Book Club, 148
Organic intellectual, 262–263, 266–267,
271, 273–274
Ormerod, Susan, 228
Outsourcing, 142
Paige, Rod, 18, 118
Paramount Pictures, 148
Parliament, 263
Pascal, Blaise, 186–193, 204
Patriotism, 167
Pavlov, Ivan, 104
PBS, 160–161, 168
Pepsi, 133
Perez and Martina, 268
Perfectly Legal, 134
Performance model, 95
Performance standards, 95
Performance tests, 84
Personality, 201
Phonics, 256
Piekhanov, George, 194
Pinker, Steven, 242
Pioneer House, 162
Pizza Hut, 133
Plato, 196
Plutarch, 195
Pokemon, 138
Polanyi, Michael, 176
Polaroid, 154
Political spectacle, 117
Politics of information, 9
Popular culture, 138, 167
Por Esta Calles Bravas, 268
Porsche, 266
Portfolios, 98
Positivism, 11–12, 15, 17, 19, 25
Positivistic aptitude test, 13
Positivistic evidence-based research,
12–15, 21
Positivistic methods, 22
Positivist research tradition, 11
Poverty, 257
Power, 3, 73, 152
Predatory culture, 128–130
Primate Visions, 132
Primedia, 146, 161
Private schools, 1, 5
Privatization of education, 2–3, 6, 8
Privilege and power, 12
Prodigal Summer, 105
Production of knowledge, 11
Professionalism, 115
Professional practice, 120
For-profit corporate schools, 9
Progressive classroom, 106
Progressive education, 174–175
Progressive ideology, 91
Progressive/liberal ideology, 99
Project Head Start, 214, 220
Proof, 186
Proposition, 187, 209, 227, 241, 
247, 251
Public Broadcasting Act, 161
Public Broadcasting Corporation, 
162
Public Broadcasting System, 148
Puente, Tito, 267
Punkvoter. com, 163
Purpose of schooling, 28
INDEX
291

Qualitative insight, 15
Quantitative methods, 14
Queen Christina of Sweden, 187, 189
QVC, 154
Race, 262
Race and genius, 201
Racine, 185–186
Rancho Rio High school, 125
Rand Corporation, 160
Raphael, 198
Ravitch, Diane, 94, 97, 257
Reading First, 16, 22, 256
Reagan administration, 127, 161
Reagan, Ronald, 248, 277
Reflective-Synthetic knowledge, 25
Regents Competency Test, 96
Regents Examination, 96
Reggie Award, 150
Reliability, 98
Religion, 2
Research methods, 13, 16
Resnick, Lauren, 76, 95
Reynolds, R.J., 135–136
Right On!, 266
Right-wing advocacy of basic 
skills, 10
Right-wing agenda, 16
Right-wing education, 3–4, 9
Right-wing educational politics, 27
Right-wing groups, 1
Right-wing ideological success/goals,
3–4, 7
Right-wing operatives, 2, 22, 26
Right-wing policies, 26
Right-wing politics of knowledge, 2
Right-wing think tanks, 1
Rigor, 3
Rigorous standards, 90
Ripple, 154
Ripplewood Holdings, 146
RJR Nabisco, 146
Rodriguez, Richard, 251
Romanticism, 186
Romer, Roy, 97
Rove, Karl, 2
Ruskin, John, 263
Said, Edward, 263
Santeria, 265
SAT (Scholastic Aptitude Test), 93,
95–96, 98–99, 111, 171, 190
Scapp, Ron, 128
Schlafly, Phyllis, 163
Schlosser, Eric, 130–131
Schön, Donald, 25
Scholar practitioners, 15
Scholastic.com, 161
Scholastic, Inc., 149, 151, 153–154,
156, 165
Scholastic Magazine, 145
Scholastic Productions, 148
Scholastic Publishing Company, 147
Scholastic school group, 149
School choice, 2
School testing, 98
School vouchers, 2
Schumpater, Joseph, 127
Science wars, 16
Scientific educational knowledge, 20
Scientific knowledge, 12
Scientific management, 92
Scientifically based research, 256, 278,
283
Scientific testing, 92–93
Searching for Bobby Fischer, 186
Sex In The City, 263
Shakespeare, William, 185, 196
Shaw, Bernard, 191
Shelley, Mary, 200
Shell Oil, 146
Sis, Peter, 218
Situated learning, 100
Situated thinking, 100
Six Flags Theme parks, 154
Smith, Adam, 186–187, 190–193, 195
Social class hierarchy, 81
Social Darwinists, 171, 178
Social efficiency, 173
Social Security, 5
Social theory, 193
Social theory of authorship, 188
Socioeconomic status (SES), 176–177
Spanish Jesuits, 90
Special Edition, 162
Spoken word, 174
Sputnik, 94, 172
Standardization, 116
Standardized curricula of right-wing
schools, 10
Standardization of curriculum, 90
Standardized evaluation, 83
Standardized high-stakes testing, 80,
110, 111, 116
INDEX
292

Standardized testing, 10, 14, 21, 71, 74,
80, 82, 89, 172, 255
Standardized thinking, 100
Standards, 3, 28–29, 70–71, 77, 85, 120
Standards and accountability models, 79
Standards of complexity, 74, 76–78,
83–84, 86
Standards movement, 116
Standard test, 89
Stanley, Thomas J., 170
Starbuck’s, 263
Stein, Gertrude, 199
Sternberg, Robert, 99
Stine, R.L., 269
Structured English Immersion Program,
242, 244, 250
Student achievement, 71
Student learning, 76
Student performance, 84
Summative assessment, 79
Summerhill School, 215
Super Bowl, 111, 159
Supreme Court, 91, 248
Survivor, 129, 142
Swift, Jonathan, 270
Systemworld, 115
Tacit Dimension, 176
Tacit knowledge, 90, 176, 177
Taco Bell, 133
TCI, 152
Teacher certification, 6
Teacher deprofessionalization
movements, 8
Teacher deskilling, 15
Teacher proof instructional materials, 74
Technical standards, 71, 73–75, 78, 81, 83
Technology, 138, 144
Technology corporations, 8
Teen Newsweek, 147, 159, 161
Terman, Lewis, 171–172, 203
Test scores, 18, 81, 95, 255
Test validity, 82
Testing, 172–173
Texas, 17
The Advertising Council, 149
The Apprentice, 142
The Bell Curve, 177
The Bluest Eye, 236
The Daily Show With Jon Stewart, 145
The Declaration of Independence Road
Trip, 149
The History Channel, 149
The Learning Channel, 149
The Magic School Bus, 148–149
The Millionaire Mind, 170
The National Institute on Drug Abuse,
149
The News Hour with Jim Lehrer, 162,
168
The New York Times, 148, 159–160, 168
The Scholastic, 147
The School and Society, 174
The Wall Street Journal, 160
The Weekly Reader group for K-8 readers,
145–147, 163
Thomas, Piri, 269
Thoreau, Henry David, 263
Thurman, Wallace, 269
Time Corporations, 160
Time Warner, 150, 161–163
Tinker v. Des Moines, 125
Title I, 256
Tolstoy, Leo, 193
Tom Jones, 195
Toyota Camry, 266
Toys “R” Us, 151
TQM (Total Quality Management), 119
Tracking, 173
Traditional classroom, 105, 108
Traditional intellectuals, 262, 274
Transition Advisory Committee on
Trade, 255
Transitional Bilingual Education, 243
Transmissional pedagogy, 71, 75
Trump, Donald, 129, 143
Turner Learning, 158, 162
TVA (Tennessee Valley Authority), 4
Understanding by Design, 112
Uniform Lists, 91
Unz, Ron, 241–247, 249–250,
252–253, 257–258
UPS, 149
Urban Outfitters, 163–165
U.S. English Foundation, 251
U.S. English Foundation, Inc., 247
Valdez, 131
Validity, 98
Van Manen, Max, 20–21
Varela, Francisco, 225
Viacom, 163
Vietnam, 172
INDEX
293

Virgil, 185
Voigt, Cynthia, 269
Voucher supporters, 2
Vygotsky, Lev, 85, 172, 179
Wall Street, 19
Warner Home Video, 148
Webber, Julie, 139
Weekly Reader, 159, 165
Weiler, Kathleen, 131
Weininger, Otto, 200
Wesleyan University, 145
Western Literature, 270
What Do Our 17-Year-Olds Know?, 94, 97
What on Earth, 152
White House, 166
White nationalism, 249
Whittle, Christopher, 155
Whittle Communications, 
156–157
Widmeyer-Baker, 19
Wild, Jonathan, 194–195
Winters, Ed, 157
Wolf, Christa, 229
Wollstonecraft, Mary, 200
Women and genius, 199
Women’s Movement, 16
World War II, 92, 151, 172
WRC Media Holdings, 146, 147
WRC (The Weekly Reader Corporation),
145, 151, 153, 156, 161
Wright, Richard, 233
WTO, 142
Xavier, Emanuel, 237
Xerox, 145
Yahoo!, 159
Yerkes, Robert, 172
Young, Michael, 177
Zeta-Jones, Catherine, 137
Zone of proximal development (ZPD),
179
INDEX
294

