
AUTHOR'S NOTE
This novel takes place thousands of years from now. The connection with
our languages and writing systems is tenuous. But, for what it's worth, the initial
sound in "Qeng Ho" is the same as the initial sound in the English word
"checker." (Trixia Bonsol would understand the problem!)

PROLOGUE
The manhunt extended across more than one hundred light-years and eight
centuries. It had always been a secret search, unacknowledged even among some
of the participants. In the early years, it had simply been encrypted queries
hidden in radio broadcasts. Decades and centuries passed. There were clues,
interviews with The Man's fellow-travelers, pointers in a half-dozen
contradictory directions: The Man was alone now and heading still farther away;
The Man had died before the search ever began; The Man had a war fleet and
was coming back upon them.
With time, there was some consistency to the most credible stories. The
evidence was solid enough that certain ships changed schedules and burned
decades of time to look for more clues. Fortunes were lost because of the detours
and delays, but the losses were to a few of the largest trading Families, and went
unacknowledged. They were rich enough, and this search was important enough,
that it scarcely mattered. For the search had narrowed: The Man was traveling
alone, a vague blur of multiple identities, a chain of one-shot jobs on minor
trading vessels, but always moving back and back into this end of Human Space.
The hunt narrowed from a hundred light-years, to fifty, to twenty-and a half-
dozen star systems.
And finally, the manhunt came down to a single world at the coreward end
of Human Space. Now Sammy could justify a fleet specially for the end of the
hunt. The crew and even most of the owners would not know the mission's true
purpose, but he had a good chance of finally ending the search.
Sammy himself went groundside on Triland. For once, it made sense for a
Fleet Captain to do the detail work: Sammy was the only one in the fleet who
had actually met The Man in person. And given the present popularity of his
fleet here, he could cut through whatever bureaucratic nonsense might come up.
Those were good reasons. . .but Sammy would be down here in any case.I have
waited so long, and in a little while we'llhave him.
"Why should I help you find anyone! I'm not your mother!" The little man
had backed into his inner office space. Behind him, a door was cracked five
centimeters wide. Sammy caught a glimpse of a child peeking out fearfully at
them. The little man shut the door firmly. He glared at the Forestry constables
who had preceded Sammy into the building. "I'll tell you one more time: My
place of business is the net. If you didn't find what you want there, then it's not
available from me."

" 'Scuse me." Sammy tapped the nearest constable on the shoulder. " 'Scuse
me." He slipped through the ranks of his protectors.
The proprietor could see that someone tall was coming through. He reached
toward his desk.Lordy. If he trashed the databases he had distributed across the
net, they'd get nothing out of him.
But the fellow's gesture froze. He stared in shock at Sammy's face.
"Admiral?" "Um, 'Fleet Captain,' if you please."
"Yes, yes! We've been watching you on the news every day now. Please!
Sit down. You're the source of the inquiry?"
The change in manner was like a flower opening to the sunlight. Apparently
the Qeng Ho was just as popular with the city folk as it was with the Forestry
Department. In a matter of seconds, the proprietor-the "private investigator," as
he called himself-had pulled up records and started search programs. ". . .Hmm.
You don't have a name, or a good physical description, just a probable arrival
date. Okay, now Forestry claims your fellow must have become someone named
'Bidwel Ducanh.' " His gaze slid sideways to the silent constables, and he smiled.
"They're very good at reaching nonsense conclusions from insufficient
information. In this case . . ." He did something with his search programs.
"Bidwel Ducanh. Yeah, now that I search for it, I remember hearing about that
fellow. Sixty or a hundred years ago he made some kind of a name for himself."
A figure that had come from nowhere, with a moderate amount of money and an
uncanny flare for self-advertisement. In a period of thirty years, he had gathered
the support of several major corporations and even the favor of the Forestry
Department. "Ducanh claimed to be a city-person, but he was no freedom
fighter. He wanted to spend money on some crazy, long-term scheme. What was
it? He wanted to . . ." The private investigator looked up from his reading to
stare a moment at Sammy. "He wanted to finance an expedition to the OnOff
star!"
Sammy just nodded.
"Damn! If he had been successful, Triland would have an expedition
partway there right now." The investigator was silent for a moment, seeming to
contemplate the lost opportunity. He looked back at his records. "And you know,
he almost succeeded. A world like ours would have to bankrupt itself to go
interstellar. But sixty years ago, a single Qeng Ho starship visited Triland.
Course, they didn't want to break their schedule, but some of Ducanh's
supporters were hoping they'd help out. Ducanh wouldn't have anything to do
with the idea, wouldn't even talk to the Qeng Ho. After that, Bidwel Ducanh
pretty much lost his credibility.. . .He faded from sight."
All this was in Triland's Forestry Department records. Sammy said, "Yes.

We're interested in where this individual is now." There had been no interstellar
vessel in Triland's solar system for sixty years.He is here!
"Ah, so you figure he may have some extra information, something that
would be useful even after what's happened the last three years?"
Sammy resisted an impulse to violence. A little more patience now, what
more could it cost after the centuries of waiting? "Yes," he said, benignly
judicious, "it would be good to cover all the angles, don't you think?"
"Right. You've come to the right place. I know city things that the Forestry
people never bother to track. I really want to help." He was watching some kind
of scanning analysis, so this was not completely wasted time. "These alien radio
messages are going to change our world, and I want my children to-"
The investigator frowned. "Huh! You just missed this Bidwel character,
Fleet Captain. See, he's been dead for ten years."
Sammy didn't say anything, but his mild manner must have slipped; the
little man flinched when he looked up at him. "I-I'm sorry, sir. Perhaps he left
some effects, a will."
It can't be. Not when I'm so close.But it was a possibility that Sammy had
always known. It was the commonplace in a universe of tiny lifetimes and
interstellar distances. "I suppose we are interested in any data the man left
behind." The words came out dully.At least we have closure -that would be the
concluding line from some smarmy intelligence analyst.
The investigator tapped and muttered at his devices. The Forestry
Department had reluctantly identified him as one of the best of the city class, so
well distributed that they could not simply confiscate his equipment to take him
over. He was genuinely trying to be helpful.. . ."There may be a will, Fleet
Captain, but it's not on the Grandville net."
"Some other city, then?" The fact that the Forestry Department had
partitioned the urban networks was a very bad sign for Triland's future.
". . .Not exactly. See, Ducanh died at one of Saint Xupere's Pauper
Cemeteria, the one in Lowcinder. It looks like the monks have held on to his
effects. I'm sure they would give them up in return for a decentsized donation."
His eyes returned to the constables and his expression hardened. Maybe he
recognized the oldest one, the Commissioner of Urban Security. No doubt they
could shake down the monks with no need for any contribution.
Sammy rose and thanked the private investigator; his words sounded
wooden even to himself. As he walked back toward the door and his escort, the
investigator came quickly around his desk and followed him. Sammy realized
with abrupt embarrassment that the fellow hadn't been paid. He turned back,
feeling a sudden liking for the guy. He admired someone who would demand his

pay in the face of unfriendly cops. "Here," Sammy started to say, "this is what I
can-"
But the fellow held up his hands. "No, not necessary. But there is a favor I
would like from you. See, I have a big family, the brightest kids you've ever
seen. This joint expedition isn't going to leave Triland for another five or ten
years, right? Can you make sure that my kids, even one of them-?"
Sammy cocked his head. Favors connected with mission success came very
dear. "I'm sorry, sir," he said as gently as he could. "Your children will have to
compete with everyone else. Have them study hard in college. Have them target
the specialties that are announced. That will give them the best chance."
"Yes, Fleet Captain! That is exactly the favor that I am asking. Would you
see to it-" He swallowed and looked fiercely at Sammy, ignoring the others. "-
would you see to it that they are allowed to undertake college studies?"
"Certainly." A little grease on academic entrance requirements didn't bother
Sammy at all. Then he realized what the other was really saying. "Sir, I'll make
sure of it."
"Thank you. Thank you!" He touched his business card into Sammy's hand.
"There's my name and stats. I'll keep it up-to-date. Please remember."
"Yes, uh, Mr. Bonsol, I'll remember." It was a classic Qeng Ho deal.
The city dropped away beneath the Forestry Department flyer. Grandville
had only about half a million inhabitants, but they were crammed into a snarled
slum, the air above them shimmering with summer heat. The First Settlers' forest
lands spread away for thousands of kilometers around it, virgin terraform
wilderness.
They boosted high into clean indigo air, arcing southward. Sammy ignored
the Triland "Urban Security" boss sitting right beside him; just now he had
neither the need nor the desire to be diplomatic. He punched a connection to his
Deputy Fleet Captain. Kira Lisolet's autoreport streamed across his vision. Sum
Dotran had agreed to the schedule change: all the fleet would be going to the
OnOff star.
"Sammy!" Kira's voice cut across the automatic report. "How did it go?"
Kira Lisolet was the only other person in the fleet who knew the true purpose of
this mission, the manhunt.
"I-"We lost him, Kira. But Sammy couldn't say the words. "See for yourself,
Kira. The last two thousand seconds of my pov. I'm headed back to Lowcinder
now. . .one last loose end to tie down."
There was a pause. Lisolet was fast with an indexed scan. After a moment
he heard her curse to herself. "Okay. . .but do tie that last loose end, Sammy.
There were times before when we were sure we'd lost him."
"N
lik
hi
Ki
"

"Never like this, Kira."
"I said, you make absolutely sure." There was steel in the woman's voice.
Her people owned a big hunk of the fleet. She owned one ship herself. In fact,
she was the only operational owner on the mission. Most times, that was not a
problem. Kira Pen Lisolet was a reasonable person on almost all issues. This was
one of the exceptions.
"I'll make sure, Kira. You know that." Sammy was suddenly conscious of
the Triland Security boss at his elbow-and he remembered what he had
accidentally discovered a few moments earlier. "How are things top-side?"
Her response was light, a kind of apology. "Great. I got the shipyard
waivers. The deals with the
industrial moons and the asteroid mines look solid. We're continuing with
detailed planning. I still think we can be equipped and specialist-crewed in three
hundred Msec. You know how much the Trilanders want a cut of this mission."
He heard the smile in her voice. Their link was encrypted, but she knew that his
end was emphatically not secure. Triland was a customer and soon to be a
mission partner, but they should know just where they stood.
"Very good. Add something to the list, if it's not already there: 'Per our
desire for the best specialist crew possible, werequire that the Forestry
Department's university programs be open to all those who pass our tests, not
just the heirs of First Settlers.' "
"Of course . . ." A second passed, just enough time for a double take. "Lord,
how could we miss something like that?"We missed it because somefools are
very hard to underestimate.
A thousand seconds later, Lowcinder was rising toward them. This was
almost thirty degrees south latitude. The frozen desolation that spread around it
looked like the pre-Arrival pictures of equatorial Triland, five hundred years
ago, before the First Settlers began tweaking the greenhouse gases and building
the exquisite structure that is a terraform ecology.
Lowcinder itself was near the center of an extravagant black stain, the
product of centuries of
"nucleonically clean" rocket fuels. This was Triland's largest groundside
spaceport, yet the city's recent growth was as grim and slumlike as all the others
on the planet.
Their flyer switched to fans and trundled across the city, slowly descending.
The sun was very low, and the streets were mostly in twilight. But every
kilometer the streets seemed narrower. Custom composites gave way to cubes
that might have once been cargo containers. Sammy watched grimly. The First
Settlers had worked for centuries to create a beautiful world; now it was
exploding out from under them It was a common problem in terraformed

exploding out from under them. It was a common problem in terraformed
worlds. There were at least five reasonably painless methods of accommodating
the terraform's final success. But if the First Settlers and their "Forestry
Department" were not willing to adopt any of them. . .well, there might not be a
civilization here to welcome his fleet's return. Sometime soon, he must have a
heart-to-heart chat with members of the ruling class.
His thoughts were brought back to the present as the flyer dumped down
between blocky tenements.
Sammy and his Forestry goons walked through half-frozen slush. Piles of
clothing-donations?-lay jumbled in boxes on the steps of the building they
approached. The goons detoured around them. Then they were up the steps and
indoors.
The cemeterium's manager called himself Brother Song, and he looked old
unto death. "Bidwel
Ducanh?" His gaze slid nervously away from Sammy. Brother Song did not
recognize Sammy's face, but he knew the Forestry Department. "Bidwel Ducanh
died ten years ago."
He was lying.He was lying.
Sammy took a deep breath and looked around the dingy room. Suddenly he
felt as dangerous as some
fleet scuttlebutt made him out to be.Godforgive me, but I will do anything to get
the truth from this man. He looked back at Brother Song and attempted a
friendly smile. It must not have come out quite right; the old man stepped back a
pace. "A cemeterium is a place for people to die, is that right, Brother Song?"
"It is a place for all to live to the natural fullness of their time. We use all
the money that people bring, to help all the people who come." In the perverse
Triland situation, Brother Song's primitivism made a terrible kind of sense. He
helped the sickest of the poorest as well as he could.
Sammy held up his hand. "I will donate one hundred years of budget to
each of your order's cemeteria. . .if you take me to Bidwel Ducanh."
"I-" Brother Song took another step backwards, and sat down heavily.
Somehow he knew that Sammy could make good on his offer. Maybe.. . . But
then the old man looked up at Sammy and there was a
desperate stubbornness in his stare. "No. Bidwel Ducanh died ten years ago."
Sammy walked across the room and grasped the arms of the old man's
chair. He brought his face down close to the other's. "You know these people
I've brought with me. Do you doubt that if I give the word, they will take your
cemeterium apart, piece by piece? Do you doubt that if we don't find what I seek
here, we'll do the same to every cemeterium of your order, all over this world?"

It was clear that Brother Song did not doubt. He knew the Forestry
Department. Yet for a moment Sammy was afraid that Song would stand up
even to that.And I will then do what I must do. Abruptly, the old man seemed to
crumple in on himself, weeping silently.
Sammy stood back from his chair. Some seconds passed. The old man
stopped crying and struggled to his feet. He didn't look at Sammy or gesture; he
simply shuffled out of the room.
Sammy and his entourage followed. They walked single-file down a long
corridor. There was horror here. It wasn't in the dim and broken lighting or the
water-stained ceiling panels or the filthy floor. Along the
corridor, people sat on sofas or wheeled chairs. They sat, and stared. . .at
nothing. At first, Sammythought they were wearing head-up-displays, that their
vision was far away, maybe in some consensualimagery. After all, a few of them
were talking, a few of them were making constant, complicated gestures. Then
he noticed that the signs on the walls werepainted there. The plain, peeling wall
material was simply all there was to see. And the withered people sitting in the
hall had eyes that were naked and vacant.
Sammy walked close behind Brother Song. The monk was talking to
himself, but the words made sense. He was talking about The Man: "Bidwel
Ducanh was not a kindly man. He was not someone you could like, even at the
beginning. . .especially at the beginning. He said he had been rich, but he
brought us nothing. The first thirty years, when I was young, he worked harder
than any of us. There was no job too dirty, no job too hard. But he had ill to say
of everyone. He mocked everyone. He would sit by a patient through the last
night of life, and then afterwards sneer." Brother Song was speaking in the past
tense, but after a few seconds Sammy realized that he was not trying to convince
Sammy of anything. Song was not even talking to himself. It was as if he were
speaking a wake for someone he knew would be dead very soon. "And then as
the years passed, like all the rest of us, he could help less and less. He talked
about his enemies, how they would kill him if they ever found him. He laughed
when we promised to hide him. In the end, only his meanness survived-and that
without speech."
Brother Song stopped before a large door. The sign above it was brave and
floral:TO THE SUNROOM .
"Ducanh will be the one watching the sunset." But the monk did not open
the door. He stood with his head bowed, not quite blocking the way.
Sammy started to walk around him, then stopped, and said, "The payment I
mentioned: It will be deposited to your order's account." The old man didn't look
up at him. He spat on Sammy's jacket and then walked back down the hall,

pushing past the constables.
Sammy turned and pulled at the door's mechanical latch.
"Sir?" It was the Commissioner of Urban Security. The cop-bureaucrat
stepped close and spoke softly. "Um. We didn't want this escort job, sir. This
should have been your own people."
Huh?"I agree, Commissioner. So why didn't you let me bring them?"
"It wasn't my decision. I think they figured that constables would be more
discreet." The cop looked away. "Look, Fleet Captain. We know you Qeng Ho
carry grudges a long time."
Sammy nodded, although that truth applied more to customer civilizations
than to individuals.
The cop finally looked him in the eye. "Okay. We've cooperated. We made
sure that nothing about your search could leak back to your. . .target. But we
won't do this guy for you. We'll look the other way; we won't stop you. But I
won't do him."
"Ah." Sammy tried to imagine just where in the moral pantheon this fellow
would fit. "Well, Commissioner, staying out of my way is all that is required. I
can take care of this myself."
The cop gave a jerky nod. He stepped back, and didn't follow when Sammy
opened the door "to the sunroom."
The air was chill and stale, an improvement over the rank humidity of the
hallway. Sammy walked down a dark stairway. He was still indoors, but not by
much. This had been an exterior entrance once, leading down to street level.
Plastic sheeting walled it in now, creating some kind of sheltered patio.
What if he's like the wretches in the hallway?They reminded him of people
who lived beyond the
capabilities of medical support. Or the victims of a mad experimentory. Their
minds had died in pieces. That was a finish he had never seriously considered,
but now . . .
Sammy reached the bottom of the stairs. Around the corner was the promise
of daylight. He wiped the back of his hand across his mouth and stood quietly
for a long moment.
Do it.Sammy walked forward, into a large room. It looked like part of the
parking lot, but tented with semiopaque plastic sheets. There was no heating, and
drafts thuttered past breaks in the plastic. A few heavily bundled forms were
scattered in chairs across the open space. They sat facing in no particular
direction; some were looking into the gray stone of the exterior wall.
All that barely registered on Sammy. At the far end of the room, a column
of sunlight fell low and
l
i
h
h
b
k
i
h
f A i
l
h d

slanting through a break or transparency in the roof. A single person had
contrived to sit in the middle of that light.
Sammy walked slowly across the room, his eyes never leaving the figure
that sat in the red and gold light of sunset. The face had a racial similarity to the
high Qeng Ho Families, but it was not the face that Sammy remembered. No
matter. The Man would have changed his face long ago. Besides, Sammy had a
DNA counter in his jacket, and a copy of The Man's true DNA code.
He was bundled in blankets and wore a heavy knit cap. He didn't move but
he seemed to be watching something, watching the sunset.It's him. The
conviction came without rational thought, an emotional wave breaking over
him.Maybe incomplete, but this is him.
Sammy took a loose chair and sat down facing the figure in the light. A
hundred seconds passed. Two hundred. The last rays of sunset were fading. The
Man's stare was blank, but he reacted to the coolness on his face. His head
moved, vaguely searching, and he seemed to notice his visitor. Sammy turned so
his face was lit by the sunset sky. Something came into the other's eyes,
puzzlement, memories swimming up from the depths. Abruptly, The Man's
hands came out of his blankets and jerked clawlike at Sammy's
face.
"You!"
"Yes, sir. Me." The search of eight centuries was over.
The Man shifted uncomfortably in his wheeled chair, rearranging his
blankets. He was silent for some seconds, and when he finally spoke, his words
were halting. "I knew your. . .kind would still be looking for me. I financed this
damn Xupere cult, but I always knew. . .it might not be enough." He shifted
again on the chair. There was a glitter in his eyes that Sammy had never seen in
the old days. "Don't tell me. Each Family pitched in a little. Maybe every Qeng
Ho ship has one crewmember who keeps a lookout for me."
He had no concept of the search that had finally found him. "We mean you
no harm, sir."
The Man gave a rasp of a laugh, not arguing, but certainly disbelieving. "It's
my bad luck that you would be the agent they assigned to Triland. You're smart
enough to find me. They should have done better by you, Sammy. You should
be a Fleet Captain and more, not some assassin errand boy." He shifted again,
reached down as if to scratch his butt. What was it? Hemorrhoids? Cancer?
Lordy, I bet he's sitting on a handgun. He's beenready all these years, and now
it's tangled up in the blankets.
Sammy leaned forward earnestly. The Man was stringing him along. Fine.
It might be the only way he would talk at all. "So we were finally lucky, sir.
Myself I guessed you might come here because of the OnOff star "

Myself, I guessed you might come here, because of the OnOff star."
The surreptitious probing of blankets paused for a moment. A sneer
flickered across the old man's face. "It's only fifty light-years away, Sammy. The
nearest astrophysical enigma to Human Space. And you ball-less Qeng Ho
wonders have never visited it. Holy profit is all your kind ever cared about." He
waved his right hand forgivingly, while his left dug deeper into the blankets.
"But then, the whole human race is just as bad. Eight thousand years of telescope
observations and two botched fly-throughs, that's all the wonder rated.. . .I
thought maybe this close, I could put together a manned mission. Maybe I would
find something there, an edge.Then, whenI came back- " The strange glitter was
back in his eyes. He had
dreamed his impossible dream so long, it had consumed him. And Sammy
realized that The Man was not a fragment of himself. He was simply mad.
But debts owed to a madman are still real debts.
Sammy leaned a little closer. "You could have done it. I understand that a
starship passed through here when 'Bidwel Ducanh' was at the height of his
influence."
"That was Qeng Ho. Fuck the Qeng Ho! I have washed my hands of you."
His left arm was no longer probing. Apparently, he had found his handgun.
Sammy reached out and lightly touched the blankets that hid The Man's left
arm. It wasn't a forcible
restraint, but an acknowledgment. . .and a request for a moment's more time.
"Pham. There's reason to go to OnOff now. Even by Qeng Ho standards."
"Huh?" Sammy couldn't tell if it was the touch, or his words, or the name
that had been unspoken for so long-but something briefly held the old man still
and listening.
"Three years ago, while we were still backing into here, the Trilanders
picked up emissions from near the OnOff star. It was spark-gap radio, like a
fallen civilization might invent if it had totally lost its technological history.
We've run out our own antenna arrays, and done our own analysis. The
emissions are like manual Morse code, except human hands and human reflexes
would never have quite this rhythm."
The old man's mouth opened and shut but for a moment no words came.
"Impossible," he finally said, very faintly.
Sammy felt himself smile. "It's strange to hear that word from you, sir."
More silence. The Man's head bowed. Then: "The jackpot. I missed it by
just sixty years. And you, by hunting me down here. . .now you'll get it all." His
arm was still hidden, but he had slumped forward in his chair, defeated by his
inner vision of defeat.

"Sir, a few of us"-more than a few-"have searched for you. You made
yourself very hard to find, and there are all the old reasons for keeping the search
secret. But we never wished you harm. We wanted to find you to-"To make
amends? To beg forgiveness? Sammy couldn't say the words, and they weren't
quite true. After all, The Man had beenwrong . So speak to the present: "We
would be honored if you would come with us, to the OnOff star."
"Never. I am not Qeng Ho."
Sammy always kept close track of his ships' status. And just now. . . Well, it
was worth a try: "I didn't come to Triland aboard a singleton, sir. I have a fleet."
The other's chin came up a fraction. "A fleet?" The interest was an old
reflex, not quite dead.
"They're in near moorage, but right now they should be visible from
Lowcinder. Would you like to see?" The old man only shrugged, but both his
hands were in the open now, resting in his lap.
"Let me show you." There was a doorway hacked in the plastic just a few
meters away. Sammy got up and moved slowly to push the wheeled chair. The
old man made no objection.
Outside, it was cold, probably below freezing. Sunset colors hung above the
rooftops ahead of him, but the only evidence of daytime warmth was the icy
slush that splashed over his shoes. He pushed the chair along, heading across the
parking lot toward a spot that would give them some view toward the west. The
old man looked around vaguely.I wonder howlong it's been since he was outside.
"You ever thought, Sammy, there could be other folks come to this tea
party?" "Sir?" The two of them were alone in the parking lot.
"There are human colony worlds closer to the OnOff star than we are."
Thattea party. "Yes, sir. We're updating our eavesdropping on them." Three
beautiful worlds in a triple star system, and back from barbarism in recent
centuries. "They call themselves 'Emergents' now. We've never visited them, sir.
Our best guess is they're some kind of tyranny, high-tech but very closed, very
inward-looking."
The old man grunted. "I don't care how inward-looking the bastards are.
This is something that could. . .wake the dead. Take guns and rockets and nukes,
Sammy. Lots and lots of nukes."
"Yes, sir."
Sammy maneuvered the old man's wheeled chair to the edge of the parking
lot. In his huds, he could see his ships climbing slowly up the sky, still hidden
from the naked eye by the nearest tenement. "Another four hundred seconds sir,
and you'll see them come out past the roof just about there." He pointed at the
spot.

The old man didn't say anything, but he was looking generally upward.
There was conventional air
traffic, and the shuttles at the Lowcinder spaceport. The evening was still in
bright twilight, but the naked eye could pick out half a dozen satellites. In the
west, a tiny red light blinked a pattern that meant it was an icon in Sammy's
huds, not a visible object. It was his marker for the OnOff star. Sammy stared at
the point for a moment. Even at night, away from Lowcinder's light, OnOff
would not quite be visible. But with a small telescope it looked like a normal G
star. . .still. In just a few more years, it would be invisible to all but the telescope
arrays.Whenmy fleet arrives there, it will have been dark for two centuries. . .and
it willalmost be ready for its next rebirth.
Sammy dropped to one knee beside the chair, ignoring the soaking chill of
the slush. "Let me tell you
about my ships, sir." And he spoke of tonnages and design specs and owners-
well, most of the owners; there were some who should be left for another time,
when the old man did not have a gun at hand. And all the while, he watched the
other's face. The old man understood what he was saying, that was clear. His
cursing was a low monotone, a new obscenity for each name that Sammy spoke.
Except for the last one-
"Lisolet? That sounds Strentmannian."
"Yes, sir. My Deputy Fleet Captain is Strentmannian." "Ah." He nodded.
"They. . .they were good people."
Sammy smiled to himself. Pre-Flight should be ten years long for this
mission.That would be long enough to bring The Man back physically. It might
be long enough to soften his madness. Sammy patted the chair's frame, near the
other's shoulder.This time, we will not desert you.
"Here comes the first of my ships, sir." Sammy pointed again. A second
later, a bright star rose past the edge of the tenement's roof. It swung stately out
into twilight, a dazzling evening star. Six seconds passed, and the second ship
came into sight. Six seconds more, and the third. And another. And another. And
another. And then a gap, and finally one brighter than all the rest. His starships
were in low-orbit moorage, four thousand kilometers out. At that distance they
were just points of light, tiny gemstones hung half a degree apart on an invisible
straight line across the sky. It was no more spectacular than a low-orbit moorage
of in-system freighters, or some local construction job. . .unless you knew how
far those points of light had come, and how far they might ultimately voyage.
Sammy heard the old man give a soft sigh of wonder.He knew.
The two watched the seven points of light slide slowly across the sky.
Sammy broke the silence. "See the bright one, at the end?" The pendent gem of

the constellation. "It's the equal of any starship ever made. It's my flagship, sir. .
.thePham Nuwen ."

PART ONE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY YEARS LATER

ONE
The Qeng Ho fleet was first to arrive at the OnOff star. That might not
matter. For the last fifty years of their voyage, they had watched the torch-
plumes of the Emergent fleet as it decelerated toward the same destination.
They were strangers, meeting far from either side's home territory. That was
nothing new to the traders of the Qeng Ho-though normally the meetings were
not so unwelcome, and there was the possibility of trade. Here, well, there was
treasure but it did not belong to either side. It lay frozen, waiting to be looted or
exploited or developed, depending on one's nature. So far from friends, so far
from a social context. .
.so far from witnesses. This was a situation where treachery might be rewarded,
and both sides knew it. Qeng Ho and Emergents, the two expeditions, had
danced around each other for days, probing for intent and firepower. Agreements
were drawn and redrawn, plans were made for joint landings. Yet the Traders
had learned precious little of true Emergent intent. And so the Emergents'
invitation to dinner was greeted with relief by some and with a silent grinding of
teeth by others.
Trixia Bonsol leaned her shoulder against his, cocked her head so that only
he could hear: "So, Ezr. The food tastes okay. Maybe they're not trying to poison
us."
"It's bland enough," he murmured back, and tried not to be distracted by her
touch. Trixia Bonsol was planet-born, one of the specialist crew. Like most of
the Trilanders, she had a streak of overtrustfulness in her makeup; she liked to
tease Ezr about his "Trader paranoia."
Ezr's gaze flicked across the tables. Fleet Captain Park had brought one
hundred to the banquet, but very few armsmen. The Qeng Ho were seated
among nearly as many Emergents. He and Trixia were far from the captain's
table. Ezr Vinh, apprentice Trader, and Trixia Bonsol, linguistics postdoc. He
assumed the Emergents down here were equally low-ranking. The best Qeng Ho
estimate was that the Emergents were strict authoritarians, but Ezr saw no overt
marks of rank. Some of the strangers were talkative, and their Nese was easily
understandable, scarcely different from the broadcast standard. The pale,
heavyset fellow on his left had maintained nonstop chitchat throughout the meal.
Ritser Brughel seemed to be a
Programmer-at-Arms, though he hadn't recognized the term when Ezr used
it. He was full of the schemes they could use in coming years.

"Tas been done often enough afore, dontcha know? Get 'em when they
don't know technology-or
haven't yet rebuilt it," said Brughel, concentrating most of his efforts away from
Ezr, on old Pham Trinli. Brughel seemed to think that apparent age conferred
some special authority, not realizing that any older guy down among the juniors
must truly be a loser. Ezr didn't mind the being ignored; it gave him an
opportunity to observe without distraction. Pham Trinli seemed to enjoy the
attention. As one Programmer-at-Arms to another, Trinli tried to top everything
the pale, blond fellow said, in the process yielding confidences that made Ezr
squirm.
One thing about these Emergents, they were technically competent. They
had ramships that traveled fast between the stars; that put them at the top in
technical savvy. And this didn't seem to be decadent knowledge. Their signal
and computer abilities were as good as the Qeng Ho's-and that, Vinh knew,
made Captain Park's security people more nervous than mere Emergent secrecy.
The Qeng Ho had culled the golden ages of a hundred civilizations. In other
circumstances, the Emergents' competence would have been cause for honest
mercantile glee.
Competent, and hardworking too. Ezr looked beyond the tables. Not to
ogle, but this place was
impressive. The "living quarters" on ramscoop ships were generally laughable.
Such ships must havesubstantial shielding and moderate strength of construction.
Even at fractional lightspeed, an interstellarvoyage took years, and crew and
passengers spent most of that time as corpsicles. Yet the Emergents had thawed
many of their people before living space was in place. They had built this habitat
and spun it up in less than eight days-even while final orbit corrections were
being done. The structure was more than two hundred meters across, a partial
ring, and it was all made from materials that had been lugged across twenty
light-years.
Inside, there was the beginning of opulence. The overall effect was
classicist in some low degree, like early Solar habitats before life-support
systems were well understood. The Emergents were masters of fabric and
ceramics, though Ezr guessed that bio-arts were nonexistent. The drapes and
furniture contrived to disguise the curvature in the floor. The ventilator breeze
was soundless and just strong enough to give the impression of limitless airy
space. There were no windows, not even spin-corrected views. Where the walls
were visible, they were covered with intricate manual artwork (oil paintings?).
Their bright colors gleamed even in the half-light. He knew Trixia wanted a
closer look at those. Even more than language, she claimed that native art
f

showed the inner heart of a culture.
Vinh looked back at Trixia, gave her a smile. She would see through it, but
maybe it fooled the
Emergents. Ezr would have given anything to possess the apparent
cordiality of Captain Park, up there at the head table, carrying on such an affable
conversation with the Emergents' Tomas Nau. You'd think the two were old
school buddies. Vinh settled back, listening not for sense but for attitude.
Not all the Emergents were smiling, talkative types. The redhead at the
front table, just a few places down from Tomas Nau: She'd been introduced, but
Vinh couldn't remember the name. Except for the glint of a silver necklace, the
woman was plainly-severely-dressed. She was slender, of indeterminate age. Her
red hair might have been a style for the evening, but her unpigmented skin
would have been harder to fake. She was exotically beautiful, except for the
awkwardness in her bearing, the hard set of her mouth. Her gaze ranged up and
down the tables, yet she might as well have been alone. Vinh noticed that their
hosts hadn't placed any guest beside her. Trixia of ten teased Vinh that he was a
great womanizer if only in his head. Well, this weird-looking lady would have
figured more in Ezr Vinh's nightmares than in any happy fantasy.
Over at the front table, Tomas Nau had come to his feet. The servers
stepped back from the tables. A hush fell upon the seated Emergents and all but
the most self-absorbed Traders.
"Time for some toasts to friendship between the stars," Ezr muttered.
Bonsol elbowed him, her attention pointedly directed at the front table. He felt
her stifle a laugh when the Emergent leader actually began with:
"Friends, we are all a long way from home." He swept his arm in a gesture
that seemed to take in the
spaces beyond the walls of the banquet room. "We've both made potentially
serious mistakes. We knew this star system is bizarre." Imagine a star so
drastically variable that it nearly turns itself off for 215 years out of every 250.
"Over the millennia, astrophysicists of more than one civilization tried to
convince their rulers to send an expedition here ways." He stopped, smiled. "Of
course, till our era, tas expensively far beyond the Human Realm. Yet now it is
the simultaneous object of two human expeditions." There weresmiles all
around, and the thoughtWhat wretched luck . "Of course, there is a reason that
made thecoincidence likely. Years aback there was no driving need for such an
expedition. Now we all have areason: The race you call the Spiders. Only the
third nonhuman intelligence ever found." And in aplanetary system as bleak as
this, such life was unlikely to have arisen naturally. The Spiders themselves must
be the descendants of starfaring nonhumans-something Humankind had never

encountered. It could be the greatest treasure the Qeng Ho had ever found, all the
more so because the present Spider civilization had only recently rediscovered
radio. They should be as safe and tractable as any fallen human civilization.
Nau gave a self-deprecating chuckle and glanced at Captain Park. "Till
recently, I had not realized how perfectly our strengths and weaknesses, our
mistakes and insights, complemented each other. You came from much farther
away, but in very fast ships already built. We came from nearer, but took the
time to bring much more. We both figured most things correctly." Telescope
arrays had watched the OnOff star for as long as Humankind had been in space.
It had been known for centuries that an Earth-sized planet with life-signature
chemistry orbited the star. If OnOff had been a normal star, the planet might
have been quite pleasant, not the frozen snowball it was most of the time. There
were no other planetary bodies in the OnOff system, and ancient astronomers
had confirmed the moonlessness of the single world in the
system. No other terrestrial planets, no gas giants, no asteroids. . .and no
cometary cloud. The spacearound the OnOff star was swept clean. Such would
not be surprising near a catastrophic variable, andcertainly the OnOff star might
have been explosive in the past-but then how did the one world survive? It was
one of the mysteries about the place.
All that was known, and planned for. Captain Park's fleet had spent its brief
time here in a frantic survey of the system, and in dredging a few kilotonnes of
volatiles from the frozen world. In fact, they had found four rocks in the system-
asteroids, you might call them, if you were in a generous mood. They were
strange things, the largest about two kilometers long. They were solid diamond.
The Trilander scientists nearly had fistfights trying to explain that.
But you can't eat diamonds, not raw anyway. Without the usual mix of
native volatiles and ores, fleet life would be very uncomfortable indeed. The
damn Emergents were both late and lucky. Apparently, they had fewer science
and academic specialists, slower starships. . .but lots and lots of hardware.
The Emergent boss gave a benign smile and continued: "There really is
only one place in all the OnOff system where volatiles exist in any quantity-and
that is on the Spider world itself." He looked back and forth across his audience,
his gaze lingering on the visitors. "I know it's something that some of you had
hoped to postpone till after the Spiders were active again.. . .But there are limits
to the value of lurking,
and my fleet includes heavy lifters. Director Reynolt"-aha, that was the redhead's
name!-"agrees with your scientists that the locals never did progress beyond
their primitive radios. All the 'Spiders' are frozen deep underground and will
remain so till the OnOff star relights." In about a year. The cause of OnOff's

cycle was a mystery, but the transition from dark to bright repeated with a period
that had drifted little in eight thousand years.
Next to him at the front table, S. J. Park was smiling, too, probably with as
much sincerity as Tomas Nau.
Fleet Captain Park had not been popular with the Triland Forestry
Department; that was partly because he cut their pre-Flight time to the bone,
even when there had been no evidence of a second fleet. Park had all but fried
his ramjets in a delayed deceleration, coming in just ahead of the Emergents. He
had a valid claim to first arrival, and precious little else: the diamond rocks, a
small cache of volatiles. Until their first landings, they hadn't even known what
the aliens really looked like. Those landings, poking around monuments, stealing
a little from garbage dumps had revealed a lot-which now must be bargained
away.
"It's time to begin working together," Nau continued. "I don't know how
much you all have heard about our discussions of the last two days. Surely there
have been rumors. You'll have details very soon, but Captain Park, your Trading
Committee, and I thought that now is a good occasion to show our united
purpose. We are planning a joint landing of considerable size. The main goal
will be to raise at least a million tonnes of water and similar quantities of
metallic ores. We have heavy lifters that can accomplish this with relative ease.
As secondary goals, we'll leave some unobtrusive sensors and undertake a small
amount of cultural sampling. These results and resources will be split equally
between our two expeditions. In space, our two groups will use the local rocks to
create a cover for our habitats, hopefully within a few light-seconds of the
Spiders." Nau glanced again at Captain Park. So some things were still under
discussion.
Nau raised his glass. "So a toast. To an end of mistakes, and to our common
undertaking. May there be a greater focus in the future."
"Hey, my dear,I'm supposed to be the paranoid one, remember? I thought
you'd be beating me up for my nasty Trader suspicions."
Trixia smiled a little weakly but didn't answer right away. She'd been
unusually quiet all the way back from the Emergent banquet. They were back in
her quarters in the Traders' temp. Here she was normally her most outspoken and
delightful self. "Their habitat was certainly nice," she finally said.
"Compared to our temp it is." Ezr patted the plastic wall. "For something
made from parts they shipped in, it was a great job." The Qeng Ho temp was
scarcely more than a giant, partitioned balloon. The gym and meeting rooms
were good-sized, but the place was not exactly elegant. The Traders saved
elegance for larger structures they could make with local materials. Trixia had
j
d
bi
h
d d
bi
l Th
ll

just two connected rooms, a bit over one hundred cubic meters total. The walls
were plain, but Trixia had worked hard on the consensus imagery: her parents
and sisters, a panorama from some great Triland forest. Much of her desk area
was filled with historical flats from Old Earth before the Space Age. There were
pictures from the first London and the first Berlin, pictures of horses and
aeroplanes and commissars. In fact, those cultures were bland compared with the
extremes played out in the histories of later worlds. But in the Dawn Age,
everything was being discovered for the first time. There had never been a time
of higher dreams or greater naïveté. That time was Ezr's specialty, to the horror
of his parents and the puzzlement of most of his friends. And yet Trixia
understood. The Dawn Age was only a hobby for her, maybe, but she loved to
talk about the old, old first times. He knew he would never find another like her.
"Look, Trixia, what's got you down? Surely there's nothing suspicious
about the Emergents having nice quarters. Most of the evening you were your
usual softheaded self"-she didn't rise to the insult-"but then something happened.
What did you notice?" He pushed off the ceiling to float closer to where she was
seated against a wall divan.
"It. . .it was several little things, and-" She reached out to catch his hand.
"You know I have an ear for languages." Another quick smile. "Their dialect of
Nese is so close to your broadcast standard that it's clear they've bootstrapped off
the Qeng Ho Net."
"Sure. That all fits with their claims. They're a young culture, crawling back
from a bad fall."Will I end up having to defend them? The Emergent offer had
been reasonable, almost generous. It was the sort of thing that made any good
Trader a little cautious. But Trixia had seen somethingelse to worry about.
"Yes, but having a common language makes a lot of things difficult to
disguise. I heard a dozen
authoritarian turns of speech-and they didn't seem to be fossil usages. The
Emergents are accustomed to owning people, Ezr."
"You mean slaves? This is a high-tech civilization, Trixia. Technical people
don't make good slaves. Without their wholehearted cooperation, things fall
apart."
She squeezed his hand abruptly, not angry, not playful, but intense in a way
he'd never seen with her before. "Yes, yes. But we don't know all their kinks. We
do know they play rough. I had a whole evening of listening to that reddish-
blond fellow sitting beside you, and the pair that were on my right. The word
'trade' does not come easily to them. Exploitation is the only relationship they
can imagine with the Spiders."
"Hmm." Trixia was like this. Things that slipped past him could make such
a difference to her

a difference to her.
Sometimes they seemed trivial even after she explained them. But
sometimes her explanation was like a bright light revealing things he had never
guessed. ". . .I don't know, Trixia. You know we Qeng Ho can sound pretty, um,
arrogant when the customers are out of earshot."
Trixia looked away from him for a second, stared out at strange quaint
rooms that had been her family's home on Triland. "Qeng Ho arrogance turned
my world upside down, Ezr. Your Captain Park busted open the school system,
opened up the Forestry.. . .And it was just a side effect."
"We didn't force anyone-"
"I know. You didn't force anyone. The Forestry wanted a stake in this
mission, and delivering certain
products was your price of admission." She was smiling oddly. "I'm not
complaining, Ezr. Without Qeng Ho arrogance I would never have been allowed
into the Forestry's screening program. I wouldn't have my doctorate, and I
wouldn't be here. You Qeng Hoare gougers, but you are also one of the nicer
things that has happened to my world."
Ezr had been in coldsleep till the last year at Triland. The Customer details
weren't that clear to him, and before tonight Trixia had not been especially
talkative about them. Hmm. Only one marriage proposal per Msec; he had
promised her no more, but. . .He opened his mouth to say"Wait, you! I'm not
done. The reason for saying all this now is that I have to convince you: There is
arrogance and arrogance, and I can tell the difference. The people at that dinner
sounded more like tyrants than traders."
"What about the servers? Did they look like downtrodden serfs?"
". . .No. . .more like employees. I know that doesn't fit. But we aren't seeing
all the Emergents' people. Maybe the victims are elsewhere. But either through
confidence or blindness, Tomas Nau left their pain posted all over the walls."
She glared at his questioning look. "The paintings, damn it!"
Trixia had made a slow stroll of leaving the banquet hall, admiring each
painting in turn. They were beautiful landscapes, either of groundside locations
or very large habitats. Every one was surreal in lighting and geometry, but
precise down to the detail of individual threads of grass. "Normal, happy people
didn't make those pictures."
Ezr shrugged. "It looked to me like they were all done by the same person.
They're so good, I'll bet they're reproductions of classics, like Deng's Canberran
castlescapes." A manic-depressive contemplating his barren future. "Great artists
are often crazy and unhappy."
"Spoken like a true Trader!"
He put his other hand across hers "Trixia I'm not trying to argue with you

He put his other hand across hers. Trixia, I m not trying to argue with you.
Until this banquet, I was the untrusting one."
"And you still are, aren't you?" The question was intense, with no sign of
playful intent.
"Yes," though not as much as Trixia, and not for the same reasons. "It's just
a little too reasonable of the Emergents to share half the haul from their heavy
lifters." There must have been some hard bargaining behind that. In theory, the
academic brainpower that the Qeng Ho had brought was worth as much as a few
heavy lifters, but the equation was subtle and difficult to argue. "I'm just trying
to understand what you saw, and what I missed.. . .Okay, suppose things are as
dangerous as you see them. Don't you think
Captain Park and the Committee are on to that?"
"So what do they think now? Watching your fleet officers on the return taxi,
I got the feeling people are pretty mellow about the Emergents now."
"They're just happy we got a deal. I don't know what the people on the
Trading Committee think."
"You could find out, Ezr. If this banquet has fooled them, you could
demand some backbone. I know, I know: You're an apprentice; there are rules
and customs and blah blah blah. But your Familyowns this expedition!"
Ezr hunched forward. "Just a part of it." This was also the first time she'd
ever made anything of the fact. Until now both of them-Ezr, at least-had been
afraid of acknowledging that difference in status. They shared the deep-down
fear that each might simply be taking advantage of the other. Ezr Vinh's parents
and his two aunts owned about one-third of the expedition: two ramscoops and
three landing craft. As a whole, the Vinh.23 Family owned thirty ships scattered
across a dozen enterprises. The voyage to Triland had been a side investment,
meriting only a token Family member. A century or three down the line he
would be back with his family. By then, Ezr Vinh would be ten or fifteen years
older. He looked forward to that reunion, to showing his parents that their boy
had made good. In the meantime, he was years short of being able to throw his
weight around. "Trixia, there's a difference between owning and managing,
especially in my case. If my parents were on this expedition, yes, they would
have a lot of clout. But they've been 'There and Back Again.' I am far more an
apprentice than an owner." And he had the humiliations to prove it. One thing
about a proper Qeng Ho expedition, there wasn't much nepotism; sometimes just
the opposite.
Trixia was silent for a long moment, her eyes searching back and forth
across Ezr's face. What next? Vinh remembered well Aunt Filipa's grim advice
about women who attach themselves to rich young Traders, who draw them in

and then think to run their lives-and worse, run the Family's proper business. Ezr
was nineteen, Trixia Bonsol twenty-five. She might think she could simply make
demands.Oh Trixia, please no.
Finally she smiled, a gentler, smaller smile than usual. "Okay, Ezr. Do what
you must. . .but a favor?
Think on what I've said." She turned, reaching up to touch his face and
gently stroke it. Her kiss was soft, tentative.

TWO
The Brat was waiting in ambush outside Ezr's quarters.
"Hey, Ezr, I watched you last night." That almost stopped him.She'stalking
about the banquet. The Trading Committee had piped it back to the fleet.
"Sure, Qiwi, you saw me on the vid. Now you're seeing me in person." He
opened his door, stepped inside. Somehow the Brat stuck so close behind that
now she was inside too. "So what are you doing here?"
Qiwi was a genius at taking questions the way she wanted them: "We got
the same scut-work shift starting in two thousand seconds. I thought we could go
down to the bactry together, trade gossip."
Vinh dived into the back room, this time shutting her out. He changed into
work fatigues. Of course, the Brat was still waiting when he emerged.
He sighed. "I don't have any gossip."Damned if I'll repeat what Trixiasaid.
Qiwi grinned triumphantly. "Well,I do. C'mon." She opened the room's
outer door and gave him an elegant zero-gee bow out into the public corridor. "I
wanna compare notes with you about what you saw, but really, I bet I got a lot
more. The Committee had three povs, including at the entrance-better views than
you had." She bounced down the hall with him, explaining how often she had
reviewed the videos, and telling of all the people she had gossiped with since.
Vinh had first met Qiwi Lin Lisolet back in pre-Flight, in Trilander space.
She'd been an eight-year-old bundle of raw obnoxiousness. And for some reason
she'd chosen him as the target of her attention. After a meal or training session,
she'd rush up behind him and slug him in the shoulder-and the angrier he got, the
more she seemed to like it. One good punch returned would have changed her
whole outlook. But you can't slug an eight-year-old. She was nine years short of
the mandatory crew minimum. The place for children was before voyages and
after-not in crews, especially crews bound for desolate space. But Qiwi's mother
owned twenty percent of the expedition.. . .The Lisolet.17 Family was truly
matriarchal, originally from Strentmann, far away across Qeng Ho space. They
were strange in both appearance and custom. A lot of rules must have been
broken, but little Qiwi had ended up on the crew. She had spent more years of
the voyage awake than any but the Watch crew. A large part of her childhood
had passed between the stars, with just a few adults around, often not even her
own parents. Just thinking of that was enough to cool a lot of Vinh's irritation.
The poor little girl. And not so little anymore. Qiwi must be fourteen years old.
And now her physical attacks had been mostly replaced by verbal ones-a good

thing considering the Strentmannian high-grav physique.
Now the two were descending through the main axis of the temp. "Hey
Raji, how's business?" Qiwi waved and grinned at every second passerby. In the
Msecs before the Emergents' arrival, Captain Park had unfrozen almost half of
the fleet crew, enough to manage all vehicles and weapons, with hot backups.
Fifteen hundred people wouldn't be more than a large party in his parents' temp.
Here, it was a crowd, even if many were away on shipboard during duty time.
With this many people, you really noticed that the quarters were temporary, new
partitions being inflated for this crew and that. The main axis was nothing but
the meeting corners of four very large balloons. The surfaces rippled
occasionally when four or five people had to slip by at once.
"I don't trust the Emergents, Ezr. After all the generous talk, they'll slit our
throats." Vinh gave an irritated grunt. "So how come you're smiling so much?"
They floated past a clear section of fabric-a real window, not wallpaper.
Beyond was the temp's park. It was barely more than a large bonsai, actually, but
probably held more open space and living things than were in all the Emergents'
sterile habitat. Qiwi's head twisted around and for a short moment she was quiet.
Living plants and animals were about the only things that could do that to her.
Her father was Fleet Life-Support Officer-and a bonsai artist known across all of
near Qeng Ho space.
Then she seemed to startle back to the present. Her smile returned,
supercilious. "Because we're the Qeng Ho, if we only stop to remember the fact!
We've got thousands of years of sneakiness on these newcomers. 'Emergents' my
big toe! They're where they are now from listening to the public part of the Qeng
Ho Net. Without the Net, they'd still be squatting in their own ruins."
The passage narrowed, curving down into a cusp. Behind and above them,
the sounds of crew were muted by the swell of wall fabric. This was the
innermost bladder of the temp. Besides the spar and power pile, it was the only
part that was absolutely necessary: the bactry pit.
The duty here was scut work, about as low as things could get, cleaning the
bacterial filters below the hydro ponds. Down here, the plants didn't smell so
nice. In fact, robust good health was signaled by a perfectly rotting stench. Most
of the work could be done by machines, but there were judgment calls that
eluded the best automation, and that no one had ever bothered to make remotes
for. In a way, it was a responsible position. Make a dumb mistake and a bacterial
strain might get across the membrane into the upper tanks. The food would taste
like vomit, and the smell could pass into the ventilator system. But even the most
terrible error probably wouldn't kill anyone-there were still the bactries on the
ramscoops, all kept in isolation from one another.
f

So this was a place to learn, ideal by the standards of harsh teachers: It was
tricky; it was physically uncomfortable; and a mistake could cause
embarrassment that would be very hard to live down.
Qiwi signed up for extra duty here. She claimed to love the place. "My papa
says you gotta start with the smallest living things, before you can handle the big
ones." She was a walking encyclopedia about bacteria, the entwined metabolic
pathways, the sewage-like bouquets that corresponded to different combinations,
the characteristics of the strains that would be damaged by any human contact
(the blessed ones whose stink they need never smell).
Ezr came close to making two mistakes in the first Ksec. He caught them,
of course, but Qiwi noticed. Normally she would have ragged him endlessly
about the errors. But today Qiwi was caught up in scheming about the
Emergents. "You know why we didn't bring any heavy lifters?"
Their two largest landers could hoist a thousand tonnes from surface to
orbit. Given time, they would have had all the volatiles and ore they needed. Of
course, time was what the Emergent arrival had taken from them. Ezr shrugged,
and kept his eyes on the sample he was drawing. "I know the rumors."
"Ha. You don't need rumors. You'd know the truth with a little arithmetic.
Fleet Captain Park guessed we might have company. He brought the minimum
of landers and habs. And he brought lots and lots of guns and nukes."
"Maybe."Certainly.
"The trouble is, the damn Emergents are so close, they brought a whole lot
more-and still arrived on our heels."
Ezr made no reply, but that didn't matter.
"Anyway. I've been tracking gossip. We've got to be really, really careful."
And she was off into military tactics and speculations about the Emergents'
weapons systems. Qiwi's mother was Deputy Fleet Captain, but she was an
armsman, too. AStrentmannian armsman. Most of the Brat's time in transit had
been spent on math and trajectories and engineering. The bactry and the bonsai
were her father's influence. She could oscillate between bloodthirsty armsman,
wily trader, and bonsai artist-all in the space of a few seconds. How had her
parents ever thought to marry? And what a lonely, messed-up kid they produced.
"So we could beat the Emergents in a straight-out fight," said Qiwi. "And they
know that. That's why they're being so nice. The thing to do is play along with
them; we need their heavy lifters. Afterwards, if they live up to the agreement,
they may be rich but we'll be much richer. Those jokers couldn't sell air to a
tankless temp.If things stay square, we'll come out of this operation with
effective control."
Ezr finished a sequence and took another sample. "Well," he said, "Trixia
thi k th
d
't
thi
t d i t
ti
t ll "

thinks they don't see this as a trade interaction at all."
"Um." Funny how Qiwi insulted almost everything about Vinh-except
Trixia. Mostly she just seemed to ignore Trixia. Qiwi was uncharacteristically
silent. For almost a second. "I think your friend has it right. Look, Vinh, I
shouldn't be telling you this, but there's quite a split on the Trading Committee."
Unless her own mother had blabbed, this had to be fantasy. "My guess is, there
are some idiots on the Committee who think this is purely a business negotiation,
each side bringing their best to a common effort-and as usual, our side being the
cleverest negotiator. They don't understand that if we get murdered, it doesn't
matter that the other side has a net loss. We've got to play this tough, be ready
for an ambush."
In her own bloodthirsty way, Qiwi sounded like Trixia. "Mama hasn't said
so straight out, but they may be deadlocked." She looked at him sideways, a
child pretending to conspiracy. "You're an owner, Ezr. You could talk to-"
"Qiwi!"
"Yeah, yeah, yeah. I didn't say anything. I didn't say anything!"
She let him be for a hundred seconds or so, then started on her schemes for
making profit off the Emergents, "if we live through the next few Msecs." If the
Spider world and the OnOff star hadn't existed, the Emergents would have been
the find of the century in this end of Qeng Ho space. From watching their fleet
operations, it was clear that they had some special cleverness with automation
and systems planning. At the same time, their starships were less than half as fast
as the Qeng Ho's, and their bioscience was just bad. Qiwi had a hundred plans
for turning all that to profit.
Ezr let the words wash over him, barely heard. Another time, he might have
lost himself in concentration on the work at hand. No chance on this shift. Plans
that spanned two centuries were all coming down to a few critical Ksecs now,
and for the first time he wondered about his fleet's management. Trixia was an
outsider, but brilliant and with a different viewpoint from lifelong Traders. The
Brat was smart, but normally her opinions were worthless. This time. . .maybe
"Mama"had put her up to this. Kira Pen Lisolet's outlook had been formed very
far away, about as far as you could get and still be in the Qeng Ho realm; maybe
she thought a teenage apprentice could affect things just because he was from an
owner's Family. Damn . . .
The shift passed without further insight. He'd be off in fifteen hundred
seconds. If he skipped lunch, he had time to change clothes. . .time to ask for an
appointment with Captain Park. In the two years subjective that he'd been with
the expedition, he had never presumed on his Family connections.And what
good can I really do now? Could I really break a stalemate? He dithered around

that worry through the end of the shift. He was still dithering as he chucked his
bactry coveralls. . .and. . .called the Captain's Audience Secretary.
Qiwi's grin was as insolent as ever. "Tell 'em straight, Vinh. This has to be
an armsman operation."
He waved her silent, then noticed that his call hadn't gone through.
Blocked? For an instant, Ezr felt a pang of relief, then saw he was preempted by
an incoming order. . .from Captain Park's office. "To appear at 5.20.00 at the
Fleet Captain's planning room. . ." What was the ancient curse about getting
one's wish? Ezr Vinh's thoughts were distinctly muddled as he climbed to the
temp's taxi locks.
Qiwi Lin Lisolet was no longer in evidence; what a wise little girl.
The meeting was not with some staff officer. Ezr showed up at the Fleet
Captain's planning room on the QHSPham Nuwen, and there was the Fleet
Captain. . .and the expedition's Trading Committee. They did not look happy.
Vinh got only a quick glimpse before coming to attention at the bracing pole.
Out of the corner of his eyes he did a quick count. Yes, every one of them was
here. They hung around the room's conference table, and their gaze did not seem
friendly.
Park acknowledged Ezr's brace with a brusque wave of his hand. "At ease,
Apprentice." Three hundred years ago, when Ezr had been five, Captain Park
had visited the Vinh Family temp in Canberra space. His parents had treated the
fellow royally, even though he wasn't a senior ship's master. But Ezr
remembered more the parkland gifts from what seemed a genuinely friendly
fellow.
At their next encounter, Vinh was a seventeen-year-old would-be
apprentice and Park was outfitting a fleet to Triland. What a difference. They
had spoken perhaps a hundred words since, and then only at formal expedition
occasions. Ezr had been just as glad for the anonymity; what he wouldn't give
for a return to it now.
Captain Park looked as though he had swallowed something sour. He
glanced around at the members of the Trading Committee, and Vinh suddenly
wondered just whom he was angry at. "Young V-Apprentice Vinh. We have an. .
.unusual. . .situation here. You know the delicacy of our situation now that the
Emergents have arrived." The Captain didn't seem to be looking for an
acknowledgment, and Ezr's "yessir" died before it reached his lips. "At this point
we have several courses of action possible." Again a glance at the Committee
members.
And Ezr realized that Qiwi Lisolet hadn't been spouting complete nonsense.
A Fleet Captain had absolute authority in tactical situations, and normally a veto

vote on strategic issues. But for major changes in expedition goals, he was at the
mercy of his Trading Committee. And something had gone wrong with the
process. Not an ordinary tie; Fleet Captains had a deciding vote in cases such as
that. No, this must be a deadlock verging on a mutiny of the management class.
It was a situation the teachers always mumbled about in school, but if it ever
happened, then just maybe a junior owner would become a factor in the decision
process. Sort of a sacrificial goat.
"First possibility," continued Park, oblivious of the unhappy conclusions
rattling around in Vinh's head. "We play the game the Emergents propose. Joint
operations. Joint control of all vehicles in this upcoming groundside mission."
Ezr took in the appearance of the Committee members. Kira Pen Lisolet sat
next to the Fleet Captain. She was dressed in the Lisolet-green uniform her
Family affected. The woman was almost as small as Qiwi, her features sober and
attentive. But there was an impression of raw physical strength. The
Strentmannian body type was extreme even by Qeng Ho standards of diversity.
Some Traders prided themselves on their masked demeanor. Not Kira Pen
Lisolet. Kira Lisolet loathed Park's first "possibility" as much as Qiwi claimed.
Ezr's attention slid to another familiar face. Sum Dotran. Management
committees were an elite. There were a few active owners, but the majority were
professional planners, working their way up to a stake that would allow them to
own their ships. And there was a minority of very old men. Most of the old guys
were consummate experts, truly preferring management over any form of
ownership. Sum Dotran was such. At one time he had worked for the Vinh
Family. Ezr guessed that he opposed Park's first "possibility," too.
"Second possibility: Separate control structures, no jointly crewed landers.
As soon as practicable, we reveal ourselves directly to the Spiders"-and let the
Lord of Trade sort the greater winners from the lesser. Once there were three
players, the advantage to simple treachery should be diminished. In a few years
their relationship with the Emergents could become a relatively normal,
competitive one. Of course, the Emergents might regard unilateral contact as a
kind of betrayal in itself. Too bad. It seemed to Vinh that at least half the
Committee supported this path-butnot Sum Dotran.The old man jerked his head
slightly at Vinh, making the message obvious.
"Third possibility: We pack up our temps and head back to Triland."
Vinh's stunned look must have been obvious. Sum Dotran elaborated.
"Young Vinh, what the Captain means is that we are outnumbered and possibly
outgunned. None of us trust these Emergents, and if they turn on us, there would
be no recourse. It's just too risky to-"
Kira Pen Lisolet slapped the table. "I object! This meeting was absurd to
b
i
i h A d
S
D
i
i
l
i
i
f
hi

begin with. And worse, now we see Sum Dotran is simply using it to force his
own views." So much for the theory that Qiwi had been operating at her mother's
direction.
"You are both out of order!" Captain Park paused a moment, staring at the
Committee. Then, "Fourth possibility: We undertake a preemptive attack against
the Emergent fleet, and secure the system for ourselves."
"Attempt to secure it," corrected Dotran.
"Iobject !" Kira Pen Lisolet again. She waved to bring up consensual
imagery. "A preemptive attack is the only sure course."
Lisolet's imagery was not a starscape or a telescopic view of the Spider
world. It was not the org or timeline charts that often consumed the attention of
planners. No, these were vaguely like planetary nav diagrams, showing the
position and velocity vectors of the two fleets in relation to each other, the
Spider's world, and the OnOff star. Traces graphed future positions in the
pertinent coordinate systems. The diamond rocks were labeled, too. There were
other markers, tactical military symbols, the notation for giga-tonnes and rocket
bombs and electronic countermeasures.
Ezr stared at the displays and tried to remember his military-science classes.
The rumors about Captain Park's secret cargo were true. The Qeng Ho
expedition had teeth-longer, sharper teeth than any normal trading fleet. And the
Qeng Ho armsmen had had some time for preparation; clearly they had used it,
even if the OnOff system was barren beyond belief, with no good place to hide
ambushes or reserves.
The Emergents, on the other hand: The military symbols clustered around
their ships were hazy assessment probabilities. The Emergents' automation was
strange, possibly superior to the Qeng Ho's. The Emergents had brought twice
the gross tonnage, and the best guesses were that they carried proportionately
more weapons.
Ezr's attention came back to the meeting table. Who besides Kira Lisolet
favored a sneak attack? Ezr had spent much of his childhood studying the
Strategies, but the great treacheries were things he'd always been taught were the
domain of insanity and evil, not something a self-repecting Qeng Ho need ever
or should ever undertake. To see a Trading Committee considering murder, that
was a sight that would. . .stay with him awhile.
The silence grew unnaturally long. Were they waiting for him to say
something? Finally Captain Park said, "You've probably guessed we have an
impasse here, Apprentice Vinh. You have no vote, no experience, and no
detailed knowledge of the situation. Without meaning to offendyou, I must say
that I am embarrassed to have you at this meeting at all. But you are the only

crewmember owner for two of our ships. If you have any advice to give with
regard to our options, we would be. . .happy. . .to hear it."
Apprentice Ezr Vinh might be a small playing piece, but he was the center
of attention just now, and what did he have to say for himself? A million
questions swirled up in his mind. At school they had practiced quick decisions,
but even there he had been given more backgrounding than this. Of course, these
people weren't much interested in real analysis from him. The thought nettled,
almost broke him out of his frozen panic. "F-four possibilities, Fleet Captain?
Are there a-any lesser ones that didn't make it to this briefing?"
"None that had any support from myself or the Committee."
"Um. You have spoken with the Emergents more than anyone. What do you
think of their leader, this
Tomas Nau?" It was just the sort of question he and Trixia had wondered
about. Ezr never imagined that he would be asking the Fleet Captain himself.
Park's lips tightened, and for an instant Ezr thought he would blow up. Then
he nodded. "He's bright. His technical background appears weak compared to a
Qeng Ho Fleet Captain's. He's a deep student of the Strategies, though not
necessarily the same ones we know.. . .The rest is guess and intuition, though I
think most Committee members agree: I would not trust Tomas Nau with any
mercantile agreement. I think he would commit a great treachery if it would
make him even a small profit. He is very smooth, a consummate liar who puts
not the faintest value on return business." All in all, that was about the most
damning statement a Qeng Ho could make about another living being. Ezr
suddenly guessed that Captain Park must be one of the supporters of sneak
attack. He looked at Sum Dotran and then back to Park. The two he would trust
the most were off the end of the map, in opposite directions!Lord, don't you
people know I'mjust an apprentice!
Ezr stepped on the internal whine. He hesitated for seconds, truly thinking
on the issue. Then, "Given your assessment, sir, I certainly oppose the first
possibility, joint operations. But. . .I also oppose the idea of a sneak attack since-
"
"Excellent decision, my boy," interrupted Sum Dotran.
"-since that is something we Qeng Ho have little practice in, no matter how
much we've studied it."
That left two possibilities: cut and run-or stay, cooperate minimally with the
Emergents, and tip off the
Spiders at the first opportunity. Even if objectively justified, retreat would
mark their expedition an abject failure. Considering their fuel state, it would also
be extraordinarily slow.

Just over a million kilometers away was the greatest mystery-possible-
treasure known to this part of Human Space. They had come across fifty light-
years to get this tantalizingly close. Great risks, great treasure. "Sir, it would be
giving up too much to leave now. But we must all be like armsmen now, until
things are clearly safe." After all, the Qeng Ho had its own warrior legends:
Pham Nuwen had won his share of battles. "I-I recommend that we stay."
Silence. Ezr thought he saw relief on most faces. Deputy Fleet Captain
Lisolet just looked grim. Sum
Dotran was not so reserved: "My boy,please. Reconsider. Your Family has
two starships at risk here. It is no disgrace to fall back before the likely loss of
all. Instead, it is wisdom. The Emergents are simply too dangerous to-"
Park drifted up from his place at the table, his beefy hand reaching out. The
hand descended gently on
Sum Dotran's shoulder, and Park's voice was soft. "I'm sorry, Sum. You did
all you could. You even got us to listen to a junior owner. Now it's time. . .for all
of us. . .to agree and proceed."
Dotran's face contorted in a look of frustration or fear. He held it for a
moment of quivering concentration, then let his breath whistle out of his mouth.
He suddenly seemed very old and tired. "Quite so, Captain."
Park slipped back to his place at the table and gave Ezr an impassive look.
"Thank you for your advice, Apprentice Vinh. I expect you to honor the
confidentiality of this meeting."
"Yessir." Ezr braced.
"Dismissed."
The door opened behind him. Ezr pushed off the bracing pole. As he glided
through the doorway, Captain Park was already talking to the Committee. "Kira,
think about putting ordnance on all the pinnaces. Perhaps we can tip the
Emergents that cooperating vessels will be very dangerous to hijack. I-"
The door slid shut over the rest. Ezr was overcome with relief and the
shakes all at the same time. Maybe forty years ahead of his time, he had actually
participated in a fleet decision. It had not been fun.

THREE
The Spider world-Arachna, some were calling it now-was twelve thousand
kilometers in diameter, with 0.95-gee surface gravity. The planet had a stony,
undifferentiated interior, but the surface was swaddled with enough volatiles for
oceans and a friendly atmosphere. Only one thing prevented this from being an
Earth-like Eden of a world: the absence of sunlight.
It was more than two hundred years since the OnOff star, this world's sun,
had entered its "Off" state. For more than two hundred years, its light upon
Arachna had been scarcely brighter than that from the far stars.
Ezr's landing craft arced down across what would be a major archipelago
during warmer times. The main event was on the other side of the world, where
the heavy-lifter crews were carving and raising a few million tonnes of seamount
and frozen ocean. No matter; Ezr had seen large-scale engineering before. This
smaller landing could be the history maker. . .
The consensus imagery on the passenger deck was a natural view. The
lands streaming silently past below were shades of gray, patches of white
sometimes faintly glistening. Maybe it was just a trick of the imagination, but
Ezr thought he could see faint shadows cast by OnOff. They conjured a
topography of crags and mountain peaks, whiteness sliding off into dark pits. He
thought he could see concentric arcs outlining some of the farther peaks:
pressure ridges where the ocean froze around the rock?
"Hey, at least put an altimeter grid on it." Benny Wen's voice came from
over his shoulder, and a faint reddish mesh overlaid the landscape. The grid
pretty much matched his intuition about shadows and snow.
Ezr waved away the red tracery. "When the star is On, there's millions of
Spiders down there. You'd think there'd be some sign of civilization."
Benny snickered. "What do you expect to see with a natural view? Most of
what is sticking up is mountaintops. And farther down is covered by meters of
oxy-nitrogen snow." A full terrestrial atmosphere froze down to about ten meters
of airsnow-if it was evenly distributed. Many of the most likely city sites-
harbors, river joins-were under dozens of meters of the cold stuff. All their
previous landings had been relatively high up, in what were probably mining
towns or primitive settlements. It wasn't until just before the Emergents arrived
that their current destination had been properly understood.
The dark lands marched on below. There were even things like glacier
streams. Ezr wondered how they had time to form. Maybe they were air-ice

glaciers?
"Lord of All Trade, will you look at that!" Benny pointed off to the left: a
reddish glow near the horizon. Benny did a zoom. The light was still small,
sliding quickly out of their field of view. It really did look like a fire, though it
changed shape rather slowly. Something was blocking the view now, and Ezr
had the brief impression of opacity rising skyward from the light. "I've got a
better view from high orbit," came a voice from farther down the aisle,
Crewleader Diem. He did not forward the picture. "It's a volcano. It just lit off."
Ezr followed the image as it fell behind their point of view. The rising
darkness, that must be a geyser of lava-or perhaps just air and water-spewing
into the spaces above it. "That's a first," said Ezr. The planet's core was cold and
dead, though there were several magma melts in what passed for a mantle.
"Everyone seems so sure that the Spiders are all in corpsicle state; what if some
of them are actually keeping warm near things like that?"
"Not likely. We've done really detailed IR surveys. We could spot any
settlements around a hot spot. Besides, the Spiders just inventedradio before this
latest dark. They're in no position to be crawling around out-of-doors just yet."
This conclusion was based on a few Msecs of recon and some plausible
life-chemistry assumptions. "I guess." He watched the reddish glow until it
slipped beyond the horizon. Then there were more exciting things directly below
and ahead. Their landing ellipse carried them smoothly downward, still
weightless. This was a full-sized world, but there would be no flying around in
atmosphere. They were moving at eight thousand meters per second, just a
couple of thousand meters above the ground. He had an impression of mountains
climbing toward them, reaching out. Ridgeline after ridgeline whipped past,
nearer and nearer. Behind him, Benny was making little uncomfortable noises,
his usual chitchat temporarily interrupted. Ezr gasped as the last ridgeline
flashed by them, so close he wondered it didn't clip the lander's dorsum.Talk
about the transfer ellipse tohell.
Then the main jet flared ahead of them.
It took them almost 30Ksec to climb down from the point that Jimmy Diem
had selected for the lander.
The inconvenience was not frivolous. Their perch was partway up a
mountainside but quite free of ice and airsnow. Their goal was at the bottom of a
narrow valley. By rights, the valley floor should have been under a hundred
meters of airsnow. By some unexpected fluke of topography and climate, there
was less than half a meter. And almost hidden beneath the overhang of the valley
walls was the largest collection of intact buildings they had found so far.
Chances were good that this was an entrance to one of the Spiders' largest
ff

hibernation caves, and perhaps a city during OnOff's warm time. Whatever was
learned here should be important. Under the joint agreement, it was all being
piped back to the Emergents. . .
Ezr hadn't heard anything about the outcome of the Trading Committee
meeting. Diem seemed to be doing everything possible to disguise this visit from
the locals, just as the Emergents should expect. Their landing point would be
covered with an avalanche shortly after they departed. Even their footprints were
to be carefully erased (though that should scarcely be necessary).
By coincidence OnOff was hanging near the zenith when they reached the
valley floor. In the "sunny season" this would be high noon. Now, well, the
OnOff star looked like some dim reddish moon, half a degree across. The
surface was mottled, like oil on a drop of water. Without display amplification,
OnOff's light was just bright enough to show their surroundings.
The landing party walked down some kind of central avenue, five suited
figures and one come-along walking machine. Tiny puffs of vapor sputtered
around their boots when they walked through drifts of airsnow and the volatiles
came in contact with the less well insulated fabric of their coveralls. When they
stopped for long, it was important not to be in deep snow, else they were quickly
surrounded by sublimation mist. Every ten meters, they set down a seismo
sensor or a thumper. When they got the whole pattern in place, they would have
a good picture of any nearby caverns. More important for this landing, they
would have a good idea what lay inside these buildings. Their big goal: written
materials, pictures. Finding a children's illustrated reader would mean certain
promotion for Diem.
Shades of reddish grays on black. Ezr reveled in the unenhanced imagery. It
was beautiful, eerie. This was a place where the Spiders hadlived . On either side
of their path, the shadows climbed up the walls of Spider buildings. Most were
only two or three stories, but even in the dim red light, even with their outline
blurred by the snows and the darkness, they could not have been confused with
something built by humans. The smallest doorways were generously wide, yet
most were less than 150 centimeters high. The windows (carefully shuttered; this
place had been abandoned in the methodical way of owners who intended to
return) were similarly wide and low.
The windows were like hundreds of slitted eyes looking down on the party
of five and their come-along walker. Vinh wondered what would happen if a
light came on behind those windows, a crack of light showing between the
shutters. His imagination ran with the possibility for a moment. What if their
feelings of smug superiority were in error? These werealiens. It was very
unlikely life could have originated on a world so bizarre as this; once upon a

time they must have had interstellar flight. Qeng Ho's trading territory was four
hundred light-years across; they had maintained a continuous technological
presence for thousands of years. The Qeng Ho had radio traces of nonhuman
civilizations that were thousands-in most cases, millions-of light-years away,
forever beyond direct contact or even conversation. The Spiders were only the
third nonhuman intelligent race ever physically encountered: three in the eight
thousand years of human space travel. One of those had been extinct for millions
of years; the other had not achieved machine technology, much less spaceflight.
The five humans, walking between the shadowy buildings with slitted
windows, were as close to making human history as Vinh could imagine.
Armstrong on Luna, Pham Nuwen at Brisgo Gap-and now Vinh and Wen and
Patil and Do and Diem pacing down this street of Spiders.
There was a pause in the background radio traffic, and for a moment the
loudest sounds were the creak of his coveralls and his own breathing. Then the
tiny voices resumed, directing them across an open space, toward the far end of
the valley. Apparently, the analysts thought that narrow cleft might be the
entrance to caves, where the local Spiders were presumedly holed up.
"That's odd," came an anonymous voice from on high. "Seismo heard
something-is hearing something-from the building next on your right."
Vinh's head snapped up and he peered into the gloom. Maybe not a light,
but asound.
"The walker?"-Diem.
"Maybe it's just the building settling?"-Benny.
"No, no. This was impulsive, like a click. Now we're getting a regular beat,
some damping. Frequency analysis. . .sounds like mechanical equipment,
moving parts and such.. . .Okay, it's mainly stopped, just some residual ringing.
Crewleader Diem, we've got a very good position on this racket. It was on the far
corner, four meters up from street level. Here's a guide marker."
Vinh and the others moved forward thirty meters, following the marker
glyph that floated in their head-up displays. It was almost funny, the furtiveness
of their movements now, even though they would be in plain sight of anyone in
the building.
The marker took them around the corner.
"The building doesn't look special," said Diem. Like the others, this
appeared to be mortarless stonework, the higher floors slightly outset from the
lower. "Wait, I see where you're pointing. There's some kind of. . .a ceramic box
bolted to the second overhang. Vinh, you're closest. Climb up there and take a
look."
Ezr started toward the building, then noticed that someone had helpfully

killed the marker. "Where?" All he could see were shadows and the grays of
stonework.
"Vinh," Diem's voice carried more than its usual snap. "Wake up, huh?"
"Sorry." Ezr felt himself blushing; he got into this sort of trouble far too
often. He enabled multispec imagery, and his view burst into color, a composite
of what the suit was seeing across several spectral regions. Where there had been
a pit of shadow, he now saw the box Diem was talking about. It was mounted a
couple of meters above his head. "Just a second; I'll get closer." He walked over
to the wall. Like most of the buildings, this one was festooned with wide, stony
slats. The analysts thought they were steps. They suited Vinh's purpose, though
he used them more like a ladder than like stairs. In a few seconds he was right
next to the gadget.
And it was a machine; there were rivets on the sides, like something out of
a medieval romance. He pulled a sensor baton from his coveralls and held it near
the box. "Do you want me to touch it?"
Diem didn't reply. This was really a question for those higher up. Vinh
heard several voices conferring. "Pan around a little. Aren't there markings on
the side of that box?" Trixia! He knew she would be one of the watchers, but it
was a very pleasant surprise to hear her voice. "Yes, ma'am," he said, and swept
the baton back and forth across the box. There was something along the sides; he
couldn't tell whether it was writing or an artifact of overly tricky multiscan
algorithms. If it was writing, this would be a minor coup.
"Okay, you can fasten the baton to the box now"-another voice, the
acoustics fellow. Ezr did as he was told.
Some seconds passed. The Spider stairs were so steep he had to lean back
against the risers. Airsnow haze streamed out from the steps, and downward; he
could feel his jacket heaters compensating for the chill of the steps' edges.
Then, "That's interesting. This thing is a sensor right out of the dark ages."
"Electrical? Is it reporting to a remote site?" Vinh started. The last words
were spoken by a woman with an Emergent accent.
"Ah, Director Reynolt, hello. No, that's the extraordinary thing about this
device. It is self-contained. The 'power source' appears to be an array of metal
springs. A mechanical clock mechanism-are you familiar with the idea?-provides
both timing and motive power. Actually, I suppose this is about the only
unsophisticated method that would work over long periods of cold."
"So what all is it observing?" That was Diem, and a good question. Vinh's
imagination took off again. Maybe the Spiders were a lot more clever than
anyone thought. Maybe his own hooded figure would show up intheir recon
reports. For that matter, what if this box was hooked up to some kind of

weapon?
"We don't see any camera equipment, Crewleader. We have a pretty good
image of the box's interior now. A gear mechanism drags a stripchart under four
recording styluses." The terms were straight out of a Fallen Civ text. "My guess
is, every day or so it advances the strip a little and notes the temperature,
pressure. . .and two other scalars I'm not sure of yet." Every day for more than
two hundred years. Human primitives would have had a hard time making a
moving-parts mechanism that could work so long, much less do it at low
temperatures. "It was our good luck to be walking by when it went off."
There followed a technical dispute about just how sophisticated such
recorders might be. Diem had Benny and the others ping the area with
picosecond light flashes. Nothing glinted back; no lensed optics were in a line of
sight.
Meanwhile, Vinh remained leaning against the stair ramp. The cold was
beginning to seep past his jacket and through his full-pressure coveralls. The
gear was not designed for extended contact with such a heat sink. He shifted
about awkwardly on the narrow steps. In a one-gee field, this sort of acrobatics
got old fast.. . .But his new position gave him a view around the corner of the
building. And on this side, some of the covering panels had fallen from the
windows. Vinh leaned precariously out from the stairs, trying to make sense of
what he saw within the room. Everything was covered with a patina of airsnow.
Waisthigh racks or cabinets were set in long rows. Above them were a metal
framework and still more cabinets.
Spider stairs connected one level to the other. Of course, to a Spider those
cabinets would not be "waisthigh." Hmm. There were loose objects piled on top,
each a collection of flat plates hinged at one end. Some were folded all together,
others were carelessly spread out, like vanity fans.
His sudden understanding was like an electric shock, and he spoke on the
public sequency without thinking. "Excuse me, Crewleader Diem?"
The conversation with those above came to a surprised halt. "What is it,
Vinh?" said Diem.
"Take a look through my pov. I think we've found a library."
Somebody up above yelped with pleasure. It really sounded like Trixia.
Thumper analysis would have brought them to the library eventually, but
Ezr's find was a significant shortcut.
There was a large door in back; getting the walker in was easy. The walker
contained a high-speed scanning manipulator. It took a while for it to adapt to
the strange shape of these "books," but now the robot was moving at breakneck
speed down the shelves-one or two centimeters per second-two of

Diem's crew feeding a steady stream of books into its maw. There was a
polite argument audible from on high. This landing was part of the joint plan, all
on a negotiated schedule that was to end in just under 100Ksec. In that time they
might not be done with this library, much less with the other buildings and the
cave entrance. The Emergents didn't want to make an exception for this one
landing. Instead, they suggested bringing one of their larger vehicles right to the
valley floor and scooping up artifacts en masse.
"And still a lurking strategy can be maintained," came a male Emergent
voice. "We can blow out the valley walls, make it look like massive rockfalls
destroyed the village at the bottom."
"Hey, these fellows really have the light touch," Benny Wen's voice came
into his ear on their private channel. Ezr didn't reply. The Emergent suggestion
wasn't exactly irrational, just. . .foreign. The Qeng Hotraded. The more sadistic
of them might enjoy pauperizing the competition, but almost all wanted
customers who would look forward to the next fleecing. Simply wrecking or
stealing was. . .gross. And why do it when they could come back again to probe
around?
High above, the Emergent proposal was politely rejected and a follow-on
mission to this glorious valley was put at the head of the list for future joint
adventures.
Diem sent Benny and Ezr Vinh to scout out the shelves. This library might
hold one hundred thousand volumes, only a few hundred gigabytes, but that was
far too much for the time remaining. Ultimately, they might have to pick and
choose, hopefully finding the holy grail of such an operation-a children's
illustrated reader.
As the Ksecs passed, Diem rotated his crewmembers between feeding the
scanner, bringing books down from the upper stories to be read, and returning
books to their original places.
By the time Vinh's meal break came, the OnOff star had swung down from
its position near the zenith. Now it hung just above the crags at the far end of the
valley and cast shadows from the buildings down the length of the street. He
found a snow-free patch of ground, dropped an insulating blanket on it, and took
the weight off his feet. Oh, that felt good. Diem had given him fifteen hundred
seconds for this break. He fiddled with his feeder, and munched slowly on a
couple of fruit bars. He could hear Trixia, but she was very busy. There was still
no "children's illustrated reader," but they had found the next best thing, a bunch
of physics and chemistry texts. Trixia seemed to think that this was a technical
library of some sort. Right now they were debating about speeding up the scan.
Trixia thought she had a correct graphemic analysis on the writing, and so now
h
ld
i h
di

they could switch to smarter reading.
Ezr had known from the moment he'd met Trixia that she was smart. But
she was just a Customer specializing in linguistics, a field that Qeng Ho
academics excelled in. What could she really contribute? Now. . .well, he could
hear the conversation above. Trixia was constantly deferred to by the other
language specialists. Maybe that was not so surprising. The entire Trilander
civilization had competed for the limited number of berths on the expedition.
Out of five hundred million people, if you chose the best in some specialty. .
.those chosen would be pretty damn good indeed. Vinh's pride in knowing her
faltered for an instant: in fact, it washe who was overreaching his station in life
by wanting her. Yes, Ezr was a major heir of the Vinh.23 Family, but he himself.
. .wasn't all that bright. Worse, he seemed to spend all his time dreaming about
other places and other times.
This discouraging line of thought turned in a familiar direction: Maybe here
he would prove that he wasn't so impractical. The Spiders might be a long time
from their original civilization. Their present era could be a lot like the Dawn
Age. Maybe he would have some insight that would make the fleet's treasure-
and earn him Trixia Bonsol. His mind slid off into happy possibilities, never
quite descending to gritty detail. . .
Vinh glanced at his chron. Aha, he still had five hundred seconds! He stood,
looked throught he lengthening shadows to where the avenue climbed into the
side of the mountain. All day, they had concentrated so much on mission
priorities that they'd never really gotten to sightsee. In fact, they had stopped just
short of a widening in the road, almost a plaza.
During the bright time, there had been plenty of vegetation. The hills were
covered with the twisted remains of things that might have been trees. Down
here, nature had been carefully trimmed; at regular intervals along the avenue
there was the organic rubble of some ornamental plant. A dozen such mounds
edged the plaza.
Four hundred seconds. He had time. He walked quickly to the edge of the
plaza, then started round it. In the middle of the circle was a little hill, the snow
covering odd shapes. When he reached the far side he was looking into the light.
The work in the library had heated the place up so much that a fog of temporary,
local atmosphere seeped out of the building. It flowed across the street,
condensing and settling back to the ground. The light of OnOff shone through it
in reddish shafts. Leaving the color aside, it might almost have been ground fog
on the main floor of his parents' temp on a summer night. And the valley walls
might have been temp partitions. For an instant Vinh was overcome by the
image, that a place so alien could suddenly seem familiar, so peaceful.
His attention came back to the center of the plaza This side was almost free

His attention came back to the center of the plaza. This side was almost free
of snow. There were odd shapes ahead, half-hidden by the darkness. Scarcely
thinking, he walked toward them. The ground was clear of snow, and it crunched
like frozen moss. He stopped, sucked in a breath. The dark things at the center-
they were statues. Of Spiders! A few more seconds and he'd report the find, but
for the moment he wondered at the scene alone and in silence. Of course, they
already knew the natives' approximate form; there had been some crude pictures
found by the earlier landings. But-Vinh stepped up the image scan-these were
lifelike statues, molded in exquisite detail out of some dark metal. There were
three of the creatures, life-sized he guessed. The word "spider" is common
language, the sort of term that dissolves to near uselessness in the light of
specific examination. In the temps of Ezr's childhood there had been several
types of critter called "spiders." Some had six legs, some eight, some ten or
twelve. Some were fat and hairy. Some were slender, black, and venomous.
These creatures looked a lot like the slender, ten-legged kind. But either they
were wearing clothes, or they were spinier than their tiny namesakes. Their legs
were wrapped around each other, all reaching for something hidden beneath
them. Making war, making love, what? Even Vinh's imagination floundered.
What had it been like here, when last the sun shone bright?

FOUR
It is an edged cliché that the world is most pleasant in the years of a Waning
Sun. It is true that the weather is not so driven, that everywhere there is a sense
of slowing down, and most places experience a few years where the summers do
not burn and the winters are not yet overly fierce. It is the classic time of
romance. It's a time that seductively beckons higher creatures to relax, postpone.
It's the last chance to prepare for the end of the world.
By blind good fortune, Sherkaner Underhill chose the most beautiful days
in the years of the Waning for his first trip to Lands Command. He soon realized
his good luck was doubled: The winding coastal roads had not been designed for
automobiles, and Sherkaner was not nearly so skilled an automobilist as he had
thought. More than once he came careening into a hairpin turn with the auto's
drive belt improperly applied, and nothing but steering and brakes to keep him
from flying into the misty blue of the Great Sea (though no doubt he'd fall short,
to the forest below, but still with deadly effect).
Sherkaner loved it. Inside of a few hours he had gotten the hang of
operating the machine. Now when he tipped up on two wheels it was almost on
purpose. It was a beautiful drive. The locals called this route the Pride of
Accord, and the Royal Family had never dared complain. This was the height of
a summer. The forest was fully thirty years old, about as old as trees could ever
get. They reached straight and high and green, and grew right up to the edge of
the highway. The scent of flowers and forest resin drifted cool past his perch on
the auto.
He didn't see many other civilian autos. There were plenty of osprechs
pulling carts, some trucks, and an inconvenient number of army convoys. The
reactions he got from the civilians were a wonderful mix: irritated, amused,
envious. Even more than around Princeton, he saw wenches who looked
pregnant and guys with dozens of baby welts on their backs. Some of their
waves seemed envious of more than Sherk's automobile.And sometimes I'm a
little envious of them. For a while, he played with the thought, not trying to
rationalize it. Instinct was such a fascinating thing, especially when you saw it
from the inside.
The miles passed by. While his body and senses reveled in the drive, the
back of Sherkaner's mind was ticking away: grad school, how to sell Lands
Command on his scheme, the truly multitudinous ways this automobile could be
improved. He pulled into a little forest town late the first

afternoon.NIGH'T'DEEPNESS, the antique sign said; Sherkaner wasn't sure if
that was a place name or a simple description.
He stopped at the local blacksmith's. The smith had the same odd smile as
some of the people on the road. "Nice automobile you have there, mister."
Actually itwas a very nice and expensive automobile, a brand-new Relmeitch. It
was totally beyond the means of the average college student. Sherkaner had won
it at an off-campus casino two days earlier. That had been a chancy thing.
Sherkaner's aspect was well known at all the gambling houses around Princeton.
The owners' guild had told him they'd break every one of his arms if they ever
caught him gambling in the city again. Still, he'd been ready to leave Princeton
anyway-and he really wanted to experiment with automobiles. The smith sidled
around the automobile, pretending to admire the silver trim and the three rotating
power cylinders. "So. Kinda far from home, ain'tcha? Whatcha going to do when
it stops working?"
"Buy some kerosene?"
"Aha, we got that. Some farm machinery needs it. No, I mean, what about
when your contraption breaks? They all do, you know. They're kinda fragile
things, not like draft animals."
Sherkaner grinned. He could see the shells of several autos in the forest
behind the smith's. This was the right place. "That could be a problem. But you
see, I have some ideas. It's leather and metal work that might interest you." He
sketched out two of the ideas he'd had that afternoon, things that should be easy
to do. The smith was agreeable; always happy to do business with madmen. But
Sherkaner had to pay him up front; fortunately, Bank of Princeton currency was
acceptable.
Afterward, Underhill drove through the little town, looking for an inn. At
first glance this was a peaceful, timeless place to live. There was a traditionalist
church of the Dark, as plain and weathered as it should be in these years. The
newspapers on sale by the post office were three days old. The headlines might
be large and red, shrieking of war and invasion, but even when a convoy for
Lands Command rumbled through, it got no special attention.
It turned out Nigh't'Deepness was too small for inns. The owner of the post
office gave him directions to a couple of bed-and-breakfast homes. As the sun
slid down toward the ocean, Sherkaner tooled around the countryside, lost and
exploring. The forest was beautiful, but it didn't leave much room for farming.
The locals made some of their living by outside trade, but they worked hard on
their mountain garden. . .and they had at most three years of good growing
seasons before the frosts would become deadly. The local harvest yards looked
full, and there was a steady stream of carts shuttling back and forth into the hills.
f f

The parish deepness was up that way about fifteen miles. It wasn't a large
deepness, but it served most of the outback folk. If these people didn't save
enough now, they would surely starve in the first, hard years of the Great Dark;
even in a modern civilization, there was precious little charity for able-bodied
persons who didn't provide for those years.
Sunset caught him on a promontory overlooking the ocean. The ground
dipped away on three sides, on the south into a little, tree-covered valley. On the
crest beyond the dell was a house that looked like the one the postmaster had
described. But Sherk still wasn't in a hurry. This was the most beautiful view of
the day. He watched the plaids shade into limited colors, the sun's trace fading
from the far horizon.
Then he turned his automobile and started down the steep dirt road into the
dell. The canopy of the forest closed in above him. . .and he was into the trickiest
driving of the day, even though he was moving slower than a cobber could walk.
The auto dipped and slid in foot-deep ruts. Gravity and luck were the main
things that kept him from getting stuck. By the time he reached the creek bed at
the bottom, Sherkaner was seriously wondering if he would be leaving his
shining new machine down here. He stared ahead and to the sides. The road was
not abandoned; those cart ruts were fresh.
The slow evening breeze brought the stench of offal and rotting garbage. A
dump? Strange to think of such a thing in the wilderness. There were piles of
indeterminate refuse. But there was also a ramshackle house half-hidden by the
trees. Its walls were bent, as if the timbers had never been cured. Its roof sagged.
Holes were stuffed with wattle-bush. The ground cover between the road and the
house had been chewed down. Maybe that accounted for the offal: a couple of
osprechs were hobbled near the creek, just upstream of the house.
Sherkaner stopped. The ruts of the road disappeared into the creek just
twenty feet ahead. For a moment he just stared, overwhelmed. These must be
genuine backwoods folk, as alien as anything city-bred Sherkaner Underhill had
ever seen. He started to get out of the auto. The viewpoints they would have!
The things he might learn. Then it occurred to him that if their viewpoint was
alienenough, these strangers might be less than pleased by his presence.
Besides. . .Sherkaner eased back onto his perch and took careful hold of the
steering wheel, throttle, and brakes. Not just the osprechs were watching him. He
looked out in all directions, his eyes fully adapted to the twilight. There were
two of them. They lurked in the shadows on either side of him. Not animals, not
people.Children? Maybe five and ten years old. The smaller one still had its
baby eyes. Yet their gaze was animal, predatory. They edged closer to the auto.
Sherkaner revved his engine and bolted forward. Just before he reached the
littl
k h
ti
d
thi d f
l
hidi
i th t
b
th

little creek, he noticed a third form-a larger one-hiding in the trees above the
water. Children they might be, but this was a serious game of lurk-and-pounce.
Sherkaner twisted the wheel hard right, bouncing out of the ruts. He was off the
road-or was he? There were faint, scraped-down grooves ahead: the real fording
point!
He entered the stream, the water spraying high in both directions. The big
one in the trees pounced. One long arm scratched down the side of the auto, but
the creature landed to the side of Sherkaner's path. And then Underhill had
reached the far bank, and was rocketing upslope. A real ambush would end in a
cul-de- sac here. But the road continued on and somehow his hurtling progress
did not carry him off to the side. There was a final scary moment as he emerged
from the forest canopy. The road steepened and his Relmeitch tipped back for a
second, rotating on its rear tires. Sherkaner threw himself forward from his
perch, and the auto slammed down, and scooted up over the hillcrest.
He ended up under stars and twilit sky, parked beside the home he had seen
from the far side of the dell.
He killed the engine and sat for a moment, catching his breath and listening
to the blood pounding in his chest. It was that quiet. He watched behind him; no
one pursued. And thinking back. . .it was strange. The last he had seen, the big
one was climbing slowly out of the creek. The other two had turned away, as if
uninterested.
He was by the house he had seen from the other side. Lights came on in the
front. A door opened, and an old lady came out on the porch. "Who's there?" The
voice was sturdy.
"Lady Enclearre?" Sherk's voice came out in kind of a squeak. "The
postmaster gave me your address. He said you had an overnight room to rent."
She came round to the driver's side and looked him over. "That I do. But
you're too late for dinner. You'll have to settle for cold sucks."
"Ah. That's all right, quite all right."
"Okay. Bring yourself on in." She chuckled and waved a little hand toward
the valley Sherkaner had just escaped. "You sure did come the long way, sonny."
• • •
Despite her words, Lady Enclearre fed Sherkaner a good meal. Afterward
they sat in her front parlor and chatted. The place was clean, but worn. The
sagging floor was unrepaired, the paint peeling here and there. It was a house at
the end of its time. But the pale glimmer lamps revealed a bookcase set between
the screened windows. There were about a hundred titles, mostly children's
primers. The old lady (and she was really old, born two generations earlier than

primers. The old lady (and she was really old, born two generations earlier than
Sherk) was a retired parish teacher. Her husband hadn't made it through the last
Dark, but she had grown children-old cobbers themselves now-living all through
these hills.
Lady Enclearre was like no city schoolteacher. "Oh, I've been around.
When I was younger 'n you, I sailed the western sea."A sailor! Sherkaner
listened with undisguised awe to her stories of hurricanes and grizzards and
iceberg eruptions. Not many people were crazy enough to be sailors, even in the
Waning Years. Lady Enclearre had been lucky to live long enough to have
children. Maybe that was why, during the next generation, she settled down to
schoolteaching and helping her husband raise the cobblies. Each year, she had
studied the texts for the next grade, staying one year ahead of the parish children,
all the way to adulthood.
In this Brightness, she had taught the new generation. When they were
grown, she was truly getting on in years. A lot of cobbers make it into a third
generation; few live the length of it. Lady Enclearre was much too frail to
prepare for the coming Dark by herself. But she had her church and the help of
her own children; she would have her chance to see a fourth Bright Time.
Meanwhile she kept up with her gossip, and her reading. She was even interested
in the war-but as an avid spectator. "Give those bleeding Tiefers a tunnel up their
rear, I say. I have two grandnieces at the Front, and I'm very proud of them."
As Sherkaner listened, he stared out through Lady Enclearre's broad, fine-
screened windows. The stars were so bright up here in the mountains, a thousand
different colors, dimly lighting the forest's broad leaves and the hills beyond.
Tiny woodsfairiestick ed incessantly at the screens, and from the trees all around,
he could hear their stridling song.
Abruptly a drum started beating. It was loud, the vibrations coming through
the tips of his feet and chest as much as through his ears. A second banging
started, drifting in and out of synch with the first.
Lady Enclearre stopped talking. She listened sourly to the racket. "This
could go on for hours, I'm afraid."
"Your neighbors?" Sherkaner gestured toward the north, the little valley. It
was interesting that, except for her one comment about his coming the "long way
round," she hadn't said a thing about those strange people in the dell.
. . .And maybe she wouldn't now. Lady Enclearre scrunched down on her
perch, silent for the first significant period since he'd arrived. Then: "You know
the story of the Lazy Woodsfairies?"
"Sure."
"I made it a big part of the catechism, 'specially for the five-and six-year-

olds. They relate to the attercops cuz they look like little people. We studied how
they grow wings, and I'd tell them about the ones that do not prepare for the
Dark, the ones who play on and on till it's too late. I could make it a scary story."
She hissed angrily into her eating hands. "We're dirt poor hereabouts. That's why
I left for the sea, and also why I eventually came back, to try and help out. Some
years, all the pay I got for my teaching was in farmers' co-op notes. But I want
you to know, young fellow, we're good people.. . .Except, here and there, there
are cobbers whochoose to be vermin. Just a few, and mostly farther up in the
hills."
Sherkaner described the ambush at the bottom of the dell.
Lady Enclearre nodded. "I figured it was something like that. You came up
here like your rear end was on fire. You were lucky you got out with your auto,
but you weren't in great danger. I mean, if you held still for them, they might
kick you to death, but basically they're too lazy to be much of a threat."
Wow.Real perverts. Sherkaner tried not to look too interested. "So the noise
is-?"
Enclearre waved dismissively. "Music, maybe. I figure they got a load of
drugged fizzspit a while back. But that's just a symptom-even if it does keep me
awake at night. No. You know what really makes them vermin? They don't plan
for the Dark. . .and they damn their own children. That pair down in the dell,
they're hill folk who couldn't stomach farming. Off and on they've done
smithing, going from farm to farm and working only when they couldn't steal.
Life is easy in the middle years of the sun. And all the time they're fornicating
away, making a steady dribble of little ones. . .
"You're young, Mister Underhill, maybe a bit sheltered. I don't know if you
realize how tedious it is to get a woman pregnant before the Waning Years. One
or two little welts are all that ever come-and any decent lady will pinch them off.
But the vermin down in the dell, they're whacking each other all the time. The
guy is always carrying around one or two welts on his back. Thank goodness,
those almost always die. But once in a while they grow into the baby stage. A
few make it to childhood, but by then they've been treated like animals foryears.
Most are sullen cretins."
Sherkaner remembered the predatory stares. Those little ones were so
different from what he remembered of childhood. "But surely some escape?
Some grow into adults?"
"A few do. Those are the dangerous ones, the ones who see what they've
missed. Off and on, things have been nasty here. I used to raise minitarants-you
know, for companionship and to make a little money. Every one of them ended
up stolen, or a sucked-out carcass on my front steps." She was silent for a time,

remembering pain.
"Shiny things catch the cretins' fancy. For a while, there was a gang of them
that figured out how to break into my place. They'd steal candysucks mostly.
Then one day they stole all the pictures in the house, even in my books. I locked
the indoors good after that. Somehow they broke in a third time-and took the rest
of my books! I was still teaching then. I needed those books! The parish
constable rousted the vermin over that, but of course she didn't find the books. I
had to buy new teacher texts for the last two years of school." She waved at the
top rows of her bookshelves, at worn copies of a dozen texts. The ones on the
lower shelves looked like primers too, for all the way back to babyhood; but they
were crisp and new and untouched. Strange.
The double drumbeat had lost its synchrony, dribbled slowly back into
silence. "So yes, Mister Underhill, some of the out-of-phase cobblies live to be
adults. They might almost pass for current-generation cobbers. In a sense, they
are the next generation of vermin. Things will get ugly in a couple of years. Like
the Lazy Woodsfairies, these people will begin to feel the cold. Very few will
get into the parish deepness. The rest will be out in the hills. There are caves
everywhere, little better than animal deepnesses. That's where our poorest
farmers spend the Dark. That's where the out-of-phase vermin are really deadly."
The old lady noticed his look. She gave him a jagged little grin. "I doubt I'll
see another Brightness of the sun. That's okay. My children will have this land.
There's a view; they might build a little inn here. But if I survive the Dark, I'll
build a little cabin here and put up a big sign proclaiming me the oldest cobber
living in the parish.. . .And I'll look down into the dell. I hope it's washed clean.
If the vermin are back, most likely it'll be because they murdered some poor
farmer family and took their deepness."
After that, Lady Enclearre turned the conversation to other things, asking
about life in Princeton and Sherk's own childhood. She said that now she had
revealed her parish's dark secrets, he should reveal what he was up to driving an
automobile down to Lands Command.
"Well, I was thinking about enlisting." Actually, Sherkaner intended that
the Command enlist inhis schemes rather than the other way around. It was an
attitude that had driven the University Professoriate nuts.
"Hmm-hmm. 'Tis a long way to come when you could enlist in a minute
back in Princeton. I noticed the luggage end of your auto is almost as big as a
farmer's cart." She waggled her eating hands in curiosity.
Sherkaner just smiled back. "My friends warned me to carry lots of spare
parts if I wanted to tour the Pride of Accord by automobile."
"Shu, I'll bet." She stood up with some difficulty, supporting herself on both
idh
d
d f
"W ll hi
ld l d
d h
l
i
'

midhands and feet. "Well, this old lady needs her sleep, even on a nice summer's
evening in such good company. Breakfast will be around sunup."
She took him to his room, insisting on climbing the stairs to show him how
to open the windows and fold out the sleeping perch. It was an airy little room,
its wallpaper peeling with age. At one time, it must have been for her children.
". . .and the privy is on the outside rear of the house. No city luxury here,
Mister Underhill."
"It will be fine, my lady."
"Good night then."
She was already starting down the stairs when he thought of one more
question. There was always one more question. He stuck his head out the
bedroom door. "You have so many books now, Lady Enclearre. Did the parish
finally buy you the rest?"
She stopped her careful progress down the stairs, and gave a little laugh.
"Yes, years later. And that's a story too. It was the new parish priest, even if the
dear cobber won't admit it; he must have used his own money. But one day,
there was this postal shipment on my doorstep, direct from the publishers in
Princeton, new copies of the teachers' books for every grade." She waved a hand.
"The silly fellow. But all the books will go to the deepness with me. I'll see they
get to whoever teaches the next generation of parish children." And she
continued down the stairs.
Sherkaner settled onto the sleeping perch, scrunched around until its
knobby stuffing felt comfortable. He was very tired, but sleep did not come. The
room's tiny windows overlooked the dell. Starlight reflected the color of burned
wood from a tiny thread of smoke. The smoke had its own far-red light, but there
were no flecks of living fire in it.I guess even pervertssleep.
From the trees all around came the sound of the woodsfairies, tiny critters
mating and hoarding.
Sherkaner wished he had some time for entomology. The critters' buzzing
scaled up and down. When he was little there had been the story of the Lazy
Woodsfairies, but he also remembered the silly poems they used to put to the
fairies' music. "So high, so low, so many things to know." The funny little song
seemed to hide behind the stridling sound.
The words and the endless song lulled him finally into sleep.

FIVE
Sherkaner made it to Lands Command in two more days. It might have
taken longer, except that his redesign of the auto's drive belt made it safer to run
the downhill curves fast. It might have taken less time, except that three times he
had mechanical failures, one a cracked cylinder. It had been an evasion rather
than a lie to tell Lady Enclearre that his cargo was spare parts. In fact, he had
taken a few, the things he figured he couldn't build himself at a backcountry
smith's.
It was late afternoon when he came round the last bend and caught his first
glimpse of the long valley that housed Lands Command. It cut for miles, straight
back into the mountains, the valley walls so high that parts of the floor were
already in twilight. The far end was blued with distance; Royal Falls descended
in slow-motion majesty from the peaks above. This was about as close as tourists
ever got. The Royal
Family held tight to this land and the deepness beneath the mountain, had
held it since they were nothing more than an upstart dukedom forty Darks ago.
Sherkaner ate a good meal at the last little inn, fueled up his auto, and
headed into the Royal reservation. The letter from his cousin got him through the
outer checkpoints. The swingpole barricades were raised, bored troopers in drab
green uniforms waved him through. There were barracks, parade grounds, and-
sunk behind massive berms-ammo dumps. But Lands Command had never been
an ordinary military installation. During the early days of the Accord, it had been
mostly a playground for the Royals. Then, generation after generation, the affairs
of government had become more settled and rational and unromantic. Lands
Command fulfilled its name, became the hidey-hole for the Accord's supreme
headquarters. Finally, it became something more: the site of the Accord's most
advanced military research.
That was what most interested Sherkaner Underhill. He didn't slow down to
gawk; the police-soldiers had been very definite that he proceed directly to his
official destination. But there was nothing to prevent him from looking in all
directions, swaying slightly on his perch as he did so. The only identification on
the buildings was discreet little numerical signs, but some were pretty obvious.
Wireless telegraphy: a long barracks sprouting the weirdest radio masts. Heh, if
things were orderly and efficient, the building beside it would be the crypto
academy. On the other side of the road lay a field of asphalt wider and smoother
than any road. It was no surprise that two low-wing monoplanes sat on the far

end. Sherkaner would have given a lot to see what was behind them, under
tarpaulins. Farther on, a huge digger snout stuck steeply out of the lawn in front
of one building. The digger's impossible angle gave an impression of speed and
violence to what was the slowest conceivable way of getting from here to there.
He was nearing the end of the valley. Royal Falls towered above. A
rainbow of a thousand colors floated in its spray. He passed what was probably a
library, drove around a parking circle featuring the royal colors and the usual
Reaching-for-Accord thing. The stone buildings around the circle were a special
part of the mystique of Lands Command. By some fluke of shade and shelter,
they survived each New Sun with little damage; not even their contents burned.
BUILDING5007, the sign said. Office of Materials Research, it said on the
directions the sentry had handed him. A good omen that it was right at the center
of everything. He parked between two other autos that were already pulled over
at the side of the street. Better not be conspicuous.
As he climbed the steps, he could see that the sun was setting almost
directly down the path he had come. It was already below the highest cliffs. At
the center of the traffic circle, the statues Reaching for Accord cast long shadows
across the lawn. Somehow he suspected that the average military base was not
quite this beautiful.
The sergeant held Sherkaner's letter with obvious distaste. "So who is this
Captain Underhill-"
"Oh, no relation, Sergeant. He-"
"-and why should his wishes count for squat with us?"
"Ah, if you will read on further, you'll see that he is adjutant to Colonel A.
G. Castleworth, Royal Perch QM."
The sergeant mumbled something that sounded like "Dumb-ass gate
security." He settled his considerable bulk into a resigned crouch. "Very well,
Mr. Underhill, just what is your proposed contribution to the war effort?"
Something about the fellow was skewed. Then Sherkaner noticed that the
sergeant wore medical casts on all his left legs. He was talking to a veteran of
real combat.
This was going to be a hard sell. Even with a sympathetic audience,
Sherkaner knew he didn't cut a very imposing figure: young, too thin to be
handsome, sort of a gawky know-it-all. He had been hoping to get to an
engineering officer. "Well, Sergeant, for at least the last three generations, you
military people have been trying to get some advantage by working longer into
the Dark. First it was just for a few hundred days, long enough to lay unexpected
mines or strengthen fortifications. Then it was a year, two, long enough to move
large numbers of troops into position for attack at the next New Sun."

The sergeant-HRUNKNER UNNERBY, his name tag said-just stared.
"It's common knowledge that both sides on the Eastern Front have massive
tunneling efforts going, that we may end up with huge battles fought up to ten
years into the coming Dark."
Unnerby was struck by a happy thought and his scowl deepened. "If that's
what you think, you should be talking to the Diggers. This is Materials Research
here, Mr. Underhill."
"Oh, I know that. But without materials research we have no chance of
penetrating through to the really cold times. And also. . .my plans don't have
anything to do with digging." He said the last in a kind of rush.
"Then what?"
"I-I propose that we select appropriate Tiefstadt targets, wake ourselves in
the Deepest Dark, walk overland to the targets, and destroy them." Now, that
piled all the impossibilities into one concise statement. He held up forestalling
hands. "I've thought about each of the difficulties, Sergeant. I have solutions, or
a start on solutions-"
Unnerby's voice was almost soft as he interrupted. "In the Deepest Dark,
you say? And you are a researcher at Kingschool in Princeton?" That's how
Sherkaner's cousin had put it in the letter.
"Yes, in math and-"
"Shut up. Do you have any idea how many millions the Crown spends on
military research at places like Kingschool? Do you have any idea how closely
we watch the serious work that they do? God, how I hate you Westerling snots.
The most you have to worry about is preparing for the Dark, and you're barely
up to that. If you had any stiffness in your shell, you'd be enlisting. There are
peopledying now in the East, cobber. There are thousands more who will die
unprepared for the Dark, more who will die in the tunnels, and many more who
may die when the New Sun lights and there is nothing to eat. And here you sit,
spouting fantasy what-ifs."
Unnerby paused, seemed to tuck his temper away. "Ah, but I'll tell you a
funny story before I boot your ass back to Princeton. You see, I'm a bit
unbalanced." He waggled his left legs. "An argument with a shredder. Until I get
well, I help filter the crank notions that people like you keep sending our way.
Fortunately, most of the crap comes in the mail. About once in ten days, some
cobber warns us about the low-temperature allotrope of tinOops, maybe
Iamtalking to an engineer!
"-and that we shouldn't ought to use it in solder. At least they have their
facts right; they're just wasting our time. But then there are the ones who have
just read about radium and figure we ought to make super digger heads out of
th
t ff W h
littl
t
t
l
b
t
h
t th bi
t

the stuff. We have a little contest among ourselves about who gets the biggest
idiots. Well, Mr. Underhill, I think you've made me a winner. You figure on
waking yourself in the middle of the Dark, and then traveling overland in
temperatures lower than you'll find in any commercial lab and in vacuum harder
than even we can create." Unnerby paused, taken aback at having given away a
morsel of classified information? Then Sherkaner realized that the sergeant was
looking at something in Sherkaner's blind spot.
"Lieutenant Smith! Good afternoon, ma'am." The sergeant almost came to
attention.
"Good afternoon, Hrunkner." The speaker moved into view. She was . .
.beautiful. Her legs were slender, hard, curving, and every motion had an
understated grace. Her uniform was a black black that Sherkaner didn't
recognize. The only insignia were her deep-red rank pips and name tag. Victory
Smith. She looked impossibly young. Born out-of-phase? Maybe so, and the
noncom's exaggerated show of respect was a kind of taunt.
Lieutenant Smith turned her attention on Sherkaner. Her aspect seemed
friendly in a distant, almost amused way. "So, Mr. Underhill, you are a
researcher in the Kingschool Mathematics Department."
"Well, more a graduate student actually. . . ." Her silent gaze seemed to call
for a more forthcoming answer. "Um, math is really just the specialization listed
on my official program. I've done a lot of course work in the Medical School and
in Mechanical Engineering." He half-expected Unnerby to make some rude
comment, but the sergeant was suddenly very quiet.
"Then you understand the nature of the Deepest Dark, the ultralow
temperatures, the hard vacuum."
"Yes, ma'am. And I've given these problems considerable thought."Almost
half a year, but better not say that. "I have lots of ideas, some preliminary
designs. Some of the solutions are biological and there's not much to show you
yet. But I did bring prototypes for some of the mechanical aspects of the project.
They're out in my automobile."
"Ah, yes. Parked between the cars of Generals Greenval and Downing.
Perhaps we should take a look-and move your auto to a safer place."
The full realization was years away, but in that moment Sherkaner
Underhill had his first glimmering. Of all the people at Lands Command-of all
the people in the wide world-he could not have found a more appropriate listener
than Lieutenant Victory Smith.

SIX
In the last years of a Waning Sun there are storms, often fierce ones. But
these are not the steaming, explosive agony of the storms of a New Sun. The
winds and blizzards of the coming Dark are more as though the world is
someone mortally stabbed, flailing weakly as life's blood leaks out. For the
warmth of the world is its lifeblood, and as that soaks into the Dark, the dying
world is less and less able to protest.
There comes a time when a hundred stars can be seen in the same sky as the
noonday sun. And then a thousand stars, and finally the sun gets no dimmer. .
.and the Dark has truly arrived. The larger plants have long since died, the
powder of their spores is hidden deep beneath the snows. The lower animals
have passed the same way. Scum mottles the lee of snowbanks, and an
occasional glow flows around exposed carcasses: the spirits of the dead, classical
observers wrote; a last bacterial scavenging, scientists of later eras discovered.
Yet there are still living people on the surface. Some are the massacred,
prevented by stronger tribes (or stronger nations) from entering deep sanctuary.
Others are the victims of floods or earthquakes, whose ancestral deepnesses have
been destroyed. In olden times, there was only one way to learn what the Dark
might really be: stranded topside, you might attain tenuous immortality by
writing what you saw and saving the story so securely that it survived the fires of
the New Sun. And occasionally one of these topsiders survived more than a year
or two into the Dark, either by extraordinary circumstance or by clever planning
and the desire to see into the heart of the Dark. One philosopher survived so long
that his last scrawl was taken for insanity or metaphor by those who found his
words cut into stone above their deepness: "and the dry air is turning to frost."
On one thing the propagandists of both Crown and Tiefstadt agreed. This
Dark would be different from all that had gone before. This Dark was the first to
be directly assaulted by science in the service of war. While their millions of
citizens retreated to the still pools of a thousand deepnesses, the armies of both
sides continued to fight. Often the fighting was in open trenches, warmed by
steamer fires. But the great differences were underground, in the digging of
tunnels that swept deep beneath the front lines of either side. Where these
intersected, fierce battles of machine guns and poison gas were fought. Where
intersection did not occur, the tunnels continued through the chalky rock of the
Eastern Front, yard by yard, days on days, long after all fighting on the surface
had ended.

Five years after the Dark began, only a technical elite, perhaps ten thousand
on the Crown side, still prosecuted the campaign below the East. Even at their
depths, the temperatures were far below freezing. Fresh air was circulated
through the occupied tunnels, by foram-burning fans. The last of the air holes
would ice over soon.
"We haven't heard any Tiefstadter activity for nearly ten days. Digger
Command hasn't stopped congratulating itself." General Greenval popped an
aromatique into his maw and crunched loudly; the chief of Accord Intelligence
had never been known for great diplomacy, and he had become perceptibly more
crotchety over the last days. He was an old cobber, and though the conditions at
Lands Command might be the most benign left anywhere in the world, even they
were entering an extreme phase. In the bunkers next to the Royal Deepness,
perhaps fifty people were still conscious. Every hour, the air seemed to become a
little more stale. Greenval had given up his stately library more than a year ago.
Now his office consisted of a twenty-by-ten-by-four-foot slot in the dead space
above the dormitory. The walls of the little room were covered with maps, the
table with reams of teletype reports from landlines. Wireless communication had
reached final failure some seventy days earlier. During the year before that the
Crown's radiomen had experimented with more and more powerful transmitters,
and there had been some hope that they would have wireless right up to the end.
But no, all that was left was telegraphy and line-of- sight radio. Greenval looked
at his visitor, certainly the last to Lands Command for more than two hundred
years. "So, Colonel Smith, you just got back from the East. Why don't I hear any
huzzahs from yourself? We've outlasted the enemy."
Victory Smith's attention had been caught by the General's periscope. It was
the reason Greenval had stuck his cubbyhole up here-a last view upon the world.
Royal Falls had stilled more than two years ago. She could see all the way up the
valley. A dark land, covered now with an eldritch frost that formed endlessly on
rock and ice alike. Carbon dioxide, leaching out of the atmosphere.But
Sherkaner will see a world far colder than this.
"Colonel?"
Smith stepped back from the periscope. "Sorry, sir.. . .I admire the Diggers
with all my heart."At least the
troops who are actually doing thedigging. She had been in their field
deepnesses. "But it's been days since they could reach any enemy positions. Less
than half will be in fighting form after the Dark. I'm afraid that Digger
Command guessed the stand-down point wrong."
"Yeah," grumpily. "Digger Command makes the record book for longest
sustained operations, but the
f

Tiefers gained by quitting just when they did." He sighed and said
something that might have gotten him cashiered in other circumstances, but
when you're five years past the end of the world, there aren't a lot of people to
hear. "You know, the Tiefers aren't such a bad sort. Take the long view and
you'll see nastier types in some of our own allies, waiting for Crown and
Tiefstadt to beat each other into a bloody pulp. That's the place where we should
be doing our planning, for the next baddies that are going to come after us. We're
going to win this war, but if we have to win it with the tunnels and the Diggers,
we'll still be fighting for years into the New Sun."
He gave his aromatique an emphatic crunch and jabbed a forehand at
Smith. "Your project is our only chance to bring this to a clean end."
Smith's reply was abrupt. "And the chances would have been still better if
you had let me stay with the Team."
Greenval seemed to ignore the complaint. "Victory, you've been with this
project for seven years now. Do you really think it can work?"
Maybe it was the stale air, making them all daft. Indecision was totally
alien to the public image of Strut Greenval. She had known him for nine years.
Among his closest confidants, Greenval was an open-minded person-up to the
point where final decisions had to be made. Then he was the man without doubt,
facing down ranks of generals and even the King's political advisors. Never had
she heard such a sad, lost question coming from him. Now she saw an old, old
man who in a few hours would surrender to the Dark, perhaps for the last time.
The realization was like leaning against a familiar railing and feeling it begin to
give way. "S-sir, we have selected our targets well. If they are destroyed,
Tiefstadt's surrender should follow almost immediately. Underhill's Team is in a
lake less than two miles from the targets." And that was an enormous
achievement in itself. The lake was near Tiefstadt's most important supply
center, a hundred miles deep in Tiefer territory.
"Unnerby and Underhill and the others need only walk a short distance, sir.
We tested their suits and the exotherms for much longer periods in conditions
almost as-"
Greenval smiled weakly. "Yes, I know. I jammed the numbers down the
craw of the General Staff often enough. But now we're really going to do it.
Think what that means. Over the last few generations, we military types have
done our little desecrations around the edges of the Dark. But Unnerby's team
will see the center of the Deepest Dark. What can that really be like? Yes, we
think we know: the frozen air, the vacuum. But that's all guesses. I'm not
religious, Colonel Smith, but. . .I wonder at what they may find."
Religious or not, all the ancient superstitions of snow-trolls and earth-
l
d t h
j
t b hi d th
l'
d
E
th
t
ti
l

angels seemed to hover just behind the general's words. Even the most rational
quailed before the thought of a Dark so intense that in a sense the world did not
exist. With an effort, Victory ignored the emotions that Greenval's words
conjured. "Yes, sir, there could be surprises. And I'd rate this scheme as a likely
failure, except for one thing: Sherkaner Underhill."
"Our pet screwball."
"Yes, a screwball of a most extraordinary sort. I've known him for seven
years-ever since that afternoon he showed up with a car full of half-made
prototypes and a head full of crazy schemes. Lucky for us I was having a slow
afternoon. I had time to listen and be amused. The average academic type comes
up with maybe twenty ideas in a lifetime. Underhill has twenty an hour; it's
almost like a palsy with him. But I've known people almost as extreme in
Intelligence school. The difference is that Underhill's ideas are feasible about
one percent of the time-and he can tell the good ones from the bad with some
accuracy. Maybe someone else would have thought of using swamp sludge to
breed the exotherms. Certainly someone else could have had his ideas about
airsuits. But he has the ideas and he brings them together, and they work.
"But that's only part of it. Without Sherkaner, we could not have come close
to implementing all we have in these last seven years. He has the magic ability to
rope bright people into his schemes." She remembered Hrunkner Unnerby's
angry contempt that first afternoon, how it had changed over a period of days
until Hrunkner's engineering imagination was totally swept up by the ideas
Sherkaner was spewing at him. "In a sense, Underhill has no patience for details,
but that doesn't matter. He generates an entourage whichdoes. He's just. .
.remarkable."
This was all old news to both of them; Greenval had argued similarly to his
own bosses over the years. But it was the best reassurance Victory could give the
old cobber now. Greenval smiled and his look was strange. "So why didn't you
marry him, Colonel?"
Smith hadn't meant that to come up, but hell, they were alone, and at the
end of the world: "I intend to, sir. But there's a war on, and you know I'm. . .not
much for tradition; we'll marry after the Dark." It had taken Victory Smith just
one afternoon to realize that Underhill was the strangest person she had ever
met. It had taken her another couple of days to realize he was a genius who
could be used like a dynamo, could be used to literally change the course of a
world war. Within fifty days she had had Strut Greenval convinced of the same,
and Underhill was tucked away in his own lab, with labs growing up around him
to handle the peripheral needs of the project. Between her own missions, Victory
had schemed on how she might claim the Underhill phenomenon-that was how
she thought of him how the Intelligence Staff thought of him as her permanent

she thought of him, how the Intelligence Staff thought of him-as her permanent
advantage. Marriage was the obvious move. A traditional Marriage-in- the-
Waning would have suited her career path. It all would have been perfect, except
for Sherkaner Underhill himself. Sherk was a person with his own plans.
Ultimately he had become her best friend, as much someone to scheme with as
to scheme about. Sherk had plans for after the Dark, things that Victory had
never repeated to anyone. Her few other friends-even Hrunkner Unnerby-liked
her despite her being out-of-phase. Sherkaner Underhill actually liked the idea of
out-of-phase children. It was the first time in her life that Victory had met with
more than mere acceptance. So for now they fought a war. If they both survived,
there was another world of plans and a life together, after the Dark.
And Strut Greenval was clever enough to figure out a lot of this. Abruptly,
she glared at her boss. "You already knew, didn't you? That's why you wouldn't
let me stay with the Team. You figure it's a suicide mission, and my judgment
would be warped.. . .Well it is dangerous, but you don't understand Sherkaner
Underhill; self-sacrifice is not on his agenda. By our standards he's rather a
coward. He's not especially taken by most of the things you and I hold dear. He's
risking his life out of simple curiosity-but he's very, very careful when it comes
to his own safety. I think the Team will succeedand survive. The odds would
only have been improved if you'd let me stay with them! Sir."
Her last words were punctuated by the dramatic dimming of the room's
single lamp. "Hah," said
Greenval, "we've been without fuel oil for twelve hours, did you know that,
Colonel? Now the lead acid batteries have about run down. In a couple of
minutes Captain Diredr will be here with the Last Word from maintenance:
'Begging your pardon, sir, but the last pools will freeze momentarily.
Engineering begs that you join them for final shutdown.' " He mimicked his
aide's high-pitched voice.
Greenval stood, leaned across the desk. His doubts were hidden once more,
and the old snap was back in his manner. "In that time, I want to clear up a few
things about your orders and your future. Yes, I brought you back because I don't
want to risk you on this mission. Your Sergeant Unnerby and I have had some
long talks. We've had nine years to put you through almost limitless risk, and to
watch how your mind works when thousands of lives depend on the right
answers. It's time to take you off the front lines of special operations. You are
one of the youngest colonels in modern times; after this Dark, you'll be the
youngest general."
"Only if the Underhill mission succeeds."
"Don't interrupt. However the Underhill affair goes, the King's advisors
know how good you are

know how good you are.
Whether or not I survive this Dark, you'll be sitting in my job within a few
years of the starting of the New Sun-and your days of personal risk-taking must
be over. If your Mr. Underhill survives, marry him, breed him, I couldn't care
less. But never ever again are you to put yourself at risk." He waved his pointed
hand at her head, a mock threat with an edge. "If you do, I swear I'll come back
from the grave and crack your thick shell."
There was the sound of footsteps in the narrow hallway. Hands scratched at
the heavy curtain that was the room's only door. It was Captain Diredr. "Excuse
me, General. Engineering is absolutely insistent, sir. We have thirty minutes of
electrical power, at the outside. They are begging, sir-"
Greenval spat that last aromatique into a stained cuspidor. "Very good,
Captain. We are coming down instanter." He sidled around the Colonel, and
pulled back the curtain. When Smith hesitated to go before him, he waved her
through the doorway. "In this case, senior means last, my dear. I've never liked
this business of cheating on the Dark, but if we have to do it,I'm the one who
gets to turn out the lights!"

SEVEN
By rights Pham Trinli should not have been on the Fleet Captain's bridge,
certainly not during a serious operation. The old man sat at one of the duplicate
comm posts, but he really didn't do anything with it. Trinli was Programmer-at-
Arms 3rd, though no one had ever seen him behave productively, even at that
low rank. He seemed to come and go at his own pleasure, and spent most of his
time down in the employees' dayroom. Fleet Captain Park was known to be a
little irrational when it came to "respect for age." Apparently, as long as Pham
Trinli did no harm, he could stay on the payroll.
Just now, Trinli sat half-turned away from his post. He listened
dyspeptically to the quiet conversations, the flow of check and response. He
looked past the techs and armsmen at the common displays.
The landings of Qeng Ho and Emergent vessels had been a dance of
caution. Mistrust for the Emergents extended from top to bottom among Captain
Park's people. Thus there were no combined crews, and the comm nets were
fully duplicated. Captain Park had positioned his capital vessels in three groups,
each responsible for a third of the planetary operations. Every Emergent ship,
every lander, every free-flying crewman was monitored for evidence of
treachery.
The bridge's consensus imagery showed most of this. Relayed from the
"eastern" cluster, Trinli could see a trio of Emergent heavy lifters coming off the
frozen surface of the ocean, towing between them a quarter-million-tonne block
of ice. That was the sixth lift in this op. The surface was brightly lit by the rocket
glare. Trinli could see a hole hundreds of meters deep. Steaming froth masked
the gouge in the seafloor. Soundings showed there were plenty of heavy metals
in this section of continental shelf, and they were mining it with the same brute
force that they employed when they carved the ice.
Nothing really suspicious there, though things may change when itcomes
time to divvy up the loot.
He studied at the comm status windows. Both sides had agreed to broadcast
intership communications in the clear; a number of Emergent specialists were in
constant conference comm with corresponding Qeng Ho officers; the other side
was sucking in everything they could about Diem's discoveries in the dry valley.
Interesting how the Emergents suggested simply grabbing the native artifacts.
Very un-Qeng-Ho-like.More like something I might do.
Park had dumped most of his fleet's microsats into near-planetary space just

before the Emergents arrived. There were tens of thousands of the fist-sized
gadgets out there now. Subtly maneuvering, they came between the Emergents'
vehicles far more often than simple chance would predict. And they reported
back to the electronic intelligence window here on the bridge. They reported that
there was far too much line-of-sight talk between the Emergent vessels. It might
be innocent automation. More likely it was cover for encrypted military
coordination, sly preparation on the part of the enemy. (And Pham Trinli had
never thought of the Emergents as anything but an enemy.)
Park's staff recognized the signs, of course. In their prissy way, these Qeng
Ho armsmen were very sharp. Trinli watched three of them argue about the
broadcast patterns that washed across the fleet from Emergent emitters. One of
the junior armsmen thought they might be seeing a mix of physical-layer and
software probing-all in an orchestrated tangle. But if that were true, it was more
sophisticated than the Qeng Ho's own best e-measures. . .and that was
unbelievable. The senior armsman just frowned at the junior, as if the suggestion
were a king-sized headache.Even theones who have been in combat don't get the
point. For a moment, Trinli's expression got even more sour.
A voice sounded privately in his ear. "What do you think, Pham?"
Trinli sighed. He mumbled back into his comm, his lips barely moving, "It
stinks, Sammy. You know that."
"I'd feel better if you were at an alternate control center." ThePhamNuwen
's "bridge" had this official location, but in fact there were control centers
distributed throughout the ship's livable spaces. More than half the staff visible
on the bridge were really elsewhere. In theory, it made the starship a tougher
kill. In theory.
"I can do better than that. I've hacked one of the taxis for remote
command." The old man floated off his saddle. He drifted silently behind the
ranks of the bridge technicians, past the view on the heavy lifters, the view of
Diem's crew preparing to lift off from the dry valley, the images of oh-so-intent
Emergent faces. . .past the ominous e-measures displays. No one really noticed
his passage, except that as he slid through the bridge entranceway, Sammy Park
glanced at him. Trinli gave the Fleet Captain a little nod.
Spineless wretches, nearly every one.Only Sammy and Kira Pen Lisolet had
understood the need to strike first. And they had not persuaded a single member
of the Trading Committee. Even after meeting the Emergents face-to-face, the
committee couldn't recognize the other side's certain treachery. Instead, they
asked a Vinh to decide for them. AVinh !
Trinli coasted down empty corridors, slowed to a stop by the taxi lock, and
popped the hatch on the one he had specially prepared.I could askLisolet to

mutiny. The Deputy Fleet Captain had her own command, the QHSInvisible
Hand . A mutiny was physically possible, and once she started shooting, Sammy
and the others would surely have to join her.
He slipped into the taxi, started the lock pumps.No, I wash my handsof all
of them. Somewhere at the back of his skull, a little headache was growing.
Tension didn't usually affect him this way. He shook his head. Okay, the truth
was, he wasn't asking Lisolet to mutiny, because she was one of those very rare
people who had honor. So, he would do the best with what he had. Sammyhad
brought weapons. Trinli grinned, anticipating the time ahead.Even if the other
side strikes first, I wager we're the last menstanding. As his taxi drifted out from
the Qeng Ho flagship, Trinli studied the threat updates, planning. What would
the other side try? If they waited long enough, he might yet figure out Sammy's
weapons locks. . .and be his own one-man mutiny.
There were plenty of signs of the treachery abuilding, but even Pham Trinli
missed the most blatant. You had to guess the method of attack to recognize that
one.
Ezr Vinh was quite ignorant of military developments overhead. The Ksecs
spent on the surface had been hard, fascinating work, work that didn't leave
much time to pursue suspicions. In all his life, he had spent only a few dozen
Msecs walking around on the surface of planets. Despite exercise and Qeng Ho
medicine, he was feeling the strain. The first Ksecs had seemed relatively easy,
but now every muscle ached. Fortunately, he wasn't the only wimp. The whole
crew seemed to be dragging. Final cleanup was an eternity of careful checking
that they had left no garbage, that any signs of their presence would be lost in the
effects of OnOff's relighting. Crewleader Diem twisted his ankle on the climb
back to the lander. Without the freight winch on the lander, the rest of the climb
would have been impossible. When they finally got aboard, even stripping off
and stowing their thermal jackets was a pain.
"Lord." Benny collapsed on the rack next to Vinh. There were groans from
all along the aisle as the lander boosted them skyward. Still, Vinh felt a quiet
glow of satisfaction; the fleet had learned far more from their one landing than
anyone expected. Theirs was a righteous fatigue.
There was little chitchat among Diem's crewmembers now. The sound of
the lander's torch was an almost subsonic drone that seemed to originate in their
bones and grow outward. Vinh could still hear public conversations from on
high, but Trixia was out of it. No one was talking to Diem's people now.
Correction: Qiwi was trying to talk to him, but Ezr was just too tired to humor
the Brat.
Over the curve of the world, the heavy lifting was behind schedule. Clean

nukes had broken up several million tonnes of frozen ocean, but steam above the
extraction site was complicating the remainder of the job. The Emergent,
Brughel, was complaining that they had lost contact with one of their lifters.
"I think it's your angle of view, sir," came the voice of a Qeng Ho tech. "We
can see all of them. Three are still at the surface; one is heavily obscured by the
local haze, but it looks well positioned. Three more are in ascent, clean lifts, well
separated.. . .One moment. . . ." Seconds passed. On a more "distant" channel, a
voice was talking about some sort of medical problem; apparently someone had
committed a zero-gee barf. Then the flight controller was back: "That's strange.
We've lost our view of the East Coast operation."
Brughel, his voice sharpening: "Surely you have secondaries?" The Qeng
Ho tech did not reply.
A third voice: "We just got an EM pulse. I thought you people were done
with your surface blasting?" "We are!" Brughel was indignant.
"Well we just got three more pulses. I-Yessir!"
EM pulses?Vinh struggled to sit up, but the acceleration was too much, and
suddenly his head hurt even more than ever.Say something more, damnit! But
the fellow who just said "yessir"-a Qeng Ho armsman by the sound of him-was
off the air, or more likely had changed mode and encrypted himself.
The Emergent's voice was clipped and angry: "I want to talk to someone in
authority.Now. We know targeting lasers when they shine on us! Turn them off
or we'll all regret it."
Ezr's head-up display went clear, and he was looking at the lander's
bulkheads. The wallpaper backup flickered on, but the video was some random
emergency-procedures sequence.
"Shit!" It was Jimmy Diem. At the front of the cabin, the crewleader was
pounding on a command console. Somewhere behind Vinh there was the sound
of vomiting. It was like one of those nightmares where everything goes nuts at
once.
At that instant, the lander reached end-of-burn. In the space of three
seconds, the terrible pressure eased off Vinh's chest and there was the
comforting familiarity of zero gee. He pulled on his couch release and coasted
forward to Diem.
From the ceiling it was easy to stand with his head by Diem's and see the
emergency displays, without getting in the crewleader's way. "We're really
shooting at them?"Lord, but my head hurts! When he tried to read Diem's
command console, the glyphs swam before his eyes.
Diem turned his head a fraction to look at Ezr. Agony was clear in his face;
he could barely move. "I don't know what we're doing. I've lost consensual
i
i
Ti
lf d
" H l
d f
d
h
h
f
h

imaging. Tie yourself down. . . ." He leaned forward as though to focus on the
display. "The fleet net has gone hard crypto, and we're stuck at the least secure
level," which meant that they would get little information beyond direct
commands from Park's armsmen.
The ceiling gave Vinh a solid whack on the butt, and he started to slide
toward the back of the cabin. The lander was turning, some kind of emergency
override-the autopilot had given no warning. Most likely, fleet command was
prepping them for another burn. He tied down behind Diem, just as the lander's
main torch lit off at about a tenth of a gee. "They're moving us to a lower orbit. .
.but I don't see anything coming to rendezvous," said Diem. He poked
awkwardly at the password field beneath the display. "Okay, I'm doing my own
snooping.. . .I hope Park isn't too pissed. . . ."
Behind them, there was the sound of more vomiting. Diem started to turn
his head, winced. "You're the mobile one, Vinh. Take care of that."
Ezr slid down the aisle's ladderline, letting the one-tenth-gee load do the
moving for him. Qeng Ho lived their lives under varying accelerations. Medicine
and good breeding made orientation sickness a rare thing among them. But
Tsufe Do and Pham Patil had both upchucked, and Benny Wen was curled up as
far as his ties would permit. He held the sides of his head and swayed in
apparent agony. "The pressure, the pressure . . ."
Vinh eased next to Patil and Do, gently vac'd the goo that was dribbling
down their coveralls. Tsufe looked up at him, embarrassment in her eyes. "Never
barfed in my life."
"It's not you," said Vinh, and tried to think past the pain that squeezed
harder and harder.Stupid, stupid,
stupid. How could it take so long tounderstand? It was not the Qeng Ho
that was attacking the Emergents; somehow it was quite the reverse.
Suddenly he could see outside again. "I got local consensus," Diem's voice
came in his earphones. The crewleader's words came in short, tortured bursts.
"Five high-gee bombs from Emergent positions.. . .Target: Park's flag. . . ."
Vinh leaned across the row of couches and looked out. The missiles' jets
were pointing away from the lander's viewpoint; the five were faint stars moving
faster and faster across the sky, closing on the QHSPham Nuwen. Yet their paths
were not smooth arcs. There were sharp bends and wobbles.
"We must be lasing at them. They're jinking."
One of the tiny lights vanished. "We got one! We-"
Four points of light blazed in the sky. The brightness grew and grew, a
thousand times brighter than the faded disk of the sun.
Then the view was gone again. The cabin lights died, winked back on, died
again The bottommost emergency system came online There was a faint

again. The bottommost emergency system came online. There was a faint
network of reddish lines, outlining equipment bays, airlock, the emergency
console. The system was rad-hardened but very simpleminded and low-powered.
There wasn't even backup video.
"What about Park's flagship, Crewleader?" asked Vinh. Four close-set
detonations, so terribly bright-the corners of a regular tetrahedron, clasping its
victim. The view was gone but it would burn in his memory forever."Jimmy!"
Vinh screamed at the front of the cabin. "What about thePhamNuwen?" The red
emergency lights seemed to sway around him; the shouting brought him close to
blacking out.
Then Diem's voice came hoarse and loud. "I. . .I think it's g-gone." Fried,
vaped, none of the masking words were easy anymore. "I don't have anything
now, but the four nukes. . .Lord, they were right on top of him!"
Several other voices interrupted, but they were even weaker than Jimmy
Diem's. As Vinh started back up the line toward him, the one-tenth-gee burn
ended. Without light or brains, what was the lander but a dark coffin? For the
first time in his life, Ezr Vinh felt the groundsider's disorienting terror: zero gee
could mean they had reached designated orbit, or that they were falling in a
ballistic arc that intersected the planet's surface. . .
Vinh clamped down on his terror and coasted forward. They could use the
emergency console. They could listen for word. They could use the local
autopilot to fly to the surviving Qeng Ho forces. The pain in his head grew
beyond anything Ezr Vinh had ever known. The little red emergency lights
seemed to get dimmer and dimmer. He felt his consciousness squeezing down,
and the panic rose and choked him. There was nothing he could do.
And just before things all went away, fate showed him one kindness, a
memory: Trixia Bonsol had not been aboard thePham Nuwen.

EIGHT
For more than two hundred years, the clock mechanism beneath the frozen
lake had faithfully advanced itself, exhausting the tension of spring coil after
spring coil. The mechanism ticked reliably down through the last spring. . .and
jammed on a fleck of airsnow in the final trigger. There it might have hung until
the coming of the new sun, if not for certain other unforeseen events: On the
seventh day of the two-hundred- and-ninth year, a series of sharp earthquakes
spread outward from the frozen sea, jolting loose the final trigger. A piston slid a
froth of organic sludge into a tank of frozen air. Nothing happened for several
minutes. Then a glow spread through the organics, temperatures rose past the
vapor points of oxygen and nitrogen, and even carbon dioxide. The exhalation of
a trillion budding exotherms melted the ice above the little vehicle. The ascent to
the surface had begun.
Coming awake from the Dark was not like waking from an ordinary sleep.
A thousand poets had written about the moment and-in recent eras-ten thousand
academics had studied it. This was the second time that Sherkaner Underhill had
experienced it (but the first time didn't really count, since that memory was
mixed with the vague memories of babyhood, of clinging to his father's back in
the pools of the Mountroyal Deepness).
Coming awake from the Dark was done in pieces. Vision, touch, hearing.
Memory, recognition, thought. Did they happen first one and then another and
another? Or did they happen all at once, but with the parts not communicating?
Where did "mind" begin from all the pieces? The questions would rattle around
in Sherkaner's imagination for all of his life, the basis for his ultimate quest.. .
.But in those moments of fragmented consciousness, they coexisted with things
that seemed much more important: bringing self together; remembering who he
was, why he was here, and what had to be done right now to survive. The
instincts of a million years were in the driver's perch.
Time passed and thought coalesced and Sherkaner Underhill looked out his
vessel's cracked window into the darkness. There was motion-roiling steam? No,
more like a veil of crystals swirling in the dim light they floated on.
Someone was bumping his right shoulders, calling his name again and
again. Sherkaner pieced together memories. "Yes, Sergeant, I'm away. . . I mean,
awake."
"Excellent." Unnerby's voice was tinny. "Are you injured? You know the
drill."

Sherkaner dutifully wiggled his legs. They all hurt; that was a good start.
Midhands, forehands, eating hands. "Not sure I can feel my right mid and fore.
Maybe they're stuck together."
"Yeah. Probably still frozen."
"How are Gil and Amber?"
"I'm talking to them on the other cables. You're the last one to get his head
together, but they've got bigger hunks of body still frozen."
"Gimme the cable head." Unnerby passed him the sound-conducting gear,
and Sherkaner talked directly to the other Team members. The body can tolerate
a lot of differential thawing, but if the process doesn't complete, rot sets in. The
problem here was that the bags of exotherm and fuel had shifted around as the
boat melted its way to the surface. Sherkaner reset the bags and started sludge
and air flowing through them. The green glow within their tiny hull brightened,
and Sherkaner took advantage of the light to check for punctures in their
breathing tubes. The exotherms were essential for heat, but if the Team had to
compete with them for oxygen the Team would be the dead loser.
A half hour passed, the warmth enveloping them, freeing their limbs. The
only frost damage was at the tips of Gil Haven's midhands. That was a better
safety record than most deepnesses. A broad smile spread across Sherkaner's
aspect. They had made it, wakenedthemselves in the Deep of the Dark.
The four rested a while longer, monitoring the airflow, exercising
Sherkaner's scheme for controlling the exotherms. Unnerby and Amberdon
Nizhnimor went through the detailed checklist, passing suspicious and broken
items across to Sherkaner. Nizhnimor, Haven, and Unnerby were very bright
people, a chemist and two engineers. But they were also combat professionals.
Sherkaner found fascinating the change that came over them when they moved
out of the lab and into the field. Unnerby especially was such a layering:
hardbitten soldier atop imaginative engineer, hiding a traditional, straitlaced
morality. Sherkaner had known the sergeant for seven years now. The fellow's
initial contempt for Underhill schemes was long past; they had been close
friends. But when their Team finally moved to the Eastern Front, his manner had
become distant. He had begun to address Underhill as "sir," and sometimes his
respectfulness was edged with impatience.
He'd asked Victory about that. It had been the last time they were alone
together, in a cold burrowbarracks beneath the last operating aerodrome on the
Eastern Front. She had laughed at the question. "Ah, dear soft one, what do you
expect? Hrunk will have operational command once the Team leaves friendly
territory.You are the civilian advisor with no military training, who must
somehow be tucked into the chain of command. He needs your instant

obedience, but also your imagination and flexibility." She laughed softly; only a
curtain separated their conversation from the main hall of the narrow barracks.
"If you were an ordinary recruit, Unnerby would have fried your shell half a
dozen times by now. The poor cobber is so afraid that when seconds count, your
genius will be caught on something completely irrelevant-astronomy, whatever."
"Um." Actually, he had wondered how the stars might look without the
atmosphere to dim their colors. "I see what you mean. Put that way, I'm
surprised he let Greenval put me on the Team."
"Are you kidding? Hrunk demanded you be on it. He knows there'll be
surprises that only you can figure out. As I said; he's a cobber with a problem."
It wasn't often that Sherkaner Underhill felt taken aback, but this was one of
those times. "Well, I'll be good."
"Yes, I know you will. I just wanted you to know what Hrunk is up against..
. .Hey, you can look on it as a behavioral mystery: How can such radically crazy
people cooperate and survive where no one has ever lived before?" Maybe she
meant it as a joke, but itwas an interesting question.
• • •
Without doubt, their vehicle was the strangest in all history: part submarine,
part portable deepness, part sludge bucket. Now the fifteen-foot shell rested in a
shallow pool of glowing green and tepid-red. The water was in a vacuum boil,
gases swirling up from it, chilling into tiny crystals, and falling back. Unnerby
pushed open the hatch, and the team formed a chain, handing equipment and
exotherm tanks from one to the next to the next, until the ground just beyond the
pool was piled with the gear they would carry.
They strung audio cable between themselves, Underhill to Unnerby to
Haven to Nizhnimor. Sherkaner had been hoping for portable radios almost until
the end, but such gear was still too bulky and no one was sure how it would
operate under these conditions. So they each could talk to just one other team
member. Still, they needed safety lines in any case, so the cable was no extra
inconvenience.
Sherkaner led the way back to the lakeshore, with Unnerby behind him, and
Nizhnimor and Haven pulling the sled. Away from their submarine, the darkness
closed in. There were still glimmers of heat-red light, where exotherms had
sprayed across the ground; the sub had burned tons of fuel in melting its way to
the surface. The rest of the mission must be powered by just the exotherms they
could carry and what fuels they could find beneath the snow.
More than anything else, the exotherms were the trick that made this walk
in the Dark possible Before the invention of the microscope the "great thinkers"

in the Dark possible. Before the invention of the microscope, the "great thinkers"
claimed that what separated the higher animals from the rest of life was their
ability to survive as individuals through the Great Dark. Plants and simpler
animals died; it was only their encysted eggs that survived. Nowadays, it was
known that many singlecelled animals survived freezing just fine, and without
having to retreat to deepnesses. Even stranger, and this had been discovered by
biologists at Kingschool while Sherkaner was an undergraduate, there were
forms of Lesser Bacteria that lived in volcanoes and stayed active right through
the Dark. Sherkaner had been very taken by these microscopic creatures. The
professors assumed that such creatures must suspend or sporulate when a
volcano went cold, but he wondered if there might be varieties that could live
through freezes by making their own heat. After all, even in the Dark, there was
still plenty of oxygen-and in most places there was a layer of organic ruin
beneath the airsnow. If there were some catalyst for starting oxidation at super-
low temperatures, maybe the little bugs could just "burn" vegetation between
volcanic surges. Such bacteria would be the best adapted of all to live after Dark.
In retrospect, it was mainly Sherkaner's ignorance that permitted him to
entertain the idea. The two life strategies required entirely different chemistries.
The external oxidation effect was very weak, and in warm environments
nonexistent. In many situations, the trick was a serious disability to the little
bugs; the two metabolisms were generally poisonous to each other. In the Dark,
they would gain a very slight advantage if they were near a periodic volcanic hot
spot. It would never have been noticed if Sherkaner hadn't gone looking for it.
He had turned an undergraduate biology lab into a frozen swamp and gotten
himself (temporarily) kicked out of school, but there they were: his exotherms.
After seven years of selective breeding by the Materials Research
Department, the bacteria had a pure, high-velocity oxidizing metabolism. So
when Sherkaner slopped exotherm sludge into the airsnow, there was a burst of
vapor, and then a tiny glow that faded as the still-liquid droplet sank and cooled.
A second would pass and if you looked very carefully (and if the exotherms in
that droplet had been lucky) you would see a faint light frombeneath the snow,
feeding across the surface of whatever buried organics there might be.
The glow was sprouting brighter now on his left. The airsnow shivered and
slumped and some kind of steam curled out of it. Sherkaner tugged on the cable
to Unnerby, guiding the team toward denser fuel. However clever the idea, using
exotherms was still a form of firemaking. Airsnow was everywhere, but the
combustibles were hidden. It was only the work of trillions of Lesser Bacteria
that made it possible to find and use the fuel. For a while, even Materials
Research had been intimidated by their creation. Like the mat algae on the
Southern Banks these tiny creatures were in a sense social They moved and

Southern Banks, these tiny creatures were in a sense social. They moved and
reproduced as fast as any mat that crawled the Banks. What if this excursion set
the world on fire? But in fact the high-velocity metabolism was bacterial suicide.
Underhill and company had at most fifteen hours before the last of their
exotherms would all die.
Soon they were off the lake, and walking across a level field that had been
the Base Commander's bowling green in the Waning Years. Fuel was plentiful
here; at one point the exotherms got into a fallen mound of vegetation, the
remains of a traumtree. The pile glowed more and more warmly, until a brilliant
emerald light exploded through the snow. For a few moments, the field and the
buildings beyond were clearly visible. Then the green light faded, and there was
just the heat-red glow.
They had come perhaps one hundred yards from the sub. If there were no
obstacles, they had more than four thousand yards to go. The team settled into a
painful routine: walk a few dozen yards, stop and spread exotherms. While
Nizhnimor and Haven rested, Unnerby and Underhill would look about for
where the exotherms had found the richest fuel. From those spots, they would
top off everyone's sludge panniers. Sometimes, there wasn't much fuel to be
found (walking across a wide cement slab), and about all they had to shovel was
airsnow. They needed that, too; they needed to breathe. But without fuel for the
exotherms, the cold quickly became numbing, spreading in from the joints in the
suits and up from their footpads. Then success depended on Sherkaner
successfully guessing where to go next.
Actually, Sherkaner found that pretty easy. He'd gotten his bearings by the
light of the burning tree, and by now the patterns of airsnow that concealed
vegetation were obvious. Things were okay; he wasn't refreezing. The pain at the
tips of his hands and feet was sharp, and every joint seemed to be a ring of fire,
the pain of pressure-swelling, cold, and suit-chafe. Interesting problem, pain. So
helpful, so obnoxious. Even the likes of Hrunkner Unnerby couldn't entirely
ignore it; he could hear Unnerby's hoarse breath over the cable.
Stop, refill the panniers, top off the air, and then on again. Over and over.
Gil Haven's frostbite seemed to be getting worse. They stopped, tried to
rearrange the cobber's suit. Unnerby swapped places with Haven, to help
Nizhnimor with the sled. "No problem, it's only the midhands," said Gil. But his
labored breathing sounded much worse than Unnerby's.
Even so, they were still doing better than Sherk had expected. They trudged
on through the Dark, and their routine soon became almost automatic. All that
was left was the pain. . .and the wonder. Sherkaner looked out through the tiny
portholes of his helmet. Beyond the swirl of mist and the exotherms' glow. .
there were gentle hills It was not totally dark Sometimes when his head was

.there were gentle hills. It was not totally dark. Sometimes when his head was
angled just right, he caught a glimpse of a reddish disk low in the western sky.
He was seeing the sun of the Deepest Dark.
And through the tiny roof porthole, Sherkaner could see the stars.Weare
here at last. The first to ever look upon the Deepest Dark. It was a world that
some ancient philosophers had denied existence-for how can somethingbe, that
can never be observed? But now it was seen. It did exist, centuries of cold and
stillness. . .and stars everywhere. Even through the heavy glass of the porthole,
even with only his topside eyes, he could see colors there that had never been
seen in the stars before. If he would just stop for a while and angle all his eyes to
watch, what more might he see? Most theorists figured the auroral patches
would be gone without sunlight to drive them; others thought the aurora was
somehow powered by the volcanoes that lived beneath them. There might be
other lights here besides the stars. . .
A jerk on the cable brought him back to earth. "Keep moving, gotta keep
moving." Gil's voice was gasping. No doubt he was relaying from Unnerby.
Underhill started to apologize, then realized that it was Amberdon Nizhnimor,
back by the sled, who had paused.
"What is it?" Sherkaner asked.
". . .Amber saw. . .light in the east.. . .Keep moving."
East. To the right. The glass on that side of his helmet was fogged. He had a
vague impression of a near ridgeline. Their operation was within four miles of
the coast. Over that ridge they'd have a clear view of the horizon. Either the light
was quite close or very far away. Yes! There was a light, a pale glow that spread
sideways and up. Aurora? Sherkaner clamped down on his curiosity, kept
putting one foot in front of another. But God below, how he wished he could
climb that ridge and look across the frozen sea!
Sherkaner was a good little trouper right up to the next sludge stop. He was
shoveling a glowing mix of exotherms, fuel, and airsnow into Haven's panniers
when it happened. Five tiny lights raced into the western sky, leaving little
corners here and there like some kind of slow lightning. One of the five faded to
nothing, but the others drew quickly together and-lightblazed, so bright that
Underhill's upward vision blurred in pain. But out to the sides, he could still see.
The brightness grew and grew, a thousand times brighter than the faded disk of
the sun. Multiple shadows showed stark around them. Still brighter and brighter
grew the four lights, till Sherkaner could feel the heat soaking through the shell-
cover of his suit. The airsnow all across the field burst upward in misty white-
out brilliance. The warmth increased a moment more, almost scalding now-and
then faded, leaving his back with the warm feeling you have when you walk into

the shade on a Middle Years summer day.
The mists swirled around them, making the first perceptible wind they had
experienced since leaving the sub. Suddenly it was very cold, the mists sucking
warmth from their suits; only their boots were designed for immersion. The light
was fading now, the air and water cooling to crystal and falling back to earth.
Underhill risked focusing his upward eyes: The fierce points of light had spread
into glowing disks, fading even as he watched. Where they overlapped, he saw a
wavering and a folding, aurora-like; so they were localized in range as well as
angle. Four, close set-the corners of a regular tetrahedron? So beautiful.. . .But
what was the range? Was this some kind of ball lightning, just a few hundred
yards above the field?
In another few minutes they would be too faint to see. But there were other
lights now, bright flashes beyond the eastern ridgeline. In the west, pinpricks of
light slid faster and faster toward the zenith. A shimmering veil of light spread
behind them.
The four Team members stood motionless. For an instant, Unnerby's soldier
persona was blown away, and all that was left was awe. He stumbled away from
the sled, and laid one hand on Sherkaner's back. His voice came faintly across
the poor connection: "What is it, Sherkaner?"
"Don't know." He could feel Unnerby's arm trembling. "But someday we'll
understand.. . .Let's keep moving, Sergeant."
Like spring-driven marionettes suddenly kicked into motion, the Team
finished loading up, and continued on their path. The show continued overhead,
and though there was nothing like the four searing suns, the lights were more
beautiful and extensive than any aurora ever known. Two moving stars slid
faster and faster across the sky. The ghostly curtains of their passing spread all
the way down to the west. Now high in the eastern sky, they flared incandescent,
miniature versions of the first burning lights. As they dimmed and spread, legs
of light crept down from their point of vanishment, brightening wherever they
passed through the earlier glows.
The most spectacular movements were past now, but the slow wraithlike
movement of light continued. If it was hundreds of miles up, like a true aurora,
there was some immense energy source here. If it was just above their heads,
maybe they were seeing the Deep Dark analogue of summer lightning. Either
way, the show was worth all the risks of this adventure.
At last they reached the edge of Tiefer cantonment. The strange aurora was
still visible as they started down the entrance ramp.
There had never been much question about the targets. They were the ones
Underhill had originally imagined, the ones that Victory Smith came up with

that first afternoon at Lands Command. If somehow they could reach the
Deepest Dark, four soldiers and some explosives could do various damage to
fuel dumps, to the shallow deepnesses of surface troops, perhaps even to
Tiefstadt's general staff. Even these targets could not justify the research
investment that Underhill was demanding.
Yet there was an obvious choke point. Just as the modern military machine
endeavored to gain advantage at the beginning of the Dark by fighting longer to
outmaneuver a sleeping enemy, so at the beginning of the New Sun, the first
armies that were effectively back in the field would win a decisive advantage.
Both sides had built large stockpiles for that time, but with a strategy quite
different from that of the
Waning Years and the beginning of the Dark. As far as science could
determine, the New Sun grew to its immense brightness in a space of days,
perhaps of hours. For a few days it was a searing monster, more than a hundred
times brighter than during the Middle and Waning Years. It was that explosion
of brightness-not the cold of the Dark-that destroyed all but the sturdiest
structures of each generation.
This ramp led to a Tiefer outreach depot. There were others along the front,
but this was the rear-echelon depot that would support their maneuver force.
Without it, the best of the Tiefer troops would be compelled to stay out of
combat. Tiefer forward elements at the point of the Crown's advance would have
no backup. Lands Command figured that destroying the depot would force a
favorable armistice, or a string of easy victories for the Crown's armies. Four
soldiers and some subtle vandalism might just be enough to do it.
. . .If they didn't freeze trying to get down this ramp. There were wisps of
airsnow on the steps, and an occasional shred of brush that had grown between
the flags, but that was all. Now when they stopped, it was to pass forward pails
of sludge from the sled that Nizhnimor and Unnerby were pulling. The darkness
closed in tight around them, lit only by an occasional gleam of spilled exotherm.
Intelligence reports claimed the ramp extended less than two hundred yards. . .
Up ahead glowed an oval of light. The end of the tunnel. The Team
staggered off the ramp onto a field that had been open once, but that was now
shielded from the sky by silvery sunblinds. A forest of tent poles stretched off all
around them. In places the fall of airsnow had torn the structure, but most of it
was intact. In the dim, slatted patches of light, they could see the forms of steam
locomotives, rail layers, machine-gun cars, and armored automobiles. Even in
the dimness, there was a glint of silver paint in the airsnow. When the New Sun
lit, this gear would be ready. While ice steamed and melted, and flowed torrents
down the channels that webbed this field, Tiefer combateers would come out of
h
b d
d
f
h
f
f h i
hi l
Th
ld

the nearby deepnesses and run for the safety of their vehicles. The waters would
be diverted into holding tanks, and the cooling sprays started. There would be a
few hours of frantic checking of inventories and mechanical status, a few hours
more to repair the failures of two centuries of Dark and the hours of new heat.
And then they would be off on whichever rail path their commanders thought led
to victory. This was the culmination of generations of scientific research into the
nature of the Dark and the New Sun. Intelligence estimated that in many ways it
was more advanced than the Crown's own quartermaster science.
Hrunkner gathered them together, so they could all hear him. "I'll bet they'll
have forward guards out here within an hour of First Sunlight, but now it's just
ours for the taking.. . .Okay, we top off our panniers and split up per plan. Gil,
are you up to this?"
Gil Haven had weaved his way down the steps like a drunkard with broken
feet. It looked to Sherkaner that his suit failure had extended back to his walking
feet. But he straightened at Unnerby's words, and his voice seemed almost
normal. "Sergeant, I didn't come all this way to sit an' watch you cobbers. I can
handle my part."
And so they had come to the point of it all. They disconnected their audio
cables, and each gathered up his appointed explosives and dye-black. They had
practiced this often enough. If they double-timed between each action point, if
they didn't fall into a drainage ditch and break some legs, if the maps they had
memorized were accurate, there would be time to do it all and still not freeze.
They moved off in four directions. The explosives they set beneath the sunblinds
were scarcely more than hand grenades. They made silent flashes as they went
off-and collapsed strategic sections of the canopy. The dye-black mortars
followed, completely unimpressive, but working just as all the Materials
Research work had predicted they would. The length and breadth of the outreach
depot lay in mottled black, awaiting the kiss of the New Sun.
Three hours later they were almost a mile north of the depot. Unnerby had
pushed them hard after they left the depot, pushed them to accomplish a final,
ancillary goal: survival.
They had almost made it. Almost. Gil Haven was delirious and strangely
frantic when they finished at the depot. He tried to leave the depot on his own.
"Gotta find a place to dig." He said the words again and again, struggling against
Nizhnimor and Unnerby as they tied him back into the row of safety lines.
"That's where we're going now, Gil. Hang on." Unnerby released Haven to
Amber, and for a moment
Hrunkner and Sherk could hear only each other.
"He's got more spirit than before," said Sherkaner. Haven was bouncing
around like a cobber on wooden legs

around like a cobber on wooden legs.
"I don't think he can feel the pain anymore." Hrunk's reply was faint but
clear. "That's not what worries me. I think he's sliding into Wanderdeep."
Rapture of the Dark. It was the mad panic that took cobbers when the inner
core of their minds realized that they were trapped outside. The animal mind
took over, driving the victim to find some place, any place, that might serve as a
deepness.
"Damn." The word was muffled, chopped as Unnerby broke contact and
tried to get them all moving.
They were only hours from probable safety. And yet. . .watching Gil Haven
struggle woke primeval reflexes in all of them. Instinct was such a marvelous
thing-but if they gave in to it now, it would surely lead them to death.
After two hours, they had barely reached the hills beyond the depot. Twice,
Gil had broken free, each time more frantic, to run toward the false promise of
the steep defiles alongside their path. Each time, Amber had dragged him back,
tried to reason with him. But Gil didn't know where he was anymore, and his
thrashing had torn his suit in several places. Parts of him were stiff and frozen.
The end had come when they reached the first of the hard climbs. They had
to leave the sled behind; the rest of the way would be with just the air and
exotherms they could carry in their panniers. A third time, Gil ripped free of the
safety line. He fled with a strange, bounding stagger. Nizhnimor took off after
him. Amber was a large woman, and until now she'd had little trouble handling
Gil Haven. This time was different. Gil had reached the final desperation of
Wanderdeep. As she pulled him back from the edge, he turned on her, stabbing
with the points of his hands. Amber staggered back, releasing him. Hrunk and
Sherkaner were right behind her, but it was too late. Haven's arms flailed in all
directions and he tumbled off the path into the shadows below.
The three of them stood in stupefied paralysis for a moment; then Amber
began to sidle over the edge, her legs feeling down through the airsnow for some
purchase on the rocks beneath. Unnerby and Underhill grabbed her, pulled her
back.
"No, let me go! Frozen he has a chance. We just have to carry him with us."
Underhill leaned over the drop-off, took a long look below. Gil had hit
naked rocks on his way down. The body lay still. If he wasn't already dead,
desiccation and partial freezing would kill him before they could even get the
body back to the path.
Hrunkner must have seen it too. "He's gone, Amber," he said gently. Then
his sergeant's voice returned.
"And we still have a mission."
After a moment Amber's free hands curled in assent but Sherk could not

After a moment, Amber s free hands curled in assent, but Sherk could not
hear that she said a word. She climbed back to the path and helped to refasten
their safety lines and audio.
The three of them continued up the climb, moving faster now.
They had only a few quarts of living exotherms by the time they reached
their goal. Before the Dark, these hills had been a lush traumtree forest, part of a
Tiefer nobleman's estate, a game preserve. Behind them was a cleft in the rocks,
the entrance to a natural deepness. In any wilderness with big game, there would
have to be animal deepnesses. In settled lands, such were normally taken over
and expanded for the use of people-or they fell into disuse. Sherkaner couldn't
imagine how Accord Intelligence knew about this one unless some Tiefers on
this estate were Accord agents. But this was no prepped safe-hole; it looked as
wild and real as anything in Far Brunlargo.
Nizhnimor was the only real hunter on the Team. She and Unnerby cut
through three spitsilk barriers and climbed all the way down. Sherkaner hung
above them, feeding warmth and light downward. "I see five pools. . . two adult
tarants. Give us a little more light."
Sherkaner swung lower, putting most of his weight on the spitsilk. The light
in his lowest hands shone all the way to the back of the cave. Now he could see
two of the pools. They were almost clear of airsnow. The ice was typical of a
hibernating pool-clear of all bubbles. Beneath the ice, he had a glimpse of the
creature, its frozen eyes gleaming in the light. God, it was big! Even so, it must
be a male; it was covered with dozens of baby welts.
"The other pools are all food stash. Fresh kills like you'd expect." In the
first year of the New Sun, such a tarant pair would stay in their deepness,
sucking off the fluids of their stash, the babies growing to a size where they
could learn to hunt when the fires and storms gentled. Tarants were pure
carnivores and not nearly as bright as thracts, but they looked very much like
real people. Killing them and stealing their food was necessary, but it seemed
more like deepness-murder than hunting.
The work took another hour, and used almost all the remaining exotherms.
They climbed back to the surface one last time, to reanchor the spitsilk barrier as
best they could. Underhill was numb in several shoulder joints, and he couldn't
feel the tips of his left hands. Their suits had been through a lot the last few
hours, been punctured and patched. Some of the wrist joints in Amber's suit had
burned away, victims of too much contact with airsnow and exotherms. They'd
been forced to let the limbs freeze. She would likely lose some hands.
Nevertheless, all three of them stood a moment more.
Finally Amber said, "This counts as triumph, doesn't it?"
Unnerby's voice was strong "Yes And you know damn well that Gil would

Unnerby s voice was strong. Yes. And you know damn well that Gil would
agree."
They reached together in a somber clasp, almost a perfect replay of Gokna's
Reaching for Accord; there was even a Missing Companion.
Amberdon Nizhnimor retreated through the cleft in the rocks. Green-
glowing mist spurted from the spitsilk as she passed through; down below, she
would mix the exotherms into pools. The water would be cold slush, but they
could burrow in it. If they opened their suits wide, hopefully they could get a
uniform freeze. Against this last great peril, there was little more they could do.
"Take a last look, Sherkaner. Your handiwork." The certainty was gone
from Unnerby's voice. Amber Nizhnimor was a soldier; Unnerby had done his
duty by her. Now he seemed to be out of combat mode, and so tired that he
barely held his belly clear of the airsnow.
Underhill looked out. They were standing a couple of hundred feet above
the level of the Tiefer depot.
The aurora had faded; the moving points of light, the sky flashes-all were
long gone. In that faded light, the depot was a field of splotchy black amid the
starlit gray. But the black wasn't shadow. It was the powdered dye they had
blasted all across the installation.
"Such a small thing," said Unnerby, "a few hundred pounds of dye-black.
You really think it'll work?"
"Oh yes. The first hours of the New Sun are something out of hell. That
powder black will make their gear hotter than any design tolerance. You know
what happens in that kind of a flash." In fact, Sergeant Unnerby had managed
those tests himself. A hundred times the light of a middle-Brightness sun shining
on dye-black on metal: In minutes, metal contact points were spot-welded,
bearings to sleeves, pistons to cylinders, wheels to rails. The enemy troops
would have to retreat underground, their most important outreach depot on the
front effectively a loss.
"This is the first and last time your trick will ever work, Sherkaner. A few
barriers, a few mines, and we would have been stopped dead."
"Sure. But other things will change, too. This is the last Dark that
Spiderkind will ever sleep through. Next time, it won't be just four cobbers in
airsuits. All civilization will stay awake. We're going to colonize the Dark,
Hrunkner."
Unnerby laughed, obviously disbelieving. He waved Underhill toward the
cleft in the rock, and the deepness below. Tired as he was, the sergeant would be
the last one down, the setter-of-final-barriers.
Sherkaner had one last glimpse of the gray lands, and the curtains of

impossible aurora hanging above.So high, so low, so many things toknow.

NINE
Ezr Vinh's childhood had generally been a protected and safe one. Only one
time had his life been in real jeopardy, and that had been a criminally silly
accident.
Even by Qeng Ho standards, the Vinh.23 Family was a very extended one.
There were branches of the
Family that hadn't touched hands for thousands of years. Vinh.23.4 and
Vinh.23.4.1 had been halfway across Human Space for much of that time,
making their own fortunes, evolving their own mores. Perhaps it would have
been a better thing not to attempt a synch after all that time-except that blessed
chance had brought so many of all three branches together at Old Kielle, and all
at the same time. So they tarried some years, built temps that most sessile
civilizations would call palace-habitats, and tried to figure out what had become
of their common background. Vinh.23.4.1 was a consensual demarchy. That
didn't affect their trading relations, but Aunt Filipa had been scandalized. "No
one's going to votemy property rights away," little Ezr remembered her saying.
Vinh.23.4 seemed much closer to the branches Ezr's parents knew, though their
dialect of Nese was almost unintelligible. The 23.4 Family hadn't bothered to
track the broadcast standards faithfully. But the standards-even more than the
blacklists-were important things. On a picnic, one checked the children's suits,
and one's automation double-checked them; but one didn't expect that
"atmosphere-seconds" meant something different for your cousins' air than for
your own. Ezr had climbed around a small rock that orbited the picnic asteroid;
he was charmed by the way he could make his own little world move under his
hands and feet, rather than the other way around. But when his air ran out, his
playmates had already found their own worlds in the rock cloud. The picnic
monitor ignored his suit's cries for help until the child within was nearly
flatlined.
Ezr only remembered waking in a new, specially made nursery. He had
been treated like a king for uncounted Ksecs afterward.
So Ezr Vinh had always come out of coldsleep in a happy mood. He
suffered the usual disorientation, the usual physical discomfort, but childhood
memories assured him that wherever he was things would be good.
At first, this time was no different, except perhaps gentler than usual. He
was lying in near zero gee, snug in a warm bed. He had the impression of space,
a high ceiling. There was a painting on the wall beyond the bed . . .so

meticulously rendered; it might have been a photo.Trixia loathedthose pictures.
The thought popped up, fixed some context on this waking. Trixia. Triland. The
mission to the OnOff star. And this was not the first waking there. There had
been some very bad times, the Emergent ambush. How had they won over that?
The very last memories before this sleep, what were they?Floating through
darkness in a crippled lander. Park'sflagship destroyed. Trixia. . .
"I think that brought him out of it, Podmaster." A woman's voice.
Almost unwillingly, he turned his head toward the voice. Anne Reynolt sat
at his bedside, and next to her was Tomas Nau.
"Ah, Apprentice Vinh. I am pleased to see you back among the living."
Nau's smile was concerned and solemn.
It took Ezr a couple of tries to gargle up something intelligible: "Wha's. .
.What's happening? Where am I?"
"You're aboard my principal residence. It's about eight days since your fleet
attempted to destroy mine." "Guh?"We attacked you?
Nau cocked his head quizzically at Vinh's incoherence. "I wanted to be here
when we woke you. Director Reynolt will fill you in on the details, but I just
wanted to assure you of my support. I'm appointing you Fleet Manager of what's
left of the Qeng Ho expedition." He stood, patted Vinh gently on the shoulder.
Vinh's gaze followed the Emergent out of the room.Fleet Manager?
Reynolt brought Vinh a book of windows with more hard facts than he
could easily absorb. They could not all be lies.. . .Fourteen hundred Qeng Ho
had died, almost half the fleet's complement. Four of the seven Qeng Ho
starships had been destroyed. The ramscoops on the rest were disabled. Most of
the smaller vehicles had been destroyed or seriously damaged. Nau's people
were busy cleaning up the orbital flotsam of the firefights. They quite intended
to continue the "joint operation." The volatiles and ores that had been lifted from
Arachna would support habitats the Emergents were building at the L1 point of
the sun/planet system.
And she let him see the crew lists. ThePham Nuwen had been lost with all
hands. Captain Park and several members of the Trading Committee were dead.
Most people on the surviving ships still lived, but the senior ones were being
held in coldsleep.
The killing headache of his last few moments on the lander was gone. Ezr
had been cured of the
"unfortunate contagion," Reynolt said. But only an engineered disease
could have such a convenient and universal time of onset. The Emergent lies
were scarcely more than an excuse for civility. They had planned the ambush
from the beginning, and down to the last second.

At least Anne Reynolt did not smile when she spoke the lies. In fact, she
rarely smiled at all. Director of Human Resources Reynolt. Funny that not even
Trixia had picked up on what that title might imply. At first, Ezr thought Reynolt
was fighting a proper sense of shame: she hardly ever looked him directly in the
eye. But gradually he realized that looking at his face was no more interesting to
her than studying a bulkhead. She didn't see him as a person; she didn't care a jot
for the dead.
Ezr read the reports quietly, not sneering, not crying out when he saw that
Sum Dotran was gone.Trixia's name was nowhere on the list of thedead. Finally
he came to the lists of the waking survivors and their present disposition. Almost
three hundred were aboard the Qeng Ho temp, also moved to the L1 point. Ezr
scanned the names, memorizing: junior people, and virtually no Trilanders or
academics. No Trixia Bonsol. He paged further. . .another list.Trixia! Her name
was there, and she was even listed under "Linguistics Department."
Ezr looked up from the book of windows, tried to sound casual. "What, um,
what's the meaning of this glyph beside some of the names?"BesideTrixia's
name.
" 'Focused." '
"And what does that mean?" There was an edge, unwanted, in his voice.
"They're still under medical treatment. Not everyone recovered as easily as
you." Her stare was hard and impassive.
The next day, Nau showed up again.
"Time to introduce you to your new subordinates," he said. They coasted
through a long, straight corridor to a vehicular airlock. This habitat wasn't the
banquet place. There was the faintest drift of gravity, as though it were set on a
small asteroid. The taxi beyond the airlock was larger than any the Qeng Ho had
brought. It was luxurious in a baroque, primitive way. There were low tables and
a bar that served in all directions. Wide, natural-looking windows surrounded
them. Nau gave him a moment to look out:
The taxi was rising through the strutwork of a grounded habitat. The thing
was incomplete but it looked as big as a Qeng Ho legation temp. Now they were
above the strutwork. The ground curved away into a jumble of gray leviathans.
These were the diamond mountains, all collected together. The blocks were
strangely uncratered, but as somberly dull as common asteroids. Here and there
the frail sunlight picked out where the surface graphite had been nicked away,
and there was a rainbow glitter. Nestled between two of the mountains he saw
pale fields of snow, a blocky tumble of freshly cut rock and ice; these must be
the fragments of ocean and seamount they'd lifted from Arachna. The taxi rose
further. Around the corner of the mountains, the forms of starships climbed into
i
Th
hi
h
i h
d d
l
b
d
f d b
h

view. The ships were more than six hundred meters long, but dwarfed by the
rockpile. They were moored tightly together, the way salvage is bundled in a
junkyard; Ezr counted quickly, estimated what he could not see directly. "So
you've brought everything here-to L1? You really intend a lurking strategy?"
Nau gave a nod. "I'm afraid so. It's best to be frank about this. Our fighting
has put us all near the edge. We have sufficient resources to return home, but
empty-handed. Instead, if we can just cooperate. . .well, from here at L1 we can
watch the Spiders. If they are indeed entering the Information Age, we can
eventually use their resources to refit. In either case, we may get much of what
we came for."
Hm. An extended lurk, waiting for your customers to mature. It was a
strategy the Qeng Ho had followed on a few occasions. Sometimes it even
worked. "It will be difficult."
From behind Ezr, a voice said, "For you perhaps. But Emergents live well,
little man. Best you learn that now." It was a voice that Vinh recognized, the
voice that had protested of Qeng Ho ambush even as the killing began. Ritser
Brughel. Ezr turned. The big, blond fellow was grinning at him. No subtle
nuance here. "And we also play to win. The Spiders will learn that too." Not too
long ago, Ezr Vinh had spent an evening sitting next to this fellow, listening to
him lecture Pham Trinli. The blond was a boor and a bully, but it hadn't mattered
then. Vinh's gaze flickered across the carpeted walls to Anne Reynolt. She was
watching the conversation intently. Physically, she and Brughel could have been
sister and brother. There was even a tinge of red in the guy's blond hair. But
there the similarity ended. Obnoxious as he was, Brughel's emotions were clear
things, and intense. The only affect that Vinh had seen in Anne Reynolt was
impatience. She watched the present conversation as one might watch insects in
garden soil.
"But don't worry, Peddler boy. Your quarters are properly inconspicuous."
Brughel pointed out the forward window. There was a greenish speck, barely
showing a disk. It was the Qeng Ho temp. "We have it parked in an eight-day
orbit of the main jumble."
Tomas Nau raised his hand politely, almost as if asking for the floor, and
Brughel shut up. "We have only a moment, Mr. Vinh. I know that Anne Reynolt
has given you an overview, but I want to make sure you understand your new
responsibilities." He did something with his cuff, and the image of the Qeng Ho
temp swelled. Vinh swallowed; funny, it was just an ordinary field temp, barely
one hundred meters on a side. His eyes searched the lumpy, quilted hull. He had
lived in there less than 2Msec, cursed its squat economies a thousand times. But
now, it was the closest thing to home that still existed; inside were many of Ezr's
surviving friends A field temp is so easy to destroy Yet all the cells looked

surviving friends. A field temp is so easy to destroy. Yet all the cells looked
fully inflated and there was no patchwork. Captain Park had set this one far from
his ships, and Nau had spared it. ". . .so your new position is an important one.
As my Fleet Manager, you have responsibilities comparable to the late Captain
Park's. You will have my consistent support; I will make sure that my people
understand this." A glance at Ritser Brughel. "But please remember: Our
success-even our survival-now depends on our cooperation."

TEN
When it came to personnel management, Ezr knew he was a little slow.
What Nau was up to should have been instantly obvious. Vinh had even studied
such things in school. When they reached the temp, Nau gave an unctuous little
speech, introducing Vinh as the new "Qeng Ho Fleet Manager." Nau made a
special point of the fact that Ezr Vinh was the most senior member of a ship-
owning Family present. The two Vinh starships had survived the recent ambush
relatively undamaged. If there was any legitimate master for the Qeng Ho ships,
it was Ezr Vinh. And if everyone cooperated with legitimate authority, there
would yet be wealth for all. Then Ezr was pushed forward to mumble a few
words about how glad he was to be back among friends, and how he hoped for
their help.
In the days that followed, he came to understand the wedge that Nau had
slipped between duty and loyalty. Ezr was home and yet he was not. Every day,
he saw familiar faces. Benny Wen and Jimmy Diem had both survived. Ezr had
known Benny since they were six years old; now he was like a stranger, a
cooperative stranger.
And then one day, more by luck than planning, Ezr ran into Benny near the
temp's taxi locks. Ezr was alone. More and more, his Emergent assistants did not
dog his moves. They trusted him? They had him bugged? They couldn't imagine
him doing harm? All the possibilities were obnoxious, but it was good to be free
of them.
Benny was with a small crew of Qeng Ho right under the outermost balloon
wall. Being near the locks, there was no exterior quilting here; every so often the
lights of a passing taxi sent a moving glow across the fabric. Benny's crew was
spread out across the wall, working at the nodes of the approach automation.
Their Emergent gang boss was at the far end of the open space.
Ezr glided out of the radial tunnel, saw Benny Wen, and bounced easily
across the wall toward him.
Wen looked up from his work and nodded courteously. "Fleet Manager."
The formality was familiar now-and still as painful as a kick in the face.
"Hi, Benny. H-how are things going?"
Wen looked briefly down the length of the volume at the Emergent gang
boss. That guy really stuck out, his work clothes gray and stark against the
rampant individualism of most Qeng Ho. He was talking loudly to three of the
work crew, but at this distance his words were muffled by the balloon fabric.

Benny looked back at Ezr and shrugged. "Oh, just fine. You know what we're
doing here?"
"Replacing the comm inputs." One of the Emergents' first moves had been
to confiscate all head-up displays. The huds and their associated input
electronics were the classic tools of freedom.
Wen laughed softly, his eyes still on the gang boss. "Right the first time,
Ezr old pal. You see, our new. . .employers. . .have a problem. They need our
ships. They need our equipment. But none of that will work without the
automation. And how can they trust that?" All effective machinery had
embedded controllers. And of course the controllers were networked, with the
invisible glue of their fleet's local net that made everything work consistently.
The software for that system had been developed over millennia, refined by
the Qeng Ho over centuries. Destroy it and the fleet would be barely more than
scrap metal. But how could any conqueror trust what all those centuries had built
in? In most such situations, the losers' gear was simply destroyed. But as Tomas
Nau admitted, no one could afford to lose any more resources.
"Their own work gangs are going through every node, you know. Not just
here, but on all our surviving ships. Bit by bit they are rehosting them."
"There's no way they can replace everything."I hope. The worst tyrannies
were the ones where a government required its own logic on every embedded
node.
"You'd be surprised what they are replacing. I've seen them work. Their
computer techs are. . .strange.
They've dug up stuff in the system that I never suspected." Benny shrugged.
"But you're right, they aren't touching the lowest-level embedded stuff. It's
mainly the I/O logic that gets jerked. In return, we get brand-new interfaces."
Benny's face twisted in a little smile. He pulled a black plastic oblong from his
belt. Some kind of keyboard. "This is the only thing we'll be using for a while."
"Lord, that looks ancient."
"Simple, not ancient. I think these are just backups the Emergents had
floating around." Benny sent another look in the direction of the gang boss. "The
important thing is, the comm gear in these boxes is known to the Emergents.
Tamper with it, and there'll be alarms up the local net. In principle they can filter
everything we do." Benny looked down at the box, hefted it. Benny was just
another apprentice, like Ezr. He wasn't much sharper about technical things than
Ezr, but he always had a nose for clever deals. "Strange. What I've seen of
Emergent technology looks pretty dull. Yet these guys really intend to dredge
and monitor everything. There'ssomething about their automation that we don't
understand." He was almost talking to himself.

On the wall behind him a light grew and grew, shifted slowly sideways. A
taxi was approaching the docking bay. The light slid around the curve of the
wall, and a second later there was a mutedkchunk. Shallow ripples chased out
across the fabric from the docking cylinder. The lock pumps kicked in. Here,
their whine was louder than at the dock entrance itself. Ezr hesitated. The noise
was enough to mask their conversation from the gang boss.Sure, and any
surveillance bugs could hear through the racketbetter than our own ears. So
when he spoke, it was not a conspiratorial murmur, but loud against the racket of
the pumps. "Benny, lots has happened. I just want you to know I haven't
changed. I'm not-"I'm not atraitor, damn it!
For a moment, Benny's expression was opaque. . .and then he suddenly
smiled. "I know, Ezr. I know."
Benny led him along the wall in the general direction of the rest of his work
crew. "Let me show you the other things that we are up to." Ezr followed as the
other pointed to this and that, described the changes the Emergents were making
in the dock protocols. And suddenly he understood a little more of the game.The
enemy needs us, expects to be working us foryears. There's lots we can say to
each other. They won't kill us for exchanginginformation to get their jobs done.
They won't kill us for speculating aboutwhat's going on.
The whine of the pumps died. Somewhere beyond the plastic of the docking
cylinder, people and cargo would be debarking.
Wen swung close to the open hatch of a utility duct. "They're bringing in
lots of their own people, I hear."
"Yes, four hundred soon, maybe more." This temp was just some balloons,
inflated a few Msecs earlier, upon the fleet's arrival. But it was large enough for
all the crews that had been packed as corpsicles for the fifty-light-year transit
from Triland. That had been three thousand people. Now it held only three
hundred.
Benny raised an eyebrow. "I thought they had their own temp, and better
than this."
"I-" The gang boss was almost within earshot.But this isn't conspiracy. Lord
of Trade, we have to be able to talk about our jobs. "I think they lost more than
they're letting on."I think we came within centimeters ofwinning, even though we
were ambushed, even though they had knocked usdown with their war disease.
Benny nodded, and Ezr guessed that he already knew. But did he know this:
"That will still leave a lot of space. Tomas Nau is thinking of bringing more of
us out of coldsleep, maybe some officers." Sure, the senior people would be
more of a risk to the Emergents, but if Nau really wanted effective cooperation. .
.Unfortunately, the Podmaster was much less forthcoming about the

"Focused."Trixia.
"Oh?" Benny's voice was noncommittal, but his gaze was suddenly sharp.
He looked away. "That would make a big difference, especially to some of us. .
.like the little lady I have working in this duct." He stuck his head partway
through the hatch and shouted. "Hey, Qiwi, are you done in there yet?"
The Brat? Ezr had only seen her two or three times since the ambush,
enough to know she wasn't injured and not a hostage. But more than most, she
had spent time outside of the temp and with the Emergents. Maybe she just
seemed too young to be a threat. A moment passed; a tiny figure in a screwball
harlequin outfit slipped out of the duct.
"Yeah, yeah, I'm all done. I strung the tamperproof all-" She saw Ezr. "Hi,
Ezr!" For once, the little girl did not swarm on him. She just nodded and kind of
smiled. Maybe she was growing up. If so, this was the hard way to do it. "I
strung it all the way past the locks, no problem. You gotta wonder why these
guys don't just use encryption, though." She was smiling, but there were dark
shadows around her eyes. It was a face Ezr would expect in someone older. Qiwi
stood in the relaxed crouch of zero gee, with one checkered boot slipped under a
wall stop. But she held her arms close at her sides, her hands clasping her
elbows. The expansive, grabbing and punching little monster of before the
ambush was gone. Qiwi's father was one of the still-infected, like Trixia. Like
Trixia, he might never come back. And Kira Pen Lisolet was a senior armsman.
The little girl continued talking about the setup inside the duct. She was
well qualified. Other children might have toys and games and playmates; Qiwi's
home had been a near-empty ramship, out between the stars. That long alone-
time had left her on the verge of being several kinds of specialist.
She had several ideas for how they might save time with the cable-pulling
the Emergents required. Benny was nodding, taking notes.
Then Qiwi was on a different topic. "I hear we're gonna have new people in
the temp." "Yes-"
"Who? Who?"
"Emergents. Then some of our own people, I think."
Her smile blazed for an instant, and then she forced her enthusiasm down
with a visible effort. "I-I was over at Hammerfest. Podmaster Nau wanted me to
check out the coldsleep gear before they move it toFarTreasure. I. . .I saw
Mama, Ezr. I could see her face through the transp. I could see her slow-
breathe."
Benny said, "Don't worry, kid. We'll. . .Things will be okay for both your
mom and pop." "I know. That's what Podmaster Nau told me, too."
He could see the hope in her eyes. So Nau was making vague promises to

her, becoming poor Qiwi's lifeline. And some of the promises might even be
true. Maybe they would finally cure her father of their damn war disease. But
armsmen like Kira Pen Lisolet would be terribly dangerous to any tyrant. Short
of a counterambush, Kira Lisolet might sleep for a long, long time. . .Short of a
counterambush.His glance flickered across to Benny. His friend's stare was
completely blank, a return to the earlier opacity. And suddenly Ezr knew that
there really was a conspiracy. In a few Msecs at most, some among the Qeng Ho
would act.
I can help; I know I can.The official coordination of all Emergent orders
passed through Ezr Vinh. If he were on the inside. . .But he was also the most
closely watched of all, even if Tomas Nau had no real respect for him. For a
moment, fury rose in Ezr. Benny knew he wasn't a traitor-but there was no way
he could help without giving the conspiracy away.
The Qeng Ho temp had escaped the ambush without a scratch. There had
not even been pulse damage; before they maimed the local net, the Emergents
had a great time mining the databases there.
What was left worked well enough for routine ops. Every few days, a few
more people were added to the temp's population. Most were Emergents, but
some were low-rank Qeng Ho released from coldsleep detention. Emergents and
Qeng Ho, they all looked like refugees from disaster. There was no disguising
the damage the Emergents had suffered, the equipment they had lost.And maybe
Trixia is dead. The "Focused" were kept in the Emergents' new habitat,
Hammerfest. But no one had seen any of them.
Meantime, conditions in the Qeng Ho temp slowly got worse. They were at
less than one-third the temp's design population, yet systems were failing. Part of
it was the maimed automation. Part of it-and this was a subtle effect-was that
people weren't doing their jobs properly. Between the damaged automation and
the Emergents' clumsiness with life-systems, the other side hadn't caught on.
Fortunately for the conspirators, Qiwi spent most of her time off the temp. Ezr
knew she could have detected the scam instantly. Ezr's contribution to the
conspiracy was silence, simply not noticing what was going on. He moved from
petty emergency to petty emergency, doing the obvious-and wondering what his
friends were really up to.
The temp was actually beginning to stink. Ezr and his Emergent assistants
took a trip down to the bactry pools at the innermost core of the temp, the place
where Apprentice Vinh had spent so many Ksecs. . .before. He would give
anything to be an apprentice forever down here, if only it would bring back
Captain Park and the others.
The stench in the bactry was worse than Ezr had known outside of a failed

school exercise. The walls behind the bio-weirs were covered with soft black
goo. It swayed like old flesh in the breeze of the ventilators. Ciret and Marli
retched, one barfing inside his respirator. Marli gasped out, "Pus! I'm not putting
up with this. We'll be just outside when you're done."
They splashed and spattered their way out, and the door sealed. And Ezr
was alone with the smells. He stood for a moment, suddenly realizing that if he
ever wanted to be completely alone, this was the place!
As he started to survey the contamination, a figure in goo-spattered
waterproofs and a respirator drifted out from the filth. It raised one hand for
silence, and passed a signals unit across Vinh's body. "Mmph. You're clean,"
came a muffled voice. "Or maybe they just trust you."
It was Jimmy Diem. Ezr almost hugged him, bactry shit and all. Against all
odds, the conspiracy had found a way to talk to him. But there was no happy
relief in Diem's voice. His eyes were invisible behind goggles, but tension coiled
in his posture. "Why are you toadying, Vinh?"
"I'mnot ! I'm just playing for time."
"That's what. . .some of us think. But Nau has laid so many perks on you,
and you're the guy we have to clear every little thing with. Do you really think
you own what's left of us?"
That was the line that Nau pushed even now. "No!Maybe they think they've
bought me, but. . .Lord of Trade, sir, wasn't I a solid crewmember?"
A muffled chuckle, and some of the tension seemed to leave Diem's
shoulders. "Yeah. You were a daydreamer who could never quite keep his eye
on the ball"-words from familiar critiques, but spoken almost fondly-"but you're
not stupid and you never traded on your Family connections.. . .Okay,
Apprentice, welcome aboard."
It was the most joyful promotion Ezr Vinh had ever received. He stifled a
hundred questions that percolated up; most had answers that he shouldn't be told.
But still, just one, about TrixiaDiem was already talking. "I've got some code
schemes for you to memorize, but we may have to meet face-to-face again. So
the stink will get better, but it's going to continue to be a problem; you'll have
plenty of excuse to visit. A couple of general things for now: We need to get
outdoors."
Vinh thought of theFar Treasure and the Qeng Ho armsmen in coldsleep
there. Or maybe there were weapons caches in secret places aboard the surviving
Qeng Hoships. "Hm. There are several outside repair projects where we're the
experts."
"I know. The main thing is to get the right people on the crews, and in the
right job slots. We'll get you some names."
"Ri h "

"Right."
"Another thing: We need to know about the 'Focused ones.' Where exactly
are they being held? Can they be moved fast?"
"I'm trying to learn about them,"more than you may know, Crewleader.
"Reynolt says they're alive, that they've stopped the progression of the
disease."The mindrot. That chilling term was not from Reynolt, but the slip of
tongue he'd heard from an ordinary Emergent. "I'm trying to get permission to
see-"
"Yeah. Trixia Bonsol, right?" Goo-sticky fingers patted Vinh's arm
sympathetically. "Hmm. You've got a solid motive to keep after them on this. Be
a good boy in every other way, but pushhard on this. You know, like it's the big
favor that will keep you in line, if only they'll grant it.. . . Okay. Get yourself out
of here."
Diem faded into the shrouds of odiferous glop. Vinh smeared out the
fingerprint traces on his sleeve. As he turned back to the hatch, he was scarcely
conscious of the smell anymore. He was working with his friends again. And
they had a chance.
Just as the remains of the Qeng Ho expedition had its mock "Fleet
Manager," Ezr Vinh, so Tomas Nau also appointed a "Fleet Management
Committee" to advise and aid in its operation. It was typical of Nau's strategy,
coopting innocent people into apparent treason. Their once-per-Msec meetings
would have been torture for Vinh, except for one thing: Jimmy Diem was one of
the committee members.
Ezr watched the ten troop into his conference room. Nau had furnished the
room with polished wood and high-quality windows; everyone in the temp knew
about the cushy treatment given the Fleet Manager and his committee. Except
for Qiwi, all ten realized how they were being used. Most of them realized that it
would be years, if ever, before Tomas Nau released all the surviving Qeng Ho
from coldsleep detention. Some, like Jimmy, guessed that in fact the senior
officers might occasionally be brought out, secretly, for interrogations and brief
service. It was an unending villainy that would give the Emergents the
permanent upper hand.
So, there were no traitors here. They were a discouraging sight
nevertheless: five apprentices, three junior officers, a fourteen-year-old, and one
doddering incompetent. Okay, to be honest, Pham Trinli didn't dodder, not
physically; for an old man, he was in pretty good shape. Most likely, he'd always
been a goofball. It was a testament to his record that he was not being held in
coldsleep. Trinli was the only Qeng Ho military man left awake.
And all this rather makes me the Clown of Clowns.Fleet Manager Vinh

called the meeting to order. You'd think that being fraudulent toadies would at
least make these meetings quick. But no, they often dragged on for many Ksecs,
dribbling off into pickle-headed assignments for individual members.I hope you
enjoy eavesdropping on this, Nau scum.
The first order of business was the putrefaction in the bactry. That was
under control. The widespread stench should be flushed by their next meeting
time. There remained some out-of-control gene lines in the bactry itself (good!)
but they posed no danger to the temp. Vinh avoided looking at Jimmy Diem as
he listened to the report. He'd met Diem in the bactry three times now. The
conversations had been brief and one-sided. The things Vinh was most curious
to know were just what he absolutely must not know: How many Qeng Ho were
in on Diem's operation? Who? Was there any concrete plan to smash the
Emergents, to rescue the hostages?
The second item was more contentious. The Emergents wanted their own
time units used in all fleet work. "I don't understand," Vinh said to the unhappy
looks. "The Emergent second is the same as ours-and for local operations, the
rest is just calendar frippery. Our software deals with Customer calendars all the
time." Certainly, there was little problem in casual conversation. The Balacrean
day wasn't far off the 100Ksec shift "day" the Qeng Ho used. And their year was
close enough to 30Msec that most of the yearstem words caused no confusion.
"Sure, we can handle weird calendars, but that's in front-end applications."
Arlo Dinh had been an apprentice programmer; now he was in charge of
software mods. "Our new, um, employers are using Qeng Ho internal tools.
'There will be side effects."' Arlo intoned the mantra ominously.
"Okay, okay. I'll take-" Ezr paused, experiencing a burst of administrative
insight. "Arlo, why don'tyou take this up with Reynolt? Explain the problems to
her."
Ezr looked down at his agenda, avoiding Arlo's annoyed gaze. "Next item.
We're getting more new tenants. The Podmaster says to expect at least another
three hundred Emergents, and after that another fifty Qeng Ho. It looks like life-
support can tolerate this. What about our other systems? Gonle?"
When their ranks had been real, Gonle Fong had been a junior
quartermaster on theInvisible Hand. Fong's mind still hadn't caught up with the
changes. She was of indeterminate age, and if not for the ambush she might have
lived out her life a junior quartermaster. Maybe she was one of those people
whose career paths had stopped at just the right place, where their abilities
precisely matched what was asked of them. But now . . .
Fong nodded at his question. "Yeah, I have some numbers to show you."
She plinked away at the

Emergent keyboard in front of her, made some mistakes, tried to correct.
On the window across the room, various error messages reported on her
flailings. "How do you turn those off?" Fong muttered, swearing to herself. She
made another typo and her rage became very public. "Goddamn it to hell, I can't
stand these fucking things!" She grabbed the keyboard and smashed it down
onto the polished wood table. The wood veneer cracked, but the keyboard was
unharmed. She smashed it again; the error display across the room shimmered in
iridescent protest and vanished. Fong half rose from her seat and waved the
oddly bent keyboard in Ezr's face. "Those Emergent fuckers have taken away all
the I/O that works. I can't use voice, I can't use head-up displays. All we have are
windows and these mother-damned things!" She threw the keyboard at the table.
It bounced up, spinning into the ceiling.
There was a chorus of agreement, though not quite so manic. "You can't do
everything through a keyboard. We need huds.. . .We're crippled even when the
underlying systems are okay."
Ezr held up his hands, waiting for the mutiny to die down. "You all know
the reason for this. The Emergents simply don't trust our systems; they feel they
need to control the periphery."
"Sure! They want spies on every interaction. I wouldn't trust captured
automation either. But this is impossible! I'll use their I/O, but make 'em give us
head-up displays and eye-pointers and-"
"I'll tell you, there are some people who are just going on using their old
gear," said Gonle Fong.
"Stop!"This was the part of being a toady that hurt the most. Ezr did his best
to glare at Fong.
"Understand what you are saying, Miss Fong. Yes. This is a major
inconvenience, but Podmaster Nau regards disobedience on this point as treason.
It's something the Emergents see as a direct threat."So keep your old I/O gear but
understand the risk. He didn't say that out loud.
Fong was hunched down over the table. She looked up at him and nodded
grimly.
"Look," Ezr continued, "I've asked Nau and Reynolt for other devices. We
may get a few. But remember, we're stuck light-years from the nearest industrial
civilization. Any new gadgets have to be made with just what the Emergents
have here at L1." Ezr doubted that very much would be forthcoming. "It is
deadly important for you to make the I/O ban clear to your people. For their own
safety."
He looked from face to face. Almost everyone glared back at him. But Vinh
saw their secret sense of relief. When they went back to their friends, the
i
b
ld h
E
Vi h
i
h
i
l
f ll
h

committee members would have Ezr Vinh to point at as the spineless fellow who
was ramrodding the Emergent demands-and their own unpopular position would
be a little easier.
Ezr sat silent a moment more, feeling impotent.Please let this be
whatCrewleader Diem wants of me. But Jimmy's eyes were as blank and hard as
the others. Outside of the bactry, he played his role well. Finally, Ezr leaned
forward and said quietly to Fong, "You were going to tell me about the
newcomers. What are the problems?"
Fong grunted, remembering what they'd been discussing before she blew
up. But surprisingly, she said, "Ah, forget the numbers. The short answer is, we
can handle more people. Hell, if we could control our automation properly we
could house three thousand in this balloon. As for the people themselves?" She
shrugged, but without any great anger. "They're typical Chumps. The sort I've
seen in a lot of tyrannies. They call themselves 'managers,' but they're peons.
The fact is, behind some bluster they're kind of nervous aboutus. " A sneaky
smile spread across her heavy features. "We got people who know how to handle
Customers like these. Some of us are making friends. There's lots they're not
supposed to talk about-like how bad this 'mindrot' crap really is. But I'll tell you,
if their big bosses don't come clean soon, we'll find out for ourselves."
Ezr didn't smile back.Are you listening, Podmaster Nau? Whateveryour
desires, soon we will know the truth. And what they discovered, Jimmy Diem
could use. Coming in to this meeting, Ezr had been totally wrapped up in one
item, the last on the agenda. Now he was beginning to see that everything fit
together. And maybe he wasn't doing such a bad job after all.
That last agenda item was the upcoming explosion of the sun. And Jimmy
had a fool-surely an unknowing fool-to front for them on this: Pham Trinli. The
armsman made a big show of moving to the front of the table. "Yes, yes," he
said. "I've got the pictures here. Just a second." A dozen engineering graphics
appeared on the windows around the room. Trinli launched himself to the
podium, and lectured them on Lagrange stability points. Funny, the man actually
had a voice and style that bespoke command, but the ideas that came out were
tendentious commonplaces.
Vinh let him ramble for a hundred seconds. Then, "I believe your agenda
item is 'Preparations for Relight,' Mr. Trinli. What is it the Emergents are asking
us to do?"
The old man fixed Ezr with a stare as intimidating as any crewleader's:
"That'sArmsman Trinli, if you please, Fleet Manager." The stare continued a
second longer. "Very well, to the heart of the matter. Here we have some five
billion tonnes of diamond." A red pointer lit on the window behind him, pointing

at the slowly turning pile of rocks, all the loose material that Captain Park had
found in this solar system. The ice and ore that had been lifted from Arachna
were smaller mountains wedged in the corners and creases of the asteroidal
blocks. "The rocks are in a classic contact jumble. At the present time, our fleets
are moored to this jumble or in orbit around it. Now, as I was trying to explain a
few seconds ago, the Emergents want us to emplace and manage a system of
electric jets on the core blocks of the jumble."
Diem: "Before the Relight?"
"Indeed."
"They want to maintain contact stability during the Relight?" "That's
exactly right."
Uneasy looks passed around the table. Stationkeeping was a common and
ancient practice. If done properly, an orbit about L1 cost very little fuel. They
would be less than a million and a half kilometers from Arachna, and almost
directly between the planet and its sun. In the coming bright years, they would
be effectively hidden in its glare. But the Emergents didn't think small; they
already had built various structures, including their "Hammerfest," down on the
rockpile. So now they wanted the stationkeeping jets in place before Relight.
OnOff would shine at fifty to one hundred sols before it settled down. The
Chumps wanted to use the stationkeeping jets to keep the big rocks from shifting
around during that time. It was dangerous foolishness, but the Emergents were
boss.And this will giveJimmy access to the out-of-doors.
"Actually, I don't think there will be serious problems." Qiwi Lisolet rose
from her seat. She coasted over to Pham Trinli's maps, preempting whatever
more Trinli had to say. "I did a number of exercises like this while we were in
transit. My mother wants me to be an engineer and she thought stationkeeping
might be an important part of this mission." Qiwi sounded more adultly serious
than usual. This was also the first time he'd seen her dressed in Lisolet-greens.
She floated in front of the windows for a moment, reading the details. Her
ladylike dignity faltered. "Lord, they are asking a lot! That rockpile is so loose.
Even if we get the math right, there's no way we can know all the stresses inside
the pile. And if the volatiles get into sunlight, there'll be a whole new problem."
She whistled, and her smile was one of childlike relish. "We may have to move
the jets during the Relight. I-"
Pham Trinli glowered at the girl. No doubt she had just trashed a thousand
seconds of his presentation. "Yes, it will be quite a job. We have only a hundred
electric jets for the whole thing. We'll need crews down on the jumble the whole
time."
"No, no, that's not true. About the jets, I mean. We have lots more ejets

over on theBrisgo Gap. This job isn't more than a hundred times bigger than
ones I practiced-" Qiwi was wholely caught up in her enthusiasm, and for once it
wasn't Ezr Vinh who was on the other side of her arguing.
Not everyone accepted the situation quietly. The junior officers, including
Diem, demanded that the rockpile be dispersed during the Relight, the volatiles
piled on the shadowside of the biggest diamond.
Nau be damned, this was just too risky. Trinli bristled, shouted back that he
had already made these points to the Emergents.
Ezr slapped the table, then again, louder. "Order please. This is the job
we've been assigned. The best way we can help our people is by behaving
responsibly with what we've got. I think we can get added help from the
Emergents on this, but we have to approach them properly."
The argument rolled on around him.How many of them are in on
theconspiracy, he wondered. Surely not Qiwi? After some seconds of further
argument, they were left where they began: with no choice but to truckle. Jimmy
Diem shifted back, and sighed. "All right, we do as we're told. But at least we
know they need us. Let's put the squeeze on Nau, get him to release some senior
specialists."
There was mumbled agreement. Vinh's gaze locked with Jimmy's, and then
he looked away. Maybe they could get some hostages released for this; more
likely not. But suddenly Ezr knew when the conspiracy would strike.

ELEVEN
The OnOff star might better have been called "old faithful." Its catastrophic
variability had first been noticed by the Dawn Age astronomers of Old Earth. In
less than eight hundred seconds, a star catalogued as "singleton brown dwarf
[peculiar]" had gone from magnitude 26 to magnitude 4. Over a span of thirty-
five years the object had faded back to virtual invisibility-and generated dozens
of graduate research degrees in the process. Since then the star had been watched
carefully, and the mystery had become grander. The initial spike varied by as
much as thirty percent, but as a whole the light curve was incredibly regular. On,
off, on, off. . .a cycle some 250 years long, with onset predictable to within one
second.
In the millennia since the Dawn, human civilizations had spread steadily
outward from Earth's solar system. The observations of OnOff became ever
more accurate, and from smaller and smaller distances.
And finally, humans stood within the OnOff system, and watched the
seconds tick down toward a new Relighting.
Tomas Nau gave a little speech, ending with: "It will be an interesting
show." They were using the temp's largest meeting room to watch the Relight.
Just now it was crowded, sagging in the microgravity at the rockpile's surface.
Over in Hammerfest, Emergent specialists were overseeing the operation. There
were also skeleton crews aboard the starships. But Ezr knew that most of the
Qeng Ho and all of the off-duty Emergents were here. The two sides were
almost sociable, almost friendly. It was forty days since the ambush. Rumors
were that Emergent security would ease up significantly after the Relight.
Ezr had latched on to a spot near the ceiling. Without huds, the only view
was through the room's wallpaper. Hanging from here, he could see the three
most interesting windows-at least when other people weren't coasting across his
line of sight. One was a full-disk view of the OnOff star. Another window
looked out from one of the microsats in low orbit around the OnOff star. Even
from five hundred kilometers, the star's surface did not look threatening. The
view might have been from an aircraft flying over a glowing cloud deck. If it
weren't for the surface gravity, humans could almost have landed on it. The
"clouds" slid slowly past the microsat's view, glimmers of glowing red showing
up between them. It was the sullen red of a brown dwarf, a black-body redness.
There was no sign of the cataclysm that was due to arrive in another. . .six
hundred seconds.

Nau and his senior flight technician came up to join Ezr. Brughel was
nowhere to be seen. You could always tell when Nau wanted mellow feelings-
just check for the absence of Ritser Brughel. The Podmaster grabbed a spot next
to Vinh. He was smiling like some Customer politician. "Well, Fleet Manager,
are you still nervous about this operation?"
Vinh nodded. "You know my committee's recommendation. For this
Relight, we should have moved the volatiles behind a single rock and taken it
further out. We should be in the outer system for this." The ships of both fleets
and all the habitats were moored to one side of the largest diamond rock. They
would be shielded from the Relight, but if things started shifting . . .
Nau's technician shook his head. "We've got too much on the ground here.
Besides, we're running on empty; we'd have to use a lot of our volatiles to go
flying around the system." The tech, Jau Xin, looked almost as young as Ezr.
Xin was pleasant enough, but did not have quite the edge of competence that Ezr
was used to in senior Qeng Ho. "I've been very impressed by your engineers."
Xin nodded at the other windows. "They're much better than we would be at
handling the rockpile. It's hard to see how they could be this sharp without zip . .
." His voice trailed off. There were still secrets; that might change sooner than
the Emergents expected.
Nau smoothly filled the pause in Xin's speech. "Your people are good, Ezr.
Really, I think that's why they complained about this plan so much; they aim for
perfection." He looked out the window on the OnOff star. "Think of all the
history that comes together here."
Around and below them, the crowd was clustered into groups of Emergents
and Qeng Ho, but discussion was going on in all directions. The window on the
far wall looked out onto the exposed surface of the rockpile. Jimmy Diem's work
crew was spreading a silvery canopy over the tops of icy boulders. Nau frowned.
"That's to cover the water ice and airsnow, sir," said Vinh. "The tops are in
line of sight of OnOff. The curtains should cut down on boil-off."
"Ah." Nau nodded.
There were more than a dozen figures out there on the surface. Some were
tethered, others maneuvered free. Surface gravity was virtually non-existent.
They sailed the ties over the tops of the icy mountains with the ease of a lifetime
of outside operations-and millennia of Qeng Ho experience beyond that. He
watched the figures, trying to guess who was who. But they wore thermal jackets
over their coveralls, and all Vinh could see were identical forms dancing above
the dark landscape. Ezr didn't know the details of what the conspiracy planned,
but Jimmy had set him certain errands and Ezr had his guesses. They might
never have an opportunity this good again: They had access to the ejets aboard

theBrisgo Gap. They had almost unlimited access to the outside, in places free of
Emergent observers. In the seconds following the Relighting, some chaos was to
be expected-and with Qeng Ho in charge of the stationkeeping operation, they
could fine-tune that chaos to support the conspiracy.But all I can dois stand here
with Tomas Nau. . .and be a good actor.
Ezr smiled at the Podmaster.
Qiwi Lisolet flounced out of the airlock in a rage. "Damn! Damn and fuck
damn and-" She swore up and down as she ripped off her thermal jacket and
pants. Somewhere in the back of her mind she made a note to spend more time
with Gonle Fong. Surely there must be more offensive things she could say
when things got this messed up. She threw the thermals into a locker and dived
down the axis tunnel without taking off her coveralls and hood.
Lord of Trade, how could they do this to her? She'd been kicked indoors to
stand around with her finger up her nose, while the workshe should be doing was
taken over by Jimmy Diem!
Pham Trinli floated thirty meters above the insulation canopy they were
tying across the iceberg. Trinli was official head of stationkeeping operations,
though he made sure that any orders he gave were blustery generalities. It was
Jimmy Diem who made most things happen. And surprisingly, it was little Qiwi
Lisolet who had the best ideas about where to place the electric thrusters and
how to run the stationkeeping programs. If they had followed all her
recommendations, the Relight might go without a hitch.
And that would not be a good thing at all.
Pham Trinli was a member of the "great conspiracy." A very minor
member, and not to be trusted with any critical part of the plan. All that was fine
with Pham Trinli. He tipped around so that now his back was to the moonlike
glow of the OnOff star, and the rockpile hung almost over his head. In the deep
shadows of the rockpile, there was a further jumble: the lashed-down ships and
temps and volatiles refineries, hiding against the light that would soon storm out
of the sky. One of the habitats, Hammerfest, was a rooted design; it would have
had a certain bizarre grace if not for all the gear around it. The Trader temp just
looked like a big balloon tied to the surface. Inside it were all the waking Qeng
Ho and a big hunk of the Emergent population.
Beyond the habitats, partly hidden by the shoulder of Diamond One, were
the moored ramscoops. A grim sight indeed. Starships should not be tied
together like that, and never so close to a jumble of loose rocks. A memory
floated up: piles of dead whales rotting in a sexual embrace. This was no way to
run a shipyard. But then this was more a junkyard than anything else. The
Emergents had paid dearly for their ambush. After Sammy's flagship was

destroyed, Pham had drifted for most of a day in a wrecked taxi-but plugged into
all the remaining battle automation. Presumably Podmaster Nau never figured
out who was coordinating the battle. If he had, Pham would have ended up dead,
or in frozen sleep with the other surviving armsmen on theFar Treasure.
Even ambushed, the Qeng Ho had come close to victory.We wouldhave
won if the damn Emergent
mindrot hadn't wiped us all. It was enough to teach a body caution. An
expensive victory had been turned into something close to mutual suicide: There
were perhaps two starships that were still capable of ramscoop flight; a couple
more might be repaired by scavenging the other wrecks. From the looks of the
volatiles distillery, it would be a long time before they had enough hydrogen to
boost even one vehicle up to ram speed.
Less than five hundred seconds till Relight. Pham drifted slowly upward
toward the rocks, until the junkyard was blocked from view by the insulation
canopy. Across the surface of the rockpile, his people-Diem and Do and Patil,
now that they had sent Qiwi indoors-were supposedly doing final checks on the
ejet arrays. Jimmy Diem's voice came calmly over the work-crew channel, but
Pham knew that was a recording. Behind the canopy, Diem and others had
disappeared around the far side of the rockpile. All three were armed now; it was
amazing what you could do with an electric jet, especially a Qeng Ho model.
And so Pham Trinli was left behind. No doubt, Jimmy was just as happy to
be rid of him. He was trusted, but only for simple parts of the plan, such as
maintaining the appearance of a functioning work crew. Trinli moved in and out
of view of Hammerfest and the temp, responding to the cues in Jimmy Diem's
soundtrack.
Three hundred seconds to Relight. Trinli drifted under the canopy. From
here you could see jagged ice and carefully settled airsnow. The shadowed pile
dwindled off beyond the canopy, finally met the bare surface of the diamond
mountain.
Diamond. Where Pham Trinli had been a child, diamonds were an ultimate
form of wealth. A single gram of gem-grade diamond could finance the murder
of a prince. To the average Qeng Ho, diamond was simply another allotrope of
carbon, cheaply made in tonne lots. But even the Qeng Ho had been a little
intimidated by these boulders. Asteroids like this didn't exist outside of theory.
And although these rocks weren't single gems, there was a vast, crystalline order
to them. The cores of gas giants, planets blown away in some long-ago
detonation? They were just another mystery of the OnOff system.
Since work began on the rockpile, Trinli had studied the terrain, but not for
the same reasons as Qiwi Lisolet, or even Jimmy Diem. There was a cleft where

the ice and airsnow filled the space between Diamond One and Diamond Two.
That was significant to Qiwi and Jimmy, but only in connection with rockpile
maintenance. For Pham Trinli. . .with a little digging, that cleft was a path from
their main work site to Hammerfest, a path that was out of sight of ships and
habitats. He hadn't mentioned it to Diem; the conspirators' plan was for
Hammerfest to be taken after they grabbed theFar Treasure.
Trinli crawled along the -shaped cleft, closer and closer to the Emergent
habitat. It would have surprised Diem and the others to know it, but Pham Trinli
was not a born spacer. And sometimes when he climbed around like this, he got
the vertigo that afflicted Chump groundlings. If he let his imagination go. . .he
wasn't crawling hand-by-hand along a narrow ditch, but instead he was rock-
climbing up a mountain chimney, a chimney that bent farther and farther back on
him, till he must surely fall.
Trinli paused a second, holding his place with one hand while his whole
body quivered with the need for crampons and ropes, and pitons driven solid into
the walls around him.Lord. It had been a long time since his groundsider
orientation had come back this strongly. He moved forward. Forward. Not up.
By his count of arm paces, he was just outside Hammerfest now, near its
communications array. Odds were very high some camera could image him if he
popped out. Of course, the odds were fairly good that no one and no program
would be monitoring such a view in time to change things. Nevertheless, Trinli
stayed hunkered down. If necessary, he would move closer, but for now he just
wanted to snoop. He lay back in the cleft, his feet against the ice and his back
against the diamond wall. He reeled out his little antenna probe. The Emergents
had played smiling tyrant since the ambush. The one thing they made ugly
threats about was possession of non-approved I/O devices. Pham knew that
Diem and the core of the conspiracy had Qeng Ho huds, and had used black
crypto across the local net. Most of the planning had been done right under the
Emergents' noses. Some communication avoided automation altogether; many of
these youngsters knew a variation on the old dots-and-dashes game, blinkertalk.
As a peripheral member of the conspiracy, Pham Trinli knew its secrets
only because he was filthy with forbidden electronics. This little antenna reel
would have been a sign of sneaky intent even in peaceful times.
The thread he spun out was transparent to almost anything that might shine
on it here. At the tip, a tiny sensor sniffed at the electromagnetic spectrum. His
main goal was a comm array on the Emergent habitat that had a line of sight on
the Qeng Ho temp. Trinli moved his arms like a fisherman repositioning his cast.
The slender thread had a stiffness that was very effective in a micrograv
environment.There. The sensor hung in the beam between Hammerfest and the

temp. Pham eased a directional element over the edge of the cleft, aimed it at an
unused port on the Qeng Ho temp. From there he was hooked directly into the
fleet's local net, and around all the Emergent security. This was exactly what
Nau and the others were so afraid of and the reason for their death-penalty
threats. Jimmy Diem wisely had not taken chances like this. Pham Trinli had
some advantages. He knew the old,old tricks that were hidden in Qeng Ho gear..
. .Even so, he would not have risked it if Jimmy and his conspirators hadn't bet
so much on their takeover scheme.
Maybe he should have talked to Jimmy Diem straight out. There were too
many critical things they didn't know about the Emergents. What made some of
their automation so good? In the firefights at the ambush, they'd been clearly
inferior in high-level tactics, but their target queuing had been better than any
system
Pham Trinli had ever fought.
Trinli had the ugly feeling that comes when you've been maneuvered into a
corner. The conspirators figured that this might be both their best and last chance
to knock over the Emergents. Maybe. But the whole thing was just too pat, too
perfect.
So make the best of it.
Pham looked at the display windows inside his hood. He was intercepting
Emergent telemetry and some of the video they were transmitting to the temp.
Some of that he could decrypt. The Emergent bastards just trusted their line-of-
sight link a little bit too much. It was time to do some real snooping.
"Fifty seconds to Relight." The voice had been counting off in a flat
monotone for the last two hundred seconds. In the auditorium, almost everyone
was watching the windows in silence.
"Forty seconds to Relight."
Ezr took a quick look around the room. The flight tech, Xin, was looking
from display to display. He was visibly nervous. Tomas Nau was watching the
view that came from low above OnOff's surface. His intentness seemed to hold
more curiosity than fear or suspicion.
Qiwi Lisolet glared at the window that showed the insulation canopy and
Jimmy Diem's work crew. Her look had been dark and scowly ever since she
flew into the auditorium. Ezr could guess what had happened. . . and he was
relieved. Jimmy had used an innocent fourteen-year-old as camouflage for the
plot. But Jimmy had never been an absolute hardass. He had taken a chance to
get the girl out of harm's way.But I bet Qiwiwon't forgive him, even when she
knows the truth.
"Wave front to arrive in ten seconds."

Stillno change in the view from the microsat. Only a mild red glow peeked
between the sliding clouds. Either "old faithful" had played a cosmic joke on
them, or this was an absolute knife-edge of an effect.
"Relight."
In the full-disk view, a point of brilliance burned in the exact center of the
disk, spread outward, and in less than two seconds filled the disk. The low-
altitude view had vanished sometime during that spread. The light got brighter
and brighter andbrighter. A soft, awed sigh spread around the room. The light
cast shadows on the opposite wall before the wallpaper damped its output.
"Five seconds after Relight." The voice must be automatic. "We're up to
seven kilowatts per square meter." This was a different tech, speaking in a flat
Trilander accent.Not an Emergent? The question flickered past Ezr's attention,
swamped for the moment by the rest of the action.
"Ten seconds after Relight." At the side of the room was a smaller window,
a view of the Spider world. It had been dark and dim as ever, but now the light
was coming back from it and the planetary disk glowed with its own brightness
as ice and air woke to a sun that was already five times as bright as Sol standard.
And still brightening:
"Twenty kilowatts per square meter." A strip graph was playing out below
the image of the new sun, comparing its output with the historical record. This
Relight looked as powerful as any before.
"Neutron flux is still below detectable limits."
Nau and Vinh exchanged relieved looks, for once sincere on both
sides.That was the sort of danger that couldn't be detected from interstellar
distances, and one of the oldentimes fly-throughs had failed at about this point.
At least they wouldn't fry in radiation that no one had seen from afar.
"Thirty seconds after Relight."
"Fifty kilowatts per square meter."
Outside, the mountainside that shielded them from the sun was beginning
toglow.
• • •
Pham Trinli had the public audio channel playing. Even without it, Relight
would have been obvious. But for the moment he held those events in a small
part of his mind and concentrated on what was going over the private links out
of Hammerfest. It was at moments like this, when technicians were
overwhelmed by externalities, that security was most likely to slip. If Diem was
on schedule, he and his crew were now at the mooring point of theFar Treasure.

Trinli's eyes flickered across the half-dozen displays that now filled most of
his hood's view space. His fleet net programs were doing a good job with the
telemetry.Ha. You can't beat old trapdoors. Now that they needed lots of
computing power, the Emergents were using more and more Qeng Ho
automation, and Trinli's snooping was correspondingly more effective.
The signal strength faded. Alignment drift? Trinli cleared several display
windows and looked at the world around him. The OnOff star was hidden behind
the mountains, but its light glared off the hills that stuck up into its view. Where
ice or airsnow was exposed, vapor steamed out. For the moment, Jimmy's silver
canopy was holding, but the fabric slowly swayed and flapped. There was an
almost bluish color to the sky now, the mists of thousands of tonnes of water and
air boiling up, turning the rockpile into a comet.
And screwing up his line of sight on Hammerfest. Trinli wiggled his
antenna. Losing the link couldn't have been the mists alone. Something had
shifted.There. He was picking up Hammerfest's traffic again. After a second his
crypto resynchronized and he was back in business. But now he kept an eye on
the storm around him. The new sun was even more of a show than they had
expected.
Trinli's network feelers were inside Hammerfest now. Every program had
its exceptional circumstances, the situations that the designers assumed were
outside the scope of their responsibility. There were loopholes that the present
extremities had shaken open. . .
Strange. There seemed to be dozens of users logged into system internals.
And there were big sections of the Emergent system that he didn't recognize, that
weren't built on the common foundations. But the Emergents were supposed to
be ordinary Chumps, recently returned to high technology with the help of the
Qeng Ho broadcast net. There was just too much strange stuff here. He dipped
into the voice traffic. The Emergent Nese was understandable but clipped and
full of jargon. ". . .Diem. . .around front of rocks. . .according to plan."
According to plan?
Trinli scanned related data streams, saw graphics that showed just what
weapons Jimmy's crew would carry, that showed the entrance he intended to use
to sneak aboard theFar Treasure. There were tables of names. . . of the
conspirators. Pham Trinli was listed as a minor accomplice. More tables.Jimmy
Diem's black crypto. The first version was only partially accurate; later files
converged on precisely what Jimmy and the others were using. Somehow, they
had been watching closely enough to see through all the tricks. There had been
no traitors, just an inhuman attention to detail.
Pham jerked down his equipment and crawled a little farther. He popped

up, pointing his directional at a slanted overhang of Hammerfest's roof. From
here the angle should be right. He could bounce a beam down atFar Treasure 's
moorage point.
"Jimmy, Jimmy! Can you hear me?" It was Qeng Ho encrypted, but if any
enemy heard, both ends of the link would be nailed.
All Jimmy Diem had ever wanted was to be a crewleader good enough to
make management track. Then he and Tsufe could get married, all perfectly
timed for when the voyage to the OnOff star began to pay off. Of course, that
had been before the Emergents arrived and before the ambush. Now? Now he
was leading a conspiracy, betting everything on a few moments of hellish risk.
Well, at least they were finally acting. . .
In less than forty seconds, they had run four thousand meters, all the way
around the sunside of the jumble. That would have been a good piece of free
space rappelling even if the sun had not been blowing up, even if they hadn't
been wrapped in silver foil. They'd almost lost Pham Patil. A fast rappel
depended on knowing exactly where to put your next ground spike, exactly how
much force the piton could take when you accelerated out from the surface along
your cable. But their surveys of the pile had all been done for placing the
stationkeeping jets. There just hadn't been an excuse to test the rappel points.
Patil had been swinging out at nearly half a gee when his ground spike slipped
free. He'd have floated out forever if Tsufe and Jimmy hadn't been securely tied
down. A few seconds more and the direct sunlight would have fried them right
through their makeshift shields.
But it worked!They were on the opposite side of the starships from where
the bastards would expect visitors. While everyone's eyes had been on the sun,
and blinded by that, they had gotten in position.
They hunkered down just short of theTreasure 's mooring point. The ship
towered six hundred meters above them, so close that all they could see was part
of the throat and the forward primer tanks. But from all their careful spying, they
knew this was the least damaged of all the Qeng Ho ships. And inside was
equipment-and more important,people -who could take back freedom.
All was in shadow, but now the coma of gases had spread high. Reflected
light softened the dark. Jimmy and the others shed their silver covers and
thermal outerwear. It felt suddenly chill wearing just fullpressure coveralls and
hood. They slipped from hiding place to hiding place, dragging their tools and
improvised guns, and trying to keep it all out of the light from the glowing sky.It
can't get any brighter, can it? But his time display said that less than one
hundred seconds had passed since Relight. They were perhaps another hundred
seconds short of maximum brightness.

The three floated up the moorage pilings, the maw ofTreasure 's throat
growing huge above them. One nice thing about sneaking aboard something as
massive as a ramscoop, there wasn't much worry that their movement would bob
the vehicle around. There would be a maintenance crew aboard theTreasure. But
would they expect armed visitors in the middle of all this? They had thought and
thought on those risks, and there was no way to make them better. But if they
took the ship, they would have one of the best remaining pieces of equipment,
real weapons, and the surviving Qeng Ho armsmen. They would have a chance
of ending the nightmare.
Now there was sunlight coming through the raw face of the diamond rock!
Jimmy paused for an instant to stare, bug-eyed. Even this high up, there were at
least three hundred meters of solid diamond between them and the naked light of
OnOff. Yet that was not enough. Scattered off a million fracture planes, bounced
and diminished and diffused and diffracted, some of OnOff's light made it
through. The light was a glitter of rainbows, a thousand tiny sun-disks glowing
from everywhere across the face of the rock. And every second it grew brighter,
until he could see structure within the mountain, could see fracture and cleavage
planes that extended hundreds of meters into diamond. And still the light got
brighter.
So much for slipping by in the dark.Jimmy shut down his imagination and
dashed upward. From the ground, the rim hatch was a tiny pucker at the edge of
the ramscoop's maw, but as he ascended it became larger and larger, and
centered over his head. He waved Do and Patil to either side of the hatch. The
Emergents had reprogrammed the hatch, of course, but they hadn't replaced the
physical mechanism as they had aboard the temp. Tsufe had snooped the
passcode with binoculars, and their own gloves would be accepted as matching
keys. How many guards would they face?We can take them. I know we can. He
reached up to tap on the hatch control, andSomeone pinged him.
"Jimmy, Jimmy! Can you hear me?" The voice was tiny in his ear. A
telltale claimed it was the decryption of a laser burst from the roof of the
Emergent hab. But the voice was Pham Trinli's.
Jimmy froze. Worst case: the enemy was toying with him. Best case: Pham
Trinli had guessed they were going after theFar Treasure and now was screwing
up worse than anyone could have imagined.Ignore the fool,and if you live, beat
the crap out of him. Jimmy glanced at the sky above Hammerfest. The coma was
pale violet, slowly roiling in the light of OnOff. In space, a laser link is very hard
to detect. But this was no longer ordinary space. It was more like a cometary
surface at close passage. If the Emergents knew where to look they could
probablysee Trinli's link.

Jimmy's reply was a millisecond compression flung back in the direction of
the other's beam. "Turn that off, you old shit. Now!"
"Soon. First: They know about the plan. They saw through your black
crypto." It was Trinli, and yet different. And Trinli had never been told about the
crypto. "This is a setup, Jimmy. But they don't know everything. Back off.
Whatever they've got planned inside theTreasure will only make things worse."
Lord.For a moment, Jimmy just froze. Thoughts of failure and death had
haunted his every sleep since the ambush. To get this far, they had taken a
thousand deadly risks. He had accepted that they might be discovered. But never
had he thought it would happen like this. What the old fool had found might be
important; it might be worthless. And backing down now would be nearly a
worst-case outcome.It's just too late.
Jimmy forced his mouth to open, his lips to speak. "I said, close down the
link!" He turned back to theTreasure 's hull and tapped the Emergent passcode
on the hatch. A second passed-and then the clamshells parted. Do and Patil dove
upward into the dimness of the airlock. Diem paused just a second, slapped a
small gadget onto the hull beside the door, and followed them up.

TWELVE
Pham Trinli shut down the link. He flipped and climbed rapidly back along
the cleft.So we were suckered. Tomas Nau was too clever by half, and he had
some strange kind of edge. Trinli had seen a hundred ops, some smaller than
this, some that lasted for centuries. But he had never seen the sort of precise
fanatical attention to detail that he had seen in those snoop logs the Emergents
kept on the black crypto. Nau had either magic software or teams of
monomaniacs. In the back of his mind, the planner in him was wondering what it
could be and how Pham Trinli might someday take advantage of it.
For now, survival was the only issue. If Diem would only back off from
theTreasure, the trap Nau planned might not close or might not be so deadly.
The sheer diamond face on his left was sparkling now, the largest gemstone
of all time shining sunlight all round him. Ahead, the light was almost as
brilliant, a dazzling nimbus where icy peaks stood in OnOff's light. The silver
sunshield was billowing high, tied down in only three places.
Abruptly, Pham's hands and knees were kicked out from under him. He
spun out from the path, caught himself by one hand. And through that hand he
could hear the mountains groan. Mist spewed out from the cleft all along its
length-and the diamond mountain moved. It was less than a centimeter per
second, stately, but it moved. Pham could see light all along the opening. He had
seen the crew's rock maps. Diamonds One and Two abutted each other along a
common plane. The Emergent engineers had used the valley above as a
convenient placement anchor for part of the ice and snow from Arachna. All
very sensible. . .and not well enough modeled. Some of the volatiles had slipped
between the two mountains. The light reflecting back and forth between One and
Two had found that ice and air. Now the boil-off was pushing Diamonds One
and Two apart. What had been hundreds of meters of shielding was now a
jagged break, a million mirrors. The light shining through was a rainbow from
hell.
"One hundred forty-five kilowatts per square meter."
"That's the top of the spike," someone said. OnOff was shining more than a
hundred times as bright as standard solar. It was following the track of its
previous lightings, though this was brighter than most. OnOff would stay this
bright for another ten thousand seconds, then drop back steeply to just over two
solars, where it would stay for some years.
There was no triumphant shouting. The last few hundred seconds, the

crowd in the temp had been almost silent. At first, Qiwi had been totally
involved with her own anger at being kicked indoors. But she had quieted as one
and then another of the silver canopy's ties had broken, and the ice had been
touched by direct sunlight. "I told Jimmy that wouldn't hold." But she didn't
sound angry anymore. The light show was beautiful, but the damage was far
more than they had planned. Outgassing streamers were visible on all sides-and
there was no way their pitiful electric jets could counter that. It would be Msecs
before they got the rockpile gentled down again.
Then, at four hundred seconds into the Relight, the canopy tore free. It
lifted slowly, twisting in the violet sky. There was no sign of the crewfolk who
should have been sheltering under it. Worried murmuring grew. Nau did
something with his cuff, and his voice was suddenly loud enough to be heard
across the room. "Don't worry. They had several hundred seconds to see the
canopy was going, plenty of time to move down into the shadow."
Qiwi nodded, but she said quietly to Ezr. "If they didn't fall off. I don't
know why they were up there in the first place." If they had fallen off, drifted out
into the sunlight. . .Even with thermal jackets, they'd just cook.
He felt a small hand slip into his.Does the Brat even know she didthat? But
after a second he squeezed her hand gently. Qiwi was staring out at the main
work site. "I should be out there." It was the same thing Qiwi had been saying
since she came indoors, but now her tone was quite different.
Then the outside views jittered, as if something had hit all the cameras at
once. The light leaking through the naked face of Diamond Two brightened into
a jagged line. And now there wassound, a moan that grew louder and louder, its
pitch scaling first up and then down.
"Podmaster!" The voice was loud and insistent, not the robotlike reporting
of the Emergent techs. It was Ritser Brughel. "Diamond Two is shifting, lifting
off-" And now it was obvious. The whole mountain was tilting. Billions of
tonnes, loose.
And the moaning sound that still filled the auditorium must be the moorage
webbing, twisting beneath the temp. "We're not in its way, sir." Ezr could see
that now. The immensity was moving slowly, slowly, but its slide was away
from the temp and Hammerfest and the moored starships. The view outside had
slowly rotated, now was turning back. Everyone in the auditorium was
scrambling for tie-downs.
Hammerfest was built into Diamond One. The big rock looked unchanged,
unmoved. The starships beyond. . .They were minnows beside the bulk of the
Diamonds, but each ship was over six hundred meters long, a million tonnes
unfueled. And the ships were swaying slowly at the end of their mooring points
f

on Diamond One. It was a dance of leviathans, and a dance that would totally
wreck them if it continued.
"Podmaster!" Brughel again. "I'm getting audio from the crewleader,
Diem." "Well put him on!"
• • •
It was dark above the airlock. The lights did not come on, and there was no
atmosphere. Diem and the others floated up the tunnel from the lock, their hood
lights flickering this way and that. They looked out from the tunnels into empty
rooms, into rooms with partitions blasted away, gutted fifty meters deep. This
was supposed to be theundamaged ship. A coldness grew inside Diem. The
enemy had come in after the battle and sucked it dry, left a dead hulk.
Behind him, Tsufe said, "Jimmy, theTreasure is moving."
"Yeah, I've got a solid contact with the wall here. Sounds like it's twisting
on its mooring point."
Diem reached out from the ladderline and pressed his hood against the wall.
Yes. If there had been atmosphere, the place would be full of the sounds of
ringing destruction. So the Relight was causing more shifting than anyone had
guessed. A day ago that knowledge would have terrorized. Now. . ."I don't think
it matters, Tsufe. Come on." He led Do and Patil still faster up the ladderline. So
Pham Trinli had been right, and the plan was doomed. But one way or another,
he was going to discover what had been done to them. And just maybe he could
get the truth out to the others.
The interior locks had been ripped out and vacuum extended to every room.
They floated up past what should have been repair bays and workshops, past
deep holes that should have held the ram's startup injectors.
High abaft, in the shielded heart of theFar Treasure that was where the
sickbay had been, that was where there should be coldsleep tanks. Now. .
.Jimmy and the others moved sideways through the shielding. When their hands
touched the walls, they could hear the creaking of the hull, feel its slow motion.
So far, the close-tethered starships had not collided-though Jimmy wasn't sure if
they could really know that. The ships were so large, so massive, if they collided
at a few centimeters per second the hulls would just slide into each other with
scarcely a jolt.
They had reached the entrance to the sickbay. Where the Emergents
claimed to hold the surviving armsmen.
More emptiness? Another lie?
Jimmy slipped through the door. Their head lamps flickered around the
room Tsufe Do cried out

room. Tsufe Do cried out.
Not empty. Bodies. He swept his light about, and everywhere. . .the
coldsleep boxes had been removed, but the room was. . .filled with corpses.
Diem pulled the lamp from his head and stuck it to an open patch of wall. Their
shadows still danced and twisted, but now he could see it all.
"Th-they're all dead, aren't they?" Pham Patil's voice was dreamy, the
question simply an expression of horror.
Diem moved among the dead. They were neatly stacked. Hundreds, but in a
small volume. He recognized some armsmen. Qiwi's mom. Only a few showed
violent decompression damage.When did the rest die? Some of the faces were
peaceful, but others-He stopped, frozen by a pair of glittering dead eyes that
stared out at him. The face was emaciated; there were frozen bruises across the
forehead. This one had lived some time after the ambush. And Jimmy
recognized the face.
Tsufe came across the room, her shadow skittering across the horror.
"That's one of the Trilanders, isn't it?"
"Yeah. One of the geologists, I think." One of the academics supposedly
being held on Hammerfest.
Diem moved back toward the light he had set on the wall. How many were
here? The bodies stretched off into the dimness beyond where once there had
been walls.Did they kill everyone? Nausea clawed its way up his throat.
Patil had floated motionless since that first inane question. But Tsufe was
shaking, her voice going from dullness to a giddy wavering. "We thought they
had so many hostages. And all the time they had nothing but deaders." She
laughed, high-pitched. "But it didn't matter, did it? We believed, and that served
them as well as the truth."
"Maybe not." And suddenly the nausea was gone. The trap had been
sprung. No doubt, he and Tsufe and Patil would die very soon. But if they lived
even seconds, perhaps the monsters could be unmasked. He pulled an audio box
from his coveralls, found a clean piece of wall to make contact.Another banned
I/O device. Death is the penalty for possession. Yeah. Yeah. But now he could
talk the length of theTreasure, to the broadcaster he had left at the rim airlock.
The nearside of the temp would be bathed in his message. Embedded utilities
would detect it. Surely some would respond to its priority, would squirt the
message to where Qeng Ho would hear it.
And Jimmy began talking. "Qeng Ho! Listen! I'm aboard theFar Treasure.
It's gutted. They've killed everyone we thought was here. . . ."
Ezr-everyone in the temp's auditorium-waited a silent second as Ritser
Brughel set up the connection. Then Jimmy began talking:
"Qeng Ho! Listen! I'm-"

Qeng Ho! Listen! I m
"Crewleader!" Tomas Nau interrupted. "Are you all right? We can't see you
outside." Jimmy laughed. "That's because I'm aboard theFar Treasure. "
The look on Nau's face was puzzled. "Idon't understand. TheTreasure 's
crew hasn't reported-"
"Of course they haven't." Ezr could almost hear the smile behind Jimmy's
words. "You see,Far Treasure is a Qeng Ho vessel and now we've taken it
back!"
Shock and joy spread across the faces Ezr could see. So that was the plan!
A working starship, perhaps with its original weapons. The main Emergent
sickbay, the armsmen and senior crew who survived the ambush.We have a
chance now!
Tomas Nau seemed to realize the same. His puzzled expression changed to
an angry, frightened scowl. "Brughel?" He said to the air.
"Podmaster, I think he's telling the truth. He's on theTreasure 's
maintenance channel, and I can't raise anyone else there."
The power graph in the main window hovered just under 145kW/m² The
light reflected between One and Two was beginning to boil snow and ice in the
shadows. Thousand-and hundred-thousand-tonne boulders of ore and ice were
shifting in the clefts between the great diamonds. The motion was almost
imperceptible, a few centimeters per second. But some of the boulders were now
floating free. However slow-moving, they could destroy whatever human work
they collided with.
Nau stared out the window for a couple of seconds. When he spoke his
voice seemed more intense than commanding: "Look, Diem. It can't work. The
Relight is causing a lot more damage than anyone could have known-"
A harsh laugh came from the other end of the connection. "Anyone? Not
really. We retuned the stationkeeping network to shake things up a bit. Whatever
instabilities there were, we gave them an extra nudge."
Qiwi's hand tightened on Ezr's. The girl's eyes were wide with surprise.
And Ezr felt a little sick. The stationkeeping grid couldn't have done much one
way or another, but why make thingsworse ?
Around them, people with full-press coveralls and hoods were zipping up;
others were diving out the doors of the auditorium. A huge ore boulder floated
just a hundred meters off. It was rising slowly, its top dazzling in direct sunlight.
It would just miss the top of the temp.
"But, but-" For a moment the glib Podmaster seemed speechless. "Your
own people could die! And we've taken the weapons off theTreasure. It's our
hospital ship, for God's sake!"
There was no answer for a moment, just the sound of mumbled argument.

, j
g
Ezr noticed that the Emergent flight technician, Xin, hadn't said a word. He
watched his Podmaster with a wide-eyed, stricken look.
Then Jimmy was back on the link: "Damnyou. So you gutted the weapons
systems. But it doesn't matter, little man. We've prepared four kilos of S7. You
never guessed we had access to explosives, did you? Lots of things were in with
those electric jets that you never guessed."
"No, no." Nau was shaking his head almost aimlessly.
"As you say, Podmaster, this is your hospital ship. There are your own
people here besides our armsmen in coldsleep. Even without the ship's guns, I'd
say we have some negotiating leverage."
Nau glanced beseechingly at Ezr and Qiwi. "A truce. Until we've settled the
rockpile." "No!" shouted Jimmy. "You'll wriggle out soon as events don't have
you by the throat." "Damn it, man, it's your own people aboard theTreasure. "
"If they were out of coldsleep, they'd agree with me, Podmaster. It's
showdown time. We've got twentythree ofyour people in the sickbay plus the
five in your maintenance crew. We know how to play the hostage game, too. I
want you and Brughel over here. You can use your taxis, all nice and safe. You
have one thousand seconds."
Nau had always seemed a very calculating type to Ezr Vinh. And already,
he seemed recovered from his shock. Nau raised his chin dramatically and glared
at the sound of Jimmy's voice. "And if we don't?"
"We lose, but so do you. To start with, your people here die. Then we'll use
the S7 to blow theTreasure free of its moorings. We'll ram it into your damn
Hammerfest."
Qiwi had listened with pale, wide-eyed shock. Now suddenly she was
bawling. She launched herself toward the sound of Jimmy's voice. "No! No!
Jimmy! Please don't!"
For a few seconds every eye was on Qiwi. Even the frantic closing of hoods
and gloves ceased, and there was only the loud moaning of the temp's mooring
web as it twisted slowly about. Qiwi's mother was aboard theFarTreasure; her
father was on Hammerfest with all the mindrot victims. In coldsleep or "Focus,"
most of the survivors of the Qeng Ho expedition were in one place or the other.
Trixia.This is too much, Jimmy. Slow down! But the words died in Ezr's throat.
He had trusted everything to Jimmy. If this deadly talk convinced Ezr Vinh,
maybe it would convince Tomas Nau.
When Jimmy spoke again, he ignored Qiwi's cry. "You have only nine
hundred seventy-five seconds, Podmaster. I advise you and Brughel to get your
butts over here."
That would have been hard to do even if Nau had bolted out of the temp.

p
He turned to Xin and the two argued in low voices.
"Yes, I can get you there. It's dangerous, but the loose stuff is moving at
less than a meter per second. We can avoid it."
Nau nodded. "Then let's go. I want-" He fastened his full-press jacket and
hood, and his voice became inaudible.
The crowd of Qeng Ho and Emergents melted away from the two as they
headed toward tqhe exit.
From the speaker link, there was a loud thump, cut off abruptly. In the
auditorium someone shouted, pointing at the main window. Something flickered
from the side of theFar Treasure, something small and moving fast. A fragment
of hull.
Nau had stopped at the auditorium doors. He looked back at
theFarTreasure. "System status says theFar Treasure has been breached," said
Brughel. "Multiple explosions in aft radial deck fifteen."
That was coldsleep storage and sickbay. Ezr couldn't move, couldn't look
away. The hull of theTreasure puckered out in two more places. Pale light
flickered briefly from the holes. It was insignificant compared to the storm of the
Relight. To an untrained eye, theTreasure might have looked undamaged. The
hull holes were only a couple of meters across. But S7 was the Qeng Ho's most
powerful chemical explosive, and it looked as if all four kilograms had gone up.
Radial deck fifteen was behind four bulkheads, twenty meters below the outer
hull. Extending inward, the blast had most likely crushed theFar Treasure 's
ramscoop throat. One more starship had died.
Qiwi floated motionless in the middle of the room, beyond the reach of
comforting hands.

THIRTEEN
Ksecs passed, busier than any time in Ezr's life. The horror of Jimmy's
failure hung in the back of his mind. There wasn't room for it to leak out. They
were all too busy simply trying to save what they could from the human and
natural catastrophes.
The next day, Tomas Nau addressed the survivors on the temp and at
Hammerfest. The Tomas Nau that looked out of the window at them was visibly
tired and lacked his usual smoothness.
"Ladies and gentlemen, congratulations. We've survived the second
harshest Relight in the recorded history of OnOff. We did this despite the most
terrible treachery." He moved closer to the pov, as if looking at the exhausted
Emergents and Qeng Ho huddled in the auditorium. "Damage survey and
reclamation attempts will be our most important jobs over the next Msecs. . .but
I must be frank with you. The initial battle between the Qeng Ho and Emergent
fleets was immensely destructive of the Qeng Ho; I regret to say that tas nearly
as bad for the Emergent side. We tried to disguise some of that damage. We had
plenty of equipment spares, medical facilities, and the raw materials we brought
up from Arachna.
We would have had the expertise of hundreds of senior Qeng Ho available
once the security issues were resolved. Nevertheless, we were operating near the
edge of safety. After the events of yesterday, all safety margins have vanished.
At this moment, we do not have a single functioning ramscoop-and it's not clear
if we will be able to scavenge one from the wreckage."
Only two of the starships had collided. But apparently theFar Treasure had
been the most functional-and after Jimmy's action, its drive and most of its life-
support system were junk.
"Many of you have risked your lives over the last Ksecs trying to save some
of the volatiles. That part of the disaster appears to be no one's fault. None of us
had counted on the violence of this Relighting, or the effect that ice trapped
between the diamonds might have. As you know, we've recaptured most of the
large blocks. Only three remain loose." Benny Wen and Jau Xin were working
together to try to bring back those and several smaller ones. They were only
thirty kilometers away, but the big ones massed one hundred thousand tonnes
each-and all they had for hauling equipment were taxis and one crippled lifter.
"OnOff's flux is down to two point five kilowatts per square meter. Our
vehicles can operate in that light. Properly suited crew can work briefly in it. But

the airsnow that drifted out is lost, and we fear that much of the water ice is gone
too."
Nau spread his hands, and sighed. "This is like so many of the histories you
Qeng Ho have told us of. We fought and fought, and in the end we've nearly
made ourselves extinct. With what we have, we can't go home-to either of our
homes. We can only guess how long we can survive on what we salvage here.
Five years? One hundred years? The old truths still hold: without a sustaining
civilization, no isolated collection of ships and humans can rebuild the core of
technology."
A wan smile came briefly to his face. "And yet there is hope. In a way,
these disasters have forced us to concentrate all our attention on what our
missions were initially dedicated to. It is no longer a matter of academic
curiosity, or even Qeng Ho selling to customers-now our very survival depends
on the sophonts of Arachna. They are on the verge of the Information Age. From
everything we can tell, they will attain a competent industrial ecology during the
current bright time. If we can last a few more decades, the Spiders will have the
industry that we need. Our two missions will have succeeded, even if at far
greater human cost than any of us ever imagined.
"Can we last three to five more decades? Maybe. We can scavenge, we can
conserve.. . .The real question is, can we cooperate? So far, our history here is
not good. Whether in offense or defense, all our hands are drenched in blood.
You all know about Jimmy Diem. There were at least three involved in his
conspiracy. There may be more-but a security pogrom would just diminish our
overall chances for survival. So I appeal to all of you among the Qeng Ho who
may have been part of this plot, even peripherally: Remember what Jimmy Diem
and Tsufe Do and Pham Patil did and tried to do. They were willing to destroy
all the ships and crush Hammerfest. Instead, their own explosives destroyed
them, destroyed the Qeng Ho that we were holding in coldsleep, and destroyed a
sickbay full of Emergents and Qeng Ho.
"So. This will be our Exile. An Exile we have brought upon ourselves. I
will continue to do my best to lead, but without your help we will surely fail. We
must bury what differences and hatred there may be. We Emergents know much
about you Qeng Ho; we have listened to your public network for hundreds of
years. Your information made a critical difference to us as we regained
technology." That tired smile again. "I know you did it to make more good
customers; we are grateful nevertheless. But what we Emergents have become is
not what you expect. I believe we bring something new and wonderful and
powerful to the human universe: Focus. It is something that will be strange to
you at first. I beg you to give time a chance here. Learn our ways, as we have

yours.
"With everyone's willing support, we can survive. In the end, we can
prosper."
Nau's face vanished from the display, leaving a view out on the rear-ranged
surface of the rockpile.
Around the room, Qeng Ho looked at one another, talked quietly. Traders
had enormous pride, especially when they compared themselves with
Customers. To them, even the grandest Customer civilizations, even Namqem
and Canberra, were like brilliant flowers, doomed by their beauty and fixed
position to fade and wither. This was the first time that Ezr had seen shame on
the faces of so many Qeng Ho.Iworked with Jimmy. I helped him. Even the ones
who didn't must have gloried in Jimmy's first words from theFar Treasure.
How could something go so wrong?
Ciret and Marli came for him. "Some questions related to the investigation."
The Emergent guards took him inward and up, but not to the taxi dock. Nau was
in Vinh's own "Fleet Manager's" office. The Podmaster sat with Ritser Brughel
and Anne Reynolt.
"Have a seat. . .Fleet Manager," Nau said quietly, waving at Ezr's place at
the middle of the table.
Vinh approached it slowly, sat down. It was hard to look Tomas Nau in the
eye. The others. . .Anne
Reynolt seemed as impatient and irritable as ever. There was no trouble
avoiding her gaze, since she never looked directly into his eyes anyway. Ritser
Brughel seemed as tired as the Podmaster, but he had an odd smile that flickered
on and off. The man was staring hard at him; Vinh suddenly realized that
Brughel was brimming with unspoken triumph. All the deaths-on both sides-
were nothing to this sadist.
"Fleet Manager." Nau's quiet voice brought Vinh's head around. "About
J.Y. Diem's conspiracy-" "I knew, Podmaster." The words were somewhere
between defiance and confession. "I-"
Nau held up a hand. "I know. But you were a minor participant. We've
identified several others. The old man, Pham Trinli. He provided them with
protective coloration-and almost died for his trouble."
Brughel chuckled. "Yeah, he got half poached. Bet he's whimpering even
yet."
Nau turned to look at Brughel. He didn't say anything, just stared. After a
second, Ritser nodded and his demeanor became a sullen imitation of Nau's.
The Podmaster turned back to Vinh. "None of us can afford rage or triumph
in this. Now we need everyone, even Pham Trinli." He looked at Vinh
i
f ll
d E
f ll
t hi

meaningfully, and Ezr fully met his gaze.
"Yes, sir. I understand."
"We'll debrief you later about the plot, Fleet Manager. We do want to
identify all those who need special watching. For now, there are much more
important things than raking over the past."
"Even after this, you want me to be Fleet Manager?" He had hated that job
so much. Now he hated it even more, for entirely different reasons.
But the Podmaster nodded. "You were the proper person before, and you
still are. Furthermore, we need continuity. If you visibly and wholeheartedly
accept my leadership, the community as a whole has a better chance."
"Yes, sir." Sometimes it was possible to atone for guilt. That was more than
Jimmy and Tsufe and Pham Patil could ever do.
"Good. As I understand it, our physical situation has stabilized. There are
no ongoing emergencies. What about Xin and Wen? Are they going to be able
rescue those ice blocks they're chasing? Getting them more fuel is a priority."
"We have the distillery online, sir. We'll begin feeding it in a few Ksecs."
And could refuel the taxis. "I'm hoping we'll have the last ice blocks grounded
and in the shade within forty Ksec."
Nau glanced at Anne Reynolt.
"The estimate is reasonable, Podmaster. All other problems are under
control."
"Then we have time for the important, human issues. Mr. Vinh, we'll be
putting out several announcements later today. I want you to understand them.
Both you and Qiwi Lin Lisolet will be thanked for your help in tracking down
what is left of the conspiracy."
"But-"
"Yes, I know that there's an element of fabrication there. But Qiwi was
never in on the conspiracy, and she has given us solid help." Nau paused. "The
poor girl was ripped apart by this. There's a lot of rage in her. For her sake, and
for the sake of the whole community, I want you to play along with the story. I
need it emphasized that there are plenty of Qeng Ho who are not irrational, who
have pledged to work with me."
He paused. "And now the most important thing. You heard my speech, the
part about learning Emergent ways?"
"About. . .Focus?" About what had they had really done to Trixia.
Behind Nau, the sadistic smirk flickered once again across Ritser Brughel's
face.
"That's the main thing," said Nau. "Perhaps we should have been open
about it, but the training period wasn't complete. Focus can make the difference
between life and death in the present circumstances Ezr I want Anne to take

between life and death in the present circumstances. Ezr, I want Anne to take
you over to Hammerfest and explain it all to you. You'll be the first. I want you
to understand, to make your peace with it. When you have, I want you to explain
Focus to your people, and do it so they can accept it, so what is left of our
missions can survive."
And so the secret Vinh had pushed to know, the secret that had driven every
dream for Msecs, was now to be revealed to him. Ezr followed Reynolt up the
central corridor to the taxi lock. Every meter was a battle for him. Focus. The
infection they could not cure. The mindrot. There had been rumors, nightmares,
and now he would know.
Reynolt waved him into the taxi. "Sit over there, Vinh." In a paradoxical
way, he preferred dealing with Anne Reynolt. She didn't disguise her contempt,
and she had none of the sadistic triumph that oozed from Ritser Brughel.
The taxi sealed up and pushed off. The Qeng Ho temp was still tied down to
the rockpile. The sunlight was still too bright to allow it to be released. The
purple sky had faded back to black, but there were a halfdozen comet tails
streaking the stars-sundry blocks of ice that now floated some kilometers away.
Wen and Xin were out there somewhere.
Hammerfest was less than five hundred meters from the temp, an easy free
jump if Reynolt had wished it. Instead they floated across the space in
shirtsleeve comfort. If you hadn't seen it all before the Relight, you might not
guess the disaster that had happened. The monster rocks had long since stopped
moving. Loose ice and snow had been redistributed across the shadow, larger
chunks and smaller and smaller and smaller, a fractal pile. Only now there was
less ice, and much less airsnow. Now the shadowed side of the jumble was lit as
by a bright moon-the light reflected from Arachna. The taxi passed fifty meters
above crews working to reemplace the electric jets. Last time he had checked,
Qiwi Lisolet was down there, more or less running the operation.
Reynolt had strapped down across from him. "The successfully Focused are
all on Hammerfest. You can talk to almost anyone you please."
Hammerfest looked like an elegant personal estate. It was the luxurious
heart of the Emergent operation. That had been some comfort to Ezr. He'd told
himself that Trixia and the others would be treated decently there. They might be
held like the hostages of Qeng Ho history, like the One Hundred at Far Pyorya.
But no sensible Trader would ever build a habitat rooted in a rubble pile. The
taxi coasted over towers of eerie beauty, a fey castle spiring up from the crystal
plane. In a short time, he would know what the castle hid.. . .Reynolt's phrasing
finally took hold of his attention. "Successfully Focused?"
Reynolt shrugged. "Focus is mindrot on a leash. We lost thirty percent in

the initial conversions; we may lose more in the coming years. We had moved
the sickest ones over to theFar Treasure ."
"But what-"
"Be quiet and let me tell you." Her attention flicked to something beyond
Vinh's shoulder, and she was quiet for several seconds. "You remember
becoming sick at the time of the ambush. You've guessed that was a disease of
our design; its incubation time was an important part of our planning. What you
don't know is that the microbe's military use is of secondary importance." The
mindrot was viral. Its original, natural, form had killed millions in the
Emergents' home solar system, had crashed their civilization. . .and set the stage
for the present era of expansion. For the original strains of the bug had a novel
property: they were a treasure house of neurotoxins.
"In the centuries since the Plague Time, the Emergency has gentled the
mindrot and turned it to the service of civilization. Its present form needs special
help to break through the blood-brain barrier, and spreads throughout the brain
in a nearly harmless way, infecting about ninety percent of the glial cells. And
now we can control the release of neuroactives."
The taxi slowed and turned precisely to match Hammerfest's lock. Arachna
slid across the sky, a full "moon" nearly a half-degree across. The planet
gleamed white and featureless, cloud decks hiding its furious rebirth.
Ezr scarcely noticed. His imagination was trapped in the vision that lurked
behind Anne Reynolt's dry jargon: the Emergents' pet virus, penetrating the
brain, breeding by the tens of billions, dripping poison into a still-living brain.
He remembered the killing pressure in his head as their lander had climbed up
from Arachna. That had been the disease banging on the portals of his mind. Ezr
Vinh and all the others on the Qeng Ho temp had fought off that assault-or
maybe their brains were still infected, and the disease was quiescent. But Trixia
Bonsol and the people with the "Focus" glyph by their names had been given
special treatment. Instead of a cure, Reynolt's people had grown the disease in
the victims' brains like mold in the flesh of a fruit. If there had been even the
slightest gravity in the taxi, Ezr would have vomited. "Butwhy ?"
Reynolt ignored him. She opened the lock hatch and led him into
Hammerfest. When she spoke again, there was something close to enthusiasm in
her flat tones. "Focusing ennobles. It is the key to Emergent success, and a much
more subtle thing than you imagine. It's not just that we've created a
pyschoactive microbe. This is one whose growth within the brain can be
controlled with millimeter precision-and once in place, the ensemble can be
guided in its actions with the same precision."
Vinh's response was so blank that it penetrated even Reynolt's attention.

"Don't you see? We can improve the attention-focusing aspects of
consciousness: we can take humans and turn them into analytical engines." She
spelled it out in wretched detail. On the Emergent worlds, the Focusing process
was spread over the last years of a specialist's schooling, intensifying the
graduate-school experience to produce genius. For Trixia and the others, the
process had been necessarily more abrupt. For many days, Reynolt and her
technicians had tweaked the virus, triggering genetic expression that precisely
released the chemicals of thought-all guided by Emergent medical computers
that gathered feedback from conventional brain diagnostics. . .
"And now the training is complete. The survivors are ready to pursue their
researches as they never could have before."
Reynolt led him through rooms with plush furniture and carpeted walls.
They followed corridors that became narrower and narrower until they were in
tunnels barely one meter across. It was a capillary architecture he had seen in
histories. . .pictures from the heart of an urban tyranny. And finally they stood
before a simple door. Like the others behind them, it bore a number and
speciality. This one said:F
042EXPLORATORY LINGUISTICS.
Reynolt paused. "One last thing. Podmaster Nau believes you may be upset
by what you see here. I know outlanders behave in extreme ways when they first
encounter Focus." She cocked her head as though debating Ezr Vinh's
rationality. "So. The Podmaster has asked me to emphasize: Focus is normally
reversible, at least to a great extent." She shrugged, as though delivering a rote
speech.
"Open the door." Ezr's voice cracked on the words.
The roomlet was tiny, lit dimly by the glow from a dozen active windows.
The light formed a halo around the head of the person within: short hair, slender
form in simple fatigues.
"Trixia?" he said softly. He reached across the room to touch her shoulder.
She didn't turn her head. Vinh swallowed his terror and pulled himself around to
look into her face. "Trixia?"
For an instant she seemed to look directly into his eyes. Then she twisted
away from his touch and tried to peer around him, at the windows. "You're
blocking my view. I can't see!" Her tone was nervous, edging into panic.
Ezr ducked his head, turned to see what was so important in the windows.
The walls around Trixia were filled with structure and generation diagrams. One
whole section appeared to be vocabulary options. There were Nese words in n-
to-one match with fragments of unpronounceable nonsense. It was a typical
language-analysis environment, though with more active windows than a
bl
ld
T i i '
fli k
d f
i
i
h

reasonable person would use. Trixia's gaze flickered from point to point, her
fingers tapping choices. Occasionally she would mutter a command. Her face
was filled with a look of total concentration. It was not an alien look, and not by
itself horrifying; he had seen it before, when she was totally fascinated by some
language problem.
Once he moved out of her way, he was gone from her mind. She was more.
. .focused. . .than he had ever seen her before.
And Ezr Vinh began to understand.
He watched her for some seconds, watched the patterns expand in the
windows, watched choices made, structures change. Finally, he asked in a quiet,
almost disinterested voice, "So how is it going, Trixia?"
"Fine." The answer was immediate, the tone exactly that of the old Trixia in
a distracted mood. "The books from the Spider library, they're marvelous. I have
a handle on their graphemics now. No one's ever seen anything like this, ever
done anything like this. The Spiders don't see the way we do; visual fusion is
entirely different with them. If it hadn't been for the physics books, I'd never
have imagined the notion of split graphemes." Her voice was distant, a little
excited. She didn't turn to look at him as she spoke, and her fingers continued to
tap. Now that his eyes had adjusted to the dim light, he could see small,
frightening things. Her fatigues were fresh but there were syrupy stains down the
front. Her hair, even cut short, looked tangled and greasy. A fleck of something-
food? snot?-clung to the curve of her face just above her lips.
Can she even bathe herself?Vinh glanced downward, at the doorway. The
place wasn't big enough for three, but Reynolt had stuck her head and shoulders
through the opening. She floated easily on her elbows. She was staring up at Ezr
and Trixia with intense interest. "Dr. Bonsol has done well, even better than our
own linguists, and they've been Focused since graduate school. Because of her,
we'll have a reading knowledge of their language even before the Spiders come
back to life."
Ezr touched Trixia's shoulder again. Again, she twitched away. It wasn't a
gesture of anger or fear; it was as if she were shrugging off a pesky fly. "Do you
remember me, Trixia?" No answer, but he was sure she did-it simply wasn't
important enough to comment on. She was an ensorcelled princess, and only the
evil witches might waken her. But this ensorcellment might never have
happened if he had listened more to the princess's fears, if he had agreed with
Sum Dotran. "I'm so sorry, Trixia."
Reynolt said, "Enough for this visit, Fleet Manager." She gestured him out
of the roomlet.
Vinh slid back. Trixia's eyes never left her work. Something like that
intentness had originally attracted him to her She was a Trilander one of the

intentness had originally attracted him to her. She was a Trilander, one of the
few who had shipped on the Qeng Ho expedition without close friends or even a
little family. Trixia had dreamed of learning the truly alien, learning things no
human had ever known. She had held the dream as fiercely as the most daring
Qeng Ho. And now she had what she had sacrificed for. . .and nothing else.
Halfway through the door, he stopped and looked across the room at the
back of her head. "Are you happy?" he said in a small voice, not really expecting
an answer.
She didn't turn, but her fingers ceased their tapping. Where his face and
touch had made no impression, thewords of a silly question stopped her.
Somewhere in that beloved head, the question filtered past layers of Focus, was
considered briefly. "Yes, very." And the sound of her tapping resumed.
Vinh had no recollection of the trip back to the temp, and after that, little
more than confused fragments of memory. He saw Benny Wen in the docking
area.
Benny wanted to talk. "We're back earlier that I'd ever guessed. You can't
imagine how slick Xin's pilots are." His voice dropped. "One of them was Ai
Sun. You know, from theInvisible Hand. She was in Navigation.One of our own
people, Ezr. But it's like she's dead inside, just like his other pilots and the
Emergent programmers. Xin said she was Focused. He said you could explain.
Ezr, you know my pop is over on Hammerfest. What-"
And that was all Ezr remembered. Maybe he screamed at Benny, maybe he
just pushed past him.Explain Focus to your people, and do it so theycan accept
it, so what is left of our missions can survive.
When reason returned . . .
Vinh was alone in the temp's central park, without any recollection of
having wandered there. The park spread out around him, the leafy treetops
reaching across to touch him from five sides. There was an old saying: Without a
bactry, a habitat cannot support its tenants; without a park, the tenants lose their
souls. Even on ramships deep between the stars, there was still the Captain's
bonsai. In the larger temps, the thousand-year habitats at Canberra and Namqem,
the park was the largest space within the structure, kilometer on kilometer of
nature. But even the smallest park had all the millennia of Qeng Ho ingenuity
behind its design. This one gave the impression of forest depth, of creatures
great and small waiting just behind the nearest trees. Keeping the balance of life
in a park this small was probably the most difficult project in the temp.
The park was in deepening twilight, darkest in the direction of down. To his
right the last glimmer of skylike blue shone beyond the trees. Vinh reached out,
pulled himself hand over hand to the ground. It was a short trip; all together, the
park was less than twelve meters across Vinh hugged himself into the deep

park was less than twelve meters across. Vinh hugged himself into the deep
moss by a tree trunk and listened to the sounds of the cooling forest evening. A
bat flickered against the sky, and somewhere a nest of butterflies muttered
musically to itself. The bat was likely fake. A park this small could not stock
large animals or scamperers, but the butterflies would be real.
For a blessed space of time, all thought fled . . .
. . .and returned with knives resharpened. Jimmy was dead. And Tsufe, and
Pham Patil. In dying, they had killed hundreds of others, including the people
who might know what to do now.Yet I still live.
Even half a day ago, knowing what had happened to Trixia would have put
him in a rage beyond reason. Now that rage choked on his shame. Ezr Vinh had
had a hand in the deaths aboard theFar Treasure. If Jimmy had been a little more
"successful," all those on Hammerfest might be dead too. Was being foolish, and
supporting foolish, violent people-was that as evil as committing a treacherous
ambush?No, no, no! And yet, in the end, Jimmy had killed a good fraction of
those who had survived the ambush.And I must make amends. Now I must
somehow explain Focus to my people,and do it so they can accept it, so what is
left of our mission can survive.
Ezr choked on a sob. He was supposed to convince others to accept what he
would have died to prevent. In all his schooling, all his reading, all his nineteen
years of life, he had never imagined there could be anything so difficult.
A tiny light swung through the middle distance. Branches shuffled aside.
Someone had entered the park, was bumbling nearer the central glade. The light
flashed briefly in Vinh's face, then went out.
"Aha. I figured you might go to ground." It was Pham Trinli. The old man
grabbed a low-growing branch and settled on the moss near Vinh. "Brace up,
young fellow. Diem's heart was in the right place. I helped him out as best I
could, but he was a careless hothead-remember how he sounded? I never thought
he was that foolish, and now a lot of people got killed. Well, shit happens."
Vinh turned toward the sound of the words; the other's face was a grayish
blob in the twilight. For a moment, Vinh teetered on the edge of violence. It
would feel sogood to pulp that face. Instead, he settled a little deeper in the dark
and let his breath steady. "Yeah. It happens."Andmaybe some will happen to you.
Surely Nau had the park bugged.
"Courage. I like that." In the darkness, Vinh couldn't tell whether the other
was smiling or if the fatuous compliment was meant seriously. Trinli slid a little
closer and his voice dropped to a whisper. "Don't take it so hard. Sometimes you
have to go along to get along. And I think I can manipulate that Nau fellow. The
speech he gave-did you notice? After all the death Jimmy caused, Nau

wasaccommodating. I swear, he cribbed his talk from something in our own
history."
So even in hell, there are clowns. Pham Trinli, the aging martinet, whose
idea of subtle conspiracy was a whispered chat in a temp's central park. Trinli
was so totally clueless. Worse, he had so many thingsbackwards . . .
They sat in the near-total darkness for some seconds, and Pham Trinli
remained mercifully silent. The guy's stupidity was like a load of rock dumped
into the pool of Vinh's despair. It stirred things up. The absurdities gave him
something to hit on besides himself. Nau's speech. . .accommodating? In a sense.
Nau was the injured party in this. But they were all injured parties. Cooperation
was the only way out now. He thought back over Nau's words.Huh. Some of the
phrases really were borrowed, from Pham Nuwen's speech at Brisgo Gap. Brisgo
Gap was a shining high point in the history of the Qeng Ho, where the Traders
had saved a high civilization and billions of lives. As much as something so
large could be tied to a single point in space-time, Brisgo Gap was the origin of
the modern Qeng Ho. The similarities with the present situation were about nil. .
. except that there, too, people from all over had cooperated, had prevailed in the
face of terrible treachery.
Pham Nuwen's speech had been 'cast across Human Space many times
during the last two thousand years. It wasn't surprising Tomas Nau would know
it. So he'd spliced in a phrase here and there, sought a common background. .
.except that Tomas Nau's notion of "cooperation" meant accepting Focus and
what had been done to Trixia Bonsol. Vinh realized that some part of his mind
had felt the similarities, had been moved by them. But seeing the cribbing laid
out cold made things different. It was all so pat, and it ended with Ezr Vinh
having to accept. . .Focus.
Shame and guilt lay so heavily on the last two days. Now Ezr wondered.
Jimmy Diem had never been afriend of Ezr's. The other had been a few years
older, and since they first met, Diem had been his crewleader, his most constant
disciplinarian. Ezr tried to think back on Jimmy, think of him from the outside.
Ezr Vinh was no prize himself, but he had grown up near the pinnacle of
Vinh.23. His aunts and uncles and cousins included some of the most successful
Traders in this end of Human Space. Ezr had listened to them and played with
them since his nursery days. . .and Jimmy Diem was just not in their league.
Jimmy was hardworking, but he didn't have that much imagination. His goals
had been modest, which was fortunate since even working as hard as he did,
Jimmy was scarcely able to manage a single work crew.Huh. I never thought
about him that way. It was a sad surprise that suddenly made Jimmy the
hardnosed crewleader much more likable, someone who could have been a

friend.
And just as suddenly, he realized how much Jimmy must have hated
playing the game of high-stakes threats with Tomas Nau. He didn't have the
scheming talent for such things, and in the end he had simply miscalculated. All
the guy really wanted to do was marry Tsufe Do and get into middle
management.It doesn't make sense. Vinh was suddenly aware of the darkness
around him, the sounds of butterflies sleeping in the trees. The damp of the moss
was chill through his shirt and pants. He tried to remember exactly what he'd
heard over the auditorium speakers. The voice was Jimmy's, no doubt. The
accent was precisely his Diem-family Nese. But the tone, the choice of words,
those had been so confident, so arrogant, so . . .almostjoyful. Jimmy Diem could
never have faked that enthusiasm. And Jimmy would never have felt such
enthusiasm, either.
And that left only one conclusion. Faking Jimmy's voice and accent would
have been difficult, but somehow they had done it. And so what else had been a
lie?Jimmy didn't kill anyone. The senior Qeng
Ho had been murdered before Jimmy and Tsufe and Pham Patil ever went
aboard theFar Treasure.
Tomas Nau had committed murders on top of murders to claim his moral
high ground.Explain Focus to your people, and do it sothey can accept it, so
what is left of our missions can survive.
Vinh stared up into the last light in the sky. Stars glinted here and there
between the branches, a fake heaven from a sky light-years away. He heard
Pham Trinli shift. He patted Ezr awkwardly on the shoulder, and his lanky form
floated off the ground. "Good, you're not bawling anymore. I figured you just
needed a little backbone. Just remember, you gotta go along to get along. Nau is
basically a softy; we can handle him."
Ezr was trembling, a growl of rage climbing up his throat. He caught the
growl, made it a sobbing sound, made his trembling anger an exhausted
quavering. "Y-yes. We've got to go along."
"Good man." Trinli patted him on the shoulder again, then turned to find his
way back through the treetops. Ezr remembered Ritser Brughel's description of
Trinli after the Relight. The old man was immune to Tomas Nau's moral
manipulation. But that didn't matter, because Trinli was also a selfdeceiving
coward.You gotta go along to get along.
One Jimmy Diem was worth any number of Pham Trinlis.
Tomas Nau had maneuvered them all so cleverly. He had stolen the minds
of Trixia and hundreds of others. He had murdered all those who might have
made a difference. And he hadused those murders to make the rest of them into

his willing tools.
Ezr stared up at the false stars, at the tree branches that curved like claws
across the sky.Maybe it's
possible to push someone too far, to breakhim so he can't bea tool anymore.
Staring up at the dark claws all around him, Vinh felt his mind spin off in
separate directions. One part watched passively, marveling that such
disintegration could happen to Ezr Vinh. Another part drew in on itself, drowned
in pools of sorrow; Sum Dotran would never return, nor S.J. Park, and any
promise of reversing Trixia's Focus must surely be a lie. But there was a third
fragment, cool and analytical and murderous:
For both Qeng Ho and Emergents, the Exile would last for decades. Much
of that time would be spent off-Watch, in coldsleep. . .but they still had years
stretching before them. And Tomas Nau needed all the survivors. For now, the
Qeng Ho were beaten down, raped, and-so Tomas Nau must be led to think-
deceived. The cool one within him, the one who could kill, looked out upon that
future with grim intent. This was not the life that Ezr Vinh had ever dreamed
would be his. There would be no friends he could safely confide in. There would
be enemies and fools all around. He watched Trinli's light vanish at the entrance
to the park. Fools like Pham Trinli could be used. As long as it didn't implicate
competent Qeng Ho, Trinli was a sacrifice piece in the game. Tomas Nau had set
him a role for life, and his greatest reward might be nothing more than revenge.
(But maybe a chance, the original watcher tried to say, maybe a chance that
Reynolt wasn't lying about Trixia and the reversability of Focus.)
The cool one took a last long look down the years of patient work that lay
ahead. . .and then for the moment, it retired. Surely there were cameras
watching. Better not to seem too calm after all that had happened. Vinh curled in
upon himself and surrendered to the one who could weep.

PART TWO

FOURTEEN
Only the most literal-minded would dispute the saying "New sun, new
world." It's true, the core of the planet is surely unchanged by the New Sun, and
the continental outlines are mostly the same. But the steam-storms of the first
year of the sun scour back the dry wreckage of all previous surface life. Forests
and jungles, prairies and swamps, all must start again. Of Spiderkind's surface
works, only stone buildings in protected valleys may survive.
Spore-borne life spreads quickly, torn apart in the storms to sprout again
and again. In the first years, higher animals may poke their snouts from
deepnesses, may try to gain advantage with an early taking of territory, but it is a
deadly business. The "birth of the new world" is so violent that the metaphor is
strained.
. . .And yet, after the third or fourth year, there are occasional breaks in the
storms. Avalanches and steam surges become rare, and plants can survive from
year to year. In the winter season, when the winds have gentled and there is a
gap between the storms, there are times when one can look out at the land and
imagine this phase of the sun as an exuberance of life.
Pride of Accord was once more complete, a grander highway than ever it
had been before. Victory Smith had the sports car up past sixty miles per hour on
the straightaway, slowing to just under thirty when they entered a switchback.
From his perch in the back, Hrunkner Unnerby had heart-stopping views of each
new precipice. He held on to his perch with every hand and foot. Except for that
terrorized embrace, he was sure the last turn would have flung him out the side
of the auto.
"Are you sure you wouldn't rather have me drive, ma'am?" He asked.
Smith laughed. "And me sit back where you are? No way. I know how
scary it is to watch from the back perch."
Sherkaner Underhill tilted his head out the side window. "Um, I never
realized how exciting this ride was for passengers."
"Okay, I get the message." Smith slowed, drove more cautiously than any
of them might have done alone. In fact, road conditions were excellent. The
storm had been blown away by a hot, compressional wind, leaving the concrete
surface dry and clear. In another hour, they would be back in the soup. Their
mountain route scraped just under ragged, fast-moving clouds, and the lands to
the south were dark with the haze of rain. The view was about as open as it ever
got along Pride of Accord. The forest was just two years old, hard-barked cones

sprouting tear-away leaves. Most of the treelets were scarcely a yard tall, though
here and there a sproutling or a softbush might reach six or ten feet. The green
stretched for miles, interrupted here and there by the brown of avalanches or the
spray of waterfalls. In this phase of the sun, the Westermost Forest was like
God's own lawn and from almost every point on the Pride, the travelers could
see down to the ocean.
Hrunkner relaxed the grip on his perch a fraction. Behind them, he could
see Smith's security detail appear around the last switchback. For most of the
trip, the escort had had no trouble staying close. For one thing, the storm and
rain had kept Victory to very low speeds. Now they were scrambling, and
Hrunkner wouldn't blame them if they were steamed. Unfortunately, their
commanding officer was about the only person they could complain to, and that
was Victory Smith. Smith wore the uniform of a major in the Accord
Quartermaster Corps. The branch wasn't quite a lie, since Intelligence was
construed as a branch of Quartermaster whenever convenient. But Smith was no
major. Unnerby had been out of the service for four years, but he still had his old
drinking buddies. . .and he knew just how the Great War had finally been won: if
Victory Smith was not the new chief of Accord Intelligence, Unnerby would be
enormously surprised.
There had been other surprises though-at least they'd been surprises until he
thought things through.
Two days ago, Smith had called, inviting him back to the Service. Today,
when she showed up at his shop in Princeton, he'd half expected the discreet
security-but Sherkaner Underhill's presence had been totally unexpected. Not so
surprising was the pleasure he'd felt in seeing the two again. Hrunkner Unnerby
had achieved no fame for his role in truncating the Great War; it would be at
least ten years before the records of their walk in the Dark were unsealed. But
his share of the bounty for that mission had been twenty times his life's savings.
Finally, an excuse to quit the Service, a chance to do something constructive
with his engineering background.
In the first years of a New Sun, there were enormous works to be done,
under conditions that could be as dangerous as combat. In some cases real
combat was involved. Even in a modern civilization, this phase of the sun was
one where treachery-from theft to murder to squatting-was common. Hrunkner
Unnerby had done very well, so perhaps the biggest surprise was how easy it had
been for Victory Smith to persuade him to accept a thirty-day enlistment. "Just
long enough to learn what we're up to and decide whether you'd like to come
back to longer service."
Hence this trip to Lands Command. So far, it was a welcome vacation, a
f
f
ff

meeting with old friends (and it's not often a sergeant got chauffeured by a
general officer). Sherkaner Underhill was as much the unhinged genius as ever,
though the nerve damage he'd suffered in their ad hoc deepness made him seem
older than he was. Smith was more open and cheerful than he had ever seen her.
Fifteen miles out of Princeton, beyond the temporary rowhouses and just into the
foothills of the Westermost Range, the two let him in on their personal secret:
"You're what?" Unnerby had said, almost slipping off his perch. Hot rain
was slamming down all around them; maybe he hadn't heard right.
"You heard me, Hrunkner. The General and I are wife and husband."
Underhill was grinning like an idiot. Victory Smith raised a pointed hand. "One
correction. Don't call me General."
Unnerby was usually better at masking astonishment; even Underhill could
see this had taken him by surprise, and his grin got even broader. "Surely you
had guessed there was something going on between us before the Big Dark."
"Well. . ."Yes, though nothing could come of it, what with Sherkaner about
to head off for his very uncertain walk in the Dark. Hrunkner had always felt
sorry for the two because of that.
In fact, they did make a great team. Sherkaner Underhill had more bright
ideas than any dozen people the Sergeant had ever known; but most of his ideas
were grossly impractical, at least in terms of what could be accomplished in one
person's lifetime. On the other hand, Victory Smith had an eye for workable
results. Why, if she hadn't been around at just the right time that afternoon long
ago, Unnerby would have booted poor Underhill all the way back to Princeton-
and his mad scheme for winning the Great War would have been lost. So, yes.
Except for the timing, he wasn't surprised. And if Victory Smith was now the
Director of Accord Intelligence, the country itself stood to win big. An ugly
thought wormed its way to his mouth, and then seemed to pop out of its own
volition: "But children? Not now of course."
"Yup. The General's pregnant. I'll be carrying two baby welts on my back in
less than half a year."
Hrunkner realized he was sucking on his eating hands in embarrassment.
He gargled something unintelligible. They drove for half a minute in silence, the
hot rain hissing back across the windshields.How could theydo this to their own
children?
Finally, the General said quietly, "Do you have a problem with this,
Hrunkner?"
Unnerby wanted to swallow his hands all over again. He had known
Victory Smith since the day she came into Lands Command, a spanking new
junior lieutenant, a lady with an unplaced name and an undisguisable
thf l
Y
l
t
thi
i th
ilit
d
b d
d

youthfulness. You saw almost everything in the military, and everybody guessed
straightaway. The junior lieutenant was truly new; she was born out-of-phase.
Yet somehow she'd been educated well enough to get into officer school. The
rumor was that Victory Smith was the get of a rich East Coast pervert, the
fellow's family had finally disowned him, and the daughter who shouldn't exist.
Unnerby remembered the slurs and worse that had followed her everywhere for
the first quarter year or so. In fact, his first glimmer that she was destined for
greatness was the way she stood up to the ostracism, her intelligence and
courage in facing the shame of her time of birth.
Finally he got his voice. "Uk. Yes, ma'am. I know. I meant no disrespect. I
was brought up to believe a certain way,"about how decent peopleshould live.
Decent people conceived their children in the Waning years, and gave birth with
the new sun.
The General didn't reply, but Underhill gave him a backhanded pat. "That's
okay, Sergeant. You should have seen my cousin's reaction. But just wait; things
change. When we have time, I'll explain why the old rules don't really make
sense anymore." And that was the most disquieting thing about Sherkaner
Underhill: he probably could explain away their behavior-and remain blissfully
remote from the rage it would cause in others.
But the embarrassing moment had passed. If these two could put up with
Hrunkner's straitlaced nature, he would do his best to ignore their. . . quirks.
Heaven knew he had put up with worse during the war. Besides, Victory Smith
was the sort who seemed to create her own propriety-and once created, it was as
deep as any Unnerby had known.
As for Underhill. . .his attention was already elsewhere. His nervous tremor
made him look old, but the mind was as sharp-or as flaky-as ever. It flitted from
idea to idea, never quite coming to rest the way a normal person's would. The
rain had stopped and the wind became hot and dry. As they entered the steep
country, Unnerby took a quick look at his watch and began counting how much
craziness the other might come up with in the next few minutes. (1) Pointing out
at the hard-armored first growth of the forest, Underhill speculated what
Spiderkind might have been like if it regrew from spores after every Dark
instead of emerging full-grown and with children. (2) A crack in the cloud cover
appeared ahead, fortunately several miles to the side of their path. For a few
minutes, the searing whiteness of once-reflected sunlight shone down upon
them, clouds so bright they had to shade that side of the car. Somewhere uphill
of them, direct sunlight was frying the mountainside. And Sherkaner Underhill
wondered if maybe someone could build "heat farms" on the mountaintops,
using temperature differentials to generate electricity for the towns below. (3)
Something green scuttled across the road narrowly avoiding their wheels

Something green scuttled across the road, narrowly avoiding their wheels.
Sherkaner had a take on that, too, something about evolution and the automobile.
(And Victory commented that such evolution could work both ways.) (4) Ah, but
Underhill had an idea for much safer, faster transport than autos or even aircraft.
"Ten minutes from Princeton to Lands Command, twenty minutes across the
continent. See, you dig these tunnels along minimum-time arcs, evacuate the air
from them, and just let gravity do the work." By Unnerby's watch, there was a
five-second pause. Then: "Oops, little problem there. The minimum-time
solution for Princeton to Lands Command would go down kinda deep. . .like six
hundred miles. I probably couldn't convince even the General to finance it."
"You are right about that!" And the two were off in an extended argument
about less-than-optimal tunnel arcs and trade-offs against air travel. The deep
tunnel idea was really dumb, it turned out.
Unnerby lost track after a while. For one thing, Sherkaner was very curious
about Unnerby's construction business. The fellow was a good listener, and his
questions gave Unnerby ideas he might never have had otherwise. Some of those
might actually make money. Lots of money. Hmm.
Smith noticed: "Hey, I need this sergeant to be poor and in need of a
generous enlistment bonus. Don't lead him astray!"
"Sorry, dear." But Underhill did not seem apologetic. "It's been a long time,
Hrunkner. I wish we'd seen more of you these last years. You remember back
then, my big, ah-"
"Screwball idea of the moment?"
"Yes, exactly!"
"I remember just before we buttoned up in that Tiefer animal deepness, you
were mumbling about this being the last Dark that civilization would ever sleep
through. In the hospital afterwards, you were still going on about it. You should
be a science-fiction writer, Sherkaner."
Underhill waved a hand airily, as if acknowledging a compliment.
"Actually, it's been done in fiction. But truly, Hrunk, ours is the first era where
we can make it happen."
Hrunkner shrugged. He had walked in the Great Dark; it still made him
queasy. "I'm sure there will be lots more Deep Dark expeditions, larger and
better equipped than ours. It's an exciting idea, and I'm sure the Gen-Major
Smith also has all sorts of plans. I could even imagine significant battles in the
middle of the Dark."
"This is a new age, Hrunk. Look at what science is doing all around us."
They rounded the last curve of dry roadway and plowed into a solid wall of
hot rain, the storm they had seen from the north. Smith was not caught by
surprise They had their windows rolled almost all the way up and the auto was

surprise. They had their windows rolled almost all the way up, and the auto was
doing only twenty miles per hour when they were enveloped. Still, the driving
conditions were suddenly ghastly, the windows fogging almost too fast for the
car's blowers, the rain so thick that even with the deep-red rain lights they could
barely see the edge of the roadway. The rain that spattered past the chinks in the
windows was hot as a baby's spit. Behind them, two pairs of deep-reds loomed in
the darkness, Smith's security people pulling closer.
It took a forcible effort to bring his attention back from the storm outside
and remember what Underhill had been saying. "I know about the 'Age of
Science,' Sherk. That's been my edge in the construction business. By the last
Waning we had radio, aircraft, telephones, sound recording. Even during the
build-back since the New Sun, that progress has continued. Your auto is an
incredible improvement over that Relmeitch you had before the Dark-and that
was an expensive vehicle for its time." And someday, Unnerby wanted to learn
just how Sherkaner had obtained it on a grad student's stipend. "Without a doubt,
this is the most exciting era I could ever hope to live in. Aircraft will soon break
the sound barrier. The Crown is building a national highway system. You
wouldn't be behind that, would you, Major?"
Victory smiled. "No need. There are plenty of people in Quartermaster who
are. And the highway system would happen without any government help at all.
But this way, we retain control."
"So. Big things are happening. In thirty years-by the next Dark-I wouldn't
be surprised if there is worldwide air traffic, picturing telephones, maybe even
rocket-borne relays that orbit the world the way the world orbits the sun. If we
can avoid another war, I'm going to have the time of my life. But your idea that
our entire civilization will sustain itself right through the Dark-pardon me, old
Corporal, but I don't think you've worked out the numbers. To do that we'd
essentially have to recreate the sun. Do you have any idea of the energy
involved? I remember what it took to support our diggers after Dark during the
War. We used more fuel in those operations than in all the rest of the War put
together."
Ha! For once, Sherkaner Underhill didn't have a ready reply. Then he
realized that Sherk was waiting for the General to speak. After a moment,
Victory Smith raised a hand. "Until now everything has been very sociable,
Sergeant. I know, you've learned some things that enemies might make use of-
clearly you've guessed my present job."
"Yes. And congratulations, ma'am. Next to Strut Greenval, you're the best
that ever had that job."
"Why. . .thank you, Hrunkner. But my point is that Sherkaner's idle talk has
moved us to the heart of why I asked you to take a thirty-day recruitment. What

moved us to the heart of why I asked you to take a thirty day recruitment. What
you're going to hear now is explicitly Strategic Secret."
"Yes, ma'am." He hadn't expected the mission brief to sneak up on him like
this. Outside, the storm roared louder. Smith was pushing along at barely twenty
miles per hour even on the straightaway. During the early years of a New Sun,
even overcast days were dangerously bright, but this storm was so deep that the
sky had darkened down to a murky twilight. The wind picked at the auto, trying
to pry it off the road. The inside of the cab was like a steam bath.
Smith waved for Sherkaner to continue. Underhill leaned back in his perch
and raised his voice to be heard over the growing storm. "As it happens, I have
'worked out the numbers.' After the War, I peddled my ideas around a number of
Victory's colleagues. That nearly ruined her promotion. Those cobbers can do
the numbers almost as well as you. But things have changed."
"Correction," said Smith. "Thingsmay change." The wind slid them toward
a drop-off that Unnerby could barely see. Smith downshifted, forced the auto
back toward the middle of the road.
"You see," continued Underhill, undistracted, "there really are power
sources that could support civilization through the Dark. You said we'd have to
create our own sun. That's close, even if no one knows how the sun works. But
there's theoretical and practical evidence of the power of the atom."
A few minutes earlier, Unnerby would have laughed. Even now, he couldn't
keep the scorn out of his voice. "Radioactivity? You're going to keep us warm
with tons of refined radium?" Maybe the great secret was that the Crown's high
command was readingAmazing Science.
Such incredulity rolled off Underhill's back as smoothly as ever. "There are
several possibilities. If they are pursued with imagination, I have no doubt that I
will have the numbers on my side by the time of the next Waning."
And the General said, "Just so you understand, Sergeant. Ido have doubts.
But this is something we can't afford to overlook. Even if the scheme doesn't
work, thefailure could be a weapon a thousand times deadlier than anything in
the Great War."
"Deadlier than poison gas in a deepness?" Suddenly the storm outside didn't
seem as dark as what Victory Smith was saying.
He realized that for an instant all her attention was upon him. "Yes,
Sergeant, worse than that. Our largest cities could be destroyed in a matter of
hours."
Underhill almost bounced off his perch. "Worst case! Worst case! That's all
you military types ever think about. Look, Unnerby. If we work at this over the
next thirty years, we'll likely have power sources that can keep buried cities-not
deepnesses, but waking cities-going right through the Dark. We can keep

p
,
g
g
g
g
g
p
roadways clear of ice and airsnow-and by the middle years of the Dark, they'll
stay that way. Surface transport could be much easier than it is during much of
the Bright Times." He waved at the hissing rain beyond the sports car's windows.
"Yeah, and I suppose air transport will be likewise simplified,"withall the
air lying frozen on the ground. But Unnerby's sarcasm sounded faint even to
himself.Yes, with a power source, maybe we could do it.
Unnerby's change of heart must have shown; Underhill smiled. "You do
see! Fifty years from now we'll look back at these times and wonder why it
wasn't obvious. The Dark is actually a more benign phase than most any other
time."
"Yeah." He shivered. Some would call it sacrilege, but-"Yeah, it would be
something marvelous. You haven't convinced me it can be done."
"If it can be done at all, it will be very hard," said Smith. "We have about
thirty years left before the next Dark. We've got some physicists who think that-
in theory-atomic power can work. But God Below, it wasn't till 58//10 that they
even knew about atoms! I've sold the High Command on this; considering the
investment, I'll surely be out of a job if it fizzles. But you know-sorry,
Sherkaner-I rather hope it doesn't work at all."
Funny that she would support the traditional view on this.
Sherkaner: "It will be like finding a new world!"
"No! It will be like recolonizing the present one. Sherk, let's consider the
'best case' scenario that you claim we narrow-minded military types always
ignore. Let's say the scientists get things figured out. Say that in ten years, or by
60//20 at the outside, we start building atomic power plants for your hypothetical
'cities-in-the-Dark.' Even if the rest of the world hasn't discovered atomic power
on its own, this sort of construction cannot be kept secret. So even if there is no
other reason for war, there will be an arms race. And it will be a lot worse than
anything in the Great War."
Unnerby: "Ugh. Yes. The first to colonize the Dark would own the world."
"Yes," said Smith. "I'm not sure I'd trust the Crown to respect property in a
situation like that. But Iknow the world would wake up enslaved or dead if some
group like the Kindred conquered the Dark instead."
It was the sort of self-generated nightmare that had driven Unnerby out of
the military. "I hope this doesn't sound disloyal, but have you considered killing
this idea?" He waved ironically at Underhill. "You could think about other
things, right?"
"Youhave lost the military view, haven't you? But yes, I have considered
suppressing this research. Just maybe-if dear Sherkaner keeps his mouth shut-

that would be enough. If no one gets an early start on this business, there's no
way anybody will be ready to take over the Dark this time around. And maybe
we're generations away from putting this theory into practice-that's what some of
the physicists think."
"Well, I'll tell you," said Underhill, "this will be a matter of engineering
soon enough. Even if we don't touch it, atomic power will be a big deal in fifteen
or twenty years. Only it will be too late for power plants and sealed cities. It will
be too late to conquer the Dark. All atomic power will be good for is weapons.
You were talking about radium, Hrunkner. Just think what large amounts of such
a substance could do as a war poison. And that's just the most obvious thing.
Basically, whatever we do, civilization will be at risk. At least if we try for it all,
there could be a wonderful payoff, civilization all through the Dark."
Smith waved unhappy agreement; Unnerby had the feeling that he was
witnessing a much-repeated discussion. Victory Smith had bought into
Underhill's scheme-and sold it to the High Command. The next thirty years were
going to be even more exciting than Hrunkner Unnerby had thought.
They reached the mountain village very late in the day, the last three hours
of the trip covering just twenty miles through the storm. The weather broke a
couple of miles short of the little town.
Five years into the New Sun, Nigh't'Deepness was mostly rebuilt. The stone
foundations had survived the initial flash and the high-speed floods. As after
every Dark going back many generations, the villagers had used the armored
sprouts of the forest's first growth to build the ground floors of their homes and
businesses and elementary schools. Perhaps by the year 60//10 they would have
better timber and would install a second floor and-at the church-perhaps a third.
For now, all was low and green, the short conical logs giving the exterior walls a
scaled apearance.
Underhill insisted they pass up the kerosene service station on the main
road. "I know a better place," he said, and directed Smith to drive back along the
old roadway.
They had rolled down the windows. The rain had stopped. A dry, almost
cool wind swept over them. There was a break in the cloud cover and for a few
minutes they could see sunlight on clouds. But the light was not the murky
furnace of earlier in the day. The sun must be near setting. The tumbled clouds
were bright with red and orange and alpha plaid-and beyond that the blue and
ultra of clear sky. Brilliance splashed the street and buildings and foothills
beyond. God the surrealist.
Sure enough, at the end of the gravel path was a low barn and a single
kerosene pumping station. "This is the 'better place,' Sherk?" asked Unnerby.

"Well. . .more interesting anyway," The other opened the door and hopped
off his perch. "Let's see if this cobber remembers me." He walked back and forth
by the car, getting the kinks out. After the long drive, his tremor was more
pronounced than usual.
Smith and Unnerby got out, and after a moment the proprietor, a heavy-set
fellow wearing a tool pannier, came out of the barn. He was followed by a pair
of children.
"Fill it up, old cobber?" the fellow said.
Underhill grinned at him, not bothering to correct the misestimate of his
age. "Sure thing." He followed the other over to the pump. The sky was even
brighter now, blue and sunset reds shining down. "Remember me, do you? I
used to come through in a big red Relmeitch, right before the Dark. You were a
blacksmith then."
The other stopped, took a long stare at Underhill. "The Relmeitch I
remember." His two five-year-olds danced behind him, watching the curious
visitor.
"Funny how things change, isn't it?"
The properietor didn't know just what Underhill was talking about, but after
a few moments the two were gossiping like old pals. Yes, the proprietor liked
automobiles, clearly the wave of the future and no more blacksmithing for him.
Sherkaner complimented him on some job he had done for him long ago, and
said it was a shame that there was a kerosene filling station on the main road
now. He bet it wasn't nearly as good at repair work as here, and had the former
blacksmith considered how street advertising was being done up in Princeton
these days? Smith's security pulled into the open space beyond the road, and the
proprietor scarcely noticed. Funny how Underhill could get along with almost
anyone, tuning down his manias to whatever the traffic would bear.
Meantime, Smith was across the road, talking to the captain who was
running her security detail. She came back after Sherk had paid for the kerosene.
"Damn. Lands Command says there's a worse storm due in about midnight. First
time I take my own car, and all hell breaks loose." Smith sounded angry, which
usually meant she was irritated with herself. They got aboard the auto. She
poked at the ignition motor twice. Three times. The engine caught. "We'll
bivouac here overnight." She sat for a moment, almost indecisive. Or maybe she
was watching the sky to the south. "I know where there's some Crown land west
of town."
• • •
Smith tooled down gravel roads then muddy trails Unnerby almost thought

Smith tooled down gravel roads, then muddy trails. Unnerby almost thought
she was lost except she never hesitated or backtracked. Behind them came the
security vehicles, about as inconspicuous as a parade of osprechs. The mud path
petered out on a promontory overlooking the ocean. Steep slopes fell away on
three sides. Someday, the forest would be tall here again, but now even the
millions of armored sproutlings could not hide the naked rock of the drop-off.
Smith stopped at the dead end, and leaned back on her perch. "Sorry. I. .
.made a wrong turn." She waved at the first of the security vehicles pulling up
behind her.
Unnerby stared out at the ocean and the sky above. Sometimes wrong
turnings were the best kind. "That's okay. God, what a view." The breaks in the
clouds were like deep canyons. The light coming down them flared red and near-
red, reflections of sunset. A billion rubies glinted in the water droplets on the
foliage around them. He scrambled out the back of the auto, and walked a little
way through the sprouts toward the end of the promontory. The forest mat
squelched deep and wet beneath his feet. After a moment, Sherkaner followed
him.
The breeze coming off the ocean was moist and cool. You didn't have to be
the Met Department to know a storm was coming. He looked out over the water.
They were standing less than three miles from the breakers, about as close as it
was safe to be in this phase of the sun. From here you could see the turbulence
and hear the grinding. Three icebergs were stranded, towering, in the surf. But
there were hundreds more, stretching off to the horizon. It was the eternal battle,
the fire from the New Sun against the ice of the good earth. Neither could finally
win. It would be twenty years before the last of the shallows ice had surfaced
and melted. By then, the sun would be waning. Even Sherkaner seemed subdued
by the scene.
Victory Smith had left the auto, but instead of following them, she walked
back, along the south edge of the promontory.The poor General.She can't decide
if this trip is business or pleasure. Unnerby was just as happy they wouldn't get
down to Lands Command in one whack.
They walked back to Smith. On this side of the promontory, the ground
dropped into a little valley. On the high ground beyond there was some kind of
building, perhaps a small inn. Smith was standing where the bedrock edge of the
drop-off was nicked, and the slope was not deadly steep. Once, the road might
have continued down into the little valley and up the other side.
Sherkaner stopped by his wife's side and draped his left arms over her
shoulders; after a moment she slipped two of her arms over his, never saying a
word. Unnerby walked to the edge and dipped his head over the drop-off. There
were traces of road cut all the way to the bottom But the storms and floods of

were traces of road cut, all the way to the bottom. But the storms and floods of
the Early Bright had gouged new cliffs. The valley itself was charming,
untouched and clean. "Heh, heh. No way we're going to drive down there,
ma'am. The road is washed clean away."
Victory Smith was silent for a moment. "Yes. Washed clean. That's for the
best. . . ."
Sherk said, "You know, we could probably walk across, and up the other
side." He jabbed a hand at the inn on the hillcrest beyond the valley. "We could
see if Lady Encl-"
Victory gave him a sharp, rippling hug. "No. That place couldn't put up
more than the three of us, anyway. We'll camp with my security team."
After a moment, Sherk gave a little laugh. ". . .Fine by me. I'm curious to
see a modern motorized bivouac." They followed Smith back to the trail. By the
time they reached the vehicles, Sherkaner was in full form, some scheme for
lightweight tents that could survive even the storms of the First Bright.

FIFTEEN
Tomas Nau stood at his bedroom window, looking out. In fact, his rooms
were fifty meters deep in
Diamond One, but the view out his window was from the loftiest spire of
Hammerfest. His estate had grown since the Relighting. Cut diamond slabs made
adequate walls, and the surviving special craftsmen would spend their lives
polishing and faceting, carving friezes as intricate as anything Nau had owned at
home.
The grounds around Hammerfest had been planed smooth, tiled with metals
from the ore dump on
Diamond Two. He tried to keep the rockpile oriented so only Hammerfest's
flag spire actually spiked into the sunlight. The last year or so, that caution
wasn't really necessary, but staying in the shade meant that water ice could be
used for shielding and some gluework. Arachna hung halfway up the sky, a
brilliant blue-and-white disk almost half a degree across. Its light was bright and
soft across the castle grounds. It was all quite a contrast to the first Msecs here,
the hell of the Relight. Nau had worked five years to create the present view, the
peace, the beauty.
Five years. And how many years more would they be stuck here? Thirty to
forty was the specialists' best estimate; however long it took the Spiders to create
an industrial ecology. It was funny how things had worked out. This really was
an Exile, though quite unlike what he had planned back on Balacrea. That
original mission had been a different kind of calculated risk: a couple of
centuries away from the increasingly deadly politics of the home regime, an
opportunity to breed his resources away from poachers-and the outside, golden
chance that they might learn the secrets of a star-faring nonhuman race. He
hadn't counted on the Qeng Ho arriving first.
Qeng Ho knowledge was the core of Balacrea's Emergent civilization.
Tomas Nau had studied the Qeng Ho all his life, yet till he met them he had not
understood how weirdly different the Peddlers were. Their fleet had been
softheaded and naive. Infecting them with timed-expression mindrot had been
trivial, arranging the ambush almost as easy. But once under attack, the Peddlers
had fought like devils, clever devils with a hundred surprises they must have
prepared in advance. Their flagship had been destroyed in the first hundred
seconds of the battle-yet that seemed only to make them more deadly killers.
When finally the mindrot shut the Peddlers down, both sides were wrecked. And

after the battle had come Nau's second great misestimate of the Peddlers.
Mindrot could kill Qeng Ho, but many of them could not be scrubbed or
Focused. The field interrogations had gone very badly, though in the end he had
turned that debacle into the means of unifying the survivors.
So Hammerfest's attic and Focus clinic and splendid furnishings-those were
cut from the ruined starships. Here and there within the ruins, high technology
still functioned. All the rest must come from the raw materials of the rockpile-
and the eventual civilization of the Spiders.
Thirty or forty years. They could make it. There should be enough
coldsleep coffins to serve the survivors. The main thing now was to study the
Spiders, learn their languages, their history and culture.
To span the decades, the work was split into a tree of Watches, a few Msecs
on duty, a year or two off and in coldsleep. Some, the translators and scientists,
would be spending a lot of time on Watch. Others-the pilots and tactics people-
would be mainly unused in the early years, then live full time toward the end of
the mission. Nau had explained it all in meetings with his own people and the
Qeng Ho. And what he had promised was mostly true. The Qeng Ho had great
expertise in such operations; with luck, the average person would get through the
Exile with only ten to twelve years of lifetime spent. Along the way, he would
plunder the Peddlers' fleet library; he would learn everything the Qeng Ho had
ever learned.
Nau rested his hand against the surface of the window. It was as warm as
the carpet on the walls. Plague's name, this Qeng Ho wallpaper was good. Even
looking off to the side, there was no distortion. He chuckled softly. In the end,
running the Peddler side of the Exile might be the easiest thing.They had some
experience with the duty schedule that Nau proposed.
But for himself. . .Nau allowed a moment of self-pity. Someone trustable
and competent must stay on Watch till final recovery. There was only one such
person, and his name was Tomas Nau. On his own, Ritser Brughel would
foolishly kill resources that could not be spared-or do his best to kill Nau
himself. On her own, Anne Reynolt could be trusted for years, but if something
unexpected came up. . .Well, the Qeng Ho seemed thoroughly subdued, and after
the interrogations, Nau was relatively sure that no big secrets remained. But if
the Qeng Ho did again conspire, Anne Reynolt would be lost.
So Tomas Nau might be a hundred years old before he saw triumph here.
That was middle-aged by
Balacrean standards. Nau sighed. So be it. Qeng Ho medicine would more
than make up for the time lost. And thenThe room shivered, a nearly inaudible
groaning sound. Where Nau's hand touched the wall, the vibration crept in along

his bones. It was the third rock quake in the last 40Ksec.
On the far side of the room, the Peddler girl stirred in their bed. "Wha-?"
Qiwi Lin Lisolet emerged from sleep, her motion lifting her out of the bed. She
had been working for nearly three days straight, trying yet again to find a stable
configuration for the rockpile. Lisolet's gaze wobbled about. She probably didn't
even know what had wakened her. Her eyes fixed on Nau standing by the
window, and a sympathetic smile spread across her face. "Oh, Tomas, you're
losing more sleep worrying about us?"
She reached out her arms, a comforting. Nau smiled shyly and nodded.
Hell, what she said was even approximately true. He floated across the room,
stopped himself with one hand against the wall behind her head. She wrapped
her arms around him and they floated, slowly sinking, toward the bed below. He
slid his arms toward her waist, felt her strong legs bend around his. "You're
doing everything you can, Tomas. Don't try to do more. Things will be all right."
Her hands brushed gently against the hair at the back of his neck, and he felt the
trembling in her. It was Qiwi Lisolet who worried, who would work herself to
death if she thought it would add one percent to their overall chances of survival.
They drifted silent for long seconds, till gravity drew them down to the froth of
lace that was their bed.
Nau let his hands roam her flanks; he felt the worry slowly subside in her.
Lots had gone wrong with this mission, but Qiwi Lin Lisolet could be counted as
a small triumph. She had been fourteen-precocious, naive, willful-when Nau
took down the Qeng Ho fleet. The girl was properly infected with mindrot. She
could have been Focused; for a while he had considered making her his body
toy.Thank the Plague I didn't.
During the first couple of years, the girl had spent much of her time in this
room, crying. Diem's
"murder" of her mother had made her the first wholehearted turncoat. Nau
had spent Msecs comforting her. At first that had been simply an exercise in the
persuasive arts, with the possible side effect that Qiwi might improve his
credibility with the other Peddlers. But as time passed, Nau came to see that the
girl was more dangerous and more useful than he had guessed. Qiwi had lived
much of her childhood on-Watch during the voyage from Triland. She had used
the time with almost Focused intensity, learning construction engineering, life-
support technology, and trading practices. It was weird; why was one child given
such special treatment? Like so many of the Qeng Ho factions, the Lisolet
Family had its own secrets, its own interior culture. During the interrogations, he
had squeezed the probable explanation out of the girl's mother. The Lisolets used
the time between the stars to mold those girl children who were intended for
li
iti
i th F
il
If thi
h d
di
t Ki
P
Li
l t'

ruling positions in the Family. If things had gone according to Kira Pen Lisolet's
plans, the girl would have been ready for further instruction here in-system,
totally dominated by her loyalty toward her mother.
As things turned out, this made the girl ideal for Tomas Nau's purposes. She
was young and talented, and desperately in need of someone in whom to invest
her loyalty. He could run her Watch after Watch without coldsleep, just as he
had to run himself. She would be a good companion for the time ahead-and one
who was a constant test of his plans. Qiwi was smart and in many ways her
personality was still very independent. Even now, with the evidence of what
really happened to her mother and the others safely blown away, slipups could
happen. Using Qiwi was a thrill ride, a constant test of his nerve. But at least he
understood the danger now, and had taken precautions.
"Tomas-" She turned to face him directly. "Do you think I'llever get the
rockpile stabilized?"
Indeed, that was a proper thing for her to worry about. Ritser Brughel-or
even a younger Tomas
Nau-would not have realized that the correct response was not a threat or
even disapproval. "Yes, you'll think of something. We'll think of something.
Take a few days' vacation, okay? Old Trinli is off coldsleep this Watch. Let him
balance the rockpile for a while."
Qiwi's laughter made her sound even younger than she looked. "Oh, yes.
Pham Trinli!" He was the only one of Diem's conspirators she had more
contempt than anger for. "Remember the last time he ran the balance? He talks
loud, but he started out so timid. Before he knew it, the rockpile was three
meters per second off L1 track. Then he overreacted and-" She started laughing
again. The strangest things made this Peddler girl laugh. It was one of the
puzzles about her that still intrigued him.
Lisolet was silent for a moment, and when she finally spoke, she surprised
the Podmaster. "Yeah. .
.maybe you're right. If it's just four days, I can set things up so even Trinli
can't do too much damage. I do need to step back, think about things. Maybe we
can water-weld the blocks after all.. . .Besides, Papa is awake on this Watch. I'd
like to be with him a little more." She looked at him questioningly, implicitly
asking for release from duty.
Hunh.Sometimes the manipulation didn't work out as expected. He'd have
bet three zipheads she wouldn't take him up on the offer.I could stillturn her
back. He could agree with just enough reluctance to make her ashamed. No. It
wasn't worth it, not this time.And if one does not forbid,then be wholeheartedly
generous in giving permission. He gathered her close. "Yes! Even you have to

learn to relax."
She sighed, smiled with a hint of mischievousness. "Oh, yes, but I've
already learned that." She reached down, and neither of them spoke for some
time. Qiwi Lisolet was still a clumsy teenager, but she was learning. And Tomas
Nau had years to teach her. Kira Pen Lisolet had not had nearly so much time,
and had been a resisting adult. Nau smiled, remembering. Oh yes. In different
ways, both mother and daughter had served him well.
Ali Lin had not been born into the Lisolet Family. He had been Kira Pen
Lisolet's external acquisition.
Ali was one in a trillion, a genius when it came to parks and living things.
And he was Qiwi's father. Both Kira and Qiwi had loved him very much, even if
he could never be what Kira was and what Qiwi would one day be.
Ali Lin was important to the Emergents, probably as important as any of the
Focused. He was one of the few who had a lab outside the attic warrens of
Hammerfest. He was one of the few who did not have Anne Reynolt or one of
the lesser managers constantly watching out for him.
Now he and Qiwi sat in the treetops of the Qeng Ho park, playing a slow,
patient game with the bugs. She had been here 10Ksec, and Papa some time
more. He had her doing DNA diffs on the new strains of garbage spiders he'd
been breeding. Even now, he seemed to trust her with that work, only checking
her results every Ksec or so. The rest of the time he was lost in his examination
of the leaves and a sort of daydreaming contemplation of how he might do the
projects that Anne Reynolt had set for him.
Qiwi looked down past her feet, at the floor of the park. The trees were
flowering a mandors, bred for microgravity over thousands of years by people
like Ali Lin. The leaves twisted down and down, bushing out so that their eyrie
was almost invisible from the shadowed "below." Even without gravity, the blue
sky and the turn of the branches gave a subtle orientation to the park. The largest
real animals were the butterflies and the bees. She could hear the bees, see an
occasional erratic bullet of their flight. The butterflies were everywhere. The
micro-gee varieties oriented on the false sunlight, so their flight provided the
visitor with one more psychological cue about up and down. Right now the park
was empty of other humans, officially closed for maintenance. That was
something of a fib, but Tomas Nau had not called her on it. In fact, the park had
just become too popular. The Emergents loved it at least as much as the Qeng
Ho. The place was so popular that Qiwi could detect the beginnings of system
failure; the little garbage spiders weren't quite keeping up anymore.
She looked at her father's abstracted features and smiled. This really was
maintenance time, of a sort. "Here's the latest set of diffs; is this what you're

looking for, Papa?"
"Hmm?" The other didn't look up from his work. Then abruptly he seemed
to hear. "Really? Let's see, Qiwi."
She slid the list across to him. "See? Here and here. This is the pattern
match we were looking for. The imaginal disks will change just the way you
wanted." Papa wanted a higher metabolism, without losing the population
bounds. In this park, the insects did not have bacterial predators; the contest for
life went on within their genomes.
Ali took the list from her hands. He smiled gently, almost looking at her,
almost noticing her. "Good, you got the multiplier trick just right."
Hearing such words was about as close as Qiwi Lin Lisolet could come to
recapturing the past. Age nine to fourteen had been Qiwi's Lisoletish learning
time. It had been a lonely time, but Mom had been right about it. Qiwi had come
a long way toward growing up, learning to be alone in the great dark. She had
learned about the life-support systems that were her father's specialty, learned
the celestial mechanics that made all her mother's constructions possible, and
most of all she had learned how much she loved to be around others during their
waking times. Both her parents had spent several of those years out of coldsleep,
sharing maintenance duty with her and the Watch techs.
Now Mama was dead and Papa was Focused, his soul concentrated down
upon one thing: the biological management of ecosystems. But within that
Focus, he and she could still communicate. In the years since the ambush, they
had been together for Msecs of common Watch. Qiwi had continued to learn
from him. And sometimes, when they were deep within the complexity of
species stability, sometimes it was like before, in childhood, when Papa would
get so trapped in his passion for living things that he seemed to forget his
daughter was really a person, and they were both swallowed up by wonders
greater than themselves.
Qiwi studied the diffs-but mostly she was watching her father. She knew he
was very close to finishing the garbage-spider project, his part of it anyway.
Long experience told her that there would be a few moments after that when Ali
Lin would be approachable, when his Focus cast about for something new to
bind on. Qiwi smiled to herself.And I have the project. It was almost what
Reynolt and Tomas wanted from Papa, so diverting him would be possible if she
played it just right.
There.Ali Lin sighed, gazing contentedly on the branches and leaves around
them. Qiwi had maybe fifty seconds. She slipped downward from her branch,
holding her position with the tip of her foot. She snagged the bonsai bubble she
had smuggled in, and returned to her father. "Remember these, Papa? Really,

really small parks?"
Papa didn't ignore her words. He turned toward her as quickly as a normal
person, and his eyes widened when he caught sight of the clear plastic sphere.
"Yes! Except for light, a completely closed ecology."
Qiwi floated the empty bubble into his hands. Bonsai bubbles were a
commonplace in the confines of a ramscoop under way. They existed in all
levels of sophistication, from lumps of moss up to things almost as complex as
this temp's park. And-"This is a little smaller than the problems we've been
working on. I'm not sure your solutions would work here."
Appeals to pride had often worked on the old Ali, almost as often as
appeals to love. Now you had to catch Papa at just the right instant. He squinted
at the bubble, seemed to feel the dimensions with his hands. "No, no! I can do it.
My new tricks are very powerful.. . .Would you like a little lake, maybe lipid
bound to lie flat?"
Qiwi nodded.
"And those garbage spiders, I can make them smaller and give them colored
wings."
"Yes." Reynolt would let him spend more effort on the garbage bugs. They
were important for more than just the central park. So much had been destroyed
in the fighting. Ali's work would allow small-scale life-support modules all
through the surviving structures. It was something that would normally take a
Qeng
Ho specialist team and deep searches of the fleet's databases-but Papa was
both Focused and a genius. He could do such design work all by himself, and in
just a few Msecs.
Papa just needed a push in the right conceptual direction, something that
old prune, Anne Reynolt, could rarely provide. SoAli Lin was suddenly grinning
from ear to ear. "I bet I can top the Namqem High Treasures. Look, the filtration
webs will carry straight across. The shrubs will be standard, maybe a little
modified to support your insect diffs."
"Yes, yes," said Qiwi. They had a real conversation, several hundred
seconds, before her father lapsed into the fierce concentration that would make
the "simple changes" actually doable. The hardest part would be at the bacterial
and mitochondrial level, and that was totally beyond Qiwi. She smiled at her
father, almost reached out to touch his shoulder. Mama would be proud of them.
Papa's methods might even be new-they certainly weren't in any of the obvious
places in the historical dbs. Qiwi had guessed that they might allow somevery
nice microparks, but this was more than she had hoped for.
The High Treasure bonsais were no bigger than this, thirty centimeters

across. Some of them had lived for two hundred years, complete animal/ plant
ecosystems-even supporting fake evolution. The method was proprietary and not
even the Qeng Ho had been able to purchase all of it. Creating such things with
only mission resources would be a miracle. If Papa could do better than that. .
.hmm.Most people, even Tomas, seemed to think that Qiwi had been brought up
to be an armsman, following her mother's military career. They didn't
understand. The Lisolets wereQengHo. Fighting came a far second. Sure, she
had learned a little about combat. Sure, Mama intended she spend a decade or
two learning what to do When All Else Fails. But Trading was what everything
came back to. Trading and making a profit. So they had been taken over by the
Emergents. But Tomas was a decent person-and he had the hardest job she could
imagine. She was doing everything she could to support him, to make what was
left of their expeditions survive. Tomas couldn't help that his culture was all
screwed up.
And in the end it wouldn't matter that Tomas didn't understand. Qiwi smiled
at the empty plastic sphere, imagining what it would be like filled with her
father's creation. In civilized places, a top bonsai might sell for the price of an
entire starship. Here? Well, Qiwi might make these on the side. After all, it was
a frivolity, something that Tomas probably couldn't justify to himself. Tomas
had banned hoarding and favor-trading.Uh-oh.Maybe I'll have to work around
him for a while. It was much easier to get permission afterward. In the end, she
figured the Qeng Ho would change Tomas's people far more than the reverse.
She was just starting a new diffs sequence when there was a ripping sound
from below, the source hidden by the lower foliage. For a second, Qiwi didn't
recognize the sound.The floor access hatch. That was for construction only.
Opening it would tear the moss layer. Damn.
Qiwi swung out from their little nest, and moved quietly downward, careful
not to crack branches or cast a shadow on the bottom moss. Breaking in while
the park was officially closed was only an annoyance-heck, it was the sort of
thing she would do if she felt like it. But that floor hatch was not supposed to be
opened. It spoiled the park's illusion, and it damaged the turf. What sort of
jackass would do something like that-especially considering how seriously
Emergents took official rules and regulations?
Qiwi hovered just above the bottommost canopy of leaves. In a second the
intruder would be in view, but she could already hear him. It was Ritser Brughel.
The Vice-Podmaster proceeded across the moss, cursing and whacking at
something in the bushes. The guy was a real sewer-mouth. Qiwi was an avid
student of such language, and she had listened to him before. Brughel might be
the number-two boss man of the Emergent expedition-but he was also a one-man

proof that Emergent leaders could be bums. Tomas seemed to realize the fellow
was a bad actor; he'd put the Vice Podmaster's quarters off the rockpile, on the
oldInvisible Hand. And Brughel's Watch schedule was the same as much of the
regular crew. While poor Tomas aged year after year to keep the mission safe,
Brughel was out of coldsleep only 10Msec in every 40. So Qiwi didn't know him
very well-but what she knew she loathed.If this jerk could be trusted to pull his
ownweight, Tomas wouldn't be burning his lifetime away for us. She listened in
silence for a moment more.Neat stuff. But there was an undercurrent to it she
didn't hear in most folk's obscenities, like the fellow meant what he was saying
literally.
Qiwi pushed loudly between the branches, holding herself so that she stood
half a meter in the air-about eye-to-eye with the Emergent. "The park is closed
for maintenance, Podmaster."
Brughel gave a tiny flinch of surprise. For a second he was silent, his pale
pink skin darkening in the most comical way. "You insolent little. . . so what
areyou doing here?"
"I'm doing the maintenance." Well, that was at least cousin to the truth.
Now counterattack: "And what are you doing here?"
Brughel's face got even darker. He pulled himself upward, his head ten
centimeters above Qiwi's. Now his feet floated on air, too. "Scum have no
business questioning me." He was carrying that silly steel baton. It was a plain
metal dowel incised here and there with dark-stained dings. He braced himself
with one hand and swung the baton through a glittering arc that splintered the
sapling beside Qiwi's head.
Now Qiwi was getting angry, too. She grabbed one of the lower branches,
hoisted herself so that she and Brughel were eye-to-eye once more. "That's
vandalism, not an explanation." She knew that Tomas had the park monitored-
and vandalism was at least the crime for Emergents that it was for Qeng Ho.
The Podmaster was so angry that he had trouble talking. "You're the
vandals. This park was beautiful, more than I thought scum could ever make.
But now you're sabotaging it. I was in here yesterday-you've infected it with
vermin." He swung the metal dowel again, the blow dislodging a garbage web
that was hidden in the branches. The web creatures floated off in all directions,
silken glides streaming behind them. Brughel poked at the web, shaking beetle
casings and dead leaves and miscellaneous detritus into a cloud around them.
"See? What else are you poisoning?" He leaned close, looking down at her from
above.
For a moment Qiwi just stared, uncomprehending. He couldn't possibly
mean what he was saying. How could anyone be so ignorant?But remember,he's

a Chump. She pulled herself high enough to look down at Brughel, and shouted
into his face. "It's a zero-gee park, for God's sake! What do you think keeps the
air clean of floating crap? The garbage bugs have always been here. . .though
maybe they're a little overworked just now." She hadn't meant it quite the way it
came out, but now she looked the Podmaster up and down as though she had one
particularly large piece of garbage in mind.
They were above the lower leaf canopies now. From the corner of her eye,
Qiwi could see Papa. The sky was limitless blue, guarded by an occasional
branch. She could feel the fake sunlight hot on the back of her head. If they
played a few more rounds of one-up-one-up, they'd be banging their heads on
plastic. Qiwi started laughing.
And now Brughel was silent, just staring at her. He slapped his steel baton
into his palm again and again. There were rumors about those dark stains in the
metal; it was obvious what Ritser Brughel wanted people to think they were. But
the guy just didn't carry himself like a fighter. And when he swung that baton, it
was as though he had never considered the possibility that there might be targets
that could fight back. Just now, his only hold-on was the toe of one boot hooked
between branches. Qiwi braced herself unobtrusively and smiled her most
insolent smile.
Brughel was motionless for a second. His gaze flicked to either side of her.
And then without another word he pushed off, floundered for a moment, found a
branch, and dived for the bottom-level hatch.
Qiwi floated silent, the strangest feelings chasing up her body, down her
arms. For a moment she couldn't identify them. But the park. . .how wonderful it
was with Ritser Brughel gone! She could hear the little buzzing sounds and the
butterflies, where a moment before all her attention had tunneled down on the
Podmaster's anger. And now she recognized the tingling in her arms, and the
racing of her heart: rage and fear.
Qiwi Lin Lisolet had teased and enraged her share of people. It had been
almost her hobby in pre-Flight. Mama said it was mind-hidden anger at the
thought of being alone between the stars. Maybe. But it had also been fun. This
was different.
She turned back toward her father's nest in the trees. And plenty of people
had been angry with her over the years. Back in innocent times, Ezr Vinh used to
get near apoplectic.Poor Ezr, I wish . . .But this today had been different. She
had seen the difference in Ritser Brughel's eyes. The man had really wanted to
kill her, had teetered on the edge of trying. And probably the only thing that
stopped him was the thought that Tomas would know. But if Brughel could ever
get her alone, unseen by the security monitors . . .

Qiwi's hands were shaking by the time she reached Ali Lin. Papa. She
wanted so much to be held, to have him soothe the shaking. Ali Lin wasn't even
looking at her. Papa had been Focused for several years now, but Qiwi could
remember the times before so well. Before. . .Papa would have rushed out of the
trees at the first sound of argument below. He would have put himself between
Qiwi and Brughel, steel club or no. Now. . .Qiwi didn't remember much of the
last few moments except for Ritser Brughel. But there were fragments: Ali had
sat unmoved among his displays and analytics. He had heard the argument, even
glanced their way when the shouting became loud and close. His look had been
impatient, a "don't-distract-me" dismissal.
Qiwi reached out a still-shaking hand to touch his shoulder. He shrugged
the way you might shoo off a pesky bug. In some ways Papa still lived, but in
others he seemed more dead than Mama. Tomas said that Focus could be
reversed. But Tomas needed Papa and the other Focused the way they were now.
Besides, Tomas had been raised an Emergent. They used Focus to make people
into property. They wereproud of doing so. Qiwi knew that there were plenty of
Qeng Ho survivors who considered all the talk of "reversal of Focus" to be a lie.
So far, not a single Focused person had been reversed.Tomas wouldn't lie about
something so important.
And maybe if she and Papa did well enough, she could get him back the
sooner. For this wasn't a death that went on forever. She slipped into her seat
beside him and resumed looking at the new diffs. The processors had given her
the beginning of results while she was off trading insults with Ritser Brughel.
Papa would be pleased.
Nau still met with the Fleet Management Committee every Msec or so. Of
course, just who attended changed substantially from Watch to Watch. Ezr Vinh
was present today; it would be very interesting to see the boy's reaction to the
surprise he had planned. And Ritser Brughel was attending, so he had asked
Qiwi to stay away. Nau smiled to himself.Damn, I neverguessed how thoroughly
she could humiliate the man.
Nau had combined the committee with his own Emergent staff meetings
and called them "Watchmanager" meetings. The point was always that whatever
their old differences, they were all in this together now and survival could only
come through cooperation. The meetings were not as meaningful as Nau's
private consults with Anne Reynolt or his work with Ritser and the security
people.Those often occurred between the regular Watches. Still, it wasn't a lie to
say that important work was done at these per-Msec meetings. Nau flicked his
hand at the agenda. "So. Our last item: Anne Reynolt's expedition to the sun.
Anne?"
A
did '
il
h
d hi
"Th
h
i i
'

Anne didn't smile as she corrected him. "The astrophysicists' report,
Podmaster. But first, I have a complaint. We need at least one unFocused
specialist in this area. You know how hard it is to judge technical results. . . ."
Nau sighed. She had been after him about this in private, too. "Anne, we
don't have the resources. We have just three surviving specialists in this area."
And they were all zipheads.
"I still need a reviewer with common sense." She shrugged. "Very well. Per
your direction, we have run two of the astrophysicists on a continuous Watch
since before the Relight. Keep in mind, they've had five years to think about this
report." Reynolt waved at the air, and they were looking out on a modified Qeng
Ho taxi. Auxiliary fuel tanks were strapped on every side, and the front was a
forest of sensor gear. A silver shield-sail was propped on a rickety framework
from one side of the craft. "Right before the Relight, Doctors Li and Wen flew
this vehicle into low orbit around OnOff." A second window showed the descent
path, and a final orbit scarcely five hundred kilometers above the surface of the
OnOff star. "By keeping the sail properly oriented, they safely flew at that
altitude for more than a day."
Actually it was Jau Xin's pilot-zipheads who had done the flying. Nau
nodded at Xin. "That was good work, Pilot Manager."
Xin grinned. "Thank you, sir. Something to tell my children about."
Reynolt ignored the comment. She popped up multiple windows, showing
low-altitude views in various spectral regimes. "We've had a hard time with the
analysis right from the beginning."
They could hear the recorded voices of the two zipheads now. Li was
Emergent-bred, but the other voice spoke in a Qeng Ho dialect. That must be
Wen: "We've always known OnOff has the mass and density of a normal G star.
Now we can make high-resolution maps of the interior temperatures and dens-"
Dr. Li butted in with the typical urgency of a ziphead, "-but we need more
microsats.. . .Resources be damned.
We need two hundred at least, right through the time of Relighting."
Reynolt paused the audio. "We got them one hundred microsats." More
windows popped up, Li and Wen back at Hammerfest after the Relight, arguing
and arguing. Reynolt's reports were often like this, a barrage of pictures and
tables and sound bites.
Wen was talking again. He sounded tired. "Even in Off-state, the central
densities were typical of a G star, yet there was no collapse. The surface
turbulence is barely ten thousand kilometers deep. How? How? How?"
Li: "And after Relight, the deep internal structure looks still the same." "We
can't know for sure; we can't get close."
"No it looks perfectly typical now We have models
"

"No, it looks perfectly typical now. We have models. . . ."
Wen's voice changed again. He was speaking faster, in a tone of frustration,
almost pain. "All this data, and we have just the same mysteries as before. I've
spent five years now studying reaction paths, and I'm as clueless as the Dawn
Age astronomers. Therehas to be something going on in the extended core, or
else there would be a collapse."
The other ziphead sounded petulant. "Obviously, even in Off state the star
is still radiating, but radiating something that converts to low-interaction."
"But what? What? And if there could be such a thing, why don't the higher
layers collapse?"
"Cuz the conversion is at the base of the photosphere, and thatis collapsed!
Ryop. I'm using your own modeling software to show this!"
"No. Post hoc nonsense, no better than ages past." "But I've gotdata !"
"So? Your adiabats are-"
Reynolt cut the audio. "They went on like this for many days. Most of it is a
private jargon, the sort of things a close-bound Focused pair often invents."
Nau straightened in his chair. "If they can only talk to each other, we have
no access. Did you lose them?"
"No. At least not in the usual way. Dr. Wen became so frustrated that he
began to consider random externalities. In a normal person that might lead to
creativity but-"
Brughel laughed, genuinely amused. "So your astronomer laddie lost sight
of the ball, eh, Reynolt?"
Reynolt didn't even look at Brughel. "Be silent," she said. Nau noticed the
Peddlers' startlement at her words. Ritser was second-in-command, the obvious
sadist among the rulers-and here she had abruptly put him down.I wonder when
the Peddlers will figure it out. A scowl passed briefly across Brughel's features.
Then his grin broadened. He settled back in his chair and flicked an amused
glance in Nau's direction. Anne continued without missing a beat: "Wen backed
off from the problem, setting it in a wider and wider context. At first, there was
some relevance."
Wen's voice resumed, the same rushed monotone as before. "OnOff's
galactic orbit. A clue." The presumptive graph of OnOff's galactic orbit-
assuming no close stellar encounters-flashed in a window. Anne was dredging
from the fellow's notebooks. The plot extended back over half a billion years. It
was the typical flower-petal figure of a halo-population star: Once every two
hundred million years, OnOff penetrated the hidden heart of the galaxy. From
there, it swung out and out till the stars spread thin and the intergalactic dark
began. Tomas Nau was no astronomer, but he knew that halo-pop stars don't
have usable planetary systems and as a result aren't often visited But surely that

have usable planetary systems, and as a result aren t often visited. But surely that
was the least of the strangeness of OnOff.
Somehow the Qeng Ho ziphead had become totally fixated on the star's
galactic orbit. "This thing-it can't be a star-has seen the Heart of All. Again and
again and again-" Reynolt skipped through what must have been a long, trapped
loop in poor Wen's thinking. The ziphead's voice was momentarily calmer:
"Clues. There are lots of clues, really. Forget the physics; just consider the light
curve. For two hundred and fifteen years out of two hundred and fifty, it radiates
less perceptible energy than a brown dwarf." The windows accompanying Wen's
thoughts flickered from idea to idea, pictures of brown dwarfs, the much more
rapid oscillations that the physicists had extrapolated for OnOff's distant past.
"Things are happening that we can't see. Relight, a light curve vaguely like a
periodic Q-nova, settling over a few Msecs to a spectrum that might almost be
an explainable star riding a fusion core. And then the light slowly fades back to
zero. . . or changes into something else we cannot see. It's not a star at all! It's
magic. A magic machine that now is broken. I'll bet it was a fast squarewave
generator once. That's it! Magic from the heart of the galaxy, broken now so that
we can't understand it."
The audio abruptly ended, and Wen's kaleidoscope of windows was fixed in
mid-frenzy. "Dr. Wen has been thoroughly trapped in this cycle of ideas for ten
Msec," said Reynolt.
Nau already knew where this was going, but he put on a concerned look
anyway. "What are we left with?"
"Dr. Li is doing okay. He was slipping into his own contrarian cycle till we
separated him from Wen. But now-well, he's fixated on the Qeng Ho system
identification software. He has an enormously complex model that matches all
the observations." More pictures, Li's theory of a new family of subatomic
particles. "Dr. Li is spreading into the cognitive territory that Hunte Wen
monopolized, but he's getting very different results."
Li's voice: "Yes. Yes! My model predicts stars like this must be common
very near the galaxy's hole.
Very very rarely, they interact, a strongly coupled explosion. The result gets
kicked high out of the core." Of course, Li's trajectory was identical to Wen's
after the presumed explosion. "I can fit all the parameters. We can't see blinking
stars in the dust of the core; they're not bright and they're very high-rate. But
once in a billion years we get this asymmetrical destruction, and an ejection."
Pictures of the hypothetical explosion of OnOff's hypothetical destroyer. Pictures
of OnOff's original solar system blown away-all except a tiny protected shadow
on the far side of OnOff from the destroyer.
Ezr Vinh leaned forward "Lord he's explained just about everything "

Ezr Vinh leaned forward. Lord, he s explained just about everything.
"Yes," said Nau. "Even the singleton nature of the planetary system." He
turned away from the jumble of windows, and looked at Anne. "So what do you
think?"
Reynolt shrugged. "Who knows? That's why we need an unFocused
specialist, Podmaster. Dr. Li is spreading his net wider and wider. That can be a
symptom of a classic, explain-everything trap. And his particle theory is large; it
may be a Shannon tautology." She paused. Anne Reynolt was totally incapable
of showmanship. Nau had arranged his questions so her bombshell came out
last: "That particle theory is in his central specialty, however. And it has
consequences, perhaps a faster ramscoop drive."
No one said anything for several seconds. The Qeng Ho had been diddling
their drives for thousands of years, since before Pham Nuwen even. They had
stolen insights from hundreds of civilizations. In the last thousand years, they'd
made less than a one-percent improvement. "Well, well, well." Tomas Nau knew
how good it felt to gamble big. . .and win. Even the Peddlers were grinning like
idiots. He let the good feeling pass back and forth around the room. It was
veryvery good news, even if the payoff was at the end of the Exile. "This does
make our astrophysicists a precious commodity. Can you do anything about
Wen?"
"Hunte Wen is not recoverable, I'm afraid." She opened a window on
medical imagery. To a Qeng Ho physician it might have looked like a simple
brain diagnostic. To Anne Reynolt, it was a strategy map. "See, the connectivity
here and here is associated with his work on OnOff; I've demonstrated that by
detuning some of it. If we try to back him out of his fixation, we'll wipe his work
of the last five years-as well as cross connections into much of his general
expertise. Remember. Focus surgery is mainly grope and peek, with resolution
not much better than a millimeter."
"So we'd end up with a vegetable?"
"No. If we back out and undo the Focus, he'll have the personality and most
of the memories of before. He just won't be much of a physicist anymore."
"Hmm," said Nau, considering. So they couldn't just deFocus the Peddler
and have the outside expert Reynolt needed.And I'll be damned if I'llrisk
deFocusing the third fellow. Yet there was a very tidy solution, that still made
good use of all three men. "Okay, Anne. Here is what I propose. Bring the other
physicist online, but on a low duty cycle. Keep Dr. Li in the freezer while the
new fellow reviews Li's results. This won't be as good as an unFocused review,
but if you do it cleverly the results should be pretty unbiased."
Another shrug. Reynolt had no false modesty, but she also didn't realize
how very good she was.

ow ve y good s e was.
"As for Hunte Wen," Nau continued. "He's done his best for us, and we
can't ask for more." Literally so, according to Anne. "I want you to deFocus
him."
Ezr Vinh was staring, openmouthed. The other Peddlers looked almost as
shocked. There was a small risk here; Hunte Wen would not be the best proof
that Focus could be reversed. On the other hand, he was obviously a hardship
case.Show your concern: "We've run Dr. Wen for more than five years straight,
and I see he is already middle-aged. Use whatever medical consumables it takes
to give him the best health possible."
It was the final agenda item, and the meeting didn't continue for long after
that. Nau watched as everyone floated out, jabbering to one another their
enthusiasm about Li's discovery and Wen's manumission. Ezr Vinh left last, but
he wasn't talking to anyone. The boy had a glassy look about him.Yes, Mr. Vinh.
Be good, and maybe someday I'll free the one you careabout.

SIXTEEN
Things got very quiet during the Tween Watch. Most Watches were
multiples of an Msec, with overlap so people could brief the new Watch on
current problems. The Tween was no secret, but Nau officially treated it as a
glitch in the scheduling program, a four-day gap that appeared between Watches
every so often. In fact, it was like the missing seventh floor, or that mythical
magic day that comes between Oneday and Twoday.
"Say, wouldn't it be great to have Tween Watches back home?" Brughel
joked as he led Nau and Kal
Omo into the corpsicle stacks. "I did security at Frenk for five years-it sure
would have been easier if I could have declared time out every so often, and
rearranged the game to suit my needs." His voice sounded loud in the hold, the
echoes coming back from several directions. In fact, they were the only ones
awake aboard theSuivire. Down on Hammerfest, there was Reynolt and a
contingent of waking zipheads. A skeleton crew of Emergents and Peddlers-
including Qiwi Lisolet-were working the stabilization jets on the rockpile. But,
zipheads aside, only nine people knew the hardest secrets. And here between
Watches, they could do all that was necessary to protect the pod.
The interior walls of theSuivire 's coldsleep hold had been knocked out, and
dozens of additional coffins installed. All of Watch A slept here, almost seven
hundred people. Watch trees B and Misc were on theBrisgoGap, while C and D
were aboard theCommon Good. But it was A's Watch that began after this
Tween time.
A red light appeared on the wall; the hold's stand-alone data system was
ready to talk. Nau put on his huds, and suddenly the caskets were labeled by
name and affiliation. Everything looked green.Thank
goodness. Nau turned to his podsergeant. Kal Omo's name, status, and vital
signs floated in the air beside his face; the data system took its duties very
literally. "Anne's medical people will be here in a few thousand seconds, Kal.
Don't let them in till Ritser and I are finished."
"Yes, sir." There was a faint smile on the man's face as he turned and
coasted out the door. Kal Omo had been through this before; he'd helped create
the hoax aboard theFar Treasure. He knew what to expect.
And then he and Ritser Brughel were alone. "Okay, have you found any
more bad apples, Ritser?"
Ritser was grinning; he had some surprise planned. They drifted past racks

of coffins, the room light shining up from beneath their feet. The coffins had
been through hell, yet they still worked reliably-the Qeng Ho ones, anyway. The
Peddlers were clever; they broadcast technology throughout Human Space-yet
their own goods were better than what they shouted free to the stars.But now we
have a fleet library. . .and people tomake sense of it.
"I've been running my snoops hard, Podmaster. Watch A is pretty clean,
though-" He paused and stopped his coast with a hand against the rack. The
slender railings flexed along the length of the rack; this really was an ad hoc
setup. "-though I don't know why you put up with seditious deadwood like this."
He tapped one of the coffins with his podmaster's baton.
The Peddler coffins had wide, curved windows, and an internal light. Even
without the display label, Nau would have recognized Pham Trinli. Somehow,
the guy looked younger when his face was inanimate.
Ritser must have taken his silence for indecision. "He knew about Diem's
plot."
Nau shrugged. "Of course. So did Vinh. So did a few others. And now
they're known quantities." "But-"
"Remember, Ritser, we agreed. We can't afford any more casual wet-work."
His biggest mistake of this whole adventure had been in the field interrogations
after the ambush. Nau had followed the disaster-management strategies of the
Plague Time, the hard strategies that were shrouded from the view of ordinary
citizens. But the First Podmasters had been in a very different situation; they'd
had plenty of human resources. In this situation . . .well, for the Qeng Ho who
could be Focused, interrogation was no problem. But the others were amazingly
tough. Worst of all, they didn't respond to threats in a rational way. Ritser had
gotten a little crazy, and Tomas hadn't been far behind. They had killed the last
of the senior Peddlers before they really understood the other side's psychology.
All in all, it had been quite a debacle, but it had also been a maturing experience.
Tomas had learned how to deal with the survivors.
Ritser smiled. "Okay. At least he's good for comic relief. The way he tries
to suck up to you and me-and pompous at the same time!" He waved at the
racked corpsicles. "Sure. Wake 'em all per schedule. We've had to explain too
many 'accidents' as it is." He turned back toward Nau. He still wore a smile, but
the bottom light made it look like the grimace it really was. "The real problem
isn't with Watch A. Podmaster, in the last four days, I've discovered clear
subversion elsewhere."
Nau stared at him with an expression of mild surprise. This was what he'd
been waiting for. "Qiwi Lisolet?"
"Yes! Wait, I know you saw the face-off I had with her the other day. The

pus-sucker deserves to die for that-but that's not my complaint to you. I have
solid evidence she's breaking Your Law. And she is in league with others."
Nau actually was a bit surprised by this. "In what way?"
"You know I caught her in the Peddlers' park with her father. She had shut
the park down on her own whim. That's what made me so angry. But afterwards.
. .I put my snoops on her. Random monitoring might not have noticed it for
several more Watches: the little slut is diverting the pod's resources. She's stolen
output from the volatiles distillery. She's embezzled time from the factory. She's
diverted her father's Focus to help her with private ventures."
Pestilence. This was more than Qiwi had told him about. "So. . .what is she
doing with these resources?"
"These resources and others, Podmaster. She has a variety of plans. And she
is not alone.. . .She intends to barter these stolen goods for her own
advancement."
For a moment, Nau couldn't think of what to say. Of course, bartering
community resources was a crime. During most of the Plague Years, more
people had been executed for barter and hoarding than had died of the Plague
itself. But in modern times. . .well, barter could never be totally eliminated. On
Balacrea, it was periodically the excuse for major exterminations-but only that,
an excuse. "Ritser." Nau spoke carefully, lying: "I knew about all these
activities. Certainly they are against the letter of My Law. But consider. We are
twenty light-years from home. We are dealing with the Qeng Ho. They reallyare
peddlers. I know it is hard to accept, but their whole existence revolves around
cheating the community. We cannot hope to suppress that in an instant-"
"No!"Brughel pushed off the rack he had been holding, grabbed the railing
next to Tomas. "They are all scum, but it is only Lisolet and a few aggravant
conspirators-and I can tell you just who they are-who are violating Your Law!"
Nau could imagine how all this happened. Qiwi Lin Lisolet had never
obeyed rules, even among the Qeng Ho. Her crazy mother had set her up to be
manipulated, but even so the girl was beyond direct control. More that anything,
she loved to play. Qiwi had once said to him, "It's always easier to get
forgiveness than to get permission." As much as anything, that simple claim
showed the gulf that separated Qiwi's worldview from the First Podmasters'.
It took an effort of will not to retreat before Brughel's advance.
What's gotten into him?He looked straight into the other's eyes, ignoring the
baton in Ritser's twitching hand. "I'm sure you could identify them. That's your
job, Vice-Podmaster. And part of my job is to interpret My Law. You know that
Qiwi never shook off the mindrot; if necessary, she can be easily. . .curbed. I
want you to keep me informed of these possible infractions, but for now I choose

to wink at them."
"You choose to wink at them? Youchoose ? I-" Brughel was wordless for a
second. When he continued, his voice was more controlled, a metered rage.
"Yes, we're twenty light-years from home. We're twenty light-years from your
family. And your uncle doesn't rule anymore." The word of Alan Nau's
assassination had arrived while their expedition was still three years out of the
OnOff system. "At home maybe you could break any rule, protect lawbreakers
simply because they were a good lay." He slapped his baton gently against his
palm. "Out here, and right now, you're very alone."
Lethal force between Podmasters was beyond any law. That was a principle
dating back to the Plague Years-but it was also a basic truth of nature. If Brughel
were to smash his skull now, Kal Omo would follow the Vice-Podmaster. But
Nau just spoke quietly. "You are even more alone, my friend. How many of the
Focused are imprinted on you?"
"I-I have Xin's pilots, I have the snoops. I could make Reynolt redirect
whatever else I need."
Ritser was teetering at the edge of an abyss that Tomas hadn't noticed
before, but at least he was calming down. "I think you understand Anne better
than that, Ritser."
And abruptly the killing flame in Brughel was quenched. "Yeah, you're
right. You're right." He seemed to crumple. "Sir. . .it's just that this mission has
turned out so different from what I imagined. We had the resources to live like
High Podmasters here. We had the prospect of finding a treasure world. Now
most of our zipheads are dead. We don't have the equipment for a safe return.
We're stuck here for decades. . . ."
Ritser seemed on the verge of tears. The passage from threat to weakness
was fascinating. Tomas spoke quietly, his tone comforting. "I understand, Ritser.
We are in a more extreme situation than anyone has been in since the Plagues. If
this is painful to one as strong as you, I am very afraid for ordinary crew of the
mission." All true, though most of the crew had much less remarkable
personalities than Ritser Brughel. Like Ritser, they were caught in a decades-
long cul-de-sac in which family and children-raising were not an option. That
was a dangerous problem, one that he must not overlook. But most of the
ordinary folk would have no trouble continuing relationships, finding new ones;
there were almost a thousand unFocused people here. Ritser's drives would be
harder to satisfy. Ritser used people up, and now there were scarcely any left for
him.
"But there is still the prospect of treasure-perhaps all that we hoped for.
Taking the Qeng Ho nearly cost us our lives, but now we are learning their

secrets. And you were at the last Watch-manager meeting: we've discovered
physics that is new even to the Qeng Ho. The best is yet to come, Ritser. The
Spiders are primitive now, but life could scarcely have originated here; this solar
system is just too extreme. We aren't the first species that has come snooping.
Imagine, Ritser: a nonhuman, starfaring civilization. Its secrets are down there,
somewhere in the ruins of their past."
He guided his Vice-Podmaster around the far end of the coffin racks, and
they started back along the second aisle. The head-up display reported green
everywhere, though as usual the Emergent coffins were showing high wear.
Sigh. In a few years, they might not have enough usable coffins to maintain a
comfortable Watch schedule. By itself, a star fleet could not build another fleet,
or even keep itself indefinitely provisioned with hightech supplies. It was an old,
old problem: to build the most advanced technological products you need an
entire civilization-a civilization with all its webs of expertise and layers of
capital industry. There were no shortcuts; Humankind had often imagined, but
never created, a general assembler.
Ritser seemed calmer now, his desperate anger replaced by thought. ". .
.Okay. We sacrifice a lot, but in the end we go home winners. I can gut it out as
well as any. But still. . .why should it take so pus long? We should land squat on
some Spider kingdom and take over-"
"They've just reinvented electronics, Ritser. We need more-"
The Vice-Podmaster shook his head impatiently. "Yes, yes. Of course. We
need a solid industrial base. I probably know that better than you; I was
Podmaster at the Lorbita Shipyards. Nothing short of a major rebuild is going to
save our ass. But there's still no reason for hiding here at L1. If we take over
some Spider nation-maybe just pretend to ally with it-we could speed things up."
"True, but the real problem is maintaining control. For that, timing is
everything. You know I was in on the conquest of Gaspr. The early post-
conquest, actually; if I'd been with the first fleet, I'd own millions now." Nau
didn't keep the envy from his voice; it was a vision that Brughel would
understand. Gaspr had been a jackpot. "Lord, what that first fleet did. It was just
two ships, Ritser! Imagine. They had only five hundred zipheads-fewer than we
have. But they sat and lurked and when Gaspr reattained the Information Age,
they controlled every data system on the planet. The treasure just fell into their
hands!" Nau shook his head, dismissing the vision. "Yes. We could try to take
the Spiders now. It might speed things up. But it would be largely bluff on our
part, against aliens that we don't understand. If we miscalculated, if we got into a
guerrilla war, we could piss away everything very quickly.. . .We'd probably
'win,' but a thirty-year wait might become five hundred. There's precedent for
h
f f il
Ri
h
h i d
'
f
Pl
Ti
D

that sort of failure, Ritser, though it doesn't come from our Plague Time. Do you
know the story of Canberra?"
Brughel shrugged. Canberra might be the most powerful civilization in
Human Space, but it was too far away to interest him. Like many Emergents,
Brughel's interest in the wider universe was minimal.
"Three thousand years ago, Canberra was medieval. Like Gaspr, the
original colony had bombed itself into total savagery, except that the Canberrans
weren't even halfway back. A small Qeng Ho fleet voyaged there; through some
crazy mistake, they thought the Canberrans still had a profitable civilization.
That was the Peddlers' first big mistake. The second was in hanging around; they
tried to trade with the Canberrans as they were. The Qeng Ho had all the power,
they could make the primitive societies of Canberra do whatever they wanted."
Brughel grunted. "I see where this is going. But the locals sound a lot more
primitive than what we have here."
"Yes, but they were human. And the Qeng Ho had much better resources.
Anyway, they made their alliances. They pushed the local technology as hard as
they could. They set out to conquer the world. And actually, they succeeded. But
every step ground them down. The original crew lived their old age in stone
castles. They didn't even have coldsleep anymore. The hybrid civilization of
Peddlers and locals eventually became very advanced and powerful-but that was
too late for the originals."
The Podmaster and his Vice were almost back to the main entrance.
Brughel floated ahead, turning slowly so that he touched the wall like a deck,
feet first. He looked up at the approaching Nau with an intent expression.
Nau touched down, let the grabfelt in his boots stop his rebound. "Think
about what I've said, Ritser. Our Exile here is really necessary, and the payoff is
as great as you ever imagined. In the meantime, let's work on what's bothering
you. A Podmaster should not have to suffer."
The look on the younger man's face was surprised and grateful. "Ththank
you, sir. A little help now and then is all I need." They talked a few moments
more, setting up the necessary compromises.
Coming back from theSuivire, Tomas had some time to think. From his
taxi, the rockpile was a glittering jumble ahead of him, the sky around it
speckled with the irregular shapes of the temps and warehouses and starships
that orbited the pile. Here at Tween Watch he saw no evidence of human
movement. Even Qiwi's crews were out of sight, probably on the shade side of
the pile. Far beyond the diamond mountains, Arachna floated in glorious
isolation. Its great ocean showed patches of cloudlessness today. The tropical
convergence zone was clear against the blue. More and more, the Spider world

was looking like archetype Mother Earth, the one-in-a-thousand world where
humans could land and thrive. It would continue to look like paradise for another
thirty years or so-till once more its sun guttered out.And by then we will own it.
Just now, he had made that ultimate success a little more likely. He had
solved a mystery and defused an unnecessary risk. Tomas's mouth twisted in an
unhappy smile. Ritser was quite wrong to think that being Alan Nau's first
nephew waseasy. True, Alan Nau had favored Tomas. It was clear from the
beginning that Tomas would continue the Nau dominance of the Emergency.
That was part of the problem, for it made Tomas a great threat to the elder Nau.
Succession-even within Podmaster families-was most often by assassination. Yet
Alan Nau had been clever. He did want his nephew to carry on the line-but only
after Alan had lived and ruled as long as natural life would sustain him. Giving
Tomas Nau command of the expedition to the OnOff star was a piece of
statecraft that saved both ruler and heir apparent. Tomas Nau would be off the
world stage for more than a two centuries. When he returned, it could well be
with the resources to continue the Nau family's rule.
Tomas had often wondered if Ritser Brughel might be a subtle kind of
sabotage. Back home, the fellow had seemed a good choice for Vice-Podmaster.
He was young, and he'd done a solid job cleaning up the Lorbita Shipyards. He
was of Frenkisch stock; his parents had been two of the first supporters of Alan
Nau's invasion. As much as possible, the Emergency tried to transform each new
conquest with the same stresses that the Plague Time had wrought upon
Balacrea: the megadeaths, the mindrot, the establishment of the Podmaster class.
Young Ritser had adapted to every demand of the new order.
But since they began this Exile, he'd been a pus-be-damned screwup:
careless, slovenly, almost insolent. Part of that was his assigned role as Heavy,
but Ritser wasn't acting. He had become closed and uncooperative. There was
the obvious conclusion: The Nau family's enemies were clever, long-planning
people. Maybe, somehow, they had slipped a ringer past Uncle Alan's security.
Today, the mystery and the suspicions had collided.And I find notsabotage,
nor even incompetence. His
Vice-Podmaster simply had certain frustrated needs, and had been too
proud to talk about them. Back in civilization, satisfying those needs would have
been easy; such was a normal, if unpublicized, part of every Podmaster's
birthright. Here in the wilderness, all but shipwrecked. . .here Ritser faced some
real hardship.
The taxi ghosted over the topmost spires of Hammerfest, and settled into
the shadows below.
Satisfying Brughel would be difficult; the younger man would have to show

some real restraint. Tomas was already reviewing the crew and ziphead
rosters.Yes, I can make this work. And it would be worth it. Ritser Brughel was
the only other Podmaster within twenty light-years. The Podmaster class was
often deadly within itself, but there was a bond among them. Every one of them
knew the hidden, hard strategies. Every one of them understood the true virtues
of the Emergency. Ritser was young, still growing into himself. If the proper
relationship could be established, other problems would be more tractable.
And their ultimate success might be even greater than what he told Ritser. It
could be greater than Uncle Alan had imagined. It was a vision that might have
eluded Tomas himself, if not for this firsthand meeting with the Peddlers.
Uncle Alan had had a respect for far threats; he had continued the
Balacrean traditions of emission security. But even Uncle Alan never seemed to
realize that they were playing tyrant over a laughably tiny pond: Balacrea, Frenk,
Gaspr. Nau had just told Ritser Brughel about the founding of Canberra. There
were better examples he could have used, but Canberra was a favorite of Tomas
Nau's. While his peers studied Emergency history to death, and added trivial
nuances to the strategies, Tomas Nau studied the histories of Human Space.
Even a disaster like the Plague Time was a commonplace in the larger scheme of
things. The conquerors in the histories dwarfed the Balacrean stage. So Tomas
Nau was familiar with a thousand faraway Strategists, from Alexander of
Macedon to Tarf Lu. . .to Pham Nuwen. Of them all, Pham Nuwen was Nau's
central model, the greatest of the Qeng Ho.
In a sense, Nuwen created the modern Qeng Ho. The Peddler broadcasts
described Nuwen's life in some detail, but they were sugar-coated. There were
other versions, contradictory whispers between the stars. Every aspect of his life
was worth study. Pham Nuwen had been born on Canberra just before the Qeng
Ho landing. The child Nuwen had come into the Qeng Ho from outside. . .and
transformed it. For a few centuries he drove the Peddlers to empire, the greatest
empire known. He had been an Alexander to all Human Space. And-as with
Alexander-his empire had not lasted.
The man had been a genius of conquest and organization. He simply did not
have all the necessary tools.
Nau took a last look at the sky-blue beauty of Arachna as it slipped behind
Hammerfest's towers. He had a dream now. So far, it was a dream he admitted
only to himself. In a few years he would conquer a nonhuman race, a race that
had once flown between the stars. In a few years he would plumb the deepest
secrets of the Qeng Ho fleet automation. With all that, he might be the equal of
Pham Nuwen. With all that, he might make a star empire. But Tomas Nau's
dream went further, for he already had a tool of empire that Pham Nuwen and

Tarf Lu and all the others had lacked.Focus.
The fulfillment of his dream was half a lifetime away, on the other side of
the Exile and deadliness he might not yet imagine. Sometimes he wondered if he
was crazy to think he could get there. Ah, but the dream burned so bright in his
mind:
With Focus, Tomas Nau might hold what he could grasp. Tomas Nau's
Emergency would become a single empire across all Human Space. And it
would be the one that lasted.

SEVENTEEN
Officially, of course, Benny Wen's booze parlor did not exist. Benny had
grabbed some empty utility space between the inner balloons. Working in their
free time, he and his father had gradually populated it with furniture, a zero-pool
game, video wallpaper. You could still see the utility piping on the walls, but
even that was covered with colored tape.
When his tree had the Watch, Pham Trinli spent most of his free time
loafing here. And there had been more free time since he botched the L1
stabilization and Qiwi Lisolet took over.
The aroma of hops and barley hit Pham the moment he got past the door. A
cluster of beery droplets drifted close by his ear, then zigged into the cleaning
vent by the door.
"Hey, Pham, where the hell have you been? Grab a seat." His usual cronies
were mostly sitting on the ceiling side of the game room. Pham gave them a
wave and glided across the room to take a seat on the outer wall. It meant he was
facing sideways from the others, but there wasn't that much room here.
Trud Silipan waved across the room at where Benny floated by the bar.
"Where's the beer and frids, Benny boy? Hey, and add on a big one for the
military genius here!"
Everyone laughed, though Pham's response was more an indignant snort.
He'd worked hard to be the bluff blowhard. Want to hear a tale of derring-do?
Just listen to Pham Trinli for more than a hundred seconds. Of course, if you had
any real-world experience yourself, you'd see the stories were mostly fraud-and
where they were not, the heroic parts belonged to somebody else. He looked
around the room. As usual, more than half the clientele were Follower-class
Emergents, but most of the groups contained one or two Qeng Ho. It was more
than six years since Relight, since the "Diem atrocity." For many of them, that
was almost two years of lifetime. The surviving Qeng Ho had learned and
adapted. They weren't exactly assimilated, but like Pham Trinli, they had
become an integral part of the Exile.
Hunte Wen drifted across the room from the bar. He towed a net full of
drink bulbs, and the snack food that was the most he and Benny risked importing
to the parlor. Talk lulled for a moment as he passed the goods around, picked up
favor scrip in return.
Pham snagged a bulb of the brew. The container was new plastic. Benny
had some kind of in with the crews that ran surface operations on the rockpile.

The little volatiles plant gulped in airsnow and water ice and ground diamond. .
.and out came raw stocks, including the plastics for drinking bulbs, furniture, the
zero-gee pool game. Even the parlor's chief attraction was the product of the
rockpile-touched by the magic of the temp's bactry.
This bulb had a colored drawing on the side:DIAMOND AND ICE
BREWERY , it said, and there was a picture of the rockpile being dissolved into
suds. The picture was an intricate thing, evidently from a handdrawn original.
Pham stared at the clever drawing for a moment. He swallowed his wondering
questions. In any case, others would ask them. . .in their own way.
There was a flurry of laughter as Trud and his friends noticed the pictures.
"Hey, Hunte, did you do this?" The elder Wen smiled shyly and nodded.
"Hey, it's kinda cute. Not like what a Focused artist could do, of course."
"I thought you were some kind of physicist, before you got your freedom?"
"An astrophysicist. I-I don't remember much of that anymore. I'm trying
new things."
The Emergents chatted with Wen for several minutes. Most were friendly,
and-except for Trud
Silipan-seemed genuinely sympathetic. Pham had vague recollections of
Hunte Wen before the ambush, impressions of an outspoken, good-natured
academic. Well, the good nature remained. The fellow smiled a lot, but a bit too
apologetically. His personality was like a ceramic vessel, once shattered, now
painstakingly reassembled, functional but fragile.
Wen picked up the last of the payment scrip and drifted back across the
room. He stopped halfway to the bar. He drifted close to the wallpaper, and
looked out upon the rockpile and the sun. He seemed to have forgotten all of
them, was caught once more by the mysteries of the OnOff star. Trud Silipan
chuckled and leaned across the table toward Trinli. "Driftier than hell, isn't he?
Most de-zips aren't that bad."
Benny Wen came from the bar and drew his father out of sight. Benny had
been one of the firebreathers. He was probably the most obvious of Diem's
conspirators to survive.
Talk returned to the important issues of the day. Jau Xin wanted to find
someone in Watch tree A who was willing to trade into B; his lady was stuck on
the other Watch. It was the sort of swap that had to be cleared by the
Podmasters, but if everyone was willing. . .Someone else pointed out that some
Qeng Ho woman down in Quartermaster was brokering such deals, in return for
other favors. "Damn Peddlers put a price on everything," Silipan muttered.
And Trinli regaled them with a story-true actually, but with enough
absurdities that they would know it false-about a Long Watch mission he
f
f

allegedly commanded. "Fifty years we spent with only four Watch groups. In the
end I had to break the rules, allow children In Flight. But by that time, we had a
market advantage-"
Pham was coming down on the punch line when Trud Silipan jabbed him in
the ribs. "Hsst! My Qeng Ho Lord, your nemesis has arrived." That got a round
of chuckles. Pham glared at Silipan, then turned to look.
Qiwi Lin Lisolet had just sailed through the parlor's doorway. She twisted
in midair, and touched down by Benny Wen. There was a lull in the room noise
and her voice carried to Trinli's group up by the ceiling. "Benny! Have you got
those swap forms? Gonle can cover-" Her words faded as the two moved to the
far side of the bar and other conversations resumed. Qiwi was clearly in full
haggle, twisting Benny's arm about some new deal.
"Is it true she'sstill in charge of stabilizing the rockpile? I thought that was
your job, Pham." Jau Xin grimaced. "Give it a rest, Trud."
Pham raised a hand, the image of an irritated old man trying to look
important. "I told you before, I got promoted. Lisolet handles the field details,
and I supervise the whole operation for Podmaster Nau." He looked in Qiwi's
direction, tried to put just the right truculence into his gaze.Iwonder what she's
up to now. The child was amazing.
From the corner of his eye, Pham saw Silipan shrug apologetically at Jau
Xin. They all figured Pham was a fraud, but he was well liked. His tales might
be tall, but they were very entertaining. The trouble with Trud Silipan was he
didn't know when to stop goading. Now the fellow was probably trying to think
of some way to make amends.
"Yes," said Silipan, "there aren't many of us who report directly to the
Podmaster. And I'll tell you something about Qiwi Lin Lisolet." He looked
around to see just who else was in the parlor. "You know I manage the zipheads
for Reynolt-well, we provide support for Ritser Brughel's snoops. I talked to the
boys over there. Our Miss Lisolet is on their hot list. She's involved in more
scams than you can imagine." He gestured at the furniture. "Where do you think
this plastic comes from? Now that she's got Pham's old job, she's down on the
rockpile all the time. She's diverting production to people like Benny."
One of the others waggled a Diamonds and Ice drink bulb at Silipan. "You
seem to be enjoying your share, Trud."
"You know that's not the point. Look. These are community resources that
she and the likes of Benny
Wen are messing with." There were solemn nods from around the table.
"Whatever accidental good it does, it's still theft from the common weal." His
eyes went hard. "In the Plague Time there weren't many greater sins."
"Y
b t th P d
t
k
b
t it It'
t d i
t h
"

"Yes, but the Podmasters know about it. It's not doing any great harm."
Silipan nodded. "True. They are tolerating it for now." His smile turned sly.
"For maybe as long as she's sleeping with Podmaster Nau." That was another
rumor that had been going around.
"Look, Pham. You're Qeng Ho. But basically you're a military man. That's
an honorable profession, and it sets you high, no matter what your origin. You
see, there are moral levels to society." Silipan was clearly lecturing from the
received wisdom. "At the top are the Podmasters, statesmen I guess you'd call
them. Below that are the military leaders, and underneath the leaders are the staff
planners, the technicians, and the armsmen. Underneath that. . .are vermin of
different categories: fallen members of the useful categories, persons with a
chance of fitting back in the system. And below them are the factory workers
and farmers. And at the very bottom-combining the worst aspects of all the
scum-are the peddlers." Silipan smiled at Pham. Evidently he felt he was being
flattering, that he had set Pham Trinli among the naturally noble. "Traders are
the eaters of dead and dying, too cowardly to steal by force."
Even Trinli's cover persona should choke on this analysis. Pham blustered,
"I'll have you know the Qeng Ho has been in its present form for thousands of
years, Silipan. That's hardly the mark of failure."
Silipan smiled with cordial sympathy. "I know it's hard to accept this,
Trinli. You're a good man, and it's right to be loyal. But I think you're coming to
understand. The peddlers will always be with us, whether they're selling
unlicensed food in an alley or lurking between the stars. The star-going ones call
themselves a civilization, but they're just the rabble that hangs around the edges
of true civilizations."
Pham grunted. "I don't think I've ever been flattered and insulted so much
all at the same time."
They all laughed, and Trud Silipan seemed to think his lecture had
somehow cheered Trinli. Pham finished his little story without further
interruption. Talk drifted on to speculation about Arachna's spider creatures.
Ordinarily, Pham would soak up these stories with well-concealed enthusiasm.
Today, his lack of attention was not an act. His gaze drifted back to the parlor's
bar table. Benny and Qiwi were half out of sight now, arguing about some deal.
Mixed in with all the Emergent insanity, Trud Silipan did have a few things
right. Over the last couple of years, an underground had bloomed here. It wasn't
the violent subversion of Jimmy Diem's conspiracy. In the minds of the Qeng Ho
participants it wasn't a conspiracy at all, merely getting on with business. Benny
and his father and dozens of others were routinely bending and even violating
Podmaster dicta. So far Nau hadn't retaliated; so far, the Qeng Ho underground
had improved the situation for almost everyone Pham had seen this sort of thing

had improved the situation for almost everyone. Pham had seen this sort of thing
happen once or twice before-when Qeng Ho couldn't trade as free human beings,
and couldn't run, and couldn't fight.
Little Qiwi Lin Lisolet was at the center of it all. Pham's gaze rested on her
wonderingly. For a moment, he forgot to glower. Qiwi had lost so much. By
some standards of honor, she had sold out. Yet here she was, awake Watch on
Watch, in a position to do deals in all directions. Pham bit back the fond smile he
felt growing on his lips, and frowned at her. If Trud Silipan or Jau Xin ever
knew how he really felt about Qiwi Lisolet, they would think him stark raving
mad. If someone as clever as Tomas Nau ever understood, he might put two and
two together-and that would be the end of Pham Trinli.
When Pham looked at Qiwi Lin Lisolet, he saw-more than he ever had
before in his life-himself.True, Qiwi was female, and sexism was one of Trinli's
peculiarities that was not an act. But the similarities between them went deeper
than gender. Qiwi had been-what, eight years old?-when she had started on this
voyage. She had lived almost half her childhood in the dark between the stars,
alone but for the fleet's maintenance Watches. And now she was plunged into a
totally different culture. And still she survived, and faced up to every new
challenge. And she was winning.
Pham's mind turned inward. He wasn't listening to his drinking buddies
anymore. He wasn't even watching Qiwi Lin Lisolet. He was remembering a
time more than three thousand years ago, across three centuries of his own
lifetime.
Canberra. Pham had been thirteen, the youngest son of Tran Nuwen, King
and Lord of all the Northland. Pham had grown up with swords and poison and
intrigue, living in stone castles by a cold, cold sea. No doubt he would have
ended up murdered-or king of all-if life had continued in the medieval way. But
when he was thirteen everything changed. A world that had only legends of
aircraft and radio was confronted by interstellar traders, the Qeng Ho. Pham still
remembered the scorch their pinnaces had made of the Great Swamp south of
the castle. In a single year, Canberra's feudal politics was turned on its head.
The Qeng Ho had invested three ships in the expedition to Canberra. They
had seriously miscalculated, thinking the locals would be at a much higher level
of technology by the time of their arrival. But even Tran Nuwen's realm couldn't
resupply them. Two of the ships stayed behind. Young Pham left with the third-a
crazy hostage deal his father thought he was putting over on the star folk.
Pham's last day on Canberra was cold and foggy. The trip from the castle
walls down to the fen took most of the morning. It was the first time he had been
allowed to see the visitors' great ships close up, and little Pham Nuwen was on a
crest of joy There might never be a moment in Pham's life when he had so many

crest of joy. There might never be a moment in Pham s life when he had so many
things wrong and backwards: The starships that loomed out of the mists were
simply landing pinnaces. The tall, strange captain who greeted Pham's father was
in fact a second officer. Three subordinate steps behind him walked a young
woman, her face twisted with barely concealed discomfort-a concubine? a
handmaiden? The real captain, it turned out.
Pham's father the King gave a hand signal. The boy's tutor and his dour
servants marched him across the mud, toward the star folk. The hands on his
shoulders were holding tight, but Pham didn't notice. He looked up, wondering,
his eyes devouring the "starships," trying to follow the sweeping curves of
glistening maybe-metal. In a painting or a small piece of jewelry he had seen
such perfection-but this was dream incarnate.
They might have gotten him aboard the pinnace before he really understood
the betrayal, if it hadn't been for Cindi. Cindi Ducanh, lesser daughter of Tran's
cousin. Her family was important enough to live at court, but not important
enough to matter. Cindi was fifteen, the strangest, wildest person Pham had ever
known, so strange that he didn't even have a word for what she was-though
"friend" would have sufficed.
Suddenly she was there, standing between them and the star folk. "No!It's
not right. It does no good.
Don't-" She held her hands up, as if to stop them. From the side, Pham
could hear a woman shouting. It was Cindi's mother, screaming at her daughter.
It was such a silly, stupid, hopeless gesture. Pham's party didn't even slow
down. His tutor swung his quarterstaff in a low arc across Cindi's legs. She went
down.
Pham turned, tried to reach out to her, but now hard hands lifted him,
trapped his arms and legs. His last glimpse of Cindi was her struggling up from
the mud, still looking in his direction, oblivious of the axemen running toward
her. Pham Nuwen never learned how much it had cost the one person who had
stood up to protect him. Centuries later, he had returned to Canberra, rich
enough to buy the planet even in its newly civilized state. He had probed the old
libraries, the fragmented digital records of the Qeng Ho who had stayed behind.
There had been nothing about the aftermath of Cindi's action, nothing certain in
the birth records of Cindi's family forward from her time. She and what she had
done and what it had cost were simply insignificant in the eyes of time.
Pham was swept up, carried quickly forward. He had a brief vision of his
brothers and sisters, young men and women with cold, hard faces. Today, one
very small threat was being removed. The servants stopped briefly before Pham's
father the King. The old man-forty years old, actually-stared down at him
briefly. Tran had always been a distant force of nature, capricious behind ranks

briefly. Tran had always been a distant force of nature, capricious behind ranks
of tutors and contesting heirs and courtiers. His lips were drawn down in a thin
line. For an instant something like sympathy might have lived in the hard eyes.
He touched the side of Pham's face. "Be strong, boy. You bear my name."
Tran turned, spoke pidgin words to the star man. And Pham was in alien
hands.
Like Qiwi Lin Lisolet, Pham Nuwen had been cast out into the great
darkness. And like Qiwi, Pham did not belong.
He remembered those first years more clearly than any other time in his
life. No doubt the crew intended to pop him into cold storage and dump him at
the next stop. What can you make of a kid who thinks there's one world and it's
flat, who has spent his whole life learning to whack about with a sword?
Pham Nuwen had had his own agenda. The coldsleep coffins scared the
devil out of him. TheReprise had scarcely left Canberra orbit when little Pham
disappeared from his appointed cabin. He had always been small for his age, and
by now he understood about remote surveillance. He kept the crew of theReprise
busy for more than four days searching for him. In the end, of course, Pham lost-
and some very angry Qeng Ho dragged him before the ship's master.
By now he knew that was the "handmaiden" he had seen in the fen. Even
knowing, it was still hard to believe. One weak woman, commanding a starship
and a crew of a thousand (though soon almost all of those were off-Watch, in
coldsleep). Hmm. Maybe she had been the owner's concubine, but had poisoned
him and now ruled in his place. That was a credible scenario, but it made her an
exceptionally dangerous person. In fact, Sura had been a junior captain, the
leader of the faction that voted against staying at Canberra. Those who stayed
called them "the cautious cowards." And now they were heading home, into
certain bankruptcy.
Pham remembered the look on her face when they finally caught him and
brought him to the bridge. She had scowled down at the little prince, a boy still
dressed in the velvet of Canberran nobility.
"You've delayed the start of the Watches, young fellow."
The language was barely intelligible to Pham. The boy pushed down the
panic and the loneliness and glared right back at her. "Madam. I am your
hostage, not your slave, not your victim."
"Damn, what did he say?" Sura Vinh looked around at her lieutenants.
"Look, son. It's a sixty-year flight. We've got to put you away."
That last comment got through the language barrier, but it sounded too
much like what the stable boss said when he was going to behead a horse.
"No!You'll not put me in a coffin."
And Sura Vinh understood that, too.

,
One of the others spoke abruptly to Shipmaster Vinh. Probably something
like "It doesn't matter what he wants, ma'am."
Pham tensed himself for another futile wrestling match. But Sura just stared
at him for a second and then ordered everyone else out of her office. The two of
them talked pidgin for some Ksecs. Pham knew court intrigue and strategy, and
none of it seemed to apply here. Before they were done, the little boy was crying
inconsolably and Sura had her arm across his shoulders. "It will be years," she
said. "You understand that?"
". . .Y-yes."
"You'll arrive an old man if you don't let us put you in coldsleep." That last
was still an unfortunate word.
"No, no, no!I'll die first." Pham Nuwen was beyond logic.
Sura was silent for a moment. Years later, she told Phamher side of the
encounter: "Yeah, I could have heaved you in the freezer. It would have been
prudent and ethical-and it would have saved me a world of problems. I will
never understand why Deng's fleet committee forced me to accept you; they
were petty and pissed, but this was too much.
"So there you were, a little kid sold out by his own father. I'd be damned if
I'd treat you the way he and the committee did. Besides, if you spent the flight on
ice, you'd still be a zero when we got to Namqem, helpless in a tech civilization.
So why not let you stay out of coldsleep and try to teach you the basics? I
figured you'd see how long the years looked in a ship between the stars. In a few
years, the coldsleep coffins might not seem quite so terrible to you."
It hadn't been simple. Ship security had to be reprogrammed for the
presence of an irresponsible human. No uncrewed Tween Watches could be
allowed. But the programming was done, and several of the Watch standers
volunteered to extend their time out of coldsleep.
TheReprise reached ramcruise, 0.3 lightspeed, and sailed endlessly across
the depths.
And Pham Nuwen had all the time in the universe. Several crewfolk-Sura
for the first few Watches-did their best to tutor him. At first, he would have none
of it. . .but the time stretched long. He learned to speak Sura's language. He
learned generalities about Qeng Ho.
"We trade between the stars," said Sura. The two were sitting alone on the
ramscoop's bridge. The windows showed a symbolic map of the five star
systems that the Qeng Ho circuited.
"Qeng Ho is an empire," the boy said, looking out at the stars and trying to
imagine how those territories compared with his father's kingdom.
Sura laughed. "No, not an empire. No government can maintain itself across

g
p
g
light-years. Hell, most governments don't last more than a few centuries. Politics
may come and go, but trade goes on forever."
Little Pham Nuwen frowned. Even now, Sura's words were sometimes
nonsense. "No. It has to be an empire."
Sura didn't argue. A few days later, she went off-Watch, dead in one of the
strange, cold coffins. Pham almost begged her not to kill herself, and for Msecs
afterward he grieved on wounds he hadn't imagined before. Now there were
other strangers, and unending days of silence. Eventually he learned to read
Nese.
And two years later, Sura returned from the dead. The boy still refused to
go off-Watch, but from that point on he welcomed everything they wanted to
teach him. He knew there was power beyond any Canberran lordship here, and
now he understood that he might be master of it. In two years, he made up for
what a child of civilization might learn in five. He had a competency in math; he
could use the top-and second-level Qeng Ho program interfaces.
Sura looked almost the same as before her coldsleep, except that in some
strange way, she seemed younger now. One day he caught her staring at him.
"So what's the problem?" Pham asked.
Sura grinned. "I never saw a kid on a long flight. You're what now, fifteen
Canberra years old? Bret tells me you've learned a lot."
"Yes. I'm going to be Qeng Ho."
"Hmm." She smiled, but it was not the patronizing, sympathy-filled smile
that Pham remembered. She was truly pleased, and she didn't disbelieve his
claim. "You've got an awful lot to learn."
"I've got an awful lot of time to do it."
Sura Vinh stayed on Watch four straight years that time. Bret Trinli stayed
for the first of those years, extending his own Watch. The three of them trekked
through every accessible cubic meter of theReprise: the sick-bay and coffins, the
control deck, the fuel tanks. TheReprise had burned almost two million tonnes of
hydrogen to reach ramcruise speeds. In effect, she was a vast, nearly empty hulk
now. "And without lots of support at the destination, this ship will never fly
again."
"You could refuel, even if there were only gas giants at the destination.
Even I could manage the programs for that."
"Yeah, and that's what we did at Canberra. But without an overhaul, we
can't go far and we can't do zip once we get there." Sura paused, cursed under
her breath. "Those damn fools. Why did they stay behind?" Sura seemed caught
between her contempt for the shipmasters who had stayed to conquer Canberra,
and her own guilt at having deserted them.

Bret Trinli broke the silence. "Don't feel so bad for them. They're taking a
big chance, but if they win, they'll have the Customers we were all expecting
there."
"I know-and we're guaranteed to arrive at Namqem with nothing. Bet we'll
lose theReprise. " She shook herself, visibly pushing back the worries that
always seemed to gnaw her. "Okay, in the meantime we're going to create one
more trained crewmember." She nailed Pham with a mock-glare. "What
specialty do we need the most, Bret?"
Trinli rolled his eyes. "You mean that can bring us the most income?
Obviously: ProgrammerArcheologist."
The question was, could a feral child like Pham Nuwen ever become one?
By now, the boy could use almost all the standard interfaces. He even thought of
himself as a programmer, and potentially a ship's master. With the standard
interfaces, one could fly theReprise, execute planetary orbit insertion, monitor
the coldsleep coffins"And if anything goes wrong, you're dead, dead, dead" was
how Sura finished Pham's litany of prowess. "Boy, you have to learn something.
It's something that children in civilization often are confused about, too. We've
had computers and programs since the beginning of civilization, even before
spaceflight. But there's only so much they can do; they can't think their way out
of an unexpected jam or do anything really creative."
"But-I know that's not true. I play games with the machines. If I set the skill
ratings high, I never win."
"That's just computers doing simple things, very fast. There is only one
important way that computers are anything like wise. They contain thousands of
years of programs, and can run most of them. In a sense, they remember every
slick trick that Humankind has ever devised."
Bret Trinli sniffed. "Along with all the nonsense."
Sura shrugged. "Of course. Look. What's our crew size-when we're in-
system and everybody is up?"
"One thousand and twenty-three," said Pham. He had long since learned
every physical characteristic of theReprise and this voyage.
"Okay. Now, suppose you're light-years from nowhere-" Trinli: "You don't
have to suppose that, it's the pure truth."
"-and something goes wrong. It takes perhaps ten thousand human
specialties to build a starship, and that's on top of an enormous capital industry
base. There's no way a ship's crew can know everything it takes to analyze a
star's spectrum, and make a vaccine against some wild change in the bactry, and
understand every deficiency disease we may meet-"
"Yes!" said Pham. "That's why we have the programs and the computers."
"Th '
h
'
i
i h
h
O
h
d
f
h

"That's why we can't survive without them. Over thousands of years, the
machine memories have been filled with programs that can help. But like Bret
says, many of those programs are lies, all of them are buggy, and only the top-
level ones are precisely appropriate for our needs." She paused, looked at Pham
significantly. "It takes a smart and highly trained human being to look at what is
available, to choose and modify the right programs, and then to interpret the
results properly."
Pham was silent for a moment, thinking back to all the times the machines
had not done what he really wanted. It wasn't always Pham's fault. The programs
that tried to translate Canberran to Nese were crap. "So. . . you want me to learn
to program something better."
Sura grinned, and there was a barely suppressed chuckle from Bret. "We'll
be satisfied if you become a good programmer, and then learn to use the stuff
that already exists."
Pham Nuwen spent years learning to program/explore. Programming went
back to the beginning of time. It was a little like the midden out back of his
father's castle. Where the creek had worn that away, ten meters down, there were
the crumpled hulks of machines-flying machines, the peasants said-from the
great days of Canberra's original colonial era. But the castle midden was clean
and fresh compared to what lay within theReprise 's local net. There were
programs here that had been written five thousand years ago, before Humankind
ever left Earth. The wonder of it-the horror of it, Sura said-was that unlike the
useless wrecks of Canberra's past, these programs still worked! And via a
million million circuitous threads of inheritance, many of the oldest programs
still ran in the bowels of the Qeng Ho system. Take the Traders' method of
timekeeping. The frame corrections were incredibly complex-and down at the
very bottom of it was a little program that ran a counter. Second by second, the
Qeng Ho counted from the instant that a human had first set foot on Old Earth's
moon. But if you looked at it still more closely. . .the starting instant was
actually some hundred million seconds later, the 0-second of one of
Humankind's first computer operating systems.
So behind all the top-level interfaces was layer under layer of support.
Some of that software had been designed for wildly different situations. Every so
often, the inconsistencies caused fatal accidents. Despite the romance of
spaceflight, the most common accidents were simply caused by ancient, misused
programs finally getting their revenge.
"We should rewrite it all," said Pham.
"It's been done," said Sura, not looking up. She was preparing to go off-
Watch, and had spent the last four days trying to root a problem out of the
ld l
t
ti

coldsleep automation.
"It's been tried," corrected Bret, just back from the freezers. "But even the
top levels of fleet system code are enormous. You and a thousand of your friends
would have to work for a century or so to reproduce it." Trinli grinned evilly.
"And guess what-even if you did, by the time you finished, you'd have your own
set of inconsistencies. And you still wouldn't be consistent with all the
applications that might be needed now and then."
Sura gave up on her debugging for the moment. "The word for all this is
'mature programming environment.' Basically, when hardware performance has
been pushed to its final limit, and programmmers have had several centuries to
code, you reach a point where there is far more signicant code than can be
rationalized. The best you can do is understand the overall layering, and know
how to search for the oddball tool that may come in handy-take the situation I
have here." She waved at the dependency chart she had been working on. "We
are low on working fluid for the coffins. Like a million other things, there was
none for sale on dear old Canberra. Well, the obvious thing is to move the
coffins near the aft hull, and cool by direct radiation. We don't have the proper
equipment to support this-so lately, I've been doing my share of archeology. It
seems that five hundred years ago, a similar thing happened after an in-system
war at Torma. They hacked together a temperature maintenance package that is
precisely what we need."
"Almostprecisely." Bret was grinning again. "With some minor revisions."
"Yes, which I've almost completed." She glanced at Pham, saw the look on
his face. "Aha. I thought you'd rather die than use a coffin."
Pham smiled shyly, remembering the little boy of six years before. "No, I'll
use it. Someday."
That day was another five years of Pham's lifetime away. They were busy
years. Both Bret and Sura were off-Watch, and Pham never felt close to their
replacements. The foursome played musical instruments-manually, just like
minstrels at court! They'd do it for Ksecs on end; there seemed be some strange
mental/social high they got from playing together. Pham was vaguely affected
by music, but these people worked so hard for such ordinary results. Pham did
not have the patience even to begin down that path. He drifted off. Being alone
was something he was very good at. There was so much to learn.
The more he studied, the more he understood what Sura Vinh had meant
about "mature programming environments." By comparison with the crew
members he knew, Pham had become an excellent programmer. "Flaming
genius" was how he'd heard Sura describe him when she hadn't known he was
nearby. He could codeanything -but life is short, and most significant systems

were terribly large. So Pham learned to hack about with the leviathans of the
past. He could interface weapons code from Eldritch Faerie with patched conic
planners from before the conquest of space. Just as important, he knew how and
where to look for possibly appropriate applications hidden in the ship's network.
. . .And he learned something about mature programming environments that
Sura had never quite said. When systems depended on underlying systems, and
those depended on things still older. . .it became impossible to know all the
systems could do. Deep in the interior of fleet automation there could be-there
must be-a maze of trapdoors. Most of the authors were thousands of years dead,
their hidden accesses probably lost forever. Other traps had been set by
companies or governments that hoped to survive the passage of time. Sura and
Bret and maybe a few of the others knew things about theReprise 's systems that
gave them special powers.
The medieval prince in Pham Nuwen was entranced by this insight.If only
one could be at the ground floor of some universally popularsystem.. . . If the
new layer was used everywhere, then the owner of those trapdoors would be like
a king forever after, throughout the entire universe of use.
• • •
Eleven years had passed since a certain frightened thirteen-year-old had
been taken from Canberra.
Sura had just returned from coldsleep. It was a return that Pham had
awaited with increasing desire. .
.since just after she departed. There was so much he wanted to tell her, so
much to ask her and show her. Yet when the time finally came, he couldn't bring
himself to stay at the coldsleep hold and greet her.
She found him in an equipment bay on the aft hull, a tiny niche with a real
window on the stars. It was a place that Pham had appropriated several years
earlier.
There was tap on the light plastic cover. He slipped it aside.
"Hello, Pham." Sura had a strange smile on her face.She looked strange. So
young. In fact, she simply hadn't aged. And now Pham Nuwen had lived twenty-
four years. He waved her into the tiny room. She floated close past him, and
turned. Her eyes were solemn above the smile. "You've grown up, friend."
Pham started to shake his head. "Yes. But I-you are still ahead of me."
"Maybe. In some ways. But you're twice the programmer I will ever be. I
saw the solutions you worked out for Ceng this last Watch."
They sat, and she asked him about Ceng's problems and his solutions. All

the glib speeches and bravado he'd spent the last year planning were swept from
his mind, his conversation reduced to awkward starts and stops. Sura didn't seem
to notice.Damn. How does a Qeng Ho man take a woman? On Canberra, he had
grown up believing in chivalry and sacrifice. . .and had gradually learned that the
true method was very different: a gentleman simply grabbed what he wanted,
assuming a more powerful gentleman did not already own it. Pham's own
personal experience was limited and surely untypical: poor Cindi had
grabbedhim. At the beginning of the last Watch, he had tried the true Canberra
method on one of the female crew. Xina Rao had broken his wrist and made a
formal complaint. It was something Sura would surely hear about sooner or later.
The thought blew away Pham's tenuous hold on the conversation. He stared
at Sura in embarrassed silence, then blurted out the announcement he had been
holding secret for some special moment. "I. . .I'm going to go off-Watch, Sura.
I'll finally start coldsleep."
She nodded solemnly, as if she had never guessed.
"You know what really did it for me, Sura? The dustmote that broke me? It
was three years ago. You were off-Watch,"and I realized how longit would be
until next I saw you. "I was trying to make that second-level celestial mech stuff
work. You really have to understand some math to do that. For a while, I was
stumped. For the hell of it, I moved up here, just started staring at the sky. I've
done that before.
Every year, my sun is dimmer; it's scary."
"I'll bet," said Sura, "but I didn't know you could see directly aft, even from
here." She slid near the fortycentimeter port, and killed the lights.
"Yes you can," said Pham, "at least when your eyes adjust." The room was
dark as pitch now. This was areal window, not some enhancing display device.
He moved close behind her. "See, there's the four bright stars of the Pikeman.
Now Canberra's star just makes his pole one tong longer."Silly. She doesn't know
the Canberran sky. He babbled on, a mindless cover for what he was feeling.
"But even that is not what got me; my sun is another star, so what? The thing is,
the constellations: the Pikeman, the Wild Goose, the Plow. I can still recognize
them, but even their shapes have changed. I know, I should have expected that.
I'd been doing the math behind much harder things. But. . .it struck me. In eleven
years, we have moved so far that the whole sky has changed. It gave me a gut
feeling of how far we've come, how very far we still have to go."
He gestured in the dark, and his palm slapped lightly on the smooth swell of
her rear. His voice died in a little squeak, and for a measurable instant his hand
sat motionless on her pants, his fingers touching her bare flesh just above the hip
line. Somehow he hadn't noticed before; her blouse wasn't even tucked in. His

hand swept around her waist and upward across the smooth curve of her belly,
kept moving till he touched the undersides of her breasts. The move was a grab,
modified and tentative perhaps, but a definite grab.
Sura's reaction was almost as swift as Xina Rao's had been. She twisted
beneath him, her breast centering in the palm of his other hand. Before Pham
could get out of her way, her arm was behind his neck, levering him down. . .for
a long, hard kiss. He felt multiple shocks where his lips touched hers, where his
hand rested, where her leg slid up between his.
And now she was pulling his shirt from his pants, forcing their bodies into a
single long touch. She leaned her head back from his lips and laughed softly.
"Lord! I've been wanting to get my hands on you ever since you were fifteen
years old."
But why didn't you? I was in your power.It was the last coherent thought he
had for some time. In the dark, there loomed more wonderful questions. How to
get leverage, how to join the smooth endpoints of softness and hard. They
bounced randomly from wall to wall, and poor Pham might never have found his
way if not for his partner and guide.
Afterward she brought up the lights, and showed him how to do it in his
sleeping hammock. And then again, with the lights out once more. After a long
while, they floated exhausted in the dark. Peace and joy, and his arms were so
full with her. Starlight was a magical faintness, that after enough time seemed
almost bright. Bright enough to glint on Sura's eyes, to show the white of her
teeth. She was smiling. "You're right about the stars," she said. "It is a bit
humbling to see the sweep of the stars, to know how little we count."
Pham squeezed her gently, but was for the moment so satisfied he could
actually think about what she said. ". . .Yes, it's scary. But at the same time, I
look out and realize that with starships and coldsleep, we are outside and beyond
them. We can make what we want of the universe."
The white of Sura's smile broadened. "Ah, Pham, maybe you haven't
changed. I remember the first days of little Pham, when you could barely spit out
an intelligible sentence. You kept insisting the Qeng Ho was an empire, and I
kept saying we were simply traders, could never be anything more."
"I remember, but still I don't understand. Qeng Ho has been around for how
long?" "That name for 'trading fleet'? Maybe two thousand years."
"That's longer than most empires."
"Sure, and part of the reason is, we're not an empire. It's our function that
makes us seem everlasting. The Qeng Ho of two thousand years ago had a
different language, had no common culture with now. I'm sure that things like it
exist off and on through all Human Space. It's a process, not a government."
"J
b
h f
h h
b d i
i il
hi
?"

"Just a bunch of guys who happen to be doing similar things?"
"You got it."
Pham was silent for a while. She just didn't understand. "Okay. That is the
way things are now. But don't you see the power that this gives you? You hold a
high technology across hundreds of light-years of space and thousands of years
of time."
"No. That's like saying the sea surf could rule a world: it's everywhere, it's
powerful, and it seems to be coordinated."
"You could have a network, like the fleet network you used at Canberra."
"Lightspeed, Pham, remember? Nothing goes faster. I've no idea what
traders are doing on the other side of Human Space-and at best that information
would be centuries out of date. The most you've seen is networking across
theReprise; you've studied how a small fleet network is run. I doubt you can
imagine the sort of net it takes to support a planetary civilization. You'll see at
Namqem. Every time we visit a place like that, we lose some crew. Life with a
planetary network, where you can interact with millions of people with
millisecond latencies-that is something you are still blind to. I'll bet when we get
to Namqem, you'll leave, too."
"I'll never-"
But Sura was turning in his embrace, her breasts sliding across his chest,
her hand sweeping down his belly, reaching. Pham's denial was lost in his body's
electric response.
After that, Pham moved into Sura's cruise quarters. They spent so much
time together that the other
Watch standers teased him for "kidnapping our captain." In fact, the time
with Sura Vinh was unending joy to Pham, but it was not just lust fulfilled. They
talked and talked and argued and argued. . .and set the course of the rest of their
lives.
And sometimes he thought of Cindi. Both she and Sura had come after him,
lifting him to new awareness. They had both taught him things, argued with him,
and bedeviled him. But they were as different as summer from winter, as
different as a pond from an ocean. Cindi had stood up for him at the risk of her
life, stood alone against all the King's men. In his wildest dreams, Pham could
not imagine Sura Vinh committing her life against such odds. No, Sura was
infinitely thoughtful and cautious. It was she who had analyzed the risks of
remaining at Canberra, and concluded that success was unlikely-and persuaded
enough others about those risks to wangle a ship from the fleet committee and
escape Canberra space. Sura Vinh planned for the long haul, saw problems
where no one else could see. She avoided risks-or confronted them with
overwhelming force of her own In Pham's confused moral pantheon she was

overwhelming force of her own. In Pham's confused moral pantheon, she was
much less than Cindi. . .and much more.
Sura never bought his notion of a Qeng Ho star kingdom. But she didn't
simply deny him; she showered him with books, with economics and histories
that had eluded his decade-long reading schedule. A reasonable person would
have accepted her point; there had been so many "common sense" things that
Pham Nuwen had been wrong about before. But Pham still had his old
stubbornness. Maybe it was Sura who wore blinders. "We could build an
interstellar net. It would just be. . .slow."
Sura laughed. "Yeah! Slow. Like a three-way handshake would take a
thousand years!"
"Well, obviously the protocols would be different. And the usage, too. But
it could change the random trading function into something much more, ah,
profitable." He had almost saidpowerful, but he knew that would just get him
zinged about his "medieval" mind-set. "We could keep a floating database of
Customers."
Sura shook her head, "But out of date by decades to millennia."
"We could maintain human language standards. Our network programming
standards would outlive any Customer government. Our trading culture could
last forever."
"But Qeng Ho is just one fish in a random sea of traders.. . .Oh." Pham
could see that he was finally getting through. "So the 'culture' of our broadcasts
would give participants a trading edge. So there would be a reinforcement
effect."
"Yes, yes! And we could crypto-partition the broadcasts to protect against
nearby competition." Pham smiled slyly. The next point was something that little
Pham, and probably Pham's father the King of all Northland, could never have
conceived. "In fact, we could even have some broadcasts in the clear. The
language standards material, for instance, and the low end of our tech libraries.
I've been reading the Customer histories. All the way back to Old Earth, the only
constant is the churn, the rise of civilization, the fall, as often as not the local
extinction of Humankind. Over time, Qeng Ho broadcasts could damp those
swings."
Sura was nodding, a far look settling into her eyes. "Yes. If we did it right,
we'd end up with Customer cultures that spokeour language, were molded to our
trading needs, and usedour programming environment-" Her gaze snapped up to
his face. "You still have empire on the brain, don't you?"
Pham just smiled.
Sura had a million objections, but she had caught the spirit of the idea,
recast it into her experience and now her entire imagination was working

recast it into her experience, and now her entire imagination was working
alongside his. As the days passed, her objections became more like suggestions,
and their arguments more a kind of wondrous scheming.
"You're crazy, Pham. . .but that doesn't matter. Maybe it takes a crazy
medievalist to be so ambitious. It's like. . .it's like we're creating a civilization
out of whole cloth. We can set up our own myths, our own conventions. We'll be
in at the ground floor of everything."
"And we'll outlast any competition."
"Lord," Sura said softly. (It would be some time before they invented the
"Lord of All Trade" and the pantheon of lesser gods.) "And you know, Namqem
is the ideal place to start. They're about as advanced as a civilization can ever
get, but they're getting a little cynical and decadent. They have propaganda techs
as good as any in human histories. What you're suggesting is strange, but it's
trivial compared to ad campaigns on a planetary net. If my cousins are still in
Namqem space, I bet they'd bankroll the operation." She laughed, joyous and
almost childlike, and Pham realized how badly the fear of bankruptcy and
disgrace had bent her down. "Hell, we're gonna turn aprofit !"
The rest of their Watch was a nonstop orgy of imagination and invention
and lust. Pham came up with a combination of beamed and broadcast interstellar
radio, schedules that could keep fleets and families in synch across centuries.
Sura accepted most of the protocol design, wonder and obvious delight in her
eyes. As for the human engineering, Pham's scheme of hereditary lords and
military fleets-Sura laughed at those, and Pham did not argue the judgment.
After all, in people-things he was still scarcely more than a thirteen-year-old
medieval.
In fact, Sura Vinh was far more awed than patronizing. Pham remembered
their last conversation before he took his first turn in a coldsleep coffin. Sura had
been calibrating the radiative coolers, checking the hypothermia drugs. "We'll
come out almost together, Pham, me a hundred Ksec before you. I'll be here to
help." She smiled and he could feel her gaze gently searching in him. "Don't
worry."
Pham made some flippant remark, but of course she saw the uneasiness in
him. She spoke of other things as he slipped into the coffin, a running
monologue of their plans and daydreams, what they would begin when they
finally reached Namqem. And then it was time, and she hesitated. She leaned
down and kissed him lightly on the lips. Her smile turned faintly teasing, but she
was mocking herself as much as him: "Sleep well, sweet prince."
And then she was gone, and the drugs were taking effect. It didn't feel cold
at all. His last thoughts were a strange floating back across his past. During
Pham's childhood on Canberra his father had been a faraway figure His own

Pham s childhood on Canberra, his father had been a faraway figure. His own
brothers had been lethal threats to his existence. Cindi, he had lost Cindi before
he ever really understood. But for Sura Vinh. . .he had the feeling of a grown
child for a loving parent, the feeling of a man for his woman, the feeling of a
human being for a dear friend.
In some fundamental sense, Sura Vinh had been all those things. For much
of her long life, Sura Vinh had seemed to be his friend. And even though she
was ultimately his betrayer-still, there at the beginning, Sura Vinh had been a
woman good and true.
Someone was shaking him gently, waving a hand in his face. "Hey, Trinli!
Pham! Are you still with us?" It was Jau Xin, and he looked genuinely
concerned.
"Ungh, yes, yes. I'm fine."
"You sure?" Xin watched him for several seconds, then drifted back to his
seat. "I had an uncle who went all glassy-eyed like you just did. Tas a stroke, and
he-"
"Yeah, well I'm fine. Never better." Pham put the bluster back in his voice.
"I was just thinking, that's all."
The claim provoked diversionary laughter all round the table. "Thinking. A
bad habit, Pham, old boy!" After a few moments, their concern faded. Pham
listened attentively now, occasionally injecting loud opinions.
In fact, invasive daydreaming had been a feature of his personality since at
least his leaving the Canberra. He'd get totally wrapped up in memories or
planning, and lose himself the way some people did in immersion videos. He'd
screwed up at least one deal because of it. From the corner of his eye, he could
see that Qiwi was gone. Yes, the girl's childhood had been much like his, and
maybe that accounted for her imagination and drive now. In fact, he had often
wondered if the Strentmannians' crazy childrearing was based on stories of
Pham's time on theReprise. At least when he had reached his destination, things
got better. Poor Qiwi had found only death and deception here. But she still kept
going. . .
"We're getting good translations now." Trud Silipan was back on the
Spiders. "I'm in charge of Reynolt's translator zipheads." Trud was more like an
attendant than a manager, but no one pointed that out. "I tell you, any day now
we'll start getting information about what the Spiders' original civilization was
like."
"I don't know, Trud. Everyone says this must be a fallen colony. But if the
Spiders are elsewhere in space, how come we don't hear their radio?"
Pham: "Look. We've been over this before. Arachna must be a colony
world. This system is just too hostile for life to start naturally."

wo d.
s syste
s just too ost e o
e to sta t atu a y.
And someone else: "Maybe the creatures don't have a Qeng Ho." Chuckles
went round the table. "No, there'd still be plenty of radio noise. We'd hear them."
"Maybe the rest of them are really far away, like the Perseus Mumbling-"
"Or maybe they're so advanced they don't use radio. We only noticed these
guys because they're starting over." It was an old, old argument, part of a
mystery that extended back to the Age of Failed Dreams. More than anything
else it was what had drawn the human expeditions to Arachna. It was certainly
what had drawn Pham.
And indeed, Pham had already found Something New, something so
powerful that the origin of the
Spiders was now a peripheral issue for him. Pham had found Focus. With
Focus, the Emergents could convert their brightest people into dedicated
machines of thought. A dud like Trud Silipan could get effective translations at
the touch of a key. A monster like Tomas Nau could have eyes unresting. Focus
gave the Emergents a power that no one had ever had before, subtlety that
surpassed any machine and patience that surpassed any human. That was one of
the Failed Dreams-but they had achieved it.
Watching Silipan pontificate, Pham realized that the next stage in his plan
had finally arrived. The lowlevel Emergents had accepted Pham Trinli. Nau
tolerated, even humored him, thinking he might be an unknowing window on the
Qeng Ho military mind. It was time to learn a lot more about Focus. Learn from
Silipan, from Reynolt. . .someday learn the technical side of the thing.
Pham had tried to build a true civilization across all of Human Space. For a
few brief centuries it had seemed he might succeed. In the end, he had been
betrayed. But Pham had long ago realized that the betrayal had been just the
overt failure. What Sura and the others did to him at Brisgo Gap had been
inevitable. An interstellar empire covers so much space, so much time. The
goodness and justice of such a thing is not enough. You need an edge.
Pham Nuwen raised his bulb of Diamonds and Ice and drank an unnoticed
toast, to the lessons of the past and the promise of the future. This time he would
do things right.

EIGHTEEN
Ezr Vinh's first two years after the ambush were spread across nearly eight
years of objective time. Almost like a good Qeng Ho captain, Tomas Nau was
pacing their duty time to match local developments. Qiwi and her crews were
out of coldsleep more than any, but even they were slowing down.
Anne Reynolt kept her astrophysicists busy, too. OnOff continued to settle
along the light curve that had been seen in previous centuries; to a lay observer,
it looked like a normal, hydrogen-eating sun, complete with sunspots. At first,
she held the other academics to a lower duty cycle, awaiting the resumption of
Spider activity.
Military radio transmissions were heard from Arachna less than one day
after the Relight, even while steam-storms churned the surface. Apparently, the
Off phase of the sun had interrupted some local war. Within a year or two, there
were dozens of transmission sites on two continents. Every two centuries these
creatures had to rebuild their surface structures almost from the foundations up,
but apparently they were very good at it. When gaps showed in the cloud cover,
the spacers caught sight of new roads, towns.
By the fourth year there were two thousand transmission points, the
classical fixed-station model. Now Trixia Bonsol and the other linguists went to
a heavier duty cycle. For the first time they had continuous audio to study.
When their Watches matched-and they often did now-Ezr visited Trixia
Bonsol every day. At first, Trixia was more remote than ever. She didn't seem to
hear him; the Spider talk flooded her workroom. The sounds were a squeaking
shrillness that changed from day to day as Trixia and the other Focused linguists
determined where in the acoustic spectrum the sense of Spider talk was hidden,
and devised convenient representations, both auditory and visual, for its study.
Eventually, Trixia had a usable data representation.
And then the translations really began. Reynolt's Focused translators
grabbed everything they could get, producing thousands of words of semi-
intelligible text per day. Trixia was the best. That was obvious from the
beginning. It was her work with the physics texts that had been the original
breakthrough, and it was she who melded that written language with the
language spoken in two-thirds of the radio broadcasts. Even compared to the
Qeng Ho linguists, Trixia Bonsol excelled; how proud she would be if only she
could know. "She's indispensable." Reynolt passed sentence with her typical flat
affect, free of both praise and sadism, a statement of fact. Trixia Bonsol would

get no early out, as Hunte Wen had.
Vinh tried to read everything the translators produced. At first it was typical
of raw field linguistics, where each sentence consisted of dozens of pointers to
alternative meanings, alternative parsings. After a few Msecs, the translations
were almost readable. There were living beings down there on Arachna, and
these were their words.
Some of the Focused linguists never got beyond the annotated-style
translations. They were caught in the lower levels of meaning and fought any
attempt to capture the spirit of the aliens. Maybe that was enough. For one thing,
they learned that the Spiders had no knowledge of any previous civilization:
"We're seeing no mention of a golden age of technology."
Nau looked at Reynolt skeptically. "That's suspicious in itself. Even on Old
Earth, there were at least myths of a lost past." And if ever there were an origin
world, it was Old Earth.
Reynolt shrugged. "I'm telling you that any mention of past technical
civilizations is below the plausible background level. For instance, as far as we
can tell, archeology is considered an insignificant academic pursuit"-not the
world-creating frenzy of the typical fallen colony.
"Well, Plague take it," said Ritser Brughel. "If there's nothing for these guys
to dig up, our payoff is just about crap."
Pity you didn't think of that before you came,thought Ezr.
Nau looked sour and surprised, but he disagreed with Brughel:
"We've still got Dr. Li's results." His glance flickered across the Qeng Ho at
the foot of the table, and Ezr was sure that something else passed through the
Emergent's mind:We've still got a Qeng Ho fleet library, andPeddlers to explore
it for us.
Trixia let Ezr touch her now, sometimes to comb her hair, sometimes just to
pat her shoulder. Maybe he had spent so much time in her workroom that she
thought of him as a piece of furniture, as safe as any other voice-activated
machine. Trixia normally worked with a head-up display now; sometimes that
gave the comforting illusion that she was actually looking at him. She would
even answer his questions, as long as they stayed within the scope of her Focus
and did not interrupt her conversations with her equipment and the other
translators.
Much of the time, Trixia sat in the semidarkness, listening and speaking her
translations at the same time. Several of the translators worked in that mode,
scarcely more than automatons. Trixia was different, Vinh liked to think: like the
others, she analyzed and reanalyzed, but not to insert a dozen extra
interpretations beneath every syntactic structure. Trixia's translations seemed to
f
f
f

reach for the meaning as it was in the minds of the speakers, in minds for which
the Spider world was a normal, familiar place. Trixia Bonsol's translations were.
. .art.
Art was not what Anne Reynolt was looking for. At first she had only little
things to complain about. The translators chose an alternative orthography for
their output; they represented thex * andq * glyphs with digraphs. It made their
translations look very quaint. Fortunately, Trixia wasn't the first to use the
bizarre scheme. Unfortunately, she originated far too much of the questionable
novelty.
One terrible day, Reynolt threatened to bar Ezr from Trixia's workroom-that
is, from Trixia's life.
"Whatever you're doing, Vinh, it's messing her up. She's giving me
figurative translations. Look at these names: 'Sherkaner Underhill,' 'Jaybert
Landers.' She's throwing away complications that all the translators agree on. In
other places she's making up nonsense syllables."
"She's doing just what she should be doing, Reynolt. You've been working
with automatons too long." One thing about Reynolt: Though she was crass even
by Emergent standards, she never seemed vindictive. She could even be argued
with. But if she barred him from seeing Trixia . . .
Reynolt stared at him for a moment. "You're no linguist."
"I'm Qeng Ho. To make our way, we've had to understand the heart of
thousands of human cultures, and a couple of nonhuman ones. You people have
mucked around this small end of Human Space, with languages based on our
broadcasts. There are languages that are enormously different."
"Yes. That's why her grotesque simplifications are not acceptable."
"No! You need people who truly understand the other side's minds, who can
show the rest of us what is important about the aliens' differences. So Trixia's
Spider names look silly. But this 'Accord' group is a young culture. Their names
are still mostly meaningful in their daily language."
"Not all of them, and not the given names. In fact, real Spider talk merges
given names and surnames, that interphonation trick."
"I'm telling you, what Trixia is doing is fine. I'll bet the given names are
from older and related languages. Notice how they almost make sense, some of
them."
"Yes, and that's the worst of all. Some of this looks like bits of Ladille or
Aminese. These Ladille units-'hours,' 'inches,' 'minutes'-they just make for
awkward reading."
Ezr had his own problems with the crazy Ladille units, but he wasn't going
to admit that to Reynolt. "I'm sure Trixia sees things that relate to her central
t
l ti
th
A i
d L dill
l t t th N
d I
k "

translation the way Aminese and Ladille relate to the Nese you and I speak."
Reynolt was silent for a long moment, vacantly staring. Sometimes that
meant that the discussion was over, and she had just not bothered to dismiss him.
Other times it meant that she was trying very hard to understand. "So you're
saying that she's achieving a higher level of translation, giving us insight by
trading on our own self-awareness."
It was a typical Reynolt analysis, awkward and precise. "Yes! That's it. You
still want the translations with all the pointers and exceptions and caveats, since
our understanding is still evolving. But the heart of good trading is having a gut
feel for the other side's needs and expectations."
Reynolt had bought the explanation. In any case, Nau liked the
simplifications, even the Ladille quaintness. As time passed, the other translators
adopted more and more of Trixia's conventions. Ezr doubted if any of the
unFocused Emergents were really competent to judge the translations. And
despite his own confident talk, Ezr wondered more and more: Trixia's meta-trans
of the Spiders was too much like the Dawn Age history he had pushed at her just
before the ambush. That might seem alien to Nau and Brughel and Reynolt, but
it was Ezr's specialty and he saw too many suspicious coincidences.
Trixia consistently ignored the physical nature of the Spiders. Maybe this
was just as well, considering the loathing that some humans felt for spiders. But
the creatureswere radically nonhuman in appearance, more alien in form and life
cycle than any intelligence yet encountered by Humankind. Some of their limbs
had the function of human jaws, and they had nothing exactly like hands and
fingers, instead using their large number of legs to manipulate objects. These
differences were all but invisible in Trixia's translations. There was an
occasional reference to "a pointed hand" (perhaps the stiletto shape that a foreleg
could fold into) or to midhands and forehands-but that was all. In school, Ezr
had seen translations that were this soft, but those had been done by experts with
decades of face-to-face experience with the Customer culture.
Children's radio programming-at least that's what Trixia thought it was-had
been invented on the Spider world. She translated the show's title as "The
Children's Hour of Science," and currently it was their best source of insight
about the Spiders. The radio show was an ideal combination of science
language-which the humans had made good progress on-and the colloquial
language of everyday culture. No one knew if it was really aimed at schooling
children or simply entertaining them. Conceivably, it was remedial education for
military conscripts. Yet Trixia's title caught on, and that colored everything that
followed with innocence and cuteness. Trixia's Arachna seemed like something
from a Dawn Age fairy tale. Sometimes when Ezr had spent a long day with her,
when she had not spoken a word to him when her Focus was so narrow that it

when she had not spoken a word to him, when her Focus was so narrow that it
denied all humanity. . .sometimes he wondered if these translations might be the
Trixia of old, trapped in the most effective slavery of all time, and still reaching
out for hope. The Spider world was the only place her Focus allowed her to gaze
upon. May be she was distorting what she heard, creating a dream of happiness
in the only way that was left to her.

NINETEEN
It was in the midphase of the sun, and Princeton had recovered much of its
beauty. In the cooler times ahead, there would be much more construction, the
open theaters, the Palace of the Waning Years, the University's arboreta. But by
60//19, the street plan of generations past was fully in place, the central business
section was complete, and the University held classes all the year round.
In other ways, the year 60//19 was different from 59//19, and very different
from the tenth year of all generations before that. The world had entered the Age
of Science. An airfield covered the river lowlands that had been farm paddies in
past eras. Radio masts grew from the city's highest hills; at night, their farred
marker lights could be seen for miles.
By 60//19 most of the Accord's cities were similarly changed, as were the
great cities of Tiefstadt and the Kindred, and to a lesser degree the cities of
poorer nations. But even by the standards of the new age, Princeton was a very
special place. There were things happening here that didn't show on the visible
landscape, yet were the seeds of greater revolution.
Hrunkner Unnerby flew in to Princeton one rainy spring morning. An
airport taxi drove him from the riverfront up through the center of town.
Unnerby had grown up in Princeton and his old construction company had been
here. He arrived before most shops' opening time; street cleaners scuttled this
way and that around his taxi. A cool drizzle left the shops and the trees with
glints of a thousand colors. Hrunkner liked the old downtown, where many of
the stone foundations had survived more than three or four generations. Even the
new concrete and the brick upper stories followed designs from before the time
of any living person.
Out of the downtown, they climbed through new housing. This was a
former Royal property that the government had sold to finance the Great War-
the conflict the new generation was already calling simply the War with the
Tiefers. Some parts of the new district were instant slums; others-the higher
viewpoints-were elegant estates. The taxi trundled back and forth along the
switchbacks, rising slowly toward the highest spot in the new tract. The top was
obscured by dripping ferns, but here and there he glimpsed outbuildings. Gates
opened silently and without apparent attendants. Hunh. There was a bloody
palace up ahead.
Sherkaner Underhill stood by the parking circle at the end, looking quite
out of place beside the grand entrance. The rain was just a comfortable mist, but

Underhill popped open an umbrella as he walked out to greet Unnerby.
"Welcome, Sergeant! Welcome! All the years I've been after you to visit
my little hillhouse, and finally you're here."
Hrunkner shrugged.
"I have so much to show you. . .starting with two small but important
items." He tipped back the umbrella. After a moment, two tiny heads peeked up
from the fur on his back. The two were babies, holding tight to their father. They
could be no older than normal children in the early Bright, just old enough to be
cute. "The little girl is Rhapsa and the boy is Hrunkner."
Unnerby stepped forward, trying to seem casual.They probably namedthe
child Hrunkner out of
friendship. God in deepest earth. "Very pleased to meet you." In the best of
times, Unnerby had no way with children-training new hires was the closest he'd
ever come to raising them. Hopefully, that would excuse his unease.
The babies seemed to sense his distaste, and retreated shyly from sight. "
Never mind," said Sherkaner, in that oblivious way of his. "They'll come
out and play once we're indoors."
Sherkaner led him inside, talking all the way about how much he had to
show him, how good it was that Hrunkner was finally visiting. The years had
changed Underhill, physically at least. Gone was the painful leanness; he had
been through several molts. The fur on his back was deep and paternal, strange
to see on anyone in this phase of the sun. The tremor in his head and forebody
was a little worse than Unnerby remembered.
They walked through a foyer big enough for a hotel, and down a wide spiral
of steps that looked out upon wing after wing of Sherkaner's "little hillhouse."
There were plenty of other people here, servants perhaps, though they didn't
wear the livery that the super-rich usually demanded. In fact, the place had the
utilitarian feel of corporate or government property. Unnerby interrupted the
other's nonstop chatter with, "This is all a front, isn't it, Underhill? The King
never sold this hill at all, just transferred it." To the Intelligence Service.
"No, really. I do own the ground; I bought it myself. But, um, I do a lot of
consulting, and Victory-I mean Accord Intelligence-decided that security was
best served by setting up the labs right here. I have some things to show you."
"Yeah. Well, that's the point of my visit, Sherk. I don't think you're working
on the right things. You've pushed the Crown into going all out for-I assume we
can talk freely here?"
"Yes, yes, of course."
Ordinarily, Unnerby wouldn't have accepted such a casual assertion, but he
was beginning to realize how thoroughly secure the building was. There was
f
f
f

plenty of Sherkaner design, the logarithmic spiral of the main rooms for
instance, but there was also Victory's touch, the-guards, he now realized-lurking
everywhere, the crisply clean nature of the carpets and walls. This place was
probably as safe as Unnerby's labs inside Lands Command. "Okay. You've
pushed the Crown into going all out for atomic power. I'm managing more men
and equipment than a billionaire, including several people almost as smart as
you are." In fact, though Hrunkner Unnerby was still a sergeant, his job was
about as far from that rank as one could get. His life these days was beyond his
wildest contractor's dream.
"Good, good. Victory has a lot of faith in you, you know." He led his guest
into a large and peculiar room. There were bookcases and a desk, all
overflowing with reports, randomly piled books, and notepaper. But the
bookcases were fastened to a cobblie jungle gym, and children's books were
mixed with the arcana. His two babies hopped from his back and scuttled up the
gym. Now they peered down upon them from the ceiling. Sherkaner pushed
books and magazines off a lower perch and waved for Unnerby to seat himself.
Thank God he didn't try to change the subject.
"Yeah, but you haven't seen my reports."
"Yes, I have. Victory sends them to me, though I haven't had time to read
them."
"Well, maybe you should!"Deep Secret reports are sent to him and
hedoesn't have time to read
them-and he's the cobber who started it all. "Look, Sherkaner, I'm telling
you it's not working out. In principle, atomic power can do everything we need.
In practice-well, we've made some really deadly poisons. There are things like
radium but a lot easier to produce in bulk. We've also got one isotope of uranium
that's very hard to isolate, but I think if we do, we can make a hell of a bomb: we
can give you the energy to keep a city warm through the Dark, but all in less
than a second!"
"Excellent! That's a start."
"That excellent start may be as far as it gets. I've had three labs taken over
by the bomb cobbers. Trouble is, this is peacetime; this technology is going to
leak out, first to mining interests, then to foreign states. Can you imagine what
will happen once the Kindred and the Old Tiefers and God knows who else starts
making these things?"
That seemed to penetrate Underhill's durable armor of inattention. ". . .Yes,
that will be very bad. I haven't read your reports, but Victory is up here often.
Technology gives us wonders and terrible dangers. We can't have one without
the other. But I'm convinced we won't survive unless we play with these things.
Y
'
i
j
t
t f it ll L
k I k
Vi t
t

You're seeing just one part of it all. Look, I know Victory can get you more
money. Accord Intelligence has a good credit rating. They can go beyond the
tithe for a decade without having to show a profit. We'll get you more labs,
whatever you want-"
"Sherkaner, have you heard of 'forcing the learning curve'?" "Well, uh-"
Clearly he had.
"Right now, if I had all the wealth in the world, I could give you a city
heating unit, maybe. It would suffer catastrophic failure every few years, and
even when it was working 'properly,' its transfer fluid-superheated steam, say-
would be so radioactive that your city's residents would all be dead before the
Dark was even ten years old. Beyond a certain point, throwing more money and
technicians at a problem just doesn't help."
Sherkaner didn't answer immediately. Unnerby had the feeling that his
attention was roaming around the top of the jungle gym, watching his two
babies. This room was a truly bizarre combination of wealth, the old Underhill
intellectual chaos, and the new Underhill paternity. Where the floor wasn't piled
with books and knickknacks, he could see plush carpet. The wall covering was
one of those superexpensive delusional patterns. The windows were quartz-
paned, extending all the way to the high ceiling. They were cranked open now.
The smell of ferns in the cool morning floated in past wrought-iron trellises.
There were electric lamps by Underhill's desks and by the legholds of the
bookcases, but they were all turned off now.
The only light was the green and near-red that filtered through the ferns.
That was more than enough to read the titles on the nearest books. There were
psychology, math, electronics, an occasional astronomy text-and lots of
children's storybooks. The books were stacked in low piles, filling most of the
space between toys and equipment. And it wasn't always clear which were
Underhill's toys and which were the children's. Some of the stuff looked like
travel souvenirs, perhaps from Victory's military postings: a Tiefer leg polisher,
dried flowers that might have been an Islander garland. And over in the corner. .
.it looked like a Mark 7 artillery rocket, for God's sake. The warhead hatch had
been removed, and there was a dollhouse installed in place of the customary high
explosives.
Finally Underhill said, "You're right, money alone won't make progress. It
takes time to make the machines that make the machines, and so on. But we still
have another twenty-five years or so, and the General tells me you are a genius
at managing something this large."
Hrunkner felt an old pride in hearing that, more pride than for all the
medals he had collected in the Great War; but if it hadn't been for Smith and
Underhill he never would have discovered he had such talents He replied

Underhill, he never would have discovered he had such talents. He replied
grumpily, careful not to give away how much such praise meant to him: "Thank
you so much. But what I'm telling you is that none of that is enough. If you want
this done in less than twenty years, I need something more."
"Yes, what?"
"You, damn it! Your insight! Since the first year of the project, you've been
hidden away up here in Princeton, doing God knows what."
"Oh.. . .Look Hrunkner, I'm sorry. The atomic power stuff just isn't very
interesting to me anymore."
Knowing Underhill for all these years, Unnerby should not have been
surprised by the comment.
Nevertheless, it made him want to chew on his hands. Here was a fellow
who abandoned fields of endeavor before others even knew they existed. If he
were simply a crank, there'd be no problem. As it was, sometimes Unnerby
would have cheerfully killed the cobber.
"Yes," continued Underhill, "you need more bright people. I'm working on
that, you know; I have some things I want to show you. But even so," he said,
obliviously pouring fuel on the fire, "my intuition is that atomic power will turn
out to be relatively easy, compared to the other challenges."
"Such. As. What?"
Sherkaner laughed. "Such as raising children, for example." He pointed at
the antique pendulum clock on the side wall. "I thought the other cobblies would
be here by now; maybe I should show you the institute first." He got off his
perch, began waving in that silly way parents do to small children. "Come down,
come down. Rhapsa, stay off the clock!" Too late: the baby had scuttled off the
gym, made a flying leap onto the pendulum, and slid all the way to the floor.
"I've got so much junk here, I'm afraid something will fall on the babies and
squash them." The two ran across the floor, hopped into their appointed places in
their father's fur. They were scarcely bigger than woodsfairies.
Underhill had gotten his institute declared a division of Kingschool. The
hillhouse contained a number of classrooms, each occupying an arc of the
outside perimeter. And it wasn't Crown funds that paid for most of it, at least
according to Underhill. Much of the research was simply proprietary, paid for by
companies that had been very impressed by Underhill. "I could have hired away
some of Kingschool's best, but we made a deal. Their people continue to teach
and do research downtown, but they get time up here, with a percentage of our
overhead getting fed back to Kingschool. And up here, what counts is results."
"No classes?"
When Sherkaner shrugged, the two little ones bobbed up and down on his

back and made excited littlemeeping, sounds that probably meant, "Do it again,
Daddy!"
"Yes, we have classes. . .sort of. The main thing is, people get to talk to
other people, across many specialties. Students take a risk because things are so
unstructured. I've got a few who are having a good time, but who aren't bright
enough for this to work for them."
Most of the classrooms had two or three persons at the blackboards, and a
crowd watching from low perches. It was hard to tell who was the prof and who
the student. In some cases, Hrunkner couldn't even guess the field being
discussed. They stopped for a moment by one door. A current-generation cobblie
was lecturing a bunch of old cobbers. The blackboard scratching looked like a
combination of celestial mechanics and electromagnetics. Sherkaner stopped,
waved a smile at the people in the room. "You remember the aurora we saw in
Dark? I have a fellow here who thinks that maybe it was caused by objects in
space, things that are exceptionally dark."
"They weren't dark when we saw them."
"Yes! Maybe they actually have something to do with the start of the New
Sun. I have my doubts. Jaybert doesn't know much celestial mechanics yet.
Hedoes know E&M. He's working on a wireless device that can radiate at
wavelengths of just a few inches."
"Huh? That sounds more like super far-red than radio."
"It's not something we could ever see, but it's going to be neat. He wants to
use it as an echo finder for his space rocks."
They walked farther down the hall. He noticed that Underhill was suddenly
silent, no doubt to give him time to think on the idea. Hrunkner Unnerby was a
very practical fellow; he suspected that was the reason he was essential to some
of General Smith's wilder projects. But even he could be brought up short by an
idea that was spectacular enough. He had only the vaguest notion how such short
wavelengths would behave, though they should be highly directional. The power
needed for echo detection would vary as the inverse fourth power of the range-
they'd have effective ground uses for it before they ever had enough juice to go
looking for rocks in outer space. Hmm. The military angle could be more
important than anything this Jaybert was planning.. . ."Has anyonebuilt this high-
frequency transmitter?"
His interest must have shown; Underhill was smiling more and more. "Yes,
and that's Jaybert's real work of genius, something he calls a cavity oscillator.
I've got a little antenna on the roof; it looks more like a telescope mirror than a
radio mast. Victory installed a row of relays down the Westermost Range to
Lands Command. I can talk to her as reliably as over the telephone cable. I'm

using it as a test bed for one class's crypto schemes. We'll end up with the most
secure, high-volume wireless you can imagine."
Even if Jaybert's stargazing never works out.Sherkaner Underhill was as
crazy as ever, and Unnerby was beginning to see what he was getting at, why he
refused to drop everything and work on atomic power. "You really think this
school is going to produce the geniuses we need at Lands Command?"
"It's going to find them, anyway-and I think we're bringing out the best in
what we find. I've never had more fun in my life. But you have to be flexible,
Hrunk. The essence of real creativity is a certain playfulness, a flitting from idea
to idea without getting bogged down by fixated demands. Of course, you don't
always get what you thought you were asking for. From this era on, I think
invention will be the parent of necessity-and not the other way around."
That was easy for Sherkaner Underhill to say. He didn't have to engineer
the science into reality.
Underhill had stopped at an empty classroom; he peeked in at the
blackboards. More gobbledegook. "You remember the cam-and-gear devices
that Lands Command used in the War, to figure ballistic tables? We're making
things like that with vacuum tubes and magnet cores. They're a million times
faster than the cam gadgets, and we can input the numbers as symbol strings
instead of vernier settings. Your physicists will love it." He chuckled. "You'll
see, Hrunk. Except for the fact that the inventions are firstpatented by our
sponsors, you and Victory will have more than enough to keep you happy. . . ."
They continued up the long spiral stair. It opened finally onto an atrium
near the top of the hill. There were higher hills around Princeton, but the view
from here was spectacular enough, even in a cool drizzle. Unnerby could see a
trimotor coming in at the airport. Tracts of late-phase development on the other
side of the valley were the colors of wet granite and just-laid asphalt. Unnerby
knew the company on that job. They had faith in the rumors that there would be
power available to live long into the next Dark. What would Princeton be like if
that were so? A city under the stars and hard vacuum, yet not asleep, and its
deepnesses empty. The biggest risks would be late in the Waning Years, when
people must decide whether to stock up for a conventional Dark, or gamble on
what Hrunkner Unnerby's engineers thought they could do. His nightmares were
not of failure, but of partial success.
"Daddy, Daddy!" Two five-year-olds careered into sight behind them. They
were followed by two more cobblies, but these looked almost big enough to be
in-phase. For more than ten years, Hrunkner Unnerby had done his best to
overlook his boss's perversions: General Victory Smith was the best Intelligence
chief he could imagine, probably even better than Strut Greenval. It shouldn't

matter what her personal habits were. It had certainly never bothered him that
she was born out-of-phase herself; that was something a person had no control
over. But that she would start a family at the beginning of a New Sun, that she
would damn her own children as she had been damned. . .And they aren't even
all the same age.The two babies had hopped off Underhill's back. They scuttled
across the grass and up the legs of their two oldest siblings. It was almost as if
Smith and Underhill had deliberately set out to smear offal in the eyes of
society's regard. This visit, so long avoided, was turning out to be just as bad as
he'd feared.
The two oldest, both boys, hoisted the babies up, pretended for a moment to
carry them like real fathers. They had no back fur, of course, and the babies
slipped and slid down their carapaces. They grabbed hold of their brothers'
jackets and scrambled back up, their baby laughter loud.
Underhill introduced the four to the sergeant. They all trooped across the
soggy grass to the protection of an awning. This was the biggest play area that
Unnerby had ever seen outside a schoolyard, but it was also very strange. A
proper school went through discrete grades, targeting the current age of the
pupils. The equipment in Underhill's play garden spanned a number of years.
There were vertical gymnets, such as only a two-year-old could easily use. There
were sandboxes, several huge dollhouses, and low play tables with picture books
and games.
"Junior is the reason we didn't meet you and Mr. Unnerby downstairs,
Dad." The twelve-year-old flicked a pointed hand in the direction of one of the
five-year-olds-Victory Junior? "She wanted you up here, so we could show Mr.
Unnerby all our toys."
Five-year-olds are not very good at hiding their feelings. Victory Junior still
had her baby eyes. Even though baby eyes could turn a few degrees, there were
only two of them; she had to face almost directly toward whatever she wanted to
observe. In a way that could never be true of an adult, it was easy to see where
Junior's attention was. Her two big eyes looked first at Underhill and Unnerby,
then glanced toward her older brother. "Snitch!" she hissed at him. "You wanted
them up here, too." She flicked her eating hands at him, and sidled close to
Underhill. "I'm sorry, Daddy. I wanted to show my dollhouse, and Brent and
Gokna still had their lessons to finish."
Underhill lifted his forearms to enclose her in a hug. "Well, we were going
to come up here anyway." And to Unnerby: "I'm afraid the General has made
rather a big thing of you, Hrunkner."
"Yeah, you're an Engineer!" said the other five-year-old-Gokna?
Whatever Junior's desires, Brent and Jirlib got to show off first. Their actual

educational state was hard to estimate. The two had some kind of study
curriculum, but were otherwise allowed to look into whatever they wished.
Jirlib-the boy who had tattled on Junior-collected things. He seemed more
deeply into fossils than any child Unnerby had ever seen. Jirlib had books from
the Kingschool library that would have challenged adult students. He had a
collection of diamond foraminiafera from trips with his parents down to Lands
Command. And almost as much as his father, he was full of crazy theories.
"We're not the first, you know. A hundred million years ago, just under the
diamond strata, there are the Distorts of Khelm. Most scientists think they were
dumb animals, but they weren't. They had a magic civilization, and I'm going to
figure out how it worked." Actually, that was not new craziness, but Unnerby
was a little surprised that Sherkaner let his children read Khelm's crank
paleontology.
Brent, the other twelve-year-old, was more like the stereotype of an out-of-
phase child: withdrawn, a little bit sullen, perhaps retarded. He didn't seem to
know what to do with his hands and feet, and though he had plenty of eyes, he
favored his foreview as though he were still much younger. Brent didn't seem to
have any special interests except for what he called "Daddy's tests." He had bags
of buildertoys, shiny metal dowels and connector hubs. Three or four of the
tables were covered by elaborate dowel and connector structures. By clever
variation of the number of dowels per hub, someone had constructed various
curved surfaces for the child. "I've thought a lot about Daddy's tests. I'm getting
better and better." He began fiddling with a large torus, breaking up the carefully
built framework.
"Tests?" Unnerby waved a glare at Sherkaner. "What are you doing with
these children?"
Underhill didn't seem to hear the anger in his voice. "Aren't children
wonderful-I mean, when they aren't a pain in the ass. Watching a baby grow up,
you can see the mechanisms of thought grow into place, stage by stage." He
slipped a hand gently across his back, petting the two babies, who had returned
to safe haven. "In some ways, these two are less intelligent than a jungle tarant.
There are patterns of thought that just don't exist in babies. When I play with
them, I can almost feel the barriers. But as the years pass, the minds grow;
methods are added." Underhill walked along the play tables as he spoke. One of
the five-year-olds-Gokna-danced half a pace in front of him, mimicking his
gestures, even to the tremor. He stopped at a table covered with beautiful blown-
glass bottles, a dozen shapes and tints. Several were filled with fruitwater and
ice, as if for some bizarre lawn party. "But even the five-year-olds have mental
blinders. They have good language skills, but they're still missing basic
"

concepts-"
"And it's not just that we don't understand sex!" said Gokna.
For once, Underhill looked a little embarrassed. "She's heard this speech too
many times, I fear. And by now her brothers have told her what to say when we
play question games."
Gokna pulled on his leg. "Sit down and play. I want to show Mr. Unnerby
what we do."
"Okay. We can do that-where is your sister?" His voice was suddenly sharp
and loud. "Viki! You get down from there! It's not safe for you."
Victory Junior was on the babies' gymnet, scuttling back and forth just
below the awning. "Oh, it is safe, Daddy. Now that you're here!"
"No it's not! You come down right now."
Junior's descent was accompanied by much loud grumbling, but within a
few minutes she was showing off in another way.
One by one, they showed him all their projects. The two oldest had parts in
a national radio program, explaining science for young people. Apparently
Sherkaner was producing the show, for reasons that remained murky.
Hrunkner put up with it all, smiling and laughing and pretending. And each
one was a wonderful child.
With the exception of Brent, each was brighter and more open than almost
any Unnerby remembered. All that made it even worse when he imagined what
life would be like for them once they had to face the outside world.
Victory Junior had a dollhouse, a huge thing that extended back a little way
into the ferns. When her turn came, she hooked two hands under one of
Hrunkner's forearms and almost dragged him over to the open face of her house.
"See," she said, pointing to a hole in the toy basement. It looked
suspiciously like the entrance to a termite nest. "My house even has its own
deepness. And a pantry, and a dining hall, and seven bedrooms . . ." Each room
had to be displayed to her guest, and all the furniture explained. She opened a
bedroom wall, and there was a flurry of activity within. "And I even have little
people to live in my house. See the attercops." In fact, the scale of Viki's house
was almost perfect for the little creatures, at least in this phase of the sun.
Eventually, their middle legs would become colored wings. They would be
woodsfairies, and they wouldn't fit at all. But for the moment, they did look like
little people, scurrying to and fro between the inner rooms.
"They like me a lot. They can go back to the trees whenever they want, but
I put little pieces of food in the rooms and they come every day to visit." She
pulled at little brass handles and a part of one floor came out like a drawer from
a cabinet. Inside was an intricate maze built of flimsy wood partitions. "I even
experiment with them like Daddy plays with us except a lot simpler " Her baby

experiment with them, like Daddy plays with us, except a lot simpler." Her baby
eyes were both looking down so she couldn't see Unnerby's reaction. "I put
honeydrip near this exit, then let them in at the other end. Then I time how long
it takes.. . .Oh, you are lost, aren't you, little one? You've been here two hours
now. I'm sorry." She reached an eating hand undaintily into the box and gently
moved the attercop to a ledge by the ferns. "Heh, heh," a very Sherkanish
chuckle, "some of them are a lot dumber than others-or maybe it's luck. Now,
how do I count her time, when she never got through the maze at all?"
"I. . .don't know."
She turned to face him, her beautiful eyes looking up at him. "Mommy says
my little brother is named after you. Hrunkner?"
"Yes. I guess that's right."
"Mommy says that you are the best engineer in the world. She says you can
make even Daddy's crazy ideas come true. Mommy wants you to like us."
There was something about a child's gaze. It was sodirected. There was no
way the target could pretend that he wasn't the one regarded. All the
embarrassment and pain of the visit seemed to come together in that one
moment. "I like you," he said.
Victory Junior look at him for a moment more, and then her gaze slid away.
"Okay."
They had lunch with the cobblies up in the atrium. The cloud cover was
burning off, and things were getting hot, at least for a Princeton spring day in the
nineteenth year. Even under the awning it was warm enough to start sweat from
every joint. The children didn't seem to mind. They were still taken by the
stranger who had given their baby brother his name. Except for Viki, they were
as raucous as ever, and Unnerby did his best to respond.
As they were finishing, the children's tutors showed up. They looked like
students from the institute. The children would never have to go to a real school.
Would that make it any easier for them in the end?
The children wanted Unnerby to stay for their lessons, but Sherkaner would
have none of it. "Concentrate on studying," he said.
And so-hopefully-the hardest part of the visit was past. Except for the
babies, Underhill and Unnerby were alone back in his study in the cool ground
floor of the institute. They talked for a while about
Unnerby's specific needs. Even if Sherkaner was unwilling to help directly,
he really did have some bright cobbers up here. "I'd like you to talk to some of
my theory people. And I want you to see our computing-machinery experts. It
seems to me that some of your grunt problems would be solved if you just had
fast methods for solving differential equations."
Underhill stretched out on the perch behind his desk His aspect was

Underhill stretched out on the perch behind his desk. His aspect was
suddenly quizzical. "Hrunk. .
.socializing aside, we accomplished more today than a dozen phone calls
could have done. I know the institute is a place you'd love. Not that you'd fit in!
We have plenty of technicians, but our theory people think they can boss them
around. You're in a different class. You're the type that can boss the thinkers
around and use what ideas they have to reach your engineering goals."
Hrunkner smiled weakly. "I thought invention was to be the parent of
necessity?"
"Hmf. It mainly is. That's why we need people like you, who can bend the
pieces together. You'll see what I mean this afternoon. These are people you'd
love to take advantage of, and vice versa.. . .I just wish you had come up a lot
earlier."
Unnerby started to make some weak excuse, stopped. He just couldn't
pretend anymore. Besides,
Sherkaner was so much easier to face than the General. "You know why I
didn't come before, Sherk. In fact, I wouldn't be here now if General Smith
hadn't given me explicit orders. I'd follow her through Hell, you know that. But
she wants more. She wants acceptance of your perversions. I-You two have such
beautiful children, Sherk. How could you do such a thing to them?"
He expected the other to laugh the question off, or perhaps to react with the
icy hostility that Smith showed at any hint of such criticism. Instead, Underhill
sat silently for a moment, playing with an antique children's puzzle. The little
wood pieces clicked back and forth in the quiet of the study. "You agree the
children are healthy and happy?"
"Yes, though Brent seems. . .slow."
"You don't think I regard them as experimental animals?"
Unnerby thought back to Victory Junior and her dollhouse maze. Why
when he was her age, he used to fry attercops with a magnifying glass. "Um, you
experiment with everything, Sherk; that's just the way you are. I think you love
your children as much as any good father. And that's why it's all the harder for
me to imagine how you could bring them into the world out of phase. So what if
only one was mentally damaged? I notice they didn't talk of having any
contemporary playmates. You can't find any who aren't monstrous, can you?"
From Sherkaner's aspect, he could tell his question had a struck home.
"Sherk. Your poor children will live their whole lives in a society that sees them
as a crime against nature."
"We're working on these things, Hrunkner. Jirlib told you about 'The
Children's Hour of Science,' didn't he?"
"I wondered what that was all about So he and Brent are really on a radio

I wondered what that was all about. So he and Brent are really on a radio
show? Those two could almost pass for in-phase, but in the long run somebody
will guess and-"
"Of course. If not, Victory Junior is eager to be on the show. Eventually,
Iwant the audience to understand. The program is going to cover all sorts of
science topics, but there will be a continuing thread about biology and evolution
and how the Dark has caused us to live our lives in certain ways. With the rise of
technology, whatever social reason there is for rigid birthing times is irrelevant."
"You'll never convince the Church of the Dark."
"That's okay. I'm hoping to convince the millions of open-minded people
like Hrunkner Unnerby."
Unnerby couldn't think what to say. The other's argument was all so glib.
Didn't Underhill understand? All decent societies agreed on basic issues, things
that meant the healthy survival of their people. Things might be changing, but it
was self-serving nonsense to throw the rules overboard. Even if they lived in the
Dark, there would still be a need for decent cycles of life.. . .The silence
stretched out. There was just the clicking of Sherk's little puzzle blocks.
Finally, Sherkaner spoke. "The General likes you very much, Hrunk. You
were her dearest cobber-in- arms-but more, you were decent to her when she was
a new lieutenant and it looked like her career would end on the trash pile."
"She's the best. She couldn't help when she was born."
". . .Granted. But that's also why she's been making your life so hard lately.
She thought that you, of all people, would accept what she and I are doing."
"I know, Sherk, but Ican't. You saw me today. I did my best, but your
cobblies saw through me. Junior did anyway."
"Heh, heh. She did indeed. It's not just her name; Little Victory is smart like
her mother. But-as you say-she's going to have to face much worse.. . .Look,
Hrunk. I'm going to have a little chat with the
General. She should accept what she can get, learn a little tolerance-even if
it is tolerance for your intolerance."
"I-that would help, Sherk. Thanks."
"In the meantime, we'll need you up here more often. But you can come on
your own terms. The children would like to see you, but at whatever distance
you prefer."
"Okay. I do like them. I'm just afraid I can't be what they want."
"Ha. Then finding the right distance will be their little experiment." He
smiled. "They can be pretty flexible if they look at you that way."

TWENTY
In Pre-Flight, Pham Trinli had been a distant curiosity to Ezr Vinh. What
little he had seen of the guy seemed sullen, lazy, and probably incompetent. He
was "somebody's relative"; it was the only explanation for how he had made the
crew. It was only since the ambush that Trinli's boorish, loudmouth behavior had
made its impact on Ezr. Occasionally he was amusing; much more often he was
loathsome. Trinli's Watch time overlapped Ezr's by sixty percent. When he went
over to Hammerfest, there was Pham Trinli trading dirty stories with Reynolt's
techs. When he visited Benny's booze parlor, there was Trinli with a gang of
Emergents, loud and pompous as ever. It had been years-really since Jimmy
Diem died-since anyone would think his behavior traitorous. Qeng Ho and
Emergents had to get along, and there were plenty of Traders in Trinli's circle.
Today Ezr's loathing for the man had changed to something darker. It was
the once-per-Msec Watchmanager meeting, chaired as always by Tomas Nau.
This was not the empty propaganda of Ezr's fake
"Fleet Management Committee." The expertise of both sides was needed if
they were to survive here.
And though there was never a question of who was boss, Nau actually
heeded much of the advice given at these meetings. Ritser Brughel was currently
off-Watch, so this meeting would proceed without pathological overtones. With
the exception of Pham Trinli, the managers were people who really could make
things work.
All had gone smoothly through the first Ksec. Kal Omo's programmers had
sanitized a batch of head-up displays for Qeng Ho use. The new interface was
limited, but better than nothing. Anne Reynolt had a new Focused roster. The
full schedule was still a secret, but it looked like Trixia might get more time off.
Gonle Fong proposed some Watch changes. Ezr knew were these were secret
payoffs for various deals she had on the side, but Nau blandly accepted them.
The underground economy she and Benny had masterminded was surely known
to Tomas Nau. . .but the years had passed and he had consistently ignored it.And
he has consistently benefitedby it. Ezr Vinh would never have thought that free
trading could add much efficiency in such a small and closed society as this little
camp at L1, but it clearly had improved life. Most people had their favored
Watch companions. Many had Qiwi Lisolet's little bonsai bubbles in their rooms.
Equipment allocation was about as slick as it could be. Maybe it just showed
how screwed up the original Emergent allocation system had been. Ezr still

clung to the secret belief that Tomas Nau was the deepest villain he had ever
known, a mass murderer, who murdered simply to advance a lie. But he was so
clever, so outwardly conciliatory. Tomas Nau was more than smart enough to
allow this underground trade that helped him to proceed.
"Very well, last item." He smiled down the length of the table. "As usual,
the most interesting and difficult item. Qiwi?"
Qiwi Lisolet rose smoothly, stopped herself with a hand on the low ceiling.
Gravity existed on
Hammerfest, but it was barely good enough to keep the drinking bulbs on
the table. "Interesting? I guess." She made a face. "But it's also a very irritating
problem." Qiwi opened a deep pocket and pulled out a bundle of head-up
displays-all tagged with "cleared-for-Peddler-use" seals. "Let's try out Kal Omo's
toys." She passed them out to the various Watch managers. Ezr took one, smiled
back at her shy grin. Qiwi was still child-short, but she was as compact and
nearly as tall as an average Strentmannian adult. She was no longer a little girl,
or even the devastated orphan of the Relighting. Qiwi had lived Watch-on-
Watch in the years after the Relight; she had aged a full year for every year that
passed. Since OnOff's light had faded to a more manageable level, she'd had
some time off-Watch, but Ezr could see tiny creases beginning at the corners of
her eyes.She's what now? Older than I am. The old playfulness sometimes
showed even still, but she never teased Ezr anymore. And he knew the stories
about Qiwi and Tomas Nau were true. Poor, damned Qiwi.
But Qiwi Lin Lisolet had become something more than Ezr ever expected.
Now Qiwi balanced mountains.
She waited until they all were wearing their huds. Then: "You know I
manage our halo-orbit around L1." Above the middle of the table, the rockpile
suddenly materialized. A tiny Hammerfest stuck out of the jumble on Ezr's side;
a taxi was just mooring on the high tower. The image was crisp, cutting precisely
across the wall and people behind it. But when he turned his head quickly from
the rockpile to Qiwi and back, the pile blurred slightly. The placement
automation couldn't quite keep up with the motion, and the visual fraud failed.
No doubt, Kal Omo's programmers had been forced to replace some of the
optimizations. Still, what was left was close to Qeng Ho quality, the images
separately coordinated in the field of each head-up display.
Dozens of tiny red lights appeared across the surface of the rockpile.
"Those are the electric-jet emplacements"-and then even more yellow spots of
light-"and that is the sensor grid." She laughed, as light and playful as he
remembered. "Altogether it looks like a finite element solution grid, doesn't it?
But then, that's just what it is, though the grid points are real machines collecting

data. Anyway, my people and I have two problems. Either one of them is fairly
easy: We need to keep the jumble in orbit around L1." The jumble shrank to a
stylized symbol, tracing an everchanging Lissajous figure around the glyphL1.
On one side hung Arachna; far away but on the same line was the OnOff star.
"We have it set so we're always near the sun's limb as seen by the Spiders. It will
be many years before they have the technology to detect us here.. . .But the other
goal of the stabilization is to keep Hammerfest and the remaining blocks of
ocean ice and airsnow all in the shadow." Back to the original view of the
jumble, but now the volatiles were marked in blue and green. Every year that
precious resource shrank, consumed by the humans and by evaporation into
space. "Unfortunately these two goals are somewhat inconsistent. The rubble
pile isloose. Sometimes our L1 stationkeeping causes torques and the rocks
slide."
"The rubble quakes," said Jau Xin.
"Yes. Down here at Hammerfest, you feel them all the time. Without
constant supervision, the problem would be worse." The surface of the meeting
table became a model of the juncture of Diamonds One and Two. Qiwi motioned
across the blocks and a forty-centimeter swath of surface turned pink. "That's a
shift that almost got away from us. But we can't afford the human resources to-"
Pham Trinli had sat through all this in silence, his eyes squinted down in a
look of angry concentration. As Nau's original choice to manage the
stabilization, Trinli had a long history of humiliation on this subject. Finally he
exploded. "Crap. I thought you were going to spend some of the water, melt it
into a glue you could inject between the Diamonds."
"We did that. It helps some, but-"
"But you still can't keep things settled, can you?" Trinli turned to Nau, and
half rose from his chair.
"Podmaster, I've told you before that I'm best for the job. The Lisolet girl
knows how to run a dynamics program, and she works as hard as anyone-but she
doesn't have any depth of experience."Depth of experience? How many years of
hands-on does she need, old man?
But Nau just smiled at Trinli. No matter how absurd the idiot's contentions,
Nau always invited him back. For a long time, Ezr had suspected it was some
sadistic humor on the Podmaster's part.
"Well, then perhaps I should give you the job, Armsman. But consider,
even now it would mean at least one-third time on-Watch." Nau's tone was
courteous, but Trinli caught the dare in it. Ezr could just see the anger growing
in the old man.
"One-third?" said Trinli. "I could do it on a one-fifth Watch, even if the

other crewmembers were novices. No matter how cleverly the jets are emplaced,
success comes down to the quality of the guidance network. Miss Lisolet doesn't
understand all the features of the localizer devices she is using."
"Explain," said Anne Reynolt. "A localizer is a localizer. We've been using
both ours and yours in this project." Localizers were a basic tool of any technical
civilization. The tiny devices chirped their impulse codes at one another, using
time of flight and distributed algorithms to accurately locate each participating
device. Several thousand of them formed the positioning grid on the rubble pile.
Together they were a kind of low-level network, providing information on the
orientation, position, and relative velocity of the electric jets and the rubble.
"Not so." Trinli smiled patronizingly. "Ours work with yours well enough,
but at the price of degrading their natural performance. Here's what the units
look like." The old man fiddled with his hand pad. "Miss Lisolet, these interfaces
are worthless."
"Allow me," said Nau. He spoke into the air, "here are the two types of
localizers we're using."
The landscape vanished, and two pieces of vacuum-rated electronics
appeared on the table. No matter how often Ezr saw this sort of demonstration, it
was hard to get used to. In a practiced presentation, with a predetermined display
sequence, it was easy to use voice recognition to guide things. What Nau had
just done was subtly beyond any Qeng Ho interface. Somewhere up in
Hammerfest's attic, one or more of his ziphead slaves was listening to every
word spoken here, giving context to Nau's words and mapping them through to
the fleet's automation or other ziphead specialists. And here were the resulting
images, as quick as if Nau's own mind contained the fleet's entire database.
Of course, Pham Trinli was oblivious to the magic. "Right." He leaned
closer to the equipment. "Except that these are really more than the localizers
themselves."
Qiwi: "I don't understand. We need a power supply, the sensor probes."
Trinli grinned at her, triumph dripping in his smile. "That's what you think-
and perhaps it was true in the early years when ol' OnOff was frying everything.
But now-" He reached closer and his finger disappeared into the side of the
smaller package. "Can you show the localizer core, Podmaster?"
Nau nodded. "Right." And the image of the Qeng Ho package was cut
away, component layer by component layer. In the end, all that was left was a
tiny blackened fleck, not more than a millimeter across.
Sitting next to him, Ezr caught an instant of tension in Tomas Nau. The
other was suddenly, intensely interested. The moment passed before Ezr was
even sure it existed. "My, that is small. Let's take a closer look."
Th d
i
ll d
il i
d l
f

The dustmote image swelled until it was a meter across and almost forty
centimeters high. The head-up display automation painted appropriate
reflections and shadows.
"Thanks." Trinli stood so they could all see him over the top of the lens-
shaped gadget. "This is the basic Qeng Ho localizer-normally embedded in
protective barriers, and so on. But see, in a benign environment-even outside in
the shade-it is quite self-sufficient."
"Power?" said Reynolt.
Trinli waved his hand dismissively. "Just pulse them with microwaves,
maybe a dozen times a second. I don't know the details, but I've seen them used
in much larger numbers on some projects. I'm sure that would give finer control.
As for sensors, these puppies have several simple things built in-temperature,
light levels, sonics."
Jau Xin: "But how could Qiwi and the rest be ignorant of all this?"
Ezr could see where it was all going, but there wasn't a thing he could do
about it.
Trinli shrugged magnanimously. He still did not realize how far his ego had
taken him. "As I've been saying all along: Qiwi Lin Lisolet is young and
inexperienced. Coarse-grain localizers are good enough for most projects.
Besides, the advanced characteristics are most useful in military work, and I
wager that the texts she studies are deliberately vague on those issues. I, on the
other hand, have worked as both an engineer and an armsman. Though it's not
permitted normally, the localizers are an excellent oversight facility."
"Certainly," Nau said, looking thoughtful. "Localizers and attached sensors
are the heart of proper security." And these dustmotes already had sensors and
independence built in. They weren't an embedded component of a system; they
could be the system itself.
"What do you think, Qiwi? Would a slew of these make things simpler for
you?"
"Maybe. This is all news to me; I never thought a tech book would lie to
me." She thought a moment. "But yes, if we had lots more localizers and the
processing power scales properly fitted, then we could probably cut back on the
human supervision."
"Very well. I want you to get the details from Armsman Trinli, and install
an extended network." "I'll be glad to take over the job, Podmaster," said Trinli.
But Nau was no fool. He shook his head. "No, you're much more valuable
in your overall supervisory role. In fact, I want you and Anne to chat about this.
When he comes on-Watch, Ritser will be interested, too. There should be a
number of public safety applications for these gadgets."
So Pham Trinli had handed the Emergents even better manacles and chains

So Pham Trinli had handed the Emergents even better manacles and chains.
For an instant something like chagrined understanding flickered across the old
man's face.
Ezr did his best not to talk to anyone for the rest of the day. He had never
imagined that he could hate a stupid clown so much. Pham Trinli was no mass
murderer, and his devious nature was written large across his every foolish
move. But his stupidity had betrayed a secret the enemy had never guessed, a
secret that Ezr himself had never known, a secret that others must have taken to
their deaths rather than give to Tomas Nau and Ritser Brughel.
Before, he had thought that Nau kept Trinli around for laughs. Now Ezr
knew better. And not since that long-ago night in the temp park had Ezr felt so
coldly murderous. If there ever came a time when Pham Trinli could have a fatal
accident . . .
After second mess, Ezr stayed in his quarters. His behavior shouldn't be
suspicious. The live-music people took over Benny's every day about this time,
and jamming was one Qeng Ho custom that Ezr had never enjoyed, even as a
listener. Besides, there was plenty of work to catch up on. Some of it didn't even
require that he talk to others. He slipped on the new head-up display, and looked
at the Fleet Library.
In some sense, the survival of the Fleet Library was Captain Park's greatest
failure. Every fleet had elaborate precautions for destroying critical parts of their
local library if capture was imminent. Such schemes couldn't be complete.
Libraries existed in a distributed form across the ships of their fleet. Pieces
would be cached in a thousand nodes depending on the usage of the moment.
Individual chips-those damnable localizers-contained extensive maintenance and
operations manuals. Yet major databases should have been zeroed in very short
order. What was left would have some usefulness, but the capital insights, the
terabytes of hard experimental data would be gone-or left only as hardware
instantiations, understandable only by painstaking reverse engineering.
Somehow that destruction had not happened, even when it was obvious that the
Emergent ambush would overwhelm all the ships of Park's fleet. Or maybe Park
had acted and there had been off-net nodes or backups that-contrary to all
policy-had contained full copies of the library.
Tomas Nau knew a treasure when he saw it. Anne Reynolt's slaves were
dissecting the thing with the inhuman precision of the Focused. Sooner or later,
they would know every Trader secret. But that would take years; zipheads didn't
know where to start. So Nau was using various unFocused staff to wander about
the library and report on the big picture. Ezr had spent Msecs at it so far. It was a
dicey job, because he had to produce some good results. . .and at the same time
he tried subtly to guide their research away from things that might be

he tried subtly to guide their research away from things that might be
immediately useful. He knew he might slip up, and eventually Nau would sense
the lack of cooperation. The monster was subtle; more than once Ezr wondered
who was using whom.
But today. . .Pham Trinli had just given away so much.
Ezr forced calmness on himself.Just look at the library. Write somesilly
report. That would count as duty time and he wouldn't have to freak out in any
visible way. He played with the hand control that came with the new, "sanitized"
head-up display. At least it recognized the simpler command chords: the huds
seamlessly replaced his natural vision of his cabin with a view of the library's
entry layer. As he looked around, the automation tracked his head motion and
the images slid past almost as smoothly as if the documents were real objects
floating in his room. But. . .he fiddled with the control. Damn. Almost no
customization was possible. They had gutted the interface, or changed it to some
Emergent standard. This wasn't much better than ordinary wallpaper!
He reached up to pull the thing from his face, to crumple it.Calmdown. He
was still too ticked by Trinli's screwup. Besides, this really was an improvement
over wall displays. He smiled for a moment, remembering Gonle Fong's
obscenity-spattered fit about keyboards.
So what to look at today? Something that would seem natural to Nau, but
couldn't give them any more than they already had. Ah, yes, Trinli's super
localizers. They'd be sitting in an out-of-the-way niche in some secure section.
He followed a couple of threads, the obvious directions. This was a view of the
library that no mere apprentice would have. Nau had obtained-in ways that Ezr
imagined, and still gave him nightmares-top-level passwords and security
parameters. Now Ezr had the same view that Captain
Park himself could have had.
No luck. The pointers showed the localizers clearly. Their small size was
not really a secret, but even their incidentals manifest did not show them as
carrying sensors. The on-chip manuals were just as innocent of strange
features.Hunh. So Trinli was claiming there were trapdoors in the manuals that
were invisible even in a captain's view of the library?
The anger that had been churning his guts was momentarily forgotten. Ezr
stared out at the data lands ranged around him, feeling suddenly relieved. Tomas
Nau would see nothing strange in this situation. Except for Ezr Vinh, there might
not be a single surviving Trader who would realize how absurd Trinli's story
must be.
But Ezr Vinh had grown up in the heart of a great trading Family. As a
child he had sat at the dinner table, listening to discussions of fleet strategies as
they were really practiced A Captain's level of access to his fleet library did not

they were really practiced. A Captain s level of access to his fleet library did not
normally admit of further hidden features. Things-as always-could be lost;
legacy applications were often so old that the search engines couldn't find
relevance. But short of sabotage or a customizing, nonstandard Captain, there
should be no isolated secrets. In the long run, such measures were simply too
painful for the system maintainers.
Ezr would have laughed, except he suspected that these sanitized huds were
reporting every sound he made back to Brughel's zipheads. Yet this was the first
happy thought of the day.Trinli was bullshitting us! The old fraud bluffed about
a lot of things, but he was usually careful with Tomas Nau. When it came time to
give Reynolt the details, Trinli would scrounge in the chip manuals. . .and come
up empty-handed. Somehow Ezr couldn't feel much sympathy for him; for once
the old bastard would get what he deserved.

TWENTY-ONE
Qiwi Lin Lisolet spent a lot of time out-of-doors. Maybe with the localizer
gimmick Old Trinli was promising, that would change. Qiwi floated low across
the old Diamond One/Two contact edge. Now it was in sunlight, the volatiles of
the earlier years moved or boiled away. Where it was undisturbed, the surface of
the diamond was gray and dull and smooth, almost opalescent. The sunlight
eventually burned the top millimeter or so into graphite, kind of a micro-regolith,
disguising the glitter below. Every ten meters along the edge there was a
rainbow glint, where a sensor was set. The ejet emplacements extended off on
either side. Even this close, you could scarcely see the activity, but Qiwi knew
her gear: the electric jets sputtered in millisecond bursts, guided by the programs
that listened to her sensors. And even that wasn't delicate enough. Qiwi spent
more than two thirds of her duty time floating around the rockpile, adjusting the
ejets-and still the rock quakes were dangerously large. With a finer sensor net
and the programs that Trinli was claiming, it should be easy to design better
firing regimes. Then there would be millions of quakes, but so small no one
would notice. And then she wouldn't have to be here so much of the time. Qiwi
wondered what it would be like to be on a low-duty cycle Watch schedule like
most people. It would save medical resources, but it would also leave poor
Tomas even more alone.
Her mind slid around the worry.There are things you can cure andthings
you can't; be grateful for what Trinli's localizers will make right. She floated up
from the cleft, and checked with the rest of her maintenance crew.
"Just the usual problems," Floria Peres's voice sounded in her ear. Floria
was coasting over the "upper slopes" of Diamond Three. That was above the
rockpile's current zero-surface. They lost a few jets there every year. "Three
loosened mountings. . .we caught them in time."
"Very good. I'll put Arn and Dima on it. I think we're done early." She
smiled to herself. Plenty of time for the more interesting projects. She switched
her comm away from her crew's public sequency. "Hey, Floria. You're in charge
of the distillery this Watch, true?"
"Sure." There was a chuckle in the other's voice. "I try to get that job every
time; working for you is just one of the unavoidable chores that come along with
it."
"Well, I have some things for you. Maybe we can deal?"
"Oh, maybe." Floria was on a mere ten-percent duty cycle; even so, this

was a dance they had been through before. Besides, she was Qeng Ho. "Meet me
down at the distillery in a couple of thousand seconds. We can have tea."
The volatiles distillery sat at the end of its slow trek across the dark side of
the rockpile. Its towers and retorts glistened with frost in the Arachna-light; in
other places, it glowed with dull red heat where fractionation and recombination
occurred. What came out was the simple stock materials for their factory and the
organic sludges for the bactries. The core of the L1 distillery was from the Qeng
Ho fleet. The Emergents had brought along similar equipment, but it had been
lost in the fighting.Thank goodness it was ours that survived. The repairs and
new construction had forced them to scavenge from all the ships. If the distillery
core had been Emergent technology, they'd've been lucky to have anything
working now.
Qiwi tied down her taxi a few meters from the distillery. She unloaded her
thermal-wrapped cargo, and pulled herself along the guide ropes toward the
entrance. Around her lay the sweeping drifts of their remaining hoard of
volatiles: airsnow and ocean ice from the surface of Arachna. Those had come a
long way, and cost a lot. Much of the original mass, especially the airsnow, had
been lost in the Relight and chance illuminations since. The remainder had been
pushed and balanced into the safest shadows, had been melted in a vain attempt
to glue the rockpile together, had been used to breathe and eat and live. Tomas
had plans to hollow out portions of Diamond One as a really secure capture
cave. Maybe that wouldn't be necessary. As the sun slowly dimmed, it should be
easier to save what was left. Meantime, the distillery made its slow progress-less
than ten meters per year-through the drifts of ice and air. Behind, it left starglint
on raw diamond, and a track of anchor holes.
Floria's control cubby was at the base of the distillery's rearmost towers. As
part of the original Qeng Ho module, it had been nothing more than a
pressurized hutch to eat and nap in. Over the years of the Exile, its various
occupants had added to it. Coming in on it from ground level. . .Qiwi paused a
moment. Most of her life was spent either in close-in rooms and tunnels, or in
open emptiness. Floria's latest changes made this something in between. She
could imagine what Ezr would say of this: It really did look like a little cabin,
almost like the fairy-tale pictures of how a farmer might live in the snow-
covered foothills of an ancient land, close to a glistening forest.
Qiwi climbed past the outriggers and anchor cables-the edge of the magic
forest-and knocked on the cabin door.
Trading was always fun. She had tried so many times to explain that to
Tomas. The poor fellow had a good heart, but he came from a culture that just
could not understand.
f

Qiwi brought partial payment for Floria's most recent output: inside the
thermal wrap was a twentycentimeter bonsai, something Papa had worked Msecs
to build. Micro-dwarf ferns grew out into multiple canopies. Floria held the
bonsai bubble close to the room's overhead light and looked up through the
green. "The midges!"-submillimeter bugs. "They have colored wings!"
Qiwi had followed her friend's reaction with carefully pretended neutrality,
but now she couldn't help herself, and she laughed. "I wondered if you would
notice." The bonsai was smaller than Papa's usual, but it might be the most
beautiful yet, better than anything Qiwi had ever seen in the library. She reached
into the thermal wrap and brought out the other part of the payment. "And this is
from Gonle, personally. It's a clasp stand for the bonsai."
"It's. . .wood." Floria had been charmed by the bonsai. Her reaction to the
wood plate was more like amazement. She reached out to slide her fingers across
the polished grain.
"We can make it by the tonne lot now, kind of a reverse dry rot. Of course,
since Gonle grows it in vats, it looks a little strange." The stripes and whorls
were biowaves caught in the grain of the wood. "We'd need more space and time
to get real rings." Or maybe not; Papa thought he might be able to trick the
biowaves into faking growth rings.
"Doesn't matter." Floria's voice was abstracted. "Gonle has won her bet. .
.or your father has won it for her. Imagine. Real wood in quantity, not just twigs
in a bonsai bubble, or brush in the temp's park." She looked at Qiwi's grinning
face. "And I bet she figures this more than pays for past deals."
"Well. . .we hoped it would soften you up." They sat down, and Floria
brought out the tea she had promised, from Gonle Fong's agris and before that
from the mounds of volatiles and diamond that surrounded the distillery. The
two of them worked through the list that Benny and Gonle had put together.
The list was not just their orders, but the result of the brokering that went on
day after day up in Benny's parlor. There were items here that were mainly for
Emergent use. Lord, there were items in here that Tomas could have simply
demanded, and that Ritser Brughel would certainly have demanded.
Floria's objections were a catalogue of technical problems, things she would
need before she could undertake what was asked of the distillery. She would get
all she could out of these deals, but in fact what was being asked of her was
technically difficult. Once, in pre-Flight when Qiwi couldn't have been more
than seven years old, Papa had taken her to a distillery at Triland. "This is what
feeds the bactries, Qiwi, just as the bactries support the parks. Each layer is more
wonderful than the one below it, but making even the lowliest distillery is a kind
of art." Ali loved his high end of the job above all others, but he still respected
th
th
Fl
i P
t l
t d h
i t
d th d
d
h
d

those others. Floria Peres was a talented chemist, and the dead goo she made was
a marvelous creation.
Four thousand seconds later, they had agreed on a web of perks and favors
for the rest of Floria's Watch. They sat for a time, sipping a new batch of tea and
idly discussing what they might try after the current goals were accomplished.
Qiwi told her Trinli's claims about the localizers.
"That's good news, if the old fart isn't lying. Maybe now you won't have to
live at such a high duty cycle." Floria looked across at Qiwi, and there was a
strange, sad expression in her eyes. "You were a little girl, and now you're older
than I am. You shouldn't have to burn your life out, child, just to keep a bunch of
rocks lined up."
"It-It's not that bad. It needs to be done, even if we don't have the best
medical support."Besides, Tomas is always on Watch and he needsmy help.
"And there are advantages to being up most of the time. I get into almost
everything. I know where there are deals to be made, goodies to be scrounged. It
makes me a better Trader."
"Hmm." Floria looked away, and then abruptly back. "This isn't trading! It's
a silly game!" Her voice softened. "I'm sorry, Qiwi. You can't really know. . .but
I know what trade is really like. I've been to Kielle. I've been to Canberra. This,"
she waved her hand, as if to encompass all of L1-"this is just pretend. You know
why I always ask for this distillery job? I've made this control cubby into
something like a home, whereI can pretend. I can pretend I'm alone and far
away. I don't have to live in the temp with Emergents who pretend they are
decent human beings."
"But many of them are, Floria!"
Peres shook her head, and her voice rose. "Maybe. And maybe that's the
most terrible part of it.
Emergents like Rita Liao and Jau Xin. Just folks, eh? And every day they
use other human beings like less than animals, like-likemachine parts. Even
worse, that's their living. Isn't Liao a 'programmer manager' and Xin a 'pilot
manager'? The greatest evil in the universe, and they lap it up and then sit down
with us in Benny's parlor,and we accept them! " Her voice scaled up to just short
of a shriek, and she was abruptly silent. She closed her eyes tight, and tears
floated gently downward through the air.
Qiwi reached out to touch Floria's hand, not knowing if the other might
simply strike her. This was a pain she saw in various people. Some she could
reach. Others, like Ezr Vinh, held it so rigidly secret that all she felt was a hint of
hidden, pulsing rage.
Floria was silent, hunched over on herself. But after a moment she grasped
Qiwi's hand in both her own and bowed her head toward it weeping Her words

Qiwi s hand in both her own and bowed her head toward it, weeping. Her words
were choked, almost unintelligible. ". . .don't blame you. . . .I really don't. I know
'bout your father." She gasped on silent sobs, and after a moment her words
came more clearly. "I know you love this Tomas Nau. That's okay. He couldn't
manage without you, but we'd probably all be dead then, too."
Qiwi put her other arm around the woman's shoulders. "But I don't love
him." The words popped out, surprising her. And Floria looked up, surprised too.
"I mean, I respect him. He saved me when things were worst, after Jimmy
killed my mother. But-"
Strange to be talking to Floria like this, saying words that before she had
said only inside herself. Tomas needed her. He was a good man raised in a
terrible, evil system. The proof of his goodness was that he had come as far as he
had, that he understood the evil and worked to end it. Qiwi doubted that she
could have done as much; she would have been more like Rita and Jau, dumbly
accepting, grateful to have evaded the net of Focus. Tomas Nau really wanted to
change things. But love him? For all his humor, love, wisdom, there was a. .
.remoteness. . .to Tomas. She hoped he never realized she felt that about
him.And I hope subversive Floria has disabled Ritser's bugs.
Qiwi pushed the thoughts away. For a moment she and Floria just stared at
each other, surprised to see the other's heart exposed.Hmm. She gave Floria a
little pat on the shoulder. "I've known you for more than a year of shared Watch,
and this is the first time there's been any hint you felt this way. . . ."
Floria released Qiwi's hand, and wiped at the tears that still stood in her
eyes. Her voice was almost under control. "Yeah. Before, I could always keep a
lid on it. 'Lie low,' I told myself, 'and be a proper little conquered Peddler.' We're
naturally good at that, don't you think? Maybe it comes from having the long
view. But now. . .You know I had a sister in-fleet?"
"No."I'm sorry. There had been so many Qeng Ho in the fleet before the
fighting, and little Qiwi had known so few.
"Luan was a wild card, not too bright, but good with people. . .the sort a
wise Fleet Captain throws in the mix." A smile came close to surfacing, then
drowned in bleak remembrance. "I have a doctorate in chemical engineering, but
they Focused Luan and left me free. It should have beenme, but they took her
instead."
Floria's face twisted with guilt that should not have been. Maybe Floria was
immune to permanent infection by the mindrot, like many of the Qeng Ho. Or
maybe not. Tomas needed at least as many free as Focused, else the system
would die the death of details. Qiwi opened her mouth to explain, but Floria
wasn't listening.

"I lived with that. And I kept track of Luan. They Focused her on theirart .
Watch-on-Watch, she and her gang carved out those friezes on Hammerfest.
You probably saw her a hundred times."
Yes, that is surely true.The carving gangs were the lowest of the Focused
jobs. It wasn't the high creation of Ali Lin or the translators. The patterns of the
Emergent "legend art" left nothing to creativity. The workers beetled down the
diamond corridors, centimeter by centimeter, scooping tiny bits from the walls
according to the master pattern. Ritser's original plan had been that the project
burn up all the "waste human resources," working them without medical care
unto death.
"But they don't work Watch-on-Watch anymore, Floria." That had been one
of Qiwi's earliest triumphs over Ritser Brughel. The carving was made lighter
work, and medical resources were made available to all who remained awake.
The carvers would live through the Exile, to the manumissions that Tomas had
promised.
Floria nodded. "Right, and even though our Watches were almost disjoint, I
still kept track of Luan. I used to hang around the corridors, pretending to be
passing through whenever other people came along. I even talked to her about
that damn filthy art she loved; it was the only thing she could talk about, 'The
Defeat of the Frenkisch Orc.' " Floria all but spat the title. Her anger faded, and
she seemed to wilt. "Even so, I still could see her and maybe, if I was a good
little Peddler, she would be free someday. But now. . ." She turned to look at
Qiwi and her voice once more lost its steadiness. ". . .now she's gone, not even
on the roster. They claim her coffin failed. They claim she died in coldsleep. The
lying, treacherous,bastards . . ."
Qeng Ho coldsleep boxes were so safe that the failure rate was a kind of
statistical guess, at least under proper use and for spans of less than 4Gsec.
Emergent equipment was flakier, and since the fighting, nobody's gear was
absolutely trustable. Luan's death was most likely a terrible accident, just another
echo of the madness that had nearly killed them all.And how can I convince poor
Floria of this? "I guess we can't be certain of anything we are told, Floria. The
Emergents have an evil system. But. . . I was on one hundred percent Watch for
a long time. I'm on fifty percent even now. I've been into almost everything. And
you know, in all that time, I haven't caught Tomas in a lie."
"Okay," grudgingly.
"And why would anyone want to kill Luan?"
"I didn't say 'kill.' And maybe your Tomas doesn't know. See, I wasn't the
only one who hung around the diamond carvers. Twice, I saw Ritser Brughel.
Once he had all the women together, and was behind them, just watching. The

other time. . .the other time it was just him and Luan."
"Oh." The word came out very small.
"I don't have evidence. What I saw was nothing more than a gesture, a
posture, a look on a man's face. And so I was silent, and now Luan is gone."
Floria's paranoia suddenly seemed quite plausible. Ritser Brughelwas a
monster, a monster barely held in check by the Podmaster system. The memory
of their confrontation had never left Qiwi, theslap slap slap of his steel baton in
his hands as he raged at her. At the time, Qiwi had felt angry triumph at putting
him down. Since, she'd realized how scared she should have been. Without
Tomas, she surely would have died then. . .or worse. Ritser knew what would
happen if he was caught.
Faking a death, even committing an unsanctioned execution, was tricky.
The Podmasters had their own peculiar record-keeping requirements. Unless
Ritser was very clever, there would be clues. "Listen, Floria. There are ways I
can check on this. You could be right about Luan, but one way or another we'll
find out the truth. And if you're right-well, there's no way Tomas can put up with
such abuse. He needs all the Qeng Ho cooperating, or none of us have a chance."
Floria looked at her solemnly, then reached round to give her a fierce hug.
Qiwi could feel the shivers that passed through her body, but she wasn't crying.
After a long moment, Floria said, "Thank you. Thank you. This last Msec, I've
been so frightened. . .so ashamed."
"Ashamed?"
"I love Luan, but Focus made her a stranger. I should have screamed bloody
murder when I heard she was gone. Hell, I should have complained when I saw
Brughel with her. But I was afraid for myself. Now. . ." Floria loosened her grip
and regarded Qiwi with a shaky smile. "Now, maybe I've endangered someone
else, too. But at least you have a chance. . .and you know, it's possible that she's
alive even now, Qiwi. If we can find her soon enough."
Qiwi raised her palm. "Maybe, maybe. Let's see what I can discover."
"Yes." They finished their tea, discussed everything Floria could remember
about her sister and what she had seen. She was doing her best now to seem
calm, but relief and nervousness made her words come a bit too fast, made her
gestures a bit too broad.
Qiwi helped her set the bonsai bubble and its wood stand in brackets
beneath the room's main light. "I can get you lots more wood. Gonle really,
really wants you to program for meta-crylates. You might want to panel your
home with polished wood, like old-time captains did their inner cabins."
Floria looked around her little space, and played along. "I could indeed.
Tell her, maybe we can do a deal."
A d h
Qi i
di
h l
k' i
d
d
lli
d
h

And then Qiwi was standing at the lock's inner door, and pulling down her
coverall hood. For a moment, the fear was back in Floria's face. "Be careful,
Qiwi."
"I will."
• • •
Qiwi took her taxi through the rest of its stops, inspecting the rockpile,
posting problems and changes to the ziphead net. Meantime, her mind raced
down scary corridors. It was just as well she had this time to think. If Floria was
right, then even with Tomas on her side, this could be very dangerous. Ritser
was just into too many things. If he was sabotaging the coldsleep or falsifying
death records, then big parts of Tomas's net had been subverted.
Does Ritser suspect that I know?Qiwi glided down across the canyon that
separated Diamond Three from Diamond Four. Arachna's blue light shone from
directly behind her, illuminating the caves that were the rough interface between
the blocks. There was sublimation from some of the water glue. It was too fine
to show on the sensor grid, but when she hovered with her face just centimeters
from the surface she could see it. Even as she called in the problem, another part
of her mind was turning on the deadlier question: Floria was clever enough to
sweep her little cabin, even the outside. And Qiwi was very careful with her suit.
Tomas had given her permission to disable all its bugs, both official and covert.
On the net it was a different story. If Ritser was doing what Floria thought, then
very likely he was monitoring even pod communications. It would be tricky to
discover anything without tipping him off.
So be very, very careful.She needed an excuse for anything she did now.Ah.
The personnel studies that she and Ezr had been assigned. Coasting up from her
inspection of the rockpile, it would be reasonable for her to work on that. She
put in a low-priority call to Ezr asking for a conference, then downloaded a large
block of the Watch and personnel database. The records on Luan would be in
there, but they were now cached locally, and her processors were covered by
Tomas's own security.
She brought up the bio on Luan Peres. Yes, reported dead in coldsleep.
Qiwi flicker-read down through the text. There was lots of jargon, conjecture
about how the unit had failed. Qiwi had had years to practice with coldsleep
gear, if only as a front-end technician. She could more or less follow the
discussion, though it seemed like the florid overkill of a rambling ziphead, what
you might get if youasked a Focused person to invent a credible failure.
The taxi floated out of the rockpile's shadow and the sunlight washed away
the quiet blues of Arachna-light The rockpile sunside was naked rock graphite

the quiet blues of Arachna light. The rockpile sunside was naked rock, graphite
on diamond. Qiwi dimmed the view and turned back to the report on Luan. It
was almost a clean report. It might have fooled her if she hadn't been suspicious
or if she hadn't known all the requirements of Emergent doc. Where were the
third and fourth crosschecks on the autopsy? Reynolt always wanted her zips to
do that; the woman lost what little flexibility she had when it came to ziphead
fatalities.
The report was bogus. Tomas would understand that the moment she
pointed it out to him.
A chime sounded in her ear. "Ezr, hello." Damn. Her call to him had just
been a cover, an excuse to download a big block and look at Luan's records. But
here he was. For a moment, he seemed to be sitting next to her in the taxi. Then
the image flickered as her huds figured out they couldn't manage the illusion,
and settled for putting him in a fixed position pseudo-display. Behind him were
the blue-green walls of the Hammerfest attic. He was visiting Trixia, of course.
The picture was more than good enough to show the impatience in his face.
"I decided to get right back to you. You know I go off-Watch in sixty Ksec."
"Yes, sorry to bother you. I've been looking over the personnel stats. For
that planning committee stuff you and I are stuck with? Anyway, I came up with
a question." Her mind raced ahead of her words, searching madly for some issue
that would justify this call. Funny how the least attempt at deception always
seemed to make life more complicated. She stumbled along for a few sentences,
finally came up with a really stupid question about specialist mixing.
Ezr was looking at her a little strangely now. He shrugged. "You're asking
about the end of the Exile, Qiwi. Who knows what we'll need when the Spiders
are ready for contact. I thought we were going to bring all specialties out of
coldsleep then, and run flat out."
"Of course, that's the plan, but there are details-" Qiwi weaseled her way
toward credibility. The main thing was just to end the conversation. "-so I'll
think about this some more. Let's have a real meeting after you get back on from
coldsleep."
Ezr grimaced. "That will be a while. I'm off for fifty Msec." Most of two
years. "What?" That was more than four times as long as his usual off-Watch.
"You know, new faces and all that." There were branches of his Watch tree
that had not had much time. Tomas and the manager committee-Qiwi and Ezr
included!-had thought everyone should get hands-on time and exposure to the
usual training courses.
"You're starting a little early." And 50Msec was longer than she expected.
"Yeah. Well, you have to start someplace." He looked away from the video
pov. At Trixia? When he looked back, his tone was less impatient but somehow

pov.
t
a? W e
e oo ed bac ,
s to e was ess
pat e t but so e ow
more urgent. "Look, Qiwi. I'm going to be on ice for a big fifty, and even
afterwards I'll be on a low duty cycle for a while." He raised a hand as if to
forestall objections. "I'm not complaining! I participated in the decisions myself..
. .But Trixia will be onWatch all that time. That's longer than she has ever been
alone. There'll be nobody to stand up for her."
Qiwi wished she could reach out and comfort him. "No one will harm her,
Ezr."
"Yeah, I know. She's toovaluable to harm. Just like your father." Something
flickered in his eyes, but it wasn't the usual anger. Poor Ezr was begging her.
"They'll keep her body working, they'll keep her moderately clean. But I don't
want her hassled any more than she already is. Keep an eye on her, Qiwi. You
have real power, at least over small fish like Trud Silipan."
It was the first time Ezr had really asked her for help.
"I'll watch out for her, Ezr," Qiwi said softly. "I promise."
After he rang off, Qiwi sat unmoving for several seconds. Strange that a
phone call that was an accident and a scam should have such an impact. But Ezr
had always had that effect on her. When she was thirteen, Ezr Vinh had seemed
the most wonderful man in the universe-and the only way she could get his
attention was by goading him. Such teenage crushes should vape away, right?
Occasionally she wondered if the Diem massacre had somehow stunted her soul,
trapped her affections as they were in the last innocent days before all the death..
. .Whatever the reason, it felt good that she could do something for him.
Maybe paranoia was contagious. Luan Peres dead. Now Ezr gone for even
longer than they had planned.I wonder who actually specified thatWatch
change? Qiwi looked back through her cache. The schedule change was
nominally from the Watch-manager committee. . .with Ritser Brughel doing the
actual signoff. That happened often enough; one Podmaster or the other had to
sign for all such changes.
Qiwi's taxi continued its slow coast upward. From this distance, the
rockpile was a craggy jumble,
Diamond Two in sunlight, the glare obscuring all but the brightest stars. It
might have been a wilderness scene except for the regular form of the Qeng Ho
temp gleaming off to the side. With augmented vision, Qiwi could see the
dozens of warehouses of the L1 system. Down in the shade of the rockpile were
Hammerfest and the distillery, and the arsenal at L1-A. In the spaces around
orbited the temp, the warehouses, the junked and semi-junked starships that had
brought them all here. Qiwi used them as a kind of soft auxiliary to the electric
jets. It was a well-tended dynamical system, even though it did look like chaos
compared to the close mooring of the early Exile.

p
g
y
Qiwi took in the configuration with practiced eyes, even as her mind
considered the much more treacherous problems of political intrigue. Ritser
Brughel's private domain, the old QHSInvisible Hand, was outward from the
pile, less than two thousand meters from her taxi; she would pass less than
fifteen hundred meters from its throat.Hmm. So, what if Ritser had kidnapped
Luan Peres? That would be his boldest move ever against Tomas.And maybe it's
not the only thing. If Ritser could get away with this, there might be other
deaths.Ezr.
Qiwi took a deep breath.Just take one problem at a time. So: SupposeFloria
is right and Luan still lives, a toy in Ritser's private space? There were limits to
how fast Tomas could act against another Podmaster. If she complained, and
there was any delay at all, Luan might die for real-and all the evidence could
just. . .disappear.
Qiwi turned in her seat, got a naked-eye view of theHand. She was less than
seventeen hundred meters out now. It might be days before she could wangle a
configuration this slick. The starship's stubby form was so close that she could
see the emergency repair welds, and the blistering where X-ray fire had struck
the ramscoop's projection flange. Qiwi knew the architecture of theInvisible
Hand about as well as anyone at L1; she had lived on that ship through years of
the voyage here, had used it as her hands-on example of every ship topic in her
schooling. She knew its blind spots.. . .More important, she had
Podmaster-level access. It was just one of the many things that Tomas
trusted her with. Until now she had never used it so, um, provocatively,
butQiwi's hands were moving even before she finished rationalizing her scheme.
She keyed in her personal crypto link to Tomas, and spoke quickly, outlining
what she had learned and what she suspected-and what she planned to do. She
squirted the message off, delivery contingent on a deadman condition. Now
Tomas would know no matter what, and she would have something to threaten
Ritser with if he caught her.
Sixteen hundred meters from theInvisible Hand. Qiwi pulled down her
coverall hood, and cycled the taxi's atmosphere. Her intuition and her huds
agreed on the jump path she must follow, the trajectory that would take her
down theHand 's throat, in the ship's blind spot all the way. She popped the taxi's
hatch, waited till her acrobatic instinct saidgo -and leaped into the emptiness.
• • •
Qiwi finger-walked down theHand 's empty freight hold. Using a
combination of Tomas's authority and her own special knowledge of the ship's

architecture, she had reached the level of the living quarters without tripping any
audible alarms. Every few meters, Qiwi put her ear to the wall, and simply
listened. She was so close to onWatch country that she could hear other people.
Things sounded very ordinary, no sudden movement, no anxious talk.. .
.Hmm.That sounded like someone crying.
Qiwi moved faster, feeling something like the giddy anger of her long-ago
confrontation with Ritser Brughel-only now she had more sense, and was
correspondingly more afraid. During their common Watches since that time in
the park, she had often felt Ritser's eyes upon her. She had always expected that
there would be another confrontaion. As much as it was to honor her mother's
memory, Qiwi's fanatical gym work-all the martial arts-was intended as
insurance against Ritser and his steel baton.Lot ofgood it will do, if he pots me
with a wire gun. But Ritser was such an idiot, he'd never kill her like that; he'd
want to gloat. Today, if it came to it, she'd have time to threaten him with the
message she'd left Tomas. She pushed down her fear, and moved closer to the
sound of weeping.
Qiwi hovered over an access hatch. Suddenly her shoulders and arms were
tense. Strange, random thoughts skittered through her mind.I willremember. I
will remember. Freaky craziness.
Beyond this point, her only invisibility would be in her Podmaster passkey.
Very likely that would not be enough.But I just need a few seconds. Qiwi
checked her recorder and data link one last time. . .and slipped through the hatch,
into a crew corridor.
Lord.For a moment, Qiwi just stared in astonishment. The corridor was the
size that she remembered. Ten meters farther on, it curved right, toward the
Captain's living quarters. But Ritser had pasted wallpaper on all four walls, and
the pictures were a kind of swirling pink. The air stank of animal musk. This was
a different universe from theInvisible Hand that she had known. She grasped
wildly at her courage, and moved slowly up the hallway. Now there was music
ahead, at least thethump thump thump of percussion. Somebody was singing. .
.sharp, barking screams, in time with the beat.
Like they had a life of their own, her shoulders cramped tight, aching to
bounce off the wall and race back the way she had come.Do I need anymore
proof? Yes. Just a look at the data system with a local override. That would
mean more than any number of hysterical stories about Ritser's choice of video
and music.
Door by door, she moved up the corridor. These had been staff officer
quarters, but used by the Watch crew on the voyage from Triland. She had lived
in the second room from the end for three years-and she really didn't want to

know what that looked like now. The Captain's planning room was just beyond
the bend. She flicked her passkey at the lock, and the door slid open. Inside. .
.this was no planning room. It looked like a cross between a gym and a bedroom.
And the walls were again covered with video wallpaper. Qiwi pulled herself
over a strange, gauntleted rack and settled down, out of sight of the doorway.
She touched her huds, asked for a local override connection to the ship's net.
There was a pause as her location and authorization were checked, and then she
was looking at names and dates and pictures.Yes! Ol' Ritser was running his own
small-scale coldsleep business right here on theInvisible Hand. Luan Peres was
listed . . .andhere she was listed as living, onWatch!
That's enough; time to get out of this madhouse.But Qiwi hesitated an
instant longer. There were so many names here, familiar names and faces from
long ago. Little death glyphs sat by each picture. She had been a child when she
last saw these people, but not like this. . .these faces were variously sullen,
sleeping, terribly bruised or burned. The living, the dead, the beaten, the fiercely
resisting.This is from before Jimmy Diem. She knew there had been
interrogations, a period of many Ksecs between the fighting and the resumption
of Watches, but. . .Qiwi felt a numb horror spreading up from the pit of her
stomach. She paged through the names. Kira Pen Lisolet. Mama. A bruised face,
the eyes staring steadily back at her.Whatdid Ritser do to you? How could Tomas
not know? She wasn't really conscious of following the data links from that
picture, but suddenly her huds were running an immersion video. The room was
the same, but filled with the sights and sounds of long ago. As if from the other
side of the rack, there came the sound of panting and moaning. Qiwi slid to the
side and the vision tracked with near perfection. Around the corner of the rack,
she came face-to-face with. . .Tomas Nau. A younger Tomas Nau. Out of sight,
beyond the edge of the rack, he seemed to be thrusting from his hips. The look
on his face was the sort of ecstatic pleasure that Qiwi had seen in his face so
many times, the look he had when they could finally be alone and he could come
in her. But this Tomas of years ago held a tiny, red-splattered knife. He leaned
forward, out of sight, leaned down on someone whose moans changed to a shrill
scream. Qiwi pulled herself over the edge of the rack and looked straight down
at the true past, at the woman Nau was cutting.
"Mama!"The past didn't notice her cry; Nau continued his business. Qiwi
doubled up on herself, spewing vomit across the rack and beyond. She couldn't
see them anymore, but the sounds of the past continued, as if they were
happening just on the other side of the rack. Even as her stomach emptied, she
tore the huds from her face, threw them wildly away. She choked and gagged;
gibbering horror was in charge of her reflexes.

The light changed as the room's door opened. There were voices. Voices in
the present. "Yeah, she's in here, Marli."
"Phew. What a mess." Sounds of the two men quartering the room, coming
closer to Qiwi's hiding place. Mindlessly she retreated, floated down beneath the
nightmare equipment, and braced herself against the floor.
A face coasted across her position. "Got h-"
Qiwi exploded upward, the blade of her hand just missing the other's neck.
She slammed into the wall partition behind him. Pain lanced back along her arm.
She felt the prick of stunner darts. She turned, tried to bounce toward her
attacker, but her legs were already dead. The two waited cautiously a second.
Then the shooter, Marli, grinned and snagged her slowly-turning body. She
couldn't move. She could barely breathe. But there was some sensation. She felt
Marli draw her back to him, run his hand across her breasts. "She's safed; don't
worry, Tung." Marli laughed. "Or maybe you should worry. Look at that hole
she put in the wall. Another four centimeters and you'd be breathing out the back
of your neck!"
"Pus." Tung's voice was sullen.
"You got her? Good." It was Tomas's voice, from the door. Marli abruptly
released his hold on her breasts. He coasted her around the equipment, into the
open.
Qiwi couldn't turn her head. She saw whatever happened to be before her
eyes. Tomas, calm as ever.Calm as ever. He glanced at her in passing, nodded to
Marli. Qiwi tried to scream, but no sound came.Tomas will killme, like all the
others.. . .But if he doesn't? If he doesn't, then nothing inGod's
universe can save him.
Tomas turned. Ritser Brughel was behind him, disheveled and half-naked.
"Ritser, this is inexcusable. The whole point of giving her access codes is to
make capture predictable and easy. You knew she was coming, and you left
yourself wide open."
Brughel's voice was whiny. "Plague take it. She's never twigged this soon
after her last scrub. And I had less than three hundred seconds from your first
warning till she arrived here. That'snever happened before."
Tomas glared at his Vice-Podmaster. "The second was just bad luck-
something you should count on. The first . . ." He looked back at Qiwi, and his
anger turned to thoughtfulness. "Something unexpected triggered her this time.
Have Kal review just who she's been talking to."
He gestured to Marli and Tung. "Put her in a box and take her down to
Hammerfest. Tell Anne I want the usual."
"What cutoff time on the memories, sir?"
"I'll
lk
A
b
h
lf W '
d
l
k
"

"I'll talk to Anne about that myself. We've got some records to look at."
Qiwi got a glimpse of the corridor, of hands dragging her along.Howmany
times has this happened
before? No matter how hard she strained, she couldn't move a muscle.
Inside she was screaming.This time I will remember. I willremember!

TWENTY-TWO
Pham followed Trud Silipan up the central tower of Hammerfest, toward
the Attic. In a sense, this was the moment he had been angling for through
Msecs of casual shmoozing-an excuse to get inside the Focus system, to see
more than the results. No doubt he could have gotten here earlier-in fact, Silipan
had offered more than once to show him around. Over the Watches they had
known each other, Pham had made enough silly assertions about Focus, had bet
Silipan and Xin enough scrip about his opinions; a plausible visit was inevitable.
But there was plenty of time and Pham had never had quite the cover he'd
wanted.Don't fool yourself. Popping thelocalizers on Tomas Nau has put you in
more danger than anything so far.
"Now, finally, you're going to see behind the scenes, Pham old boy. After
this, I hope you'll shut up about some of your crazy theories." Silipan was
grinning; clearly, he'd been looking forward to this moment himself.
They drifted upward, past narrow tunnels that forked and forked. The place
was a warren.
Pham pulled himself even with the coasting Silipan. "What's to know? So
you Emergents can make people into automatic devices. So what? Even a
ziphead can't multiply numbers faster than once or twice a second. Machines can
do it trillions of times faster. So with zipheads, you get the pleasure of bossing
people around-and for what? The slowest, crappiest automation since
Humankind learned to write."
"Yeah, yeah. You've been saying that for years. But you're still wrong." He
stuck out a foot, catching a stop with the toe of his shoe. "Keep your voice down
inside the grouproom, okay?" They were facing a real door, not one of the little
crawl hatches of lower down. Silipan waved it open and they drifted through.
Pham's first impression was of body odor and packed humanity.
"They do get pretty ripe, don't they? They're healthy, though. I see to that."
He spoke with a technician's pride.
There was rack on rack of micro-gee seating, packed in a three-dimensional
lattice that would have been impossible in any real gravity. Most of the seats
were occupied. There were men and women of all ages, dressed in grays, most
using what looked to be premium Qeng Ho head-up display devices. This wasn't
what he had been expecting. "I thought you kept them isolated," in little cells
such as Ezr Vinh had described in more than one tearful session in the booze
parlor.

"Some we do. It depends on the application." He waved at the room
attendants, two men dressed like hospital orderlies. "This is a lot cheaper. Two
guys can handle all the potty calls, and the usual fights."
"Fights?"
"'Professional disagreements.' "Silipan chuckled. "Snits, really. They're only
dangerous if they upset the mindrot's balance."
They floated diagonally upward between the close-packed rows. Some of
the huds flickered transparently and he could see the zipheads' eyes moving. But
no one seemed to notice Pham and Trud; their vision was elsewhere.
There was low-pitched mumbling from all directions, the combined voices
of all the zipheads in the room. There were a lot of people talking, all in short
bursts of words-Nese, but still nonsense. The global effect was an almost
hypnotic chant.
The zipheads typed ceaselessly on chording keyboards. Silipan pointed to
their hands with special pride. "See, not one in five has any joint damage; we
can't afford to lose people. We have so few, and Reynolt can't completely control
the mindrot. But it's been most of a year since we had a simple medical fatality-
and that was almost unavoidable. Somehow the zip got a punctured colon
rightafter a clean checkup. He was an isolated specialty. His performance fell
off, but we didn't know there was a problem till the smell got completely rank."
So the slave had died from the inside out, too dedicated to cry his pain, too
neglected for anyone to notice. Trud Silipan was only caring in the mean.
They reached the top, looked back down the lattice of mumbling humanity.
"Now in one way you're right, Mr. Armsman Trinli. If these people were doing
arithmetic or string sorting, this operation would be a joke. The smallest
processor in a finger ring can do that sort of thing a billion times faster than any
human. But you hear the zipheads talking?"
"Yeah, but it doesn't make any sense."
"It's internal jargon; they get into that pretty fast when we work them in
teams. But the point is, they're not doing low-level machine functions.
They'reusing our computer resources. See, for us Emergents, the zipheads are the
next system layer above software. They can apply human intelligence, but with
the persistence and patience of a machine. And that's also why unFocused
specialists-especially techs like me-are important. Focus is useless unless there
are normal people to direct it and to find the proper balance of hardware and
software and Focus. Done right, the combination is totally beyond what you
Qeng Ho ever achieved."
Pham had long ago understood that, but denying the point provoked
steadily more detailed explanations from Emergents like Trud Silipan. "So what

is this group actually doing?"
"Let's see." He motioned for Pham to put on his huds. "Ah, see? We have
them partitioned into three groups. The top third is rote-layer processing,
zipheads that can be easily retargeted. They're great for routine tasks, like direct
queries. The middle third is programming. As a Programmer-at-Arms, this
should interest you." He popped up some dependency charts. They were
squirrelly nonsense, immense blocks with no evolutionary coherence. "This is a
rewrite of your own weapons targeting code."
"Crap. I could never maintain something like that."
"No,you couldn't. But a Programmer-Manager-someone like Rita Liao-can,
as long as she has a team of ziphead programmers. She's having them rearrange
and optimize the code. They've done what ordinary humans could do if they
could concentrate endlessly. Together with good development software, these
zips have produced a code that is about half the size of your original-and five
times as fast on the same hardware. They also combed out hundreds of bugs."
Pham didn't say anything for a moment. He just paged through the maze of
the dependency charts. Pham had hacked for years at the weapons programs.
Sure there were bugs, as there were in any large system. But the weapons code
had been the object of thousands of years of work, of constant effort to optimize
and remove flaws.. . .He cleared his huds and looked across the ranked
slaves.Such a terrible price to pay.
. .for such wonderfulresults.
Silipan chuckled. "Can't fool me, Trinli. I can tell you're impressed." "Yeah,
well if it works I am. So what's the third group doing?"
But Silipan was already heading back to the entrance. "Oh, them." He
waved negligently at the zipheads on his right. "Reynolt's ongoing project. We're
going through the corpus of your fleet system code, looking for trapdoors, that
sort of thing."
It was the wild-goose chase that preoccupied the most paranoid system
administrators, but after what he'd just seen. . .suddenly Pham didn't feel quite so
secure.How long do I have before they notice some of mylong-agomods?
They left the grouproom and started back down the central tower. "See,
Pham, you-all you Qeng Ho-grew up wearing blinders. You justknow certain
things are impossible. I see the clichés in your literature: 'Garbage input means
garbage output'; 'The trouble with automation is that it does exactly what you ask
it'; 'Automation can never be truly creative.' Humankind has accepted such
claims for thousands of years. But we Emergents have disproved them! With
ziphead support, I can get correct performance from ambiguous inputs. I can get
effective natural language translation. I can get humanquality judgment as part

of the automation!"
They coasted downward at several meters per second; upward traffic was
sparse just now. The light at the bottom of the tower glowed brighter. "Yeah, so
what about creativity?" This was something Trud loved to pontificate on.
"Even that, Pham. Well, not all forms of creativity. Like I said, there is a
real need for managers such as Rita and myself, and the Podmasters above us.
But you know about really creative people, the artists who end up in your history
books? As often as not, they're some poor dweeb who doesn't have a life. He or
she is just totally fixated on learning everything about some single topic. A sane
person couldn't justify losing friends and family to concentrate so hard. Of
course, the payoff is that the dweeb may find things or make things that are
totally unexpected. See, in that way a little of Focus has always been part of the
human race. We Emergents have simply institutionalized this sacrifice so the
whole community can benefit in a concentrated, organized way."
Silipan reached out, lightly touching the walls on both sides, slowing his
descent. He dropped behind for a moment before Pham started braking too.
"How long till your appointment with Anne Reynolt?" Silipan asked. "Just
over a Ksec."
"Okay, I'll keep this short. Can't keep the boss lady waiting." He laughed.
Silipan seemed to have an especially low regard for Anne Reynolt. If she were
incompetent, a lot of things would be simpler for Pham. . .
They passed through a pressure door, into what might have been a sickbay.
There were a few coldsleep coffins; they looked like medical temporaries.
Visible behind the equipment was another door, this one bearing a Podmaster
special seal. Trud gave a nervous glance in that direction, and did not look back
again.
"So. Here's where it all happens, Pham. The real magic of Focus." He
dragged Pham across the room, away from the half-hidden door. A technician
was working by the limp form of a ziphead, maneuvering the "patient's" head
into one of the large toroids that dominated the room. Those might be diagnostic
imagers, though they were even clunkier-looking than most Emergent hardware.
"You already know the basic principles, right, Pham?"
"Sure." Those had been carefully explained in the first Watch after Jimmy's
murder. "You've got this special virus, the mindrot; you infected us all."
"Right, right. But that was a military operation. In most cases the rot didn't
get past the blood/brain barrier. But when it does. . .You know about glial cells?
You've got lots more of those in your brain than neurons, actually. Anyway, the
rot uses the glials as a kind of broth, infects almost all of them. After four days
or so-"

"-You have a ziphead?"
"No. You have the raw material for a ziphead; many of you Qeng Ho ended
up in that state-unFocused, perfectly healthy, but with the infection permanently
established. In such people, every neuron in the brain is adjacent to infection
cells. And each rotted cell has a menu of neuroactives it can secrete. Now, this
guy-" He turned to the tech, who was still working on the comatose ziphead.
"Bil, whatis this one in for?"
Bil Phuong shrugged. "He's been fighting. Al had to stun him. There's no
chance of mindrot runaway, but Reynolt wants his basal-five retrained on the
sequence from . . ."
The two traded jargon. Pham glanced with careful disinterest at the ziphead.
Egil Manrhi. Egil had been the punning-est armsman in pre-Flight. But now. .
.now he was probably a better analyst than he had ever been before.
Trud was nodding at Phuong: "Huh. I don't see why messing with basal-five
will do any good. But then she is the boss, isn't she?" He grinned at the other.
"Hey, let me do this one, okay? I want to show Pham."
"Just so you sign for it." Phuong moved out of their way, looking faintly
bored. Silipan slid down beside the gray-painted toroid. Pham noticed that the
gadget had separate power cables, each a centimeter wide.
"Is this some kind of an imager, Trud? It looks like obsolete junk."
"Ha. Not exactly. Help me get this guy's head in the cradle. Don't let him
touch the sides. . . ." An alarm tone sounded. "And for God's sake, give Bil that
ring you're wearing. If you're standing in the wrong place, the magnets in this
baby would tear your finger off."
Even in low gee, it was awkward to maneuver the comatose Egil Manrhi. It
was a tight fit, and the rockpile's gravity was just strong enough to drag Egil's
head onto the lower side of the hole.
Trud moved back from his handiwork, and smiled. "All set. Now you're
going to see what it's all about, Pham, my boy." He spoke commands and some
kind of medical image floated in the air between them, presumably a view inside
Egil's head. Pham could recognize gross anatomical features, but this was far
from anything he had studied. "You're right about the imaging, Pham. This is
standard MRI, as old as time. But it's good enough. See, the basal-five harmony
is generated here." A pointer moved along a complex curve near the surface of
the brain.
"Now here's the cute thing, what makes mindrot more than a neuropathic
curiosity." A galaxy of tiny glowing dots appeared in the three-dimensional
image. They glowed in every color, though most were pink. There were clusters
and strands of tiny dots, many of them flickering in time with one another.
"Y
'
i
i f
d li l
ll
l
h
l
"

"You're seeing infected glial cells, at least the relevant groups."
"The colors?"
"Those show current drug secretion by type.. . .Now, what I want to do . . ."
More commands, and Pham had his first look at the toroid's user manual. ". . .is
change the output and firing frequency along this path." His little marker arrow
swept along one of the threads of light. He grinned at Pham. "Thisis how our
gear is more than an imager. See, the mindrot virus expresses certain para-and
dia-magnetic proteins, andthese respond variously to magnetic fields to trigger
the production of specific neuroactives. So while you Qeng Ho and all the rest of
humanity use MRI solely as anobserving tool, we Emergents can use it actively,
to make changes." He tapped his keyboard; Pham heard a creaking sound as the
superconducting cables spread apart from each other. Egil twitched a couple of
times. Trud reached out to steady him. "Damn. Can't get millimeter resolution
with him thrashing."
"I don't see any change in the brain map."
"You won't till I turn off active mode. You can't image and modify at the
same time." He paused, watching the step-by-step in the manual. "Almost done..
. .There! Okay, let's see the changes." There was a new picture. And now the
glowing thread of lights was mostly blue, and frantically blinking. "It'll take a
few seconds to settle in." He continued to watch the model as he talked. "See,
Pham. This is what I'm really good at. I don't know what you could compare me
to in your culture. I'm a little like a programmer, but I don't code. I'm a little like
a neurologist, exceptI get results. I guess I'm most like a hardware technician. I
keep the gear going for all the higher-ups who take the credit."
Trud frowned. ". . .Hunh? Pus." He looked across the room at where the
other Emergent was working. "Bil, this guy's leptin-dop ratio is still low."
"You turned off the field?"
"Of course. Basal-five should have retrained by now."
Bil didn't come over, but apparently he was looking at the patient's brain
model.
The line of blue glitter was still a jumble of random change. Trud
continued, "It's just a loose end, but I don't know what's causing it. Can you take
care of it?" He hooked a thumb in Pham's direction, indicating he had other,
more important business.
Bil said, dubiously, "You did sign for it?" "Yes, yes. Just take care of it,
huh?" "Yeah, okay."
"Thanks." Silipan gestured Pham away from the MRI gear; the brain image
vanished. "That Reynolt. Her jobs are the trickiest, not by the book. Then, when
you do it the right way, you're likely to end up in a heap of trouble."
Pham followed him out the door and down a side tunnel that cut through the

Pham followed him out the door and down a side tunnel that cut through the
crystal of Diamond One. The walls were a chiseled mosaic, the same style of
precise artwork that had mystified Pham long ago, at the "welcoming banquet."
Not all the zipheads were high-tech specialists: they passed a dozen slave artists
clustered around the circumference of the tunnel, hunched close over magnifying
glasses and needle-like tools. Pham had been along here before, several Watches
earlier. Then, the frieze had been only roughly outlined, a mountain landscape
with some sort of military force moving toward a nebulous goal. Even that had
been a guess, based on the title: "The Defeat of the Frenkisch Orc." Now the
figures were mostly complete, sturdy heroic fighters that glittered rainbows.
Their goal was some kind of monster. The creature wasn't that novel, a typical
Cthulhonic horror, tearing humans with its long claws and eating the pieces.
Emergents made a big thing of their conquest of Frenk. Somehow, Pham
doubted that the mutations they had warred against had been so spectacular. He
slowed, and Silipan took his stare for admiration.
"The carvers make only fifty centimeters' progress every Msec. But the art
brings some of the warmth of our past."
Warmth?"Reynolt wants things pretty?" It was a random question.
"Ha. Reynolt couldn't care less. Podmaster Brughel ordered this, per my
recommendation."
"But I thought Podmasters were sovereign in their domains." Pham hadn't
seen much of Reynolt on prior
Watches, but he had seen her humiliate Ritser Brughel in meetings with
Nau.
Trud continued on for several meters, not speaking. His face quirked in a
silly smile, a look he sometimes got during their bull sessions at Benny's. This
time though, the smiled broke into laughter. "Podmaster? Anne Reynolt? Pham,
watching you boggle has already made my day-but this tops all." He coasted for
several seconds more, still chuckling. Then he saw the glower on Pham Trinli's
face. "I'm sorry, Pham. You Peddlers are clever in so many ways, but you're like
children when it comes to the basics of culture.. . .I got you cleared to see the
Focus clinic; I guess it can't hurt to spell some other things out. No, Anne
Reynolt is not a Podmaster, though most likely she was a powerful one, once
upon a time. Reynolt is just another ziphead."
Pham let his glower fade to blank astonishment-which also happened to be
his true reaction. "But. . .she's running a big part of the show. She gives you
orders."
Silipan shrugged. His smile had changed to something sour. "Yeah. She
gives me orders. It's a rare thing, but it can happen. I'd almost rather work for
Podmaster Brughel and Kal Omo except that they play so
rough " His voice

Podmaster Brughel and Kal Omo except that they play so. . . rough.  His voice
trailed off nervously.
Pham caught up. "I think I see," he lied. "When a specialist gets Focused,
he fixates on his specialty. So anartist becomes one of your mosaic carvers, a
physicist becomes like Hunte Wen, and a manager becomes, uh, I don't know,
the manager from Hell."
Trud shook his head. "It doesn't work like that. See, technical specialties
Focus well. We got a seventypercent success rate even with you Qeng Ho. But
people skills-counseling, politics, personnel management-normally, those don't
survive Focusing at all. You've seen enough zipheads by now; the one thing they
have in common is flat affect. They can no more imagine what's going on in a
normal person's head than a rock can. We're lucky to have as many good
translators as we do; that's never been tried on this scale before.
"No. Anne Reynolt is something very, very rare. Rumor is, she was a High
Podmaster in the Xevalle clique. Most of those got killed or mind-scrubbed, but
the story is Reynolt had really pissed the Nauly clique. For laughs they Focused
her; maybe they thought to use her as body comfort.
But that's not how it turned out. My guess is, she was already close to being
a monomaniac. It was one chance in a billion, but Reynolt's management
abilities survived-even some of her people skills survived."
Up ahead, Pham could see the end of the tunnel. Light shone on an
unadorned hatch. Trud came to a stop and turned to face Pham. "She's a freak,
but she is also Podmaster Nau's most valued property. In principle, she doubles
his reach. . . ." He grimaced. "It doesn't make it any easier to take orders from
her,
I'll tell you that. Personally, I think the Podmaster overrates her. She's a
miraculous freak, but so what? It's like a dog that writes poetry-no one notices
that it's doggerel."
"You don't seem to care if she knows your opinion."
Now Trud was smiling again. "Of course not. That's the one plus of my
situation. She's almost impossible to fool on things directly related to my job-but
outside of that she's like any other ziphead. Why, I've played some pus-funny j-"
He stopped. "Ah, never mind. Tell her what Podmaster Nau asked you to and
you'll be okay." He winked, then started back up the corridor, away from
Reynolt's office.
"Watch her close. You'll see what I mean."
If Pham had known about Anne Reynolt, he might have postponed the
whole localizer scam. But now he was sitting in her office, and there weren't
many options. In a way it felt good to be winging it. Ever since Jimmy died,
every one of Pham's moves had been so considered so damned cautious

every one of Pham s moves had been so considered, so damned cautious.
At first, the woman didn't even acknowledge his presence. Pham sat
uninvited on the chair across from her desk and looked around the room. It was
nothing like Nau's office. These walls were naked, rough diamond. There were
no pictures, not even the abominations that passed for Emergent art. Reynolt's
desk was an agglomeration of empty storage crates and network gear.
And Reynolt herself? Pham stared at her face more intently than he might
have dared otherwise. He'd been in her presence maybe 20Ksec total and those
encounters had been in meetings, with Reynolt generally at the far end of the
table. She always dressed plainly, except for that silver necklace tucked down
into her blouse. With her red hair and pale skin, the woman might have been
Ritser Brughel's sister. The physical type was rare in this end of Human Space,
arising most often from local mutation. Anne might have been thirty years old-or
a couple of centuries, with really good medical support. In a crazy, exotic way
she was lovely. Physically lovely.So you were a Podmaster.
Reynolt's gaze flickered up, and impaled him for an instant. "Okay. You're
here to tell me the details of these localizers."
Pham nodded. Strange. After that momentary glance, her gaze shifted away
from his eyes. She was watching his lips, his throat, only briefly his eyes. There
was no sympathy, no communication, but Pham had the chill feeling that she
was seeing through all his masks.
"Good. What is their standard sensorium?"
He grumbled through the answers, claiming ignorance of details.
Reynolt didn't seem to take offense. Her questions were delivered in a
uniformly calm, mildly contemptuous tone. Then: "This isn't enough to work
with. I need the manuals."
"Sure. That's what I'm here for. The full manuals are on the localizer chips,
encrypted beneath what ordinary techs are allowed to see."
Again that long, scattered stare: "We've looked. We don't see them."
This was the dangerous part. At best, Nau and Brughel would be taking a
very close look at Trinli's buffoon persona. At worst. . .if they realized he was
giving away secrets that even top armsmen wouldn't know, he'd be in serious
trouble. Pham pointed to a head-up display on Reynolt's desk. "Allow me," he
said.
Reynolt didn't react to his flippancy, but she did put on the huds and
accepted consensual imaging. Pham continued, "I remember the passcode. It's
long, though"-and the full version was keyed to his own body, but he didn't say
that. He tried several incorrect codes, and acted irritable and nervous when they
failed. A normal human, even Tomas Nau, would have expressed impatience-or
laughed.

aug ed.
Reynolt didn't say anything. She just sat there. But then, suddenly, "I have
no patience for this. Do not pretend incompetence."
She knew.In all the time since Triland, no one had ever seen this far behind
his cover. He'd hoped for more time; once they started using the localizers he
could write some new cover for himself.Damn. Then he remembered what
Silipan had said. Anne Reynolt knewsomething. Most likely, she had simply
concluded that Trinli was a reluctant informant.
"Sorry," Pham mumbled. He typed in the correct sequence.
A simple acknowledgment came back from the fleet library, chip doc
subsection. The glyphs floated silver on the air between them. The secret
inventory data, the component specifications.
"Good enough," said Reynolt. She did something with her control, and her
office seemed to vanish. The two of them floated through the inventory
information, and then they were standing within the localizers' specifications.
"As you said, temperature, sonics, light levels. . .multispectrum. But this is
more elaborate than you described at the meeting."
"I said it was good. These are just the details."
Reynolt spoke quickly, reviewing capability after capability. Now she
sounded almost excited. This was far beyond the corresponding Emergent
products. "A naked localizer, with a good sensorium and independent operation."
And she was seeing only the part that Pham wanted her to see.
"You do have to pulse it power."
"Just as well. That way we can limit its use till we thoroughly understand
it."
She flicked away the image, and they were sitting in her office again, the
lights sparkling cool off the rough walls. Pham could feel himself beginning to
sweat.
She wasn't even looking at him anymore. "The inventory showed several
million localizers in addition to those embedded in fleet hardware."
"Sure. Inactive, they pack into just a few liters."
Calm observation: "You were fools not to use them for security."
Pham glowered at her. "We armsmen knew what they could do. In a
military situation-"
But those were not the details in Anne Reynolt's Focus. She waved him
silent. "It looks like we have more than enough for our purposes."
The beautiful janissary looked back into Pham's face. For an instant, her
gaze stabbed directly into his eyes.
"You've made possible a new era of control, Armsman."
Pham looked into the clear blue eyes and nodded; he hoped she didn't

y
;
p
understand the full truth that she spoke. And now Pham realized how central she
was to all his plans. Anne Reynolt managed almost all the zipheads. Anne
Reynolt was Tomas Nau's direct control over operations. Anne Reynolt
understood the things about the Emergents that a successful revolutionary must
understand. And Anne Reynolt was a ziphead. She might figure out what he was
up to-or she might be the key to destroying Nau and Brughel.
Things never got completely quiet in an ad hoc habitat. The Traders' temp
was only a hundred meters across; the crew, bouncing around in it, created
stresses that could not be completely damped. And thermal stress made an
occasional loud snapping sound. But just now was in the middle of most of the
crew's sleep period; Pham Nuwen's little cabin was about as quiet as it ever got.
He floated in the darkened cabin, pretending to drowse. His secret life was about
to become very busy. The Emergents didn't know it, but they'd just been snared
by a trap that went deeper than most any Qeng Ho Fleet Captain knew about. It
was one of two or three scams that Pham Nuwen had set up long ago. Sura and a
few others had known about them, but even after Brisgo Gap, the knowledge
hadn't seeped into the general Qeng Ho armamentarium. Pham had always
wondered about that; Sura could be subtle.
How long would it take Reynolt and Brughel to retrain their people to use
the localizers? There were more than enough of the gadgets to run the L1 stab
operations, and also snoop all living spaces. At third meal, some of the comm
people had told of spikes in the temp's cable spine. Ten times a second, a
microwave pulse spread through the temp-enough wireless power to keep the
localizers well fed. Just before the beginning of the sleep period, he'd noticed the
first of the dustmotes come wafting through the ventilator. Right now, Brughel
and Reynolt were probably calibrating the system. Brughel and Nau would be
congratulating themselves on the quality of the sound and video. With good
luck, they would eventually phase out their own clunky spy devices; even if he
wasn't so lucky. . .well, in a few Msecs he would have the ability to subvert the
reports from them.
Something scarcely heavier than a dustmote settled on his cheek. He made
as if to wipe his face, and in the act settled the mote just beside his eyelid. A few
moments later he poked another deep within the channel of his right ear. It was
ironic, considering how much effort the Emergents had gone to, disabling
untrusted I/O devices.
The localizers did everything that Pham had told Tomas Nau. Just as such
devices had done through all of human history, these located one another in
geometrical space-a simple exercise, nothing more than a time-of-flight
computation. The Qeng Ho versions were smaller than most, could be powered

by wireless across short distances, and had a simple set of sensors. They made
great spy devices, just what Podmaster Nau needed. Localizers were by their
nature a type of computer network, in fact a type of distributed processor. Each
little dustmote had a small amount of computing ability-and they communicated
with one another. A few hundred thousand of them dusted across the Traders'
temp was more computing power than all the gear that Nau and Brughel had
brought aboard. Of course, all localizers-even the Emergent clunkers-had such
computational potential. The real secret of the Qeng Ho version was that no
added interface was necessary, for output or input. If you knew the secret, you
could access the Qeng Ho localizers directly, let the localizers sense your body
position, interpret the proper codings, and respond with built-in effectors. Itdidn't
matter that the Emergents had removed all front-end interfaces from the temp.
Now a Qeng Ho interface was all around them, for anyone who knew the secrets.
Access took special knowledge and some concentration. It was not
something that could happen by accident or under coercion. Pham relaxed in the
hammock, partly to pretend to finally fall asleep, partly to get in the mood for his
coming work. He needed a particular pattern of heartbeats, a particular cadence
of breathing.Do I even remember it anymore, after allthis time? The sharp
moment of panic took him aback. One mote by his eye, another in his ear; that
should be enough to provide alignment for the other localizers that must be
floating in the room. That should be enough.
But the proper mood still eluded him. He kept thinking back to Anne
Reynolt and to what Silipan had shown him. The Focused would see through his
schemes; it was just a matter of time. Focus was a miracle. Pham Nuwen could
have made the Qeng Ho a true empire-despite Sura's treachery-if only he'd had
Focused tools. Yes, the price was high. Pham remembered the rows of zombies
up in Hammerfest's Attic. He could see a dozen ways to make the system
gentler, but in the end, to use Focused tools, there would have to be some
sacrifice.
Was final success, a true Qeng Ho empire, worth that price? Could he pay
it?
Yes and yes!
At this rate he'd never achieve access state. He backed off, began the whole
relax cycle again. He let his imagination slide into memories. What had it been
like in the beginning times? Sura Vinh had delivered theReprise and a still very
naive Pham Nuwen to the megalopolis moons of Namqem. . .
He had remained at Namqem for fifteen years. They were the happiest
years of Pham Nuwen's life.
Sura's cousins were in-system, too-and they fell in love with the schemes

that Sura and her young barbarian proposed: a method of interstellar
synchronization, the trading of technical tricks where their own buying and
selling would not be affected, the prospect of a cohesive interstellar trading
culture. (Pham learned not to talk about his goals beyond that.) Sura's cousins
were back from some very profitable adventures, but they could see the limits of
isolated trading. Left to themselves, they would make fortunes, even keep them
for a time. . .but in the end they would be lost in time and the interstellar dark.
They had a gut appreciation for many of Pham's goals.
In some ways, his time with Sura at Namqem was like their first days on
theReprise. But this went on and on, the imaginings and the teaming ever richer.
And there were wonders that his hard head with all its grandiose plans had never
considered: children. He had never imagined how different a family could be
from the one of his birth. Ratko, Butra, and Qo were their first little ones. He
lived with them, taught them, played blinkertalk and evercatch with them,
showed them the wonders of the Namqem world park. Pham loved them far
more than himself, and almost as much as he loved Sura. He almost abandoned
the Grand Schedule to stay with them. But there would be other times, and Sura
forgave him. When he returned, thirty years later, Sura awaited, with news of
other parts of the Plan well under way. But by then their first three children were
themselves avoyaging, playing their own part in founding the new Qeng Ho.
Pham ended up with a fleet of three starships. There were setbacks and
disasters. Treachery. Zamle Eng leaving him for dead in Kielle's comet cloud.
Twenty years he was fleetless at Kielle, making himself a trillionaire from
scratch, just to escape the place.
Sura flew with him on several missions, and they raised new families on
half a dozen worlds. A century passed. Three. The mission protocols they had
devised on the oldReprise served them well, and across the years there were
reunions with children and children's children. Some were greater friends than
Ratko or Butra or Qo, but he never loved them quite so much. Pham could see
the new structure emerging. Now it was simply trade, sometimes leavened with
family ties. It would be much more.
The hardest thing was the realization that they needed someone at the
center, at least in the early centuries. More and more Sura stayed behind,
coordinating what Pham and others undertook.
And yet they still had children. Sura had new sons and daughters while
Pham was lightyears away. He joked with her about the miracle, though in truth
he was hurt at the thought she had other lovers. Sura had smiled gently and
shook her head. "No, Pham, any child I call my own is also of you." Her smile
turned mischievous. "Over the years, you have stuffed me with enough of
lf
bi h
I
'
h
if
ll
b
i I
ill "

yourself to birth an army. I can't use that gift all at once, but use it I will."
"No clones." Pham's word came out sharper than he intended.
"Lord, no." She looked away. "I. . .one of you is all I can handle."
Maybe she was just as superstitious as he was. Or maybe not: "No, I'm
using you in natural zygotes. I'm not always the other donor, or the only other
donor. Namqem medics are very good at this kind of thing." She turned back,
and saw the look on his face. "I swear, Pham, every one of your children has a
family. Every one is loved.. . .We need them, Pham. We need families and Great
Families. The Plan needs them."
She jabbed at him playfully, trying to jolly the disapproval from his face.
"Hey, Pham! Isn't this the wet dream of every conquering barbarian lord? Well,
I'll tell you, you've outfathered the greatest of them."
Yes. Thousands of children by dozens of partners, raised without personal
cost to the father. His own father had unsuccessfully attempted something much
smaller with his campaign of regicide and concubinage in the North Coast states.
Pham was getting it all without the murder, without the violence. And yet. . .how
long had Sura been doing this? How many children, and by how many "donors"?
He could imagine her now, planning bloodlines, slotting the right talents into the
founding of each new Family, dispersing them throughout the new Qeng Ho. He
felt the strangest double vision as he turned the situation around in his mind. As
Sura said, it was a barbarian wet dream. . .but it was also a little like being raped.
"I would have told you at the beginning, Pham. But I was afraid you would
object. And this is so important." In the end, Pham did not object. Itwould
advance their Plan. But it hurt to think of all the children he would never know.
Voyaging at 0.3c, Pham Nuwen traveled far. Everywhere there were
Traders, though beyond thirty lightyears, they rarely called themselves "Qeng
Ho." It didn't matter. They could understand the Plan. The ones he met spread
the ideas still farther. Wherever they went-and farther, since some were
convinced simply by the radio messages Pham sent across the dark-the spirit of
the Qeng Ho was spread.
Pham returned to Namqem again and again, bending the Grand Schedule
almost to its breaking point.
Sura was aging. She was two or three centuries old now. Her body was at
the limit of what medical science could make young and supple. Even some of
their children were old, living too long in port amid their voyaging. And
sometimes in Sura's eyes, Pham glimpsed unknowable experience.
Each time he returned to Namqem, he tossed the question up at her. Finally,
one night after love almost as good as they had ever had, he came close to
bawling. "This wasn't how it was supposed to be, Sura! The Plan was for both of

us. Come away with me. At least, go avoyaging."And wecan meet again and
again, however long we live.
Sura leaned back from him and slipped her hand behind his neck. Her smile
was crooked and sad. "I know. We thought we could both be fly-abouts. Strange
that that's the biggest mistake we had in all our original scheming. But, be
honest. You know that one of us has to stay in some central place, has to deal
with the Plan almost in one long Watch." There were a trillion little details
involved in conquering the universe, and they couldn't be handled while you
were in coldsleep.
"Yes, in the early centuries. But not for. . .not for your whole life!"
Sura shook her head, her hand brushing gently at his neck. "I'm afraid we
were wrong." She saw the look on his face, the anguish, and she drew him down
to her. "My poor barbarian prince." He could hear the fond, mocking smile in her
words. "You are my unique treasure. And do you know why? You're a flaming
genius. You're driven. But the reason I've always loved you is something more.
Inside your head, you are such a contradiction. Little Pham grew up in a
rundown suburb of Hell. You saw betrayal and you were betrayed. You
understand violent evil as well as the most bloody-handed villain. And yet, little
Pham also bought into all the myths of chivalry and honor and quest. Somehow
in your head, both live at once, and you've spent your life trying to make the
universe fit your contradictions. You will come very close to achieving that goal,
close enough for me or any reasonable person-but maybe not close enough to
satisfy yourself. So. I must stay if our Plan is to succeed. And you must go for
the same reason. Unfortunately you know that, don't you, Pham?"
Pham looked out the real windows that surrounded Sura's penthouse. They
were at the top of an office spire sticking high out of Namqem's largest
megalopolis moon. Tarelsk office real estate prices were in a frenzy that was
downright absurd considering the power of network communication. The last
time this tower had been on the open market, the annual rental on the penthouse
floor could havebought a starship. For the last seventy years, Qeng Ho Families-
mostly his and Sura's descendants-had owned the spire and huge swaths of the
surrounding office territory. It was the smallest part of their holdings, a nod to
fashion.
Just now, it was early evening. The crescent of Namqem hung low in the
sky; the lights of the Tarelsk business district rivaled the mother world's glow.
The Vinh & Mamso shipyards would rise in another Ksec or so. Vinh & Mamso
were probably the largest yards in Human Space. Yet even that was a small part
of their Families' wealth. And beyond that-stretching ever more tenuously to the
limits of Human Space, but growing still-was the cooperative wealth of the Qeng

Ho. He and Sura had founded the greatest trading culture in the history of all
time. That was how Sura saw it. That was all she ever saw. It was all she ever
wanted. Sura didn't mind that she wouldn't live in the era of their final success. .
.because she thought it would never come.
So Pham stilled the tears that waited behind his eyes. He slipped his arms
gently around Sura, and kissed her neck. "Yes, I know," he finally said.
Pham postponed his departure from Namqem for two years, five. He stayed
so long that the Grand
Schedule itself was broken. There would be appointments missed. Any
more delay and the Plan itself might fail. And when he finally left Sura,
something died inside him. Their partnership survived, even their love, in some
abstract way. But a chasm of time had opened between them and he knew they
could never bridge it again.
By the time he had lived one hundred years, Pham Nuwen had seen more
than thirty solar systems, a hundred cultures. There were Traders who had seen
more, but not many. Certainly Sura, huddled in planning mode back on
Namqem, never saw what Pham did. Sura had only books and histories, reports
from far away.
For sessile civilizations, even space-faring ones, nothing lasted forever. It
was something of a miracle that the human race had survived long enough to
escape Earth. There were so many ways that an intelligent race could make itself
extinct. Deadlocks and runaways, plagues, atmosphere catastrophes, impact
events-those were the simplest dangers. Humankind had lived long enough to
understand some of the threats. Yet, even with the greatest care, a technological
civilization carried the seeds of its own destruction. Sooner or later, it ossified
and politics carried it into a fall. Pham Nuwen had been born on Canberra in the
depths of a dark age. He knew now that the disaster had been mild by some
standards-after all, the human race had survived on Canberra even though it lost
its high technology. There were worlds that Pham visited multiple times during
his first hundred years. Sometimes, it was centuries between the visits. He saw
the utopia that had been Neumars fade into overpopulated dictatorship, the ocean
cities becoming slums for billions. Seventy years later, he came back to a world
with a population of one million, a world of small villages, of savages with
painted faces and hand-axes and songs of heartbreak. The voyage would have
been a bust, if not for the chants of Vilnios. But Neumars was lucky compared to
the dead worlds. Old Earth had been recolonized from scratch four times since
the diaspora began.
There had to be a better way, and every new world Pham saw made him
more sure that he knew that better way.Empire. A government so large that the

failure of an entire solar system would be a manageable disaster. The Qeng Ho
trading culture was a start. It would become the Qeng Ho trading empire. . .and
someday a true, governing empire. For the Qeng Ho were in a unique position.
At its peak, a Customer civilization possessed extraordinary science-and
sometimes made marginal improvements over the best that had ever existed
before. Most often, these improvements died when the civilization died. The
Qeng Ho, however-they went on forever, patiently gathering the best that could
be found. To Sura, that was the Qeng Ho's greatest trading edge.
To Pham Nuwen, it was more.Why should we trade back all that welearn?
Some, yes. That is largely how we make our living. But let us takethe glittering
peaks of all human progress-and hold them for the goodof all .
That was how the "Qeng Ho" localizers had come to be. Pham had been
aground on Trygve Ytre, as far from Namqem as he had ever voyaged. The
people were not even from the same ur-stock as the humans of familiar parts of
Human Space.
Trygve's sun was one of those dim little M stars, the vermin of the
colonizable galaxy. There were dozens of such stars for every one that was like
Old Earth's sun-and most had planets. They were dangerous places to settle, the
stellar ecosphere so narrow that a civilization without technology could not exist.
In the early millennia of Humankind's conquest of space, that fact had been
ignored, and a number of such worlds had been colonized. Ever optimistic, these
humans, thinking their technology would last forever. And then at the first Fall,
millions of people were left on a world of ice-or a world of fire, if the planet was
on the inner side of their star's ecosphere.
Trygve Ytre was a slightly safer variant, and a common situation: The star
was accompanied by a giant planet, Trygve, which orbited a bit outside of the
primary's ecosphere. The giant planet had just two moons, one of them Earth-
sized. Both were inhabited in the era when Pham visited. But the larger, Ytre,
was the gem. Tidal and direct heating from Trygve supplemented the sun's
meager output. Ytre had land and air and liquid oceans. The humans of Trygve
Ytre had survived at least one collapse of their civilization.
What they had now was a technology as high as Humankind ever attained.
Pham's little fleet of starships was welcomed, found decent shipyards in the
asteroid belt that lay a billion kilometers out from the sun. Pham left crews
aboard the ships, and took local transport inward, to Trygve and Ytre. This was
no Namqem, but these people had seen other Traders. They had also seen Pham's
ramscoops and his preliminary trading list. . .and most of what Pham had did not
measure up to Ytre's native magics.
Nuwen stayed on Ytre for a time, someweeks the locals called the unit, the

600Ksec or so that it took giant Ytre to orbit Trygve. Trygve itself orbited the
sun in just over 6Msec. So the Ytreisch calendar worked out neatly to ten weeks.
Though the world teetered between fire and ice, much of Ytre was
habitable. "We have a more climatestable world than Old Earth itself," the locals
bragged. "Ytre is deep within Trygve's gravity well, with no significant
perturbers. The tidal heating has been mellow across a geologic time." And even
the dangers were no big surprise. The M3 sun was just over one degree across. A
foolish person could look directly at the reddish disk, see the whorling of gasses,
see sunspots vast and dark. A few seconds of such sungazing could cause serious
retinal burns, since of course the star was far brighter in the near-IR than in
visible light. The recommended eye protectors looked like clear plastic, but
Pham was very careful to wear them.
His hosts-a group of local companies-put him up at their expense. He spent
his official time trying to learn more of their language and trying to discover
something his fleet had brought that might be worth something to his customers.
They were trying just as hard. It was something like industrial espionage in
reverse. The locals' electronics was a little better than Pham had ever seen,
though there were program improvements the Qeng Ho might suggest. Their
medical automation was significantly backward; that would be his foot in the
door, a place to haggle from.
Pham and his staff categorized all the things they might bring from this
encounter. It would pay for the voyage and more. But Pham heard rumors. His
hosts represented a number of-"cartels" was the nearest translation that Pham
could make of the word. They hid things from one another. The rumor was of a
new type of localizer, smaller than any made elsewhere, and needing no internal
power supply. Any improvement in localizers was a profitable item; the gadgets
were the positional glue that made embedded systems so powerful. But these
"super" localizers were alleged to contain sensors and effectors. If it was
anything more than rumor, it would have political and military consequences on
Ytre itself-destabilizing consequences.
By now, Pham Nuwen knew how to collect information in a technical
society, even one where he wasn't a fluent speaker, even one where he was being
watched. In four weeks he knew which cartel might have the maybe-existent
invention. He knew the name of its magnate: Gunnar Larson. The Larson cartel
had not mentioned the invention in their trading negotiations. It was not on the
table-and Pham didn't want to hint about it when others were present. He
arranged a face-to-face meeting with Larson. It was the sort of thing that would
have made sense even to Pham's aunts and uncles back on medieval Canberra,
though the technical subterfuge behind the meeting would have been

unintelligible to them.
Six weeks after his landfall on Ytre, Pham Nuwen walked alone through the
most exclusive open street in Dirby. Scattered clouds were reminders of the
recent rain. They showed pink and gray in the bright twilight. The sun had just
set in the deep heart of Trygve. Near the limb of the giant planet, an arch of gold
and red was the memory of the sun's passing into eclipse. The disk of the giant
stood across ten degrees of sky. Silent blue lightning flickered in its polar
latitudes.
The air was cool and moist, the breeze carrying some natural perfume.
Pham kept up his pace, pulling the leash tight every time his snarlihunds wanted
to investigate something off the promenade. His cover demanded that he take
things slowly, enjoy the view, wave in a courtly way to the similarly dressed
people who passed by. After all, what else would a rich, retired resident be doing
out in the open but admiring the lights and showing off his hunds? That's what
his contact had claimed anyway. "Security on Huskestrade isn't really tight. But
if you don't have an excuse to be there, the police may stop you. Take some prize
snarlihunds. That's legitimate reason to be on the promenade."
Pham's gaze took in the palaces that showed here and there through the
foliage along the promenade.
Dirby seemed like a peaceful place. There was security here. . .but if
enough people wanted to pull things down, it could be done in a single night of
fire and riot. The cartels played a hard commercial game, but their civilization
was coasting through the highest, happiest of its good times.. . .Maybe "cartels"
wasn't even the right word. Gunnar Larson and some of the other magnates put
on airs of deep, ancient wisdom. Larson was a boss man all right, but the word
for his rank meant something more than that. Pham knew the term "philosopher
king." But Larson was a businessman. Maybe his title meant "philosopher-
magnate."Hmm.
Pham reached the Larson estate. He turned down a private offway that was
almost as broad as the promenade. The output of his head-up display faded; after
a few more paces, he had only a natural view. Pham was annoyed but not
surprised. He walked on as if he owned the place, even let the hunds take a crap
behind a two-meter stand of flowers.Let thephilosopher-magnate understand my
deep respect for all the mystery.
"Please follow, Sir." A voice came quietly from behind him. Pham
suppressed a start, turned and nodded casually to the speaker. In the reddish
twilight he couldn't see any weapons. High in the sky and two million kilometers
away, a chain of blue lightning flickered bright on the face of Trygve. He got a
good look at his guide, and three others who had been hidden by the dark. They
b
b
h
ld '
i
h
ili
b
i
h h d
h

wore corporate robes, but he couldn't miss the military bearing, or the huds they
wore across their eyes.
He let them take the hunds. That was just as well. The four creatures were
big and carnivore-looking mean. They might be overbred into gentleness, but it
would take more than one twilight walk to make Pham a hund lover.
Pham and the remaining guards walked more than one hundred meters. He
had a glimpse of delicately turned branches, moss that sat just so at joints of the
roots. The higher the social position, the more these fellows went for rustic
nature-and the more perfect every detail had to be. No doubt this "forest path"
had been manicured for a century to capture untrammeled wildness.
The path opened onto a hillside garden, sitting above a stream and a pond.
The reddish arch of Trygve was enough for him to make out the tables, the small
human form that rose to greet him.
"Magnate Larson." Pham gave the little half bow he had seen between
equals. Larson reciprocated, and somehow Pham knew the other fellow was
grinning.
"Fleet Captain Nuwen.. . .Please take a seat."
There were cultures where trade couldn't begin until everyone is bored unto
death by irrelevant chitchat. Pham wasn't expecting that here. He was due back
in his hotel in 20Ksec-and it would be well for both of them if the other cartelists
didn't realize where Pham had been. Yet Gunnar Larson seemed in no hurry.
Occasional Trygve lightning showed him: typical Ytre stock, but very old, the
blondish hair thinning, the pale pink skin wrinkled. They sat in the flashing
twilight for more than 2Ksec. The old man chatting about Pham's history and the
past of Trygve Ytre.Hell, maybe he's gettingback at me for dumping in his
flowers. Or maybe it was something Ytreisch inscrutable. On the bright side, the
fellow spoke excellent Aminese and Pham wasn't backward in that language
either.
Larson's estate was strangely quiet. Dirby city contained almost a million
people, and though none of the buildings were monstrously tall, there was
urbanization to within a thousand meters of the high-class Huskestrade section.
Yet sitting here, the loudest sounds were Gunnar Larson's inane chitchat-and the
splashing of the little waterfall just down the hillside. Pham's eyes were well
adjusted now. He could see the reflection of Trygve's arching light in the pond.
He could see ripples when some large, shelled creature breached the surface.I'm
actually coming to like the cycle of lighton Ytre. Three weeks ago Pham would
have never thought that time could come. The nights and days were long beyond
any rhythm Pham could sustain, but the midday eclipses gave some respite. And
after a while you began to forget that almost every color was a shade of red.

There was a comfortable safeness about this world; these people had kept a
prosperous peace for almost a thousand years. So maybe there was wisdom here.
. .
Abruptly, without breaking the cadence of triviality, Larson said, "So you
think to learn the secret of Larson localizers?"
Pham knew his startled expression didn't go beyond his eyes.
"First I would like to learn if such things exist. The rumors are very
spectacular. . .and very vague."
The old man's teeth glinted in a smile. "Oh, they exist." He gestured around
them. "They give me eyes everywhere. They make this darkness into day."
"I see." The old man wasn't wearing a head-up. Could he guess at the
sardonic expression on Pham's face?
Larson laughed softly. "Oh yes." He touched his temple just behind the
orbit of his eye. "There's one resting right here. The others align on it and
precisely stimulate my optic nerve. It takes a lot of practice on both sides. But if
you have enough Larson localizers, they can handle the load. They can
synthesize views from whatever direction I choose." He made an obscure motion
with his hands. "Your facial expressions are as clear as day to me, Pham Nuwen.
And from the localizers that have dusted your hands and neck, I can even look
inside. I can hear your heart beat, your lungs breathe. With a little
concentration"-he cocked his head-"I can estimate blood flow within regions of
your brain.. . .You are sincerely surprised, young man."
Pham's lips tightened in anger at himself. The other had spent more than a
Ksec calibrating him. If this had been in an office, away from this garden and
this quiet darkness, he would have been much more on his guard. Pham
shrugged. "Your localizers are far and away the most interesting thing about the
current stage of Ytreisch civilization. I'm very interested in acquiring some
samples-even more interested in the program base, and the factory
specification."
"To what end?"
"That should be obvious and irrelevant. The important thing is what I can
give you in trade. Your medical science is poorer than at Namqem or Kielle."
Larson seemed to nod. "It's worse than we had here before the Fall. We've
never recovered all the old secrets."
"You called me 'young man," ' said Pham, "but what is your own age, sir?
Ninety? One hundred?" Pham and his staff had looked carefully at the Ytreisch
net, gauging the locals' medical science.
"Ninety-one of your thirty-Msec years," said Larson.
"Well, sir, I have lived a hundred and twenty-seven years. That doesn't

count coldsleep, of course."And I look like a young man.
Larson was silent for a long moment, and Pham was sure that he had scored
a point. Maybe these "philosopher-magnates" weren't so inscrutable.
"Yes, I would like to be young again. And millions would spend millions
for the same. What can your medicine give?"
"A century or two, looking about as you see me. Two or three centuries
after that, visibly aging."
"Ah. That's even a bit better than we achieved before the Fall. But the very
old will look as bad and suffer as much as the old always have. There are
intrinsic limits to how far the human body can be pushed."
Pham was politely silent, but he smiled inside. Medicine was the hook, all
right. Pham would get their localizers in return for decent medical science. Both
sides would benefit enormously. Magnate Larson would live a few extra
centuries. If he was lucky, the current cycle of his civilization would outlive him.
But a thousand years from now, when Larson was dust, when his civilization had
fallen as the planetbound inevitably did-a thousand years from now, Pham and
the Qeng Ho would still be flying between the stars. And they would still have
the Larson localizers.
Larson was making a strange, soft sound. After a moment, Pham realized it
was coughing laughter. "Ah, forgive me. You may be a hundred and twenty-
seven years old, but you are still a young man in your mind. You hide behind the
dark and an expressionless face-don't be offended. You haven't trained at the
right disguises. With my localizers I see your pulse and the blood flow in your
brain.. . .You think that someday you'll dance on my grave, no?"
"I-"Damn. An expert, using the very best invasive probes, couldn't see that
much about another's attitude. Larson was just guessing-or the localizers were
even more a treasure than Pham had thought. Pham's awe and caution were
tinged with anger. The other was mocking him. Well then, truly: "In a sense, yes.
If you accept the trade I'm hoping for, you will live just as many years as I. But I
am Qeng Ho. I sleep decades between the stars. You Customer civilizations are
ephemera to us."There. That shouldraise yourblood pressure.
"Fleet Captain, you remind me a little of Fred down there in the pool.
Again, no real insult intended. Fred is aluksterfiske. " He must be talking about
the creature that Pham had noticed diving near the waterfall. "Fred is curious
about lots of things. He's been hopping around since you arrived, trying to figure
you out. Can you see, right now he's sitting at the edge of the pond? Two
armored tentacles are tickling the grass about three meters from your feet."
Pham felt a shock of surprise. He had thought those werevines. He followed
the slender limbs back to the water. . .yes, there were four eye stalks, four

unblinking eyes. They glittered yellow in the waning light of
Trygve's sky arch. "Fred has lived a long time. Archeologists have found
his breeding documents, a little experiment with native wildlife just before the
Fall. He was some rich man's pet, about as smart as a hund. But Fred is very old.
He lived through the Fall. He was something of a legend in these parts. You are
right, Fleet Captain; if you live long enough you see much. In the Middle Ages,
Dirby was first a ruin, then the beginning of a great kingdom-its lords mined the
secrets of the earlier age, to their own great profit. For a time, this hillside was
the senate of those rulers. During the Renaissance, this was a slum and the lake
at the bottom of the hill an open sewer. Even the name 'Huskestrade'-the epitome
of high-class modern Dirby addresses-, once meant something like 'Street of the
Outhouses.'
"But Fred survived it all. He was the legend of the sewers, his existence
disbelieved by sensible folk until three centuries ago. Now he lives with full
honor-in the cleanest water." There was fondness in the old man's voice. "So
Fred has lived long, and he's seen much. He's still intellectually alive, as much as
aluksterfiske can be. Witness his beady eyes upon us. But Fred knows far less of
the world and his own history than I do from reading history."
"Not a valid analogy. Fred is a dumb animal."
"True. You are a bright human and you fly between the stars. You live a
few hundred years, but those years are spread across a span as great as Fred's.
What more do you really see? Civilizations rise and fall, but all technical
civilizations know the greatest secrets now. They know which social
mechanisms normally work, and which ones quickly fail. They know the means
to postpone disaster and evade the most foolish catastrophes. They know that
even so, each civilization must inevitably fall. The electronics that you want
from me may not exist anywhere else in Human Space-but I'm sure that
equipment that good has been invented by humans before, and will be again.
Similarly for the medical technology you correctly assume we want from you.
Humankind as a whole is in a steady state, even if our domain is slowly
expanding. Yes, compared to you I am like a bug in the forest, alive for one day.
But I see as much as you; I live as much as you. I can study my histories and the
radio accounts that float between the stars. I can see all the variety of triumph
and barbarism that you Qeng Ho do."
"We gather the best. With us it never dies."
"I wonder. There was another trading fleet that came to Trygve Ytre when I
was a young man. They were totally unlike you. Different language, different
culture. Interstellar traders are simply a niche, not a culture." Sura argued that,
too. Here, in this ancient garden, the quiet words seemed to weigh more heavily

than when Sura Vinh spoke them; Gunnar Larson's voice was almost hypnotic.
"Those earlier traders did not have your airs, Fleet Captain. They hoped to make
their fortune, to ultimately go somewhere else and set up a planetary
civilization."
"Then they would no longer be Traders."
"True; perhaps they would be something more. You've been in many
planetary systems. Your manifest says you've spent a number of years at
Namqem, long enough to appreciate a planetary civilization. We have hundreds
of millions of people living within a few light-seconds of each other. The local
net that spans Trygve Ytre gives almost every citizen a view on Human Space
that you can only have when you come to port.. . .More than anything, your
trading life between the stars is a Ruritania of the Mind."
Pham didn't recognize the reference, but he got the other's point. "Magnate
Larson, I wonder that you want to live long. You have everything figured out-a
universe free of progress, where all things die and no good is accumulated."
Pham's words were partly sarcasm, partly honest puzzlement. Gunnar Larson
had opened windows, and the view was bleak.
Barely audible, a sigh. "You don't read very much, do you, son?" Strange.
Pham did not think the other was probing anymore. There was something like
sad amusement in the question.
"I read enough." Sura herself complained that Pham spent too much time
with manuals. But Pham had started late, and had spent his whole life trying to
catch up. So what if his education was a little skewed?
"You ask me the real point of it all. Each of us must take his own path on
that, Fleet Captain. Different paths have their own advantages, their own perils.
But for your own, human, sake. . .you should consider: Each civilization has its
time. Each science has its limits. And each of us must die, living less than half a
thousand years. If you truly understand those limits. . .then you are ready to
grow up, to know what counts." He was silent for a while. "Yes. . .just listen to
the peace. It's a gift to be able to do that. Too much time is spent in frenzied
rushing. Listen to the breeze in thelestras. Watch Fred try to figure us out. Listen
to the laughter of your children and your grandchildren. Enjoy the time you
have, however it is given to you, and for however long."
Larson leaned back in his chair. He seemed to be staring out at the starless
darkness that was the center of Trygve's disk. The arch of light from the eclipsed
sun was dim and uniform all around the disk. The lightning had long since
vanished; Pham guessed that seeing it was some function of viewing angle and
the orientation of Trygve's thunderheads. "An example, Fleet Captain. Sit and
feel and see: sometimes, at mid-eclipse, there is an especial beauty. Watch the
iddl
f T
' di k " S
d
d Ph
d
d T
' l

middle of Trygve's disk." Seconds passed. Pham stared upward. Trygve's lower
latitudes were normally so dark. . .but now: There was faint red, first so dim that
Pham thought it might just be a figment of suggestibility. The light brightened
slowly, a deep, deep red, like sword steel still too cold for the hammer. There
were bands of dark crossing it.
"The light is from the depths of Trygve itself. You know we get some direct
warming from the planet.
Sometimes, when the cloud canyons are oriented just right and the upper
storms are gone, we have a very deep view-and we can see its glow with the
naked eye." The light came a little brighter. Pham glanced around the garden.
Everything was in shades of red, but he could see more now than he had
glimpsed in the lightning. The tall, stranded trees above the pond-they were part
of the waterfall, guiding the water in extra swirls and pools. Clouds of flying
things moved between the tree branches, and for a few moments they sang. Fred
had climbed all the way out of the pond. He sat on multiple leg paddles and his
shorter tentacles twitched upward, toward the light in the sky.
They watched in silence. Pham had observed Trygve with multispec on the
way in from the asteroids. He wasn't seeing anything now that was news to him.
The whole show was just a happenstance of geometry and timing. And yet. .
.being tied to a single place, on a course that was determined beyond human
control, he could see how Customers might be impressed when the universe
chose to reveal something. It was ridiculous, but he could feel some of the awe
himself.
And then Trygve's heart was dark again and the singing in the trees died
away; the whole show had lasted less than one hundred seconds.
It was Larson who broke the silence. "I'm sure we can do business, my
young-old man. In a measure I shouldn't reveal, we do want your medical
technology. But still, I would be grateful for your answer to my original
question. What will you do with the Larson localizers? Among the unsuspecting,
they are an espionage miracle. Abused, they lead to ubiquitous law enforcement,
and a quick end to civilization. Who will you sell them to?"
For some reason, Pham answered him frankly. As the eastern limb of
Trygve slowly brightened, Pham explained his vision of empire, the empire of
all Humankind. It was something that he had never told a mere Customer. It was
something he told only certain Qeng Ho, the ones who seemed the brightest and
the most flexible. Even then, most could not accept the whole plan. Most were
like Sura, rejecting Pham's real goal, but more than willing to profit from a
genuine Qeng Ho culture.. . ."So, we may keep the localizers to ourselves. It will
cost us trade, but there is anedge we need over the Customer civilizations. The

common language, the synchronized voyage plans, our public databases-all
those things will give our Qeng Ho a cohesive culture. But tricks like these
localizers will take us a step beyond that. In the end, we will not be random
occupiers of the 'trading niche'; we will be the surviving culture of Humankind."
Larson was silent for a long moment. "It's a marvelous dream you have,
son," Larson said. The obscure amusement was gone from his voice. "A League
of Humankind, breaking the wheel of time. I'm sorry, I cannot believe we'll ever
reach the summit of your dream. But the foothills, the lower slopes of it. . .those
are something marvelous, and perhaps attainable. The bright times could be
brighter and they could last longer. . . ."
Larson was an extraordinary person, customer or no. But for whatever
reason, he had the same blinders as Sura Vinh. Pham slumped back onto the soft
wooden bench. After a moment, Larson continued. "You're disappointed. You
respected me enough to hope for more. You see rightly about many things, Fleet
Captain. You see marvelously clear for someone from. . .Ruritania." His voice
seemed to smile gently. "You know, my family's lineage is two thousand years
deep. That's a blink of the Trader's eye-but only because Traders spend most of
their time in sleep. And beyond the wisdom we have gathered directly, I and
those before me have read of other places and times, a hundred worlds, a
thousand civilizations. There are things about your ideas that could work. There
are things about your ideas that are more plausibly hopeful than anything since
the Age of Failed Dreams. I think I have insights that could be helpful. . . ."
They talked through the rest of the eclipse, as the eastern limb of Trygve
brightened, and the sun's disk formed out of the planet's depths and climbed
toward open sky. The sky brightened into blue. And still they talked. Now it was
Gunnar Larson who had the most to say. He was trying to be clear, and Pham
was recording what the old man said. But maybe Aminese was not such a perfect
mutual language as he thought; there was a lot of it that Pham never understood.
Along the way, they hit a deal for Pham's entire medical manifest, and for
the Larson localizers. There were other items-a breeding sample of the mid-
eclipse song creatures-but overall the trading was very easy. There was so much
benefit going in both directions. . .and Pham was overwhelmed by the other
things that Gunnar Larson had to say, the advice that might be worthless but that
had the stench of wisdom.
Pham's voyage to Trygve Ytre was one of the more profitable of his trading
career, but it was that dark-red conversation with the Ytreisch mystic that stuck
the deepest in Pham Nuwen's memory. Afterward, he was certain Larson had
used some kind of psychoactive drugs on him; Pham could never have been so
suggestible otherwise. But. . .maybe it didn't matter. Gunnar Larson had had

good ideas-the ones Pham could understand, anyway. That garden and the sense
of peace that surrounded it-those were powerful, impressive things. Coming
back from Trygve Ytre, Pham understood the peace that came from a living
garden, and he understood the power of the mereappearance of wisdom. The
two insights could be combined. Biologicals had always been a critical trade
item. . .but now they would be more. The new Qeng Ho would have an ethic of
living things at its heart. Every vehicle that could support a park should have
one. The Qeng Ho would gather the best of living things as fanatically as they
did the best of technology. That part of the old man's advice had been very clear.
Qeng Ho would have a reputation for understanding living things, for a timeless
attachment to nature.
Thus were the park and bonsai traditions born. The parks were a major
overhead, but in the millennia since Trygve Ytre, they had become the deepest
and most loved of all the Qeng Ho traditions.
And Trygve Ytre and Gunnar Larson? Larson was millennia dead, of
course. The civilization at Ytre had barely outlived the man. There had been an
era of ubiquitous law enforcement, and some kind of distributed terror. Most
likely, Larson's own localizers had precipitated the end. All the wisdom, all the
inscrutability, hadn't helped his world much.
Pham shifted in his sleep hammock. Thinking about Ytre and Larson
always left him uneasy. It was wasted time. . .except tonight. Tonight he needed
the mood of the time after that meeting. He needed something of the kinesthetic
memory of dealing with the localizers. There must be dozens in this room by
now. What was the pattern of motion and body state that would trigger them to
talk back to him? Pham pulled the hammock wrap fully over his hands. Inside,
his fingers played at a phantom keyboard. Surely that was too obvious. Until he
had rapport, nothing like keystrokes should have an effect. Pham sighed,
changed breathing and pulse yet again . . .and recaptured the awe of his first
practice sessions with the Larson localizers.
A pale blue light, bluer than blue, blinked once near the edge of his vision.
Pham opened his eyes a slit.
The room was midnight dark. The light from the sleep panel was too faint
to reveal colors. Nothing moved except the slow drifting of his hammock in the
ventilator's breeze. The blue light had been from elsewhere. From inside his
optic nerve. Pham closed his eyes, repeated the breathing exercise. The blue,
blinking light appeared once more. It was the effect of a localizer array's
synthesized beam, guiding off the two he had set by his temple and in his ear. As
communication went, it was very crude, no more impressive than the random
sparkles that most people ignore all the time. The system was programmed to be

very cautious about revealing itself. This time he kept his eyes closed, and didn't
change the level of his breath or the calmness of his pulse. He curled two fingers
toward his palm. A second passed. The light blinked again, responding. Pham
coughed, waited, moved his right arm just so. The blue light blinked: One, Two,
Three. . .it was a pulse train, counting binary for him. He echoed back to it, using
the codes that he had set up long ago.
He was past the challenge/response module.He was in! The lights that
flickered behind his eyes were almost random stimuli. It would take Ksecs to
train the localizer net to the precision that this sort of display could have. The
optic nerve was simply too large, too complex for instantly clear video. No
matter. The net was reliably talking to him now. The old customizations were
coming out of hiding. The localizers had established his physical parameters; he
could talk to them in any number of ways from now on. He had almost 3Msec
remaining in his current Watch. That should be time enough to do the absolutely
necessary, to invade the fleet net and establish a new cover story. What would it
be? Something shameful, yes. Some shameful reason for "Pham Trinli" to play
the buffoon all these years. A story that Nau and Brughel could relate to and
think to use as a lever against him. What?
Pham felt a smile steal across his face.Zamle Eng, may your slave-trading
soul rot in Hell. You caused me so much grief. Maybe you can dome some
posthumous good.

TWENTY-THREE
"The Children's Hour of Science." What an innocent name. Ezr returned
from his long off-Watch to find that it had become his personal nightmare.Qiwi
promised; how could she let this happen? But every live show was more of a
circus than the last.
And today's might be the worst yet. With good luck it might also be the last.
Ezr drifted into Benny's about a thousand seconds before show time. Till
the last moment, he'd intended to watch it from his room, but masochism had
won another round. He settled into the crowd and listened silently to the chatter.
Benny's booze parlor had become the central institution of their existence at
L1. The parlor was sixteen years old now. Benny himself was on a twentyfive-
percent duty cycle; he and his father shared the running of the place with Gonle
Fong and others. The old wallpaper had blistered in places, and in some places
the illusion of three-dimensional view was lost. Everything here was unofficial,
either appropriated from other sites in the L1 cloud, or made from diamonds and
ice and airsnow. Ali Lin had even come up with a fungal matrix that allowed the
growing of incredible wood, complete with grain and something like growth
rings. Sometime during Ezr's long absence, the bar and the walls had all been
paneled in dark, polished wood. It was a comfortable place, almost what free
Qeng Ho might make. . .
The parlor's tables were carved with the names of people you might not
have seen for years, people on Watch shifts that didn't overlap your own. The
picture above the bar was a continuously updated copy of Nau's Watch Chart. As
with most things, the Emergents used standard Qeng Ho notation. A single
glance at the chart and you could see how many Msecs-objective time or
personal-it would be before you ever met any particular person.
During Ezr's off-Watch, Benny had added to the Watch Chart. Now it
showed the current Spider date, in Trixia's notation: 60//21. The twenty-first year
of the current Spider "generation," which was the sixtieth sun-cycle since the
founding of some dynasty or other. There was an old Qeng Ho saying, "You
know you've stayed too long when you start using the locals' calendar." 60//21.
Twenty-one years since the Relight, since Jimmy and the others had died. After
the generation and year number, there were the day number and the time in
Ladille "hours" and "minutes," a base-sixty system that the translators had never
bothered to rationalize. And now everyone who came to the bar could read those
times as easily as they could read a Qeng Ho chron. They knew to the second

when Trixia's show would begin.
Trixia's show.Ezr ground his teeth hard together. A public slave show, and
the worst of it was that no one seemed to care.Bit by bit, we arebecoming
Emergents.
Jau Xin and Rita Liao and half a dozen other couples-two of them Qeng
Ho-were clustered around their usual tables, babbling about what might happen
today. Ezr sat at the periphery of the group, fascinated and repelled. Nowadays,
even some of the Emergents were his friends. Jau Xin, for instance. Xin and
Liao had much of the Emergent moral blindness, but they also had touching,
human problems. And sometimes, when no one else might notice, Ezr saw
something in Xin's eyes. Jau was bright, academically inclined. Except for his
good luck in the Emergent lottery, his university days would have ended in
Focus. Most Emergents could double-think their way around such things;
sometimes Jau could not.
"-so afraid this will be the last show," Rita Liao looked genuinely
distraught. "Don't gloom on it, Rita. We don't even know if this is a serious
problem."
"That's for sure." Gonle Fong drifted in headfirst, from above. She
distributed flasks of Diamonds and Ice all around. "I think the zipheads-" She
glanced apologetically at Ezr. "-I think the translators have finally lost it. The
ads for this show just don't make any sense."
"No, no. They're really quite clear." It was one of the Emergents, with a
fairly good explanation of what the "out-of-phase perversion" was all about. The
problem wasn't with the translators; the problem was with the human ability to
accept the bizarre.
"The Children's Hour of Science" had been one of the first voice broadcasts
that Trixia and the others had translated. Just mapping audio to the previously
translated written forms had been a triumph. The early shows-fifteen objective
years ago-had been printed translations. They'd been discussed in Benny's parlor,
but with the same abstract interest as the latest ziphead theories about the OnOff
star. As the years passed, the show had become popular for itself.Fine. But
sometime in the last 50Msec, Qiwi Lin had worked a deal with Trud Silipan.
Every nine or ten days, Trixia and the other translators were put on exhibit, a
live show. So far this Watch, Ezr hadn't spoken more than ten words to Qiwi.She
promised to look afterTrixia. What do you say to someone who breaks such a
promise? Even now, he didn't believe Qiwi was a traitor. But she was in bed
with Tomas Nau. Maybe she used that "position" to protect Qeng Ho interests.
Maybe. In the end, it all seemed to benefit Nau.
Ezr had seen four "performances" now. More than any normal human
f

translator, far more than any machine system, each ziphead put emotion and
body language into the interpretation.
"Rappaport Digby" was the zipheads' name for the show's host. (Wheredo
they get those crazy
names?People still asked that. Ezr knew the names came mostly from
Trixia. That was one of the few things he and Trixia could really talk about, his
knowledge of the First Classicism. Sometimes she asked him for new words. In
fact,Ezr had suggested the "Digby" name, years ago. The word fit something she
saw in the background of this particular Spider.) Ezr knew the translator who
played Rappaport Digby. Outside of the show, Zinmin Broute was a typical
ziphead, irritable, fixated, uncommunicative. But now, when he appeared as the
Spider Rappaport Digby, he was kindly and garrulous, a patient explainer to
children.. . .It was like seeing a zombie briefly animated by someone else's soul.
Each new Watch saw the Spider children a little differently. After all, most
Watches were only a twentyfive-percent duty cycle; the Spider children lived
four years for every one that most spacers lived. Rita and some of the others took
to visualizing human children to go with the voices. The pictures were scattered
across the parlor's wallpaper. Pictures of imaginary human children, with the
names Trixia had chosen. "Jirlib" was short, with tousled dark hair and a
mischievous smile. "Brent" was larger, not as cocky-looking as his brother.
Benny had told him how Ritser Brughel once replaced the smiling faces with
pictures of real Spiders: low-slung, skeletal, armored-images from the statuary
Ezr had seen in his landing on Arachna, supplemented with low-res pics from
the snoopersats.
Brughel's vandalism hadn't mattered; he didn't understand what was behind
the popularity of "The
Children's Hour." Tomas Nau obviouslydid understand, and was perfectly
content that the customers at Benny's booze parlor could sublimate the greatest
personnel problem his little kingdom faced. Even more than the Qeng Ho
expedition, the Emergents had expected to live in luxury. They had expected that
there would be ever-expanding resources, that marriages planned at home could
result in children and families here in the OnOff system. . .
Now all that was postponed.Our own out-of-phase taboo. Couples like Xin
and Liao had only their dreams for the future-and the children's words and
children's thoughts that came from the translation of "The Children's Hour."
Even before the live shows, the humans noticed that all the children were
the same age. Year by Arachnan year they aged, but when new children came on
the show, they were the same age as those replaced. The earliest translations had
been lessons about magnetism and static electricity, all free of mathematics.
L t
th l
i t
d
d
l
i
d
tit ti
th d

Later the lessons introduced analysis and quantitative methods.
About two years ago, there had been a subtle change, remarked on in the
ziphead's written reports-and instantly, instinctively noticed by Jau Xin and Rita
Liao: "Jirlib" and "Brent" had appeared on the show. They were introduced as
any other children, but Trixia's translations made them seemyounger than the
others. Showmaster Digby never remarked on the difference, and the math and
science in the show continued to become more sophisticated.
"Victory Junior" and "Gokna" were the latest additions to the cast, new on
this Watch. Ezr had seen Trixia play them. Her voice had hopped with childish
impatience; sometimes she had bubbled with laughter. Rita's pictures showed
these two Spiders as laughing seven-year-olds. It was all too pat. Why should the
average age of children on the show be declining? Benny claimed the
explanation was obvious. "The Children's Hour" must be under new
management. The ubiquitous Sherkaner Underhill was credited with writing the
lessons now. And Underhill was apparently the father of all the new children.
By the time Ezr had returned from coldsleep, the show was packing the
parlor to capacity. Ezr saw four performances, each a private horror for him.
And then, surcease. "The Children's Hour" had not been broadcast for twenty
days now. Instead, there had been a stern announcement: "After numerous
listener allegations, the owners of this broadcasting station have determined that
the family of Sherkaner Underhill practices the out-of-phase perversion. Pending
resolution of this situation, broadcasts of 'The Children's Hour of Science' are
suspended." Broute had read the announcement with a voice quite unlike that of
Rappaport Digby. The new voice was cold and distant, and full of indignation.
For once, the alienness of Arachna penetrated all the glib wishful thinking.
So Spider tradition only allowed new children at the beginning of a New Sun.
Generations were strictly separated, each marching through life as a same-aged
group. The humans had only guesses for why this should be the case, but
apparently "The Children's Hour" had been a cover for a major violation of the
taboo. The show missed one scheduled broadcast, two. In Benny's booze parlor,
things were sad and empty; Rita began to talk of taking down the silly pictures.
And Ezr began to hope that maybe this was the end of the circus.
But that was too much to hope. Four days ago, the gloom had abruptly
lifted, even if the mystery remained. Broadcasts from radio stations all across the
"Goknan Accord" announced that a spokesman for the Church of the Dark
would meet in debate with Sherkaner Underhill about the "propriety" of his radio
show. Trud Silipan had promised that the zipheads would be ready, able to
translate this new show format.
Now Benny's show-time clock was counting down the seconds to this
special edition of "The Children's Hour "

special edition of The Children s Hour.
In his usual place on the other side of the parlor, Trud Silipan seemed to
ignore the suspense. He and
Pham Trinli were talking in low tones. The two were constant drinking
buddies, planning great deals that never seemed to go anywhere.Funny, I used to
think Trinli was a loud buffoon. Pham's "magic localizer" claims had not been a
bluff; Ezr had noticed the dustmotes. Nau and Brughel had begun using the
gadgets. Somehow, Pham Trinli had known a secret about the localizers that had
been missing from the innermost sections of the fleet library. Ezr Vinh might be
the only one to realize it, but Pham Trinli was not totally a buffoon. More and
more, Ezr guessed that the old man was in no part a fool. There were secrets
hidden all through the fleet library; there had to be in anything that old and that
large. But for a secret that important to be known by this man. . .Pham Trinli
must go back along way.
"Hey, Trud!" shouted Rita, pointing at the clock. "Where are your
zipheads?" The parlor's wallpaper still looked out on the forests of some
Balacrean nature preserve.
Trud Silipan rose from his table and floated down before the crowd. "It's
okay, folks. I just got word.
Princeton Radio has started the 'Children's Hour' intro. Director Reynolt
will bring out the zipheads in a moment. They're still synching with the word
stream."
Liao's irritation melted away. "Great! Good going, Trud."
Silipan gave a bow, accepting kudos for what was a zero contribution on his
part. "So, in a few moments we should know what strange things this Underhill
creature has been doing with his children.. . ." He cocked his head, listening to
his private data feed. "And here they are!"
The dripping, blue-green forest landscape disappeared. The bar side of the
room suddenly seemed to extend into one of the meeting rooms down on
Hammerfest. Anne Reynolt slid in from the right, her form distorted by the
perspective angle; that part of the wallpaper just couldn't handle 3D. Behind
Reynolt came a couple of technicians and five zipheads. . .Focused persons. One
of those was Trixia.
This was where Ezr wanted to start screaming-or run off to some dark place
and pretend the world didn't exist. Normally the Emergents hid their zipheads
deep within their systems, as if they felt some remnant shame. Normally the
Emergents liked to get results from computer and head-up displays, all graphics
and hygienically filtered data. Benny had told him that in the beginning Qiwi's
freak show had just been the zipheads' voices piped into the parlor. Then Trud
told everyone about the translators' byplay and the show went visual Surely the

told everyone about the translators  byplay, and the show went visual. Surely the
zipheads couldn't intuit body language from a Spider audio. That didn't seem to
matter; the byplay might be nonsense, but it was what the ghouls around him
wanted.
Trixia was dressed in loose fatigues. Her hair floated out, partly tangled.
Ezr had combed it sleek less than 40Ksec earlier. She shrugged off her handlers
and grabbed the edge of a table. She was looking this way and that, and
mumbling to herself. She wiped her face on the sleeve of her fatigue blouse and
pulled herself down to a chair restraint. The others followed her, looking as
abstracted as Trixia. Most were wearing huds. Ezr knew the sort of thing they
were seeing and hearing, the midlevel transduction of the Spider language. That
was Trixia's entire world.
"We're synched, Director," one of the techs said to Reynolt.
The Emergent Director for Human Resources floated down the rank of
slaves, moving the fidgeting zipheads about for reasons that Ezr couldn't guess.
After all this time, Ezr knew the woman had a special talent. She was a stone-
eyed bitch, but she knew how to get results from zipheads.
"Okay, start 'em running-" She moved up, out of the way. Zinmin Broute
had risen against his seat, and was already speaking in his ponderous
announcer's voice. "My name is Rappaport Digby, and this is 'The Children's
Hour of Science.'. . ."
Daddy took them all to the radio station that day. Jirlib and Brent were up
on the top deck of the car, acting very serious and grown-up-and they looked
near enough to in-phase that they didn't attract attention. Rhapsa and Little
Hrunk were still tiny enough to perch in Daddy's fur; it might be another year
before they rejected being called the babies of the family.
Gokna and Victory Junior sat in the back, each on her separate perch.
Victory stared out through the smoky glass at the streets of Princeton. This all
made her feel a little like royalty. She tilted her head slyly in her sister's
direction; maybe Gokna was her handmaiden.
Gokna sniffed imperiously. They were alike enough that she was certainly
thinking the same thing-with herself as Great Ruler. "Daddy, if you're doing the
show today, why are we even along?"
Daddy laughed. "Oh, you never know. The Church of the Dark thinks they
own the Right. But I wonder if their debater even knows any out-of-phase
children. Underneath all the indignation, she might be likable. In person, she
might not be able to breathe fire on little ones just because they aren't the right
age."
That was possible. Victory thought of Uncle Hrunk, who hated the idea of
their family. . .and loved them at the same time.

their family. . .and loved them at the same time.
The car drove through crowded streets, up the crosstown avenue that led to
the radio hills. Princeton
Station was the oldest in the city-Daddy said it began broadcasting before
the last Dark, when it was a military radio station. In this generation, the owners
had built on the original foundations. They could have had their studios in town,
but they made a big thing of their great tradition. So the drive to the station was
exciting, wrapping round and round a hill that was the tallest ever, much taller
than even the one they lived on. Outside, there was still morning frost on the
ground. Victory pushed over onto Gokna's perch and the two swayed out for a
better look. This was the middle of winter, and they were almost to the Middle
Years of the Sun, but this was only the second time they had seen frost. Gokna
jabbed a hand out toward the east. "Look, we're high enough now-you can see
the Craggies!"
"And there'ssnow on them!" The two squealed the words together. But the
distant glint was really the color of morning frost. It might be a couple more
years before firstsnow came to the Princeton area, even in midwinter. What
would it be like to walk in snow? What would it be like to fall in a drift of it? For
a moment, the two pondered the questions, forgetting the other events of the
day-the radio debate that had preoccupied everyone, even the General, for the
last ten days.
At first, all of the cobblies and especially Jirlib had been afraid of this
debate. "It's the end of the show," their elder brother said. "Now the public
knows about us." The General had come up from Lands Command especially to
tell them there was nothing to worry about, that Daddy would take care of the
complaints. But she didn't say they would get their radio show back again.
General Victory Smith was used to briefing troops and staff. She didn't quite
have the knack for reassuring children. Secretly, Gokna and Victory thought that
maybe this flap about the radio show made Mom more nervous than any of the
wartime adventures that lurked in her past.
Daddy was the only one who wasn't caught in the gloom. "This is what I've
been waiting for all along," he told Mom when she came up from Lands
Command. "It's more than time to go public. This debate will bring lots of things
out into the open." Those were the same ideas that Mom spoke of, but from
Daddy they sounded joyous. The last ten days, he had been playing with them
even more than usual. "You're my special experts for this debate, so I can spend
all my time with you and still be the dutiful worker." He had sidled dolefully
from side to side, pretending to work at an invisible job. The babies had loved it,
and even Jirlib and Brent seemed to accept their father's optimism. The General
had departed for the south the night before; as usual, she had lots more to worry

p
g
;
,
y
about than family problems.
The top of Radio Hill was above the tree line. Low furze covered the
ground by the parking circle. The children got out, marveling at the chill that
was still in the air. Little Victory felt an odd burning all along her breathing
passages, as if. . .as iffrost was forming there. Was that possible?
"Come along children. Gokna, don't gawk." Daddy and his older sons
herded them up the broad old steps of the station. The stone was flame-pitted
and unpolished, like the owners wanted people to think they represented some
ancient tradition.
The walls inside were hung with photo-impressions, portraits of the owners
and the inventors of radio (the same people, in this case). All of them except
Rhapsa and Hrunk had been here before. Jirlib and Brent had been doing the
radio show for two years, taking over from the in-phase children when Daddy
bought the show's franchise. Both boys sounded older than they really were, and
Jirlib was smart as most adults. Nobody had seemed to suspect their true age.
Daddy had been a little irritated by that. "I want people to guess on their own-but
they're too foolish to imagine the truth!" So finally, Gokna and Victory Junior
had been added to the show. That had been fun, pretending to be years older,
playing up to the dumb scripts they used on the show. And Mr. Digby had been
nice, even if he was no real scientist.
Still, both Gokna and Junior still had very young-sounding voices.
Eventually, someone had overcome their faith in the goodness of all radio
broadcasts, and realized that serious perversion was being flaunted across the
public's maw. But Princeton Radio was privately owned, and more important, it
owned its patch of spectrum and had interference easements on nearby bands.
The owners were Generation 58 cobbers who were still counting their money.
Unless the Church of the Dark could make an effective listener boycott,
Princeton Radio was going to keep "The Children's Hour." Hence this debate.
"Ah, Dr. Underhill, such apleasure !" Madame Subtrime came sweeping
out of her cubicle. The station manager was all legs and pointy hands, with a
body scarcely bigger than her head. Gokna and Viki got plenty of laughs
imitating her. "You won't believe the interest this debate has generated. We are
forwarding to the East Coast, and copies will be on the shortwave. I tell you
without exaggeration, we have listeners from justall over!"
I tell you without exaggeration. . .Hidden from the manager, Gokna
waggled her mouth parts in time with the words. Viki kept her own aspect prim,
and pretended not to notice.
Daddy tipped his head to the manager. "I'm glad to be so popular,
Madame."

"Oh, yes, indeed! We've got sponsors killing each other for the slots in this
time. Simplykilling each other!" She smiled down at the children. "I've arranged
that you can watch from our engineer's loft."
They all knew where that was, but they followed obediently along, listening
to her unending gush. None of them really knew what Madame Subtrime
thought of them. Jirlib claimed that she was no fool, that under all the words
lurked a cold counter of cash. "She knows to the tenth-penny how much she can
earn for the old cobbers by outraging the public." Maybe, but Viki liked her even
so, and even forgave her shrill and foolish talk. Too many people were so stuck
on their beliefs that nothing would bend them.
"Didi's on duty this hour. You know her." Madame Subtrime stopped at the
entrance to the engineer's loft. For the first time she seemed to notice the babies
peeking out of Sherkaner Underhill's fur. "My, you do have all ages, don't you?
I. . .will they be safe with your children? I don't know who else could take care
of them."
"Quite all right, Madame. I intend to introduce Rhapsa and Little Hrunk to
the representative of the Church."
Madam Subtrime froze. For a full second, all the fidgety legs and hands
were simultaneously motionless. It was the first time Viki had seen her
really,really taken aback. Then her body relaxed into a slow, broad smile. "Dr.
Underhill! Has anyone ever told you you're a genius?"
Daddy grinned back. "Never with such good reason.. . .Jirlib, make sure
everyone stays in the room with
Didi. If I want you to come out, you'll know it."
The cobblies climbed into the engineering loft. Didire Ultmot was slouched
on her usual perch overlooking the controls. A thick glass wall separated the
room from the soundstage itself. It was soundproof, and darned hard to see
through, too. The children edged close to the glass. There was someone already
perched on the stage.
Didire waved a hand at them. "That's the Church's rep out there. The cobber
came an hour early." Didi was her usual, faintly impatient, self. She was a very
good-looking twenty-one-year-old. Didi wasn't as smart as some of Daddy's
students, but she was bright. She was Princeton Radio's chief technician. At
fourteen she had been a prime-time operator, and knew as much about electrical
engineering as Jirlib. In fact, she wanted to become an electrical engineer. All
that had come across the first time Jirlib and Brent met her, back when they
started on the show. Viki remembered the strange way Jirlib had acted when he
told them about that meeting; he seemed almost in awe of the Didire creature.
She was nineteen then, and Jirlib was twelve. . .but big for his age. It took her

two shows to realize that Jirlib was out-of-phase. She had taken the surprise as
an intentional, personal insult. Poor Jirlib walked around like his legs were
broken for a few days. He got over it-after all, there would be worse rejections in
the future.
Didire more or less got over it, too. As long as Jirlib kept his distance, she
was civil. And sometimes, when she forgot herself, Didi was more fun than any
current-generation person that Viki knew. When they weren't onstage, she would
let Viki and Gokna sit by her perch and watch her tweak the dozens of controls.
Didire was very proud of her control panel. In fact-except that the frame was
furniture wood and not sheet metal-it looked almost as scientific as some of the
gear at Hill House.
"So what's this church cobber like?" asked Gokna. She and Viki had
pressed their main eyes flat against the glass wall. The glass was so thick that
lots of colors could not penetrate. The stranger perched onstage could have been
dead for all the far-red you could see of her.
Didi shrugged. "Name's 'Honored Pedure.' She talks funny. I think she's a
Tiefer. And that cleric's shawl she's wearing? It's not just our crummy view from
the control room: that shawl really isdark, across all colors but the farthest reds."
Hmm. Expensive. Mom had a dress uniform like that, only most people
never saw her in it.
A wicked smile grew across Didi's aspect. "I bet she pukes when she sees
the babies in your father's fur."
No such luck. But when Sherkaner Underhill came in a few seconds later,
the Honored Pedure stiffened under her shapeless cowl. A second later,
Rappaport Digby trotted onto the stage and grabbed an earphone. Digby had
been with "The Children's Hour" from the beginning, long before Jirlib and
Brent had started on the show. He was an old coot, and Brent claimed he was
really one of the station owners. Viki didn't believe it, not after the way Didi
sassed him.
"Okay, everybody." Didi's voice came amplified now. Daddy and the
Honored Pedure straightened, each hearing the words from the speaker on their
side. "We're coming up on fifteen seconds. Will you be ready, Master Digby, or
should I play some dead air?"
Digby's snout was stuck in a wad of written notes. "Laugh if you like, Miss
Ultmot, but air time is money. One way or another, I will-"
"Three, two, one-" Didi cut her speaker and stabbed a long, pointed hand in
Digby's direction.
The cobber picked up his cue as if he'd been waiting in patient alertness.
His words had the usual smooth dignity, the trademark that had introduced the
h
f
h
fif
"M
i R
Di b
d hi i 'Th

show for more than fifteen years: "My name is Rappaport Digby, and this is 'The
Children's Hour of Science.'. . ."
When Zinmin Broute spoke in translation, his motions were no longer fitful
and compulsive. He looked directly forward and smiled or frowned with
emotions that seemed very real. And maybe they were real-for some armored
spider creature down on the surface of Arachna. Occasionally there was some
hesitation, a glitch in the intermediate conversions. Even more rarely, Broute
would turn away, perhaps when some important cue appeared off-center in his
head-up. But unless you knew what to look for, the fellow seemed to be
speaking as fluently as any human announcer reading from notes written in his
birth language.
Broute as Digby began with a little self-congratulatory history of the radio
program, then described the shadow that had fallen upon it in recent days. "Out
of phase," "perversion of birth." Broute rattled off the words as if he'd known
them all his life. "This afternoon, we are back on the air as promised. The
charges made in recent days are grave. Ladies and gentlemen, these charges of
themselves are true."
The silence was a dramatic three beat, and then: "So my friends, you may
wonder what gave us the courage-or the impudence-to return. For the answer to
that, I ask you to listen to this afternoon's edition of 'The Children's Hour.'
Whether we continue in the future will largely depend on your reactions to what
you hear today. . . ."
Silipan snorted. "What a money-grubbing hypocrite." Xin and the others
waved at him to shut up. Trud sailed over to sit beside Ezr. This had happened
before; he seemed to think that because Ezr sat at the edge, somehow he wanted
to hear Silipan's analysis.
Beyond the wallpaper, Broute was introducing the debaters. Silipan
anchored a comp to his knee and flipped it open. It was a clumsy Emergent
thing, but it had ziphead support and that made it more effective than anything
Humankind had created before. He punched the Explain key and a tiny voice
gave him background: "Officially, the Honored Pedure represents the traditional
Church. In fact-" The voice coming from Trud's comp paused, presumably while
hardware searched databases. "-Pedure is a foreigner to the Goknan Accord.
She's probably an agent of the Kindred government."
Xin looked around at them, momentarily losing track of Broute-Digby.
"Pus, these people take their fundamentalism seriously. Does Underhill know
about this?"
The voice from Trud's hand comp replied. "It's possible. 'Sherkaner
Underhill' is strongly correlated with Accord's security communications. . . .To
d t
h
't
ilit
g t ffi di
i g thi d b t
b t th

date, we haven't seen any military message traffic discussing this debate, but the
Spider civilization is not yet well automated. There could be things we're
missing."
Trud spoke to the device: "I have a lowest-pri background task for you.
What would the Kindred want from this debate?" He glanced up at Jau and
shrugged. "Dunno if we'll get any answer. Things are pretty busy."
Broute was almost done with his introductions. Honored Pedure was to be
played by a Xopi Reung. Xopi was a thin little Emergent. Ezr knew her name
only from studying rosters and talking to Anne Reynolt.I wonder ifanyone else
here knows the woman's name? thought Ezr. Certainly not Jau and Rita. Trud
would, just as a livestock herder in primitive times would know his property.
Xopi Reung was young; she had been brought out of the freezer to replace what
Silipan called "a senility failure." Reung had been onWatch for about 40Msec.
She was responsible for most of the progress in learning other Spider languages,
in particular "Tiefic." And she was already the second-best translator of
"Standard Accord" speech. Someday, she might very well be better than Trixia.
In a sane world, Xopi Reung would have been a premier academic, famous
across her solar system. But Xopi Reung had been selected in the Podmaster
Lottery. While Xin and Liao and Silipan led fully conscious lives, Xopi Reung
was part of the automation in the walls, unseen except for the occasional peculiar
circumstance.
Xopi Reung spoke: "Thank you, Master Digby. The Radio of Princeton
secures itself proud by giving us this time to talk." During Broute's introduction,
Reung's attention had flickered all around, birdlike. Perhaps her huds were out of
adjustment, or maybe she preferred to scatter important cues all about her visual
field. But when she started talking, something feral came into her eyes.
"Not a very good translation," someone complained.
"She's new, remember," said Trud.
"Or maybe this Pedure really does talk funny. You said she's a foreigner."
Reungas-Pedure leaned out over the table. Her voice came silky and low.
"Twenty days ago, we all discovered a corruption afester in what millions of
people had been taking for years into their homes, into their husbands' and
children's ears." She continued for several moments, speaking awkward
sentences that seemed very self-righteous. Then: "So it is fitting that the Radio of
Princeton should now give us opportunity to cleanse the community's air." She
paused, "I-I-" It was as though she couldn't think of the right words. For an
instant she seemed the ziphead again, fidgeting, her head cocked. Then abruptly
she slammed her palm against the surface of the table. She pulled herself down
to her chair and shut up.
"I told you that one's not much of a translator "

I told you, that one s not much of a translator.

TWENTY-FOUR
By leaning hands and forelegs on the wall, Viki and Gokna could keep their
main eyes against the glass. It was an awkward pose, and the two skittered back
and forth along the base of the window.
"Thank you, Master Digby. The Radio of Princeton secures itself proud by-
" blah blah blah. "She talks funny," said Gokna.
"I already told you that. She's a foreigner." Didire spoke abstractedly. She
was busy with some arcane adjustment of her equipment. She didn't seem to be
paying much attention to what was actually being said on the soundstage. Brent
was watching the show with stolid fascination, while Jirlib alternated between
the window and standing as close as he could to Didi. He was well cured of
giving her technical advice, but he still liked to stand close. Sometimes he would
ask an appropriately naive question. When Didi wasn't busy, that usually got her
talking to him.
Gokna grinned at Viki. "No. I meant 'Honored Pedure' talks like a bad
joke."
"Hm." Viki wasn't so sure. Pedure's clothing was strange, of course. She
hadn't seen cleric shawls outside of books. It was a shapeless cloak that came
down on every side, obscuring all but Pedure's head and maw. But she had an
impression of strength under cover. Viki knew what most people thought of
children such as herself. Pedure was just a full-time advocate of that view, right?
But her speech had a certain menace.. . ."Do you think she really believes what
she's saying?"
"Sure she believes it. That's what makes her so funny. See how Daddy's
smiling?" Sherkaner Underhill was perched on the other side of the soundstage,
quietly petting his babies. He hadn't said a word yet, but there was a faint smile
twitching across him. Two pairs of baby eyes peered fearfully out from his fur.
Rhapsa and Hrunk couldn't understand everything that was going on, but they
looked frightened.
Gokna noticed, too. "Poor babies. They're the only ones she can scare.
Watch! I'm gonna Give Ten to the Honored Pedure." She turned away from the
window and ran to the side wall-and then up the rack of audio tapes. The girls
were seven years old, much too big for acrobatics.Oops. The rack was
freestanding. It swayed out from the wall, tapes and assorted junk sliding to the
edge of each shelf. Gokna reached the top before anyone but Viki realized what
was happening. And from there she leaped out, grabbing the top molding of the

soundstage window. The rest of her body swung down against the glass with a
solidsplat sound. For an instant, she was a perfect Ten splayed out across the
window. On the far side of the glass,
Pedure stared in stupefied shock. The two girls shrieked with laughter. It
wasn't often you could give such a perfect Ten, flaring your underwear in the
target's face.
"Quit it!"Didi's voice was a flat hiss. Her hands flickered across the
controls. "This is the last time you little crappers get into my control room!
Jirlib, get over there! Shut your sisters down or drag them out, but no more
crapping nonsense."
"Yes, yes! I'm so sorry." Jirlib really did sound sorry. He rushed over and
plucked Gokna from the glass wall. A second later Brent followed him, grabbing
Victory.
Jirlib didn't seem angry, just upset. He held Gokna very close to his head.
"You must be quiet. For once you must be serious." It occurred to Viki that
maybe he was just upset because Didi was so angry with him. But it really didn't
matter. All the laughter had leaked out of Gokna. She touched an eating hand to
her brother's maw, and said softly, "Yes. I'll be good for the rest of the show. I
promise."
Behind them, Viki could see Didi talking-probably to the phone in Digby's
ear. Viki couldn't hear the words, but the guy was nodding agreement. He had
eased Pedure back to her seat, and now segued into his introduction of Daddy.
All the action on this side of the glass had accounted for virtually nothing out
there. Someday she and Gokna were going to get themselves into real trouble,
but it looked like that adventure was still somewhere in the future.
Xopi sat down amid general confusion. Usually the zipheads tried to keep
these shows in approximate real time. Silipan claimed that was only partly his
specification-the ziphead translators really liked to stay in synch with the word
stream. In some sense, they really did like to act. Today they just weren't very
successful at it.
Finally, Broute got himself together and gave a relatively smooth
introduction to Sherkaner Underhill.
Sherkaner Underhill. Trixia Bonsol translated him. Who else could it have
been? Trixia had been the first to crack the spoken language of the Spiders. Jau
had told Ezr that in the early days of the live show, she had handled all the parts,
children's voices, old people, phone-in questions. After other zipheads acquired
fluency and there was a consensus of style, still Trixia had taken the hard parts.
Sherkaner Underhill: That might be the first Spider they ever had a name
for. Underhill showed up in an incredible range of radio broadcasts. At first, it

seemed that he had invented two-thirds of the industrial revolution. That
misconception had faded: "Underhill" was a common name, and where this
"Sherkaner Underhill" was referenced, it was always one of his students who
actually did the work. So the guy must be a bureaucrat, the founder of the
Princeton Institute, where most of his students seemed to be. But ever since the
Spiders invented microwave relays, the snoopersats had been sucking on an
increasing stream of easily decrypted national secrets. The "Sherkaner
Underhill" ID showed up on almost twenty percent of all the high-security traffic
that flowed across the Goknan Accord. Clearly, they were dealing with some
kind of institutional name. Clearly. . . until they learned that "Sherkaner
Underhill" had children, and they were on this radio show. Even though they
hadn't figured it all out, there was some real political significance to "The
Children's Hour." No doubt, Tomas Nau was watching this show over on
Hammerfest.I wonder if Qiwiis with him.
Trixia spoke: "Thank you, Master Digby. I am very happy to be here this
afternoon. It's time there be an open discussion of these issues. In fact, I hope
that young people-both in-phase and out-of-phase-are listening. I know my
children are."
The look Trixia sent Xopi's way was relaxed and confident. Yet there was a
faint tremor in her voice. Ezr stared at her face. How old was Trixia now? The
full ziphead Watch schedules were classified-probably because so many were
being run at one hundred percent. It should take a lifetime to learn all Trixia had
learned. At least after the early years, every Watch he stood, there she was. She
looked ten years older than the Trixia before Focus. And when she played
Underhill, she seemed even older.
Trixia was still talking: "But I want to correct one thing that Lady Pedure
said. There was no secret plot to keep the age of these children a secret. My two
oldest-they're fourteen, now-have been on the show for some time. It's quite
natural that they should participate, and from the letters they got, I know that
they were very popular with both current-generation children and their parents."
Xopi looked down the table at Trixia: "And of course, that is simply
because they kept quiet their true age. On the radio, you can't tell such small a
difference. On the radio, some. . .obscenities. . .go unnoticed."
Trixia laughed. "Indeed they do. But I want our listeners to think on this.
Most of them are fond of Jirlib and Brent and Gokna and Viki. Meeting my
children 'blind' on the radio showed our listeners a truth they might have missed
otherwise: the oophase are as decent as anyone else. But again, I hid nothing.
Eventually. . .well, eventually the facts of the matter were so obvious that no one
could ignore them."

"So blatant, you mean. Your second clutch of oophases is scarce seven
years old.That obscenity even radio can not disguise. And when we met here in
the studio, I see you have twonewborns suckling in your fur. Tell me, sir, is there
any limit to how much evil you will do?"
"Lady Pedure, what evil, what harm? Our audience has listened to one or
another of my children for more than two years. They know Jirlib and Brent and
Viki and Gokna as real and likable people. You see Little Hrunk and Rhapsa
looking at you from my shoulders-" Trixia paused as if to give the other time for
a look. "I know it pains you to see babies so far from the Waning Years. But in a
year or two they will be old enough to talk, and I fully intend to have 'The
Children's Hour' include all the ages of my children. From program to program,
our audience will see that these little cobblies are just as worthy as ones born at
the end of the Waning Years."
"Absurdity! Your scheme only wins if you sneak up on decent people a
small step at a time, getting them to accept this waiver of morality and then that,
until . . ."
"Until what?" Trixia asked, smiling benignly.
"Until-until-" Behind her semiclear huds, Ezr could see that Xopi was
staring wildly. "Until decent people will kiss upon those ill-timed maggots you
carry on your back!" She was out of her chair, waving her arms in Trixia's
direction.
Trixia was still smiling. "In a word, my dear Pedure, 'Yes.' Even you see
that there can be acceptance. But out-of-phase children are not maggots. They do
not need a First Darkness to give them their souls. They are creatures who can
become lovable Spiders in their own right. As the years pass, 'The Children's
Hour' will make this obvious to everyone, perhaps even to you."
Xopi sat down. She looked very much like a debater who has been bested
and is casting about for some different line of attack. "I see appeal to decency
has no strength with you, Master Underhill. And there may be weak people in
the audience who move to perversion by your gradual approach. Everyone has
immoral inclinations, in that we agree. But we also have quite moral ones,
innate. Tradition guides us between the two. . .but I can see that tradition has
small weight with such as you. You are a scientist, not so?"
"Hm, yes."
"And one of the four Darkstriders?" ". . .Yes."
"Our audience may not realize so distinguished a person lurks behind 'The
Children's Hour.' You are one of four who has actually seen the Deepest Dark.
Nothing holds mystery for you." Trixia started to respond, but Xopi as Pedure
rolled right over her words. "I daresay this explains much of your flaw. You are

blind about the striving of previous generations, the slow learning of what is
deadly and what is safe in Spiderly affairs. There are reasons for moral law, sir!
Without moral law, diligent hoarders will be robbed by the indolent at the end of
the Waning Years. Without moral law, innocents in their deepnesses will be
massacred by the first-getting-awake. We all want many things, but some of
those are bottomly destructive of all desires."
"This last is true, Lady Pedure. What is your point?"
"The point is that there arereasons for rules, in especial for the rules against
oophaseness. As a
Darkstrider you make trivial of things, but even you must know the Dark is
the great cleanser. I've listened to your children. Today before air time, I
watched them in the engineer's control room. There is a scandal within your
secret, but not surprising. At least one of your children-the one named Brent?-is
a cretin, is he not?"
Xopi stopped talking, but Trixia didn't respond. Her gaze was steady; she
wasn't scrambling to keep up with the intermediate-layer data reps. And
suddenly, Ezr felt the strangest change in perspective, like a change in imagined-
down, but enormously more intense. It wasn't caused by the translators' words or
even the emotion in their words. It was the. . .silence. For the first time, Ezr
knew a Spider as a person, a person who could be hurt.
The silence stretched on for several more seconds. "Ha," said Silipan.
"That's pretty good confirmation on a lot of guesses. The Spiders breed in large
clutches, and then Mother Nature kills off the weak ones during the Dark. Slick."
Liao grimaced. "Yeah, I guess." Her hand reached to her husband's
shoulder.
Zinmin Broute abruptly broke the silence. "Master Underhill, are you going
to reply to the Honored Pedure's question?"
"Yes." The quaver in Trixia's voice was more pronounced than before.
"Brent is no cretin. He's not verbal and he learns differently than other children."
Her voice picked up enthusiasm, and there was a shadow of a smile.
"Intelligence is such a remarkable thing. In Brent I see-"
Xopi cut her off. "-In BrentI see the classical birth wreck of the oophase
child. My friends, I know the strength of the Church suffers now in this
generation. There is so much change, and the old ways are so much thought
tyrannical. In previous times, a child such as Brent could only happen in
backwoods townships, where barbarism and perversion have always been. In
previous times, such was easy to explain: 'The parents evaded the Dark, like not
even animals would do. They brought poor Brent into the world to live some
years of crippled life, and rightly should they be loathed for their cruelty.' But in

our times, it is an intellectual such as Underhill"-a nod in the direction of Trixia-
"who makes this sin. He makes you laugh upon tradition, and I must fight him
with his own reasons. Look upon this child, Master Underhill. How many more
have you borne like him?"
Trixia: "All my cobblies-"
"Ah, yes. No doubt there have been other failures. You have six that we
know of. How many more are there? Do you kill the clear failures? If the world
follows your perversion, civilization will die before even the next Dark comes,
smothered in hordes of ill-conceived and crippled cobblies." Pedure went on in
this vein at some length. In fact, her complaints were very concrete: birth
deformities, overpopulation, forced killings, riots in deepnesses at the beginning
of the Dark-all would follow if there were a popular move toward out-of-phase
births. Xopi rattled on until she was visibly out of breath.
Broute turned to Trixia as Underhill: "And your reply?"
Trixia: "Ah, it is nice to be able to reply." Trixia was smiling again, her
tone almost as light as at the beginning of the program. If Underhill had been
unhinged by the attack on his son, maybe Pedure's long speech had given him
time to recover. "First, all my children are living. There are only six. That should
not be surprising. It's hard to conceive children out-of-phase. I'm sure everyone
knows this. It is also very hard to nurture the out-of-phase baby welts long
enough for them to grow eyes. Nature does indeed prefer that cobblies be created
right before the Dark."
Xopi leaned forward, speaking loudly. "Take careful note, friends!
Underhill just now admits that he commits crime against nature!"
"Not at all. Evolution has caused us to survive and thrive within Nature. But
times change-"
Xopi sounded sarcastic: "So times change? Science made you a Darkstrider,
and now you are greater than Nature?"
Trixia laughed. "Oh, I'm still very much a part of Nature. But even before
technology-did you know that ten million years ago, the length of the sun's cycle
was less than one year?"
"Fantasy. How could creatures live-"
"How indeed?" Trixia was smiling more broadly, and her tone was one of
triumph. "But the record of fossil edgings is very clear. Ten million years ago,
the cycle was much shorter and the variation in brightness much less intense.
There was no need for deepnesses and hibernation. As the cycle of light and dark
became longer and more extreme, all surviving creatures adapted. I imagine it
was a harsh process. Many great changes were necessary. And now-"
Xopi made a cutting gesture. Did she make those up or were they somehow

implied by the Spider broadcast? "If not fantasy, it's still not proved. Sir, I will
not argue evolution with you. There are decent people who believe it, but it is
speculation-no basis for death-and-life decisions."
"Ha!Point for Daddy!" From their perches atop Brent and Jirlib, the two
girls exchanged quiet editorial comments. Where Didire couldn't see, they were
also making maw-gestures at the Honored Pedure. After that first Ten, there had
been no obvious reaction, but it felt good to show the cobber how they felt about
her.
"Don't worry, Brent. Daddy's going to get this Pedure."
Brent had been even more quiet than usual. "I knew this was going to
happen. Things were hard enough. Now Dad has to explain about me, too."
In fact, Daddy had almost lost it when Pedure called Brent a cretin. Viki
had never seen him look quite so lost. But he was taking back lost ground now.
Viki had thought Pedure would be a know-nothing, but she seemed familiar with
some of what Daddy was throwing at her. It didn't matter. Honored Pedure
wasn't that knowledgeable; besides, Daddy wasright.
And he was on a real pounce now: "Strange that tradition should not show
more interest in the earliest past, Lady Pedure. But no matter. The changes that
science is making in this current generation will be so great that I might better
use them to illustrate. Nature enforced certain strategies-and the cycle of
generations is one of them, I agree. Without that enforcement, we likely would
not exist. But think of the waste, my lady. All our children are in one stage of
life in each year. Once past that stage, the tools of their schooling must lie idle
until the next generation. There is no need for such waste anymore. With
science-"
Honored Pedure gave a whistling laugh, full of sarcasm and surprise. "So
you admit it there! You plot that oophase be a way of life, not your isolated sin."
"Of course!" Daddy bounced up. "I want people to know that we live in an
era that is different. I want people to be free to have children in every season of
the sun."
"Yes. You intend to invade the rest of us. Tell me, Underhill, do you
already have secret schools for the oophase? Are there hundreds or thousands
like your six, just waiting for our acceptance?"
"Uh, no. So far we have not found playmates for my children."
Over the years, all of them had wanted playmates. Mother had searched for
them, so far without success. Gokna and Viki had concluded that other oophases
must be very well hidden. . .or very rare. Sometimes, Viki wondered if maybe
they really were damned; it was so hard to find any others.
Honored Pedure leaned back on her perch, smiling in an almost friendly
"Th
l
i
f
M
U d hill E
i
i
f lk

way. "That last is comfort to me, Master Underhill. Even in our times, most folk
are decent, and your perversions are rare. Nevertheless, 'The Children's Hour'
continues to be popular, even though the in-phase are now more than twenty
years old. Your show is a lure that didn't exist beforetimes. And our view
exchange is therefore terribly important."
"Yes, indeed. I think so, too."
Honored Pedure cocked her head. What rotten luck. The cobber realized
that Daddy meant it. If she got
Daddy to speculating. . .things could be very sticky. Pedure's next question
was spoken in a casual tone of honest curiosity. "It seems to me, Master
Underhill, that you understand moral law. Do you consider it, maybe, to be
something like the law of creative art-to be broken by the greatest thinkers, such
as yourself?"
"Greatest thinkers, fooey." But the question had clearly caught Daddy's
imagination, drawing him away from persuasive rhetoric. "You know, Pedure, I
never looked at moral rules like that before. What an interesting idea! You
suggest that they could be ignored by those who have some innate-what? Talent
for goodness? Surely not.. . .Though I confess to being an illiterate when it
comes to moral argument. I like to play and I like to think. The Darkstriding was
a great lark, as much as it was important to the war effort. Science will create
wonderful change in the near future of Spiderkind. I'm having enormous fun
with these things, and I want the public-including those whoare experts at moral
thought-to understand the consequences of the change."
Honored Pedure said, "Indeed." The sarcasm was there only if you were
listening as suspiciously as Little Victory was. "And you intend somehow for
science to replace the Dark as the great cleanser and the great mystery?"
Daddy made dismissing gestures with his eating hands. He seemed to have
forgotten that he was on the radio. "Science will make the Dark of the Sun as
innocuous and knowable as the night that comes at the end of every day."
In the control room, Didi gave a little yip of surprise. It was the first time
Viki had ever heard the engineer react to the broadcasts she was supervising. Out
on the soundstage, Rappaport Digby sat up as straight as if someone had stuck a
spear up his rear. Daddy didn't seem to notice, and Honored Pedure's response
was as casual as if they were discussing the possibility of rain: "We'll live and
work right through the Dark as if it was just one long night?"
"Yes! What do you think all the talk of nuclear power means?"
"So then we all will be Darkstriders, and there will be no Dark, no mystery,
no Deepness for the mind of Spiderkind to rest within. Science will take all."
"Piffle. On this one small world, there will be no more real darkness. But
there will always be the Dark Go out tonight Lady Pedure Look up We are

there will always be the Dark. Go out tonight, Lady Pedure. Look up. We are
surrounded by the Dark and always will be. And just as our Dark ends with the
passage of time in a New Sun, so the greater Dark ends at the shores of a million
million stars. Think! If our sun's cycle was once less than a year, then even
earlier our sun might have been middling bright all the time. I have students who
are sure most of the stars are just like our sun, only much much younger, and
many with worlds like ours. You want a deepness that endures, a deepness that
Spiderkind can depend on? Pedure, there is a deepness in the sky, and it
extends forever." And Daddy was off on his space-travel thing. Even graduate
students glazed over when Daddy started on this; only a hard core of crazies
specialized in astronomy. It was all so upside down and inside out. For most
people, the idea that lights as steady as stars could be like the sun was a leap of
faith greater than most religions asked for.
Digby and Honored Pedure watched open-mawed as Daddy built the theory
up in more and more elaboration. Digby had always liked the science part of the
show, and this had him all but hypnotized. Pedure on the other hand. . .her shock
faded quickly. Either she had heard this before, or it was tending away from the
path she wanted to follow.
The clock on the control-room wall was ticking down toward the orgy of
commercial messages that always ended the show. It looked like Daddy was
going to get the last word. . .except that Viki was sure Honored Pedure was
watching that clock more intensely than anything in the studio, waiting for some
precisely chosen strategic instant.
And then the cleric grabbed her mike close, and spoke loudly enough to
break into Sherkaner's flow of thought. "So interesting, but colonizing the space
between the stars is surely beyond the time of this current generation."
Daddy waved dismissively. "Perhaps yes, but-"
Honored Pedure continued, her voice academic and interested, "So the great
change during our time is simply the conquest of the next coming Dark, that
which ends this cycle of the sun?"
"Correct. We-all who hear this radio broadcast-will have no need of
deepnesses. That is the promise of nuclear power. All the great cities will have
sufficient power to stay warm for more than two centuries-all the way through
the upcoming Dark. So-"
"I see, and so very large building projects must happen to enclose the
cities?" "Yes, and farms. And we'll need to provide-"
"And this then is also the reason you want an added generation of adults.
This is why you push oophase births."
"Oh, not directly. It is simply a feature of the new situ-"
"So the Goknan Accord will enter the coming Dark in fact with hundreds of

So the Goknan Accord will enter the coming Dark in fact with hundreds of
millions of Darkstriders. What of the rest of the world?"
Daddy seemed to realize that he was headed for trouble. "Um, but other
technologically advanced countries may do the same. The poorer countries will
have their conventional deepnesses, and their awakening will come later."
Now Pedure's voice had steel in it, a trap that was finally sprung: " 'Their
awakening will come later.'
During the Great War, four Darkstriders brought down the most powerful
nation of the world. In the next Dark, you will be Darkstriders by the millions.
This seems not different from a preparation for the greatest deepness massacres
in history."
"No, it's not like that at all. We wouldn't-" "I'm sorry, lady and sir, our time
has run out." "But-"
Digby rumbled on over Daddy's objections. "I'd like to thank you both for
being with us today and-" blah blah blah.
On the soundstage, Pedure stood up the moment Digby finished his spiel.
The microphones were off now and Viki couldn't hear the words. The cleric was
evidently exchanging pleasantries with the announcer. On the other side of the
stage, Daddy looked very nonplussed. As Honored Pedure swept past him,
Daddy stood and followed her offstage, talking animatedly. Pedure's only
expression was a haughty little smile.
Behind Viki, Didi Ultmot was pushing levers, tuning the most important
part of the broadcast, the commercials. Finally, she turned away from the
controls. There was something a little dazed about her aspect. ". . .You know,
your dad has some really. . .weird. . .ideas."
There was a sequence of chords that might have been music, and the words,
"Sharpened hands are happy hands. Brim the tinfall with mirthly bands-"
Spider commercials were sometimes the high point of Princeton Radio
programs. Molt refresh, eye polish, leggings-many of the products made some
sense, even if the selling points did not. Other products were just nonsense
words, especially if it was a previously unknown product, and second-string
translators.
Today, it was the second-stringers. Reung, Broute, and Trixia sat fidgeting,
cut off from the signal stream. Their handlers were already moving in to clear
them from the stage. Today the crowd in Benny's parlor pretty much ignored the
commercials, too:
"Not as much fun as when the kids are on, but-"
"Did you get the angle on spaceflight? I wonder what this does to the
Schedule? If-"
Ezr wasn't paying attention His gaze stayed on the wall and all the chitchat

Ezr wasn t paying attention. His gaze stayed on the wall, and all the chitchat
was just distant buzzing. Trixia looked worse than usual. The flicker of her gaze
seemed desperate to Ezr. He often thought that, and a dozen times Anne Reynolt
had claimed the behavior was nothing but eagerness to get back to work.
"Ezr?" A hand brushed gently against his sleeve. It was Qiwi. Sometime
during the program she had slipped into the parlor. She had done this before,
sitting silently, watching the show. Now she had the gall to act like a friend.
"Ezr, I-"
"Save it." Ezr turned away from her.
And so he was looking directly at Trixia when it happened: The handlers
had moved Broute out of the room. As they led Xopi Reung past her, Trixia
shrieked and lunged from her chair, her fist smashing into the younger woman's
face. Xopi twisted away, jerking out of her handler's grip. She stared dazedly at
the blood streaming from her nose, then wiped her face with her hand. The other
tech grabbed the screaming Trixia before she could do more damage. Somehow
Trixia's words made it onto the general audio channel: "Pedure bad! Die! Die!"
"Oh, boy." Next to Ezr, Trud Silipan bounced off his seat and pushed his
way toward the entrance to Benny's parlor. "Reynolt is going to have a fit about
this. I gotta get back to Hammerfest."
"I'm coming, too." Ezr brushed past Qiwi and dived for the door. Benny's
parlor was silent for a shocked moment, then everyone was talking-but by that
time, Ezr was nearly out of earshot, and chasing Silipan. They moved quickly to
the main corridor, heading for the taxi tubes. At the locks, Silipan tapped
something on the scheduler, then turned. "What do you two want?"
Ezr looked over his shoulder, saw that Pham Trinli had followed them out
of Benny's. Ezr said, "I have to come, Trud. I have to see Trixia."
Trinli sounded worried too. "Is this going to screw our deal, Silipan? We
need to make sure that-"
"Oh, pus. Yeah, we gotta think how this may affect things. Okay. Come
along." He glanced at Ezr. "But you. There's nothing you can do to help."
"I'm coming, Trud." Ezr found himself less than ten centimeters from the
other, with his fists raised.
"Okay, okay! Just stay out of the way." A moment later, the taxi lock
blinked green and they were aboard and accelerating out from the temp. The
rockpile was a sunlit jumble just to one side of Arachna's blue disk. "Pest, this
would happen when we were on the far side. Taxi!"
"Sir?"
"Best time to Hammerfest." Normally, they had to baby the taxi hardware-
but apparently the automation recognized Trud's voice and tone.
"Yessir." The taxi pushed off at nearly a tenth of a gee. Silipan and the

ess .
e ta
pus ed o
at ea y a te t o a gee. S
pa a d t e
others grabbed for restraints, and tied down. Ahead of them the rockpile grew
and grew. "This really sucks, you know that? Reynolt is going to say I was
absent from my post."
"Well, weren't you?" Trinli had settled down right beside Silipan.
"Of course, but it shouldn't matter. Hell, one handler should have been
enough for the whole pus-be- damned translator crew. But now,I'm going to be
the one who looks bad."
"But is Trixia all right?"
"Why did Bonsol blow up like that?" said Trinli.
"It beats me. You know they bicker and fight, especially some of the ones
in the same specialty. But this came from nowhere." Silipan abruptly stopped
talking. For a long moment he stared into his huds. Then, "It'll be okay. It'll be
okay. I bet there was still some audio feed from the ground. You know, a live
mike, a failure of their show management. Maybe Underhill took a swipe at the
other Spider. That might make Bonsol's action 'valid translation.'. . .Damn!"
Now the guy was really worried, grasping at random explanations. Trinli
seemed too dense to notice. He grinned and slapped Silipan lightly on the
shoulder. "Don't worry about it. You know Qiwi Lisolet is in on the deal. That
means that Podmaster Nau wants the zips to be more widely used, too. We'll just
say you were aboard the temp to help me with the details."
The taxi turned end for end, braking for its landing. The rockpile and
Arachna tumbled across the sky.

TWENTY-FIVE
They didn't see the Honored Pedure on the way out of the radio station.
Daddy was a little subdued, but he smiled and laughed when the cobblies told
him how much they liked his performance. He didn't even scold Gokna for
Giving Ten. Brent got to sit up front with Daddy on the way back to Hill House.
Gokna and Victory didn't talk much in the car. They both knew that
everybody was fooling everybody.
When they got home, it was still two hours until dinner. The kitchen staff
claimed that General Smith had returned from Lands Command and that she
would be at dinner. Gokna and Viki exchanged looks.I wonderwhat Mother will
say to Daddy. The juiciest parts wouldn't be at dinner.Hmm. So what to do with
the rest of the afternoon? The sisters split up, separately recon'd the spiraled
halls of Hill House. There were rooms-lots of rooms-that were always locked.
Some of them were ones that they had never even been able to steal keys for.
The General had her own offices here, even if the most important stuff was
down at Lands Command.
Viki poked into Daddy's ground-floor den and the tech-level cafeteria, but
only briefly. She'd bet Gokna that Daddy would not be hiding, but now she
realized that today "not hiding" did not preclude "difficult to find." She roamed
through the labs, found the typical signs of his passage, graduate students in
various states of puzzlement and sudden, surprised enlightenment. ("Underhill
Dazzle" was what the students called it: If you came away puzzled, chances were
that Daddy had said something worthwhile. If you were instantly enlightened, it
probably meant Daddy had fooled both himself and you with a facile
misinsight.)
The new signals lab was near the top of the house, under a roof full of
experimental antennas. She caught Jaybert Landers coming down the steps from
there. The cobber wasn't showing any symptoms of Underhill Dazzle. Too bad.
"Hello, Jaybert. Have you seen my-"
"Yeah, they're both up in the lab." He jerked a hand over his shoulder.
Aha! But Viki didn't immediately sidle past him. If the General was already
here, maybe she should get some far intelligence. "So what's happening,
Jaybert?"
Of course, Jaybert took the question to be about his work. "Damnedest
thing. I put my new antenna on the Lands Command link just this morning. At
first the alignment was fine, but then I started getting these fifteen-second

patches where it looks like there are two stations on the line-of-sight. I wanted to
ask your father-" Viki followed him a few steps down the stairs, making
agreeable sounds to the other's unintelligible talk about amplifier stages and
transient alignment failures. No doubt Jaybert had been very pleased to get
Daddy's quick attention, and no doubt Daddy had been delighted for an excuse to
hole up in the signals lab. And then Mother showed up. . .
Viki left Jaybert down by his office-cubby, and climbed back up the stairs,
this time circling around to the lab's utility entrance. There was a column of light
at the end of the corridor. Ha! The door was partway open. She could hear the
General's voice. Viki slipped down the hallway to the door.
"-just don't understand, Sherkaner. You are a brilliant person. How can you
behave like such an idiot?"
Victory Junior hesitated, almost backed out of the darkened hall. She had
never heard Mom sound quite so angry. It. . .hurt. On the other hand, Gokna
would give anything to hear Viki's report-of-action. Viki moved silently forward,
turned her head sideways to peek through the narrow gap. The lab was pretty
much as she remembered it, full of oscilloscopes and high-speed recorders. The
covers were off some of Jaybert's gear, but apparently Mom had arrived before
the two got into any serious electronic dismemberment. Mother was standing in
front of Daddy, blocking his best eyes from seeing Viki.And I bet I'm near the
center of Mom's blind spot.
". . .Was I really that bad?" Daddy was saying. "Yes!"
Sherkaner Underhill seemed to wilt under the General's glare. "I don't
know. The cobber got me off guard. The comment about little Brent. I knew that
was coming. You and I had talked about that. Even Brent and I talked about it.
And even so, it knocked my legs out. I got confused."
Mom jerked her hand, dismissing the comment. "That was no problem,
Sherk. You gave a good response.
Your hurt came across in a caring, paternal way. And yet a few minutes
later she sucked you in-"
"Except for the astronomy, I only said things we had planned for the show
over the next year." "But you said them all at once!"
". . .I know. Pedure started talking like a bright, curious person. Like Hrunk
or people here at Hill House. She raised some interesting questions and I got
carried away. And you know? Even now. . .this Pedure is smart and flexible.
Given time, I think I could have won her over."
The General's laugh was sharp and unhappy. "God Below, you are a fool!
Sherk, I. . ." Mom reached out to touch Daddy. "I'm sorry. Funny, I don't chew
out my own staffers the way I do you."

Daddy made a kindly sound, like when he was talking to Rhapsa or Little
Hrunk. "You know the reason for that, dear. You love me as much as yourself.
And I know how much you chew on yourself."
"Inside. Only silently, and inside." They were quiet for a moment, and
Little Victory wished that she had lost her recon game with Gokna. But when
Mother spoke again, her voice was more normal. "We both screwed up on this."
She keyed open her travel case and picked out some papers. "Over the next year,
'The Children's Hour' was to introduce the virtue and the possibility of life in the
Dark, on schedule with the first construction contracts. Someday, we knew there
would be military consequences, but we didn't expect anything at this stage."
"Military consequences now?"
"Deadly maneuvering, anyway. You know this Pedure cobber is from
Tiefstadt." "Sure. Her accent is unmistakable."
"Her cover is good, partly because it's mainly true. Honored Pedure is
Cleric Three in the Church of the Dark. But she's also midlevel intelligence with
Action of God."
"The Kindred."
"Indeed. We've had friendly relations with the Tiefers since the war, but the
Kindred are beginning to change that. They already have several minor states in
their effective control. They're a legitimate sect of the Church, but-"
Far down the corridor behind Little Victory, someone turned on a hall light.
Mom raised a hand and stood very still.Oops. Maybe she had noticed a faint
silhouette, familiar grooves and armored fluting. Without turning, Smith
extended a long arm in the direction of the eavesdropper. "Junior! Shut the door
and get yourself back to your room."
Little Victory's voice was small and abashed. "Yes, Mother."
As she slid the utility door closed, she heard one last comment: "Damn. I
spend fifty million a year on signal security, and my own daughter is running
intercepts on me-"
Just now, the clinic under Hammerfest was a crowded place. On Pham's
previous visits, there had been Trud, sometimes another technician, and one or
two "patients." Today-well, a hand grenade would have caused more turmoil
among the Focused, but not by much. Both the MRI units were occupied. One of
the handlers was prepping Xopi Reung for MRI; the woman moaned, thrashing
against his efforts. Over in a corner, Dietr Li-the physicist?-was strapped down,
mumbling to himself.
Reynolt had one foot hooked over a ceiling stay, so that she hung down
close to the MRI without getting in the way of the techs. She didn't look around
as they came in. "Okay, induction complete. Keep the arms restrained." The tech
lid hi
ti
t
t i t th
iddl
f th
It
T i i B
l
h l
k d

slid his patient out into the middle of the room. It was Trixia Bonsol; she looked
around, obviously not recognizing anyone, and then her face collapsed into
hopeless sobbing.
"You've deFocused her!" Vinh shouted, pushing past Trud and Trinli. Pham
anchored and grabbed, all in one motion, and Vinh's forward motion reversed,
bouncing him lightly against the wall.
Reynolt looked in Vinh's direction. "Be silent or get out," she said. She
jerked a hand at Bil Phuong.
"Insert Dr. Reung. I want-" The rest was jargon. A normal bureaucrat would
certainly have kicked them out. Anne Reynolt really didn't care, as long as they
didn't get in her way.
Silipan drifted back to Pham and Vinh. He looked subdued and grim.
"Yeah. Shut up, Vinh." He glanced at the MRI's display. "Bonsol's still Focused.
We've just detuned her linguistics ability. It'll make her easier to. . .treat." He
glanced at Bonsol uncertainly. The woman had bent in on herself as far as the
restraints would permit. Her weeping continued, hopeless and inconsolable.
Vinh struggled briefly in Pham's grasp, and then he was still except for a
tremor that only Pham could feel. For a second it looked like he might start
bawling. Then the boy twisted, turned his face away from Bonsol, and screwed
his eyes shut.
Tomas Nau's voice came loud in the room. "Anne? I've lost three analysis
threads since this outage began. Do you know-"
Reynolt's tone was almost the same she had used with Vinh: "Give me a
Ksec. I have at least five cases of runaway rot."
"Lordy. . .keep me posted, Anne."
Reynolt was already talking to someone else. "Hom! What's the story on
Dr. Li?"
"He's rational, ma'am; I've been listening to him. Something happened
during the radio show, and-"
Reynolt sailed across the room to Dieter Li, somehow missing techs,
zipheads, and equipment. "That's bizarre. There shouldn't have been live
crosstalk between physics and the radio show."
The tech tapped a card attached to Li's blouse. "His log says he heard the
translation."
Pham noticed Silipan swallow hard. Could this be one of his screwups?
Damn. If the man was disgraced, Pham would lose his pipeline into the Focus
operation.
But Reynolt still hadn't noticed her AWOL technician. She leaned close to
Dietr Li, listened for a moment to his mumbling. "You're right. He's stuck on
what the Spider said about OnOff I doubt he's suffering from real runaway Just

what the Spider said about OnOff. I doubt he s suffering from real runaway. Just
keep watching him; let me know if he starts looping."
More voices from the walls, and these sounded Focused: ". . .Attic lab
twenty percent inchoate. .
.probable cause: cross-specialty reactions to audio stream ID2738
'Children's Hour'. . .Instabilities are undamped . . ."
"I hear you, Attic. Prep for fast shutdown." Reynolt returned to Trixia
Bonsol. She stared at the weeping woman, her look an eerie combination of
intense interest and total detachment. Abruptly she turned, her gaze skewering
Trud Silipan. "You! Get over here."
Trud bounced across the room to his boss's side. "Yes, ma'am! Yes,
ma'am!" For once there was no hidden impudence. Vengeance might be
unthinkable to Reynolt, but her judgments were ones that Nau and Brughel
would enforce. "I was checking out the effectiveness of the translations, ma'am,
how well laypersons"-namely the patrons of Benny's booze parlor-"would
understand her."
The excuses were lost on Reynolt. "Get an offline team. I want Dr. Bonsol's
log checked out." She leaned closer to Trixia, her gaze probing. The translator's
weeping had stopped. Her body was curled in a quivering tetany. "I'm not sure if
we can save this one."
Ezr Vinh twisted in Pham's grip, and for a moment it seemed he might start
shouting again. Then he gave Pham a strange look and remained silent. Pham
loosened his grip and gave him a gentle pat on the shoulder.
The two of them stayed silent, watching. "Patients" came and went. Several
more were detuned. Xopi
Reung came out of the MRI much like Trixia Bonsol. Over the last few
Watches, Pham had had plenty of opportunity to watch Silipan work, and pump
him about procedures. He'd even got a look at a beginning textbook on Focus.
This was the first time he'd had a solid look at how Reynolt and the other
technicians worked.
But something really deadly had happened here. Mindrot runaway. In
attacking the problem, Reynolt came as close to emotion as Pham had ever seen
her. Some parts of the mystery were solved right away. Trud's query right at the
beginning of the debate had triggered a search across many specialities. That
was the reason so many zipheads had been listening to the debate. Their analysis
had proceeded very normally for several hundred seconds, but then as the results
were posted, there was a surge in communication between the translators.
Normally, that was consultative, tuning the words that they spoke aloud. This
time, it was deadly nonsense. First Trixia and then most of the other translators
began to drift their brain chemistry indicating an uncontrolled excursion of the

began to drift, their brain chemistry indicating an uncontrolled excursion of the
rot. Real damage had been done even before Trixia attacked Xopi Reung, but
that had marked the beginning of the massive runaway. Whatever was being
communicated within the ziphead net provoked a cascade of similar flareups.
Before the emergency was fully appreciated, about twenty percent of all the
zipheads were affected, the virus in their brains producing out of bounds,
flooding them with psychoactives and frankly toxic chemicals.
The nav zipheads were not affected. Brughel's snoops were moderately
affected. Pham watched everything Reynolt did, trying to absorb every detail,
every clue.If I can make something like this happen to the L1 supportnetwork, if
Brughel's people could be disabled. . .
Anne Reynolt seemed to be everywhere. Every technician deferred to her. It
was she who saved most of Ritser's zips; she who managed the reboot of limited
Attic operations. And it came to Pham that without Anne Reynolt, there might
not have been any recovery. Back in the Emergents' home solar system, ziphead
crashes might be occasional inconveniences. There were universities to generate
replacements, hundreds of clinics for Focusing newly created specialists. Here,
twenty light-years from the Emergent civilization, it was a different story. Here,
little failures could grow unbounded . . .and without some supernally competent
manager, without Anne Reynolt, Tomas Nau's operation could collapse.
Xopi Reung flat-lined shortly after they brought her out of the MRI.
Reynolt broke off from managing the Attic reboot, spent frantic moments with
the translator. Here, she had no success. A hundred seconds later, the runaway
infection had poisoned Reung's brain stem. . .and the rest didn't matter. Reynolt
looked at the still body for a second more, frowning. Then she waved for the
techs to float the body out.
Pham watched as Trixia Bonsol was moved out of the clinic. She was still
alive; Reynolt herself was at the front of Bonsol's carrier.
Trud Silipan followed her toward the door. Suddenly he seemed to
remember the two visitors. He turned and made a come-along gesture. "Okay,
Trinli. End of show."
Silipan's face was grim and pale. The exact cause of the runaway was still
unknown; it was some obscure interaction between the zipheads. Trud's use of
the ziphead net-his query at the beginning of the debate-should have been an
innocuous use of the resources. But Trud was at the pointy end of some very bad
luck. Even if his query hadn't triggered the debacle, it was connected to it. In a
Qeng Ho operation, Silipan's query would have just been another clue.
Unfortunately, the Emergents had some very post hoc methods for defining sin.
"Are you going to be okay, Trud?"
Silipan gave a frightened little shrug and chivied them out of the clinic.

Silipan gave a frightened little shrug and chivied them out of the clinic.
"Get on back to the temp-and don't let Vinh come after his ziphead." Then he
turned and followed Reynolt.
Pham and Vinh hiked up from the depths of Hammerfest, alone except for
the certain presence of
Brughel's snoops. The Vinh boy was quiet. In a way, today had been the
biggest kick in the face he had suffered in years, maybe since Jimmy Diem's
death. For an n-times-removed descendant, Ezr Vinh had a face that was entirely
too familiar. He reminded Pham of Ratko Vinh when Ratko was young; he had a
lot of Sura's face. That was not a pleasant thought.Maybe my subconcious is
trying to tell me something.. . .Yes. Not just in the clinic, but all this Watch.
Every so often the kid would look at him. . .and the look was more of calculation
than contempt. Pham thought back, trying to remember just how his Trinli
character had behaved. Certainly it was a risk to be so interested in Focus. But
he had Trud's scams as a cover for that. No, even while they were standing in the
clinic and Pham's mind had been totally concentrated on Reynolt and the Bonsol
mystery-even then he was sure he hadn't looked anything but mildly dazed, an
old charlatan worried that this debacle would mess up the deals he and Trud had
planned. Yet somehow this Vinh had seen through him. How? And what to do
about it?
They came out of the main vertical corridor, and started down the ramp to
the taxi locks. The Focused murals were everywhere, ceilings, walls, floors. In
places, the diamond walls had been planed thin. Blue light-the light of full
Arachna-came softly through the crystal, darker or lighter depending on the
depth of the carving. Because Arachna was always in full phase from L1 and the
rockpile was kept in a fixed phase relative to the sun, the light had been steady
for years. There might have been a time when Pham Nuwen would have fallen in
love with that art, but now he knew how it had been made. Watch after Watch,
he and Trud Silipan would come down this ramp and see workers, carving. Nau
and Brughel had pissed away the lifetimes of nonacademic zipheads to make this
art. Pham guessed that at least two had died of old age. The survivors were gone
now, too, perhaps finishing the carvings on lesser corridors.After I take over,
thingswill be different. Focus was such a terrible thing. It must never be used
except for the most critical needs.
They passed a side corridor paneled in tank-grown wood. The grain swirled
smoothly, following the curve of the corridor that led downward to Tomas Nau's
private quarters.
And there was Qiwi Lin Lisolet. Maybe she had heard them coming. More
likely she had seen their departure from the clinic. Either way, she had been
waiting long enough that she stood with feet on the floor, as if in normal

g
g
g
,
planetary gravity.
"Ezr, please. Can we talk, just for a moment? I never meant these shows to
hurt-"
Vinh had been drifting ahead of Pham, silently pulling himself along. His
head snapped up when he saw Qiwi. For an instant it seemed he might float on
by her. Then she spoke. Vinh pushed hard against the wall, diving fast and
directly toward her. The action was as bluntly hostile as swinging a fist at
another's face.
"Here now!" Pham blustered, and forced himself to hang back in seeming
impotence. He'd already waylaid the fellow once today, and this time the scene
would be quite clear to the snoops. Besides, Pham had watched Qiwi work
outside. She was in better condition than anyone at L1, and a natural acrobat.
Maybe it would do Vinh some good to learn he couldn't off-load his anger on
her.
But Qiwi didn't defend, didn't even flinch. Vinh twisted, delivering a
powerful, openhanded slap that sent them spinning apart. "Yes, we'll talk!"
Vinh's voice was ragged. He bounced after her and he slapped her again. And
again Qiwi didn't defend, didn't even raise her hands to shield her face.
And Pham Nuwen pushed forward before he'd really thought. Something in
the back of his mind was laughing at him for risking years of masquerade just to
protect one innocent. But that same something also cheered.
Pham's dive turned into an apparently uncontrolled spin, one that just
accidentally slammed his shoulder into Vinh's gut and smashed the younger man
into the wall. Out of sight of any camera, Pham gave his opponent a piece of
elbow. An instant after the impact, the back of Vinh's head smacked against the
wall. If they had still been down in the carved diamond corridors, that might
have caused serious injury. As it was, when Vinh came off the wall, his arms
were flailing weakly. Little droplets of blood sprouted up from the back of his
head.
"Pick on someone your own size, Vinh! Cowardly, scummy piece of
vermin. You Great Family Traders are all alike." Pham's rage was real-but it was
also rage against himself, for risking his cover.
The wits slowly percolated back into Vinh's eyes. He glanced at Qiwi, four
meters down the hallway. The girl looked back, her expression a strange
combination of shock and determination. And then Vinh looked at Pham, and the
old man felt a chill. Maybe Brughel's cameras hadn't caught all the details of the
fight, but the kid knew how calculated Pham's assault had been. For an instant
the two stared at each other, and then Vinh shrugged free of his grasp and
scooted back down the ramp toward the taxi locks. It was the scuttling retreat of

p
g
a shamed and beaten man. But Pham had seen the look in his eyes; something
would have to be done about Ezr Vinh.
Qiwi started after Vinh, but dragged herself to a stop before she had gone
ten meters. She floated in the of the corridors, staring off in the direction Vinh
had gone.
Pham came near. He knew he had to get out of here. No doubt several
cameras were watching him now, and he was just no good at staying in character
around Qiwi. So what to say that would get him safely gone? "Don't worry, kid.
Vinh is just not worth it. He won't bother you again; I guarantee it."
After a moment, the girl turned to face him. Lord, she looked so much like
her mother; Nau had been running her nearly Watch-on-Watch. There were tears
in her eyes. He couldn't see any cuts or blood, but bruises were beginning to
show on her dark skin. "I really didn't meant to hurt him. God, I don't know what
I'll do if Trixia d-dies." Qiwi brushed back her close-cut black hair. Grown-up or
not, she looked as lost as during the first days after the Diem "atrocity." She was
so alone she would confide in a windbag like Pham Trinli. "When. . .when I was
little, I admired Ezr Vinh more than anyone in the universe, except my parents."
She glanced at Pham; her smile was tremulous and hurt. "I wanted so much for
him to think well of me. And then the Emergents attacked us, and then Jimmy
Diem killed my mother and all the others.. . .We are all in a very small lifeboat.
We can't have any more killing." She gave her head a sharp little shake. "Did
you know that Tomas has not used coldsleep since the Diem massacre? He's
lived every second of all these years. Tomas is so serious, so hardworking. He
believes in Focus, but he's open to new ways of doing things." She was telling
him what she had wanted to tell Ezr. "Benny's parlor wouldn't exist without
Tomas. None of the trading and bonsai would exist. Little by little we are
making the Emergents understand our ways. Someday, Tomas will be able to
release my father and Trixia and all the Focused. Someday-"
Pham wanted to reach out and comfort her. Pham Nuwen might be the only
living person besides the murderers who knew what had really happened to
Jimmy Diem, and who knew what Nau and Brughel were doing with Qiwi Lin
Lisolet. He should give her a gruff brush-off and leave, but somehow he couldn't
do that. Instead he hung in place, looking embarrassed and confused.Yes.
Someday. Someday, child, you will be avenged.

TWENTY-SIX
Ritser Brughel's quarters and command post were aboard theInvisibleHand.
He often wondered how the Peddlers had come up with such a perfect name, in
two words expressing the essence of Security. In any case, theHand was the
most nearly undamaged of all the hulls, Qeng Ho or Emergent. The flight-crew
quarters were sound. The main drive could probably sustain a one-gee thrust for
several days. Since the takeover, theHand 's comm and ECM had been
refurbished to Focused standards. Here on theInvisible Hand , he was something
of a god.
Unfortunately, physical isolation was no protection against a mindrot
runaway. Runaway was triggered by emotional imbalance in the Focused mind.
That meant it could propagate across communications networks, though
normally that only happened between closely cooperating zipheads. Back in
civilization, runaway was a constant, low-level concern, just another reason for
having hot swaps available. Here in the godforsaken nowhere, it was a deadly
threat. Ritser had been aware of the runaway almost as quickly as Reynolt-but he
couldn't afford to shut down his zips. As usual, Reynolt gave him second-class
service, but he managed. They split the snoops into small groups, and ran each
separately from the others. The resulting intelligence was fragmented; their logs
would require lots of later analysis. But they had missed nothing big. . .and
eventually they would catch up with all the details.
In the first 20Ksec, Ritser lost three snoops to the runaway. He had Omo
flush them and keep the others running. He went down to Hammerfest, had a
long meeting with Tomas Nau. It looked like Reynolt was going to lose at least
six people, including a big hunk of her translation department. The Senior
Podmaster was properly impressed with Brughel's lower casualties. "Keep your
people online, Ritser. Anne thinks the translators chose sides in that damn Spider
debate, that the runaway rot was an escalation of a normal ziphead disagreement.
Maybe so, but the debate was well removed from center of the translators' Focus.
Once things stabilize, I want you to go over every second of your records, comb
it for suspicious events."
After another 60Ksec, Brughel and Nau agreed that the crisis was past, at
least for the Security zips.
Podsergeant Omo put the snoops back into consultation with Reynolt's
people, but via a buffered link. He began a detailed scan of the immediate past.
The debacle had indeed blown away Ritser's operation, albeit very briefly. For

about one thousand seconds, they had totally lost emission security. Closer
investigation showed that nothing had been beamed toward any outside system;
their long-term secrecy was intact. Locally, the translators had screamed
something past the controllers, but the Spiders had not noticed; not surprising,
since the chaotic transmissions would have seemed like transient noise.
In the end, Ritser was forced to conclude that the runway was simply very
bad luck. But amid the trivia there were some very interesting tidbits:
Normally Ritser stayed up on theHand 's bridge, where he could maintain a
command perspective on the L1 rubble pile and Arachna far beyond. But with
Ciret and Marli helping out on Hammerfest, there were just Tan and Kal Omo to
run nearly one hundred Security snoops. So today he was mucking around in the
guts of the operation with Omo and Tan.
"Vinh has tripped three flags this Watch, Podmaster. Two times during the
runaway, as matter of fact."
As he floated in over Omo, Ritser glanced down at the zipheads on Watch.
About a third were asleep in their saddles. The rest were immersed in data
streams, reviewing the logs, correlating their results with Reynolt's Focused on
Hammerfest. "Okay, so what do you have on him?"
"This is camera analysis of Reynolt's lab and a corridor near Podmaster
Nau's residence." The scenes flickered by quickly, highlighted where the snoops
had seen exceptionable body language.
"Nothing overt?"
Omo's hatchetlike face spread in a humorless smile. "Plenty that would be
actionable back home, but not under the current RoE."
"I'll bet." Podmaster Nau's Rules of Enforcement would have been reason
for his instant removal anywhere in the Emergency. For more than twenty years,
the Senior Podmaster had let the Peddler swine get away with their excesses,
perverting law-abiding Followers in the process. It had driven Ritser to
distraction at first. Now. . .Now he could understand. Tomas was right about so
many things. They had no margin for further destruction. And letting people talk
yielded a lot of information, secrets they could use when the noose was
retightened. "So what's different about this time?"
"Analysts Seven and Eight both correlate on the last two events." Seven and
Eight were the zipheads at the end of the first row. As children they might have
had names, but that was long ago and before they entered the Police Academy.
Frivolous names and "Doctor" titles might be used in civilian work, but not in a
serious police shop. "Vinh is intent on something that goes beyond his normal
anxiety. Look at this head tracking."
It didn't mean anything to Ritser, but then his job was to lead, not to
f

understand forensic details. Omo continued, "He's watching Trinli with great
suspicion. It happens again in the corridor by the taxi locks."
Brughel riffled through the video index of Vinh's visit to Hammerfest.
"Okay. He fought Trinli. He harassed Trud Silipan. Lordy-" Brughel couldn't
help laughing. "-heassaulted Tomas Nau's private whore. But you say the
security flags are for eye contact and body language?"
Omo shrugged. "The overt behavior fits with the guy's known problems, sir.
And it doesn't come under the RoE."
So Qiwi Lisolet got slapped around, right on Tomas's doorstep. Ritser
found himself grinning at the irony. All these years, Tomas had fooled the little
slut. The periodic mindscrubs had come to be a bright spot in Ritser's life,
especially since he saw her reaction to a certain video. Still, he couldn't deny his
envy. He, Ritser Brughel, couldn't have maintained a masquerade, even with
mindscrubs. Ritser's own women just didn't last. A couple of times a year, he had
go back to Tomas and wheedle more playthings out of him. Ritser had used up
the most attractive expendables. Sometimes he had a bit of luck, as with Floria
Peres. She would have noticed Qiwi's mindscrub for sure; chemical engineer or
no, she had to be taken down. But there were limits to such good fortune. . .and
the Exile stretched out years more ahead of him. The thought was dark and
familiar, and he resolutely pushed it away.
"Okay. So your point is, Seven and Eight figure that Vinh is hiding
something that wasn't in his consciousness before-at least not at this level of
intensity."
Back in civilization, there'd have been no problem. They'd just bring the
perp in and cut the answers out of him. Here. . .well, they'd had their chance to
do some cutting; they had learned disappointingly little. Too many of the Qeng
Ho had effective blocks, and too many couldn't be properly infected with
mindrot.
He cycled through the highlighted incidents. "Hmm. Do you suppose he's
figured out that Trinli is really Zamle Eng?" The Peddlers were crazy; they
tolerated almost any corruption, but had blood hatred for one of their own simply
because he traded in flesh. Ritser's lip turned in disgust.Pus.How far we've
fallen. Blackmail was a fitting weapon between Podmasters,but simple terror
should suffice for people like Pham
Trinli. He scanned once more through Omo's evidence. It was really frail.
"Sometimes I wonder, maybe we have the trigger threshold set too low on our
snoops."
That was something that Omo had suggested before. The podsergeant was
too clever to gloat, however. "It's possible, sir. On the other hand, if there weren't
ti
l ft f
t d
id
th
ld b
d f
l
l "

questions left for managers to decide, there would be no need for real people."
The vision of one Podmaster ruling a universe of Focused was fantasy fiction.
"You know what I wish, Podmaster Brughel?"
"What?"
"I wish we could bring those run-alone Qeng Ho localizers aboard
Hammerfest. There's something perverse about havingworse security in our own
space than we do in the Qeng Ho temp. If these incidents had happened aboard
the temp, we would have had Vinh's blood pressure, his heart rate-hell, if the
localizers are on the subject's scalp, we'd have EEG. Between the Peddlers'
signal processors and our zipheads, we could practically read the subject's
bloody mind."
"Yeah, I know." The Qeng Ho localizers were an almost magical
improvement over previous standards of law enforcement. There were hundreds
of thousands of the millimeter-size devices all through the Peddler temp-
probably hundreds in the open areas of Hammerfest since Nau had relaxed the
frat rules. All they had to do was reprogram Hammerfest's utility system for
pulsed microwave, and the localizers' reach would be instantly extended. They
could say goodbye to camera patches and similar clumsy gear. "I'll bring this up
again with Podmaster Nau." Anne's programmers had been studying the Peddler
localizers for more than two years, futilely searching for hidden gotchas.
In the meantime. . ."Well, Ezr Vinh is back aboard the temp now, with all
the localizer coverage you could dream of." He grinned at Omo. "Divert a couple
more zipheads onto him. Let's see how much an intense analysis can show."
Ezr got through the emergency without cracking up again. Regular reports
emerged from Hammerfest. The mindrot runaway had been stopped. Xopi
Reung and eight other Focused persons had died. Three more were "seriously
damaged."But Trixia was marked as "returned to service, undamaged."
The speculations swept back and forth across Benny's parlor. Rita was sure
the runaway was a nearrandom crash. "We used to get them every couple of
years in my shop on Balacrea; only one time did we nail the cause. It's the price
you pay for close-coupling." But she and Jau Xin were afraid the runaway would
eliminate even delayed audio translations of "The Children's Hour." Gonle Fong
said that didn't matter, that Sherkaner Underhill had lost his strange debate with
Pedure and so there wouldn't be any more broadcasts to translate. Trud Silipan
was gone from the discussion; he was still over on Hammerfest, maybe working
for a change. Pham Trinli made up for that, spouting Silipan's theory that Trixia
had been acting out a real fight-and that had precipitated the runaway. Ezr
listened to it all, numb and silent.
His next duty was in 40Ksec; Ezr went back to his quarters early. It would
be a while before he could face Benny's again So many things had happened

be a while before he could face Benny s again. So many things had happened,
and they were all shameful or hurting or lethally mysterious. He floated in the
semidarkness of his room, skewered on Hell's rotisserie. He'd think impotently
on one problem for a time. . .and then escape to something that soon was equally
terrible, and then escape again. . .finally returning to the first horror.
Qiwi.That was his shame. He had struck her twice. Hard.If PhamTrinli had
not interfered, would I have gone on beating her? There was a horror opening up
before him that he had never imagined. Sure, he had always been afraid that
someday he would blunder, or even be a coward, but. . .today he had seen
something in himself, something basically indecent. Qiwi had helped to put
Trixia on exhibit. Sure. But she wasn't the only one involved. And yes, Qiwi did
benefit under Tomas Nau. . .but Lord, she'd been only a child when all this
began.So why did I go afterher? Because she had once seemed to care? Because
she wouldn't fight back? That was what the implacable voice in the back of his
mind insisted. At bottom, maybe Ezr Vinh was not just incompetent or weak,
maybe he was simply filth. Ezr's mind danced round and round that conclusion,
closing ever tighter, until he escaped out sideways toPham Trinli.That was the
mystery. Trinli had acted twice yesterday, both times saving Ezr from being an
even greater fool and villain. There was a crust of blood across the back of his
head, where Trinli's "clumsy" body block had smashed him into the wall. Ezr
had seen Trinli in the temp's gym. The old man made a thing of exercise, but his
body wasn't in especially good shape. His reaction time was nothing spectacular.
But somehow he knew how to move, how to make accidents happen. And
thinking back, Ezr remembered times before when Pham Trinli had been in the
right place.. . .The temp park right after the massacre.What had the old man
actuallysaid? It hadn't revealed anything to the cameras, it hadn't even tweaked
Ezr's own attention-butsomething he said had wakened the certainty that Jimmy
Diem had been murdered, that Jimmy was innocent of all Nau claimed.
Everything Pham did was loud and self-serving and incompetent, yet. . .Ezr
thought back and forth over all the details, the things he might be seeing that
others would miss. Maybe he was seeing mirages in his desperation. When
problems go beyond hope of solution, insanity comes creeping. And yesterday,
something had broken inside him. . .
Trixia.That was the pain and the rage and the fear. Yesterday Trixia had
come very close to death, her body as tortured and twisted as Xopi Reung's.
Maybe even worse.. . .He remembered the look on her face when she came out
of the MRI programmer. Trud said her linguistics ability had been temporarily
detuned. Maybe that was the cause for her desperation, losing the one thing that
still had meaning for her. And maybe he lied, as he suspected Reynolt and Nau

and Brughel lied about many things. Maybe Trixiahad been briefly deFocused
and looked about her, and seen how she had aged, and realized that they had
taken her life.And I may never know.I will continue to watch her year after year,
impotent and raging and. . .silent. There had to be someone to strike against, to
punish. . .
And so the rotisserie cycled back to Qiwi.
Two Ksec passed, four. Enough time to return again and again to problems
that were beyond solution.
This sort of thing had happened a few terrible times before. Sometimes he'd
spend the whole night on the rotisserie. Sometimes he got so tired, he'd just fall
asleep-and that would stop it. Tonight, the nth time thinking on Pham Trinli, Ezr
got angry at the process. So what if he was crazy? If all he had were mirages of
salvation, well then,grab them ! Vinh got up and put on his huds. Awkward
seconds were spent getting through the library access routines. He still wasn't
used to the crummy Emergent I/O interface, and they had yet to enable decent
customization. But then the windows around him lit up with text from the latest
report he was doing for Nau.
So, what did he know about Pham Trinli? In particular, what did he know
that had escaped the notice of Nau and Brughel? The fellow had an uncanny
ability in hand-to-hand fighting-mugging, more accurately. And he cloaked the
ability from the Emergents; he was playing a game with them.. . .And after
today, he must know thatVinh knew this.
Maybe Trinli was simply an aging criminal doing his best to blend in and
survive. But then what about the localizers? Trinli had revealed their secret to
Tomas Nau, and that secret had increased Nau's power a hundredfold. The tiny
flecks of automation were everywhere. There on his knuckle-that might be a
glint of sweat, but it also might be a localizer. The little glints and flecks could
be reporting the position of his arms, some of his fingers, the angle of his head.
Nau's snoops could know it all.
Those capabilities were simply not documented in the fleet library, even
with top-level passwords. So Pham Trinli knew secrets that went deep in the
Qeng Ho past. And very likely what he had revealed to Tomas Nau was just a
cover for. . .what?
Ezr pounded on that question for a few moments, got nowhere. Think about
the man. Pham Trinli. He was an old thug. He knew important secretsabove the
level of Qeng Ho fleet secrets. Most likely, he had been in at the founding of the
modern Qeng Ho, when Pham Nuwen and Sura Vinh and the Council of the Gap
had done their work. So Trinli was enormously old in objective years. That was
not impossible, nor even excessively rare. Long trading missions could take a

Trader across a thousand years of objective time. His parents had had one or two
friends who had actually walked on Old Earth. Yet it was highly unlikely any of
them had access to the founding layers of Qeng Ho automation.
No, if Trinli was what Ezr's insane reasoning implied, then he would likely
be a figure visible in the histories. Who?
Vinh's fingers tapped at the keyboard. His ongoing assignment was a good
cover for the questions he wanted to ask. Nau had an insatiable interest in
everything Qeng Ho. Vinh was to write him summaries, and propose research
tracks for the zipheads. However mellow and diplomatic he might seem, Ezr had
long ago realized that Nau was even crazier than Brughel. Nau studied in order
to someday rule.
Be careful.The places he really wanted to look must be fully covered by the
needs of his report writing. On top of it all, he must keep up a random pattern of
truly irrelevant references. Let the snoops try to find his intent in those!
He needed a list: Qeng Ho males, alive at the beginning of the modern
Qeng Ho, who were not known to be dead at the time Captain Park's expedition
left Triland. The list shrank substantially when he also eliminated those known
to be far from this corner of Human Space. It shrank again when he required that
they be present at Brisgo Gap. The conjunction of five booleans, the work of a
spoken command or a column of keystrokes-but Ezr could not afford such
simplicity. Each boolean was part of other searches, in support of things he
really needed for the report. The results were scattered across pages of analysis,
a name here, a name there. The orrery floating by the ceiling showed less than
15Ksec remaining before the walls of his quarters would begin to glow
dawnlight. . .but he had his list. Did it mean anything? A handful of names, some
pale and improbable. The booleans themselves were very hazy. The Qeng Ho
interstellar net was an enormous thing, in a sense the largest structure in the
histories of Humankind. But it was all out of date, by years or centuries. And
even the Qeng Ho sometimes lied among themselves, especially where the
distances were short and confusion could give commercial advantage. A handful
of names. How many and who? Even scanning the list was painstakingly slow,
else the hidden watchers would surely notice. Some names he recognized: Tran
Vinh.21, that was Sura Vinh's g'grandson and the male-side founder of Ezr's own
branch of the Vinh Family; King Xen.03, Sura's chief armsman at Brisgo Gap.
Xen could not have been Trinli. He was just over 120 centimeters tall, and nearly
as wide. Other names belonged to people who had never been famous. Jung,
Trap, Park. . .Park?
Vinh couldn't help the surprise. If Brughel's zipheads reviewed the records,
they would surely notice. The damn localizers could probably pick up on pulse,

maybe even blood pressure.If they can see the surprise, make it abig thing.
"Lord of All Trade," Vinh whispered, bringing the picture and bio material up on
all his windows. It really did look like their own S. J. Park, Fleet Captain of the
mission to the OnOff star. He remembered the man from his own childhood; that
Park hadn't seemed so very old.. . .In fact, some of this biodata seemed vague.
And the DNA record did not match the latter-day Park. Hmm. That might be
enough to deflect Nau and Reynolt; they didn't have Ezr's firsthand experience
with backstairs Family affairs. But the S. J. Park at Brisgo Gap-two thousand
years ago-had been a ship's captain. He'd ended up with Ratko Vinh. There had
been some weird scandal involving a failed marriage contract. After that, there
was nothing.
Vinh followed a couple of obvious leads on Park-then gave up, the way you
might when you learned something surprising but not universe-breaking. The
other names on the list. . .it took him another Ksec to get through them, and none
looked familiar. His mind kept returning to S. J. Park, and he almost
panicked.How well can the enemy read me? He looked at some pictures of
Trixia, surrendered to the familiar pain; he did that often enough just before
finally going to bed. Behind his tears, his mind raced. If Ezr was right about
Park, he went way,way back. No wonder his parents had treated Park as more
than a young contract captain. Lord, he could have been on Pham Nuwen's
voyage to the far side. After Brisgo Gap, when Nuwen was about as rich as he'd
ever been, he'd departed with a grand fleet, heading for the far side of Human
Space. That was typical of Nuwen's gestures. The far side was at least four
hundred light-years away. The merchanting details of its environment were
ancient history by the time they arrived on this side. And his proposed path
would take him through some of the oldest regions of Human Space. For
centuries after the departure, the Qeng Ho Net continued to report the progress
of the Prince of Canberra, of his fleets growing and sometimes shrinking. Then
the stories faltered, often lacked valid authentication. Nuwen probably never got
more than partway to his goal. As a child, Ezr and his friends had often played at
being the Lost Prince. There were so many ways it might have ended, some
adventurous and gruesome, some-the most likely-involving old age and a string
of business failures, ships lost to bankruptcy across dozens of light-years. And so
the fleet had never returned.
But parts of it might have.A person here or there, perhaps losing heart with
a voyage that would take them forever far from their own time. Who knew just
which individuals returned?Very likely, S. J. Park had known. Very likely S. J.
Park had known precisely who Pham Trinli was-and had worked to protect that
identity. Who from the era of Brisgo Gap could be so important, so well known.

. .? S. J. Park had been loyal to someone from that era. Who?
And then Ezr remembered hearing that Captain Park had personally chosen
the name of his flagship. ThePham Nuwen.
Pham Trinli. Pham Nuwen. The Lost Prince of Canberra.
And I have finally gone totally crazy.There were library checks that would
shoot down this conclusion in a second. Yes, and that would disprove nothing; if
he were right, the library itself would be a subtle lie.Yeah, sure. This was the sort
of desperate hallucination he must guard against. If you raise your desires high
enough, certainty can grow out of the background noise.But at least it got me off
the rotisserie!
It was awfully late. He stared at the pictures of Trixia for a while longer,
lost in sad memories. Inside, he calmed down. There would be other false
alarms, but he had years ahead of him, a lifetime of patient looking. He would
find a crack in the dungeon somewhere, and when it happened he wouldn't have
to wonder if it was a trick of his imagination.
• • •
Sleep came, and dreams filled with all the usual distress and the new
shame, and now mixed with his latest insanity. Eventually there was something
like peace, floating in the dark of his cabin. Mindless.
And then another dream, so real that he didn't doubt it until it was over.
Little lights were shining in his eyes, but only when he kept his eyes closed.
Awake and sitting, the room was dark as ever. Lying down, eyes asleep, then the
sparkles started again.
The lights were talking to him, a game of blinkertalk. When he was very
young he had played a lot of that, flitting from rock to rock across the out-of-
doors. Tonight, a single pattern repeated and repeated, and in Vinh's dream state
the meaning formed almost effortlessly:
"NOD UR HEAD IF U UNDRSTND ME.. . .NOD-"
Vinh made a wordless groan of surprise-and the pattern changed:
"SHUT UP SHUT UP SHUT UP . . ." for a long time. And then it changed
again. "NOD UR HEAD IF U
UNDRSTND ME. . . ."
That was easy too. Vinh moved his head a fraction of a centimeter.
"OK. PRETEND TO BE ASLEEP. CLOSE UR HAND. BLINK ON
PALM."
After all the years, conspiracy was suddenly so easy. Just pretend your palm
was a keyboard and type at your fellow-conspirators. Of course! His hands were
under the covers so no one else could see! He would have laughed out loud at

under the covers, so no one else could see! He would have laughed out loud at
the cleverness, except that would be out of character. It was so obvious now who
had come to save them. He closed his right hand and tapped: "HI O WISE
PRINCE. WHT TOOK U SO DAM LONG?"
For a long time there were no more little flashes. Ezr's mind drifted slowly
toward deeper sleep.
Then: "U NU BFR TNITE? DAM ME." Another long pause. "I VRY
SORRY. I THOT U BROKN."
Vinh nodded to himself, a little proud. And maybe someday Qiwi would
forgive him, and Trixia would return to life, and . . .
"OK," Ezr tapped at the Prince. "HOW MNY PEOPLE WE GOT?"
"SECRET. ONLY I KNO. EACH CAN TALK BUT NO ONE KNOS
ANYONE ELSE." Pause. "TILL U TONITE."
Aha. Almost the perfect conspiracy. The members could cooperate, but no
one but the Prince could betray anyone else. Things would be so much easier
now.
"WELL IM VRY TIRED NOW. WANNA SLEEP. WE CAN TALK
MORE LATR." Pause. Was his request so strange? Nights are for sleeping.
"OK. LATR."
As consciousness drifted finally away, Vinh shrugged deeper into his
hammock and smiled to himself. He was not alone. And all along, the secret had
been as close as his hand. Amazing!
The next morning, Vinh woke up rested and strangely happy. Huh. What
had he done to deserve this?
He floated into the shower bag and sudsed up. Yesterday had been so dark,
so shameful. Bitter reality seeped back into him, but strangely slow.. . .Yeah,
there had been a dream.That was not unusual, but most of his dreams hurt so
much to remember. Vinh turned the shower to dry and hung for a moment in the
swirling jets of air. What had it been about this one?
Yes! It was another of those miracle escape dreams, but this time things
hadn't turned bad at the end. Nau and Brughel had not leaped out of hiding at the
last moment.
So what had been the secret weapon this time? Oh, the usual illogic of
dreams, some kind of magic that turned his own hands into a comm link with the
chief conspirator. Pham Trinli? Ezr chuckled at the thought. Some dreams are
more absurd than others; strange how he still felt comforted by this one.
He shrugged into his clothes and set off down the temp's corridors, his
progress the typical zero-gee push, pull, bounce at the turns, swing to avoid
those moving more slowly or going in the other direction.Pham Nuwen.Pham

Trinli. There must be a billion people with that given name, and a hundred
flagships namedPham Nuwen. Recollection of his library search of the night
before gradually percolated back to mind, the crazy ideas he'd been thinking just
before he went to bed.
But the truth about Captain Park had been no dream. By the time he arrived
at the dayroom, he was moving more slowly.
Ezr drifted headfirst into the dayroom, said hello to Hunte Wen by the door.
The atmosphere was relatively relaxed. He quickly discovered that Reynolt had
brought her surviving Focused back online; there had been no more flareups. On
the far ceiling, Pham Trinli was pontificating about what had caused the
runaway and why the danger was past. This was the Pham Trinli he had dealt
with several Ksecs of each wake period on every overlapping Watch since the
ambush. Suddenly the dream and the library session before it were reduced to
the proper and completely absurd perspective.
Trinli must have heard him talking to Hunte. The old fraud turned, and for a
moment looked back down the room at Vinh. He didn't say anything, didn't nod,
and even if an Emergent spy were looking right down Vinh's line of sight, it
would have not likely mattered. But to Ezr Vinh, the moment seemed to last
forever. In that moment, the buffoon that had been Pham Trinli was gone. There
was no bluster in that face, but there was lonely, quiet authority and an
acknowledgment of their strange conversation of the night before. Somehow it
had not been a dream. The communication had not been magical. And this old
man truly was the Lost Prince of Canberra.

TWENTY-SEVEN
"But it's firstsnow. Don't you want to see it?" Victory's voice took on a
whine, a tone that worked with virtually no one except this one older brother.
"You've played in snow before."
Sure, when Daddy took them on trips to the far north. "But Brent! This is
firstsnow at Princeton. The radio says it's all over the Craggies." Brent was
absorbed in his dowel and hub frameworks, endless shiny surfaces that got more
and more complicated. By himself, he never would have considered sneaking
out of the house. He continued working at his designs for several seconds,
ignoring her. Infact, that was how Brent treated the unexpected. He was quite
good with his hands, but ideas came slowly to him. Beyond that he was very
shy-surly, grown-ups often said. His head didn't move, but Viki could tell he was
looking at her. His hands never slowed as they weaved back and forth across the
surface of the model, sometimes building, sometimes wrecking. Finally, he said,
"We aren't supposed to go out 'less we tell Dad."
"Pfui. You know he sleeps in. This morning is the coldest yet, but we'll
miss it if we don't go now. Hey, I'll leave a note for him."
Her sister Gokna would have argued the point back and forth, finally
exceeding Viki herself in clever rationalizations. Her brother Jirlib would have
gotten angry at her manipulation. But Brent didn't argue, returning instead to his
finicky modeling for a few minutes, part of him watching her, part of him
studying the dowel and connector pattern that emerged from beneath his hands,
and part of him looking out across Princeton at the tinge of frost on the near
ridges. Of all her brothers and sisters, he was the one who wouldn't really want
to go. On the other hand, he was the only one she could find this morning, and
he was even more grown-up-looking than Jirlib.
After a few moments more, he said, "Well, okay, if that's what you want."
Victory grinned to herself; as if the outcome were ever in doubt. Getting past
Captain Downing would be harder-but not by much.
It was early morning. The sunlight hadn't reached the streets below Hill
House. Victory savored each breath, the faint stinging she felt at the sides of her
chest as she tasted the frosty air. The hot blossoms and woods-fairies were still
wound tight in the tree branches; they might not even come out today. But there
were other things about, things she had only read about before now. In the frost
of the coldest hollows, crystal worms edged slowly out. These brave little
pioneers wouldn't last long-Viki remembered the radio show she had done about

them last year. These little ones would keep dying except where the cold was
good enough to last all day long. And even then, things would have to get much
colder before the rooted variety showed up.
Viki skipped briskly through the morning chill, easily keeping up with the
slower, longer strides of her big brother. This early there was hardly anyone
about. Except for the sound of distant contruction work, she could almost
imagine that they were all alone, that the city was deserted. Imagine what it
would be like in coming years, when the cold stayed, and they could only go out
as Daddy had done in the war with the Tiefers. All the way to the bottom of the
hill, Viki built on the idea, turning every aspect of the chilly morning into the
fantastical. Brent listened, occasionally offering a suggestion that would have
surprised most of Daddy's grown-up friends. Brent was not so dumb, and he did
have an imagination.
The Craggies were thirty miles away, beyond the King's high castle, beyond
the far side of Princeton. No way could they walk there. But today lots of people
wanted to travel to the near mountains. Firstsnow meant a fair-sized festival in
every land, though of course it happened at various and unpredictable times.
Viki knew that if the early snow had been predicted, Dad would have been up
early, and Mom might have flown in from Lands Command. The outing would
have been a major family affair-but not the least bit adventurous.
A sort of adventure began at the bottom of the hill. Brent was sixteen years
old now and he was big for his age. He could pass for in-phase. He had been out
on his own often enough before. He said he knew where the express buses made
their stops. Today, there were no buses, and scarcely any traffic. Had everyone
already gone to the mountains?
Brent marched from one bus stop to another, gradually becoming more
agitated. Viki tagged along silently, for once not making any suggestions; Brent
got put down often enough that he rarely asserted any sort of knowledge. It hurt
when he finally spoke up-even to a little sister-and then turned out to be wrong.
After the third false start, Brent hunkered down close to the ground. For a
moment, Viki thought maybe he was just going to wait for a bus to come along-a
thoroughly unpleasant possibility to Viki. They'd been out for more than an hour
and they hadn't even seen a local jitney. Maybe she would have to stick her
pointy little hands into the problem.. . .But after a minute, Brent stood up and
started across the street. "I bet the Big Dig people didn't get the day off. That's
only a mile south of here. There are always buses from there."
Ha.That was just what Viki had been about to suggest. Blessed be patience.
The street was still in morning shadow. This was the deepest part of the
winter season at Princeton. Here and there the frost in the darker nooks was so
f

deep that it might have been snow itself. But the section they were walking
through now was not gardened. The only plants were unruly weeds and free
crawlers. On sweaty, hot days between storms, the place would have been alive
with midges and drinkers.
On either side of the street were multistory warehouses. Things weren't so
quiet and deserted here. The ground buzzed and thrummed with the sound of
unseen diggers. Freight trucks moved in and out of the area. Every few hundred
yards, a plot of land was barricaded off from all but the construction crews. Viki
tugged at Brent's arms, urging him to crawl under the barricades. "Hey, it's our
dad who's the reason for all this. We deserve to see!" Brent would never accept
such a rationalization, but his little sister was already past the no-trespassing
signs. He had to come along just to protect her.
They crept past tall bundles of reinforcement steel, and piles of masonry.
There was something powerful and alien about this place. In the house on the
hill, everything was so safe, so orderly. Here. . .well, she could see endless
opportunities for the careless to lacerate a foot, cut an eye. Heck, if you tipped
over one of those standing slabs, it would squash you flat. All the possibilities
were crystal clear in her mind. . .and exciting. They carefully made their way to
the lip of a caisson, avoiding the eyes of the workman and the various interesting
opportunities for fatal accidents.
The railing was two strands of twine.If you don't want to die, don't falloff!
Viki and her brother hunkered close to the ground and stuck their heads over the
abyss. For a moment, it was too dark to see. The heated air that drifted up carried
the smell of burning oil and hot metal. It was a caress and a slap in the head all at
once. And the sounds: workers shouting, metal grinding against metal, engines,
and a strange hissing. Viki dipped her head, letting all her eyes adjust to the
gloom. There was light, but nothing like day or night. She had seen small
electric-arc lamps in Daddy's labs. These ones were huge: pencils of light
glowing mostly in the ultra and far ultra-colors you never see bright except in the
disk of the sun. The color splashed off the hooded workers, spread speckling
glints up and down the shaft.. . .There were other less spectacular lights, steadier
ones, electric lamps that shone local splotches of tamed color here and there.
Still twelve years before the Dark, and they were building a whole city down
there. She could see avenues of stone, huge tunnels leading off from the walls of
the shaft. And in the tunnels she glimpsed darker holes. . .ramps to smaller
diggings? Buildings and homes and gardens would come later, but already the
caves were mostly dug. Looking down, Viki felt an attraction that was new to
her, the natural, protective attraction of a deepness. But what these workers were
doing was a thousand times grander than any ordinary deepness. If all you

wanted to do was sleep frozen through the Dark, you needed just enough space
for your sleeping pool and a startup cache. Such already existed in the city
deepness beneath the old town center-and had existed there for almost twenty
generations. This new construction was tolive in, awake. In some places, where
air seal and insulation could be assured, it was built right at ground level. In
other areas, it was dug down hundreds of feet, an eerie reverse of the buildings
that made Princeton's skyline.
Viki stared and stared, lost in the dream. Until now, it had all been a story
at a distance. Little Victory read about it, heard her parents talk about it, heard it
on the radio. She knew that as much as anything, it was the reason why so many
people hated her family. That, and being oophase, were the reasons they weren't
supposed to go out alone. Dad might talk and talk about evolution in action and
how important it was for small children to be allowed to take chances, how if
that didn't happen then genius could not develop in the survivors. The trouble
was, he didn't mean it. Every time Viki tried to take on something a little risky,
Dad got all paternal and the project became a padded security blanket.
Viki realized she was chuckling low in her chest.
"What?" said Brent.
"Nothing. I was just thinking that today we are getting to see what things
are really like-Daddy or no."
Brent's aspect shifted into embarrassment. Of all her brothers and sisters, he
was the one who took rules the most literally and felt the worst about bending
them. "I think we should leave now. There are workers on the surface, getting
closer. Besides, how long does the snow last?"
Grumble. Viki backed out and followed her brother through the maze of
wonderfully massive things that filled the construction yard. At the moment,
even the prospect of snowdrifts was not an irresistible attraction.
The first real surprise of the day came when they finally reached an in-use
express stop: Standing a little apart from the crowd were Jirlib and Gokna. No
wonder she hadn't been able to find them this morning. They had snuck off
without her! Viki sidled across the plaza toward them, trying to look not the least
perturbed. Gokna was grinning her usual one-upness. Jirlib had the grace to look
embarrassed. Along with Brent he was the oldest, and should have had the sense
to prevent this outing. The four of them drifted a few yards away from the stares
and stuck their heads together.
Buzz, mumble. Miss One-Upness: "What took you so long? Had trouble
sneaking past Downing's
Detainers?" Viki: "I didn't thinkyou would even dare try. We've done lots
already this morning." Miss One-Upness: "Like what?" Viki: "Like we checked

out the New Underground." Miss One-Upness: "Well-"
Jirlib: "Shut up the both of you. Neither of you should be out here."
"But we're radio celebrities, Jirlib." Gokna preened. "People love us."
Jirlib moved a little closer and lowered his voice. "Quit it. For every three
who like 'The Children's Hour,' there are three that it worries-and four more are
trads who still hate your guts."
The children's radio hour had been more fun than anything Viki had ever
done, but it hadn't been the same since Honored Pedure. Now that their age was
public, it was like they had to prove something. They had even found some other
oophases-but so far none were right for the show. Viki and Gokna hadn't gotten
friendly with other cobblies, even the pair that had been their age. They were
strange, unfriendly children-almost the stereotype of oophase. Daddy said it was
their upbringing, the years in hiding. That was the scariest thing of all,
something she only talked about with Gokna, and then only in whispers in the
middle of the night. What if the Church was right? Maybe she and Gokna just
imagined they had souls.
For a moment, the four of them stood silently, taking Jirlib's point. Then
Brent asked, "So why are you out here, Jirlib?" From anyone else it would have
been a challenge, but verbal fighting was outside Brent's scope. The question
was simple curiosity, an honest request for enlightenment.
As such, it poked deeper than any gibe. "Um, yeah. I'm on my way
downtown. The Royal Museum has an exhibit about the Distorts of Khelm.. .
.I'mnot a problem. I look quite old enough to be in-phase." That last was true.
Jirlib wasn't as big as Brent, but he already had the beginning of paternal fur
showing through the slits of his jacket. But Viki wasn't going to let him off that
easily. She jabbed a hand in Gokna's direction: "So what is this? Your pet
tarant?"
Little Miss One-Upness smiled sweetly. Jirlib's whole aspect was a glare.
"You two are walking disaster areas, you know that?" Exactly how had Gokna
fooled Jirlib into taking her along? The question sparked real professional
interest in Viki. She and Gokna were by far the best manipulators in the whole
family. That was why they got along so badly with each other.
"We at least have a valid academic reason for our trip," said Gokna.
"What's your excuse?"
Viki waved her eating hands in her sister's face. "We're going to see the
snow. That's a learning experience."
"Hah! You just want to roll in it."
"Shut up." Jirlib raised his head, took in the various bystanders back at the
express stop. "We should all go home."

Gokna shifted into persuasion mode: "But Jirlib, that would be worse. It's a
long walk back. Let's take the bus to the museum-see, it's coming right now."
The timing was perfect. An express had just turned onto the uphill thoroughfare.
Its near-red lights marked it as part of the downtown loop. "By the time we get
done there, the snow fanatics should be back in town and there'll be an express
running all the way back home."
"Hey, I didn't come down here to see some fake alien magic! I want to see
the snow."
Gokna shrugged. "Too bad, Viki. You can always stick your head in an
icebox when we get home."
"I-" Viki saw that Jirlib had reached the end of his patience, and she didn't
have any real counterargument. A word from him to Brent, and Viki would find
herself carried willy-nilly back to the house. "-uh, what a fine day to go to the
museum."
Jirlib gave a sour smile. "Yeah, and when we arrive we'll probably find
Rhapsa and Little Hrunk already there, having sweet-talked security into driving
them down direct." That started Viki and Gokna laughing. The two littlest ones
were more than babies now, but they still hung around Dad nearly all the day.
The image of them outsmarting Mother's security team was a bit much.
The four of them maneuvered back to the edge of the crowd, and were the
last to board the express.. . .Oh well. Four really was safer than two, and the
Royal Museum was in a safe part of town. Even if Dad caught on, the children's
evident planning and caution would excuse them. And for all the rest of her life
there would be the snow.
• • •
Public expresses were nothing like the cars and airplanes that Viki was used
to. Here everyone was packed close. Rope netting-almost like babies' gymnets-
hung in sheets spaced every five feet down the length of the bus. Passengers
spread arms and legs ignominiously through the web-work and hung vertically
from the ropes. It made it possible to pack more people on board, but it felt
pretty silly. Only the driver had aproper perch.
This bus wouldn't have been crowded-except that the other passengers gave
the children a wide berth.Well, they can all shrivel. I don't care. She stopped
watching the other passengers, and studied the cross streets streaming past.
With all the work going on underground, there were places where street
repairs had been neglected. Every bump and pothole set the rope netting asway-
kind of fun. Then things smoothed out. They were entering the poshest section
of the new downtown She recognized some of the insignias on the towers above

of the new downtown. She recognized some of the insignias on the towers above
them, corporations like Under Power and Regency Radionics. Some of the
largest companies in the Accord wouldn't even exist if it weren't for her father. It
made her proud to see all the people going in and out of those buildings. Dad
was important in a good way to many people.
Brent swayed out from the rope netting, his head coming close to hers.
"You know, I think we're being followed."
Jirlib heard the quiet words too, and stiffened on the ropes. "Huh? Where?"
"Those two Roadmasters. They were parked near the bus stop."
For a second, Viki felt a little thrill of fear-and then relief. She laughed. "I
bet we didn't fool anyone this morning. Dad let us go, and Captain Downing's
people are following along the way they always like to do."
Brent said, "These cars don't look like any of the usual ones."

TWENTY-EIGHT
The Royal Museum was at the City Center express stop. Viki and her
siblings were deposited on the very steps of the place.
For a moment Viki and Gokna were speechless, staring upward at the
curving stone arch. They had done a show about this place, but they had never
been here. The Royal Museum was only three stories tall, dwarfed by the
buildings of modern times. But the smaller building was something more than all
the skyscrapers. Except for fortifications, the museum was the oldest intact
surface structure in Princeton. In fact, it had been the Royals' principal museum
for the last five cycles of the sun. There had been some rebuilding, and some
extensions, but one of the traditions of the place was that it should remain true to
King Longarms's vision. The outside sloped in a curving arch, almost like an
inverted section of aircraft wing. The wind-run arch was the invention of
architects two generations before the scientific era. The ancient buildings at
Lands Command were nothing compared with this; they had the protection of
deep valley walls. For a moment, Viki tried to imagine what it must be like here
in the days right after the sun came to life: the building hunkered low beneath
winds blasting at near sound-speed, the sun blazing hell-bright in all the colors
from ultra to farthest red. So why did King Longarms build right on the surface?
To dare the Dark and the Sun, of course. To rise above the deep little hidey-
holes andrule.
"Hey you two! Are you asleep, or what?" Jirlib's voice jabbed at them. He
and Brent were looking back from the entrance. The girls scrambled up the
steps, and for once didn't have any smart reply.
Jirlib continued on, mumbling to himself about daydreaming twits. Brent
dropped behind the other three, but followed close.
They passed into the shade of the entryway, and the sounds of the city
faded behind. A ceremonial guard of two King's troopers perched silently in
ambush niches on either side of the entrance. Up ahead was the real guardian-the
ticket clerk. The ancient walls behind his stand were hung with announcements
of the current exhibits. Jirlib was grumbling no more. He jittered around a
twelve-color "artist's conception" of a Distort of Khelm. And now Viki could see
how such foolishness had made it into the Royal Museum. It wasn't just the
Distorts. This season's museum theme was "Crank Science in All Its Aspects."
The posters advertised exhibits on deepness-witching, autocombustion,
videomancy, and-ta-da!-the

Distorts of Khelm. But Jirlib seemed oblivious of the company his hobby
was keeping. It was enough for him that a museum finally honored it.
The current-theme exhibits were in the new wing. Here the ceilings were
high, and mirrored pipes showered sunlight in misty cones upon the marble
floors. The four of them were almost alone, and the place had an eerie quality of
sound about it, not quite echoing, but magnifying. When they weren't talking,
even the tick of their feet seemed loud. It worked better than any "Quiet Please"
signs. Viki was awed by all the incredible quackery. Daddy thought such things
were amusing-"like religion but not so deadly." Unfortunately, Jirlib had eyes
only for his own quackery. Never mind that Gokna was engrossed by the
autocombustion exhibit to the point of active scheming. Never mind that Viki
wanted to see the glowing picture tubes in the videomancy hall. Jirlib was going
straight to the Distorts exhibit, and he and Brent made sure their sisters stayed
right with them.
Ah, well. In truth, Viki had always been intrigued by the Distorts. Jirlib had
been stuck on them for as long as she could remember; here, finally, they would
get to see the real thing.
The entrance to the hall was a floor-to-ceiling exhibit of diamond
foraminifera. How many tons of fuel sludge had been sifted to find such perfect
specimens? The different types were carefully labeled according to the best
scientific theories, but the tiny crystal skeletons had been artfully positioned in
their trays behind magnifying lenses: in the piped sunlight, the forams glittered
in crystal constellations like jeweled tiaras and bracelets and backdrapes. It
reduced Jirlib's collection to in significance. On a central table, a bank of
microscopes gave the interested visitor a closer look. Viki stared through the
lenses. She had seen this sort of thing often enough before, but these forams
were undamaged and the variety was boggling. Most were six-way symmetric,
yet there were many that had the little hooks and wands that the living creatures
must have used to move around in their microscopic environment. Not a single
diamond skeleton creature lived in the world anymore, and none had for more
than fifty million years. But in some sedimentary rock, the diamond foram layer
was hundreds of feet thick; out east, it was a cheaper fuel than coal. The largest
of the critters was barely flea-sized, but there had been a time when they were
the most common animal in the world. Then, about fifty million years ago-poof.
All that was left was their skeletons. Uncle Hrunkner said that was something to
think about when Daddy's ideas went over the top.
"C'mon, c'mon." Jirlib could spend hours at a time with his own foram
collection. But today, he gave the ranked glitter of the King's Own Exhibit
barely thirty seconds; the signs on the far doors proclaimed the Distorts of
f
f

Khelm. The four of them ticktoed to the darkened entrance, scarcely whispering
to one another now. In the hall beyond, a single cone of piped sunlight shone
down on the central tables. The walls were drowned in shadow, lit here and there
by lamps of the extreme colors.
The four eased quietly into the room. Gokna gave a little squeak of surprise.
There were figures in the dark. . .and they were taller than the average adult was
long. They wavered on three spindly legs and their forelegs and arms rose almost
like the branches of a Reaching Frondeur. It was everything Chundra Khelm had
ever claimed for his Distorts-and in the dark, it promised more detail to anyone
who would come closer.
Viki read the words that glowed beneath the figures, and smiled to herself.
"Hot stuff, huh?" she said to her sister.
"Yeah-I never imagined-" Then she read the description, too. "Oh, more
crapping fakes."
"Not a fake," said Jirlib, "an admitted reconstruction." But she could hear
the disappointment in his voice. They walked slowly down the darkened hall,
peering at ambiguous glimmers. And for a few minutes, the shapes were a
tantalizing mystery that floated just beyond their grasp. There were all fifty of
the racial types that Khelm described. But these were crude models, probably
from some masquerade supplier. Jirlib seemed to wilt as he walked from display
to display, and read the writeup under each. The descriptions were expansive:
"The elder races that preceded ours. . .the creatures who haunted the Arachnans
of ancient times. . .Darkest deepnesses may still contain their spawn, waiting to
take back their world." This last sign was beside a reconstruction that looked a
lot like a monster tarant, poised to bite off the viewer's head. It was all tripe, and
even Viki's little brother and sister would have known it. Chundra Khelm
admitted that his "lost site" was beneath foram strata. If the Distorts were
anything, they had been extinct atleast fifty million years-extinct millions of
years before even the earliest proto-Arachnan ever lived.
"I think they're just making fun of it, Jirl," said Viki. For once she didn't
tease about it. She didn't like it when outsiders mocked her family, even
unknowingly.
Jirlib shrugged agreement. "Yeah, you're right. The farther we walk, the
funnier they get. Ha. Ha." He stopped by the last display. "They even admit it!
Here's the last description: 'If you have reached here, you understand how
foolish are the claims of Chundra Khelm. But what are the Distorts then? Fakery
from a conveniently misplaced digging site? Or some rare natural feature of
metamorphic rock? You be the judge . . .' " His voice trailed off as his attention
shifted to the brightly lit pile of rocks in the center of the room, hidden from
li
i
b
titi

earlier view by a partition.
Jirlib did a rolling hop, bounding to the bright-lit exhibit. He was practically
jittering with excitement as he peered down into the pile. Each rock was
separately displayed. Each rock was clearly visible in all the colors of the
sunlight. They looked like nothing more than unpolished marble. Jirlib sighed,
but in awe. "These are real Distorts, the best that anyone besides Chundra Khelm
has ever found."
If they had been polished, some of the rocks would have been kind of
pretty. There were swirls that were more the color of elemental carbon than
marble. If you used your imagination, they looked a little bit like regular shapes
that had been stretched and twisted. They still didn't look like anything that had
ever been alive. On the far side of the pile was one rock that had been carefully
sliced into tenth-inch sheets, so thin that the sunlight glowed right through. The
stack of one hundred slices was mounted on a steel frame, with a gap between
each slice. If you got really close and moved your head up and down, you had
sort of a three-dimensional view of how the pattern was spread through the rock.
There was a glittering swirl of diamond dust, almost like forams, but all
smudged out. And around the diamond, a sort of webbery of dark-filled cracks.
It was beautiful. Jirlib just stood there, his head pressed closed to the steel frame,
tilting back and forth to see the light through all the slices. "This was alive once.
I know it, I know it," he said. "A million times bigger than any foram, but based
on the same principles. If we could just see what it was like before it got all
smeared apart." It was the old, Khelmic refrain-but this thingwas real. Even
Gokna seemed to be entranced by it; it was going to be a little while before Viki
got a closer look. She walked slowly around the central pile, looked at some of
the microscopic views, read the rest of the explanations. Leave aside the laughs,
the junk statues-this was supposed to be the best example of Distorts around. In
a way, that should discourage poor Jirlib as much as anything. Even if these had
once been living things, there was certainly no evidence of intelligence. If the
Distorts were what Jirlib really wanted, their creations should have been
awesome. So where were their machines, their cities?
Sigh. Viki quietly moved away from Gokna and Jirlib. She was in plain
sight behind them, but they were so caught by the translucent distort that neither
seemed to notice her. Maybe she could sneak into the next hall, the videomancy
thing. Then she saw Brent.He was not distracted by the exhibit. Her brother had
hunkered down behind a table in one of the darkest corners of the room-and right
next to the exit she was heading for. She might not have noticed him except that
his eye surfaces gleamed in the extreme-colorlamps. From where he sat, Brent
could lurk on both entrances and still see everything they were doing at the

central tables.
Viki gave him a wave that was also a grin and drifted toward the exit. Brent
didn't move or call her back. Maybe he was in an ambush mood, or just
daydreaming about his buildertoys. As long as she stayed in sight, maybe he
wouldn't squawk. She moved through the high-arched exit, into the videomancy
hall.
The exhibit began with paintings and mosaics, generations old. The idea
behind videomancy went back long before modern times, to the superstition that
if you could only picture your enemies perfectly, you would have power over
them. The notion had inspired a lot of art, the invention of new dyes and mixing
formulas. Even now, the best pictures were only a shadow of what the Spider
eye could see. Modern videomancy claimed that science could produce the
perfect picture, and the ancient dreams would be realized. Daddy thought the
whole thing was hilarious.
Viki walked between tall racks of glowing video tubes. A hundred still
landscapes, fuzzy and blurred. . .but the most advanced tubes showed colors you
never saw except in extreme lamps and sunlight. Every year, the video tubes got
better. People were talking about picture radio even. That idea fascinated Little
Victory-forget the mind-control quackery.
From somewhere beyond the far end of the hall there were voices,
frolicsome jabber that sounded like Rhapsa and Little Hrunk. Viki froze in
startlement. A few seconds passed. . .and two babies came bounding through the
far entrance. Viki remembered Jirlib's sarcastic prediction that Rhapsa and
Hrunk would show up, too. For an instant she thought he'd been right. But no,
two strangers followed them into the hall, and the children were younger than
her little sister and brother.
Viki squeaked something excited and raced down the hall toward the
children. The adults-the parents?-froze for an instant, then swept up their
children and turned in retreat.
"Wait! Wait, please! I just want to talk." Viki forced her legs down to a
casual walking gait and lifted her hands in a friendly smile. Behind her, Viki
could see that Gokna and Jirlib had left the Distort display, and were staring
after her with expressions of stark surprise.
The parents stopped, came slowly back. Both Gokna and Viki were clearly
out-of-phase. That seemed to encourage the strangers more than anything.
They talked for a few minutes, politely formal. Trenchet Suabisme was a
planner at New World
Construction; her husband was a surveyor there. "Today seemed like a good
day to come to the museum, what with most of the day-off people up in the

mountains playing in the snow. Was that your plan, too?"
"Oh, yes," said Gokna-and for her and Jirlib maybe that was so. "But we are
so glad to meet you, a-and your children. What are their names?" It was so weird
to meet strangers who seemed more familiar than anyone but family. Trenchet
and Alendon seemed to feel it too. Their children squirmed around loudly in
their arms, refusing to retreat to Alendon's back. After a few minutes, their
parents set them back on the floor. The babies took two big hops each and ended
up in the arms of Gokna and Viki. They scrambled around, chattering nonsense,
their near sighted baby eyes turning this way and that with excited curiosity.
The one climbing all over Viki-Alequere, she was-couldn't be much over
two years old. Somehow, neither Rhapsa nor Little Hrunk had ever seemed so
cute. Of course, whenthey had been two, Viki had been only seven and still out
to get all the attention she could for herself. These children were nothing like the
surly oophases they had met before now.
The most embarrassing thing was the adults' reaction when they learned
exactly who Viki and her siblings were. Trenchet Suabisme was silent for a
shocked second, "I-I guess we should have known. Who else could you be?. .
.You know, when I was in my teens, I used to listen to your radio program. You
seemed so awfully young, the only Outies I had ever heard. I really liked your
show."
"Yeah," said Alendon. He smiled as Alequere wormed her way into the
pocket on the side of Viki's jacket. "Knowing about you made it possible for me
and Trenchet to think about having our own children. It's been hard; we lost our
first baby welts. But once they get eyes, they're cute as can be."
The baby made happy squeaking noises as it scrambled around in Viki's
jacket. Her head finally emerged, waving eating hands. Viki stretched back to
tickle the little hands. It made Viki proud to know that some had listened and
gotten Daddy's message, but-"It's sad you still have to avoid the crowds. I wish
there were more like you and your children."
Surprisingly, Trenchet chuckled. "Times are changing. More and more,
people expect to be awake right through the Dark; they're beginning to see that
some rules have to change. We'll need grown children around to help finish the
construction. We know two other couples in New World who are trying to have
children out-of-phase." She patted her husband's shoulders. "We won't be alone
forever."
The enthusiasm flowed across to Viki. Alequere and the other cobblie-
Birbop?-were as nice as Rhapsa and Little Hrunk, but they weredifferent, too.
Now finally they might know lots of other children. For Viki it was like opening
a window, and seeing all the sunlight's colors.
Th
lk d l
l d
h
id
h ll G k
d T
h

They walked slowly down the videomancy hall, Gokna and Trenchet
Suabisme discussing various possibilities. Gokna was all for having the house on
the hill turned into a meeting place for oophase families. Somehow, Viki
suspected that would not fly with either Dad or the General, though for different
reasons. But overall. . .something could be worked out; it made strategic sense.
Viki followed the others, not paying much attention. She was having a very
interesting time jiggling little Alequere. Playing with the cobblie was far more
fun than seeing the snow could have been.
Then behind all the chatting, she heard the distant ticking of many feet on
marble. Four people? Five? They'd be coming through the same doorway that
Viki had, just a few minutes before. Whoever it was would have an interesting
surprise-the sight of six oophases, from babies to near-adults.
Four of the newcomers were current-generation adults, big as any of
Mother's security people. They didn't pause or even act surprised when they saw
all the children. Their clothes were the same nondescript commercial jackets that
Viki was used to back in the house on the hill. The leader was a sharp,
lastgeneration cobber with the look of a senior noncom. Viki should have felt
relief; these must be the people Brent had seen following them. But she didn't
recognize themThe leader held them all in her gaze, then gestured familiarly at
Trenchet Suabisme. "We can take it from here. General Smith wants all the
children back inside the security perimeter."
"W-what? I don't understand?" Suabisme lifted her hands in confusion.
The five strangers walked steadily forward, the leader nodding pleasantly.
But her explanations were nonsense: "Two guards just aren't enough for all the
children. After you left, we got a tip there might be problems." Two of the
security types stepped smoothly between the children and the Suabisme adults.
Viki felt herself pushed un-gently toward Jirlib and Gokna. Mother's people had
never behaved like this. "Sorry, this is an emergency-"
Several things happened at once, totally confused and nonsensical. Both
Trenchet and Alendon were shouting, panic mixed with anger. The two biggest
strangers were pushing them back from the children. One was reaching into his
pannier.
"Hey, we've missed one!"Brent.
Very high up, something was moving. The videomancy exhibit consisted of
towering racks of display tubes. With inexorable grace, the nearest came
toppling down, its pictures flickering out in showers of sparks and the sound of
crumpling metal. She had a glimpse of Brent sailing off the top, just ahead of the
destruction.
The floor smashed up at her when the display rack hit. Everywhere was the
bang of imploding video tubes the buzz of uncontrolled high voltage The rack

bang of imploding video tubes, the buzz of uncontrolled high voltage. The rack
had come down between her and the Suabismes-and right on top of two of the
strangers. She had a glimpse of colored blood oozing across the marble. Two
motionless forehands extended from under the rack; just beyond their grasp lay a
snubbarreled shotgun.
Then time resumed. Viki was grabbed roughly round her midsection and
hauled away from the wreckage. On the other side of her abductor, she could
hear Gokna and Jirlib shouting. There was a dull crunch. Gokna shrieked and
Jirlib went silent.
"Teamleader, what about-"
"Never mind! We bagged all six. Move it. Move it!"
As she was carried from the hall, Viki got one glance back. But the
strangers were leaving their two dead pals-and she couldn't see beyond the fallen
rack to where the Suabismes would be.

TWENTY-NINE
It was an afternoon that Hrunkner Unnerby would never forget. In all the
years he had known Victory
Smith, it was the first time he'd seen her come close to losing control. Just
past noon the frantic call came over the microwave communications link,
Sherkaner Underhill breaking through all military priorities with word of the
kidnappings. General Smith dumped Sherkaner from the line and pulled her staff
into emergency session. Suddenly Hrunkner Unnerby went from being a projects
director to something like. . .like a sergeant. Hrunkner got her tri-prop on the
flight line. He and lower staff checked background security. He wasn't going to
let his General take chances. Emergencies like this were just the things that
enemies like to create, and when you're thinking that nothing matters but that
emergency,then they strike at their true targets.
The tri-prop took less than two hours to make it from Lands Command to
Princeton. But the aircraft was no flying command center; such things were
beyond current budgets. So the General had two hours with only a low-speed
wireless link. That was two hours away from the command and control hub at
Lands Command or its near equal at Princeton. Two hours to listen to
fragmentary reports and try to coordinate a response. Two hours for grief and
anger and uncertainty to gnaw. It was midafternoon when they landed, then
another half hour before they reached Hill House.
Their car had scarcely stopped when Sherkaner Underhill was pulling the
doors open, urging them out. He caught Unnerby by the arm, and spoke around
him to the General. "Thanks for bringing Hrunkner. I need you both." And he
walked them across the foyer, drawing them down to his den on the ground
floor.
Over the years, Unnerby had observed Sherkaner in various tricky
situations: talking his way into Lands Command in the middle of the Tiefer War,
guiding an expedition right through the vacuum of the Deepest Dark, debating
trads. Sherk didn't always win, but he was always so full of surprise and
imagination. Everything was a grand experiment and a wonderful adventure.
Even when he failed, he saw how the failure would make for more interesting
experiments. But today. . .today Sherkaner had met despair. He reached out to
Smith, the tremor in his head and arms more pronounced than ever. "There has
to be a way to find them. There has to be. I have computers, and the microwave
link to Lands Command." All the resources that had served him so well in the

past. "I can get them back safely. I know I can."
Smith was very still for a moment. Then she moved close to him, laid an
arm across Sherk's shoulders, caressing his fur. Her voice was soft and stern,
almost like a soldier bracing another about lost comrades. "No, dear. You can
only do so much." Outside, the afternoon was moving into overcast. A thin
whistle of wind came through the half-opened windows, and the ferns scraped
back and forth on the quartz panes. A dark green gloom was all that filtered
down through the clouds and the shrubbery.
The General stood with her head close to Sherkaner's, the two just staring at
each other. Unnerby could almost feel the fear and the shame echoing back and
forth between the two. Then, abruptly, Sherkaner collapsed toward her, his arms
wrapping her. The soft hiss of Sherkaner's weeping joined the wind as the only
sounds in the room. After a moment, Smith raised one of her back hands, gently
motioning for
Hrunkner to leave.
Unnerby nodded back at her. The deep carpet was littered with toys-
Sherkaner's and the children's-but he was careful where he stepped and managed
a silent exit.
The twilight quickly became night, as much a product of the gathering
storm as the setting of the sun.
Unnerby didn't see much of the weather, since the house command post had
only tiny, beetling windows. Smith showed up there almost half an hour after
Unnerby. She acknowledged her subordinates' attention, then slid onto the perch
next to Hrunkner. He waggled hands at her questioningly. She shrugged. "Sherk
will be okay, Sergeant. He's up with his graduate students, doing what he can.
Now where are we?"
Unnerby pushed a stack of interviews across the table toward her. "Captain
Downing and his team are still here, if you want to talk to them yourself, but all
of us"-all the staff that had come up from Lands Command-"think they're clean.
The children were just too clever." The children had made fools of an efficient
security setup. Of course, they had lived with the setup for a long time, knew
Security's habits, were friends of the team members. And till now, the external
threat had been a matter of theory and occasional rumor. It all worked in the
cobblies' favor when they decided to go for a jaunt.. . .But that security team was
a creation of General Victory Smith's own staff. The team members were smart
people, loyal people; they were hurting as much as Sherkaner Underhill.
Smith pushed the reports back at him. "Okay. Get Daram and his team back
in the loop. Keep them busy. What's new with the search reports?" She waved
the other staffers close, and she herself became very busy.

The house command post had good maps, a real situation table. With the
microwave link, it could double for the command center at Lands Command.
Unfortunately, it had no special advantage for comm into Princeton. It would be
several hours before that problem was cured. There was a steady stream of
runners moving in and out of the room. Many were fresh from Lands Command,
and not part of the day's debacle. That was a good thing, their presence leavening
the fatigued dispair that showed in the aspects of some. There were leads. There
was progress. . .both heartening and ominous.
The chief of counter-Kindred operations showed up an hour later. Rachner
Thract was very new to his job, a young cobber and a Tiefer immigrant. It was
strange to see someone with such a combination in that post. He seemed bright
enough, but more bookish than deadly. Maybe that was okay; God knew they
needed people who really understood the Kindred. How could traditional values
go so wrong? In the Great War, the Kindred had been minor schismatics within
the Tiefer empire, and secret supporters of the Accord. But Victory Smith
thought they would be the next great threat-or maybe she just followed her
general suspicion of trads.
Thract laid his rain cape on the coatrack and undid the pannier he carried.
He set the documents down in front of his boss. "The Kindred are up to their
shoulders in this one, General."
"Why am I not surprised?" said Smith. Unnerby knew how tired she must
be, but she seemed fresh, almost the usual Victory Smith. Almost. She was as
calm, as courteous as at any staff meeting. Her questions were as clever as
always. But Unnerby saw a difference, a faint distraction. It didn't come across
as anxiety; it was more like the General's mind was somewhere else,
contemplating. "Nevertheless, Kindred involvement was only a low probability
this morning. What has changed, Rachner?"
"Two interviews and two autopsies. The cobbers who were killed had been
through plenty of physical training, and it doesn't look like athletics; there were
old nicks in their chitin, even a patched bullet hole."
Victory shrugged. "It's been clear this was a professional job. We know
there are domestic threats, trad fringe groups. They might hire competent
operators."
"They might, but this was the Kindred, not the local trads."
"There's hard evidence?" asked Unnerby, relieved and a little ashamed by
the feeling.
"Um." Thract seemed to consider the questioner as much as the question.
The cobber couldn't quite decide where Unnerby-a civilian addressed as
"Sergeant"-might fit in the chain of command.Get used to it,sonny. "The Kindred

make a big thing of their religious roots; but before now, they've been careful
about interfering with us domestically. Covert funding of local trad groups was
about their limit. But. . .they blew it today. These were Kindred professionals.
They went to great trouble to be untraceable, but they didn't count on our
forensic labs. Actually, it's a test one of your husband's students invented. See,
the ratio of pollen types in the breathing passages of both corpses is foreign; I
can even tell you which Kindred base they launched from. These two hadn't been
in-country for more than fifteen days."
Smith nodded. "If it had been longer, the pollen would be gone?"
"Right, captured by their immune system and flushed, the techs say. But
even so, we still would have figured most of this out. You see, the other side had
a lot more bad luck today than we did. They left behind two living witnesses. . .
." Thract hesitated, obviously remembering that this wasnot an ordinary ops
meeting, that for Smith the usual definition of operational success might count as
catastrophic failure.
The General didn't seem to notice. "Yes, the couple. The ones who brought
their children to the museum."
"Yes, ma'am. And they are half the reason why this thing blew up in the
enemy's face. Colonel
Underville"-the domestic ops chief-"has had people talking to them all
afternoon; they are desperately anxious to help. You've already heard what she
got from them right away, how one of your sons brought down an exhibit and
killed two of the kidnappers."
"And that all the children were taken alive."
"Right. But Underville has learned more. We're almost sure now.. . . The
kidnappers intended to steal all your children. When they saw the Suabismes'
little ones, they assumed those were yours. There just aren't that many oophases
in the world, even now. They naturally assumed the Suabismes wereour security
people."
God in the good cold earth.Unnerby gazed out the narrow windows. There
was a little more light than before, but now it was the actinic ultras of security
lamps. The wind was steadily picking up, driving sparkling droplets across the
windows, and bending the ferns back and forth. There was supposed to be a
lightning storm tonight.
So the Kindred screwed up because they had too high an opinion of Accord
security. Naturally, they assumed thatsomeone would be with the children.
"We got a lot from the two civilians, General: the story these fellows used
when they walked in, some turns of phrase after things blew up. . .The
kidnappers didn't intend to leave any witnesses. The Suabismes are the luckiest

people in Princeton tonight, even if they don't see it that way. The two that your
son killed were pushing the Suabismes away from the children. One of them had
unholstered an automatic shotgun, and all its safeties were off. Colonel
Underville figures the original mission was to grab all your children and leave
no witnesses. In fact, dead civilians and lots of blood was fine with their
scenario, since it would all be blamed on our trad factions."
"In that case, why not leave a couple of dead children, too? That would also
have made the getaway easier." Victory's question was calm, but it had a
distanced quality about it.
"We don't know, ma'am. But Colonel Underville thinks they're still in-
country, maybe even in Princeton."
"Oh?" Skepticism seemed to war with hope. "I know Belga clamped down
awfully fast-and the other side had its problems, too. Okay. This will be your
first big in-country operation, Rachner, but I want it done arm-in-arm with
Domestic Intelligence. And you'll have to involve the city and commercial
police." The classic anonymity of Accord Intelligence was going to get badly
bent in the next few days. "Try to be nice to the city and commercial people. We
don't have a state of war. They can cause the Crown a world of trouble."
"Yes, ma'am. Colonel Underville and I are running patrols with the city
police. When the phones are set up, we'll have some kind of joint command post
with them here at Hill House."
"Very good.. . .I think you were ahead of me all the time, Rachner."
Thract gave a little smile as he came to his feet. "We'll get your cobblies
back, Chief."
Smith started to reply, then noticed two small heads peeping around the
doorjamb. "I know you will, Rachner. Thank you."
Thract stepped back from the table, and a brief stillness spread through the
room. The two youngest of Underhill's children-maybe all who were left alive-
walked shyly into the room, followed by the head of their guard team and three
troopers. Captain Downing carried a furled umbrella, but it was clear that
Rhapsa and Little Hrunk had not taken advantage of it. Their jackets were
soaked and drops of rain stood on their glassy black chitin.
Victory had no smile for the children. Her gaze took in their soaked clothes
and the umbrella. "Were you running around?"
Rhapsa answered, more subdued than Hrunkner had ever heard the little
hellion. "No, Mother. We were with Daddy, but now he is busy. We stayed right
by Captain Downing, between him and the others. . . ."
She stopped, tilted her head shyly at her guard.
The young captain snapped to attention, but he had the terrible look of a
ldi
h h
j
b
d d f
"S
'
I d
id d

soldier who has just seen combat and defeat. "Sorry, ma'am. I decided not to use
the umbrella. I wanted to be able to see in all directions."
"Quite right, Daram. And. . .it's right that you brought them here." She
stopped, just staring at her children for a quiet second. Rhapsa and Little Hrunk
were motionless, staring back. Then, as if some central switch had been tripped,
the two swarmed across the room, their voices raised in a wordless keen. For a
moment they were all arms and legs, scrambling up Smith, hugging her like a
father. Now that the dam of their reserve was broken, their crying was loud-and
the questions, too. Was there any news about Gokna and Viki and Jirlib and
Brent? What would happen now? And they didn't want to be by themselves.
After a few moments things settled down. Smith tilted her head at the
children, and Unnerby wondered what was going through her mind. She still had
two children. Whatever the bad luck or incompetence of this day, it was two
other young children who were stolen instead of these. She raised a hand in
Unnerby's direction. "Hrunkner. I have a request. Find the Suabismes. Ask them.
. .offer them my hospitality. If they would like to wait this out here at Hill
House. . .I would be honored."
They were high up, in some kind of vertical ventilator shaft.
"No, it's not a ventilator shaft!" said Gokna. "Real ones have all sorts of
extra piping and utility cabling."
There was no rumble of ventilator fans, just the constant whistle of the wind
from above. Viki concentrated on the view straight above her head. She could
see a grilled window at the top, maybe fifty feet up. Daylight shone through,
splashing this way and that down the metal walls of the shaft. Here at the bottom
they were in twilight, but it was more than bright enough to see the sleep mats,
the chemical toilet, the metal floor. Their prison got steadily warmer as the day
progressed. Gokna was right. They'd done enough exploring back home to know
how real utility cores looked. But what else could this be? "Look at all the
patches." She waved at the disks that were sloppily welded here and there on the
walls. "Maybe this place was abandoned-no, maybe it's still under construction!"
"Yeah," said Jirlib. "All this work is fresh. They just tack-welded covers on
the access holes, maybe an hour's work." Gokna nodded, not even trying to get
the last word. So much had changed since this morning. Jirlib was no longer a
distant, angry umpire to their disputes. He was under more pressure than ever
before, and she knew how bitterly guilty he must feel. Along with Brent, he was
the eldest-and he'd let this happen. But the pain didn't show directly; Jirlib was
more patient than ever before.
And when he spoke, his sisters listened. Even if you didn't count that he
was just about an adult, he was by far the smartest of all of them.
"In fact I think I know exactly where we are " He was interrupted by the

"In fact, I think I know exactly where we are." He was interrupted by the
babies, stirring in their perches on his back. Jirlib's fur was just not deep enough
to properly comfort, and he was already beginning to stink. Alequere and Birbop
alternated between caterwauling demands for their parents and nerve-racking
silence, when they pinched tight onto poor Jirlib's back. It looked like they were
returning to noise mode. Viki reached out, coaxing Alequere into her arms.
"Where is that?" asked Gokna, but with no trace of argument in her voice.
"See the attercop webs?" said Jirlib, pointing upward. They were fresh, tiny
patches of silk that floated in the breeze by the grill. "Each type has its own
pattern. The ones up there are local to the Princeton area, but they nest in the
highest places. The top of Hill House is just barely high enough for them. So-I
figure we're still in town, and we're so high up we must be visible for miles.
We're either in the hill district or in that new skyscraper at City Center."
Alequere started crying again. Viki rocked her gently back and forth. It was
the sort of thing that always cheered up Little Hrunk, but. . .A miracle!
Alequere's wailing quieted. Maybe she was just so beaten down that she couldn't
make healthy noise. But no, after a few seconds the baby waved a weak little
smile at her and twisted around so that she could see everything. She was a good
little cobblie! Viki rocked the baby a few more seconds before she spoke. "Okay.
Maybe they just drove us around in circles-but City Center? We've heard a few
aircraft, but where are the street noises?"
"They're all around." It was almost the first thing Brent had said since the
kidnapping. Slow and dull, that was Brent. And he was the only one of all of
them who had guessed what was happening this morning. He was the one who
dropped away from the others and lurked in the dark. Brent was grown-up-
sized-riding that exhibit down on top of the enemy could have crippled him.
When they were dragged out through the museum's freight entrance, Brent had
been limp and silent. He hadn't said anything during the drive that followed, just
waved when Jirlib and Gokna asked him if he was okay.
In fact, it looked like he had cracked one foreleg and injured at least one
other, but he wouldn't let them look at the damage. Viki understood. Brent would
feel just as ashamed as Jirlib-and even more useless. He had withdrawn into a
sullen pile, and then-after the first hour in their present captivity-had begun to
limp around and around, tapping and ticking at the metal. Every so often he
would plunk himself down flat, like he was pretending to be dead-or was totally
despairing. That was his posture just now.
"Can't you hear them?" he said again. "Belly-listen."
Viki hadn't played that game in years. But she and the others imitated him,
sprawling absolutely flat, with no grasping arch at all. It wasn't very
comfortable and you couldn't hold on to anything while you did it Alequere

comfortable, and you couldn t hold on to anything while you did it. Alequere
hopped out of her arms. Birbop joined his sister. The two ticked from one of the
older children to another, prodding at them. After a moment, the two started
giggling.
"Sh, sh," Viki said softly. That only made the giggling louder. How long
had Viki been praying for spirit to return to these two? And now she wanted
them just to be quiet for a bit. She shut them out of her mind and concentrated.
Hunh. It wasn't exactly sound, not for the ears in your head, anyway. But all
along her underside she could feel it. There was a steady background hum. . .and
other vibrations, that came and went. Ha! It was a ghost of the thrumming life
you felt in the tips of your feet when you walked around downtown! And there!
The unmistakable burring of heavy brakes making a fast stop.
Jirlib was chuckling. "I guess that settles that! They thought they were so
clever with that closed cargo box, but now we know."
Viki rose to a more comfortable position and exchanged looks with Gokna.
Jirlib was smarter, but when it came to sneakiness he had never been in a class
with his sisters. Gokna's reply was mild, partly to be polite, partly because the
appropriate tones would have sent the babies back into hiding. "Jirl, I don't think
they were really trying to hide things from us."
Jirlib shifted his head back, almost his "brother knows best" gesture. Then
he caught her tone. "Gokna, they could have gotten us here in a five-minute
drive. Instead, we were on the the road for more than an hour. What-"
Viki said, "I think that may have been just to evade Mother's security.
These cobbers had several cars running around; they switched us twice,
remember. Maybe they actually tried to get out of town, and saw that they
couldn't do it." Viki waved at their quarters. "If they have any sense, they know
we've seen way too much." She tried to keep her voice light. Birbop and
Alequere had wandered over to the still-sprawled Brent and were picking his
pockets. "We could identify them, Jirlib. We also saw the driver and the lady
down in the museum loading area."
And she told him about the automatic shotgun she'd seen on the floor at the
museum. An expression of horror flickered across Jirlib. "You don't think they're
trads, just trying to embarrass Dad and the General?"
Both Gokna and Viki gestured no. Gokna said, "I think they're soldiers, Jirl,
no matter what they say." In fact, there had been lies on top of lies. When the
gang appeared at the videomancy exhibit, they'd claimed to be from Mother's
security. But by time they dumped the cobblies here, they were talking like
trads: The children were a horrible example for decent folk. They weren't to be
harmed, but their parents would be revealed as the perverts that they were. That's
what they said but both Gokna and Viki noticed their lack of fire Most

what they said, but both Gokna and Viki noticed their lack of fire. Most
traditionalists on the radio positively fumed; the ones Viki and Gokna had met in
person got all torn up just at the sight of oophase children. These kidnappers
were cool; behind the rhetoric, it was clear that the children were just cargo. Viki
had noticed only two honest emotions under their professionalism. The leader
was truly angry about the two that Brent had squashed. . .and every so often,
there was a hint of distant regret for the children themselves.
Viki saw Jirlib flinch as the implications hit home, but he remained silent.
Two shrieks of laughter interrupted his grim introspection. Alequere and Birbop
weren't paying any attention to Gokna and Viki, or Jirlib. They had discovered
the play twine that Brent kept hidden in his jacket. Alequere hopped back,
drawing the twine out in a soaring arc. Birbop jumped to grab it, ran in a quick
circle around Brent as if to trap him round the legs.
"Hey, Brent, I thought you had outgrown that stuff," said Gokna, a forced
cheeriness in her teasing.
Brent's answer was slow and a little defensive. "I get bored when I'm away
from my sticks 'n' hubs. You can play with twine anywhere." For what it was
worth, Brent was an expert at making twine patterns. When he was younger, he'd
often roll onto his back and use all his arms and legs-even his eating hands-to
wrap ever more complicated patterns. It was the sort of silly, intricate hobby that
Brent loved.
Birbop grabbed the tip of the rope from Alequere and raced ten or fifteen
feet up the wall, nimbly taking advantage of every grasp point the way only the
very young can. He wiggled the rope at his sister, daring her to try to drag him
down. When she did so, he jerked it back and climbed upward another five feet.
He was just like Rhapsa used to be, maybe even a bit more nimble.
"Not so high, Birbop, you'll fall!"-and Viki was sounding just like Daddy
now.
The walls stretched up and up above the baby. And at the top, fifty feet
above them, was the tiny window. Behind herself, Viki saw Gokna start with
surprise. "Are you thinking what I am?" Viki said.
"P-probably. When she was little, Rhapsa could have climbed to the top."
Their kidnappers weren't as smart as they thought. Anyone who had looked after
babies would know better. But both the male kidnappers were young, current-
generation.
"But if he falls-"
If he fell, there would be no gymnet base web, not even a soft carpet. A
two-year-old might weigh fifteen or twenty pounds. They loved to climb; it was
as if they sensed that once they got big and heavy, they'd be stuck with climbing
stairs and making only the most trivial jumps. Babies could fall a lot farther than

sta s a d
a
g o y t e
ost t v a ju ps. Bab es cou d a
a ot a t e t a
grown-ups without serious injury, but long falls would still kill them. Two-year-
olds didn't know that. A simple suggestion would send Birbop off for the
window at the top. The chances were good that he would make it. . .
Normally, Viki and Gokna would jump into any wild scheme, but this was
someone else's life.. . .The two stared at each other for a moment. "I-I don't
know, Viki."
And if they did nothing? The babies would likely be killed along with the
rest of them. There could be terrible consequences whatever they chose.
Suddenly Viki was more frightened than she had ever been before; she walked
across the floor to stand under the grinning Birbop. Her arms reached up as if
with a life of their own, to coax the baby back down. She forced her arms down,
forced her voice into a light, teasing tone. "Hi, Birbop! Do you think you can
carry the twine all the way to that little window?"
Birbop tilted his head, turned his baby eyes upward. "Sure." And he was
off, scuttling back and forth from weld patch to pipefitting, upward and upward.I
owe you, little one, even if you don't know it.
On the ground, Alequere squawked outrage that Birbop should have all the
attention. She jerked hard on the twine, leaving her brother dangling by three
arms from a narrow ledge twenty feet up. Gokna scooped her off the floor and
away from the twine, and handed her to Jirlib.
Viki tried to shake off the terror she felt; she watched the baby climb higher
and higher.And if we can get to the window, then what? Throw out notes? But
they had nothing to write with-and they didn't know just where they were or
where the wind might carry a note.. . .And suddenly she saw how one thing
might solve two problems. "Brent, your jacket." She jerked her hands, waving
for Gokna to help him take it off.
"Yes!" Gokna was pulling at the sleeves and pants almost before Viki
finished talking. Brent stared in surprise for a second, and then he got the idea
and started helping. His jacket was almost as big as Jirlib's, but without the slits
down the back. The three of them stretched it flat between them and sidled this
way and that, trying to track the lateral movements of the high-climbing Birbop.
Maybe, even if he fell. . .It was the sort of thing that always worked in adventure
stories. Somehow, standing here holding the jacket, it seemed absurd to imagine
such success.
Alequere was still screeching, struggling to get out of Jirlib's grasp. Birbop
laughed at her. He was quite happy to be at the center of attention, doing
something he normally would have gotten whacked for. Forty feet up. He was
slowing. The foot-and handholds were scarce; he was beyond the main ventilator
fixtures. A couple of times he almost lost the twine as it slipped from hand to

p
pp
hand. He gathered himself on an impossibly narrow ledge and leaped sidewise
up the remaining three feet-and one of his hands snagged the window grille. An
instant later, his body was silhouetted in the light.
With only two eyes, and those in front, babies almost had to turn around to
see behind themselves. Now for the first time, Birbop looked down. His
triumphant laughter choked as he saw just how far he had come, so far that even
his baby instincts told him he was at risk. There were reasons parents didn't let
you climb as high as you wanted. Birbop's arms and legs clamped reflexively to
the grillework.
And they couldn't persuade him that no one could come up to help him, and
that he could get down by himself. Viki had never imagined that this would be a
problem. On the occasions that Rhapsa or Little Hrunk had escaped to unholy
heights, neither had any trouble getting back down.
Just when it seemed that Birbop was in a permanent state of paralysis, his
sister stopped crying and began laughing at him. After that, it wasn't hard to
persuade him to thread the twine through the grillework and then use it as a kind
of pulley to support his descent.
Most babies came on the idea themselves, sailing downward on play twine;
maybe it went back to some animal memories. Birbop started down with five
limbs wrapped securely around the descending strand and three others braking
the ascending strand. But after he had descended a few feet and it became clear
how smoothly the play twine worked, he was holding with just three arms-and
then two. He bounced off the walls with his feet, flying downward like some
pouncing tarant. Below him, Viki and the others hopped around in a vain effort
to keep their makeshift net under him. . . and then he was down.
And they had a loop of play twine extending from the floor to the window
grille and back. It glowed and twitched as it released stretch energy.
Gokna and Viki argued about which of them would do the next step. Viki
won that one; she weighed under eighty pounds, the least of any of them. She
pulled and swung on it while Brent and Gokna ripped the silk lining out of his
jacket. The lining was dyed with red and ultra splotches. Better yet, it was
constructed of folded layers; cutting it along the stitching gave them a banner
that was light as smoke, but fifteen feet on a side. Surely someone would notice.
Gokna folded the lining down to a neat square and handed it to her. "The
twine, you really think it'll hold?"
"Sure." Maybe. The stuff was slick and stretchy, like any good play twine-
and what would happen when she stretched it all the way?
What Brent said comforted her more than any wishful thinking: "I think it
will hold. I like to hang things in my designs. I took this from the mechanics

lab."
Viki took off her own jacket, grabbed the homemade flag in her eating
hands, and started up. In her rear view, the others dwindled into an anxious little
pattern around the "safety net." Lot of good that would do if someone as big as
her fell. She swayed out and in, bouncing step by step up the wall. Actually, it
was easy. Even a full-grown adult wouldn't have trouble climbing a vertical with
two support ropes-as long as the ropes held. As much as she watched the twine
and the wall, she watched the doorway down below. Funny how she hadn't
started worrying about interruptions until now. But success was so close. It
would all be for nothing if one of the goons chose now to look in on them. Just a
few more feet . . .
She slipped her forehands through the window grille, and hoisted herself
close to the open air. There was no room to perch, and the grille bars were too
close-set for even a baby to sneak through-but, ah, the view! They were at the
top of one of the giant new buildings, at least thirty stories up. The sky had
become a tumbling overcast, and the wind swept fiercely past the window. Her
view downward was partly blocked by the shoulders of the building, but
Princeton spread before her like some beautiful model. She had a straight view
down one street, could see buses, automobiles, people. And if they looked in her
direction. . .Viki unwrapped the jacket liner and poked it through the grille. The
wind almost pulled it from her grasp. She caught hold more firmly, tearing the
fabric with points of her hands. The stuff was so flimsy! Gently, carefully she
pulled the ends back, tied them in four separate places. Now the wind spread the
colored square out from the side of the building. The fabric snapped in the wind,
sometimes rising to cover the window, sometimes falling against the stonework
below her view.
One last look at freedom: Out where the land met the overcast, city hills
disappeared in the murk. But Viki could see enough to orient herself. There was
a hill, not quite so high as the others, but with a spiraling pattern of streets and
buildings. Hill House! She could see all the way home!
Viki sailed down from the window, gleeful out of all proportion. They
would win yet! She and the others pulled down the sparkling twine, hid it back
in Brent's jacket. They sat in the gathering dimness, wondering when their jailers
would show up again, arguing about what to do when that happened. The
afternoon got awfully dark and the rain started. Still, the sound of fabric
snapping in the wind was a comfort.
Sometime after midnight, the storm tore the banner free and lost it in the
darkness.

THIRTY
The Right of Petition to the Podmaster was a convenient tradition. It even
had a basis in historical fact, though Tomas Nau was sure that centuries ago, in
the middle of the Plague Times, the only petitions granted were matters of
propaganda. In modern times, the manipulation of petitions had been Uncle
Alan's preferred way of maintaining popularity and undermining rival factions.
It was a clever tactic, as long as you avoided Alan's mistake of allowing
assassins as petitioners. In the twenty-four years since their arrival at OnOff,
Tomas Nau had passed on about a dozen petitions. This one today was the first
that had claimed "time is of the essence."
Nau looked across the table at the five petitioners. Correction:
representatives of Petitioners. They claimed one hundred backers, and on just
8Ksec notice. Nau smiled, waved them to their seats. "Pilot Manager Xin. You
are senior, I believe. Please explain your Petition."
"Yes, Podmaster." Xin glanced at his girlfriend, Rita Liao. Both were
Emergents from the home world, from families that had contributed Focused and
Followers for more than three hundred years. Such were the backbone of the
Emergent culture, and running them should have been easy. Alas, nothing was
easy out here, twenty light-years from civilization. Xin was wordless for a
second more. He stole a nervous glance at Kal Omo. Omo's returning look was
very cold, and Nau suddenly wished he'd taken time to be briefed by the
podsergeant. With Brughel currently off-Watch, there would be no one to blame
if he had to deny the Petition.
"As you know, Podmaster, many of us are working with the ground
analysis. Many more have a general interest in the Spiders we watch-"
Nau gave him a gentle smile. "I know. You hang out at Benny's and listen
to the translations."
"Yes, sir. Um. We very much like 'The Children's Hour,' and some of the
story translations. They help us with our analysis. And . . ." His eyes got a
faraway look. "I don't know. The Spiders have a whole world down there, even
if they aren't human. Compared to us, sometimes they seem more-"Real, Nau
was sure he was going to say. "I mean, we've come to be fond of some of the
Spider children."
As planned.The live translations were heavily buffered now. They had
never discovered precisely what caused the mindrot runaway-or even if it had
been connected with the live show. Anne figured that the current risk was no

more than that of their other operations. Nau reached to his right, gently touched
Qiwi's hand. She smiled back. The Spider children were important. This was
something he might never have understood if not for Qiwi Lisolet. Qiwi had
been so good for so much. Watching her, talking to her, deceiving her-there was
so much to learn. Real children would be an impossible drain on L1's resources,
butsomething had to substitute. Qiwi and her schemes and her dreams had shown
him the way. "We're all fond of the cobblies, Pilot Manager. Your petition has
something to do with the kidnapping?"
"Yes, sir. It's been seventy Ksec since the abduction. The 'Accord' Spiders
are using their best comm and intelligence gear more intensely than ever before.
It's not doingthem any good, but our zipheads are getting a lot from it. The
Accord microwave links have been full of intercepted Kindred messages. Most
of the Kindred encryption is algorithmic, not one-time pads. The Accord can't
break any of it, but the algorithms, are easy for us. For the last forty Ksec, we-I-
have been using our translators and analysts. I think I know where the children
are being held. Five analysts give near certainty that-"
"Five analysts, three translators, and part of the snoop array over on
theInvisible Hand. " Reynolt's voice was loud and implacable, overriding Xin's.
"In addition, Manager Xin has been using almost a third of the support
hardware."
Omo came on like a chorus, perhaps the first time Nau had ever seen
Reynolt and Security in such concert: "And furthermore, it couldn't happen
unless the Pilot Manager and a few other privileged managers were using
emergency resource codes." Sergeant Omo's glance flickered across the
petitioners. They shrank before his gaze, the Emergents more fearfully than
Qeng Ho.Abuse of the community's resources. It was the primal sin. Nau smiled
to himself. Brughel would have been still scarier, but Omo would do.
Nau raised his hand, and silence spread across the room. "I understand,
Podsergeant. I want a report from you and Director Reynolt as to any lasting
damage that might result from this . . ." He wouldn't actually use the words. ". .
.activity." He was silent for a moment more, schooling his expression as if to
hide the conflict of a just man trying to reconcile the desires of individuals with
the long-term needs of the community. He felt Qiwi squeeze his hand. "Pilot
Manager, you understand that we can't reveal ourselves?"
Xin looked completely cowed. "Yes, Podmaster."
"You of all people should know how thin we are stretched here. After the
fighting, we were short on
Focus and staff. After the rotting runaway of a few Watches back, we are
even more lacking in Focus. We have no capital equipment, few weapons, and

scarcely even an in-system transport capability. Wemight be able to intimidate a
Spider faction or ally ourselves with one, but the risks would be enormous. Our
surest course is the one we have pursued ever since the Diem Massacre: We
must wait and lurk. We are just a few years short of this world's Information
Age. Eventually, we will establish human automation in the Spiders' networks.
Eventually they will have a civilization that can restore our ships, and one that
we can safely manage. Till then. . .till then, we dare not take any direct action."
Nau's gaze took in each of the petitioners: Xin, Liao, Fong. Trinli sat a little
apart, as if to show that he had tried to dissuade the others. Ezr Vinh was off-
Watch, else he would surely be here. They were all troublemakers by Ritser
Brughel's measure. Every Watch, their tiny pod here at L1 drifted further and
further from the norms of an Emergent community. Part of it was their desperate
circumstances, part of it was Qeng Ho assimilation. Even in defeat, the Peddler
attitudes were corrosive. Yes, by civilized standards, these people were
troublemakers-but they were also the people who, along with Qiwi, made the
mission possible.
For a moment no one spoke. Tears leaked silently from Rita Liao's eyes.
Hammerfest's microscopic gravity wasn't enough to tug them down her cheeks.
Jau Xin's head bowed in submission. "I understand, Podmaster. We withdraw the
petition."
Nau gave a gracious nod. There would be no punishment, and an important
point had been made.
Then Qiwi patted his hand. She was grinning! "So why not make this a test
for what we will do later? True, we can't reveal ourselves, but look at what Jau
has done. For the first time, we're really using the Spiders' own intelligence
system. Their automation may be twenty years short of an Information Age, but
they are pushing computers even harder than in Earth's Dawn Age. Eventually,
Anne's translators will be inserting information back into their systems, why not
start now? Each year we should do a little more meddling and a little more
experimentation."
Hope shone in Xin's eyes, but his words were still in retreat. "But are they
that far along? These creatures just launched their first satellite last year. They
don't have pervasive localizer nets-or any localizer nets at all. Except for that
pitiful link from Princeton to Lands Command, they don't even have a computer
net. How can we get information back into their system?"
Yes, how?
But Qiwi was still smiling. It made her look so young, almost like the first
years that he'd had her. "You said that the Accord has intercepted Kindred comm
related to the kidnapping?"

"Sure. That's howwe know what's going on. But Accord Intelligence can't
break the Kindred crypto." "Are they trying to break the intercepts?"
"Yes. They have several of their largest computers-big as houses-flailing
away at both ends of the Princeton/Lands Command microwave link. It would
take them millions of years to come on the right decryption key. . .Oh." Xin's
eyes got even wider. "Can we do that without them twigging?"
Nau got the point at almost the same moment. He asked the air:
"Background: How are they generating test keys?"
After a second, a voice replied, "A pseudo-random walk, modified by what
their mathematicians know about the Kindred's algorithms."
Qiwi was reading something in her huds. "Apparently the Accord is
experimenting with distributed computation across the link. That's frivolous,
since there are less than ten computers on their entire net. But we have a dozen
snoopersats that pass across the lines of sight of their microwavelink. It would be
easy to mung up what's going between their relays-that's how we were going to
do our first inserts, anyway. In this case, we'll just make small changes when
they are sending trial keys. It might be as few as a hundred bits, even counting
the framing."
Reynolt: "Okay. Even if they investigate later, it would be a plausible
glitch. Do it for more than one key, and I say it's too dangerous."
"One key would be enough, if it's for the right session."
Qiwi looked at Nau. "Tomas, it could work. It's low-risk, and we should be
experimenting with active measures anyway. You know the Spiders are more
and more interested in space activities. We may be forced to meddle a lot, fairly
soon." She patted his shoulder, cajoling more publicly than ever before. No
matter how cheerful she seemed, Qiwi had her own emotional stake in this.
But she's right. This could be the ideal first sending for Anne's zipheads.
Time to be grandly generous. Nau smiled back. "Very well, ladies and
gentlemen. You have convinced me. Anne, arrange to reveal one key. I think
Manager Xin can show you the critical session. Give this operation first transient
priority for the next forty Ksec-and retroactively for the last forty." So Xin and
Liao and the others were officially off the hook.
They didn't cheer, but Nau sensed enthusiasm and abject gratitude as the
petitioners stood and floated out of the room.
Qiwi started to follow them, then turned quickly back and kissed Nau on
the forehead. "Thanks, Tomas." And then she was gone with the others.
He turned to the only remaining visitor, Kal Omo. "Keep an eye on them,
Sergeant. I'm afraid things will be more complicated from now on."
During the Great War, there had been times when Hrunkner Unnerby had

gone without sleep for days at a time, under fire all the while. This single night
was worse. God only knew how bad it was for the General and Sherkaner. Once
the phone lines were in place, Unnerby spent most of his time in the joint
command post, just down the hall from the Accord-secure room. He worked
with the local cops and Underville's comm team, trying to track the rumors
around town. The General had been in and out, the picture of composed
intensity. But Unnerby could tell that his old boss was over the edge. She was
managing too much, involving herself at low levels and high. Hell, she'd been
gone now for three hours, off with one of the field teams.
Once, he went out to check on Underhill. Sherk was holed up in the signals
lab, right below the top of the hill. Guilt lay like a blight on him, dimming the
happy spirit of genius he used to bring to every problem. But the cobber was
trying, substituting obsession for buoyant enthusiasm. He was pounding away
with his computers, coopting everything he could. Whatever he was doing, it
looked like nonsense to Unnerby.
"It's math, not engineering, Hrunk."
"Yeah, number theory." This from the scruffy-looking postdoc whose lab
this was. "We're listening for . . ." He leaned forward, apparently lost in the
mysteries of his own programming. "We're trying to break the crypto intercepts."
Apparently he was talking about the signal fragments that had been
detected coming out of the Princeton area just after the abduction. Unnerby said,
"But we don't even know if that's from the kidnappers."And if I werethe Kindred,
I'd be using one-time code words, not some keyed encryption.
Jaybert what's-his-name just shrugged and continued with his work.
Sherkaner didn't say anything either, but his aspect was desolate. This was the
best he could do.
So Unnerby had fled back to the joint command post, where there was at
least the illusion of progress.
Smith was back about an hour after sunrise. She looked through the
negative reports quickly, a nervous edge to her movements. "I left Belga
downtown with the local cops. Damnation, her comm isn't much better than the
locals'."
Unnerby rubbed his eyes, trying vainly to put a polish there that only a
good sleep could accomplish. "I fear Colonel Underville doesn't really like all
this fancy equipment." In any other generation, Belga would have been fine. In
this one-well, Belga Underville was not the only person having trouble with the
grand new era.
Victory Smith slid down next to her old sergeant. "But she has kept the
press off our backs. What word from Rachner?"
"H ' d
i
h A
d
" I f
h
j
did

"He's down in the Accord-secure center." In fact, the young major did not
confide in Unnerby.
"He's so sure this is a pure Kindred operation. I don't know. They are in on
it. . .but, you know the museum clerk is a trad? And the cobber working the
museum's loading dock has disappeared. Belga's discovered he's a traditionalist,
too. I think the local trads are in this up to their shoulders." Her voice was mild,
almost contemplative. Later, much too much later, Hrunkner would remember
back: The General's voice was mild, but she sat with every limb tensed.
Unfortunately, Hrunkner Unnerby was lost in his own world. All night long
he had watched the reports, and stared out into the windy dark. All night long he
had prayed to the coldest depths of the earth, prayed for Little Victory, Gokna,
Brent, and Jirlib. He spoke sadly, almost to himself. "I watched them grow into
real people, cobblies that anyone could love. They do have souls."
"What do you mean?" The sharpness in Victory's voice didn't penetrate his
fatigue. He had years afterward to think back on this conversation, this single
moment, to imagine the ways he might have avoided disaster. But the present
did not feel the desperate gaze of the future, and he blundered on: "It's not their
fault that they were brought into the world out-of-phase."
"It's not their fault my slippery modern ideals have killed them?" Smith's
voice was a cutting hiss, something that even sorrow and fatigue could not block
from Unnerby's attention. He saw that his General was trembling.
"No, I-" But it was finally, irrevocably too late.
Smith was on her feet. She flicked a single long arm across his head,
whiplike."Get out!"
Unnerby staggered back. His right side vision was a coruscating ray of
plaid agony. In all other directions, he saw officers and noncoms caught with
aspects of shocked surprise.
Smith advanced on him. "Trad! Traitor!" Her hands jabbed with each word,
killing blows just barely restrained. "For years you've pretended to be a friend,
but always sneering and hating us. Enough!" She stopped her relentless
approach, and brought her arms back to her sides. And Hrunkner knew she had
capped her rage, and what she said now was cold and calm and considered. .
.and it hurt even more than the wound across his eyes. "Take your moral
baggage and go. Now."
Her aspect was something he had seen once or twice before, during the
Great War, when their backs were against the wall and still she had not yielded.
There would be no argument, no relenting. Unnerby lowered his head, choked
on words he was desperate to say.I'm sorry. I meant noharm. I love your
children. But it was too late for words to change anything. Hrunkner turned,

walked quickly past the shocked and silent staff and out the door.
When Rachner Thract heard that Smith was back in the building, he
hightailed it down to the joint command post. That's where he should have been
during the night,except I'll be damned if I let my crypto get exposedto the
domestic branch and the local police. The separate operation had worked, thank
goodness. He had hard information for the chief.
He ran into Hrunkner Unnerby going the other way. The old sergeant had
lost his usual martinet bearing. He walked unsteadily down the hallway, and
there was a long, milky welt across the right side of his head.
He waved at the sergeant. "You okay?" But Unnerby walked on past him,
ignoring Rachner as a beheaded osprech might ignore a farmer. He almost
turned to follow the cobber, then remembered his own urgency and continued
into the joint command post.
The place was silent as a deepness. . .or a graveyard. Clerks and analysts sat
motionless. As Rachner walked across the room toward General Smith, the rattle
of work resumed, sounding strangely self-conscious.
Smith was paging through one of the operation logs, just a little too fast to
be getting much out of it. She waved him to the perch beside her. "Underville
sees evidence of local involvement, but we still don't have anything solid." Her
tone was casual, belying or ignoring the astounded silence of a moment before.
"Have you got anything new? Any reaction from our Kindred 'friends'?"
"Lots of reaction, Chief. Even the superficial stuff is intriguing. About an
hour after the kidnap story broke, the Kindred turned up the volume on their
propaganda-especially the stuff aimed at the poorer nation-states. The spew is
'murder after Dark' fearmongering, but more intense than usual. They're saying
that the kidnapping is the desperate act of decent people, people who realize that
non-trad elements have taken over the Accord. . . ."
Everything was getting quiet again. Victory Smith spoke, a little sharply.
"Yes, I know what they say. This is how I'd expect them to react to the
kidnappings."
Maybe he should have begun with the big news. "Yes, ma'am, though they
did respond a bit too quickly. Our usual sources hadn't heard about this
beforehand, but now-well, it's beginning to look like the kidnappings are just a
symptom that the Extreme Measures faction has achieved decisive control within
the Kindred. In fact, at least five of the Deepest were executed yesterday,
'moderates' like Klingtram and Sangst, and-alas-incompetents like Droobi.
What's left is clever and even more risk-attracted than before-"
Smith leaned back, startled. "I-see."
"We haven't known for more than half an hour, ma'am. I've got all the area

analysts on it. We see no related military developments."
For the first time, he seemed to have her full attention. "That makes sense.
We're years away from the point where a war would benefit them."
"Right, Chief. Not war, not now. The Kindred grand strategy must still be
to wear down the developed world as far as possible before the Dark, and then
fight whoever is still awake.. . .Ma'am, we also have less certain information."
Rumors, except that one of his deep-cover agents had died to get them out. "It
looks like Pedure is now the Kindred's head of external ops. You remember
Pedure. We thought she was a low-level operator. Apparently she is smarter and
more bloody-handed than we guessed. She's probably responsible for this coup.
She may be first among the new Deepest. In any case, she's convinced them that
you and, more particularly, Sherkaner Underhill are the key to the Accord's
strategic successes. Assassinating you would be very difficult, and you've
protected your husband almost as well. Kidnapping your children opens a-"
The General's hands tapped a staccato on the situation table. "Keep talking,
Major."
Pretend we're talking about somebody else's cobblies."Chief, Sherkaner
Underhill has talked often enough about his feelings on the radio, how much he
values each child. What I'm getting now"-from the agent who had blown cover
to get the word out-"is that Pedure sees almost no downside to grabbing your
children, and any number of advantages. At best, she hoped to get all of your
children out of the Accord, and then quietly play with you and your husband
over a period of-years, perhaps. She figures that you could not continue in your
present job with that sort of side conflict."
Smith began, "If they were killed one by one, pieces of them sent back to us
. . ." Her voice faded.
"You're right about Pedure. She would understand how things work with
Sherkaner and me. Okay, I want you and Belga to-"
One of the desk phones chattered, an in-building direct line. Victory Smith
flicked a pair of long arms across the table and grabbed the handset. "Smith."
She listened for a moment, then whistled softly. "Theywhat ? But. . . Okay,
Sherkaner, I believe you. Yes, Jaybert was right to pass it on to Underville."
She rang off, and said to Thract, "Sherkaner's found the key. He's
deciphered last night's radio intercepts. It looks like the cobblies are being held
in the Plaza Spar, downtown."
Now the phone by Thract went off. He stabbed the Public On hole, and
said, "Thract here."
Belga Underville's voice sounded faint and off-mike: "They have? Well,
shut them up!" Then louder: "Listen, Thract? I've got my hands full down here.
N
I
ll f
hi f
k
i
h
i i
b i
h ld
h

Now I get a call from your techie-freaks saying the victims are being held on the
top floor of the Plaza Spar. Are you cobbers for real?"
Thract: "They're not my techs. It's important intelligence, Colonel,
wherever it came from."
"Damn, I already had a real lead. The city police spotted a silk banner
snagged on the Bank of Princeton tower." That was about half a mile from the
Plaza Spar. "It was the jacket fabric that Downing described to us."
Smith leaned close to the mike, and said, "Belga, was there anything
attached? A note?"
There was an instant's hesitation, and Thract could imagine Belga
Underville getting her temper under control. Belga didn't mind complaining to
her fellows about all the "bloody stupid technology," but not with Smith on the
line.
"No, Chief. It was pretty well shredded. Look. The techs could be right
about the Plaza Spar, but that's a busy place. I'll send a team to the lower floors,
pretending to be customers. But-"
"Good. No alarms; get in close."
"Chief, I think the tower where we found the banner is a better bet. It's
mostly vacant, and-" "Fine. Go after both."
"Yes, ma'am. The problem is the city police. They went off on their own,
sirens, everything."
Last night, Victory Smith had lectured Thract on the power of local police.
But that power was economic, and political. Just now she said, "They have?
Well, shut them up! I'll take responsibility."
She waved to Thract. "We're going downtown."

THIRTY-ONE
Shynkrette paced about her "command post." Talk about luck. This mission
had been designed as a hundred-day lurk-and-pounce. Instead, they'd bagged
their targets less than ten days after insertion. The whole op had been an
incredible combination of happenstance and screwup. So what else was new?
Promotions came from pulling success out of real-world situations, and
Shynkrette had survived worse than this. Barker and Fremm getting squashed
had been bad luck and inattention. Maybe the worst mistake had been leaving
the witnesses-at least it was the worst mistake that could be laid on her own
back. On the other hand they had six children, at least four of them the targets.
The getaway from the museum had been smooth, but the airport pickup fell
through. The Accord's local security was just a little too quick-maybe again
because of those surviving witnesses.
This office space ringed the Plaza Spar, twenty-five stories up. It gave an
excellent view of city activity, except directly below. In one sense, they were
completely trapped here-who had ever hidden by sticking themselves up in the
sky? In another sense-Shynkrette paused behind her team sergeant. "What does
Trivelle say, Denni?"
The sergeant lifted the phone from his head. "Ground-floor lobby is about
average busy. He has some business visitors. An old coot and some last-
generation cobbers. They want to rent office space."
"Okay. They can look at the third-floor suites. If they want to look at
anything else, they can come back tomorrow." Tomorrow, Deep willing,
Shynkrette and her team would be long gone. They would have been gone last
night, if not for the storm. Kindred Special Operations could do things with
helicopters that the Accord military had never imagined.. . .If good luck and
competence held another day or two, her team would be back home with their
prize. The Kindred book of doctrine had always been big on assassinations and
decapitating strikes. With this op, the Honored Pedure was writing a new and
experimental chapter. Deep, what Pedure would do with those six children.
Shynkrette's mind shied away from the thought. She had been in Pedure's inner
circle ever since the Great War, and her fortunes had risen accordingly. But she
much preferred doing the Honored's fieldwork to being with her in the Kindred
torture chambers. Things could get so easily. . .turned around. . .in the chambers.
And death could be so slow there.
Shynkrette moved from quarter to quarter, scanning the streets with a

reflecting magnifier.. . .Damn, a police convoy, emergency lights blinking. She
recognized the special gear on those trucks. This was the police "heavy
weapons" team. Their great success lay in scaring criminals into surrender. The
lights-and the sirens she would surely start hearing in a minute-were all part of
the intimidation. In this case, the police had made a very large mistake.
Shynkrette was already running back around the ring of offices, pulling her little
shotgun off her back as she ran.
"Team Sergeant! We're going upstairs."
Denni raised his head in surprise. "Trivelle says he hears sirens, but they
don't seem to be coming this way."
A coincidence? Maybe the police had someone else they wanted to wave
their guns at? Shynkrette balanced in a rare moment of indecision. Denni held up
a hand, continued, "But he says he thinks three of the oldsters have left the sales
tour, maybe gone to the washroom."
So much for indecision; Shynkrette waved the sergeant to his feet. "Tell
Trivelle to melt away,"if he can. "We're into Alt Five." There was always an
Alternative Plan; that was a grim joke in Special Operations. They had had some
warning. Very likely they could get out of the building, melt into the sea of
civilians. Corporal Trivelle had less of a chance, but he knew so little it wouldn't
matter. The mission would not end up an embarrassment. If they took care of
one last piece of business, it might even be counted a partial success.
As they raced up the central stairs, Denni was pulling down his own
shotgun and combat knife. Success in Alt 5 meant taking a few minutes for a
little detour, long enough to kill the children. Long enough so it would look
really messy. Pedure apparently thought that would screw someone's head on the
Accord side. It sounded nuts to Shynkrette, but she didn't know all the facts. It
didn't matter. At the end of the war, she had helped massacre a sleeping
deepness. Nothing could be uglier than that, but the stolen hoards had financed
the Kindred's resurgence.
Hell, she was probably doing these children a favor; now they would miss
their date with Honored Pedure.
Through most of the morning, Brent had lain flat on the metal floor. He
looked as discouraged as Viki and Gokna felt. Jirlib at least had his hands full
trying to comfort the two babies. The little ones were totally and loudly unhappy
now, and wouldn't have anything to do with the sisters. The last time anyone had
been fed was the previous afternoon.
There wasn't even much left to conspire about. By morning twilight, it had
been obvious that their rescue flag was gone. A second attempt tore loose in less
than thirty minutes. After that, Gokna and Viki spent three hours wrapping the

play twine in intricate patterns through the pipe stubs above the room's only
entrance. Brent had been a real help with that-he was so good with knots and
patterns. If anyone unfriendly came through that door, they would get a mawful
of unpleasantness. But if their visitors were armed, how could it be enough? At
that question, Brent had retreated from their arguments, gone to splay himself
out on the cold floor.
Above them, a narrow square of sunlight crept foot by foot across the high
walls of their prison. It must be almost noon. "I hear sirens," Brent said abruptly,
after an hour of silent sitting. "Lie down close and listen."
Gokna and Viki did. Jirlib shushed the babies, for what that was worth.
"Yeah, I hear them."
"Those arepolice sirens, Viki. Feel thethump, thump ?"
Gokna jumped up, was already racing for the doorway.
Viki stayed on the floor a moment longer. "Bequiet, Gokna!"
And even the babies were quiet. There were other sounds: the heavy thrum
of fans somewhere lower in the building, the street noise that they had heard
before. . .but now the staccato sound of many feet, running up steps.
"That's close," said Brent. "Th-they're coming for us."
"Yes." Brent paused, in his usual dull way. "And I hear others coming,
quieter or farther away."
It didn't matter. Viki ran to the doorway, hoisted herself up after Gokna.
What they planned was pretty pitiful, but the worst and the best of it was that
they didn't have any other choice. Earlier, Jirlib had argued that he was bigger,
that he should swing down from above. Yeah, but he was only one target, and
someone had to keep the babies out of the line of fire. So now Gokna and Viki
stood against the wall, five feet above the doorway on either side, bracing
themselves against Brent's clever ropework.
Brent rose, ran to the right side of the doorway. Jirlib stood well off to the
side. He held the children tight in his arms, and didn't try to quiet them anymore.
But now, suddenly, they were quiet. Maybe they understood. Maybe it was
something instinctive.
Through the wall, Viki could feel the running steps now. Two people. One
said something low to the other. She couldn't hear the words but she recognized
the leader of the kidnappers. A key rattled in the lock. On the floor to her left,
Jirlib gently set the babies down behind him. They stayed quiet, totally still-and
Jirlib turned back to the door, ready to pounce. Viki and Gokna crouched lower
against the wall. They had twisted all the leverage they dared out of the twine. A
final look passed between the two. They had gotten the others into this mess.
They had risked the life of an innocent bystander to try to get out. Now it was
ti
f
b
k

time for payback.
The door slid open, metal slipping across metal. Brent tensed for a leap.
"Please don't hurt me," he said, his voice the same sullen monotone as always.
Brent couldn't act to save his soul, yet in a weird way that tone sounded like
someone scared into abject mindlessness.
"No one's going to hurt you. We want to move you someplace better, and
get you some food. Come on out." The boss kidnapper sounded as reasonable as
always. "Come on out," a bit more sharply. Did she think she could bag them all
without even mussing her jacket? There was quiet for a second or two. . .Viki
heard a faint sigh of irritation. There was a rush of motion.
Gokna and Viki dived as hard as they could. They were only five feet up.
Without the twine, they would have crushed their skulls on the floor. Instead, the
elastic snapped them back, heads down, through the open doorway.
Gunfire flashed sideways, seeking Brent's voice.
Viki had a glimpse of head and arms, and some kind of gun. She smashed
into the leader at the rear of her back, knocking her flat, sending her gun
skittering across the floor. But the other cobber was a couple of feet behind.
Gokna hit him in the hard of his shoulders, scrabbled to hold on. But the other
bounced her off. A single burst of fire from his gun smashed Gokna's middle.
Shards and blood spattered the wall behind her.
And then Brent was upon him.
The one under Viki bucked upward, smashing her into the top of the
doorway. Things got very dark and distant after that. Somewhere she heard more
gunfire, other voices.

THIRTY-TWO
Viki wasn't badly hurt, a small amount of internal bleeding that the doctors
could easily control. Jirlib had taken a lot of dents and some twisted arms. Poor
Brent was worse off.
When that strange Major Thract was done asking his questions, Viki and
Jirlib visited Brent in the house infirmary. Daddy was already there, perched
beside the bed. They had been free almost three hours; Daddy still looked
stunned.
Brent lay in deep padding, a siphon of water within reach of his eating
hands. He tilted his head as they came in, and waved a weak smile. "I'm okay."
Just two split legs and a couple of buckshot holes.
Jirlib patted his shoulders.
"Where's Mother?" asked Viki.
Dad's head swayed uncertainly, "She's in the building. She promised she'll
see you this evening. It's just that so much has happened. You know this wasn't
just some crazy people who did this, right?"
Viki nodded. There were more security types in the house than ever before
and even some uniformed troops outside. Major Thract's people had been full of
questions about the kidnappers, their mannerisms, how they acted toward each
other, their choice of words. They even tried to hypnotize Viki, to squeeze out
every last driblet of recollection. She could have saved them the trouble. Viki
and Gokna had tried for years to hypnotize each other without any success.
Not a single kidnapper had survived the capture; Thract implied that at least
one had killed herself to avoid capture.
"The General needs to figure out who is behind this, and how it changes the
way the Accord looks at its enemies."
"It was the Kindred," Viki said flatly. She truly had no evidence beyond the
military bearing of the kidnappers. But Viki read the newspapers as much as
anyone, and Daddy talked enough about the risks of conquering the Dark.
Underhill shrugged at her assertion. "Probably. The main thing for the
family is that things have changed."
"Yes." Viki's voice cracked. "Daddy!Of course things have changed; how
can they ever be the same?" Jirlib lowered his head till it rested limply on Brent's
perch.
Underhill seemed to shrink in on himself. "Children, I am so sorry. I never
meant for you to be hurt. I didn't mean for . . ."

"Daddy, it was Gokna 'n' me who snuck out of the house-Be quiet, Jirlib. I
know you are the oldest, but we could always tweak you around." It was true.
Sometimes the sisters used their brother's ego, sometimes his intellectual
interests-as with the Distort exhibit. Sometimes they simply traded on his
fondness for his little sisters. And Brent had his own set of weaknesses. "It was
Gokna and me who made this possible. Without Brent doing his ambush at the
museum, we'd all be dead now."
Underhill gestured no. "Oh, Little Victory, without you and Gokna the
rescuers would have been a minute too late. You would all be dead. Gokna-"
"But now Gokna is dead!"Suddenly her armor of unfeeling was broken, and
she was swept away. Viki shrieked without words and raced from the room. She
fled down the hall to the central stairs, weaving round the uniforms and the
everyday inhabitants of the house. A few arms reached out for her, but someone
called out from behind, and she was let past.
Up and up Viki ran, past the labs and the classrooms, past the atrium where
they always played, where they first met Hrunkner Unnerby.
At the summit was the little gabled attic that she and Gokna had demanded
and pleaded and schemed for. Some like the deepest and some like the highest.
Daddy always reached for the highest and his two daughters had loved to look
down from their lofty perch. It wasn't the highest place in Princeton, but it had
been enough.
Viki ran inside, slammed the door. For an instant, she was a little dizzy
from the nonstop climb. And then. . .She froze, staring all around her. There was
the attercop house, grown huge over the last five years. As the winters got
colder, it had lost its original charm; you couldn't pretend the little critters were
people when they started sprouting wings. Dozens of them flittered in and out of
the feeders. The ultra and blue of their wings was almost like a wallboard design
on the sides of the house. She and Gokna had argued endlessly over who was the
mistress of that house.
They had argued about almost everything. There by the wall was the
artillery-shell dollhouse that Gokna had brought up from the den. It really had
been Gokna's, yet still they argued about it.
The signs of Gokna were everywhere here. And Gokna would never be here
again. They could never talk again, not even to argue. Viki almost turned and
bolted back out of the room. It was as though a monstrous hole had been torn in
her side, her arms and legs ripped from her body. There was nowhere left for her
life to stand. Viki sank down in a pile, shivering.
• • •

Fathers and mothers were very different sorts of people. From what the
children had been able to figure, some of this was true even for normal families.
Dad was around all the time. He was the one who had infinite patience, the one
they could usually wheedle extra favors from. But Sherkaner Underhill had his
own special nature, surely not the usual: He regarded every rule of nature and
culture as an obstacle to be thought about, experimented with. There was humor
and cleverness in everything he did.
Mothers-their mother, anyway-was not around every minute, and could not
be depended upon to buckle to every childish demand. General Victory Smith
was with her children often enough, one day out of ten up in Princeton, and
much more so when they went on trips down to Lands Command. She was there
when real rules had to be laid down, ones that even Sherkaner Underhill might
hesitate to bend. And she was there when you had really, really screwed up.
Viki didn't know how long she had been lying in a huddle when she heard
steps ticking up the stairs to her room. Surely not more than half an hour; beyond
the windows, it was still the middle of a cool, beautiful afternoon.
There was soft tapping at her door. "Junior? Can we talk?"Mother.
Something strange stirred in Viki: welcome. Daddy could forgive, he
always forgave. . .but Mother would understand how terrible she really had been.
Viki opened the door, stepped back with her head bowed. "I thought you
were busy until tonight." Then she noticed that Victory Smith was in uniform,
the black-black jacket and sleeves, the ultra and red shoulder tabs. She had never
seen the General in that uniform up here in Princeton, and even down in Lands
Command it had been reserved for special times, for briefings given to certain
superiors.
The General stepped quietly into the room. "I-decided this was more
important." She motioned Little
Victory to sit beside her. Viki sat, feeling calmness for the first time since
this all began. Two of the
General's forearms draped lightly across her shoulders. "There have been
some serious . . .mistakes made. You know that both your father and I agree
about that?"
Viki nodded. "Yes, yes!"
"We can never bring Gokna back. But we can remember her, and love her,
and correct the mistakes that allowed this terrible thing to happen."
"Yes!"
"Your father-I-thought we should keep you out of the larger problems, at
least until you were grown. Up to a point, we were right perhaps. But now I see,
we put you at terrible risk."

"No!. . .Mother, don't you understand? It was me, a-and Gokna, who broke
the rules. We fooled Captain Downing. We just didn't believe the things that Dad
and you warned us about."
The General's arms tapped Viki's shoulders lightly. Mother was either
surprised, or suddenly angry. Viki couldn't tell which, and for a long moment her
mother was silent. Then, "You're right. Sherkaner and I made mistakes. . .but so
did you and Gokna. Neither of you meant any harm. . .but now you know that's
not enough. In some games, when you make mistakes, people get killed. But
think about it, Victory. Once you saw things turned bad, you behaved very well-
better than many cobbers with professional training would have done. You saved
the lives of the Suabisme children-"
"We risked little Birbop to-"
Smith shrugged angrily. "Yes. You'll find a hard lesson there, daughter. I've
spent most of my life trying to live with that one." She was silent again, and
something about her seemed very far away. It suddenly occurred to Viki that
indeed, even Mother must make mistakes; it wasn't just courtesy that she said so.
All their lives, the children had admired the General. She didn't talk about what
she did, but they knew enough to guess she was more than the heroine of any
dozen adventure novels. Now Viki had a glimpse of what that must really mean.
She moved closer to her mother's side.
"Viki, when the crunch finally came, you and Gokna did what was right.
All four of you did. There was a terrible price, but if we-you-don't learn from
that, then we've really screwed up."Then Gokna died fornothing.
"I'll change; I'll do anything. Tell me."
"The outside changes aren't so big. I'll get you some tutors in military
topics, maybe some physical training. But you and the younger children still
have so much book learning to do. Your time will be pretty much as before. The
big change will be inside your head and in the way we treat you. Beyond the
learning, there are enormous, deadly risks that you must understand. Hopefully,
they'll never be the minute-to-minute deadliness of this morning-but in the long
run the dangers are much greater. I'm sorry, this is a time more risky than any
before."
"And with more good possibilites, too." Daddy always said that. What
would the General say to that now?
"Yes. That is true. And that is why he and I have done what we have. But it
will take more than hope and optimism to achieve what Sherkaner intends, and
the years until then will be more and more dangerous. What happened today is
just the beginning. It's possible that the deadliest times will come when I'm very
old. And your father is a half generation older than I. . .
"I
id
f
did
ll
d
M
h
h
H

"I said you four did well today. More than that, you were a team. Have you
ever thought that our whole family is like a team? We have a special advantage
over almost anyone else: We're not all of a single generation, or even two. We're
spread from Little Hrunk all the way up to your father. We're loyal to one
another. And I think we're very talented."
Viki smiled back at he rmother. "None of us is near as smart as Daddy."
Victory laughed. "Yes, well. Sherkaner is. . .unique."
Viki continued, analytical: "Actually, except for maybe Jirlib, none of us is
even in a class with Daddy's students. On the other hand, me and G-Gokna, we
took after you, Mom. We-I can plan with people and with things. I think Rhapsa
and Little Hrunk are somewhere in between, once they settle down. And Brent,
he's not stupid, but his mind works in funny ways. He doesn't get along with
other people, but he's the most naturally suspicious of any of us. He's always
watching out for us."
The General smiled. "He'll do. There's five of you left now, Viki. Seven
when you count myself and
Sherkaner. The team. You're right in your estimates. What you can't know
is how you compare to the rest of the world. Let me tell you my coldly
professional assessment: You children can be the best. We wanted to postpone
starting things a few more years for you, but that has changed. If the times I fear
come, I want you five to know what is going on. If necessary, I want you five to
be able to act even if everyone else is in a mess."
Victory Junior was more than old enough to understand about service oaths
and chains of command. "Everyone? I-" She pointed at the rank tabs on her
mother's shoulders.
"Yes, I live by my loyalty to the Crown. I'm saying that there may come
times when-in the short term-serving the Crown means doing things outside the
visible chain of command." She smiled at her daughter. "Some of the adventure
novels are right, Viki. The head of Accord Intelligence does have her own
special authority. . .Oops, I have postponed my other meetings long enough. We
will talk again, very soon, all of us."
After the General was gone, Viki wandered around her little bedroom at the
top of the hill. She was still in a daze, but no longer felt unrelieved horror. There
was also wonder and hope. She and Gokna had always played at espionage. But
Mother didn't talk of what she did, and she was so far above the military of
everyday that it seemed a foolish dream to try to follow her. Business
intelligence, maybe with companies like Hrunkner Unnerby had founded, that
seemed more realistic. NowViki played with Gokna's little dollhouse for a
moment. She and Gokna would never get to argue about these plans. Mother's

team had suffered its first loss. But now it knew it was a team: Jirlib and Brent,
Rhapsa, Little Hrunk, Viki, Victory and Sherkaner. They would learn to do their
best.And in the end, that will be enough.

THIRTY-THREE
For Ezr Vinh, the years passed quickly, and not just because of his quarter-
time Watch cycle. The time since the ambush and the murders was almost a third
of his life. These were the years his inner self had promised would be played out
with unswerving patience, never giving up the struggle to destroy Tomas Nau
and win back what still survived. It was a time he had thought would stretch into
endless torment.
Yes. He had played with unswerving patience. And there had been pain. .
.and shame. Yet his fear was most times a distant thing. And though he still
didn't know the details, just knowing that he was working for Pham Nuwen gave
Ezr the sure feeling that in the end they would triumph. But the biggest surprise
was something that popped up again and again for uneasy introspection: In some
ways, these years were more more satisfying than any time since early
childhood. Why was that?
Podmaster Nau made thrifty use of the remaining medical automation, and
he kept critical "functions" such as translators on-Watch much of the time. Trixia
was in her forties now. Ezr saw her almost every day he was on-Watch, and the
little changes in her face tore at him.
But there were other changes in Trixia, changes that made him think that
his presence and the passing years were somehow bringing her back to him.
When he came early to her tiny cell in Hammerfest's Attic, she would still
ignore him. But then, once, he arrived one hundred seconds after the usual time.
Trixia was sitting facing the door. "You're late," she said. Her tone was the same
flat impatience that Anne Reynolt might use. All the Focused were notorious
about punctilio. Still. Trixia had noticed his absence.
And he noticed that Trixia was beginning to do some of her own grooming.
Her hair was brushed back, almost neatly, when he arrived for their sessions.
Now, as often as not, their conversations were not completely one-sided. . .at
least if he was careful about the topics.
This day, Ezr entered her cell on time, but with some smuggled cargo-two
delitesse cakelets from
Benny's parlor. "For you." He reached out, bringing one cakelet close to
her. The fragrance filled the cell. Trixia stared at his hand, briefly, as if
contemplating a rude gesture. Then she waved the distraction away. "You were
going to bring the Cur-plus-One translation requests."
Sigh.But he left the confection tacked to the workspace near her hand. "Yes,

I have them." Ezr settled in his usual spot by the door, facing her. Actually, the
list wasn't long today. Focus could work miracles, but without a glue of normal
common sense, the different specialist groups wandered off into private navel
inspection. Ezr and the other normals read summaries of the Focused work and
tried to see where each group of specialists had found something that was of
interest beyond the zipheads' fixation. Those were reported upward, to Nau, and
back downward, as requests for additional work.
Today, Trixia had no trouble accommodating the requests, though she
muttered darkly at some of them, "Waste of time."
"Also, I've been talking to Rita Liao. Her programmers are very enthusiastic
about the stuff you've been giving them. They've designed a suite of financial
applications and network software that should run great on the Spiders' new
microprocessors."
Trixia was nodding. "Yes, yes. I talk to them everyday." The translators got
along famously with the lowcode programmers and the financial/legal zipheads.
Ezr suspected it was because the translators were ignorant of those fields, and
vice versa.
"Rita wants to set up a groundside company to market the programs. They
should beat anything local, and we want saturation."
"Yes, yes. Prosperity Software Incorporated; I already invented a name. But
it's still too early."
He chatted it back and forth with her, trying to get a realistic time estimate
to pass on to Rita Liao. Trixia was on a co-thread with the zipheads who were
doing the insertion strategy, so their combined opinion was probably pretty
good. Doing everything across a computer network-even with perfect knowledge
and planning-depended on the sophistication of that net. It would be at least five
years before a big commercial market developed in software, and a little longer
before the Spiders' public networks took off. Until then, it would be next to
impossible to be a major groundside player. Even now, the only manipulations
they could do consistently were of the Accord's military net.
Too soon, Ezr came to the last item on his list. It might seem a small thing,
but from long experience he knew it was trouble. "New topic, Trixia-but it's a
real translation question: about the color 'plaid.' I notice you are still using that
term in descriptions of visual scenes. The physiologist-"
"Kakto." Trixia's eyes narrowed slightly. Where the zipheads interacted,
there was normally an almost telepathic closeness-or else they hated each other's
guts with the sort of freezing hostility usually seen only in academic romance
novels. Norm Kakto and Trixia oscillated between these states.
"Yes. Um, anyway, Dr. Kakto gave me a long lecture about the nature of

vision and the electromagnetic spectrum and assured me that talking about a
color 'plaid' could not correspond to anything meaningful."
Trixia's features screwed into a frown, and for a moment she looked much
older than Ezr liked to see. "It's a real word. I chose it. The context had a feel-"
The frown intensified. More often than not what seemed a translation mistake
turned out to be-perhaps not a literal truth, but at least a clue to some
unrecognized aspect of the Spiders' reality. But the Focused translators, even
Trixia, could be wrong. In her early translations, where she and the others were
still feeling their way across an unknown racial landscape-there had been
hundreds of facile word choices; a good portion of them had to be abandoned
later.
The problem was that zipheads did not take easily to abandoning fixation.
Trixia was coming close to real upset. The signs were not extreme. She
often frowned, though not this fiercely. And even when she was silent, she was
endlessly active with her two-handed keyboard. But this time the analysis
coming back at her spilled from her head-up display to paint across the walls.
Her breath came faster as she turned the criticism back and forth in her mind and
on the attached network. She didn't have any counterexplanation.
Ezr reached out, touched her shoulder. "Follow-up question, Trixia. I talked
with Kakto about this 'plaid' thing for some time." In fact, Ezr had all but
badgered the man. Often that was the only way that worked with a Focused
specialist: Concentrate on the ziphead's specialty and the problem at hand, and
keep asking your question in different ways. Without some skill and reasonable
luck, the technique would quickly bring communication to an end. Even after
seven Watch years, Ezr wasn't an expert, but in this case Norm Kakto had finally
been provoked into generating alternatives: "We were wondering, perhaps the
Spiders have such a surplus of visual methods that the Spider brain has to
multiplex access-you know, a fraction of a second sensing in one spectral
regime, a fraction of a second in another. They might sense-I don't know, some
kind of rippling effect."
In fact, Kakto had dismissed the idea as absurd, saying that even if the
Spider brain time-shared on its visual senses, the perception would still seem
continuous at the conscious level.
As he spoke the words, Trixia became nearly motionless, only her fingers
continuing to move. Her constantly shifting gaze fixed for a long second. .
.directly on Ezr's eyes. He was saying something that was nontrivial and near the
center of her Focus. Then she looked away, began muttering to her voice input,
and pounded even more furiously on the keys. A few seconds passed and her
eyes began darting around the room, tracking phantoms that were only visible in
h
h
d
Th
b
l
"Y
! Th
i
h
l
i
I
ll

her own head-up. Then, abruptly, "Yes! That is the explanation. I never really
thought before. . .it was just the context that made me pick the word, but-" Dates
and locations spread across the walls where they could both see. Ezr tried to
keep up, but his own huds were still barred from the Hammerfest net; he had to
depend on Trixia's vague gestures to know the incidents she was citing.
Ezr found himself grinning. Just now Trixia came about the closest she
could to normality, even if it was a kind of frenetic triumph. . . ."Look! Except
for one case of pain overload, every use of 'plaid' has involved low haze, low
humidity, and a wide range of brightness. In those situations, the whole color. .
.thevetmoot3 . . ." She was using internal jargon now, the inscrutable stuff that
flowed between the Focused translators. "The languagemood is changed. I
needed a special word, and 'plaid' is good enough."
He listened and watched. He could almost see the insight spreading within
Trixia's mind, setting up new connections, no doubt improving all later
translations. Yes, it looked real. The jackboots could not complain about the
color "plaid."
It was altogether a good session. And then Trixia did something that was a
wondrous surprise. With scarcely a break in her speech, one hand left her
keyboard and snatched sideways at the delitesse. She broke the cakelet free of its
anchor and stared into the froth and fragrence-as if suddenly recognizing what
the cakelet was and the pleasure that came from eating such things. Then she
jammed the thing into her mouth, and the light frosting splashed in colorful
drops across her lips. He thought for a moment that she was choking, but the
sound was just a happy laugh. She chewed, and swallowed. . .and after a
moment she gave the most contented sigh. It was the first time in all these years
that Ezr had seen her happy about something outside her Focus.
Even her hands stopped their constant motion for a few seconds. Then, "So.
What else?"
It took a moment for the question to penetrate Ezr's daze. "Ah, um." In fact,
that had been the last item on his list. Butjoy ! The delitesse had made a miracle.
"J-just one thing more, Trixia. Something you should know."Maybe something
you can finally understand. "You are not a machine. You're a human being."
But the words had no impact. Maybe she didn't even hear them. Her fingers
were tapping at her keys again, and her gaze was somewhere in huds imagery he
couldn't see. Ezr waited several seconds, but whatever attention there had been
seemed to have vanished. He sighed, and moved back to the cell's doorway.
Then perhaps ten or fifteen seconds after he had spoken, Trixia abruptly
looked up. There was expression on her face again, but this time it was surprise.
"Really? I'm not a machine?"
"Yes You are a real person "

"Yes. You are a real person."
"Oh." Disinterest again. She returned to her keyboards, muttering on the
voice link to her invisible ziphead siblings. Ezr quietly slipped out. In the early
years, he would have felt crushed, or at least set back, by the curt dismissal. But.
. .this was just ziphead normality. And for a moment he had broken through it.
Ezr crawled back through the capillary corridors. Usually these kinking, barely-
shoulders-wide passages got on his nerves. Every two meters another cell
doorway, right side, top, left side, bottom. What if there was ever a panic here?
What if they ever needed to evacuate? But today. . .echoes came back to him,
and suddenly he realized he was whistling.
Anne Reynolt intercepted him as he emerged into Hammerfest's main
vertical corridor. She jabbed a finger at the carrier trailing behind him. "I'll take
that."
Damn.He'd intended to leave the second delitesse with Trixia. He gave
Reynolt the carrier. "Things went well. You'll see in my report-"
"Indeed. I think I'll have that report right now." Reynolt gestured down the
hundred-meter drop. She grabbed a wall stop, flipped feet for head, and started
downward. Ezr followed. Where they passed openings in the caisson, OnOff's
light shone through a thin layer of diamond crystal. And then they were back in
artificial light, deeper and deeper in the mass of Diamond One. The mosaic
carving looked as fresh as the day it was done, but here and there the hand and
foot traffic had laid patches of grime on the fretwork. There weren't many
unskilled zipheads left, not enough to maintain Emergent perfection. They
turned sideways at the bottom, still gently descending but coasting past busy
offices and labs-all familiar to Ezr now. The ziphead clinic. There, Ezr had been
only once. It was closely guarded, closely monitored, but not quite off-limits.
Pham was a regular visitor there, Trud Silipan's great friend. But Ezr avoided the
place; it was where souls were stolen.
Reynolt's office was where it had always been, at the end of the lab tunnel,
behind a plain door. The "Director of Human Resources" settled in her chair and
opened the carrier she had taken from Ezr.
Vinh pretended to be unperturbed. He looked around the office. Nothing
new, the same rough walls, the storage crates and seemingly loose equipment
that still-after decades on-Watch-were her principal furniture. Even if he had
never been told, Ezr would have long since guessed that Anne Reynolt was a
ziphead. A miraculous, people-oriented ziphead, but still a ziphead.
Reynolt was obviously not surprised by the contents of the carrier. She
sniffed at the delitesse with the expression of a bactry technician assessing slime
ferment. "Very aromatic. Candy and junk food are not on the allowed diet list,
Mr Vinh "

Mr. Vinh.
"I'm sorry. I just meant it as a treat. . .a little reward. I don't do it often."
"True. In fact, you've never done it before." Her gaze flickered around his
face, then moved away. "It's been thirty years, Mr. Vinh. Seven years of your
own lifetime on-Watch. You know that zipheads do not respond to such
'rewards'; their motive system is primarily within their area of Focus and
secondarily attached to their owners. No. . .I think you still have your secret
plans to waken love in Dr. Bonsol."
"With a dessert confection?"
Reynolt gave him a hard little smile. His sarcasm would have gone right
past an ordinary ziphead. It didn't deflect Reynolt, but she recognized it. "With
the smell, perhaps. I imagine you've been into some Qeng Ho neurology courses-
found something about olfactory pathways having independent access to the
higher centers. Hmm?" For an instant her gaze skewered him like a bug in a
collection.
That's exactly what the neuro courses said.And the delitesse was something
that Trixia would not have smelled since before she was Focused. For a moment,
the walls around Trixia's true self had thinned to barely more than a veil. For a
moment, Ezr had touched her.
Ezr shrugged. Reynolt was so very sharp. If she ever thought to look, she
was surely bright enough to see all the way through him. She was probably
bright enough to see through even Pham Nuwen. The only thing that saved them
was that Pham and Ezr were at the edge of her Focus.IfRitser Brughel had a
snoop even half as good, Pham and I would be deadnow.
Reynolt turned away from him, for a moment tracked phantoms in her huds.
Then, "Your misbehavior has caused no harm. In some ways, Focus is a robust
state. You may think you see changes in Dr. Bonsol, but consider: Over the last
few years, all the best translators have begun to show synthetic affect. If it hurts
performance, we'll take them down to the clinic for some tuning. . .
"However, if you actively attempt manipulation again, I will keep you out
of Dr. Bonsol's way." It was a totally effective threat, but Ezr tried to laugh.
"What, no death threats?"
"My assessment, Mr. Vinh: Your knowledge of Humankind's Dawn Age
civilization makes you extremely valuable. You're an effective interface between
at least four of my groups-and I know that the
Podmaster uses your advice as well. But make no mistake: I can get along
without you in the translation department. If you cross me again, you won't see
Dr. Bonsol till after the mission is complete."
Fifteen years? Twenty?
Ezr stared at her feeling the utter certainty in her words What an

Ezr stared at her, feeling the utter certainty in her words. What an
implacable creature this woman was. Not for the first time, he wondered what
she had been like before. He was not alone in that. Trud Silipan regaled the
patrons at Benny's with the speculations. The Xevalle clique had once been the
second most powerful in the Emergency; Trud claimed she had been high in its
ranks. At one time she might have been a greater monster than Tomas Nau. At
least some of them got punished; crushed by their own kind. Anne Reynolt had
fallen far, from being a knowing Satan to being a Satan's tool.
. . .Whether that made her more or less than before, she was dangerous
enough for Ezr Vinh.
That night, alone in the dark of his room, Ezr described the encounter to
Pham Nuwen. "I get the feeling that if Reynolt ever transferred to Brughel's
operation, she'd figure out about you and me in a matter of Ksecs."
Nuwen's chuckle was a distorted buzzing sound deep in Ezr's ear. "That's a
transfer that will never happen. She's the only thing that's holding the ziphead
operation together. She had a staff of four hundred unFocused interface types
before the Ambush-now she'sbuzz zzzt. "
"Say the last again."
"I said, 'Now she's depending for much of her support on untrained help. ' "
The buzz that was not quite a voice faded in and out of intelligibility. There
were still times when Ezr had to ask for three or four repetitions. But it was a big
improvement over the blinkertalk they had used in the beginning. Now, when
Ezr pretended to go to sleep, he had a single millimeter-long localizer pressed
deep in his ear. The result was mostly buzzing and hissing, nearly inaudible, but
with enough practice you could normally guess the speech behind it. The
localizers were scattered all around the room-all around the Traders' temp. They
had become Brughel and Nau's primary security tool here.
"Still, maybe I shouldn't have tried the delitesse trick."
". . .Maybe. I wouldn't have tried anything so overt."But then PhamNuwen
wasn't in love with Trixia
Bonsol. "We've talked about this before. Brughel's zipheads are more
powerful than any security tool we Qeng Ho ever imagined. They're sniffing all
the time, and they can read"-Ezr couldn't make out the word: "naive"?
"innocent"?; he didn't feel like asking for clarification-"people like you. Face it.
They surely guess that you don't believe their story about the Diem Massacre.
They know you're hostile. They know you're scheming-or wishing to scheme-
about something. Your feelings for Bonsol give you a cover, a lesser lie to hide
the greater one. Like my Zamle Eng thing."
"Yeah."But I think I'll cool it for a while. "So you don't think Reynolt is that

much of a threat?"
For a moment, all he heard was buzzing and hissing; maybe Pham wasn't
saying anything. Then: "Vinh, I think very much the opposite. In the long run,
she's the deadliest threat we face."
"But she's not in Security."
"No, but she maintains Brughel's snoops, tweaks up their poor brains when
they begin to drift. Phuong and Hom can only do the simpler cases; Trud
pretends he can do everything, but he just follows her directions. And she has
eight ziphead programmers going through our fleet code. Three of them are still
grinding away at the localizers. Eventually, she's going to see how I've scammed
them.bzzz mumble Lord! The power Nau has." Pham's voice cut out, and there
was just the background noise.
Ezr reached out from his blankets and stuck a finger in his ear, pushing the
tiny localizer deeper. "Say again? Are you still there?"
bzzt"I'm here. About Reynolt: She's deadly. One way or another, she must
be removed."
"Kill her?" The words caught in Ezr's throat. For all he that he hated Nau
and Brughel and the whole system of Focus, he didn't hate Anne Reynolt. In her
own limited way, she looked after the slaves. Whatever Anne Reynolt had been,
now she was just a tool.
"I hope not! Maybe. . .if Nau would just take the bait on the localizers, if he
would just start using them in Hammerfest. Then we'd be as safe over there as
we are here. If that happens before her zips figure out that it's a trap . . ."
"But the whole point of the delay was to give her time to study the
localizers."
"Yeah. Nau is no fool. Don't worry. I'm tracking things. If she gets too
close, I'll. . .take care of her."
For a moment, Ezr tried to imagine what Pham might do, then forced his
mind from the imaginings. Even after two thousand years, the Vinh Family still
had a special place in its affection for the memory of Pham Nuwen. Ezr
remembered the pictures that had been in his father's den. He remembered the
stories his aunt had told him. Not all of them were in the Qeng Ho archives. That
meant the stories weren't true-or else they were truly private reminiscences, what
G'mama Sura and her children had really thought of Pham Nuwen. They loved
him for more than founding the modern Qeng Ho, for more than being g'papa to
all the Vinh Families. But some of the stories showed a hard side to the man.
Ezr opened his eyes, looked quietly around the darkened room. Vague
night-gleams lit his fatigues floating in the closet sack, showed the delitesse still
sitting uneaten on his desk. Reality. "What can you really do with the localizers,

Pham?"
Silence. Faraway buzzing. "What can I do? Well, Vinh, I can't kill with
them. . .not directly. But they are good for more than this crummy audio link. It
takes practice; there are tricks you have to see." Long pause. "Hell, you need to
learn 'em. There could be times when I'm out of link, and they're the only things
that can save your cover. We should get together in person-"
"Huh? Face-to-face? How?" Dozens, maybe hundreds of times he and
Pham Nuwen had plotted as they did tonight, like prisoners tapping
anonymously on dungeon walls. In public, they saw less of each other than in the
early Watches. Nuwen had said that Ezr just wasn't good enough at controlling
his eyes and body language, that the snoops would guess too much. Now"Here
in the temp, Brughel and his zipheads are depending on the localizers. There are
places 'tween the balloon hulls where some of their old cameras have died. If we
run into each other there, they'll have nothing to contradict what I feed them
through the localizers. The problem is, I'm sure the snoops rely on statistics as
much as anything. Once upon a time I ran a fleet security department, like
Ritser's except a bit more mellow. I had programs that highlighted suspicious
behavior-who was out of sight when, unusual conversations, equipment failures.
It worked pretty well, even when I couldn't catch the bad guys red-handed.
Zipheads plus computers should be a thousand times better. I bet they have stat
traces extending back to the beginning of L1. For them, innocuous behaviors add
up and add up-and one fine day Ritser Brughel has circumstantial evidence. And
we're dead."
Lord of Trade."But we could get away with almost anything!" Wherever
the Emergents depended on Qeng Ho localizers.
"Maybe. Once. Curb the impulse." Even in the buzzing speech, Ezr could
tell that Pham was chuckling. "When can we meet?"
"Sometime that minimizes the effect on Ritser's merry analysts. Let's see. .
.I'm going off-Watch in less than two hundred Ksec. I'll be partway through a
Watch the next time you are on. I'll fix things so we can do it right after that."
Ezr sighed.Half a year of lifetime away. But not as far away as some things;
it would do.

THIRTY-FOUR
Benny's booze parlor had begun as something sublegal, the visible evidence
of a large network of black-market transactions-capital crimes by Emergent
standards; in pure Qeng Ho Nese, the term "black market" existed, but only to
denote "trade you must do in secret because it offends the local Customers."
In the small community around the rockpile, there was no way to conduct
trade or bribe in secret. During the early years, only Qiwi Lisolet's involvement
had protected the parlor. Now. . .Benny Wen smiled to himself as he stacked the
drinks and dinners into his weir. Now he managed here full time whenever he
was on-Watch. Best of all, it was a job his father could mostly handle when
Benny and Gonle were off. Hunte Wen was still a drifty, gentle soul, and he had
never regained his competence in physics. But he had come to love managing
the parlor. When he managed it alone, strange things could happen to the place.
Sometimes they were ludicrous failures, sometimes marvelous improvements.
There was the time he cadged a perfumed lacquer from the volatiles refinery.
The smell was okay in small quantities, but painted on the parlor's walls, it gave
off a terrible stink. For a while the largest dayroom became the social hub of the
temp. There was another time-four real years later-when he redeemed a Watch's
worth of favor scrip, and Qiwi's papa devised a zero-gee vine and associated
ecosystem to decorate the parlor's walls and furniture. The place was
transformed into a beautiful, parklike space.
The vines and flowers still remained, even though Hunte had been off-
Watch for almost two years.
Benny moved up from the bar, in a long circuit through the forest of
greenery. Drinks and food were delivered to tables of customers, paper favors
paid in return. Benny set a Diamonds and Ice and a meal bucket in front of Trud
Silipan. Silipan slipped him a promise-of-favor with the same smug look as
always. He obviously figured the promise counted for nothing, that he only paid
off because it was convenient.
Benny just smiled and moved on. Who was he to argue-and in a sense, Trud
was right. But since the early Watches, very few favors were ever flatly
repudiated. Weaseled, yes. The only favors Trud could really give involved
service time with the Focused, and he constantly chiseled on his obligations, not
finding quite the right specialists, not spending enough ziphead time to get the
best answers. But even Trud came through often enough, as with the zero-gee
vines he'd caused Ali Lin to design. For behind the farce of paper favors,

everyone knew that there was Tomas Nau, who-from clever self-interest or love
of Qiwi-had made it clear that the Qeng Ho underground economy had his
protection.
"Hello, Benny! Up here!" Jau Xin waved to him from the upper table, the
"debating society" table. Watch on Watch, the same sort of people seemed to
hang out here. There was usually some overlap between Watches-apparently
enough so that even when most of the customers were different, they still sat
over here if they wanted to argue about "where it will all end." This Watch it was
Xin and of course Rita Liao, five or six other faces that were no surprise, and-
aha, someone who really knew his stuff: "Ezr! I thought it would be four
hundred Ksec before you showed up here." Damn if he didn't wish he could stay
and listen.
"Hi, Benny!" Ezr's face showed the familiar grin. Funny when you didn't
see a guy for a while, how the changes from times earlier were suddenly sharp.
Ezr-like Benny-was still a young man. But they were no longer kids. There were
the faintest creases near Ezr's eyes. And when he spoke, there was a confidence
Benny had never seen when they had been on Jimmy Diem's work crew.
"Nothing solid for me, Benny. My gut is still complaining about being unfrozen.
There was a four-day change in schedule." He pointed at the Watch-tree display
on the wall by the bar. Sure enough, the update was there, hidden in a flurry of
other small changes. "Looks like Anne Reynolt has need of my presence."
Rita Liao smiled. "That by itself is reason for a meeting of the Debating
Society."
Benny distributed the bulbs and buckets that floated in the weir behind him.
He nodded at Ezr. "I'll get you something to soothe your just-thawed carcass."
Ezr watched Benny Wen head back to the bar and food prep. Benny
probably could find something that wouldn't upset his stomach. Who'd have
thought he'd end up like this? Who'd have thought any of them would. At least
Benny was still a Trader, even if on a heartbreakingly small scale.And I'm. .
.what? A conspirator with cover so deep that sometimes it fooled even him. Ezr
was sitting here with three Qeng Ho and four Emergents-and some of the
Emergents were better friends than the Qeng Ho. No wonder Tomas Nau did so
well. He had coopted them all, even as they thought they were following the
Traders' Way. Nau had blunted their minds to the slavery that was Focus. And
maybe it was for the best. Ezr's friends were protected from the deadliness of
Nau and Brughel-and Nau and Brughel were dulled to the possibility that there
might be Qeng Ho who still worked against them.
"So what got you out of the freezer early, Ezr?"
Vinh shrugged. "Beats me. I'm going down to Hammerfest in a few

Ksecs."Whatever it is, I hope it doesn't mess up my meeting with Pham.
Trud Silipan rose up through the floor spaces, settled in an empty seat. "It's
no big thing, a snit between the translators and the hard-science zipheads. We
got it resolved earlier today."
"So why did Reynolt change Ezr's schedule?"
Silipan rolled his eyes. "Ah, you know Reynolt. No offense, Ezr, but she
thinks that since your specialty is the Dawn Age, we can't get along without
you."
Hardly,thought Ezr, remembering his last encounter with the Director of
Human Resources.
Rita said, "I'll bet tas something to do with Calorica Bay. The children are
down there now, you know." When Rita spoke of "the children" she was talking
about the Spiders from the old "Children's Hour of Science."
"They're not children anymore," Xin said gently. "Victory Junior is a young
wo-young adult."
Liao shrugged irritably. "Rhapsa and Little Hrunk still qualify as children.
They've all moved down to Calorica."
There was an embarrassed pause. The adventures of specific Spiders were
an unending drama for many-and as the years passed, it became easier to get
more details. There were other families being followed by the Spider fans, but
the Underhill one was still the most popular. Rita was easily the biggest fanatic,
and sometimes she was just too pathetically obvious.
Trud was oblivious of the sad byplay. "No, Calorica is a scam."
Xin laughed. "Hey, Trud, there really is a launch site just south of Calorica.
These Spiders are launching satellites."
"No, no. I meant to say thecavorite thing is a scam. That's what got Ezr
rousted early." He noticed Ezr's reaction and his smirk broadened. "You
recognize the term."
"Yes, it's-"
Trud rolled on, not interested in classical trivia: "It's another of the
translators' screwball references, just more obscure than most. Anyway, a year
ago, some Spiders were using abandoned mines in the altiplano south of
Calorica, trying to find a difference between gravitational mass and inertial
mass. The whole thing makes you wonder how bright these creatures really are."
"The idea is not stupid," said Ezr, "until you've done some experiments to
see otherwise." He remembered the project now. It had been mainly Tiefer
scientists. Their reports had been nearly inaccessible. The human translators had
never learned Tiefic in the depth that they had the Accord languages. Xopi
Reung and a couple of others might have become fluent in Tiefic, but they had

died in the mindrot runaway.
Trud waved off the objection. "What's stupid is, these Spiders eventually
found adifference. And they posted their foolishness, claimed to have discovered
antigravity in the altiplano."
Ezr glanced at Jau Xin. "Have you heard of this?"
"I think so. . . ." Jau looked thoughtful. Apparently this had been kept under
wraps until now. "Reynolt has had me in with the zipheads a couple of times.
They wanted to know about any orbital anomalies in our snoopersats." He
shrugged. "Of course there are anomalies. That's how you do subsurface density
maps."
"Well," Trud continued, "the Spiders who did this had about an Msec of
fame before they discovered they couldn't reproduce their miraculous discovery.
Their retraction came out just a few Ksecs ago." He chuckled. "What idiots. In a
human civilization, their claim wouldn't have lasted a day."
"The Spiders arenot stupid," said Rita.
"They're not incompetent, either," said Ezr. "Sure, most human societies
would be very skeptical of such a report. But humans have had eight thousand
years of experience with science. Even a fallen civ, if it were advanced enough
to study such questions, would have library ruins that contained the human
heritage."
"Yeah, right. 'Everything the Spiders do is for the first time.' "
"But it's true, Trud! We know they're first-timers. We have only one case
that's really comparable-our rise upon Old Earth. And there are so many things
that human first-timers got wrong."
"In fact, we're doing them a big favor by taking over." That from Arlo
Dinh, a Qeng Ho. He made the assertion with all the moral smugness of an
Emergent.
Ezr nodded reluctantly. "Yeah, our Dawn Age ancestors had an awful lot of
good luck to get out of the single-planet trap. And the Spider geniuses are no
better than the old-time human ones. Look at this guy Underhill. His students
have made a lot of things work, but-"
"But he's full of superstitions," Trud put in.
"Right. He has no concept of the limits of software design, and of the limits
that puts on hardware. He thinks immortality and godlike computers are just
around the corner, the product of just a little more progress. He's a walking
library of the Failed Dreams."
"See! That's the real reason you're Reynolt's favorite. You know what
fantasies the Spiders might believe. When the time comes to take over, that will
be important."
"Wh
h
i
" J
Xi
l
id d
il
O
h f
ll

"When the time comes. . ." Jau Xin gave a lopsided smile. On the far wall,
by the Watch Chart, Benny had a window on the Coming-Out Party Betting
Pool. Guessing just when they would come out of hiding, when the Exile would
end-that was the eternal topic of parlor debate. "It's been more than thirty real
years since the sun relighted. I'm outside a lot, you know, almost as much as
Qiwi Lisolet and her crews. These days, the sun is dimming down. We have just
a few years till it's dead again. The Spiders have themselves a deadline. I'm
betting they'll be into the Information Age in less than ten years."
"No, not far enough for us to make a smooth takeover," said Arlo.
"Okay. But in the end, other things may force our hand. The Spiders have
the beginnings of a space program. In ten years, our operations-our presence
here at L1-may be impossible to disguise."
Trud: "So? They get too uppity, we whack 'em."
Jau: "And cut our own throats, man."
"You're both talking nonsense," said Arlo. "I'll bet we have fewer than ten
nukes left. Seems we used all the rest on each other a while back-"
"We have directed-energy weapons."
"Yes, if we were in close orbit. I tell you, we couldbluff a good game, but-"
"We could drop our wrecked starships on the buggers."
Ezr exchanged a glance with Rita Liao. This was the argument that sent her
into full froth. She-and Jau and most of the people round the table-thought of the
Spiders as people. That was Trixia's triumph. The Emergents, at least outside the
Podmaster class, were uncomfortable with the notion of megamurder. In any
case, Jau Xin was certainly right: Whether or not the Emergents had the
firepower, the whole object of the Lurk was to create a customer who could put
the mission back in business. Blowing them up made sense only to crazies like
Ritser Brughel.
Ezr leaned back, out of the argument. He had seen Pham's name on the
Watch Chart; just a few more days and they would have their first real
meeting.Take it slow and patient, no rush. Okay. He hoped the Debating Society
would move on to something more interesting, but even this nonsense was a
pleasant familiar buzz. Not for the first time, Ezr realized this was almost like
having family, a family that argued endlessly about problems that never seemed
to change. He got along with even the Emergents, and they with him. Almost
like a normal life.. . .He looked through the lattice of z-vines that filled the
spaces around them. The flowers actually smelled faintly-though nothing like
that stink-lacquer that Hunte tried before. Ah. A clear view opened through the
flowers and leaves, to Benny's station on the floor of the parlor. He started to
wave to Benny. Maybe he could stomach some real food, after all. Then he saw

a flash of checkered pants and fractille blouse.
Qiwi.
She and Benny were deep in negotiation. Benny pointed at the crappy
section of wallpaper that stretched across the parlor's bottom wall. Qiwi nodded,
consulting some sort of list. Then she seemed to feel his gaze. She turned, and
waved at Ezr's group up by the ceiling.She is so beautiful. Ezr looked away, his
face suddenly chill. Once Qiwi had been the brat who irritated him beyond
measure. Once Qiwi had seemed a betrayer, abusing the zipheads. And once Ezr
had hit her and hit her.. . .Ezr remembered the rage, howgood it felt to get some
revenge for Jimmy Diem and Trixia Bonsol. But Qiwi was no betrayer; Qiwi
was a victim more than she knew. If Pham was right about mindscrub-and he
must be; the horror fit the facts too well-then Qiwi was a victim almost beyond
human imagination. And in beating Qiwi, Ezr had learned something about
himself. He had learned that Ezr Vinh's decency must be a shallow thing. That
self-knowledge was something he could keep tucked away most of the time.
Maybe he could still do good, even if at bottom he was something vile.. . . But
when he actually saw Qiwi, and when she saw him. . .then it was impossible to
forget what he had done.
"Hi Qiwi!" Rita had noticed Qiwi's wave. "Got a second? We want you to
settle something for us."
Qiwi grinned. "Be right there." She turned back to Benny. He was nodding,
handing her a bunch of paper favors. Then she came bouncing up the latticework
of vines. She trailed Benny's net, filled with beer refills and more snacks. In
effect, she was doing some of Benny's work for him. That was Qiwi for you. She
was part of the underground economy, the hustlers that made things relatively
comfortable here. Like Benny, she didn't hesitate to lend a hand, towork. And at
the same time, she had the Podmaster's ear; she brought a softness to Nau's
regime that Emergents like Jau Xin could not consciously admit. But you could
see it in Jau and Rita's eyes; they were almost in awe of Qiwi Lisolet.
And she smiled at him. "Hi, Ezr. Benny figured you might want more." She
slid the bucket into sticking contact with the table in front of him. Ezr nodded,
not able to meet her gaze.
Rita was already babbling at her; maybe no one noticed his awkwardness.
"Not to ask for inside news, Qiwi, but what's the latest estimate for our Coming-
Out date?"
Qiwi smiled. "My guess? Twelve years at the outside. Spider progress with
spaceflight may force our hand before that."
"Yeah." Rita slid a glance at Jau. "Well, we were wondering. Suppose we
can't grab everything via their computer networks. Suppose we have to take

sides, play one power block off against another. Who would we back?"

THIRTY-FIVE
Diamond One was more than two thousand meters long and nearly as wide,
by far the largest of all the rocks in the pile. Over the years, the crystal directly
beneath Hammerfest had been carved into a labyrinth of caves. The upper levels
were the labs and offices. Below that were Tomas's private rooms. Below that
was the latest addition to the inverted architecture: a lens-shaped void more than
two hundred meters across. The making of it had worn out most of the thermal
diggers, but Qiwi had not objected; in fact, this had been partly her idea.
Their three human forms were almost lost in the scale of the place. "So is
this impressive, or is this impressive?" Qiwi asked, smiling at Tomas.
Nau was staring straight upward, his face slack with wonder. That didn't
happen often. He hadn't noticed yet, but he'd lost his balance and was slowly
falling over backwards. "I. . .yes. Even the huds mockup didn't do it justice."
Qiwi laughed, and patted him back toward vertical. "I confess. In the
mockups I didn't show the lights." Actinic arcs were buried in the anechoic
grooves of the ceiling. The lamps turned the sky into a coruscating gem. By
tuning their output, almost any lighting effect could be obtained, but always
tinged with rainbows.
On her right, Papa was also staring, but not with rapture, and not upward.
Ali Lin was on his hands. He pretty much ignored the subtle hints of gravity as
he poked at the pebble-textured surface the diggers had left in the diamond floor.
"There's nothing living here, nothing at all." His face screwed up in a frown.
"It will be the largest park you've ever done, Papa. A blank slate for you to
work on." The frown eased.We'll work on it together, Papa. You canteach me
new things. This one should be big enough for real animals, maybe even the
flying kittens. Those were more dream than memory, from the time Mama and
Papa and Qiwi spent at the Trilander departure temp.
And Tomas said, "I'm so glad you pushed me on this, Qiwi. I just wanted a
little better security and you've given me something wonderful." He sighed,
smiled down at her. His hand brushed down her back to just above her hips.
"It'll be a large park, Tomas, even by Qeng Ho standards. Not the largest,
but-" "But it likely will be thebest. " He leaned past her to pat Ali on the
shoulder.
"Yes."Yes, it likely will be the best. Papa had always been a premier
parkbuilder. And now, for fifteen years of his lifetime he had been Focused on
his specialty. Every year of that time had produced new wonders. His bonsais

and microparks were already better than the finest of Namqem. Even the
Focused Emergent biologists were as good as the Qeng Ho best, now that they
had access to the fleet's life library.
And when the Exile is over, Papa, when you are finally free, then youwill
truly know what wonders you have made.
Nau's glance swept back and forth across the empty, glittering cavern. He
must be imaging some of the landscapes it might sustain-savannah, cool rain
forest, meadowland in mountains. Even Ali's magic couldn't create more than
one ecosystem at a time here, but there were choices.. . .She smiled: "How
would you like a lake?"
"What?"
"Code 'wetwater,' in my design library." And Qiwi keyed her own huds to
the design. "Unh. . .you didn't tell me about this!"
Overlaid on the diamond reality of the cavern was one of Ali's forestland
schemes-but now the center of the cavern was a lake that widened and widened
into the distance till it reached island mountains that seemed kilometers away. A
sailboat had just cast off from the arbored moorage down the hill from them.
Tomas was silent for a moment. "Lord. That's on my uncle's estate at North
Paw. I spent summers there." "I know. I got it from your biography."
"It's beautiful, Qiwi, even if it is impossible."
"Not impossible! We've got lots of water topside; this will be a good
secondary storage for some of it." She waved at the distance, where the lake
spread wide. "We dig out the far side of the cavern a little, and run the lake right
out to the wall. We can scavenge enough wallpaper to make realistic far
imagery." That might not be true. The video wallpaper from the wrecked ships
had suffered considerable vacuum damage. It didn't matter. Tomas liked to wear
huds, and they could paint the far scenery for anyone who did not participate in
the imaging.
"That's not what I mean. We can't have a real lake, not in microgravity.
Every little rockquake would send it crawling up the walls."
Qiwi let her smile grow broad. "That's the real surprise. I can do it, Tomas!
We have thousands of servo valves from the wrecked starships, more than we
can use for anything else. We put them at the bottom of the lake, and run them
off a network of localizers. It would be easy to damp the water waves, keep the
thing confined."
Tomas laughed. "You really like stabilizing the intrinsically unstable, don't
you, Qiwi! Well. . .you did it for the rockpile, maybe you can do it here."
She shrugged. "Sure I can. With a restricted shoreline, I could even do it
with Emergent localizers."

Tomas turned to look at her, and now she saw no visions before his eyes.
He was back in the hard sterile world of the diamond cavern. But he had seen the
wonder, and she knew she had pleased him. "It would be marvelous. . .a lot of
resources, though, and a lot of work." Work by non-zipheads, he meant. Even
Tomas didn't think of the Focused as real people.
"It won't get in the way of important things. The valves are scrap. The
localizers are surplus. And people owe me lots of favors."
After a time, Nau led his woman and the ziphead back out of the cavern.
Qiwi had surprised him once again, this time more spectacularly than usual. And
damn. This was just another reason why they needed the localizers in
Hammerfest. Reynolt's people still hadn't cleared the devices; just how
complicated could that be?Leave it for later. Qiwi said they could get some kind
of lake even with Emergent localizers.
They went back up through the lower levels, acknowledging the various
salutes and waves of techs, both Emergent and former Qeng Ho. They dropped
Ali Lin off in the garden park that was his workshop. Qiwi's father wasn't caged
in the Attic honeycomb. In fact, his specialty demanded open spaces and living
things. At least, that was how Tomas Nau presented the issue to Qiwi. It was
plausible, and it meant the girl was not continually exposed to the usual face of
Focused operations; that helped slow her inevitable slide toward understanding.
"You have to go over to the temp, Qiwi?"
"Yes, some errands. To see some friends." Qiwi had her trades to
accomplish, her favors to collect.
"Okay." He swept her up in a kiss, visible the length of the office hall. No
matter. "You did well, my love!"
"Thanks." Her smile was a dazzling thing. Over thirty years old, and Qiwi
Lisolet still hung on his approval. "See you this evening."
She departed up the central shaft, pulling herself hand over hand faster and
faster, all but rocketing past the other people in the shaft. Qiwi still practiced
every day in a two-gee centrifuge, still practiced the martial killing arts. It was
all that was left of her mother's influence, at least all that was visible. No doubt a
lot of her driving energy was some sort of sublimated effort to please her
mother.
Nau looked up, almost oblivious of the people coming down around him;
they would stay out of his way. He watched her figure dwindle into the heights
of the main shaft.
After Anne Reynolt, Qiwi was his most precious possession. But he had
essentially inherited Reynolt;
Qiwi Lin Lisolet was his personal triumph, a brilliant, unFocused person,
ki
i i
l f
hi
f
ll h
O
i
h
i
l i
h
i

working unstintingly for him for all these years. Owning her, manipulating her-it
was a challenge that never got stale. And there was always an edge of danger.
She had the strength and speed, at least, to kill with her hands. He hadn't
understood that in the early years. But that was also before he had realized what
a valuable thing she was.
Yes, she was his triumph, but Tomas Nau was realistic enough to know he'd
been lucky, too. He had first possessed Qiwi at just the right age and context-
when she was old enough to have absorbed a depth of Qeng Ho background, yet
young enough to be molded by the Diem Massacre. In the first ten years of the
Exile, she had seen through his lies only three times.
A little smile quirked his lips. Qiwi thought she was changinghim, that she
had shown him how well the methods of freedom worked. Well, she was right.
In the early years, allowing the underground economy had been part of the game
he was playing with her, a temporary weakness. But the underground economy
reallyworked. Even the Qeng Ho texts claimed that free markets should be
meaningless in an environment as closed and limited as this. And yet, year by
year, the Peddlers had made things better-even for operations that Nau would
have required anyway. So now, when she assured him that people owed her
favors, that they would work really hard to make the lake park-Pestilence, I
really want that
lake-Tomas Nau didn't laugh behind his hand at her. She was right: the
people-even the
Emergents-would do better on that park because they owed Qiwi than they
would because Tomas Nau was Podmaster with the ultimate power to space
them all.
Qiwi was a tiny figure at the very top of the shaft. She turned and waved.
Nau waved back, and she disappeared to the side, down one of the taxi access
tunnels.
Nau stood a moment longer, staring upward with a smile on his face. Qiwi
had taught him the power of managed freedom. Uncle Alan and the Nauly clique
had bequeathed him the power of Focused slaves. And the OnOff star. . .? The
more they learned of the star and its planet, the more he had the awed conviction
that there were miracles hiding here, maybe not the treasures they had expected,
but much greater things. The biology, the physics, the star system's far galactic
orbit. . .their combined implications were just beyond the analysts'
comprehension, teasing at his intuition.
And in a few years, the Spiders would hand him an industrial ecology with
which to exploit it all.
There had never been a place and a time in the histories of Humankind
where so much opportunity had come to one man Twenty five years ago a

where so much opportunity had come to one man. Twenty-five years ago, a
younger Tomas Nau had quailed before the uncertainties. But the years had
passed, and step by step he had met the problems and mastered them. What came
out of Arachna would be the power of a dynasty like none Humankind had ever
seen. It would take time, perhaps another century or two, but he would scarcely
be out of Qeng Ho middle age by the end of it. He could sweep the Emergent
cliques aside. This end of Human Space would see the greatest empire in all the
histories. The legend of Pham Nuwen would pale in the light that Tomas Nau
would cast.
And Qiwi? He cast a final look upward. He hoped she would last through
the end of the Exile. There were so many things she could help him with when
they took the Spiders down. But the mask was fraying. Mindscrub was not
perfect; Qiwi was catching on faster than in the early years. Without destroying
large amounts of brain tissue, Anne could not eliminate what she called "residual
neural weighting." And of course there were some contradictions that coldsleep
amnesia could not plausibly cover. Eventually, even with the most skillful
manipulation. . .How could he explain reneging on his promises of
manumission? How could he explain the measures he would take against the
Spiders, or the human breeding programs that would be necessary? No.
Inevitably, but most regrettably, he would have to dispose of Qiwi. And yet,
even then she could still serve him. Children by her would still be possible.
Someday his reign would need heirs.
Qiwi pulled into Benny's parlor about two thousand seconds later. And it
was Benny running things this Watch. Good. He was her favorite master of the
parlor. They dickered for a moment over the new gear he wanted. "Lord, Benny!
You need more wallpaper? There are other projects that could use some, you
know." Like a certain park under Hammerfest.
Benny shrugged. "Get the Podmaster to allow consensual imaging, and I
won't need wallpaper. But the stuff just wears out. See?" He waved at the floor,
where the image of Arachna was a permanent fixture. She could see a storm
system that would probably reach Princeton in a few Ksecs; certainly the display
drivers were still alive. But she could also see the distortions and the colored
smudges.
"Okay, we still have some to strip out of theInvisible Hand, but it'll cost
you." Ritser Brughel would froth and shriek, even though he had no use for the
wallpaper. Ritser regarded theHand as his private fiefdom. She looked at
Benny's handwritten list, at the other items. The finished foods were all from the
temp's bactry and ags-Gonle Fong would want to handle that. Volatiles and
feedstock, aha. As usual, Benny was negotiating on the side for those, trying to

short-circuit Gonle by going directly to the mining operation on the rockpile. For
best friends, the two took their business competition awfully seriously.
At the edge of her vision, something moved. She glanced up. Over by the
ceiling, Xin's gang was hanging out in its usual place. Ezr! An involuntary smile
spread across Qiwi's face. He had turned from the others, was looking in her
direction. She waved to him. Ezr's face seemed to close down, and he turned
away. For a moment, a lot of old pain floated up in Qiwi's mind. Even now,
when she saw him, there was always this quick, involuntary twinge of joy, like
seeing a dear friend you have so much to say to. But the years had passed, and
every time he turned away. She hadn't meant to harm Trixia Bonsol; she helped
Tomas because he was a good man, a man who was doing his best to bring them
through the Exile.
She wondered if Ezr would ever let her close enough to explain. Maybe.
There were years to come. At
Exile's end, when they had a whole civilization to help them and Trixia was
returned to him-surely then he would forgive.

THIRTY-SIX
The space between the temp's outer skin and the habitable balloons was a
buffer against blowouts. Over the years, various of Gonle Fong's farming rackets
had used the space; a pressure loss would have killed some truffles or her
experiments with Canberra flowers. Even now, Fong's ags occupied only a part
of the dead space. Pham met Ezr Vinh well away from the little farm plots. Here
the air was still and cold, and the only light was OnOff's dim glow seeping
through the outer wall.
Pham hooked his foot under a wall stop and waited quietly. Earlier in the
Watch, he had made sure that these volumes were well populated with localizers.
They were scattered here and there on the walls. A few always floated in the air
around him, though even in bright light they would have been scarcely more
than dustmotes. And so, hiding here in the twilight, Pham was a one-man
command post. He could hear and see from wherever he commanded-just now,
the airgap between the balloons. Someone was approaching cautiously. At the
back of his eyes he had vision now, almost as good as Qeng Hohuds. It was the
Vinh boy, looking nervous and stealthy.
How old was Vinh now, thirty? Not really a kid anymore. But he still had
that cast to his features, that serious manner. . .just like Sura. Not a person to
trust, oh no. But hopefully a person he could use.
Vinh appeared to the naked eye, coming around the curve of the inner
balloon. Pham raised a hand and the boy stopped, sucked in a breath of surprise.
For all his caution, Vinh had almost passed Pham by, not noticing him floating
in the inward notch of the wall fabric. "I-Hello." Vinh was whispering.
Pham floated out from the wall, to where the light of OnOff was a little
better. "We meet at last," he said, giving the boy a lopsided smile.
"Y-yes. Truly." Ezr turned, looked at him for a long moment, and then
gave-Lord!-a little bow. His Sura features spread into a shy smile. "It's strange to
actually see you, not Pham Trinli."
"Hardly a visible difference."
"Oh sir, you don't know. When you are Trinli, all the little things are
different. Here, even in this light, you look different. If Nau or Reynolt saw you
for even ten seconds, they would know, too."
The kid had an overactive imagination. "Well, the only thing they're seeing
for the next two thousand seconds is the lies my localizers are feeding them.
Hopefully, that's long enough to get you started-"

"Yes! You can actually see with the localizers, you can actually input
commands to them?"
"With enough practice." He showed the boy where to set localizer grains
around the orbit of his eye, and how to cue the nearby localizers to cooperate.
"Don't do that in public. The synthesized beam is very narrow, but might still be
noticed."
Vinh stared as if sightless. "Ah, it's like something is nibbling at the back of
my eyes."
"The localizers are tickling your optic nerve directly. What pops up may be
very weird at first. You can learn the commands with some simple exercises, but
learning to make sense of the visual tickle. . .well, I guess that's like learning to
see again." Pham guessed it was a lot like a blind man learning to use a visual
prosthesis. Some people could do it, some remained blind. He didn't say that out
loud. Instead, he led Ezr through some test patterns, patterns that Vinh could
practice with.
Pham had thought a lot about just how much of the command interface to
show the Vinh boy. But Ezr already knew enough to betray him. Short of killing
him, there was no cure for that.All the bloody clues I laid, pointingat the Zamle
Eng story, and he still picked up on the truth. Pray it was onlyhis Great Family
background that made that possible. Pham had kept him in ignorance for years
now, watching for signs of counterscheming, trying to measure the boy's actual
ability. What he had seen was a compulsive, unsure adolescent coming of age in
a tyranny-and still retaining some sense.
When the crunch came, when Pham finally moved against Nau and
Brughel, he would need someone to help pull all the strings. The boy should be
taught some of the tricks. . .but there were nights Pham ground his teeth,
thinking of the power he was handing to a Vinh.
Ezr learned the command set very quickly. Now he should have no trouble
learning the other techniques that Pham had opened for him. Full vision would
come slowly, but"Yes, I know you still can't see more than flashes of light. Just
keep trying the test patterns. In a few Msecs, you'll be as good as I am."Almostas
good.
Just the assurance seemed to calm the boy. "Okay, I'll practice and practice-
all in my room, as you say. This makes me feel. . .I don't know, like I've
accomplished more just now than I have in years."
One hundred seconds of the alloted time remained. The masking that
disguised them to the snoops couldn't be aborted. Never mind. Just react to the
kid naturally. Platitudes. "You did plenty in the past. Together, we've learned a
lot about the Hammerfest operation."
ff
f

"Yes, but this will be different.. . .What will things be like after we win,
sir?"
"Afterwards?" What not to say? "It will be. . .magnificent. We will have
Qeng Ho technology and a planetary civilization very nearly capable of using it.
By itself, that is the most powerful trading position any Qeng Ho has ever had.
But we will have more. Given time, we'll have ramdrives that take advantage of
what we've learned from OnOff's physics. And you know the DNA diversity on
Arachna. That by itself is an enormous treasure, a box of surprises that could
power-"
"And all the Focused will be set free."
"Yes, yes. Of course. Don't worry, Vinh, we'll get Trixia back." That was an
expensive promise, but one Pham intended to keep. With Trixia Bonsol free,
maybe Vinh would listen to reason about the rest. Maybe.
Pham realized that the boy was looking at him strangely; he had let the
silence stretch into unwelcome implications. "Okay. I think we've covered the
ground. Practice the input language and the visual test patterns. For now, our
time is up."Thank the Lord of All Trade. "You take off first, back the way you
came. The cover story is you got almost to the taxi port, then decided to go back
to the dayroom for breakfast."
"Okay." Vinh hesitated an instant, as if wanting to say more. Then he
turned and floated back around the curve of the inner balloon.
Pham watched the timer that hung at the back of his vision. In twenty
seconds, he would depart in the other direction. The localizers had fed two
thousand seconds of carefully planned lies back to Brughel's snoops. Later,
Pham would check it over for consistency with what was really going on
throughout the rest of the temp. There would be some patching necessary, no
doubt. This kind of meeting would have been easy if the enemy had been
ordinary analysts. With ziphead snoops, covering your ass was a major exercise
in paranoia.
Ten seconds. He stared into the dimness at where Ezr Vinh had just
disappeared. Pham Nuwen had a lifetime of experience in diplomacy and
deception.So why the bloody hell wasn't I smoother with the kid? The ghost of
Sura Vinh seemed suddenly very close, and she was laughing.
• • •
"You know, we really need to get localizers aboard Hammerfest." The
request had become a ritual at the beginning of Ritser Brughel's security
briefings. Today, maybe Ritser was in for a surprise.
"Anne's people haven't finished their evaluation "

Anne s people haven t finished their evaluation.
The Vice-Podmaster leaned forward. Over the years, Ritser had changed
more than most. Nowadays, he was on-Watch almost fifty percent, but he was
also making heavy use of medical support and the Hammerfest gym. He actually
looked healthier than he had during the early years. And somewhere along the
way, he had learned to satisfy his. . .needs. . .without producing an unending
stream of dead zipheads. He had grown to be a dependable Podmaster. "Have
you seen Reynolt's latest report, sir?"
"Yes. She's saying five more years." Anne's search for security holes in the
Peddler localizers was close to impossible. In the early years, Tomas had been
more hopeful. After all, the Qeng Ho security hackers had had no ziphead
support. But the quagmire of Qeng Ho software was almost eight thousand years
deep. Every year, Anne's zipheads pushed back their deadline for certainty
another year or two. And now this latest report.
"Five more years, sir. She might as well be saying 'never.' We both know
how unlikely it is that these localizers are a danger. My zipheads have been
using them for twelve years on the temp and in the junked starships. My zips
aren't programmer specialists, but I'll tell you, in all that time the localizers have
come up as clean as anything Qeng Ho. These gadgets are so useful, sir. Nothing
gets past them.Not using them has its own risks."
"Such as?"
Nau saw the other's faint start of surprise; this was more encouragement
than Ritser had received in some time. "Um. Such as the things we miss because
we aren't using them. Let's just look at the current briefing." There followed a
not-too-relevant discourse on all the recent security concerns: Gonle Fong's
attempts to acquire automation for her black-market farms; the perverse
affection people of all factions had developed for the Spiders-a desirable
sublimation, but a potential problem when the time for real action finally
arrived; the proper level for Anne's paranoia. "I know you monitor her, sir, but I
think she's drifting. It's not just this fixation about system trapdoors. She's
become significantly more possessive of 'her' zipheads."
"It's possible I've tuned her too edgy." Anne's suspicions about sabotaged
zipheads were totally amorphous, quite unlike her usual analytical precision.
"But what does that have to do with enabling localizers in Hammerfest?"
"With localizer support in Hammerfest, my snoops could do constant, fine-
grain analysis-correlate the net traffic with exactly what is happening physically.
It's. . .it's a scandal that our weakest security is in the place where we need the
strongest."
"Hmm." He looked back into Ritser's eyes. As a child, Tomas Nau had
learned an important rule:

learned an important rule:
Whatever else, never lie to yourself. Throughout history, self-deception had
ruined great men from
Helmun Dire to Pham Nuwen. Be honest: He reallyreally wanted the lake
that Qiwi had shown him under Hammerfest. With such a park, he would have
made something of this squalor, a splendor that the Qeng Ho rarely exceeded
even in civilized systems. All that was no excuse to break security-but maybe his
self-denial was itself making things worse.Take a different tack: Whoappears to
be pushing this? Ritser Brughel was awfully enthusiastic about it. He must not
be underestimated. Less directly, Qiwi had created this dilemma: "What about
Qiwi Lisolet, Ritser? What do your analysts say about her?"
Something glittered in Ritser's eyes. He still held a homicidal hatred for
Qiwi. "We both know how fast she can twig the truth-close surveillance is more
important than ever. But at the moment, she's absolutely, totally clean. She
doesn't love you, but her admiration for you is nearly as strong as love. She is a
masterpiece, sir."
Qiwi was twigging about every other Watch now. But her last scrubbing
was very recent-and extending the localizer coverage would keep her under an
even tighter watch. Nau thought it over for a moment more, then nodded. "Okay,
Vice-Podmaster, let's bring the localizers to Hammerfest."
Of course, the Qeng Ho localizers were already aboard Hammerfest. The
dustlike motes spread on air currents, stuck to clothes and hair and even skin.
They were ubiquitous throughout all inhabited spaces around the rockpile.
Ubiquitous they might be, but without power the localizers were harmless
pieces of metallic glass. Now Anne's people reprogrammed Hammerfest's cable
spines-and extended them into the newly dug caves beneath. Now, ten times a
second, microwaves pulsed in every open space. The energy was far below
biological-damage thresholds, so low that it didn't interfere with the other
utilities in place. The Qeng Ho localizers didn't need much power, just enough to
run their tiny sensors and communicate with their nearest neighbors. Ten Ksec
after the microwave pulses were turned on, Ritser reported that the net had
stabilized and was providing good data. Millions of processors, scattered across
a diameter of four hundred meters. Each was scarcely more powerful than a
Dawn Age computer. In principle, they were the most powerful computer net at
L1.
In four days, Qiwi finished digging out the cave, and emplaced the wave
servos. Her father was already brewing soil on the uplands. The water would
come last, but it would come.
After the fact, Nau wondered how they had managed without the localizers
all this time. Ritser Brughel had been absolutely correct. Before, their security

g
y
,
y
had been all but blind in Hammerfest. Before, the Qeng Ho temp had in fact
been a safer place for secure operations. Nau supervised Brughel and his snoops
in a thorough, many-day sweep of all Hammerfest, and then of the starships and
the warehouse cloud. He even broke with tradition and ran the localizers for
100Ksec in the L1-A arsenal vault. It was like shining a spotlight into dark
places. They found and closed dozens of security lapses. . .and found not a single
trace of subversion. Altogether, the experience was a wonderful confidence
builder, as when you check for house parasites, find none, but also see where to
put poison and barriers against future infestation.
And now, Tomas Nau had greater knowledge of his own domain than any
Podmaster in Emergent history. Ritser's snoops, using the localizers, could give
Nau the location and emotional state-even cognitive state-of anyone in
Hammerfest. After a time, he realized that there were experiments he should
have undertaken long before.
Ezr Vinh. Maybe something more could be done with him. Nau studied the
fellow's biography again. At the next briefing, he was ready. This was Vinh's
standard meeting time. It was just the two of them, but by this time the Peddler
was very used to the interaction. Vinh showed up at Nau's office to discuss his
summaries for the last ten days, the progress he was seeing with the ziphead
groups in their understanding of the Spider world.
Tomas let the Peddler rattle on. He listened, nodded, asked the reasonable
questions. . .and watched the analysis that spread across his huds.Lordy. The
localizers in the air, on Vinh's chair, even on his skin, reported to theInvisible
Hand, where programs analyzed and sent the results back to Nau's huds, painting
Vinh's skin with colors that showed galvanic response, skin temperature,
perspiration. Standard graphics around the face showed pulse and other internals.
An inset window showed what Vinh was seeing from his place across the desk,
and mapped his every eye motion with red tracks. Two of Brughel's snoops were
allocated to this interview, and their analysis was a flowing legend across the top
of Nau's vision.Subject is relaxed to tenth percentile of normal interview level.
Subject isconfident but wary, without sympathy for the Podmaster. Subject is not
currently trying to suppress explicit thought.
It was more or less what Nau would have guessed, but with a wealth of
added detail, better than the best instrumented soft interrogation, since it was
invisible to the subject.
"So the strategic politics are much clearer now," concluded Vinh, blissfully
unaware of the dual nature of the interview. "Pedure and the Kindred have some
real advantages in rocketry and nuclear weapons, but they've consistently lagged
behind the Accord in computing and networks."

p
g
Nau shrugged. "The Kindred are a strict dictatorship. Haven't you told me
that the Dawn Age tyrannies couldn't cope with computer networks?"
"Yes."Subject reacts, suppressing probable feeling of irony. "That's part of
it. We know they're planning on a first strike sometime after the sun goes out, so
that accounts for their overspending on weapons. And on the Accord side,
Sherkaner Underhill is justso enthusiastic about automation that Pedure can't
keep up. Frankly, I think we're headed for a crunch, Podmaster."The subject is
sincere in this statement. "Spider civilization only discovered the inverse square
law a couple of generations ago; their mathematics lagged behind our Dawn Age
accordingly. But the Kindred have made solid progress in rocketry. If they show
one-tenth the curiosity of Sherkaner Underhill, they're going to detect us in less
than ten years."
"Before we can completely control their networks?"
"Yes, sir."
That's what Jau Xin had been saying, reasoning off of his pilot zipheads. A
pity. But at least the shape of the end of the Exile was becoming clear. . .
.Meantime:
Subject's guard is down.Nau smiled to himself. This was as good a time as
any to shake up Manager
Vinh.Who knows, maybe I can actually manipulate him. Either way, Vinh's
reaction would be interesting. Nau leaned back in his chair, pretended to gaze
idly at the bonsai floating over his desk. "I've had years to study the Qeng Ho,
Mr. Vinh. I'm not under false illusions. You people understand the different
ways of civilization better than any sessile group."
"Yes, sir."Subject still calm, but the comment brings sincere agreement.
Nau cocked his head. "You're in the Vinh line; if any in the Qeng Ho really
understand things, it should be you. You see, one of my personal heroes has
always been Pham Nuwen."
"You've. . .mentioned that before." The words were wooden. In Nau's
display, Vinh's face was transformed by color, his pulse and perspiration spiking.
Somewhere over on theHand, the snoops analyzed, and reported:Subject feels
substantial anger directed at the Podmaster. "Honestly, Mr. Vinh, I'm not trying
to insult your traditions. You know that Emergents hold much of the Qeng Ho
culture in contempt, but Pham Nuwen is a different matter. You see. . .I know
the truth about Pham Nuwen."
The diagnostic colors were shading toward normalcy, as was Vinh's heart
rate. His eye dilation and tracking were consistent with suppressed anger. Nau
felt a fleeting incongruity; he would have read a tinge of fear in Vinh's
reaction.Maybe I have some things to learn from all this automation. And now

he was frankly puzzled: "What's the matter, Mr. Vinh? For once, let's be frank."
He smiled. "I won't tell Ritser, and you won't gossip with Xin or Liao or. . .my
Qiwi."
The pulse of anger was very stark on that one, no disagreement there. The
Peddler was hung up on Qiwi Lisolet, even if he couldn't admit it to himself.
The signs of anger receded. Vinh licked his lips, a gesture that might have
been nervousness. But the glyphs across the top of Nau's huds said,Subject is
curious. Vinh said, "It's just that I don't see the similarities between Pham
Nuwen's life and Emergent values. Sure, Pham Nuwen was not born a Peddler,
but more than anyone he made us what we are today. Look at the Qeng Ho
archives, his life-"
"Oh, I have. They're a bit scattered, don't you think?"
"Well, he was the great traveler. I doubt he ever cared much about the
historians."
"Mr. Vinh, Pham Nuwen valued the regard of history as much as any of the
giants. I think-Iknow -your Qeng Ho archives have been carefully gardened,
probably by your own Family. But you see, someone as great as Pham Nuwen
attracted other historians-from the worlds he changed, from other spacefaring
cultures. Their stories also float across the ages, and I've collected all that passed
through this end of Human Space. He is a man I have always tried to emulate.
Your Pham Nuwen was no lickspittle trader. Pham Nuwen was a Bringer of
Order, a conqueror. Sure, he used your Trader techniques, the deception and the
bribery. But he never shrank from threats and raw violence when that was
necessary."
"I-" The diagnostics painted an exquisite combination of anger and surprise
and doubt across Vinh's face, just the mix that Nau would have estimated.
"I can prove it, Mr. Vinh." He spoke key words into the air. "I've just
transferred some ofour archives to your personal domain. Take a look. These are
unvarnished, non-Qeng Ho views of the man. A dozen little atrocities. Read the
true story of how he ended the Strentmannian Pogrom, of how he was betrayed
at Brisgo Gap. Then let's talk again."
Amazing. Nau had not intended to speak so bluntly, but the evoked effects
were so interesting. They exchanged a few meaningless sentences, and the
meeting was over. Red shimmered around Vinh's hands, symptoms of an
invisible trembling, as he approached the door.
Nau sat quietly for a moment after the Peddler was gone. He stared off into
the distance, but in fact he was reading from his huds. The snoops' report was a
stream of colored glyphs against the landscape of Diamond One. He would read
the report carefully. . .later. First, there were his own thoughts to get in order.

The localizer diagnostics were almost magical. Without them, he knew he would
have scarcely noticed Vinh's agitation.More important, without the diagnostics I
wouldn't have been able to guidethe conversation, zeroing in on the topics that
needled Vinh. So yes, active manipulation did appear feasible; this wasn't simply
a snoop technique. And now he knew that Ezr Vinh had some substantial portion
of his self-image bound up in the Qeng Ho fairy tales. Could the boy actually be
turned by a different vision of those stories? Before now, he never would have
believed it. With these new tools, maybe . . .

THIRTY-SEVEN
"We should have another face-to-face talk."
". . .Okay. Look, Pham. I don't believe these lies that Nau dumped on me."
"Yeah, well everyone gets to write their own version of the past. The main
thing is, I want to give you some drill about handling that sort of ambush
interview."
"I'm sorry. For a few seconds, I thought he was on to us." The boy's voice
was faint in Pham's ear. Ezr Vinh had become quite good with their secret comm
link; good enough that Pham could hear the stunned tone in his voice.
"You did okay, though. You'll do better with some feedback training." They
talked a few moments more, setting up a time and a cover story. Then the
tenuous link was broken, and Pham was left to think on the day's events.
Damn.Today had been a disaster just barely avoided. . .or just temporarily
avoided. Pham floated in the darkened room, but his vision flitted across the gap
of kilometers, to Diamond One and Hammerfest. The localizers were
everywhere there now, and they were operational-though the MRI units in the
Focus clinic fried any nearby localizers almost immediately. Getting live
localizers onto Hammerfest was the breakthrough he had waited years for, but-If
I hadn't meddled with the diagnostics coming offVinh, we could have lost
everything.Pham had known how the Podmaster might use his new toys; similar,
if less intense, things had been going on in the temp for years. What he hadn't
guessed was that Nau would have such deadly good luck in his choice of words.
For nearly ten seconds, the boy had been sure that Nau had figured out
everything. Pham had damped the snoops' report on that reaction, and Vinh
himself had covered for it pretty well, but . . .
I never thought that Tomas Nau would know so much about me.Over the
years, the Podmaster had often claimed to be a great admirer of "the historical
giants," and he always included Pham Nuwen on his list. It had always seemed a
transparent attempt to establish a common ground with the Qeng Ho. But now,
Pham wasn't sure. While Tomas Nau had been busy "reading" Ezr Vinh, Pham
had run similar diagnostics on the Podmaster. Tomas Nau reallydid admire his
notion of the historical Pham Nuwen! Somehow, the monster thought he and
Pham Nuwen were alike.He calledme a "Bringer of Order." That rang a strange
resonance. Though Pham had never thought to use the term, it was almost what
he wished of himself.Butwe are nothing alike. Tomas Nau kills and kills and it is
for himself. All Iever wanted was an end to killing, an end to barbarism. We are

different! Pham stuffed the absurdity back in its bottle. The really amazing thing
was that Nau had so much of the true story. For the last 10Ksec, Pham had
watched over Vinh's shoulder as the boy read through much of it. Even now, he
was trickling the whole database out of Vinh's domain and into the distributed
memory of the localizer net. Over the next Msec, he would study the whole
thing.
What he had seen so far was. . .interesting. Much of it was even true. But
whether truth or lie, it was not the awed mythology that Sura Vinh had left in the
Qeng Ho histories. It was not the lie that covered Sura's ultimate treachery.And
how will Ezr Vinh take it? Pham had already been much too open with Vinh.
Vinh was totally inflexible about Focus; he just wouldn't stop whining about the
zipheads. It was strange. In his life, Pham had blithely lied to crazies and villains
and Customers and even Qeng Ho. . . but playing up to Vinh's obsession left him
exhausted. Vinh just didn't understand the miracle that Focus could make.
And there were things in Nau's archive that would make it very difficult for
Pham to disguise his true goals from the boy.
Pham dipped back into Nau's version of history, followed one story and
then another, swore at the lies that made him out to be a monster. . .winced when
the story was the truth, even if his actions had been the best he could do. It was
strange to see his real face again. Some of these videos had to be real. Pham
could almost feel the words of those speeches flowing up his throat and out his
lips. It brought back memories: the high years, when almost every destination
had brought him into contact with Traders who understood what could be made
of an interstellar trading culture. Radio had outpaced him and delivered his
message with good effect. And less than a thousand years after Little Prince
Pham had been given away to the traveling merchants, his life plan was close to
success. The idea of a true Qeng Ho had spread across most of Human Space.
From worlds on the Far Side that he might never know, to the tilled and retilled
heart of Human Space-even on Old Earth-they had heard his message, they had
seen his vision of an organization durable enough and powerful enough to stop
the wheel of fate. Yes, many of them saw nothing more than Sura had. These
were the "practical minds," only interested in making great wealth, insuring the
benefit to themselves and their Families. But Pham had thought then-and Lord, I
still want to believe now-that the majority believed in the greater goal that Pham
himself preached.
Across a thousand years of real time, Pham had left the message, the plan
for a Meeting more spectacular than any meeting before, a place and a time
where the new Qeng Ho would declare the Peace of Human Space, would agree
to serve that cause. It had been Sura Vinh who set the place:

Namqem.
True, Namqem was well on the coreward side of Human Space, but it was
near the center of heavy Qeng Ho activity. The Traders who could most certainly
participate were in relatively easy reach; they would need less than one thousand
years of lead time. Those were the reasons that Sura said. And all the time she
smiled her old disbelieving smile, as if humoring poor Pham. But Pham had
believed he would be given his chance at Namqem.
In the end, there was another reason for agreeing to meet at Namqem. Sura
had traveled so little; she had always been the planner at the center of Pham's
schemes. Decades and centuries had passed. Even with occasional coldsleep and
the best medical technology in all Human Space, Sura Vinh was now
insupportably old, five hundred years of life? six hundred? In the last century
before the Meeting, her messages made her seem so very old. If they didn't have
the Meeting at Namqem, maybe Sura would never see the success of what Pham
had worked for. Maybe Sura would never see how Pham was right.She was the
only one I totally trusted. I setmyself up for her.
And Pham drowned in an old, old rage, remembering. . .
The mother of all meetings. In a sense, the entire method and mythology
that Pham and Sura had invented had been dedicated to this single moment. So it
wasn't surprising that the arrivals were timed with unprecedented precision.
Instead of trickling in over a decade or two, five thousand ramscoops from more
than three hundred worlds were falling inward toward the Namqem system, all
to arrive within an Msec of one another.
Some had left port less than a century earlier, coming in from Canberra and
Torma. There were ships from Strentmann and Kielle, from worlds with
ethnicities that by now were almost different species.
Some had launched from so far away that they had only heard of the
Meeting by radio. There were three ships from Old Earth. Not all the Attendees
were true Traders; some were government missions hoping for the solutions in
Pham's message. Perhaps a third of the visitors' departure worlds would have
fallen from civilization in the time it took for voyage and return.
Such a meeting could not be moved or postponed. The opening of Hell
itself could not successfully deflect it. Still, decades out from port, Pham had
known that Hell was cracking open for the people of Namqem.
Pham's Flag Captain was only forty years old. He had seen a dozen worlds,
and he should have known better. But he had been born on Namqem. "They've
been civilized since before you first showed up out of the Dark, sir. They know
how to make things work. How can this be?" He looked disbelievingly at the
analysis that had arrived with Sura Vinh's latest transmission.

"Sit down, Sammy." Pham kicked a chair out from the wall, gestured for
the other to settle himself. "I've read the reports, too. The symptoms are classic.
The last decade, the rate of system deadlocks has steadily increased throughout
Namqem. See here, thirty percent of business commuting between the outer
moons is in locked state at any given time." All the hardware was in working
order, but the system complexity was so great that vehicles could not get the go-
ahead.
Sammy Park was one of Pham's best. He understood the reasons behind all
the synthetic beliefs of the new Qeng Ho-and he still embraced them. He could
make a worthy successor to Pham and
Sura-maybe better than Pham's oldest children, who were often as cautious
as their mother. But Sammy was seriously rattled: "Surely the governance of
Namqem understands the danger? They know everything Humankind has ever
learned about stability-and they have better automation than we! Surely, in
another few dozen Msecs we'll hear that they've reoptimized."
Pham shrugged, not admitting to his own disbelief.Namqem was sogood,
for so long. Aloud he said,
"Maybe. But we know they've had thirty years to work a fix." He waved at
Sura's report. "And still the problems get worse." He saw the look on Park's face,
and softened his voice. "Sammy, Namqem has had peace and freedom for almost
four thousand years. There's not another Customer civilization in all Human
Space that can say that. But that's the point. Without help, even they can't go on
forever."
Sammy's shoulders hunched down. "They've avoided the killing disasters.
They haven't had war plagues or nuclear war. The governance is still flexible and
responsive. There are just these Lord-be-damned technical problems."
"They are technicalsymptoms, Sammy, of problems I'm sure the governance
understands very well."And can't do a thing about. He remembered back to the
cynicism of Gunnar Larson. In a way this conversation was rumbling down the
same dead-end street. But Pham Nuwen had had a lifetime to think of solutions.
"The flexibility of the governance is its life and its death. They've accepted
optimizing pressures for centuries now. Genius and freedom and knowledge of
the past have kept them safe, but finally the optimizations have taken them to the
point of fragility. The megalopolis moons allowed the richest networking in
Human Space, but they are also a choke point. . . ."
"But we knew-I mean, they knew that. There were always safety margins."
Namqem was a triumph of distributed automation. And every decade it
became a little better. Every decade the flexibility of the governance responded
to the pressures to optimize resource allocation, and the margins of safety
h
k Th d
d
i l
f
b l
h
h D
A
i i

shrank. The downward spiral was far more subtle than the Dawn Age pessimism
of Karl Marx or Han Su, and only vaguely related to the insights of Mancur
Olson. The governance did not attempt direct management. Free enterprise and
individual planning were much more effective. But if you avoid all the classic
traps of corruption and central planning and mad invention, still-"In the end
there will be failures. The governance will have to take a direct hand." If you
avoided all other threats, the complexity of your own successes would eventually
get you.
"Okay, I know." Sammy looked away, and Pham synched his huds to
follow what the younger man was seeing: Tarelsk and Marest, the two largest
moons. Two billion people on each. They were gleaming disks of city lights as
they slid across the face of their mother world-which itself was the largest park
in Human Space. When the end finally came to Namqem, it would be a steep,
swift collapse. Namqem solar system was not as naturally desolate as the pure
asteroidal colonies of the early days of the Space Age. . .but the megalopolis
moons required high technology to sustain their billions. Large failures there
could easily spread into a system-wide war. It was the sort of debacle that had
sterilized more than one of Humankind's homes. Sammy watched the scene,
peaceful and wondrous-and now years out-of-date. And then he said, "I know.
This is everything you've been telling people, all the years I've been with the
Qeng Ho. And for centuries before. Sorry Pham. I always believed. . .I just never
thought my own birthplace would die, so soon."
"I. . .wonder." Pham looked across the command deck of his flag vessel
and, in smaller windows, the command decks of the other thirty ships in his
fleet. Here in midvoyage, there were only three or four people on each bridge. It
was the dullest work in the universe. But the Nuwen fleet was one of the largest
coming to the Meeting. More than ten thousand Qeng Ho slept in the holds of his
ships. They had departed Terneu just over a century ago, and flew in the closest
formation that wouldn't interfere with their ramfields. The farthest command
deck was less than four thousand light-seconds from Pham's flag. "We're still
twenty years' travel time from Namqem. That's a lot of time if we choose to
spend it on-Watch. Maybe. . .this is an opportunity to prove that what I've been
talking about can actually work. Namqem will likely be chaos by the time we
arrive. But we are help from outside their planetary trap, and we are arriving in
enough numbers to make a difference."
They were sitting on the command deck of Sammy's ship, theFarRegard.
This bridge was almost busy, with five of the thirty command posts occupied.
Sammy looked from post to post, and finally back at Pham Nuwen. Something
like hope was spreading across his face. "Yes. . .the whole reason for the

Meeting can beillustrated. " On the side he was running scheduling programs,
already caught up in the idea. "If we use contingency supplies, we can support
almost a hundred on-Watch per ship, all the way to Namqem. That's enough to
study the situation, come up with action plans. Hell, in twenty years, we should
be able to coordinate with the other fleets, too."
Sammy Park was all Flag Captain now. He stared into his calculations,
twiddling the possibilities. "Yes. The Old Earth fleet is less than a quarter light-
year from us. Half of all the Attendees are less than six light-years from us now,
and of course that distance is decreasing. What about Sura and the Qeng Ho
already in-system?"
Sura had put down roots over the centuries, but "Sura and company have
their own resources. She'll survive." Sura understood the wheel of fate, even if
she didn't believe it could be broken. She had moved her headquarters off
Tarelsk a century before; Sura's "temp" was a hoary palace in the asteroid belt.
She would guess what Pham was about to try. The wave front of her analysis
was probably headed in their direction even now. Maybe there really was a Lord
of All Trade. There was certainly an Invisible Hand. The Meeting at Namqem
would mean more than even he had imagined.
Year on year, the fleet of fleets converged upon Namqem. Five thousand
threads of light, fire flies visible across light-years-thousands of light-years to
decent telescopes. Year on year, the flares of their deceleration became tighter, a
fine ball of thistledown in the windows of every arriving ship.
Five thousand ships; more than a million human beings. The ships held
machines that could slag worlds. The ships held libraries and computer nets.. .
.And all together they were not a puff of thistledown compared to the power and
resources of a civilization like Namqem. How could a puff of thistledown save a
falling colossus? Pham had preached his answer to that question in person and
across the Qeng Ho network. Local civilizations are all isolated traps. A simple
disaster could kill them, but a little outside help might lead them to safety. And
for the nonsimple cases-like Namqem-where generations of clever optimization
finally crushed itself, even those disasters depended on the closed-system nature
of sessile civilizations. A governance had too few choices, too many debts, and
in the end it would be swept away by barbarism. An outside view, a new
automation, that was something the Qeng Ho could supply. That was what Pham
claimed would make the difference. Now he was going to get a chance to prove
his point, not just argue it. Twenty years was not too much time to get ready.
In twenty years, Namqem's once gentle decline had gone beyond
inconvenience, beyond economic recession. The governance had fallen three
times now, each time replaced by a regime designed to be "more effective"-each

time opening the way to more radical social and technical fixes, ideas that had
failed on a hundred other worlds. And with each downward step, the plans of the
approaching fleets became more precise.
People were dying now. A billion kilometers out from Namqem world, the
fleets saw the beginnings of Namqem's first war. Literally saw it with their
naked eyes: the explosions were in the gigatonne range, the destruction of a
competing governance that had seceded with two-thirds of the outer planets'
automated industry. After the detonations, only one-third of that industry
remained, but it was firmly in control of the megalopolitan regimes.
Flag Captain Sammy Park reported at a meeting: "Alqin is trying to
evacuate to the planetary surface. Maresk is on the verge of starvation; the
pipeline from the outer system will empty out just a few days before we arrive."
"The stump governance on Tarelsk seems to think they're still running a
going concern. Here is our analysis. . . ." The new speaker's Nese was fluent;
they had had twenty years now to synch their common language. This Fleet
Captain was a young. . .man. . .from Old Earth. In eight thousand years, Old
Earth had been depopulated four times. Without the existence of the daughter
worlds, the human race would have gone extinct there long ago. What lived on
Earth was strange now. None of their kind had been this far out from the center
of Human Space before. But now, as fleets made their final approach into the
Namqem system, the Old Earth ships were barely ten light-seconds from Pham's
flag. They had participated as much as anyone in setting up what they all were
calling the Rescue.
Sammy waited politely to be sure the other was finished. Chatting at many
seconds' remove took a special discipline. Then he nodded. "Tarelsk will
probably be the site of the first megadeaths, though we're not sure of the precise
cause."
Pham was sitting in the same meeting room as Sammy. He took advantage
of his location to butt in before the other's time slot was truly ended. "Give us
your summary on Sura's situation, Sammy."
"Trader Vinh is still in the main asteroid belt. She is about two thousand
light-seconds from our present location." It would still be a while before Sura
could participate firsthand. "She's supplied a lot of useful background
intelligence, but she's lost her temp and many of her ships." Sura owned a
number of estates in the belt; no doubt she was safe for the moment. "She
recommends we shift the venue of the Grand Meeting to Brisgo Gap."
Seconds drifted slowly past as they waited for comment from farther out.
Twenty seconds. Nothing from the Old Earth fleet; but that could be politeness.
Forty seconds. The Strentmannian Fleet Captain took the floor, naturally enough

a woman: "Never heard of it. Brisgo Gap?" She held up her hand, indicating she
was not giving up her speaking slot. "Okay, I see. A density-wave feature in
their asteroid belt." She gave a sour laugh. "I suppose that's a place that won't be
subject to contention. Very well, we could pick a longitude close to Trader
Vinh's holdings and all meet there. . .afterwe accomplish the Rescue."
They had come across dozens, some of them hundreds, of light-years. And
now their Grand Meeting would be in empty space. As best he could across the
time delay between them, Pham had argued with Sura about this suggestion.
Meeting in a nowhere place was a confession of failure. When theFar Regard 's
speaking turn came, Pham took the floor. "Sure, Trader Vinh is right in picking
an out-of-the-way corner of the Namqem system for the Meeting. But we've had
years to plan for the Rescue. We have our five thousand ships. We have action
strategies for each of the megalopolis populations and for those already moved
down to Namqem world. I agree with Fleet Captain Tansolet. I propose that we
execute our plan before we meet at this wherever-it-is gap."

THIRTY-EIGHT
There was a war on. Three separate megalopolitan populations were at risk.
The resources of almost a thousand ships were dedicated to suppressing the
ragtag military that had grown up in the chaos. The lander resources of two
hundred ships were sent down to the surface of Namqem itself. The world had
been a manicured park for several thousand years-but now it would become the
home of billions. Part of one megalopolis population was already down on the
surface.
More than two thousand ships were headed for Maresk. The regime there
was almost nonexistent. . .but starvation was only a few Msecs away. Much of
Maresk might be saved by a combination of subtlety and brute cargo-hauling
power.
Tarelsk still had an active governance, but it was like no governance in the
history of the Namqem system. This was something out of darker times on other
worlds, when rulers mouthed words about reconciliation-and willingly killed by
the millions. The Tarelsk governance was an unplumbed madness.
One of Sammy's analysts said, "Beating them down will be almost like an
armed conquest."
"Almost?" Pham looked up from the approach plots; every crewman was
wearing full-press coveralls and hoods. "Hell, this is the real thing." In the
simplest case, the Qeng Ho rescue mission was three coordinated coups. If they
succeeded, it would not be remembered that way. If they succeeded, each
operation would be a little miracle, salvation that the locals could not provide for
themselves. Perhaps ten times in all the histories had there been real interstellar
war across more than a couple of light-years. Pham wondered what his father
would have thought if he could have known what his throwaway son would one
day accomplish. He turned back to the approach plots. The fastest would take
50Ksec to reach
Tarelsk. "What's the latest?"
"As expected, the Tarelsk governance isn't buying our arguments. They
consider us invaders, not rescuers. And they aren't forwarding what we say to the
Tarelsk population."
"Surely the people know, though?"
"Maybe not. We've had three successful flybys." The robots had been
dropped off 4Msec before, recon darts that could make almost one-tenth
lightspeed. "We only got a millisecond look, but what we saw is consistent with

what Sura's spies are telling us. We think the governance has opted for
ubiquitous law enforcement."
Pham whistled softly. Now every embedded computing system, down to a
child's rattle, was a governance utility. It was the most extreme form of social
control ever invented. "So now they have to run everything." The notion was
terribly seductive to the authoritarian mind.. . .The only trouble was, no despot
had the resources to plan every detail in his society's behavior. Not even planet-
wrecker bombs had as dire a reputation for eliminating civilizations. The rulers
of Tarelsk had regressed far indeed. Pham leaned back in his seat. "Okay. This
makes things easier and riskier. We'll take the least-time course; these guys will
kill everyone if they are just left to themselves. Follow drop schedule nine." That
meant wave after wave of unmanned devices. The first would be fine-targeted
pulse bombs, trying to blind and numb Tarelsk's eyes and automation. Closer in,
the drops would be diggers, flooding the moon's urban areas with Qeng Ho
automation. If Pham's plans worked, Terelsk's automation would be confronted
with another system, quite alien to, and uncontrollable by, the rulers' ubiquitous
law enforcement.
Pham's fleet made a low-altitude pass by Namqem world. The maneuver
kept them out of Tarelsk's direct fire for a few thousand seconds. In itself, it was
a kind of first. Civilized systems didn't like large fusion rockets-much less
starship drives-operating in the middle of urban areas. Heavy fines, even
ostracism or confiscation were the price of such violations. For once, it was nice
to give the finger to all of that. Pham's thirty were decelerating at torch max,
more than one gee, and had been for Ksecs. They swept over Namqem's middle
north latitudes at less than two hundred kilometers-and moving at almost two
hundred kilometers per second. There was a glimpse of forests, of manicured
deserts, of the temporary cities that housed the refugees from Alqin. And then
they were heading out, their trajectory scarcely bent by the planetary mass. It
was like something out of a children's graphic, a planet literally whipping past
their viewpoint.
Just kilometers ahead of them, space was alive with hellish light, and only
some it was defensive fire. This was the real reason why high-speed flight in an
urban area was insane. The space near Namqem world had once been an orderly
scene of optimized usage. There had even been talk of setting up orbital
towers.That optimization had been successfully resisted by the governance, but
even so, low space was saturated with thousands of vehicles and satellites. In the
best of times, microcollisions had created so much junk that garbage collection
was the largest industry in near-Namqem space.
That orderly commerce had ended many Msecs earlier. The Qeng Ho

armada had not precipitated this chaos, but they were rushing through it with
bomb flares and ramfields that stretched out and sideways for hundreds of
kilometers. Pham's ramfields swept across millions of tonnes of junk and
freighters and governance military vehicles.. . .Their coming had been
announced; perhaps there were no innocent casualties. What was left behind was
as tumbled and charred as any battlefield.
Tarelsk lay directly ahead. The million lights of its great days had been put
out, either by governance fiat or by Pham's pulse bombs. But the satellite was
not dead. Casualties were as light as humanly possible. And in less than fifty
seconds Pham's ships would cut their torches. What followed would be the
riskiest time of the adventure for them personally. Without the torches, they
could not run their ramfields. . .and without the ramfields even accidental pieces
of high-speed junk could cause damage.
"Forty seconds to flameout." Their torches were already tuning down, so as
not to destroy Tarelsk's surface.
Pham scanned the reports from the other fleets: the landers down on
Namqem world, the two thousand starships moving to save the starving at
Maresk. Maresk floated like a deep-sea leviathan in the middle of a feeding
frenzy. Many of the two thousand had been able to dock. The rest hung off-
surface. The last of the freighters from the outer system was visible beyond
Maresk's limb. That huge, slow blimp had been launched Msecs earlier, when
the outermost farms were still under effective automation. The freighter was as
big as a starship, but with none of a ramscoop's structural overhead. There were
ten million tonnes of grain aboard it, enough to sustain Maresk a little while
longer.
"Twenty seconds to flameout."
Pham watched the view of Maresk for a couple of seconds more. Clouds of
lesser craft swarmed around the Qeng Ho visitors there, but they were not
fighting. The people there had not lost out to crazies as at Tarelsk.
Silver glyphs tripped across the top of Pham's view, chilling fragments of
ice. The message was from
Sura's agents on Maresk:Sabotage detected in harbored vehicles. Flee!
Flee! Flee! And the view of
Maresk vanished from Pham's huds. For a moment he was looking out
across theFar Regard 's bridge at an unembellished view back toward Namqem
world. Daylight spread serenely across two-thirds of its face. In this true view,
Maresk was hidden behind the planet.
And then the fringe of Namqem's atmosphere flared with the light of a sun,
a new sun that had been born somewhere beyond it. Two seconds later, there
th
fl
h
d th
th

was another flash, and then another.
A moment before, theFar Regard 's bridge crew had been totally intent on
the flameout countdown and preparing for the dangers that would follow the loss
of their ramfield protection. Now there was a surge of activity as they turned
startled attention upon the lights that flashed across the limb of Namqem world.
"Multigigatonne detonations around Maresk." The analyst was trying to
keep his voice level. "Our fleets near the surface-Lord-they're gone!" Gone along
with the billion-plus population of the megalopolis.
Sammy Park sat frozen, staring. Pham realized he might have to take over
the bridge. But then Sammy leaned forward against his harness, and his voice
was loud and sharp. "Tran, Lang, back to your stations. Look to our fleet!"
Another voice: "Flameout. . .now."
Pham felt the familiar, falling lightness asFar Regard 's main torch
quenched to zero. His huds showed that all thirty of his fleet had flamed out
within a hundred milliseconds of the planned instant. Less then four kilometers
ahead floated Tarelsk, so near that it did not seem a moon or a planet so much as
a landscape that stretched out and out around them. Before the coming of
Humankind, Tarelsk had been just another dead and cratered moon, scarcely
larger than the original Luna. But like Luna, the economics of transport had
brought it greatness. By the light of Namqem world, Tarelsk was a landscape of
pastels and soaring artificial mountains. And unlike old Luna, this world had
never known human-made catastrophe. . .until now.
"Closing velocity fifty-five meters per second. Range thirty-five hundred
meters." By intent, they had finished their decel so close that the other side could
not attack them without wounding themselves.But this madgovernance just
killed a billion people. "Sammy! Get usdown ! Land anywhere, hard."
"Uh-" Sammy's gaze caught his, and now he understood, too. But it was too
late.
All systems died, a vanishing that left his huds clear and silent. For the first
time in his life, Pham Nuwen felt a physical jolt on a starship. A million tonnes
of hull and shielding absorbed and smoothed out the event, butsomething had
smashed against them. Pham looked around the bridge. A crowd of voices came
through the air, reports from all over but without filtering or analysis.
"Contact nuke, by God!"
One by one, a scattering of displays came online, the backup wallpaper.
The view slid smoothly across the Tarelsk landscape and into the sky. TheFar
Regard was turning at several degrees per second. Some of the junior analysts
were climbing out of their restraints.
Sammy shouted across the bridge. "Pick up drill! Contact secondaries!"
On the single functioning window wall the Tarelsk landscape came back

On the single functioning window-wall, the Tarelsk landscape came back
into view, ramps and towers and clear domes over farmland. Tarelsk was so
large that it could almost survive without the outer-system agriculture. And they
were headed down into that at-fifteen meters per second? Without functioning
huds he couldn't see a closing velocity.
"How fast, Sammy?"
His Flag Captain shook his head. "Don't know. That nuke hit us from the
Tarelsk side, and almost on center. We can't be going more than twenty meters
per second now." But in the spinning wreck that theFar Regard had become,
there was no way they could slow down any more.
Sammy's crew were busy to distraction, trying to contact the rest of the
ship, resuming contact with the other ships of the thirty. Pham sat listening,
watching. All the thirty had been nuked. TheFar Regard was not the most or the
least damaged. As the reports trickled in, their view turned and turned. . .and the
landscape grew. Pham could see blast damage. The crazies had trashed some of
their own farms in this attack. Almost dead ahead. . .Lord. . .it was the old office
towers that he and Sura had bought in the first century.
Ship collisions came in enormous variety, from millimeter-per-second
bruisings, chiefly of interest to harbor police. . .to vast, bright flashes that wreck
planetoids and vaporize spacecraft. TheFar Regard 's encounter with Tarelsk
was something in between the extremes. A million tonnes of starship drove
downward through pressure domes and multilevel residences, but not much
faster than a human might run in a one-gee field.
A million tonnes does not stop easily. The collision went on and on and on,
a screaming, twisting fury. The city levels crushed more easily than hull metal
and drive core, but the ship and the city around it mingled into a single ruin.
It couldn't have lasted more than twenty seconds, but when it was over,
Pham and the others hung on their harnesses in the two-tenths gravity of
Tarelsk's surface. Light flickered from the buckled walls, and the displays were
mostly nonsense. Pham unlatched from his harness and slid down to walk on the
ceiling. Dust swirled near the ventilator grids, but his full-press coveralls were
tightening. The bridge itself was sucking vacuum. On the command channel, he
could hear Sammy working down through damage assessment. There had been
five hundred living people aboard theFarRegard. . . until just moments before.
"We lost all forward stowage, Fleet Captain. It'll take Ksecs to get the
bodies out. We-"
Pham climbed a wall to the hatch, and slid it open just a crack. There was a
brief gale of equalizing wind. "Our landing crews, Sammy. Are they okay?"
"Yes, sir. But-"

"Get 'em together. You can leave the others as a rescue party, but we're
going out."And kick some ass.
The next few Ksecs were confused. There was so much happening, and
happening all at once. For all the years of planning, no one had really believed
that the operation might end up as ground combat. And even the Qeng Ho
armsmen were not real fighters. Pham Nuwen had seen more blood and death in
medieval Canberra than most of them had seen in their whole lives.
But what they were fighting was not a real military either. The mad
governance of Tarelsk had not even warned the surface boroughs of the
impending collisions. Acting on their own, most people had pulled back from the
highest levels, but still, millions had died in the long, slow crushing. Pham's
teams worked their way downward, to the second-level supertrams. He had
comm with the other landings now. The people of Tarelsk were only a few years
removed from the highest technology and best education in all Human
Space.They understood the disaster; for the most part,they understood what their
mad governance did not. But they were helpless before the systems that this last
set of rulers used against them.
In his headset, Pham could hear another ship's landing party, thirty
kilometers away. They had run into ubiquitous law enforcement. "Everything is
working here, sir-against us. I lost fifteen of my people at the tram station."
"No help for it, Dav. You have pulse bombs. Use 'em, and then flood the
utility cores with our automation."
Sammy's party was slipping farther and farther away from Pham's. They
had climbed through the same rents in hull metal, but at every turning, Sammy
was going the other way. At first it didn't matter. Comm through the walls was
still easy, and the separation made them a more dispersed target. . .but hell,
Sammy was already two klicks down-east from him. Pham's party was
surrounded by locals now, and some claimed to be utility system managers,
people who could show them where to try for overrides. "Wait up, Sammy!"
The field link could support only low-rate video, so Pham couldn't see what
Sammy's team was up to.
But they were moving still farther away. After a moment: "Pham! We've
broken through the rubble into. . .a university campus. There's a blowout, and-"
A still-pic from Sammy's group popped up in Pham's huds. There was a parklike
lawn, at least several dozen locals running toward the camera-none of them
wearing pressure suits. But up near the ceiling, dust and loose papers swirled.
The audio feed was full of the high-pitched whistle of a substantial leak.
A second still-pic was mostly formed, this showing Sammy's men at work
with industrial patching equipment. The large crowd was coming out of

nowhere, some of them children-the place must be one of those inverse towers.
Sammy's voice was back on the comm. "These are my people, Pham!"
Pham remembered that the Tarelsk side of Sammy Park's family had been
academics.Damn. "Don't get sidetracked, Sammy. This place has more
floorspace than all the cities on an average planet. The chances are zero we came
down next to-"
"Not zero. . ." His voice broke in and out of audibility. ". . .didn't tell you,
seemed like a small thing. I made sureFar Regard would end up near the
Polytech."
Double damn.
"Look, we can save them, Pham! But more-they've been waiting for us.. .
.Some of Sura's people are here. Between them, they've got the core utility plans.
. .and some of the new regime's software changes. Pham, they think they know
where the screwballs are holed up!"
Maybe it was a good thing that Sammy had had his own agenda; as ground
combateers, the Qeng Ho pretty much stank. But with the core utility plans, they
had a good fix on the governance and its control net.
Ten Ksec later, Pham had a comm link with the madmen who called
themselves governance: a half-dozen red-eyed, panicky people. Their leader
wore a uniform that might once have been from park maintenance. They were an
endpoint of civilization.
"There's nothing you can do but make things worse," Pham told them.
"Nonsense. We have Tarelsk. We've wiped you and the gluttons at Maresk.
We have more than enough resources to make Tarelsk self-sufficient. With you
gone, we will bring a new order." And then the video wavered and faded; Pham
never knew if the break was deliberate or just the fractured comm system.
It didn't matter. The conversation had lasted long enough to identify the
intermediate nodes. And Pham Nuwen's forces had hardware and software that
was outside the heredity of Namqem. With their equipment and the help of the
local population, the mad governance couldn't survive more than a few more
Ksecs.
When it was gone, the hardest work of the Rescue began.

THIRTY-NINE
The Qeng Ho Grand Meeting was held 20Msec later. Namqem solar system
was still a disaster area.
Alqin was mostly empty, its people camped on Namqem world, but not
starving. Maresk, the smallest moon, was a radioactive wreck; rebuilding it
would be the work of centuries. Almost a billion people had died there. But the
last food shipment had been saved, the outer system agri automation restarted,
and there was enough food for the two billion survivors on Tarelsk. The
automation of Namqem had been trashed, and was operating at perhaps ten
percent of its predebacle efficiency. The people of Namqem system who had
survived till now would live to rebuild. There would be no extinction, no dark
age. The survivors' grandchildren would wonder at the terror of this time.
But there still was no civilized venue for the Grand Meeting. Pham and
Sura stuck by the original decision. The Meeting would be out in Brisgo Gap,
the most deserted place in the middle system. At least there was no destruction
to look upon there, no local problems to solve. From Brisgo Gap, Namqem
world and its three moons were just a blue-green disk and three spots of light.
Sura Vinh used the last of her asteroid resources to build the Grand Meeting
temp. Pham had hoped that she would be impressed by the success that the Qeng
Ho Plan had had. "We saved the civilization, Sura. Surely you believe me now.
We can be more than furtive traders."
But Sura Vinh was so old now. At the dawn of civilization, medical science
had promised immortality. In the early millennia, progress had been rapid. Two
hundred years of life, even three hundred, were achieved. After that, each
advance was less impressive and more costly. And so Humankind had gradually
lost another of its naive dreams. Coldsleep might postpone death for thousands
of years, but even with the best medical support, you couldn't expect much more
than five hundred years of real lifetime. It was the ultimate limit on one man's
reach. And getting near that limit took an awful toll.
Sura's powered chair was more like a mobile hospital ward than a piece of
furniture. Her arms twitched up, weak even in zero gee. "No, Pham," she said.
Her eyes were clear and green as ever, surely transplants or artificial. Her voice
was more obviously synthetic, but Pham could hear the familiar smile in it. "The
Grand Meeting must decide, remember? We've never agreed on your plans. The
point of coming together was to put the issue to a vote."
That was what Sura had said ever since the earliest centuries, when she'd

realized that Pham would never give up his dream.Oh, Sura, I don'twant to hurt
you, but if my view must explicitly win over yours, so be it.
The temp that Sura towed into the middle of Brisgo Gap was enormous,
even by the standards of her predebacle holdings. The starships of all the
surviving fleets could moor at it, and Sura provided security extending out more
than two million kilometers beyond the Gap.
The temp's central volume was a zero-gee meeting hall. It was probably the
grandest in history, large beyond all practical use. For Msecs before the Meeting
itself, there was socializing, the largest single meeting of Traders there had ever
been, probably the largest that would ever be. Pham took every Ksec he could
from the rescue schedules to participate. Every day, he was making more
contacts, interacting more than he could in a century of his life until now.
Somehow he had to convert the doubters. And there were so many of them. They
were basically decent, but so cautious and clever. Many of them were his own
descendants. Their admiration-even their affection-seemed sincere, but he was
never sure how many he had really convinced. Pham realized that he was edgier
than he had ever been in combat, or even in hard trading.Never mind, he told
himself. He had waited all his life for this. Small wonder that he should be
nervous when the final test was just Msecs away.
The last Msecs before the Meeting were a frantic rearrangement of
schedules. Namqem solar system still lacked decent automation. There would
probably be a decade more during which outside help would be necessary to
keep things from backsliding, to make sure that no more opportunists surfaced.
But Pham wanted his own people at the Meeting. And Sura didn't play games
with his wish. Together, they set up a scheme that would bring all Pham's people
to the temp, and still not put the new governance of Namqem at risk.
And finally, Pham's time came. His one, greatest opportunity to make
things work. He looked out past the veil of the entrance curtains, at the sweep of
the hall. Sura had just finished her introduction of Pham and was departing the
speaker's platform. Applause swept up from every direction. "Lord-" Pham
muttered.
Behind him, Sammy Park said, "Nervous, sir?"
"Damn straight." In fact, only once had he ever been frightened just this
way. . .when as a little boy he had stepped onto a starship's bridge and
confronted the Traders of the Qeng Ho for the first time. He turned to look at his
Flag Captain. Sammy was smiling. Since the rescues of Tarelsk, he had seemed
happier than ever before. Too bad. He might not be starfaring again, not with
Pham's fleet, anyway. The people his crew had rescued, they really were his own
family. And that cute little great-great-grandniece of his: Jun was a good person,

but she had her own ideas about what Sammy should do with his life. Sammy
stuck out his hand. "G-good luck, sir."
And then Pham was through the curtains. He passed Sura on his way up.
There was no time to speak, no way to hear. Her frail hand brushed his cheek.
He rose to the central platform through wave upon wave of applause.Be calm.
There were still at least twenty seconds before he had to say anything.Nineteen,
eighteen. . . The Great Hall was nearly seven hundred meters across, and built in
the most ancient tradition of an auditorium. His audience was an almost
complete sphere of humanity, stationed at their ease along the inner surface of
the hall, and facing on the tiny speaker's platform. Pham looked this way and
that, and up and down, and wherever he looked faces looked back. Correction:
There was a swath of empty seats, nearly a hundred thousand, for the Qeng Ho
who died in the destruction of Maresk. Sura had insisted on that layout-to honor
the dead. Pham had agreed, but he knew that it was also Sura's way of reminding
everyone that what Pham proposed could have a terrible price.
Pham raised his arms as he reached the platform. All across his field of
view, he saw the Qeng Ho responding. After a second, their applause came even
louder to his ears. Through clear huds, he could not make out faces. From this
distance, he could only guess at them according to the seating pattern. There
were women all across the crowd. In a few places, they were rare. In most
places, they were as common as the men. In some places-the Strentmannian
Qeng Ho-women were the overwhelming majority. Maybe he should have
appealed more to them; since Strentmann, he had come to realize that women
can have the longest view. But the prejudices of medieval Canberra still had
some subtle hold on him, and Pham had never really figured out how to lead
women.
He turned his palms outward, and waited as the shouting gradually faded.
The words of his speech floated in silver before his eyes. He had spent years
thinking on this speech, and Msecs since the Rescue, polishing every nuance,
every word.
But suddenly he didn't need the little silver glyphs. Pham's eyes saw past
them to the humanity all around, and his words came effortlessly forth.
"My people!"
The crowd noise died to near silence. A million faces looked up at him,
across at him, down at him.
"You hear my voice now with barely a second's time lag. Here in Meeting,
we hear our fellow Qeng Ho, even those from far Earth, in less than a second.
For this first and maybe only time, we can see what we all are. And we can
decide what we will be.
"M
l
l i
W h
li h
i
d

"My people, congratulations. We have come across light-centuries and
rescued a great civilization from extinction. We did this despite the most terrible
treachery." He paused, gestured solemnly at the sweep of empty seats.
"Here at Namqem, we have broken the wheel of history. On a thousand
worlds, Humankind has fought and fought, and even made itself extinct. The
only thing that saves the race is time and distance-and until now that has also
condemned humanity to repeat its failures.
"The old truths still hold: Without a sustaining civilization, no isolated
collection of ships and humans can rebuild the core of technology. But at the
same time: Without help from outside, no sessile civilization can persist."
Pham paused. He felt a wan smile steal across his face. "And so there is
hope. Together, the two halves of what Humankind has become can make the
whole live forever." He looked all around, and let his huds magnify individual
faces. They were listening. Would they finally agree? "The whole can live
forever. . .if we can make the Qeng Ho more than mere sellers to customers."
Pham didn't remember much of the actual speaking of his speech; the ideas
and the entreaties were such deep habits in his mind. His recollection was of the
faces, the hope he saw in so many, the guarded caution he saw in so many more.
In the end, he reminded them that a vote would be coming up, a final call on
everything he had ever asked for. "So. Without your help we will surely fail,
destroyed by the same wheel that crushes our Customer civilizations. But if you
look just a little beyond the trade of the moment, if you make this extra
investment in the future, then no dream will be beyond our ultimate reach."
If the hall had been under acceleration, or on a planetary surface, Pham
would have stumbled coming down from the platform. As it was, Sammy Park
had to snag him as he passed the entrance curtains.
Above their heads, past the curtains, the sound of applause seemed to be
getting louder.
Sura had remained in the anteroom, but there were other new faces-Ratko,
Butra, and Qo. His first children, now older than he was.
"Sura!"
Her chair gave a littlechuff, and she floated across the space between them.
"Will you congratulate me on my speech?" Pham grinned, still feeling
giddy. He extended his hands, gently took Sura's. She was so frail, so old.Oh
Sura! This should be our triumph. Sura was going to lose this one. And now she
was so old, she would never see it as anything but defeat. She would never see
what they both had wrought.
The applause above them grew still louder. Sura glanced up. "Yes. In every
way, you have done better than I had thought. But then, you have always done
better than anyone could imagine " Her synthetic voice managed to sound sad

better than anyone could imagine." Her synthetic voice managed to sound sad
and proud at the same time. She gestured away from the anteroom and the noise.
Pham followed her out, and the sounds faded behind him. "But you know how
much of this is luck, don't you?" she continued. "You wouldn't have had a
chance if Namqem hadn't come apart just as the fleet of fleets arrived."
Pham shrugged. "It was good luck indeed. But it proved my point, Sura!
We both know that a collapse like this can be the deadliest-and we saved them."
What he could see of Sura's body was clothed in a quilted business suit that
could not disguise the gauntness of her limbs. But her mind and will remained,
sustained by the medical unit in her chair. Sura's shake of the head was as
forceful and almost as natural as when she'd been a young woman. "Saved them?
You made a difference certainly, but billions still died. Be honest, Pham. It took
a thousand years for us to set up this meeting. It's not the sort of thing that can be
done every time some civilization goes down the toilet. And without the Maresk
die-off, even your five thousand ships would not have been enough. The whole
system would be at the edge of its carrying capacity, with still greater disasters
in the near future."
All that had occurred to Pham; he had argued against variants of the point
for Msecs before the Meeting. "But Namqem is the hardest rescue we could
possibly face, Sura. An old civilization, entrenched, a civilization exploiting
every solar-system resource. We would have had a much easier time with a
world threatened with bio-plague or even a totalitarian religion."
Sura was shaking her head. Even now she ignored what Pham set before
her. "No. In most cases, you can make a difference, but more often than not it
will be like Canberra-a small difference for the better, and written in Trader
blood. You're right: Without the fleet of fleets, civilization would have died here
in Namqem system. But some people would have survived on Namqem world;
some of the asteroid-belt urbs might have survived. The old story would have
been repeated, and someday there would be civilization here again, even if by
external colonization. You have bridged that abyss, and billions are rightly
grateful. . .but it will take years of careful management to bring this system back.
Maybe we here"-her hand twitched in the direction of the Meeting Hall-"can do
that, and maybe not. But I know that we can't do it for the universe and for all
time." Sura did something, and her chairchuff 'd to a halt.
She turned, extended her arms to touch Pham's shoulders. And suddenly
Pham had the strangest feeling, almost a kinesthetic memory, of looking up into
her face and feeling her hands on his shoulders. It was a memory from before
they were partners, before they were lovers. A memory from their earliest time
on theReprise: Sura Vinh, the young woman, serious. There were times when

she'd gotten so angry with little Pham Nuwen. There were times when she'd
reached out to grab his shoulders, tried to hold him still long enough to make
him understand what his young barbarian mind chose to ignore. "Son, don't you
see? We span all Human Space, but we can't manage whole civilizations. You'd
need a race of loving slaves to do it. And we Qeng Ho will never be that."
Pham forced himself to look back into Sura's eyes. She had argued this
since the beginning, and never wavered.I should have known it would cometo
this someday. So now she would lose, and Pham could do nothing to help her.
"I'm sorry Sura. When you give your speech, you can say this to a million
people. Many of them will believe. And then we'll allvote. And-" And from what
he had seen in the Great Hall, and what he saw in Sura Vinh's eyes. . .for the first
time, Phamknew that he had won.
Sura turned away, and her artificial voice was soft. "No. I won't be giving
that speech. Elections? Funny that you should be depending on them now.. .
.We've heard how you ended the Strentmannian Pogrom."
The change in topic was absurd, but the comment touched a nerve. "I was
down to one ship, Sura. What would you have done?"I saved theirdamn
civilization, the part that wasn't monstrous.
Sura raised her hand. "I'm sorry.. . .Pham, you are just too lucky, too good."
She seemed almost to be talking to herself now. "For almost a thousand years,
you and I have worked to make this meeting. It was always a sham, but along the
way, we created a trading culture that may last as long as your optimistic
dreams. And I always knew that in the end, when we were all face-to-face in a
Grand Meeting, common sense would prevail." She shook her head, and a smile
quavered. "But I never imagined that luck would give you the Namqem debacle
so perfectly timed-or that you would master it like magic. Pham, if we follow
your way, we'll likely have disaster here in Namqem within a decade. In a few
centuries, the Qeng Ho will fragment into a dozen dozen conflicting structures
that all think themselves 'interstellar governances.' And the dream we shared will
be destroyed.
"You're right, Pham. You might win the election. . .and that's why there
won't be one, at least not the kind you think."
The words didn't register for a moment. Pham Nuwen had been exposed to
treachery a hundred times.
The sense for it was burned into him before he'd ever seen a starship. But. .
.Sura? Sura was the only one he could always trust, his savior, his lover, his best
friend, the one he'd schemed with for a lifetime. And nowPham looked around
the room, his mind undergoing a change-of-ground more profound than any in
his life. Besides Sura, there were Sura's aides, six of them. There were also

Ratko and Butra and Qo. Of his own assistants-there was only Sammy Park.
Sammy stood a little off to the side; he looked sick.
Finally, he looked back at Sura. "I don't understand. . .but whatever the
game, there's no way you can change the election. A million people heard me."
Sura sighed. "They heard you, and you might have a bare majority in a fair
election. But many you think supported you. . .are really with me."
She hesitated, and Pham looked again at his three children. Ratko avoided
his gaze, but Butra and Qo looked back with grim steadiness. "We never wanted
to hurt you, Papa," Ratko said, finally looking at him. "We love you. This whole
charade of a meeting was supposed to show you that the Qeng Ho could not be
what you wished. But it didn't go the way we expected-"
Ratko's words didn't matter. It was the look on his children's faces. It was
the same closed stoniness of Pham's brothers and sisters, one Canberra morning.
And all the love in between. . .a charade?
He looked back at Sura. "So how do you propose to win? With the sudden,
accidental death of half a million people? Or just the selective assassination of
thirty thousand hard-core Nuwenists? It won't work, Sura. There are too many
good people out there. Maybe you can win this day, but the word will remain,
and sooner or later, you'll have your civil war."
Sura shook her head. "We're not killing anyone, Pham. And the word won't
go out, at least not widely.
Your speech will be remembered by those in the hall, but their recorders-
most are using our information utilities. Our free hospitality, remember?
Ultimately your speech will be polished into something. . .safer."
Sura continued, "Over the next twenty Ksec, you will be in special meeting
with your opposition. Coming out of that you will announce a compromise: The
Qeng Ho will put a much greater effort into our network information services,
the sort of thing that can help rebuild civilizations. But you will withdraw your
notion of interstellar governance, convinced by the arguments of the rest of us."
A charade. "You could fake that. But afterwards, you'll still have to kill a
lot of people."
"No. You will announce your new goal, an expedition to the far side of
Human Space. It will be clear that this is partly out of bitterness, but you will
wish us well. Your far fleet is almost ready, Pham, about twenty degrees back
along the Gap. We have equipped it honestly and well. Your fleet's automation is
unusually good, far more expensive than what would be profitable. You won't
need a continuous Watch, and the first wake-up will be centuries from now."
Pham looked from face to face. Something like Sura's treachery could
work, but only if most of the Fleet Captains that he thought supported him were

really like Ratko and Butra and Qo. And then only if they had set up proper lies
with their own people. "How. . .long have you been planning this, Sura?"
"Ever since you were a young man, Pham. Most of the years of my life. But
I prayed it would never come to this."
Pham nodded, numb. If she had planned that long, there would be no
obvious mistakes. It didn't matter. "My fleet awaits, you say?" His lips twisted
around the words. "And all the incorrigibles will surely be its crew. How many?
Thirty thousand?"
"A good deal less, Pham. We've studied your hard-core supporters very
carefully."
Given the choice, who wanted to go on a one-way trip to forever? They had
been very careful to keep those supporters out of this room. All but Sammy.
"Sammy?"
His Flag Captain met his eyes, but his lips were trembling. "Sir. I'm s-sorry.
Jun wants a different life for me. We-we're still Qeng Ho, but we can't ship with
you."
Pham inclined his head. "Ah."
Sura floated closer, and Pham realized that if he pushed off, he could
probably grab the handle on her chair and ram his fist right through her scrawny
quilted chest.And break my hand for the effort. Sura's heart had been a machine
for centuries. "Son? Pham? It was a beautiful dream, and along the way it made
us what we are. But in the end it was just a dream. A failed dream."
Pham turned away without responding. Now there were guards by the
doors, waiting to escort him. He didn't look at his children. He brushed past
Sammy Park without a word. From somewhere in the still, cold depths of his
heart, something wished his Flag Captain well. Sammy had betrayed him, but
not like the others. And no doubt Sammy believed the lies about a far fleet. He
hoped that Sammy would never see through them. Who would ever pay for a
fleet such as Sura described? Not crafty merchants like Sura Vinh and her stone-
faced children and the others who had plotted this day. Far cheaper, far safer to
build a fleet of real coffins.My father would haveunderstood. The best enemies
are the ones who sleep without end.
Then Pham was in a long corridor, surrounded by guards who were also
strangers. His last vision of Sura's face still hung in Pham's imagination. There
had been tears in the old woman's eyes. One last fakery.
A tiny cabin, mostly dark. The kind of room a junior officer might have in a
small temp. Work jackets floated in a closet bag. A lapel tag whispered, and a
name floated in his eyes:Pham Trinli.
As always, when Pham let the anger fill him, the memories were more vivid
h
h d
d h
h
ki d f
ki
S
' "f

than any huds, and the return to the present was a kind of mocking. Sura's "far
fleet" had not been a fleet of coffins. Even now, two thousand years after Sura's
betrayal, Pham still could not explain that. Most likely, there had been other
traitors, ones with some power and some conscience, who had insisted that Pham
and those who wouldn't betray him must not be killed. The "fleet" had been
scarcely more than refitted ram barges, with space for nothing but the refugees
and their coldsleep tanks. But there had been a separate trajectory for each ship
of the "fleet." A thousand years later, they were scattered across the width and
height of Human Space.
They had not been killed, but Pham had learned his lesson. He had begun
his slow, silent journey back. Sura was beyond mortal reach. But there was still
the Qeng Ho that he and she had created, the Qeng Ho that had betrayed him. He
still had his dream.
. . .And he would have died with it at Triland, if Sammy had not dug him
up. Now fate and time had handed him a second chance: the promise of Focus.
Pham shook away the past, and readjusted the localizers at his temple and
in his ear. There was more work than ever to be done. He should have risked
more face-to-face meetings with Vinh before now. With good feedback drills,
Vinh could learn to handle shocks like this crazy Nau interview, without giving
everything away. Yeah, that was the easy part. The hard part would be to keep
him distracted from where Pham was ultimately headed.
Pham turned in his sleeping bag, let his breathing shift to a light snore.
Behind his eyes, the images shifted to the action traces he was running on
Reynolt and the snoops. He had fooled them again. In the long run. . .? If there
weren't any more stupid surprises, in the long run, Anne Reynolt was still the
greatest threat.

FORTY
Hrunkner Unnerby flew into Calorica Bay on the First Day of the Dark.
Over the years, Unnerby had been at Calorica a number of times. Hell, he'd been
here right after mid-Brightness, when the bottom of the pit was still a boiling
cauldron. In the years after that, the edge of the mountains had harbored a small
town of construction engineers. During the mid-Brightness, conditions were
hellish even at high altitude, but the workers were very well paid; the launch
facilities farther up in the altiplano were funded by a combination of royal and
commercial monies, and after Hrunk installed good cooling machines, it wasn't
an uncomfortable place to live. The rich people hadn't begun showing up until
the Waning Years, settling as they had for each of the last five generations, in
the caldera wall.
But of all Hrunk's visits, this had the strangest feel. The First Day of the
Dark. It was a boundary in the mind more than anywhere else-and perhaps that
made it even more important.
Unnerby had taken a commercial flight out of High Equatoria, but it was no
tourister. High Equatoria might be only five hundred miles away, but it was as
far as you could get from the wealth of Calorica Bay on the First Day of the
Dark. Unnerby and his two assistants-bodyguards actually-waited until the other
passengers had clambered forward along the aisle webway. Then they pulled
down their parkas and heated leggings and the two panniers that were the whole
reason for the flight. Just short of the exit hatch, Hrunkner lost his grip on the
webbing and one of the panniers fell by the feet of the aircraft's steward. The all-
weather covering split partway open, revealing the contents to be shale-colored
powder, carefully wrapped in plastic sacks.
Hrunkner dropped from the aisle webbing and refastened the pannier. The
steward laughed, bemused. "I've heard it said High Equatoria's best export was
plain mountain dirt-never expected to see anyone take it seriously."
Unnerby shrugged his embarrassment. Sometimes that was the best cover.
He reshouldered the pannier and made to button his parka.
"Ah, um." The steward seemed about to say something more, but then
stepped back and bowed them off the aircraft. The three of them rattled down the
ladders to the tarmac, and suddenly it was obvious what else the fellow had been
about to say. Just an hour ago, as they were leaving High Equatoria, the air had
been eighty below freezing and the wind over twenty miles per hour. They had
needed heated breathers just to walk from the High Eq terminal to the aircraft.

Here. . ."By damn, this place is a furnace!" Brun Soulac, his junior security
agent, set down her pannier and shrugged out of her parka.
The senior agent laughed, though she was guilty of the same foolishness.
"What do you expect, Brun! It's Calorica Bay."
"Yeah, but this is the First Day of the Dark!"
Some of the other passengers had been similarly shortsighted. They made a
grotesque parade, hopping about as they shed parkas and breathers and leggings.
Even so, Unnerby noticed that whenever Brun's hands and feet were totally
occupied with shedding cold-weather gear, Arla Undergate had free hands and a
clear view around them. Brun was similarly alert when Arla was shucking her
overclothes. By some magic, their service pistols were never visible during the
exercise. They could act like idiots, but underneath the act, Arla and Brun were
as good as any soldiers Unnerby had known in the Great War.
The mission to High Equatoria might have been low-tech and low-key, but
the Intelligence team in the airport was efficient enough. The bags of rock flour
were carted off in armored cars; even more impressive, the major in charge had
not even wisecracked about the absurdity of the operation.
Inside of thirty minutes, Hrunk and his now not-so-relevant bodyguards
were out on the street.
"What d'ya mean, 'not relevant'?" Arla waved her arms in exaggerated
wonder. "Not relevant was shepherding that. . .stuff across the continent."
Neither of the two knew the importance of the rock flour, and they had not been
shy in showing their contempt for it. They were good agents, but they didn't have
the attitude Hrunk was used to. "Now we have something important to guard."
She jerked a hand in Unnerby's direction, and there was something serious
behind the good humor. "Why didn't you make our life easy, and go with the
major's people?"
Hrunkner smiled back. "It's more than an hour before I meet the chief.
Plenty of time to walk the distance. Aren't you curious, Arla? How many
ordinary folks get to see Calorica on the First Day of the Dark?"
Arla and Brun glowered at that, the look of noncoms confronted by stupid
behavior that they could not correct. Unnerby had felt that way often enough in
his life, though normally he hadn't shown his disapproval so obviously. The
Kindred had demonstrated more than once their willingness to be violent on
other peoples' lands.But I've lived seventy-five years, andthere are so many
things to be afraid of. He was already moving away, toward the lights at the
water's edge. Unnerby's usual bodyguards, the ones who accompanied him on
his foreign site visits, would have bodily restrained him. Arla and Brun were
loaners, not so well briefed. After a moment, they scurried forward to pace him.

But Arla was talking into her little telephone. Unnerby grinned to himself. No,
these two weren't stupid.I wonder if I'll notice the agents she's calling.
Calorica Bay had been a wonder of the world since the earliest times. It was
one of only three volcanic sites known-and the other two were under ice and
ocean. The bay itself was actually the broken-down bowl of the volcano, and
ocean waters drowned most of its central pit.
In the early years of a New Sun, it was a hell of hells, though no one had
directly observed the place then. The steeply curving walls of the bowl
concentrated the sun's light and the temperatures climbed above the melting
point of lead. Apparently this provoked-or allowed-fast lava seepage, and a
continuous series of explosions, leaving new crater walls by the time the sun had
dimmed to mid-Brightness. Even in those years, only the most foolhardy
explorers poked themselves over the altiplano rim of the bowl.
But as the sun dimmed into the Waning Years of its cycle, a different
visitor appeared. As northern and southern lands found winters that were steadily
harsher, now the highest reaches of the bowl were pleasant and warm. And as
the world cooled, lower and lower parts of the bowl became first accessible, and
then a paradise. Over the last five generations, Calorica Bay had become the
most exclusive resort of the Waning Years, the place where people so rich that
they didn't have to save and work to prepare for the Dark could come and enjoy
themselves. At the height of the Great War, when Unnerby was pounding snow
on the Eastern Front, and even later, when most of the war was tunnel fighting-
even then, he remembered seeing tinted engravings showing the life of mid-
Brightness leisure that the idle rich led at the bottom of Calorica's bowl.
In a way, Calorica at the beginning of the Dark was like the world that
modern engineering and atomic energy were bringing to the entire race of
Spiders, for all the years of the Dark. Unnerby walked toward the music and
lights ahead, wondering what he would see.
• • •
The crowds swirled everywhere. There was laughter and pipe music and
occasional argument. And the people were strange in so many ways that for a
while Unnerby did not notice the most important things.
He let the crowd motion jostle them this way and that like particles in a
suspension. He could imagine how nervous Arla and Brun felt about this mob of
uncleared strangers. But they made the most of it, blending into the rowdy noise,
just accidentally staying within arm's reach of Unnerby. In a matter of minutes,
the three had been swept down to the water's edge. Some in the crowd waved
burning sticks of incense but there was a stronger perfume here at the bottom of

burning sticks of incense, but there was a stronger perfume here at the bottom of
the crater, a sulfurous odor that drifted on the warm breeze. Across the water, at
the middle of the bay, molten rock glowed in red and near-red and yellow. Steam
floated up, wraithlike, all round the center pile. This was one body of water
where no one need worry about bottom ice and leviathans-though a volcanic
blast would kill them all just as dead.
"Damn!" Brun slipped out of character, jostled Unnerby back from the edge
of the plaza. "Look out there in the water. There are people drowning!"
Unnerby stared a second at where she was pointing. "Not drowning.
They're. . .by the Dark, they're playing in the water!" The half-submerged figures
were wearing some sort of pontoons to keep from sinking. The three of them just
stared, and he noticed they were not alone in their surprise, though most of the
onlookers tried to cover their shock. Why would anyoneplay at drowning? For a
military goal perhaps; in warmer times, both Kindred and Accord had warships.
Thirty feet down the stone palisade, another reveler splashed into the water.
Suddenly, the water's edge seemed like the edge of a deadly cliff. Unnerby
backed off, away from the screams of delight or horror that came from the water.
The three of them drifted across the bottom plaza toward light-bedecked trees.
Here, in the open, they had a clear view of the sky and the caldera walls.
It was midafternoon, yet except for the cool-colored lights in the trees, and
the heat colors from cratercenter, it was as dark as any night. The sun looked
down on them, a faint blotch in the sky, a reddish disk pocked with small dark
marks.
The First Day of the Dark. Religions and nations set minor variations in the
date. The New Sun began with an explosive blaze of light, though no one was
alive to see it. But the end of the light-that was a slow waning that extended
across almost the whole of the Brightness. For the last three years, the sun had
been a pale thing, scarcely warming your back at high noon, dim enough to stare
at with a fully open gaze. For the last year, the brighter stars had been visible all
through the day. But even that was not officially the beginning of the Dark,
though it was a sign that green plants couldn't grow anymore, that you'd better
have your main food supplies in your deepness, and that tuber and grub farms
would be all that could sustain you until it came time to retreat beneath the earth.
So in that gradual slide toward oblivion, what was it that marked the
instant-the day at least-that was the first of the Dark? Unnerby stared straight at
the sun. It was the color of a warm stovetop, but so dim he felt no warmth. It
would get no dimmer. Now the world would simply grow colder and colder and
colder with nothing more than starlight and that reddish disk to light it. From
now on, the air would always be too cold to be easily breathed. In past
generations this marked the beginning of the final rush to store the necessities in

generations, this marked the beginning of the final rush to store the necessities in
one's deepness. In past generations, it marked the last chance for a father to
provide for his cobblies' future. In past generations, it marked a time of high
nobility and great treason and cowardice, when all those who were not quite
prepared were confronted by the fact of the Dark and the cold.
Here, today-Hrunk's attention moved to those on the plaza between him and
the trees. There were some-old cobbers and many from the proper current
generation-who raised their arms to the sun and then lowered them to embrace
the earth and the promise that the long sleep should represent.
But the air around them was mild as a summer evening in the Middle
Years. And the ground was warm, as if the sun of the Middle Years had just set
and left the afternoon heat to seep up at them. Most of the people around them
were not acknowledging the departure of light. They were laughing, singing-and
their clothes were as bright and expensive as if they'd never given any thought to
the future. Maybe the rich had always been like that.
The cool-colored lights in the trees must be powered by the main fission
plant that Unnerby's companies had built in the highlands above the caldera,
almost five years ago. They turned the bottomland forest all aglimmer. Someone
had imported lazy woodsfairies, released them by the tens of thousands. Their
wings glistened blue and green and far-blue in the light, as the creatures swirled
in sympathy with the crowds under the trees.
In the forest, the people danced in piles, and some of the youngest ones ran
up into the trees to play with the fairies. The music became frantic as they
walked to the center of the grove and started up a gentle incline that would lead
to the bottom estates. By now he was used to the sight of out-of-phase people.
Even though his instincts still called them a perversion, they really were
necessary. He liked and respected many of them. On either side of him, Arla and
Brun were unobtrusively clearing the way for him. Both his guards were
oophase, about twenty years old, just a little younger than Little Victory must be
now. They were good cobbers, as good as any he had ever fought alongside of.
Yes, case by case, Hrunkner Unnerby had come to terms with his revulsion. But.
. .I've never seen so manyoophases, all together.
"Hey, old fellow, come dance with us!" Two young ladies and a male
pounced on him. Somehow Arla and Brun got him free, all the time pretending
to be jolly dancers themselves. In the darkened space beneath one tree, Unnerby
got a glimpse of what looked like a fifteen-year-old's molt. It was as if all the
carven images of sin and laziness had suddenly become real. Sure, the air was
pleasantly warm, but it carried the stench of sulfur. Sure, the ground was
pleasantly warm, but he knew that it was not sun's warmth. Instead, it was a heat
in the earth itself that extended down and down like heat from a rotting body

in the earth itself that extended down and down, like heat from a rotting body.
Any deepness dug here would be a death trap, so warm that the sleepers' flesh
would rot in their shells.
Unnerby didn't know how Arla and Brun managed it, but eventually they
were on the far side of the forest. Here there were still the crowds and the trees-
but the mania of the bottom was muted. The dancing was sedate enough that
clothes were not torn. Here, the woodsfairies felt safe enough to land on their
jackets, to sit and swing the colored lace of their wings with lazy impudence.
Everywhere else in the world, these creatures had lost their wings years ago.
Five years ago, Unnerby had walked through Princeton streets after a heavy
frost, his boot tips crunching through thousands of colored petals, the wings of
sensible woodsfairies, now burrowing deep to lay their tiny eggs. The lazy
variant might have a few more summer seasons of life, but they were doomed. .
.or should have been.
The three walked higher and higher, up the first slopes of the crater wall.
Ahead, the mansions of the Late Waning stretched in a ring of light all the way
around the wall. Of course, none of these was more than ten years old, but most
were built in the parasol-and-bauble style of the last generation. The buildings
were new, but the money and the families were old. Almost every estate was a
radial property, extending up the crater wall. The mansions of the early waning,
halfway up the wall, were often dark, their open architecture unusable. Unnerby
could see the glisten of snow on those higher mansions. Sherkaner's place was
up there somewhere, among those rich enough to weatherize the high ground of
an estate, but too cheap to rebuild down at the bottom. Sherkaner knew that even
Calorica Bay could not escape the Dark of the Sun. . .it took nuclear power to do
that.
Between the lights of the bottom forest and the ring of estates, there was
shadow. The woodsfairies took off, their wings faintly glistening, to fly back to
the bottom. The sulfur smell was faint, not as sharp as the clean chill of the air.
Above them, the sky was dark but for the stars and the pale disk of the sun. That
was real, the Dark. Unnerby just stared for a moment, trying to ignore the lights
of the bottom. He tried to laugh. "So which would you rather have, cobbers,
some honest enemy action or another run through that mob?"
Arla Undergate's answer was serious. "I'd opt for the mob, of course. But. .
.that was very strange."
"Scary, you mean." Brun sounded downright uneasy.
"Yeah," said Arla. "But did you notice? A lot of those cobbers were scared,
too. I don't know, it's like they're all-we're all-lazy woodsfairies. When you look
up andsee the Dark, when you see that the sun has died. . .you feel awfully

small."
"Yeah." Unnerby didn't know what more to say. These two youngsters were
oophase. Surely, they hadn't been submerged in trad notions all their lives. And
yet they had some of the same gut misgivings as Hrunkner Unnerby. Interesting.
"C'mon. The funicular station is around here someplace."

FORTY-ONE
Most of the midlevel mansions were huge things, stone and heavy timber
frontis-halls, extending back to natural caves in the crater wall. Hrunkner had
been expecting some kind of "Hill House South," but in fact Underhill's place
was a disappointment. It looked like a guest house for one of the real mansions,
and much of the space inside was shared with security staff, doubled now that
the chief was in residence. Unnerby was informed that his precious cargo had
already been delivered, and that he would be called for soon. Arla and Brun
collected their receipt for delivering him, and Hrunk was shown into a not-so-
spacious staff lounge. He passed the afternoon reading some very old news
magazines.
"Sergeant?" It was General Smith, standing in the doorway. "Sorry for the
delay." She wore an unmarked quartermaster uniform, very much like Strut
Greenval used to wear. Her figure was almost as lean and delicate as ever,
though her gestures seemed a little inflexible. Hrunkner followed her back
through the security section, and then up winding wooden stairs. "We've had
some good luck on this one, Sergeant, you catching Sherk and me so close to
your discovery."
"Yes, ma'am. Rachner Thract set up the itinerary." The stairs circled round
and round between jade walls. Closed doors and an occasional darkened room
showed to the sides. "Where are the children?" The question slipped
thoughtlessly out of him.
Smith hesitated, certainly looking for some complaint in his words. ". .
.Junior enlisted a year ago."
That he had heard. It had been so long since he had seen Little Victory. He
wondered how she would like the military. She had always seemed a tough little
cobblie, but with a piece of Sherkaner's whimsy. He wondered if Rhapsa and
Little Hrunk might still be around.
The stairs emerged from the crater wall. This part of the residence
presumably had existed in the early part of the Waning Years. But where before
there had been open courts and patios, now triple-paned quartz stood strong
against the Dark. It dimmed all the far colors, but the view was naked and stark.
The city lights glittered across the bottomland, circling the heat-red lake at the
center. A cold fog hung in the air above the water. It glowed dimly with all the
light from below. The General pulled the shades on the view as they ascended
toward what must have been the original owner's high perch.

She waved him into a large, brightly lit room.
"Hrunk!" Sherkaner Underhill emerged from the overstuffed pillows that
were the room's furniture. Surely these were furnishings of the original owner.
Unnerby couldn't imagine either the General or Underhill choosing such
ornaments.
Underhill trotted awkwardly across the room, his enthusiasm overmatching
his agility. He had a large guide-bug on a leash, and the creature corrected his
course, patiently bringing him toward the entrance. "You've missed Rhapsa and
Little Hrunk by a couple of days, I'm afraid. Those two aren't the cobblies you
remember; they're seventeen years old now! But the General didn't approve of
the atmosphere around here, and she shipped them back to Princeton."
Behind himself, Hrunkner saw the General glower at her husband, but she
made no comment. Instead she walked slowly from window to window, pulling
the blinds, shutting out the Dark. At one time, this room had been an open
gazebo; now there were a lot of windows. They settled themselves. Sherkaner
was full of news about the children. The General sat in silence. As Sherk
launched into Jirlib and Brent's latest adventures, she said, "I'm sure the Sergeant
isn't that interested in hearing about our children."
"Oh, but I-" Unnerby began, then saw the tenseness in the General's aspect.
"But I guess we have much else to talk about, don't we?"
Sherk hesitated, then leaned forward to stroke his guide-bug's carapace fur.
The creature was large, must have weighed seventy pounds, but it looked gentle
and smart. After a moment, the bug began purring. "I wish the rest of you were
as easy to please as Mobiy here. But yes, we do have a lot to talk about." He
reached under a filigreed table-the thing looked like a Treppen-dynasty original,
something that had survived four passages through the deepnesses of some rich
family-and pulled out one of the plastic bags that Hrunk had brought from High
Equatoria. He set it on the table with a thump. Wisps of rock flour spread across
the polished wood.
"I boggle, Hrunk! Your magic rock dust! What put you on to this? You
make one little detour-and bag a secret that all our external intelligence had
totally missed."
"Wait, wait. You make it sound like somebody fell down on the job." Some
people might look very bad unless he set things straight. "This was outside
channels, but Rachner Thract cooperated with me one hundred percent. He
loaned me the two cobbers that I came in with. More important, it was his agents
at High Equatoria-you know the story?" Four of Thract's people had trekked
across the altiplano, brought back that rock flour from the Kindred's inner
refinery.
f f

Smith nodded. "Yes. Don't worry, I blame myself for missing this. We've
gotten too confident with all our technical superiority."
Sherkaner was chuckling. "Quite so." He poked around in the rock flour.
The lights in here were bright and full-color, much better than down in airport
customs. But even in good light, the powder looked like nothing more than
shale-colored dust-upland equatorial shale, if one were well-trained in
mineralogy. "But I still don't see how you came upon this-even as a possibility."
Unnerby leaned back. Actually, the pillows felt pretty good compared with
third-class passenger webbing. "Well, you remember, about five years ago, that
joint Kindred-Accord expedition to the center of the altiplano? They had a
couple of physicists who claimed gravity was screwball there."
"Yes. They thought the mine shafts there would be a good place to establish
a new lower boundary for the equivalence principle; instead they found big
differences, which depended on the time of day. As you say, they got screwball
answers, but they retracted the whole thing after they recalibrated."
"That's the story-but when I was putting in the power plant for West
Undergate, I ran into one of the
Accord physicists from that expedition. Triga Deepdug is a solid engineer,
even if she is a physicist; I got to know her pretty well. Anyway, she claimed
that the experimental method on that first expedition was fine, and that she was
squeezed out of later participation.. . .So I began to wonder about that huge
open-pit mining operation the Kindred started on the altiplano just a year after
the expedition. That's almost centered on the physics site-and they had to build
five hundred miles of rail to serve it."
"They found copper," said Smith. "A good strike, and that's no lie."
Unnerby smiled at her. "Of course. Anything less and you would have
tumbled to it right away. But still. . .the copper mine is a marginal operation.
And my physicist friend knows her business. The more I thought about it, the
more I thought it would be nice to see what's going on there." He waved at the
bag of rock powder. "What you see there is from their third-level refining. The
Kindredian miners had to go through several hundred tons of Equatoria shale to
filter out this little packet. My guess is they filter it another hundredfold before
they get their final product."
Smith nodded. "And I'll wager that is kept in harder vaults than the Tiefer
holy gemstones."
"Sure. Thract's team didn't come close to the final product." Hrunkner
tapped at the rock powder with the tip of one hand. "I hope this is enough that
you can prove we found something."
"Oh, it is. It is!"
U
b
t
d t Sh k i
i
"Y
'
h d it h dl f
h
!"

Unnerby stared at Sherk in surprise. "You've had it hardly four hours!"
"You know me, Hrunk. This may be a vacation resort, but I've got my
hobbies." And a laboratory to pursue them, no doubt. "Under proper lighting,
your rock flour weighs almost half a percent less than otherwise.. .
.Congratulations, Sergeant, you've discovered antigravity."
"I-" Triga Deepdug had been so sure, but until now Unnerby hadn't really
believed. "Okay, Mister Instant Analysis, how does it work?"
"Beats me!" Sherk was practically vibrating with glee. "You've found
something genuinely new. Why, not even the. . ." He seemed to be searching for
words, then settled for: "But it's a subtle thing. I ground a sample of the dust
even finer-and you know, nothing floats off the top; you can't distill the
'antigravity fraction.' I think we're seeing some kind of group effect. My lab here
isn't up to doing more. I'm going to fly back to Princeton with this first thing
tomorrow. Besides its magic weight, there's only one strange thing I've found.
These upland shales always have some diamond foram content, but in this stuff
the smallest forams-the millionth-inch hexens-are enriched by a factor of a
thousand. I want to look for evidence of classical fields in the dust. Maybe these
foram particles mediate something. Maybe-" And Skerkaner Underhill was off
into a dozen speculations, and plans for a dozen dozen tests to extract the truth
from those speculations. As he talked, the years seemed to fall away from him.
He still had the tremor, but all his hands had come away from his guide-bug's
leash, and his voice was full of joy. It was the enthusiasm that had pushed his
students and Unnerby and Victory Smith to make a new world. As he spoke,
Victory rose from her perch and came over to sit close beside him. She draped
her right arms across his shoulders and gave him a sharp, rippling hug.
Unnerby felt himself grinning back at Sherkaner, captured by the other's
words. "Remember all the trouble you got into on the children's radio hour?
Saying 'all the sky can be our deepness'? By God,
Sherk, with this stuff, who needs rockets? We can hoist real ships into
space. We can finally find out what caused those lights we saw in the Dark!
Maybe we can even find other worlds out there."
"Yes, but-" Sherkaner began, but suddenly weaker, almost as if getting
manic enthusiasm reflected back on him made him realize all the problems that
stood between dream and reality. "But, um, we still have Honored Pedure and
the Kindred to contend with."
Hrunkner remembered his walk through the bottom forest.And we stillhave
to learn to live in the Dark.
The years seemed to come back down upon Sherkaner. He reached out to
pet Mobiy, and set two other hands on the animal's leash. "Yes, there are so
many problems " He shrugged as if acknowledging his age and the distance to

many problems.  He shrugged, as if acknowledging his age and the distance to
his dreams. "But I can't do anything more to save the world till I get to
Princeton. This evening is my best chance in a while to see how crowds react to
the Dark. What did you think of our First Day of the Dark, Hrunk?"
Down from the heights of hope, head to head with the limitations of
Spiderkind. "It was-scary, Sherk. We've given up all the rules one by one, and I
saw what's left down there this afternoon. Even-even if we win against Pedure,
I'm not sure what we'll be left with."
The old grin wavered across Sherkaner's aspect. "It's not that bad, Hrunk."
He came slowly to his feet and Mobiy guided him toward the door. "Most folks
left in Calorica are foolish old-money rich. . .you have to expect a little
dissipation. But there's still something to be learned by watching them." He
waved at the General. "I'm going to take a walk around the bottom of the
ringwall, my dear. These young folks may have some interesting insights."
Smith came off her pillows, walked around Mobiy to give her husband a
little hug. "You'll take the usual security team? No tricks?"
"Of course." And Hrunkner had the feeling her request was deadly serious,
that since twelve years ago Sherkaner and all the Underhill children were very
good about accepting protection.
The jade doors closed softly behind Sherkaner, and Unnerby and the
General were alone. Smith returned to her perch, and the silence stretched long.
How many years had it been since he had talked to the General in person without
a roomful of staff around? They exchanged electronic mail constantly. Unnerby
wasn't officially on Smith's staff, but the fission-plant program was the single
most important civilian part of her plan, and he took her advice as his command,
moving from city to city according to her schedule, doing his best to build to her
specs and her deadlines-and still keep the commercial contractors happy. Almost
every day, Unnerby was on the phone to her staff. Several times a year they met
at staff meetings.
Since the kidnappings. . .the barrier between them had been a fortress wall.
The barrier had existed before that, growing year by year as her children grew;
but before Gokna's death, they could always reach over it. Now, it felt very
strange to be sitting here alone with the General.
The silence stretched on, the two of them staring at each other and
pretending not to. The air was stale and cold, as if the room had been shut for a
long time. Hrunkner forced his attention to wander across the baroque tables and
cabinets, all painted with a dozen colored varnishes. Practically every piece of
woodwork looked a couple of generations old. Even the pillows and their
embroidered fabric were in the overdone style of the Generation 58. Yet he
could tell that Sherk really worked here The perch on his right was by a desk

could tell that Sherk really worked here. The perch on his right was by a desk
littered with gadgets and papers. He recognized Underhill's shaky penmanship in
one title: "Videomancy for High Payload Steganography."
Abruptly, the General broke the tense silence. "You did well, Sergeant."
She stood, and walked across the room to sit closer to him, on the perch in front
of Sherk's desk. "We had totally missed what the Kindred had discovered here.
And we'd still be clueless if you hadn't brought the matter up with Thract."
"Rachner set up the operation, ma'am. He's turned out to be a good officer."
"Yes. . .I'd appreciate it if you'd let me do any follow-up on this with him."
"Sure." Need to know and all that.
And then there was more silence with nothing to say. Finally, Hrunkner
waved at the absurd pillow furniture, the smallest worth a sergeant's yearly
salary. Except for Sherk's desk, there was not a sign of either of his friends in
this place. "You don't come here often, do you?"
"No," she said shortly. "Sherk wanted to see how people live after the Dark-
and this is as near as we could get to it before we all do it ourselves. Besides, it
seemed like a safe place to bring our youngest." She looked at him defiantly.
How not to make an argument out of this? "Yes, well I'm glad you sent
them home to Princeton. They're. . .they're good cobblies, ma'am, but this is not
a good place for them. I had the strangest feeling down there on the bottom. The
people were afraid, like the old stories about folks who don't plan and then are
left alone in the Dark. They don't have any goal, and now it's Dark."
Smith sat a little lower on her perch. "We've got millions of years of
evolution to battle; sometimes that's harder to deal with than nuclear physics and
the Honored Pedure. But people will get used to it."
That was what Sherkaner Underhill would have said, all smiling and
oblivious of the uneasiness around him. But Smith sounded more like a trooper
in a hole, repeating the High Command's assurances about enemy weakness.
Suddenly he remembered how thoroughly she had shuttered every one of the
windows. "You feel the same as I do about it, don't you?"
For a moment he thought she would blow up. Instead, she sat inscrutably
silent. Finally, ". . .You're right, Sergeant. As I said, there's a lot of instinct we're
running up against." She shrugged. "Somehow, it doesn't bother Sherkaner at all.
Or rather, he knows the fear and it fascinates him, just another wonderful puzzle.
Every day he goes down to the crater bottom and watches. He even mingles,
bodyguards and guide-bug and all-you have to see it to believe it. He would have
been down there all today if you hadn't shown up with your own kind of
fascinating puzzle."
Unnerby smiled. "That's Sherk for you." Maybe he was on a safe topic.
"Did you see how he lit up when we talked about my 'magic rock dust'? I can't

Did you see how he lit up when we talked about my magic rock dust ? I can t
wait to see what he does with it. What happens when you give a miracle to a
miracle worker?"
Smith seemed to search for words. "We'll figure out the rock dust, that's
certain. Eventually. But. . .hell, Hrunkner, you deserve to know. You've been
with Sherk as long as I have. You noticed how his tremor is getting worse? The
truth is, he's not aging as well as most in your generation."
"I noticed he's frail, but look at all the results coming out of Princeton these
days. He's doing more than ever."
"Yes. Indirectly. Over the years, he's brought together a larger and larger
circle of genius students. There are hundreds of them now, scattered all over the
computer net."
". . .But all those papers by 'Tom Lurksalot'? I thought that was Sherk and
his students being coy."
"That? No. That's. . .that's only his students being coy. They play
anonymous games on the net; they make credit-taking into a guessing game. It's
just. . .silliness."
Silly or not, it was amazingly productive. Over the last few years, "Tom
Lurksalot" had provided breakthrough insights about everything from nucleonics
to computer science to industrial standards. "It's hard to believe. Just now, he
seemed the same as always-mentally, I mean. The ideas seemed to come as fast
as ever."A dozen weird ideas a minute, when he'son a roll. Unnerby smiled to
himself, remembering. Flightiness, thy name is Underhill.
The General sighed, and her voice was soft and distant. She might have
been talking about made-up storybook characters, not her own personal tragedy.
"Sherk has had thousands of crazy ideas and hundreds of beautiful winners. But
that's. . .changed. My dear Sherkaner hasn't come up with anything new in three
years. He's into videomancy these days, did you know that? He has all his old
flamboyance, but . . ." Smith's voice guttered into silence.
For almost forty years, Victory Smith and Sherkaner Underhill had been a
team, Underhill producing an endless avalanche of ideas and Smith selecting the
best and feeding them back to him. Sherk used to describe the process more
colorfully, back when he thought artificial intelligence was the wave of the
future: "I'm the idea-generating component and Victory is the crap-detector;
we're an intelligence greater than anything on ten legs." These two had
transformed the world.
But now. . .what if half the team had lost its genius? Sherk's brilliant
whimsy had kept the General on track as much as the reverse. Without Sherk,
Victory Smith was left with her own assets: courage, strength, persistence. Was
that enough?

g
Victory didn't say anything more for a time. And Hrunkner wished that he
could walk over and put his arms across her shoulders. . .but sergeants, even old
sergeants, don't do that to generals.

FORTY-TWO
The years had passed, and the danger had grown. More implacably than any
human Pham had ever known, Reynolt kept searching and searching. As far as
possible, he had avoided manipulating the zipheads. He had even arranged for
his operations to continue while he was off-Watch; that was very risky, but it
evaded the obvious correlations. It didn't help. Now Reynolt seemed to have
concrete suspicions. Pham's tracers showed her searches intensifying, closing in
on her suspect-most likely Pham Nuwen. There was no cure for it. However
risky the operation, Anne must be eliminated. The open house for Nau's new
"office" might be the best chance Pham would get.
"North Paw" was what Tomas Nau called it. Most everybody else-certainly
the Qeng Ho who did the engineering-called it simply the Lake Park. Now
everyone on-Watch had their one opportunity to see the final result.
The last of the crowd was still trickling in when Nau appeared on the porch
of his timbered lodge. He wore a glistening full-press jacket and green pants.
"Keep your feet on the ground, people. My Qiwi has invented a whole special
etiquette for North Paw." He was smiling, and those in the crowd laughed.
Gravity on Diamond One was more of a hint than a physical law. Around the
lodge, the "ground" was cleverly textured grabfelt. So everyone did have feet on
the ground, but their notion of vertical was only a vague consensus. Beside him
on the porch, Qiwi was chuckling at the appearance of the hundreds of people
standing before them, tilting this way and that like drunks. A black-furred kitten
lay curled across the lace of her blouse.
Nau raised his hands again. "My people, my friends. This afternoon, please
enjoy and admire what you have built here. And think about it. Thirty-eight
years ago we nearly destroyed ourselves in battle and in treachery. For most of
you, that time is not so long ago, just ten or twelve years on-Watch. You
remember after that, how I said this was a time like the Plague Years on
Balacrea. We had destroyed most of the resources we brought here, we had
destroyed our starfaring capabilities. To survive, I said, we must put aside the
animosities, and work together no matter how different our backgrounds.. .
.Well, my friends, we did that. We are not out of physical danger; our destiny
with the Spiders is still to be. But look around you, and you will see how we
have healed ourselves.You all built this from the bare rock and ice and airsnow.
This North Paw-Lake Park-is not large, but it is a work of highest art. Look upon
it. You've made something that rivals the best that whole civilizations might

create.
"I'm proud of you." He reached out to slip his arm across Qiwi's shoulders,
displacing the kitten into the crook of Qiwi's arm. Once upon a time, the
relationship between Nau and Lisolet had been an ugly rumor. Now-Pham could
see people smiling comfortably at the sight. "You see this is more than a park,
more than a Podmaster's sanctum. What you see here is evidence of something
new in the universe, a melding of the best that Qeng Ho and Emergent have to
offer. Emergent Focused persons-" Pham noticed that he still didn't talk about
the slaves as bluntly as he might. "-did the detailed planning for this park. Qeng
Ho trade and individual action made it reality. And I personally have learned
something: On Balacrea and Frenk and Gaspr, we Podmasters rule for the
community good, but we rule largely by personal direction-and often by force of
law. Here, working with you former Qeng Ho, I see another way. I know that the
work on my park was accomplished as payback for that silly pink scrip you've
been hiding from me for so long." He raised a hand and several bills fluttered
into the air. Laughter passed around the crowd again. "So! Think what the
combination of Podmaster direction and Qeng Ho efficiency can do once we
have completed our mission!"
He bowed to enthusiastic applause. Qiwi slipped in front of him, to stand at
the porch railing-and the applause just got louder. The kitten, finally fed up with
the noise and the jostling, jumped off Qiwi's arm and sailed into the air over the
crowd. It unfurled soft wings and slowed its upward trajectory, then curved back
to circle over its mistress. "Take note," Qiwi said to the crowd, "Miraowis
allowed to fly here. But she has wings!" The cat made a mock dive at her, then
flew off into the forest that grew all around the inland side of Nau's lodge. "Now
I invite you to the side of the Podmaster's house for refreshments."
Some of the visitors were already there. The rest shuffled round the
pathways to trestled tables that bowed subtly downward, as if from the weight of
the food that was set upon them. Pham moved along with everyone, loudly
greeting anyone who would talk with him. It was important to establish his
presence here in as many minds as possible. Meantime, in the back of his eyes,
the view from his tiny spies built up the tactical picture of the park and the
forest.
Cultures clashed at the food tables, but by now Benny's parlor had
established an etiquette for going after food. In a few moments, most people had
their first buckets and bottles full of refreshment, and spread back into the open.
Pham walked up behind Benny and slapped him on the back. "Benny! This stuff
is good! But I thought you were supplying."
Benny Wen swallowed, coughing. "Of course it's good. And of course it's

mine-and Gonle's." He nodded at the former quartermaster clerk who was
standing beside him. "Actually, Qiwi's father sprouted some new stuff he found
in the libraries. We've had it for about half a year now, saving it for this party."
Pham puffed himself up: "I did my part out-of-doors. Someone had to
supervise the added drilling and the meltwater for the Podmaster's lake."
Gonle Fong showed her mercenary smile. More than any Qeng Ho-in a way
more than Qiwi herself-Fong bought into Tomas Nau's "cooperative vision."
Gonle had done very well by doing good. "Everybody got something out of this.
My farms are openly endorsed by the Podmaster now. And I've got real
automation."
"You have something better than a keyboard now?" Pham said slyly.
"You bet. And today, I'm in charge of services." She lifted her hand
dramatically and a food tray floated docilely over to them. It rotated beneath her
hand, bobbed politely as she grabbed at spiced seaweed. Then it moved to Benny
and then Pham. Pham's little spies looked at the gadget from all directions. The
tray maneuvered on tiny gas jets, almost silently. It was mechanically simple,
but it moved with grace and intelligence. Benny noticed too. "It's controlled by a
Focused person?" he said, sounding a little sad.
"Um, yes. The Podmaster thought it worthwhile, considering the event."
Pham watched the other trays. They swept in wide circles, out from the food
tables, picking out just the guests who hadn't been fed.Clever. The slaves were
kept diplomatically offstage, and people could pretend what Nau had often
declared, that Focus took civilization to a higher level.ButNau is right! Damn
him.
Pham said something appropriately truculent to Gonle Fong, words that
showed that "old fart Trinli" was truly impressed but determined not to admit it.
He walked out from the center of the crowd, apparently intent on food.Hmm.
Ritser Brughel was off-Watch just now-another cleverness of Tomas Nau. Many
people bought into some part of Nau's "vision" nowadays, but Ritser Brughel
could unnerve even the fully converted. But if Brughel was off-Watch, and if
Nau and Reynolt were diverting rote-layer zipheads to manual serving. . .this
was a chance even better than he had thought.So where is Reynolt? The woman
could be surprisingly hard to track; sometimes she dropped off Brughel's direct
monitor list for Ksecs at a time. Pham pushed his attention outward. There were
millions of the tiny particles scattered throughout the park. The ones stabilizing
the lake and running the ventilators were mostly tasked, but that still left
immense processing power. No way he could handle all the viewpoints and
images. As his mind swept back and forth though the park, he was vaguely
aware that he was swaying on his feet.Aha, there! Not a close view, but there

inside Nau's lodge, he had a glimpse of Reynolt's red hair and pinkish skin. As
expected, the woman wasn't participating in the festivities. She was hunched
over an Emergent input pad, her eyes hidden behind stark black huds. She
looked the same as ever. Tense, intense, as if on the verge of some deadly
insight.And for all I know, she is.
Someone whacked him on the shoulder, as hard as he had struck Benny a
few moments earlier. "So Pham, my man, what do you think?"
Pham pushed away the inner visions and looked around at his assailant:
Trud Silipan had dressed up for the event. His uniform was like nothing he'd
seen except in some Emergent historicals: blue silk, fringed and tasseled, and
somehow imitating torn, stained rags. It was the dress of the First Followers,
Trud had once told him. Pham let his surprise become exaggerated. "What do I
think about what-your uniform or the view?"
"The view, the view! I'm in uniform just because this is such a milestone.
You heard the Podmaster's speech. Go ahead, you take a few more moments.
Take in the view of Lake Park, and tell me what you think."
Behind them, Pham's inner vision showed Ezr Vinh bearing down on
them.Damn. "Well-"
"Yes, what do you think, Armsman Trinli?" Vinh walked around till he
stood facing them. He looked straight into Pham's eyes for an instant. "Of all the
Qeng Ho here, you are the oldest, most traveled. Of all of us, you must have the
deepest experience. How does the Podmaster's North Paw compare to the great
parks of the Qeng Ho?"
Vinh's words had a double meaning that went unnoticed by Trud Silipan,
but Pham felt an instant of cold rage.You're part of the reason I haveto kill Anne
Reynolt, you little jerk. Nau's "true" histories of Pham Nuwen had eaten into the
boy. For at least a year now, it was clear that he understood the true story of
Brisgo Gap. And he guessed what Pham really wanted with Focus. His demands
for guarantees and reassurance had become more and more pointed.
The localizers painted false-color images of Ezr Vinh's face, showed his
blood pressure and skin temperature. Could a good ziphead snoop look at such
pictures and guess that the boy was playing some kind of game? Maybe. The
boy's hate for Nau and Brughel still outweighed his feelings against Pham
Nuwen; Pham could still use him. But he was one more reason why Reynolt
must be removed.
The thoughts passed through Pham's mind even as his mouth twisted into a
self-satisfied smirk. "Putting it that way, my boy, you're absolutely right. Book
learning can't compare to traveling the light-years and seeing the sights with
your own two eyes." He turned away from them and looked down the footpath,

past the lodge, to the moorage and the lake beyond.Pretend to be thoughtfully
considering.
He had spent Msecs invisibly prowling this construction; it should have
been easy to play his proper role. But standing here, he could feel the air drifting
slowly out of the trees behind him. It was moist, faintly chill, with a tarry scent
that whispered of a thousand kilometers of forest stretching out behind him.
Sunlight came warm through high patchy clouds. That, too, was fake.
Nowadays, the real sun was not as bright as a decent moon. But the light systems
embedded in the diamond sky could imitate almost any visual effect. The only
clue to the fakery was the faint shimmering rainbows that arched across the
farther distances. . .
Down the hill from him was the lake itself. That was Qiwi's triumph. The
water was real, thirty meters deep in places. Qiwi's network of servos and
localizers kept it stable, the surface flat and smooth, reflecting clouds and blue
from overhead. The Podmaster's lodge overlooked a moorage that sat at the head
of an inlet. The inlet spread and spread. Kilometers out-actually less than two
hundred meters-two rocky islands rose from the mists, guarding the far shore.
The place was a Lord-blessed masterpiece. "It's atresartnis, " said Pham,
but he made the word sound like an insult.
Silipan frowned. "What-?"
Ezr said, "It's parkbuilder jargon. It means-"
"Oh, yes. I've heard the word: a park or a bonsai that goes to extremes."
Trud puffed up defensively.
"Well, it is extreme; the Podmaster pushed for that. Look! An enormous
microgravity park, perfectly imitating a planetary surface. It breaks a lot of
aesthetic rules-yet knowing when to break the rules is the mark of a great
Podmaster."
Pham shrugged, and continued to munch on Gonle's refreshments. He
turned idly and looked up into the forest. The crest of the hill matched the true
wall of the cavern, a standard parkbuilder trick. The trees stood ten and twenty
meters tall, moss glistening cool and dark on their long trunks. Ali Lin had
grown them on wires in incubator tents on Diamond One's surface. A year ago
they had been three-centimeter seedlings. Now, by Ali's magic, these trees might
have been centuries old. Here and there, dead wood of "older" forest generations
lay gray within the blue and green. There were parkbuilders who could achieve
such perfection from a single viewpoint. But Pham's hidden eyes looked from all
directions, throughout the forest. The Podmaster's park was such a perfection at
every level. Cubic meter for cubic meter it was as perfect as the finest Namqem
bonsai.

"So," said Silipan, "I think you see why I have reason to be proud!
Podmaster Nau provided the vision, but it was my work with system automation
that guided the implementation."
Pham sensed the anger building in Ezr Vinh. No doubt he could contain it,
but a good snoop would still pick it up. Pham punched Ezr lightly on the
shoulder and gave the braying laugh that was a Trinli trademark. "Did you get
that, Ezr? Trud, what you mean is the Focused persons you supervise did this."
And supervise was too strong a word. Silipan was more of a custodian, but
saying that would be an insult Trud could not forgive.
"Er, yes, the zipheads. Isn't that what I said?"
Rita Liao approached from the crowd around the tables. She was carrying
food for two. "Anyone seen Jau? This place is so big you can lose someone."
"Haven't seen him," said Pham.
"The flight tech? I think he went around the other side of the lodge"-this
from an Emergent, someone whose name Pham should not know. Nau and Qiwi
had arranged an intersection of Watches for this open house so that there were
some near-strangers in the crowd.
"Well, pus. I should just bounce off the ceiling and take a look." But even
in the present mellow circumstances, Rita Liao was a good Emergent Follower.
She kept her feet squarely on the gripping ground as she turned to scan the
crowd. "Qiwi!" she shouted. "Have you seen my Jau?"
Qiwi detached herself from the group around Tomas Nau and shuffled up
the walk toward them. "Yes," she said. Pham noticed Ezr Vinh backing off,
heading for another group. "Jau didn't believe the pier was real, so I suggested he
go take a look."
"It's real? The boat, too?"
"Sure. Come on down. I'll show you." The five of them walked down the
path. Silipan strutted along in his silken rags, waving at others to follow. "See
what we've done here!"
Pham sent his inner gaze ahead, studying the rocks around the pier, the
bushes that leaned out over the water. This Balacrean vegetation was beautiful in
a stark way that fit with the cool air. And the entrance to the utility tunnel was
hidden in the cliff behind the blue-green fronds.Thismay be my best chance.
Pham walked next to Qiwi, asking questions that hopefully would mark his
presence later. "You can actually sail in it?"
Qiwi smiled. "See for yourself."
Rita Liao made an exaggerated shivering sound. "It's cold enough to be
real. North Paw is pretty, but can't you redial for something tropical?"
"No," said Silipan. He hurried to walk in front of them and lecture. "It's too
l f
h
Ali Li '
h l
i
li
d d
il " N
h
Qi i

real for that. Ali Lin's whole point was realism and detail." Now that Qiwi was
present, he spoke of the zipheads like human beings.
The path wound back and forth, realistic switchbacks that took them down
the rocky face of the harbor wall. Most of the guests were following, curious to
see what this moorage could really be.
"Water looks awfully flat," someone said.
"Yes," said Qiwi. "Realistic waves are the hardest part. Some of my father's
friends are working on that. If we can form the water surface on a short scale
both in time and-" There was startled laughter as a trio of winged kittens zipped
low and fast over their heads. The three skimmed out across the water, then
climbed into the sky like strafing aircraft.
"I'll bet you they don't havethat at the real North Paw!"
Qiwi laughed. "True. That was my price!" She smiled up at Pham.
"Remember the kittens we had in the pre-Flight temp? When I was little-" She
looked around, searching for a face in the crowd. "When I was little, someone
gave me one for a pet."
There was still a little girl inside, who remembered other times. Pham
ignored the wistfulness in her voice. His words came out bluff and patronizing.
"Flying kittens don't have real significance. If you'd wanted a solid symbol,
you'd have wombed some flying pigs."
"Pigs?" Trud stumbled, almost lost his stride. "Oh yeah, the 'noble winged
pig.' " "Yes, the spirit of programming. There are winged pigs in all the grandest
temps."
"Yeah, sure. . .just get me an umbrella!" Trud shook his head, and some of
those behind him were laughing. The flying pig mythos had never caught on at
Balacrea.
Qiwi smiled at the byplay. "Maybe we should-I don't think I'll ever
convince the kitties to scavenge floating trash."
In less than two hundred seconds, the crowd had ranged itself along the
water's edge. Pham drifted away from Qiwi and Trud and Rita. He moved as if
seeking the best vantage point. In fact, he was coming closer to the cover of the
blue-green fronds. With any luck, there would be some excitement in the next
few moments. Surely some fool would fall off the ground. He began a final
security sweep across the localizer net. . .
Rita Liao was no fool, but when she saw where Jau Xin was, she got a little
careless. "Jau, what in
Plague's Name are you doing-" She handed her food and drink to someone
behind her and rushed out onto the pier. The boat there had slipped free, was
sliding smoothly out into the inlet. Like the lodge and the pier, it was dark
timber But this wood was tarred near the boat's waterline varnished and painted

timber. But this wood was tarred near the boat's waterline, varnished and painted
at the gunnels and prow. A Balacrean sail was hoisted on its single mast. Jau Xin
grinned at the crowd from his seat amidships.
"Jau Xin, you come back here! That's the Podmaster's boat. You'll-" Rita
started running down the pier. She realized her mistake and tried to stop herself.
When her feet left the ground she was moving at just a few centimeters per
second. She floated off the platform, a-spin and embarrassed, and loudly angry.
If no one snagged her, she would sail over her errant husband's head, and come
down in the lake a few hundred seconds later.
Time to move.His programs told him no one in the crowd was watching. His
probes into Nau's security showed that no snoop was on him right now, and he
had a glimpse of Reynolt still working at some drudge task back in the lodge. He
blinded the localizers for an instant and stepped into the fronds. Just a little
massaging of the digital record and there'd be proof he was here the whole time.
He could do what was necessary and get back unnoticed. It was still as
dangerous as hell, even if Brughel's snoops were not on alert.But taking out
Reynolt is necessary.
Pham finger-walked up the cliff face, slowed by the need to stay hidden
behind the bushes. Even here, the artistry of Ali Lin was evident. The cliff could
have been simple raw diamond, but Ali had imported rocks from the mineral
dumps on the surface of the L1 jumble. They were discolored as if etched by the
seepage of a thousand years. The rock was watercolor art as great as any ever
painted on paper or digital. Ali Lin had been a first-rank parkbuilder before the
expedition to OnOff. Sammy Park had picked Ali for the crew for that reason.
But in the years since his Focus, he had become something greater, what a
human could become if all his mind was concentrated on a single love. What he
and his fellows had done was subtle and deep. . .and as much as anything it
proved the power that Focus gave to the culture that possessed it.Using it is
right.
The tunnel entrance was still a few meters farther up. Pham sensed a half-
dozen localizers floating there, imaging the outlines of the door.
A small fraction of his attention remained with the crowd back at the
harbor. No eyes looked back in his direction. Some of the nimbler partyers had
scrambled out onto the pier and formed a chain of life that reached six or seven
meters into the air, an acrobatic tumble of humanity. The men and women of the
chain were in a dozen different orientations, the classic zero-gee pose for such an
operation. It broke the illusion of downness, and some of the Emergents looked
away, groaning. Imagining the sea as flat and down was one thing. Suddenly
seeing the sea as a watery cliff or a ceiling was enough to provoke nausea.
But then the tip of the chain extended a hand and grabbed Rita's ankle The

But then the tip of the chain extended a hand and grabbed Rita s ankle. The
chain contracted, bringing her back to the ground. Pham tapped his palm, and the
audio from the scene below came louder in his ear. Jau Xin was beginning to get
embarrassed. He apologized to his wife. "But Qiwi said it was okay. And face it,
I am a space pilot."
"A pilotmanager, Jau. It's not the same thing."
"Close enough. I can do some things without a ziphead to make it right."
Jau sat back down by the mast. He tweaked the sail a little. The boat moved out
around the pier. It stayed level in the water. Maybe suction was keeping it fitted
to the surface. But its wake rose a half meter into the air, twisting and braiding
the way surface tension makes free water do. The crowd applauded-even Rita,
now-and Jau swung the craft around, trying to make it back to the moorage.
Pham pulled himself even with the tunnel entrance. His remotes had already
been fiddling with the hatch.Everything in this park was localizer-compatible,
thank the Lord. The door opened silently. And when he drifted through, he had
no trouble closing it behind him.
He had maybe two hundred seconds.
He pushed quickly up the narrow tunnel. Here there was no illusion. These
walls were raw crystal, the naked stuff of Diamond One. Pham pushed faster.
The maps that unrolled before his eyes showed what he had seen before. Tomas
Nau intended the Lake Park to be his central site; after this open house, outsider
visits would be strictly limited. Nau had used the last of the thermal diggers to
cut these narrow tunnels. They gave him direct physical access to the critical
resources of Hammerfest.
Pham's tiny spies showed him to be just thirty meters short of the new
entrance to the Focus clinic. Nau and Reynolt were safely at the party. All the
MRI techs were at the party or off-Watch. He would have his time in the clinic,
enough time for some sabotage. Pham twisted head for feet, and extended his
hands as brakes against the walls.
Sabotage?Be honest. It was murder.No, it's an execution. Or a combatdeath
upon an enemy. Pham had killed his share in combat, and not always at the end
of a ship-to-ship trajectory.This is no different. So what if Reynolt was a
Focused automaton now, a slave to Nau? There had been a time when her evil
had been self-aware. Pham had learned enough about the Xevalle clique to know
that its villainy was not just the invention of those who had destroyed it. There
had been a time when Anne Reynolt had been like Ritser Brughel, though
doubtless more effective. In appearance, the two could have been twins: pale-
skinned, reddish-haired, with cold, killing eyes. Pham tried to catch the image,
amplify it in his mind. Someday he would overthrow the Nau/Brughel regime.

Someday Pham would invade theInvisible Hand and end the horror that Brughel
had made there.What I doto Anne Reynolt is no different.
And Pham realized he was floating in front of the clinic entrance, his
fingers poised to command it open.How much time have I wasted? The time line
he kept at the edge of his vision said only two seconds.
He tapped his fingers angrily. The door slid open, and he floated through
into the silent room. The clinic was brightly lit, but the vision behind his eyes
was suddenly dark and vacant. He moved cautiously, like a man suddenly struck
blind. The localizers from the tunnel, and what he shook out from his clothing,
spread out around him, slowly giving him back his vision. He moved quickly to
the MRI control table, trying to ignore the absence of vision in the corners and
dead spaces. The clinic was one place where the localizers could not survive
long-term. When the big magnets were pulsed on, they fried the electronics in
the localizers. Trud had taken to vacuuming them out after a magnet-accelerated
dustmote had cut his ear.
But Pham Nuwen had no intention of pulsing the magnets, and his little
spies would stay alive and well for the time it took him to set his trap. He moved
across the room, quickly cataloguing the gear. As always, the clinic was an
orderly maze of pale cabinets. Here wireless was not an option. Optical cables
and short laser links connected automation to magnets. Superconducting power
cables snaked back into areas he couldn't see yet.Ah. His localizers drifted near
the controller cabinet. It was set just the way Trud had left it the last time he had
been here. Nowadays, Pham spent many Ksecs each Watch with Trud in the
clinic. Pham Trinli had never seemed pointedly curious about the workings of
the Focus gear, but Trud liked to brag and Pham was gradually learning more
and more.
Focus could kill easily enough. Pham floated above the alignment coils.
The inner region of the MRI was less than fifty centimeters across, not even big
enough for whole-body imaging. But this gear was for the head only, and
imaging was only part of the game. It was the bank of high-frequency
modulators that made this different from any conventional imagers. Under
program control-programs mostly maintained by Anne Reynolt, despite Trud's
claims-the modulators could tweak and stimulate the Focus virus in the victim's
head. Millimeter by cubic millimeter the mindrot could be orchestrated in their
psychoactive secretion. Even done perfectly, the disease had to be retuned every
few Msecs, or the ziphead would drift into catatonia or hyperactivity. Small
errors could produce dysfunction-about a quarter of Trud's work had to be
redone. Moderate errors could easily destroy memory. Large errors could
provoke a massive stroke, the victim dying even faster than Xopi Reung had.

Anne Reynolt was due for such a massive cerebral accident the next time
she retuned herself.
He'd been gone from the Lake Park for almost one hundred seconds. Jau
Xin was taking small groups for rides in the boat. Someone had finally fallen in
the lake.Good. That will buy more time.
Pham pulled the hood off the controller box. There were interfaces to the
superconductors. Things like that could fail, on rare occasions with no warning.
Weaken the switch, tweak the management programs to recognize Reynolt when
next she used the gear on herself. . .
Since he'd entered the clinic, the active localizers he'd brought with him had
spread across the clinic. It was a little like light spreading farther and farther into
absolute dark, revealing more and more of the room. He'd set the images at a low
priority while he examined the SC switch with nearly microscopic vision.
A flicker of motion.He glimpsed a pants leg passing near one of the
background views. Someone was hiding in the dead space behind the cabinets.
Pham oriented on the localizers and dived for the open space above the cabinets.
A woman's voice: "Grab a stop and freeze!"
It was Anne Reynolt. She emerged from between the cabinets, just beyond
where he could reach. She was holding a pointing device as though it were some
kind of weapon.
Reynolt steadied herself on the ceiling and waggled the pointer at him.
"Hand over hand, walk yourself back to the wall."
For an instant, Pham teetered on the edge of a frontal attack. The pointer
could be a bluff, but even if it were guiding a cannon, what did it matter? The
game was up. The only option left was swift and overwhelming violence, here
and with the localizers all across Hammerfest.And maybe not. . . Pham retreated
as instructed.
Reynolt came out from behind the cabinets. She hooked a foot under a
restraint. The pointer in her hand did not waver. "So. Mr. Pham Trinli. It's nice
to finally know." With her free hand, she brushed her hair back from her face.
Her huds were clear, and he had a good view into her eyes. There was something
strange about her. Her face was as pale and cold as always, but the usual
impatience and indifference was overlaid with a kind of triumph, a conscious
arrogance. And. . .there was a smile, faint yet unmistakable, on her lips.
"You set me up, Anne, didn't you?" Back at Nau's lodge, he took another,
longer look at what he thought had been Anne Reynolt. It was a patch of
wallpaper, lying loosely on a bed. She had blinded the eyes that could get really
close, and fooled him with a crude video.
She nodded. "I didn't know tas you, but yes. It's been clear for a long time
h
i
l i
A fi
I h
h i
Ri

that someone was manipulating my systems. At first, I thought it was Ritser or
Kal Omo, playing political games. You were an outside bet, the fellow who was
too often in the middle of things. First you were an old fool, then an old
slavemaster in hiding as a fool. Now I see that you are something more, Mr.
Trinli. Did you really think you could outsmart the Podmaster's systems
forever?"
"I-" Pham's vision swept out of the room, roamed across Lake Park. The
party was continuing. Tomas Nau himself and Qiwi had joined Jau Xin on the
little sailboat. Pham zoomed in on Nau's face: he was not wearing huds. He was
not a man overseeing an ambush.He doesn't know! "I was very afraid I couldn't
outsmart his systems forever-you, in particular."
She nodded. "I guessed whoever-it-was would target me. I'm the critical
component." She glanced briefly away from him, at the uncovered controller
box. "You knew I was retuning in the next Msec, didn't you?"
"Yes."And you need retuning more than I knew. Hope surged in him. She
was behaving like a character in an idiot adventure. She hadn't told her boss
what she was up to. She probably had no backups. And now she was just
floating there, talking!Keep her talking. "I figured I could weaken the SC
switches. When you used the device, it would jam high and-"
"-And I'd have a capillary blowout? Very crude, very fatal, Mr. Trinli. But
then, you're not clever enough to try real reprogramming, are you?"
"No."How far out of calibration is she? Hit at emotion. "Besides, I wanted
you dead. You and Nau and Brughel are the only real monsters here. For now,
you're the only one I can reach."
Her smile widened. "You're crazy."
"No,you are. Once upon a time you were a Podmaster just like them. Your
problem is you lost. Or don't you remember? The Xevalle clique?"
Her arrogant smile vanished and for a moment her gaze was the usual
frowning indifference. Then she was smiling again. "I remember very well.
You're right, I was a loser-but tas a century before Xevalle, and I was fighting all
the Podmasters." She advanced slowly across the room. Her pointer never
wavered from Pham's chest. "The Emergents had invaded Frenk. I was an
ancient-lit major at Arnham University.. . .I learned to be other things. For
fifteen years we fought them. They had technology, they had Focus. At first, we
had numbers. We lost and lost, but we made them pay for every victory. Toward
the end we were better-armed, but by then there were so few of us. And still we
fought."
The look in her eyes was. . .joyous. He was hearing the history of Frenk
from the other side. "You-you're the Frenkisch Orc!"
Reynolt's smile broadened and she came even nearer her slim body

Reynolt's smile broadened and she came even nearer, her slim body
straightening out of zero-gee crouch. "Yes indeed. The Podmasters wisely
decided to rewrite the histories. The 'Frenkisch Orc' makes a better villain than
'Anne of Arnham.' Rescuing Frenks from a mutant subspecies makes a better
story than massacre and Focus."
Lord.But some automatic part of him still remembered why he was here. He
slid his feet back along the wall, positioning for a kick-lunge.
Reynolt stopped her approach. She lowered her aim, to his knees. "Don't try
it, Mr. Trinli. This pointer is guiding a program in the MRI controller. If you had
had a moment more, you would have seen the nickel pellets I put in the magnet
target area. It's an ad hoc weapon, but good enough to blow your legs off-and
you would still face interrogation."
Pham sent his vision back into the MRI gear. Yes, there were the pellets.
Given a proper magnetic pulse, they would be high-velocity buckshot. But the
program, if it was in the controller. . .Tiny eyes swept along the superconductor
interface. He had enough localizers to talk through the optical link and wipe her
pointer program.She still doesn't know what Ican do with them! The hope was
like a bright flame.
He tapped his fingers on the palms of his hands, maneuvering the devices
into place. Hopefully, it would look like nervous gesturing to Reynolt.
"Interrogation? You're still loyal to Nau?"
"Of course. How could it be otherwise?"
"But you're working behind his back."
"Only to serve him better. If this had turned out to be Ritser Brughel's work,
I wanted a complete case before going to my Podmas-"
Pham lunged outward from the wall. He heard Reynolt's pointer click
uselessly, and then he slammed into her. The two of them tumbled back into the
MRI cabinets. Reynolt fought almost silently, slamming her knee into him,
trying to bite at his throat. But he had her arms pinned, and as they sailed past
the magnet box, he twisted and slammed her head against the cover plate.
Reynolt went limp. Pham caught himself on a stop, ready to smash her
again.
Think.The party at North Paw was still going on, an idyll. Pham's timer
showed that 250 seconds had passed since he had left the harbor.I canstill make
this work! There were necessary changes. The blow to Reynolt's head would
show up on an autopsy.. . .But-miracles!-her clothes showed no sign of the
struggle. There would have to be some changes. He reached into the MRI target
area and swept the nickel pellets into a safety bin.. . .Something like his original
plan could still work. Suppose she had been trying to recalibrate the controllers

and had an accident?
Pham moved her body carefully into position. He held her tightly, watching
for any sign of consciousness.
The monster. The Frenkisch Orc. Of course, Anne Reynolt was neither. She
was a tall, slender woman-as much a human as Pham Nuwen or any of the far
descendants of Earth.
Now the carven legends on the Hammerfest walls had a clear translation.
For years and years, Anne Reynolt had fought against Focus, her people driven
back step by step, to that last redoubt in the mountains. Anne of Arnham. Now
all that remained was the myth of a twisted monster. . .and the real monsters like
Ritser Brughel, the descendants of the surviving Frenks, the conquered and the
Focused.
But Anne of Arnham had not died. Instead, her genius had been Focused.
And now it was deadly danger to Pham and all he worked for. And so she must
die. . .
. . .Three hundred seconds.Wake up. Pham tapped out instructions. Botched.
He typed them again. Once he weakened the SC connectors, this little program
would be enough. It was a simple thing, a coded beat of high-frequency pulses
that would turn the bugs in Anne's head into little factories, flooding her brain
with vasoconstrictors, creating millions of tiny aneurisms. It would be quick. It
would be lethal. And Trud had claimed so many times that none of their
operations were physically painful.
Unconscious, Anne's face had relaxed; she might have been asleep. There
were no marks, no bruises.
Even the slender silver chain around her throat, even that had survived their
struggle, though it had been pulled free of her blouse. There was a 'membrance
gem at the end of the chain. Pham couldn't help himself. He reached over her
shoulder and squeezed the greenish stone. The pressure was enough to power a
moment of imagery. The stone cleared, and Pham was looking down on a
mountain hillside. His viewpoint seemed to be on the cupola of an armored flyer.
Ranged around the hillside were a half-dozen other such vehicles, dragons come
down from the sky to point their energy cannons at what was already ruins, and
the entrance to a cave. In front of the guns stood a single figure, a red-haired
young woman. Trud said that 'membrance gems were moments of great
happiness or ultimate triumph. And maybe the Emergent taking the picture
thought this was such a moment. The girl in the picture-and it was clearly Anne
Reynolt-had lost. Whatever she guarded in the cave behind her would be taken
from her. And yet, she stood straight, her eyes looking up into the viewpoint. In
a moment she would be brushed aside, or blown away. . .but she had not

surrendered.
Pham let the gem go, and for a long moment he stared without seeing. Then
slowly, carefully, he tapped a long control sequence. This would be much
trickier. He altered the drug menu, hesitated. . .seconds. . .before entering an
intensity. Reynolt would lose some recent memory, hopefully thirty or forty
Msec.And then you will begin closing in on me again.
He tapped "execute." The SC cables behind the cabinet creaked and spread
apart from each other, delivering enormous and precise currents to the MRI
magnets. A second passed. His inner vision sputtered into blindness. Reynolt
spasmed in his arms. He held her close, keeping her head away from the sides of
the cabinet.
Her twitching subsided after a few seconds; her breath came relaxed and
slow. Pham eased himself away from her.Move her out from the magnets. Okay.
He touched her hair, brushing it away from her face. Nothing like that red hair
had existed on Canberra. . .but Anne Reynolt reminded him of someone from a
certain Canberra morning.
He fled blindly from the room, down the tunnel, back to the party by the
lake.

FORTY-THREE
The open house at North Paw was the high point of the Watch, of any
Watch to date. There wouldn't be anything so spectacular until the end of the
Exile. Even the Qeng Ho who had made the park possible were amazed that so
much could be done with such limited resources. Maybe there was something to
Tomas Nau's claims about Focused systems and Qeng Ho initiative.
The party wound on for Ksecs after Jau Xin's frolic. At least three people
ended up in the water. For a while there were meter-wide droplets wobbling
above the lake. The Podmaster asked his guests to come back to the lodge and let
the water settle itself. The favors of hundreds of people over a year had been
expended on the party supplies, and the usual fools-including, most
spectacularly, Pham Trinli-got very drunk.
Finally, the guests straggled out and the doors in the hillside were closed
behind them. Privately, Ezr was sure this would be the last time the riffraff were
invited into the Podmaster's domain. The riffraff had made the party possible,
and Qiwi had obviously enjoyed every second of it, but Tomas Nau was
beginning to fray toward the end of the party. The bastard was a clever one. For
the price of one tedious afternoon, the Podmaster had gotten more goodwill than
ever. A few decades of tyranny couldn't make Qeng Ho forget their heritage. .
.but Nau had made their situation an ambiguous kind of not-tyranny.Focus is
slavery. But Tomas Nau promised to free the zipheads at the end of the Exile.
Ezr shouldn't hate the Qeng Ho for accepting the situation. Many otherwise free
societies accepted parttime slavery.In any case, Nau's promise is a lie.
Anne Reynolt's unconscious body was found 4Ksecs after the end of the
party. All the next day, there were rumors and panics: Reynolt was really brain-
dead, some said, and the announcements were simply soft lies. Ritser Brughel
hadn't been in coldsleep, others claimed, and now he had staged a coup. Ezr had
his own theory.After all the years, Pham Nuwenhas finally acted.
Twenty Ksec into the workday, the ziphead support for two of the research
teams fell into deadlock, a temperamental snit that Reynolt could have cleared in
a few seconds. Phuong and Silipan whacked at the problem for 6Ksecs, then
announced that the zipheads involved would be down for the rest of the day. No,
they weren't translators-but Trixia had been working with one of them, some
kind of geologist. Ezr tried to go over to Hammerfest.
"You're not on my list, buddy." There was actually a guard at the taxi port,
one of Omo's goons. "Hammerfest is off-limits."

"For how long?"
"Dunno. Read the announcements, will you."
And so Ezr ended up in Benny's parlor, along with a mob and a half of
other people. Ezr wedged down at the table with Jau and Rita. Pham was there,
too, looking decidedly hungover.
Jau Xin had his own tale of woe: "Reynolt was supposed to retune my
pilots. Not a big deal, but our drills went like crap without it."
"What are you complaining about? Your gear is still functioning, right? But
we were trying to do an analysis of this Spider spaceflight stuff-and now our
ziphead allocation is offline. Hey, I know bits of chemistry and engineering, but
there's no way I can put it all to-"
Pham groaned loudly. He was holding his head with both hands. "Quit your
bitching. This all makes me wonder about Emergent 'superiority.' One person
gets knocked out and your house of cards comes apart.
Where's the superiority in that?"
Normally Rita Liao was a gentle sort, but the look she gave Pham was
venomous. "You Qeng Ho murdered our superiority, remember? When we came
here we had ten times the clinical staff we have now, enough to make our
systems as good as anything back home."
There was an embarrassed silence. Pham glared back at Rita, but didn't
argue further. After a moment he gave the abrupt shrug that everyone
recognized: Trinli was bested, but unwilling to retreat or apologize.
A voice from the next table broke the silence. "Hey, Trud!"
Silipan was standing halfway through the parlor doorway, looking up at
them. He was still wearing the Emergent dress uniform of the day before, but
now the silken rags had new stains, and they were not artistic tints.
The silence dissolved, people shouting questions, inviting Trud to come up
and talk to them. Trud climbed up through the vines toward Jau Xin's table.
There was no room left, so they flipped another table over to make a double-
decker. Now Ezr was almost eye to eye with Silipan, even though the other's
face was inverted from his. The crowd from other tables swarmed in close,
anchoring themselves among the vines.
"So when are you going to break that deadlock, Trud? I've got zipheads
reserved, waiting for answers." "Yeah, why are you over here when-"
"-There's only so much we can do with raw hardware, and-"
"Lord of Trade Almighty, give the fellow a chance!" Pham's voice boomed,
loud and irritated. It was a typical Trinli turnabout, always the truculent cannon,
but pointing in whatever direction might make him look good. It also, Ezr
noticed, silenced the crowd.
f
f

Silipan sent Pham a grateful look. The technician's cockiness was a fragile
thing today. There were dark rings under his eyes, and his hand shook slightly as
he raised the drink Benny had set before him.
"How is she, Trud?" Jau asked the question in sympathetic, quiet tones.
"We heard. . .we heard, she's brain-dead."
"No, no." Trud shook his head and smiled weakly. "Reynolt should make a
full recovery, minus maybe a year of retrograde amnesia. Things will be a bit
chaotic till we get her back online. I'm sorry about the deadlock. Why, I'd have it
fixed by now"-some of the old confidence crept back into his voice-"but I was
reassigned to something more important."
"What really happened to her?"
Benny showed up with a shrimp-tentacle dinner, his best entree. Silipan dug
in hungrily, seeming to ignore the question. This was the most attentive audience
Trud had ever had, literally breathless to hear his opinions. Ezr could tell the guy
realized this, that he was enjoying his sudden and central importance. At the
same time, Trud was almost too tired to see straight. His once perfect uniform
actually stank. His fork took a wobbling course from food bucket to mouth.
After a few moments, he turned a bleary-eyed look in the direction of his
questioner. "What happened? We're not sure. The last year or so, Reynolt's been
slipping-still in Focus, of course, but not well tuned. Tas a subtle thing,
something that only a pro could notice. I almost missed it myself. She seemed to
be caught up on some subproject-you know the way zipheads can obsess. Only
thing is, Reynolt does her own calibration, so there was nothing I could do. I tell
you, tas making me damn uneasy. I was about to report it to the Podmaster
when-"
Trud hesitated, seemed to realize that this was a brag with consequences.
"Anyway, it looks like she was trying to adjust some of the MRI control circuits.
Maybe she knew that her tuning was adrift. I don't know. She had the safety
hood off and was running diagnostics. It looks like there was some kind of
situational flaw in the control software; we're still trying to reproduce that.
Anyway, she got a control pulse right in the face. There was a little piece of her
scalp in the cabinet behind the controls, where she spasmed. Fortunately, the
stimulated drug production was alpha-retrox. She has a concussion and a retrox
overdose.. . .Like I say, it's all repairable. Another forty days and our old lovable
Reynolt will be back." He laughed weakly.
"Minus some recent memories."
"Of course. Zipheads aren't hardware; I don't have backups."
There was some uncomfortable mumbling around the table, but it was Rita
Liao who put the idea into words: "It's all too convenient. It's like someone
t d t
h t h
d
" Sh h
it t d E li
i th d
it h d b
Rit

wanted to shut her down." She hesitated. Earlier in the day, it had been Rita
pushing the rumors about Ritser Brughel. It showed how far these Emergents
had come that they would stick their noses into what might be a Podmaster
conflict. "Has Podmaster Nau checked into the off-Watch status of the Vice-
Podmaster?"
"And his agents?" That from a Qeng Ho behind Ezr.
Trud slapped his fork down on the table. His voice came out angry and
squeaky. "What do you think! The Podmaster is looking into the possibilities. .
.very carefully." He took a deep breath, and seemed to realize that the price of
fame was too high. "You can be absolutely sure that the Podmaster is taking this
seriously. But look-the retrox flood was simply a massive overdose, unlocalized,
just what you'd expect in an accident. The amnesia will be a patchy thing. Any
saboteur doing that would be a fool. She could be dead and it would've looked
just as much like an accident."
For a moment, everyone was silent. Pham glared back and forth at all of
them.
Silipan picked up his fork, set it down again. He stared into his half-
finished bucket of shrimp tentacles. "Lord, I am so tired. I go back on duty in
twenty-damn it, fifteen-Ksecs."
Rita reached out to pat his arm. "Well, I'm glad you came over and gave us
the straight story." There was a murmur of agreement from the people all
around.
"Bil and I will be running the show for some time now. It all depends on
us." Trud looked from face to face, seeking comfort. His voice boasted and
quailed at the same time.
They met later that day, in the buffer space beneath the temp's outer skin.
This was a meeting agreed on long before the Lake Park open house. It was a
meeting Ezr had waited for with impatience and fear-the meeting where he
would lay it on the line to Pham Nuwen about Focus.I have mylittle speech, my
little threats to make. Will they be enough?
Ezr moved quietly past Fong's sproutling trays. The bright lights and the
smell of trebyun greens faded behind him. The dark that was left was too deep
for unaided eyes. Eight years ago, on his first meeting with Nuwen, there had
been faint sunlight. Now the hull plastic showed only darkness.
But nowadays, Ezr had other ways to see.. . .He signaled the localizer that
sat on his temple. A ghostly vision rose. The colors were just shades of yellow,
such as you might see if you pressed your finger firmly against the side of your
eye. But the light wasn't random patterns. Ezr had worked long and hard with
Pham's exercises. Now the yellow light revealed the curving walls of the balloon

membranes and the outer hull. Sometimes the view was distorted. Sometimes the
perspective was from beneath his feet or behind his head. But with the right
commands, and lots of concentration, he could see where no unaided person
could.Pham can still see better. There had been hints, over the years. Nuwen
used the localizers like a private empire.
Pham Nuwen was up ahead, standing behind a wall brace, invisible but for
the fact that there were localizers beyond him, looking back. As Ezr closed the
last few meters' distance between them, his vision wavered as the other swung
his tiny servants into a different constellation.
"Okay, make it quick." Pham had stepped out to face him. The yellow
pseudo-light painted his face haggard and drawn. He hadn't dropped the Trinli
persona? No, this looked like the hangover Pham had shown in the parlor, but
there was something deeper to it.
"You-You promised me two thousand seconds."
"Yeah, but things have changed. Or haven't you noticed?"
"I've noticed a lot of things. I think it's time we finally really talked about
them. Nau, he truly admires you. . .you know that, don't you?"
"Nau is full of lies."
"True. But the stories he showed me, some large part of them is true. Pham,
you and I have worked together through several Watches now. I've thought
about things my aunt and my grand-uncles used to say about you. I'm past the
hero worship. Finally, I realize how much you must. . .love. . .Focus. You've
made me many promises, but they've always been so carefully framed. You want
to beat Nau and take back what we lost-but more than anything, you want Focus,
don't you?
The silence stretched out for five seconds.To the direct question, whathe
will he say? When he finally spoke, his voice was grating: "Focus is the key to
making a civilization that lasts-across all of Human Space."
"Focus is slavery, Pham." Ezr spoke the words softly. "Of course, you know
that; and in your heart I think you hate it. Zamle Eng-you made him your inner
cover story; I think that was your heart crying out to you."
Pham was silent for a second, glaring at him. His mouth twisted. "You're a
fool, Ezr Vinh. You read
Nau's stories and you still don't understand. I was betrayed once before by a
Vinh. It won't happen again. Do you think I'll let you live if you cross me?"
Pham glided closer. Ezr's vision was abruptly snuffed out; he was cut off
from all localizer input. Ezr raised his hands, palms up. "I don't know. But I am a
Vinh, Sura's direct descendant, and also yours. We are a Family of secrets within
secrets; someday I would have been told the truth about Brisgo Gap. But even as

a child, I heard little things, hints. The Family has not forgotten you. There's
even a motto that we never say on the outside: 'We owe all to Pham Nuwen; be
thou kind unto him.' So even if you kill me, I have to talk to you." Ezr stared into
the silent dark; he didn't even know where the other was standing now. "And
after yesterday. . .I think you will listen. I think I have nothing to fear."
"Afteryesterday ?" Pham's voice was angry and near. "My little Vinh snake,
what can you possibly know about yesterday?"
Ezr stared out in the direction of the voice. There was something about
Pham's voice, a hatred that went beyond reason.What did happen withReynolt?
Things were going terribly wrong, but all he had were the words already
planned: "You didn't kill her. I believe what Trud said. Killing her would have
been easy, and could have looked just as much like an accident. And so I think I
know about where Nau's stories are true and where they are lies." Ezr reached
out with both arms, and his hands fell on Pham's shoulders. He stared intently
into the dark, willing vision. "Pham! All your life you have been driven. That,
and your genius, made us what we are. But you wanted more. Quite what, is
never clear in the Qeng Ho histories, but I could see it in Nau's records. You had
a wonderful dream, Pham. Focus might give it to you. . .but the price is too
high."
There was a moment of silence, then a sound, almost like an animal in pain.
Abruptly, Ezr's arms were struck aside. Two hands grabbed him at the throat,
viselike and squeezing shut. All that was left was shocked surprise, dimming
toward final blackout. . .
And then the hands relaxed their pressure. All around him glowbugs flashed
stark white light, dozens of tiny popping sounds. He gasped, dazed, trying to
understand. Pham was blowing the capacitors in all the nearby localizers! The
pinpoint flashes showed Pham Nuwen in bright and black stop action. There was
a glittering madness in his eyes that Ezr had never seen.
The lights were farther away now, the destruction spreading outward from
them. Ezr's voice came out a terrified croak: "Pham. Our cover. Without the
localizers-"
The last of the tiny flashes showed a twisted smile on the other's face.
"Without the localizers, we die! Die, little Vinh. I no longer care."
Ezr heard him turn and push off. What was left was darkness and silence-
and death that must be no more than Ksecs away. For no matter how hard Ezr
tried, he found no sign of localizer support.
What do you do when your dream dies? Pham floated alone in the dark of
his room, and thought about the question with something like curiosity, almost
indifference. At the edge of his consciousness, he was aware of the ragged hole
h h d
h d i
h l
li
Th
b
Th
di
i

he had punched in the localizer net. The net was robust. That disruption was not
automatically revealed to the Emergent snoops. But without careful revision,
news of the failure would eventually percolate out to them. He was vaguely
aware that Ezr Vinh was desperately trying to cover the burnout. Surprisingly,
the boy had not made things worse, but he had not a prayer of doing the high-
level cover-up. A few hundred seconds, at most, and Kal Omo would alert
Brughel. . .and the charade would be over. It really didn't matter anymore.
What do you do when your dream dies?
Dreams die in every life. Everyone gets old. There is promise in the
beginning when life seems so bright. The promise fades when the years get
short.
Butnot Pham's dream. He had pursued it across five hundred light-years and
three thousand years of objective time. It was a dream of a single Humankind,
where justice would not be occasional flickering light, but a steady glow across
all of Human Space. He dreamed of a civilization where continents never
burned, and where two-bit kings didn't give children away as hostages. When
Sammy had dug him out of the cemeterium at Lowcinder, Pham was dying,
butnot the dream. The dream had been bright as ever in his mind, consuming
him.
And here he hadfound the edge that could make the dream come true:
Focus, an automation deep enough and smart enough to manage an inter-stellar
civilization. It could create the "loving slaves" whose possibility Sura had made
jest of. So what if it was slavery? There were far greater injustices that Focus
would banish forever.
Maybe.
He had looked away from Egil Manrhi, now scarcely more than a scanning
device. He had looked away from Trixia Bonsol and all the others, locked for
years in their tiny cells. But yesterday, he'd been forced to look upon Anne
Reynolt, standing alone against all the power of Focus, spending her life to resist
that power. The particulars had been a great surprise to Pham, but he had been
fooling himself to think that such was not part of the price for his dream. Anne
was Cindi Ducanh writ large.
And today, Ezr Vinh and his little speech:"The price is too high!" EzrVinh !
Pham might have his dream. . .if he gave up the reason for it.
Once before, a Vinh had stepped between him and final success.Letthe Vinh
snake die. Let them all die. Let me die.
Pham curled inward upon himself. He was suddenly conscious that he was
weeping. Except as a deceit, he hadn't cried since. . .he didn't remember. .
.perhaps since those days at the other end of his life when he first came aboard

theReprise.
So what do you do when your dream dies? When your dream dies, you give
it up.
And then what is left? For a long time, Pham's mind dwelled in a
nothingness. And then once more, he became aware of the images flickering
around him from the localizer net: down on the rockpile, the Focused slaves
crammed by the hundreds in the honeycombs of Hammerfest, Anne Reynolt
asleep in a cell as small as any.
They deserved better than what had happened to them. They deserved better
than what Tomas Nau had planned for them. Anne deserved better.
He reached out into the net, and gently touched Ezr Vinh, motioned him
aside. He gathered the boy's efforts up and began building them out into an
effective patch. There were details: the bruises on Vinh's neck, the need for ten
thousand new localizers in the temp interspace. He could handle them, and in the
longer runAnne Reynolt would eventually recover from what he had done to her.
When that happened, the game of cat-and-mouse would resume, but this time he
must protect her and all the other slaves. It would be so much harder than before.
But maybe with Ezr Vinh, if they worked as a real team. . .The plans formed and
re-formed in Pham's mind. It was a far cry from breaking the wheel of history,
but there was a strange, rising pleasure in doing what felt wholly right.
And somewhere before he finally fell asleep, he remembered Gunnar
Larson, the old man's gentle mocking, the old man's advice that Pham
understand the limits of the natural world, and accept them.So maybe he
wasright. Funny. All the years in this room he had lain awake, grinding his teeth,
planning his plans and dreaming what he might do with Focus. Now that he had
given it up, there were still plans, still terrible dangers. . .but for the first time in
many years there was also. . .peace.
That night he dreamed of Sura. And there was no pain.

PART THREE

FORTY-FOUR
There is always an angle. Gonle Fong had lived her whole life by that
principle. The mission to the OnOff star had been a long shot, the sort of thing
that appealed mainly to scientists. But Gonle had seen angles. Then had come
the Emergent ambush, and the long shot had been turned into servitude and
exile. A prison run by thugs. But even then there was an angle. For almost
twenty years of her life she had played the angles and prospered-if only by the
standards of this dump.
Now things were changing. Jau Xin had been gone for more than four days,
at least since the beginning of her current Watch. At first the rumor was that he
and Rita had been unofficially moved to Watch tree C, and that they were still in
coldsleep. That screwed some of the programming deals she had planned with
Rita-and it was also as unusual as hell. Then Trinli reported that two pilot
zipheads were missing from the Hammerfest Attic. So. Rita might still be on ice,
but Jau Xin and his zipheads were. . .elsewhere. The rumors grew from there:
Jau was on an expedition to the dead sun, Jau was landing on the Spider world.
Trud Silipan strutted around Benny's, smug with some inner secret that for once
he was not sharing. More than anything, that proved that something very strange
was going on.
Gonle had run a betting pool on the speculations, but she was suffering
from sucker fever herself. She wasn't one bit disappointed when the big bosses
decided to let them all in on the secret.
Tomas Nau invited a handful of the peons down to his estate for the
briefing. This was first time Gonle had been to Lake Park since the open house.
Nau had made a big thing of his hospitality then. Afterward, the place had been
locked tight-though to be honest, part of that might be because of what happened
to Anne Reynolt during the open house.
As Gonle and the three other chosen peons shuffled down the footpath
toward Nau's lodge, she passed her critical judgment on the scene. "So they
figured out how to do rain." It was more a windblown mist, so fine it dewed her
hair and eyelashes, so fine that the lack of real gravity didn't matter.
Pham Trinli gave a cynical chuckle. "I'll bet it's partly garbage collection. In
my time, I've seen plenty of these faked gravity parks, usually built by some
Customer with more money than sense. If you want to have a groundside and a
skyside, the clutter starts piling up. Pretty soon you have a sky full of crap."
Walking beside him, Trud Silipan said, "Sky looks pretty clean to me."

Trinli looked up into the driven mist. The clouds were low and gray,
moving quickly in from the lake's far shore. Some of this was real and some
must be wallpaper, but the two were seamlessly meshed. Not a cheerful scene by
Gonle Fong's standards, but one that was chill and clean. "Yeah," he said after a
moment. "I gotta hand it to you, Trud. Your Ali Lin is a genius."
Silipan puffed up a little. "Not just him. It's the coordination that counts.
I've got a team of zipheads on this. Every year it just gets better. Someday we'll
even figure out how to make naturallooking sea waves."
Gonle looked across at Ezr Vinh and rolled her eyes. Neither of these
buffoons liked to acknowledge how much everyone's cooperation-very profitable
cooperation-was involved here. Even if the peons weren't welcome anymore,
they still supplied a constant stream of food, finished woods, live plants, and
program designs.
The mist made little swirls around the lodge, and the illusion of gravity was
sorely tested as the visitors tilted this way and that on their grabber-soled shoes.
Then they were in the lodge, warmed by very naturallooking burning logs in
Tomas Nau's big fireplace. The Podmaster gestured them toward a conference
table. There were Nau, Brughel, and Reynolt. Three other figures were
silhouetted against the windows and the gray light beyond. One was Qiwi.
"Well hello, Jau," said Ezr. "Welcome. . .back."
Sure enough, it was Jau and Rita. Tomas Nau brightened the room lights.
The warmth and brightness were nothing more than in any civilized habitation,
but somehow the cold and gloom so expensively maintained outside made this
inner light a joyous security.
The Podmaster waved them to seats, then sat down himself. As usual, Nau
was a picture of generous and high-minded leadership.But he doesn'tfool me for
a moment, thought Gonle. Before this mission, she had had a long career,
dealing with a dozen Customer cultures, on three worlds. Customers came in all
the sizes and colors of humanity. And their governments were even more varied-
tyrannies, democracies, demarchies. There was always a way of doing business
with them. Big boss Nau was a villain, but a smart villain who understood that
he had to do business. Qiwi had seen to that, years ago. It was too bad he held
the physical upper hand-thatwas not part of the standard Qeng Ho business
environment. Things were dicey when you couldn't run away from the bad guys.
But in the long term, even that didn't matter.
The Podmaster nodded to each of them. "Thanks for coming in person. You
should know that this meeting is being shown live on the local net, but I hope
you'll tell your friends what you've seen firsthand." He grinned. "I'm sure it will
make for good conversation at Benny's. What I have is incredibly good news,

but it's also a great challenge. You see, Pilot Manager Xin has just returned from
low Arachna orbit." He paused.I bet there'stotal, awesome silence in Benny's.
"And what he discovered there is. . .interesting. Jau-please. Describe the
mission."
Xin came to his feet a little too quickly. His wife caught his hand and he
stood on the floor, facing them. Gonle tried unsuccessfully to catch Rita's eye,
but the woman's entire attention was on Jau.I bet they kept her on iceuntil he was
back; that was the only thing that would have kept her mouthshut about this.
Rita's expression was one of vast relief. Whatever this news was, it couldn't be
bad.
"Yes, sir. Per your instructions, I was brought on-Watch early, to undertake
a close approach of Arachna." As he spoke, Qiwi passed around some Qeng Ho-
quality huds. Gonle mouthed a buy offer at Qiwi as she passed; the other grinned
and whispered "Soon!" back at her. The big bosses still didn't let peons own
these things. Maybe finally that would change, too. A second went by as the
huds synched on the consensus image. The space above the table rippled and
became a view of the L1 rockpile. Far away, beyond the floor, there was the disk
of the Spider world.
"My pilots and I took the last functioning pinnace." A thread of gold arced
out from the rockpile; the tip accelerated to the halfway point and then began to
slow. Their pov caught up with the pinnace; ahead, the disk of Arachna grew
wide. The world looked almost as frozen and dead as when the humans had first
arrived. There was one big difference: a faint glitter of city lights across the
northern hemisphere, webbing here and there at major cities.
Pham Trinli's voice came from beyond the dark, an incredulous hoot. "I bet
you got spotted!"
"They pinged us. Show the defense radars and native satellites," he said to
the display. A cloud of blue and green dots blossomed in the space around the
planet. On the ground, there were arcs of flashing light, the sweep of the Spiders'
missile radars. "It's going to be more of a problem in the future."
Anne Reynolt's voice cut across the Pilot Manager's. "My network people
deleted all the hard evidence. The risk was well worth it."
"Hunh! That must have been something motherloving important."
"Oh Pham, tas. Tas." Jau stepped to one side of the consensus image, and
jabbed his hand deep into the haze of satellites, marking one blue dot with the
labelKINDRED GROUND RECON SATELLITE 543 followed by orbital
parameters. He glanced in Pham's direction, and there was a quiet smile on his
face, as if he were expecting some reaction. The numbers didn't mean anything
to Gonle. She leaned to one side, looked at Trinli around the edge of the image.

The old fraud looked just as mystified as any, and not at all happy with Xin's
smile or Silipan's smug chuckle.
Trinli squinted into the display. "Okay, so you matched orbits with
Recon543." Beside him, Ezr Vinh sucked in a surprised breath. This made
Trinli's frown even deeper. "Launch date seven hundred Ksec ago, booster
chemical, period synchronous, altitude . . ." His voice trailed off in a kind of
gargle. "Altitude twelve thousand damn-all kilometers! That must be a mistake."
Jau's grinned widened. "No mistake. That's the whole reason I went down
for a close look."
The significance finally percolated through to Gonle. In Supplies and
Services, she dealt mainly with bargaining and inventory managment. But
shipping was a big part of price points, and she was Qeng Ho. Arachna was a
terrestroid planet, with a 90Ksec day. Synchronous altitude should have been
way higher than twelve thousand klicks. Even for a nontechnical person, the
satellite was a magical impossibility. "It's stationkeeping?" she asked. "Little
rockets?"
"No. Even fusion rockets would have trouble doing that for days at a time."
"Cavorite." Ezr's voice was faint, awed. Where had she heard that word
before?
But Jau was nodding. "Right." He said something to the display, and now
the view was from his pinnace. "Getting a close look was a problem, especially
since I didn't want to show my main torch. Instead, I fried the satellite's cameras
and then did an instantaneous match from below.. . .You can begin to see it now,
at the center of my target pointer. The closing speed has fallen from fifty meters
a second, to an instant now where we're stopped relative to each other. It's about
five meters above us now." There was something in the pointer, something boxy
and dead black, falling toward them like a yo-yo on a string. It slowed, passed a
meter or two below them, and started back up. The topside was not black but an
irregular pattern of dark grays. "Okay, freeze the image. This should give you a
good look. A flat architecture, probably gyro-stabilized. The polyhedral shell is
for radar evasion. Except for the impossible orbit, this thing is a typical low-tech
stealthed satellite. . . ." The satellite slid upward again, but this time was met by
grappling hooks. "This is where we took it aboard the pinnace-and left behind a
credible explosion."
"Good flying, man." That from Pham Trinli, acknowledging someone
almost as good as himself.
"Ha. Tas even tougher than it looks. I had to run my zipheads near the edge
of a nonrecoverable panic all through the rendezvous. There were just too many
inconsistencies in the dynamics."
Sili
i
d h
il
"Th
ill h
W '
i
ll

Silipan interrupted cheerily, "That will change. We're reprogramming all
the pilots for cavorite maneuvers."
Jau killed the imagery and frowned at Silipan. "You screw up, and we'll
have no pilots."
Gonle couldn't take much more irrelevant chitchat. "The satellite. You have
it here? How did the Spiders do this?"
She noticed Nau grinning at her. "I think Miss Fong has identified the
immediate issue. Do you remember those stories of gravity anomalies in the
altiplano? The short of it is, those stories weretrue. The Kindred military
discovered some kind of-call it antigravity. Apparently they've been pursuing
this for ten years now. We never caught on because Accord Intelligence missed
it, and our penetration of the Kindred side has always lagged. This little satellite
massed eight tonnes, but almost two tonnes of that was 'cavorite' cladding. The
Kindred Spiders are using this remarkable substance simply to increase their
rockets' throw weight. I have a little demonstration for you. . . ."
He spoke to the air. "Douse the fireplace, cut ventilation." He paused, and
the room became very quiet. Over by the wall, Qiwi closed a tall window that
had drawn a taste of moistness in from the lake. The park's fake sun peeked
between breaks in the clouds, and streamers of light glittered on the water. Gonle
wondered vaguely if Nau's zipheads were so good that they could orchestrate his
world for these moments. Probably.
The Podmaster took a small case out of his shirt. He opened it, and held
something that glittered in the lowering sun. It was a small square, a tile. There
were flecks of light that might have been cheap mica, except that the colors
swept in coordinated iridescence. "This is one of the cladding tiles from the
satellite. There was also a layer of low-power LEDs, but we've stripped those
off. Chemically, what is left is diamond fragments bound in epoxy. Watch." He
set the square down on the table and shined a hand light on it. And they all
watched.. . .And after a moment the little square of iridescence floated upward.
At first, the motion looked like a commonplace of the microgravity environment,
a loose paperweight wafting on an air current. But the air in the room was still.
And as the seconds passed, the tile moved faster, tumbling, falling. . .straight up.
It hit the ceiling with an audible clink-and remained there.
No one said anything for several seconds.
"Ladies and gentlemen, we came to the OnOff star hoping for treasure. So
far we've learned some new astrophysics, developed a slightly better ramdrive.
The biologicals of the Spider world are another treasure, also enough to finance
our coming. But originally, we expected more. We expected to find the remains
of a starfaring race-well, after forty years, it looks like we have succeeded.
Spectacularly "

Spectacularly."
Maybe it was just as well that Nau had not scheduled this as a general
meeting. Everyone was suddenly talking at once. Lord only knew what it was
like over at Benny's. Ezr Vinh finally got a question on the floor. "You think the
Spiders made this stuff?"
Nau shook his head. "No. The Kindred had to mine thousands of tonnes of
low-grade ore to get this much magic."
Trinli said, "We've known for years that the Spiders evolved here, that they
never had a higher tech."
"Quite so. And their own archeologists have no solid evidence of
visitations. But this. . .this stuffis an artifact, even if only we can see it as such.
Anne's automation has spent several days on this. It's a coordinated processing
matrix."
"I thought you said it was refined from native ores."
"Yes. It makes the conclusion all the more fantastic. For forty years we've
thought the diamond powders of Arachna were either infalls or biological
skeletons. Now it looks like they are fossil processing devices. And at least some
of them reassert their mission when brought close together. Like localizers, but
much much smaller, and with a special purpose. . .to manipulate physical laws in
ways we don't begin to understand."
Trinli looked as if someone had punched him in the face, as if decades of
bombast had been beaten out of him. He said softly, "Nanotech. The dream."
"What? Yes, the Failed Dream. Till now." The Podmaster looked up at the
tile lying on the ceiling. He smiled. "Whoever visited here, it was millions or
billions of years ago. I doubt we'll ever find any camp tents or garbage middens.
. .but the signs of their technology are everywhere."
Vinh: "We were looking for starfarers, but we were too small and all we
saw were their ankles." He tore his gaze down from the ceiling. "Maybe even
these-" He waved at the window, and Gonle realized that he was talking about
the big diamonds of L1. "Maybe even these are artifacts."
Brughel moved forward in his chair. "Nonsense. They are simple diamond
rocks." But there was an edge of uncertainty in the aggressive look he flashed
around the table.
Nau hesitated an instant, then gave an easy chuckle, waving his thug silent.
"We're all beginning to sound like some Dawn Age fantasy. The hard facts are
extraordinary, without adding superstitious mumbo-jumbo. With what we
already have, this expedition may be the most important in human history."
And the most profitable, too.Gonle shifted back on her chair, and tried to
catalogue all the things they might do with the glittering material that was lying

on the ceiling.What's the best way to sell something like that?How many
centuries of monopoly might be wrung out of it?
But the Podmaster had returned to more practical matters. "So that's the
fantastic news. In the long term, it is good beyond our wildest dreams. In the
short term-well, it puts a real knot in the Schedule. Qiwi?"
"Yes. As you know, the Spiders are about five years from having a mature
planetary computer network, something we can reliably act through."
Something advanced enough that we can use.Until today, that had been the
biggest treasure that Gonle
Fong had envisioned coming out of these years of exile. Forget about
marginal advances in ramdrives or even biologicals. There was a whole
industrialized world down there, with a culture guaranteed to be alien from other
markets. If they controlled that, or even had a dominant bargaining position, they
would rank with the legends of the Qeng Ho marketing. Gonle understood that.
Surely Nau did. Qiwi did too, though right now she was talking simple idealism:
"Till now, we thought that they were also about five years away from really
needing our help. We thought that any Kindred/Accord war wouldn't happen till
then. Well. . .we were wrong. The Kindred don't have much of a computer net-
but they do have the cavorite mines. Their cavorite satellites are stealthed for
now, but that's only for temporary advantage. Very soon, their missile fleet will
be upgraded. Politically, we see them moving to subvert smaller countries,
egging them into confrontation with the Accord. We simply can't wait another
five years to take a hand in things."
Jau said, "There are other reasons for advancing the deadlines. With this
cavorite, it's going to be next to impossible to keep our operations a secret much
longer. The Spiders are going to be out in local space very soon. Depending on
how much of that"-he jerked his thumb at the glistening tile on the ceiling-"they
have, they may actually be more maneuverable than we are."
Beside him, Rita was looking more and more upset. "You mean there's a
chance Pedure's crowd couldwin ? If we have to advance the Schedule, then it's
time we stopped pussyfooting. We need to come down with military force, on
the side of the Accord."
The Podmaster nodded solemnly in Liao's direction. "I hear you, Rita.
There are people down there that we've all come to respect, even to-" He waved
his hand as if to push aside deeper sentiments, to concentrate on hard reality.
"But as your Podmaster, I have to look at priorities: My highest priority is the
survival of you and all the humans in our little pod. Don't mistake the beauty you
have all created here. The truth is, we have precious little real military power."
The setting sun had turned the lake to gold, and now the slanting rays lit the

meeting room with a gentle, even warmth. "In fact, we are almost castaways, and
we are about as far from Humankind as anyone has ever been. Our second
priority-and it's inextricably bound to the first-is the survival of the Spiders'
advanced industrial civilization, and therefore its people and their culture. We
must act very carefully. We can't act out of simple affection.. . .And you know, I
listen to the translations, too. I think that people like Victory Smith and
Sherkaner Underhill would understand."
"But they can help!"
"Maybe. I'd call them in an instant if we had better information and better
network penetration. But if we reveal ourselves unnecessarily, we could unite
them all against us-or alternatively, provoke Pedure into attacking them
immediately. We must save them, and we must not sacrifice ourselves."
Rita wavered. To Nau's right, but just in the shadows, Ritser Brughel
glowered at her. The younger Podmaster had never really grasped the fact that
the old, Emergent rules must change. The idea of someone giving back talk still
sent him into a rage.Thank the Lord he's not running things. Nau was a tough
nut, smooth and ruthless despite all the nice words-but you could do business
with him.
No one else spoke in support of Rita's position, yet she made one more try.
"We know Sherkaner Underhill is a genius. He would understand. He could
help."
Tomas Nau sighed. "Yes, Underhill. We owe him a lot. Without him, we'd
probably be twenty years short of success, not just five. But, I'm afraid . . ." He
glanced down the table at Ezr Vinh. "You know more about Underhill and Dawn
Age technology than anyone, Ezr. What do you think?"
Gonle almost laughed. Vinh had been following the conversation like a
spectator at a racquet match; now the ball had hit him square between the eyes.
"Um. Yes. Underhill is remarkable. He's like von Neumann, Einstein, Minsky,
Zhang-a dozen Dawn Age geniuses wrapped into one body. Either that or the
guy is just a genius at picking graduate students." Vinh smiled sadly. "I'm sorry,
Rita. For you and me, the Exile time has only been ten or fifteen years. Underhill
has lived it all, second by second. By Spider standards-and pre-tech human ones-
he's an old man. I'm afraid he's at the edge of senility. He's lived through all the
easy technical payoffs, and now he's hit the dead ends.. . .What was flexibility
has become superstitious mush. If we have to give up our Lurk advantage, I'd
suggest we just contact the Accord government, play things as a straight
business deal."
Vinh might have continued, but the Podmaster said, "Rita, we're trying for
the safest outcome for everyone. I promise, if that means throwing ourselves on
h S id
'
ll
b i " Hi
l
fli k
d
hi
i h
d G
l

the Spiders' mercy-well, so be it." His glance flickered to his right, and Gonle
realized that the message was directed at Brughel as much as anyone. Nau
paused a moment, but no one had anything more to say. His voice became more
businesslike. "So, the Schedule is suddenly very much advanced. Tas forced on
us, but I am pleased by the challenge." His smile flashed in the fake sunset. "One
way or another, our Exile will be over in a year. We can afford to-we must-
expend resources. From now till we've saved the Spider world, almost everyone
will be on-Watch."
Wow.
"We'll start running the volatile plant at redline duty cycle." Heads went up
all around the table.
"Remember, if we still need it in a year, we will have lost. We have an
awful lot of planning in front of us, people-we need to unleash every last bit of
our potential. As of now, I'm dropping the last community use limits. The
'underground' economy will have access to everything except the most critical
security automation."
Yes!Gonle grinned across the table at Qiwi Lisolet, saw her grinning right
back. So that was what Qiwi had meant by "soon"! Nau went on for some
seconds, not so much making detailed plans as undoing this and that stupid rule
that had kept operations so hobbled over the years. She could feel the enthusiasm
building with every sentence.Maybe I can start afutures market on groundside
trade.
The meeting ended on an incredible high. On the way out, Gonle gave Qiwi
a hug. "Kiddo, you did it!" she said softly.
Qiwi just grinned back, but it was a wider smile than Gonle had seen her
wear in a long time.
Afterward, the four visiting peons walked back up the hillside, the last of
the sunlight throwing long shadows before them. She took a last look behind her
before they entered the forest.Presumptuous, this park. But stillit was beautiful,
and I had something to do with it. The last light of the sun showed from under
far clouds. It might be Nauly manipulation or the random outcome of the park's
automation. Either way, it seemed auspicious. Old Nau thought he manipulated
everything. Gonle knew that this sudden, final liberalization was something the
Podmaster might try to stuff back in the bottle later on, when imagination and
sharp trading was more a risk than the alternatives. But Gonle was Qeng Ho.
Over the years, she and Qiwi and Benny and dozens of others had chipped away
at the Emergents' tight little tyranny, until almost every Emergent was
"corrupted" by the underground trade. Nau had learned that you win by doing
business. After the Spider markets were opened up, he would see there was no

advantage to stuffing freedom back in the bottle.
Tomas Nau's second meeting was later in the day, aboard theInvisibleHand.
Here they could talk, far from innocent ears. "I got Kal Omo's report, Podmaster.
From the snoops. You fooled almost everyone."
"Almost?"
"Well, you know Vinh-but he didn't see through everything you said. And
Jau Xin looks. . .dubious." Nau glanced a question at Anne Reynolt.
Reynolt's reply was quick. "Xin is one we really need, Podmaster. He's our
only remaining Pilot
Manager. We would have lost that pinnace if not for him. The ziphead
pilots glitched when they saw the cavorite orbit. Suddenly all the rules had
changed and they just couldn't deal with the situation."
"Okay, he's a secret doubter." There was no help for that really. Xin had
been near the operational center of too many things. He probably suspected the
truth behind the Diem Massacre. "So we can't ice him, and we can't fool him,
and we'll need him at the bloodiest stage of the job. Still. . .I think Rita Liao is a
sufficient lever. Ritser. Make sure Jau knows that her welfare depends on his
quality of service."
Ritser gave a little smile, and made a note.
Nau scanned Omo's report for himself. "Yes, we did quite well. But then,
telling people what they want to believe is an easy job. No one seemed to catch
all the consequences of pushing the Schedule forward five years. There's no way
we can pull a smooth network takeover now, and we need an intact industrial
ecology on the planet-but there's no need for the whole planet to participate.
Right now"-Nau glanced at the latest reports from Reynolt's zips-"seven Spider
nations have nuclear weapons. Four have substantial arsenals, and three have
delivery systems."
Reynolt shrugged. "So we engineer a war."
"A precisely limited one, one that leaves the world financial system intact
and controlled by us." An exercise in disaster management.
"And the Kindred?"
"We want them to survive, of course-but weak enough that we can bluff full
control. We'll throw a bit more 'good luck' their way."
Reynolt was nodding. "Yes. We can tailor things. Southland has long-range
missiles but is otherwise backward; most of its population will be hibernating
through the Dark. They're very frightened of what will be done to them by the
advanced powers. Honored Pedure has plans for taking advantage of that. We
can make sure she succeeds-" Anne went on, detailing what frauds and miscues
could be implemented, which cities could be safely murdered, how to save the

Accord sites that held resources the Kindred did not yet have. Most of the deaths
would be delivered by their proxies, which was just as well, considering the
sorry state of their own weapons systems.. . .Brughel was watching her with a
certain bemused awe-the way he always did when Anne talked like this.
Dispassionate and calm as ever, yet she could be as bloody-minded as Brughel
himself.
Anne Reynolt had been a young woman when the Emergency came to
Frenk. If history were written by the losing side, her name would be legend.
After the Frenkisch military had surrendered, Anne Reynolt's ragtag partisans
had fought on for years-and not as a fringe nuisance. Nau had seen the
Intelligence estimates: Reynolt had tripled the cost of the invasion. She had
taken an inchoate popular opposition and come within a hairsbreadth of
defeating the Emergency's expeditionary force. And when her cause had
ultimately failed-well, enemies such as that were best disposed of quickly. But
Alan Nau had noticed that this enemy was peculiar to the point of uniqueness.
Focusing the higher, people-oriented skills was normally a losing proposition.
The very nature of Focusing tended to leave out the broad sensibilities that were
necessary to manage people. And yet. . .Reynolt was young, brilliant, with an
absolute dedication to principle. Her fanatical resistance was like nothing so
much as a ziphead's loyalty to its subject matter. What if shecould be profitably
Focused?
Uncle Alan's long shot had paid off. Reynolt's only academic specialty had
been ancient literature, but Focus had somehow captured the more subtle skills
of her accidental career: warfare, subversion, leadership. Alan had kept his
discovery carefully out of sight, but he had used this very special ziphead over
the following decades. Her skills had helped establish Uncle Alan as the
dominant Podmaster of the Home Regime. She had been a very special gift to a
very favored nephew. . .
And though he would never admit it to Ritser Brughel, sometimes when
Tomas looked into Reynolt's pale blue eyes. . .he felt a superstitious chill. For a
hundred years of her lifetime, Anne Reynolt had worked to undo and suppress
everything that was important to her unFocused self. If she wanted to cause him
harm, she could do so much. But that was the beauty of Focus; that was the
reason the Emergency would prevail. With Focus you got the capabilities of the
subject without the humanity. And given attentive maintenance, all the ziphead's
interest and loyalty stayed squarely on its subject matter and its owner.
"Okay, get your people on it, Anne. You have one year. We'll probably
need a major vessel in low orbit during the final Ksecs."
"You know," said Ritser, "I think the groundside of this is working out for
h b
Wi h h Ki d d
i
h
W 'll k
h

the best. With the Kindred, one or two guys are in charge. We'll know who to
hold responsible when we give orders. With that pus-be- damned Accord-"
"True. There are too many autonomous power centers within the Accord;
their nonsovereign-kingship thing is even crazier than a democracy." Nau
shrugged. "It's the luck of the draw. We have to take what we know we can
control. Without the cavorite, we'd have another five years of slack. By then, the
Accord would have a mature network, and we could take over everything
without anyone firing a shot-more or less the goal I'm still hoping for in public."
Ritser leaned forward. "And that is going to be our biggest problem. Once
our people realize this is a major Spider fry and their special friends are the main
course-"
"Of course. But handled properly, the final outcome should appear to be an
unavoidable tragedy, one that would have been much more horrible without our
efforts."
"It will be even trickier than the Diem thing. I wish you hadn't given the
Peddlers increased resource access."
"It's unavoidable, Ritser. We need their logistical genius. But I will
withhold full network processing from them. We'll bring out all your security
zips, do really intense monitoring. If necessary, there can be some fatal
accidents."
He glanced at Anne. "And speaking of accidents. . .is there any progress on
your sabotage theory?" It had been almost a year since Anne's maybe-accident in
the MRI clinic. A year and not a sign of enemy action. Of course, there had been
precious little evidence before the event, either.
But Anne Reynolt was adamant. "Someone is manipulating our systems,
Podmaster, both the localizers and the zipheads. The evidence is spread through
large patterns; it's not something I can put into words. But he's getting more
aggressive. . .and I'm very close to nailing him, maybe as close as when he got
me before."
Anne had never bought the explanation that a stupid mistake had wiped her.
But her Focushad been out of tune, even if so subtly it slipped past his own
checks.Just how paranoid should I be? Anne had cleared Ritser of suspicion in
the affair. "He? Him?"
"You know the suspect list. Pham Trinli is still at the top of it. Over the
years, he's wrung my techs dry. And he was the one who gave us the secret of
the Qeng Ho localizers."
"But you've had twenty years now to study them."
Anne frowned. "The ensemble behavior is extremely complex, and there are
physical-layer issues. Give me another three or four years."
He glanced at Ritser "Opinion?"

He glanced at Ritser. "Opinion?"
The junior Podmaster grinned. "We've been over this before, sir. Trinli is
useful and we have a hold on him. He's a weasel, but he'sour weasel."
True. Trinli stood to gain much with the Emergents, and lose even more if
the Qeng Ho ever learned of his traitorous past. Watch after Watch, the old man
had passed every one of Nau's tests, and in the process become ever more useful.
In retrospect, the fellow was always just as sharp as he had to be. Of course, that
was the strongest evidence against him.Pus andPest. "Okay. Ritser, I want you
and Anne to set things up so we can pull the plug on Trinli and Vinh at an
instant's notice. Jau Xin we'll have to keep alive in any case-but we have Rita to
keep him in line."
"What about Qiwi Lisolet, sir?" Ritser's face was bland, but the Podmaster
knew there was a smirk hidden just below the surface.
"Ah. I'm sure Qiwi will figure things out; we may have to scrub her several
times before the crisis point." But with luck she might be of use right to the end.
"Okay. Those are our special problem cases, but almost anyone could twig the
truth if we have bad luck. Surveillance and suppression readiness must be of the
highest order." He nodded to his Vice-Podmaster. "It will be hard work, this next
year. The Peddlers are a competent, dedicated crowd. We'll need them on duty
till the action begins-and we'll need many of them in the aftermath. The only
letup may be during the takeover itself. It's reasonable that they be simply
observers then."
"At which time, we'll feed them the story of our noble efforts to limit the
genocide." Ritser smiled, intrigued by the challenge. "I like it."
They set up the overall plan. Anne and her strategy zips would flesh out the
details. Ritser was right; this would be trickier than the Diem wetwork. On the
other hand, if they could just maintain the fraud till the takeover. . .that might be
enough. Once he controlled Arachna, he could pick and choose from both
Spiders and Qeng Ho, the best of both their worlds. And discard the rest. The
prospect was a cool oasis at the end of his long, long journey.

FORTY-FIVE
The Dark was upon them once more. Hrunkner could almost feel the weight
of traditional values on his shoulders. For the trads-and deep down, he would
always be one-there was a time to be born and a time to die; reality turned in
cycles. And the greatest cycle was the cycle of the sun.
Hrunkner had lived through two suns now. He was an old cobber. Last time
when the Dark had come, he had been young. There had been a world war going
on, and real doubt if his country could survive. And this time? There were minor
wars, all over the globe. But the big one had not occurred. If it did, Hrunkner
would be partly responsible. And if it didn't-well, he liked to think that he would
be partly responsible for that, too.
Either way, the cycles were shattered forever. Hrunkner nodded to the
corporal who held the door for him. He stepped out onto frost-covered
flagstones. He wore thick boots, covers, and sleeves. The cold gnawed the tips of
his hands, burned his breathing passages even behind his air warmer. The
alignment of the Princeton hills kept out the heaviest snows; that and the deep
river moorage were the reasons why the city had returned cycle after cycle. But
this was late afternoon on a summer day-and you had to search to find the dim
disk that had been the sun. The world was beyond the soft kindliness of the
Waning Years, beyond even the Early Dark. It stood at the edge of the thermal
collapse, when weakening storms would circle and circle, squeezing the last
water from the air-opening the way to times much colder, and the final stillness.
In earlier generations, all but soldiers would be in their deeps by now. Even
in his own generation, in the Great War, only the die-hard tunnel warriors still
fought this far into the Dark. This time-well, there were plenty of soldiers.
Hrunkner had his own military escort. And even the security cobbers around the
Underhill house were in uniform nowadays. But these were not caretakers,
guarding against endcycle scavengers. Princeton wasoverflowing with people.
The new, Dark Time housing was jammed. The city was busier than Unnerby
had ever seen it.
And the mood? Fear close to panic, wild enthusiasm, often both in the same
people. Business was booming. Just two days earlier, Prosperity Software had
bought a controlling interest in the Bank of
Princeton. No doubt the grab had gutted Prosperity's financial reserves, and
put them in a business that their software people knew nothing about. It was
insane-and very much in the spirit of the times.

Hrunkner's guards had to push their way through the crowd at the Hill
House entrance. Even past the property limits, there were reporters with their
little four-color cameras hanging from helium balloons. They couldn't know who
Hrunkner was, but they saw the guards and the direction he was heading.
"Sir, can you tell us-"
"Has Southland threatened preemption?" This one tugged on his balloon's
string, dragging the camera down till it hung just over Hrunkner's eyes.
Unnerby raised his forearms in an elaborate shrug. "How should I know?
I'm just a friggin' sergeant." In fact, hewas still a sergeant, but the rank was
meaningless. Unnerby was one of those rankless cobbers who made whole
military bureaucracies hop to their tune. As a young fellow he had been aware of
such. They had seemed as distant as the King himself. Now. . .now he was so
busy that even a visit with a friend had to be counted by the minute, balanced
against what it might cost the life-and-death schedules he must keep.
His claim stopped the reporters just long enough for his team to get past and
scuttle up the steps. Even so, it might have been the wrong thing to say. Behind
him, Unnerby could see the reporters clustering together. By tomorrow, his name
would be on their list. Ah, for the times when everyone thought that Hill House
was just a plush annex to the University. Over the years, that cover had frayed
away. The press thought they knew all about Sherkaner now.
Past the armored-glass doors there were no more intruders. Things were
suddenly quiet, and it was much too warm for jackets and leggings. As he shed
the insulation, he saw Underhill and his guide-bug standing just around the
corner, out of the reporters' sight. In the old days, Sherk would have come
outside to greet him. Even at the height of his radio fame, it hadn't bothered him
to come outside. But nowadays Smith's security had its way.
"So, Sherk. I came."I always come when you call. For decades, every new
idea had seemed crazier than the last-and changed the world still again. But
things had slowly changed with Sherkaner too. The General had given him the
first warning, at Calorica, five years ago. After that, there had been rumors.
Sherkaner had drifted away from active research. Apparently his work on
antigravity had gone nowhere, and now the Kindred were launching floater
satellites, for God's sake!
"Thanks, Hrunk." His smile was quick, nervous. "Junior told me you would
be in town and-" "Little Victory? She's here?"
"Yes! In the building somewhere. You'll be seeing her." Sherk led
Hrunkner and his guards down the main hall, talking all the while about Little
Victory and the other children, about Jirlib's researches and the youngest ones'
basic training. Hrunkner tried to imagine what they looked like. It had been

seventeen years since the kidnappings. . .since he had last seen the cobblies.
It was quite a caravan they made trooping down the hall, the guide-bug
leading Sherkaner leading
Hrunkner and the latter's security. Underhill's progress was a slow drift to
the left, corrected by Mobiy's constant gentle tugging on his tether. Sherk's
lateral dysbadisia was not a mental disease; like his tremor, it was a low-level
nervous disorder. The luck of the Dark had made him a very late casualty of the
Great War. Nowadays he looked and talked like someone a generation older.
Sherkaner stopped by an elevator; Unnerby didn't remember it from his
previous visits. "Watch this, Hrunk.. . .Press nine, Mobiy." The bug extended
one of its long, furry forelegs. The tip hovered uncertainly for a second, then
poked the "9" slot on the elevator door. "They say no bug can be taught
numbers. Mobiy and I, we're working on it."
Hrunkner shed his entourage at the elevator. It was just the two of them-and
Mobiy-who headed upward. Sherkaner seemed to relax, and his tremor eased.
He patted Mobiy's back gently, but no longer held so tight to the tether. "This is
just between you and me, Sergeant."
Unnerby sharpened his gaze. "My guards are Deep Secret rated, Sherk.
They've seen things that-"
Underhill raised a hand. His eyes gleamed in the ceiling lights. Those eyes
seemed full of the old genius. "This is. . .different. It's something I've wanted
you to know for a long time, and now that things are so desperate-"
The elevator slowed to a stop and the doors opened. Sherkaner had taken
them all the way to the top of the hill. "I have my office up here now. This used
to be Junior's, but now that she's been commissioned, she has graciously willed it
to me!" The hall had once been out-of-doors; Hrunkner remembered it as a path
overlooking the children's little park. Now it was walled with heavy glass, strong
enough to hold pressure even after the atmosphere had snowed out.
There was the sound of electric motors, and doors slid aside. Sherkaner
waved his friend into the room beyond. Tall windows looked out on the city.
Little Victory had had quite a room. Now it was a Sherkaner jumble. Over in the
corner was that rocket bomb/dollhouse, and a sleeping perch for Mobiy. But the
room was dominated by processor boxes and superquality displays. The pictures
shown were Mountroyal landscapes, the colors wilder than Hrunk had ever seen
outside of nature. And yet, the pictures were surreal. There were shaded forest
glens, but with plaid undertones. There were grizzards sleeting across an iceberg
eruption, all in the colors of lava. It was graphical madness. . .silly videomancy.
Hrunkner stopped, and waved at the colors. "I'm impressed, but it's not very well
calibrated, Sherk."

"Oh, it's calibrated, all right-but the inner meaning hasn't been derived."
Sherk mounted a console perch, and seemed to be looking at the pictures. "Heh.
The colorsare gross; after a while, you stop noticing.. . .Hrunkner, have you ever
thought that our current problems are more serious than they should be?"
"How should I know? Everything is new." Unnerby let himself sag. "Yeah,
things are on an infernal slide. This Southland mess is every nightmare we
imagined. They have nuclear weapons, maybe two hundred, and delivery
systems. They've bankrupted themselves trying to keep up with the advanced
nations."
"Bankrupted themselves, just to kill the rest of us?"
Thirty-five years ago, Sherk had seen the shape of all this, at least in
general outlines. Now he was asking moron questions. "No," said Unnerby,
almost lecturing. "At least, that's not how it started out. They tried to create an
industrial/agricultural base that could stay active in the Dark. They failed.
They've got enough to keep a couple of cities going, a military division or two.
Right now Southland is about five years further into the cold than the rest of the
world. The dry hurricanes are already building over the south pole." Southland
was a marginally livable place at best; at the middle of the Bright Time, there
were a few years where farming was possible. But the continent was fabulously
rich in minerals. Over the last five generations, the Southlanders had been
exploited by northern mining corporations, more avariciously each cycle than
the last. But in this generation, there was a sovereign state in the South, one that
was very afraid of the North and the coming Dark. "They spent so much trying
to make the leap to nuclear-electrics that they don't even have all their
deepnesses provisioned."
"And the Kindred are poisoning whatever goodwill there might otherwise
be."
"Of course." Pedure was a genius. Assassination, blackmail, clever
fearmongering. Whatever was evil, Pedure was very good at. And so now the
Southland government figured that it was the Accord that planned to pounce on
them in the Dark. "The news networks have it right, Sherk. The Southies might
nuke us."
Hrunkner looked beyond Sherkaner's garish displays. From here, he could
see Princeton in all directions. Some of the buildings-like Hill House-would be
habitable even after the air condensed. They could hold pressure, and had good
power connections. Most of the city was just slightly underground. It had taken
fifteen years of construction madness to do that for the cities of the Accord, but
now an entire civilization could survive, awake, through the Dark. But they were
so close to the surface; they would quickly die in any nuclear war. The industries

Hrunkner had helped to create had done miracles.. . .So
now we're more at risk than ever.More miracles were needed. Hrunkner
and millions of others were struggling with those impossible demands. During
the last thirty days, Unnerby had averaged only three hours' sleep a day. This
detour to chat with Underhill had scuttled one planning meeting and an
inspection.Am I here out ofloyalty. . .or because I hope that Sherk can save us all
again?
Underhill steepled his forearms, making a little temple in front of his head.
"Have. . .have you ever thought that maybe something else is responsible for our
problems?"
"Damn it, Sherk. Like what?"
Sherkaner steadied himself on his perch, and his words came low and fast.
"Like aliens from outer space. They've been here since before the New Sun. You
and I saw them in the Dark, Hrunkner. The lights in the sky, remember?"
He rattled on, his tone so unlike the Sherkaner Underhill of years past. The
Underhill of old revealed his weird speculations with an arch look or a
challenging laugh. But now Underhill spoke in a rush, almost as if someone
would stop him. . .or contradict him? This Underhill spoke like. . .a desperate
man, grasping at fantasy.
The old fellow seemed to realize that he had lost his audience. "You don't
believe me, do you, Hrunk."
Hrunkner shrank back on his perch. What resources had already been sunk
into this horrifying nonsense? Other worlds-life on other worlds-that was one of
Underhill's oldest, craziest ideas. And now it was surfacing after years of
justified obscurity. He knew the General; she'd be no more impressed by this
than he was. The world was teetering on the edge of an abyss. There was no
room to humor poor Sherkaner. Surely the General did not let this distract her.
"It's like the videomancy, isn't it, Sherk?"All yourlife, you've made miracles. But
now you need them faster and more desperately than ever before. And all you
have left is superstition.
"No, no, Hrunk. The videomancy was just a means, a cover so the aliens
wouldn't see. Here, I'll show you!" Sherkaner's hands tapped at control holes.
The pictures flickered, the color values changing. One landscape morphed from
summer to winter. "It'll be a moment. The bit rate is low, but channel setup is a
very big computation." Underhill's head tilted toward tiny displays that Hrunkner
could not see. His hands tapped impatiently on the console. "More than anyone,
you deserved to know about this, Hrunk. You have done so much for us; you
could have done so much more if only we'd brought you into it. But the General-
"

On the display, the colors were shifting, the landscapes melting into low-
resolution chaos. Several seconds passed.
And Sherkaner gave a little cry of surprise and unhappiness.
What was left of the picture was recognizable, if much lower bandwidth
than the original video. This appeared to be a standard eight-color video stream.
They were looking out a camera in Victory Smith's office at Lands Command. It
was a good picture, but crude compared to true vision, or even Sherk's
videomancy displays.
But this picture showed something real: General Smith stared back at them
from her desk. The work was piled high around her. She waved an aide out of
the office, and stared out at Underhill and Unnerby.
"Sherkaner. . .you brought Hrunkner Unnerby to your office." Her tone was
tight and angry. "Yes, I-"
"I thought we discussed this, Sherkaner. You can play with your toys as
much as you please, but you are not to bother people who have real work to do."
Hrunkner had never heard the General use such tones and such sarcasm
with Underhill. However necessary it might be, he would have given anything
not to witness it.
Underhill seemed about to protest. He twisted on his perch, and his arms
flailed, begging. Then: "Yes, dear."
General Smith nodded and waved at Hrunkner. "I'm sorry for this
inconvenience, Sergeant. If you need help getting back on schedule . . ."
"Thank you, ma'am. That may be. I'll check with the airport and get back to
you." "Fine." The image from Lands Command vanished.
Sherkaner lowered his head until it rested on the console. His arms and legs
were inward-drawn and still. The guide-bug moved closer, pushed at him
questioningly.
Underhill moved toward him. "Sherk?" he said softly. "Are you all right?"
The other was silent for a moment. Then he raised his head. "I'll be okay.
I'm sorry, Hrunk."
"I-um, Sherkaner, I've got to go. I have another meeting-" That wasn't quite
true. He had already missed both the meeting and the inspection. What was true
was that there were so many other things to attend to. With Smith's help he
might be able to get out of Princeton fast enough to catch up.
Underhill climbed awkwardly down from his perch and let Mobiy guide
him after the sergeant. As the heavy doors slid open, Sherkaner reached out a
single forehand, gently tugging on one of his sleeves.More insanity?
"Don't ever give up, Hrunk. There's always a way, just like before; you'll
see."
U
b
dd d
bl d
hi
l
i
d
d
f h

Unnerby nodded, mumbled something apologetic, and eased out of the
room. As he walked down the glass-walled hallway toward the elevator,
Sherkaner stood with Mobiy at the entrance to the office. Once upon a time,
Underhill would have followed all the way down to the main foyer. But he
seemed to realize that something had changed between them. As the elevator
doors shut behind Unnerby, he saw his old friend give a shy little wave.
Then he was gone, and the elevator was sinking downward. For a moment,
Unnerby surrendered to rage and sadness. Funny how the two emotions could
mix. He had heard the stories about Sherkaner, and had willed disbelief. Like
Sherkaner, he hadwanted certain things to be true and had ignored the contrary
symptoms. Unlike Sherk, Hrunkner Unnerby could not ignore the hard truths of
their situation. And so this ultimate crisis would have to be won or lost without
Sherkaner Underhill. . .
Unnerby forced his mind away from Sherkaner. There would come a time
later, hopefully a time to remember the good things instead of this afternoon. For
now. . .if he could commandeer a jet out of Princeton, he might be back at Lands
Command in time to chat up his deputy directors.
Around the level of the cobblies' old park, the elevator slowed. Unnerby
had thought this was Sherkaner's private lift. Who might this be?
The doors slid back"Well! Sergeant Unnerby! May I join you?"
A young lady lieutenant, dressed in quartermaster fatigues. Victory Smith
as she had been so many years ago. Her aspect had the same brightness, her
movement the same graceful precision. For a moment, Unnerby could only
boggle at the apparition beyond the doors.
The vision stepped into the elevator, and Unnerby involuntarily moved
back, still in shock. Then the other's military bearing slipped for an instant. The
lieutenant lowered her head shyly. "Uncle Hrunk, don't you recognize me? It's
Viki, all grown up."
Of course. Unnerby gave a weak laugh. "I-I'll never call you Little Victory
again."
Viki put a couple of arms affectionately across his shoulders. "No. You're
allowed. Somehow, I don't think I'll ever be giving you orders. Daddy said you
were coming up today.. . .Have you seen him? Do you have a moment to talk
with me?"
The elevator was sliding to a stop, foyer level. "I-Yes, I did.. . .Look, I'm in
a bit of rush to get back to
Lands Command." After the debacle upstairs, he just didn't know what he
could say to Viki.
"That's okay. I'm on minus minutes myself. Let's share the ride to the
airport " She waved a grin "Twice the security "

airport." She waved a grin. "Twice the security."
Lieutenants might manage a security escort, but they are rarely the subject
of one. Young Victory's group was about half the number of Unnerby's but, from
the look of them, even more competent. Several of the guards were clearly
combat veterans. The fellow on the top perch behind the driver was one of the
biggest troopers Unnerby had ever seen. When they slid into the car, he'd given
Unnerby an odd little salute, not a military thing at all. Huh! That was Brent!
"So. What did Daddy have to say?" The tone was light, but Hrunkner could
hear the anxiety. Viki was not quite the perfect, opaque intelligence officer. It
might have been a flaw, but then he had known her since she had cobblie eyes.
And that made it all the harder for Unnerby to say the truth. "You must
know, Viki. He's not himself anymore. He's all into alien monsters and
videomancy. It took the General herself to shut him up."
Young Victory was quiet, but her arms drew into an angry frown. For a
moment, he thought she was angry with him. But then he heard her faint mutter,
"The old fool." She sighed, and they rode in silence for a few seconds.
Surface traffic was sparse, mainly cobbers traveling between disconnected
boroughs. The streetlights splashed pools of blue and ultra, glittered off the frost
that lined the gutters and the sides of buildings. Light from within the buildings
glowed through the rime, showing greenish where it caught flecks of snow moss
in the ice. Crystal worms grew by the millions on the walls, their roots probing
endlessly for morsels of heat. Here in Princeton, the natural world might survive
almost into the heart of the Dark. The city around and beneath them was a
growing, warming thing. Behind those walls, and below the ground, things were
busier than ever in the history of Princeton. The newer buildings of the business
district glowed from ten thousand windows, boasting power, spilling broad
bands of light upon the older structures.. . .And even a modest nuclear attack
would kill everyone here.
Viki touched his shoulder. "I'm sorry. . .about Daddy."
She would know much better than he how far Sherkaner had fallen. "How
long has he been into this? I remember him speculating on space monsters, but it
was never serious."
She shrugged, obviously unhappy with the question. ". . .He started playing
with videomancy after the kidnappings."
That far back?Then he remembered Sherkaner's desperation when the poor
cobber realized that all his science and logic couldn't save his children. And so
the seeds of this insanity had been planted. "Okay, Viki. Your mother is right.
The important thing is that this nonsense not get in the way. Your father has the
love and admiration of so many people"-including me, still."No one will believe

this crap, but I'm afraid that more than a few would try to help him, maybe divert
resources, do experiments he suggests. We can't afford that, not now."
"Of course." But Viki hesitated an instant, her hand tips straightening. If
Unnerby had not known her as a child, he would have missed it. She wasn't
telling him everything, and was embarrassed by the deception. Little Victory had
been a great fibber, except when she felt guilty about something.
"The General is humoring him, isn't she? Even now?"
". . .Look, nothing big. Some bandwidth, some processor time." Processor
time on what? Underhill's desktop machines, or Intelligence Service
superarrays? Maybe it didn't matter; he realized now how much of Sherk's low
profile was simply the General keeping her husband from interfering with
critical projects.But pray for the poor lady. For Victory Smith, losing Underhill
must be like having your right legs shot off at the hips.
"Okay." Whatever resources Sherk might be pissing away, there was
nothing Hrunkner Unnerby could do about it. Maybe the best wisdom was the
oldsoldier on, soldier. He glanced at Young Victory's uniform. The name tag
was on her far collar, out of sight. Would it be Victory Smith (now,that would
catch a superior officer's attention!), or Victory Underhill, or what?
"So, Lieutenant, how is your life in the military?"
Viki smiled, surely relieved to talk about something else. "It is a great
challenge, Sergeant." Formality slipped. "Actually, I'm having the time of my
life. Basic training was-hmm, well you know as well as I. In fact, it is sergeants
like you who make it the 'charming' experience it is. But I had an edge: When I
went through BT, almost all the recruits were in-phase, years older than I am.
Heh heh. It wasn't hard to do well by comparison. Now-well, you can see this
isn't your average first posting." She waved at the car, and the security around
them. "Brent is a senior sergeant now; we're working together. Rhapsa and Little
Hrunk will go through officer school eventually, but for now they're both junior
enlisted. You may see them at the airport."
"You're all working together?" Unnerby tried to keep the surprise out of his
voice.
"Yes. We're a team. When the General wants a quick inspection, and needs
absolute trust-we're the four she sends." All the surviving children except Jirlib.
For a moment, the revelation just added to Unnerby's depression. He wondered
what the General Staff and midrankers thought when they saw a troop of Smith's
relatives poking into Deep Secret affairs. But. . .Hrunkner Unnerby had once
been deep in Intelligence himself. Old Strut Greenval had also played by his own
rules. The King gave certain prerogatives to the chief of Intelligence. A lot of
midlevel Intelligence people thought it was simply stupid tradition, but if

Victory Smith thought she needed an Inspector General team from her own
family-well maybe she did.
Princeton's airport was in chaos. There were more flights, more corporate
charters, more crazy construction work than ever before. Chaotic or not, General
Smith was ahead of the problem; a jet had already been diverted for his use.
Viki's cars were cleared to drive right out onto the military side of the field. They
moved cautiously down designated lanes, under the wings of taxiing aircraft.
The secondary paths were torn by construction, a craterlike pit every hundred
feet. By the end of the year, all service operations were to be conducted without
external exposure. Ultimately, these facilities would have to support new types
of fliers, and operations in air-freezing cold.
Viki dropped him off by his jet. She hadn't said where she was bound this
evening. Unnerby found that pleasing. For all the strangeness of her present
situation, at least she knew how to keep her mouth properly shut.
She followed him out into the freeze. There was no wind, so he risked
going without the air heater. Every breath burned. It was so cold he could see
clouds of frost hanging around the exposed joints of his hands.
Maybe Viki was too young and strong to notice. She trooped across the
thirty yards to his jet, talking every second. If it weren't for all the dark omens
rising out of this visit, seeing Viki would have been an absolute joy. Even out-
of-phase, she had turned out so beautifully, a wonderful incarnation of her
mother-with Smith's hard edge softened by what Sherkaner had been at his best.
Hell, maybe part of it wasbecause she was out-of-phase! The thought almost
made him stop in the middle of the runway. But yes, Viki had spent her whole
life out of step, seeing things from a new angle. In a weird way, watching her
diminished all his misgivings about the future.
Viki stepped aside as they reached the weather shelter at the base of his jet.
She drew herself up and gave him a well-starched salute. Unnerby returned the
gesture. And then he saw her name tag.
"What an interesting name, Lieutenant. Not a profession, not some bygone
deepness. Where-?"
"Well, neither of my parents is a 'smith.' And no one knows which
'underhill' Daddy's family might be ascended from. But, see behind you-" She
pointed.
Behind him the tarmac spread away from them, hundreds of yards of
flatness and construction work, all the way back to the terminal. But Viki was
pointing higher, up from the river-bottom flatlands. The lights of Princeton
curved around the horizon, from glittering towers to the suburban hills.
"Look about five degrees to your right-rear of the radio tower. Even from
h
i " Sh
i i
U d hill' h
I
h b i h

here you can see it." She was pointing at Underhill's house. It was the brightest
thing in that direction, a tower of light in all the colors that modern fluorescents
could make.
"Daddy designed well. We've hardly had to make any changes in the house
at all. Even after the air has frozen, his light will still be up there on the hill. You
know what Daddy says: We can go down and inward-or we can stand on high
places and reach out. I'm glad that's where I grew up, and I want that place to be
my name."
She lifted her name tag so it glittered in the aircraft
lights.LIEUTENANTVICTORY LIGHTHILL. "Don't worry, Sergeant. What
you and Dad and Mother started is going to last a long time."

FORTY-SIX
Belga Underville was getting a bit tired of Lands Command. It seemed that
she was down here almost ten percent of the time-and it would be a lot more if
she hadn't become a heavy telecomm user. Colonel Underville had been head of
Domestic Intelligence since 60//15, more than half the past Bright Time. It was a
truism-at least in modern times-that the end of the Brightness was the beginning
of the bloodiest wars. She had expected things to be rough, but not like this.
Underville got to the staff meeting early. She was more than a little nervous
about what she intended; she had no desire to cross the chief, but that was
exactly how her petition might look. Rachner Thract was already there, getting
his own show in order. Grainy, ten-color reconnaissance photos were projected
on the wall behind him. Apparently he'd found more Southlander launch sites-
further evidence of Kindred aid for "the potential victims of Accord treachery."
Thract nodded civilly as she and her aides sat down. There was always some
friction between External Intelligence and Domestic. External played by rules
that were unacceptably rough for domestic operations, yet they always found
excuses for meddling. The last few years, things had been especially tense
between Thract and Underville. Since Thract had screwed up in Southland, he'd
been much easier to handle.Even the end of the world can have short-term
advantages, Belga thought sourly.
Underville flipped through the agenda. God, the crackpot distractions. Or
maybe not: "What do you think about these high-altitude bogies, Rachner?" It
was not meant as an argumentative question; Thract should not be in trouble
when it came to air defense.
Thract's hands jerked in abrupt dismissal. "After all the screaming, Air
Defense claims only three sightings. 'Sightings' my ass. Even now that we know
about Kindred antigravity capabilities, they still can't track the cobbers properly.
Now the AD Director claims the Kindred have some launch site I don't know
about. You know the chief is going to stick me with finding it.. . .Damn!"
Underville couldn't tell if that was his one-word summary answer, or if he had
just noticed something obnoxious in his notes. Either way, Thract didn't have
anything more to say to her.
The others were trickling in now: Air Defense Director Dugway (seating
himself on a perch far from Rachner Thract), the Director of Rocket Offense, the
Director of Public Relations. The chief herself entered, followed almost
immediately by the King's Own Finance Minister.

General Smith called the meeting to order, and formally welcomed the
Finance Minister. On paper,
Minister Nizhnimor was her only superior short of the King himself. In fact,
Amberdon Nizhnimor was an old crony of Smith's.
The bogies were first on the agenda, and it went about as Thract had
predicted. Air Defense had done further crunching on the three sightings.
Dugway's latest computer analysis confirmed that these were Kindred satellites,
either pop-up recon jobs or maybe even the tests of a maneuvering antigravity
missile. Either way, none of them had been seen twice. And none of them had
been launched from any of the known Kindred sites. The director of Air Defense
was very pointed about the need for competent ground intelligence from within
Kindred territory. If the enemy had mobile launchers, it was essential to learn
about them. Underville half-expected Thract to explode at the implication that
his people had failed once more, but the Colonel accepted AD's sarcasm and
General Smith's expected orders with impassive courtesy. Thract knew that this
was the least of his problems; the last item on today's agenda was his real
nemesis.
Next up, Public Relations: "I'm sorry. There's no way we can call a War
Plebiscite, much less win one. People are more frightened than ever, but the time
scales make a Plebiscite flatly unworkable." Belga nodded; she didn't need some
flack from Public Relations for this insight. Within itself, the King's
Government was a rather autocratic affair. But for the last nineteen
generations, since the Covenant of
Accord, its civil power had been terrifyingly limited. The Crown retained
sole title to its ancestral estates such as Lands Command, and had limited power
of taxation, but had lost the exclusive right to print money, the right of eminent
domain, the right to impress its subjects into military service. In peacetime, the
Covenant worked. The courts ran on a fee system, and local police forces knew
they couldn't get too frisky or they might encounter real firepower. In wartime,
well, that's what the Plebiscite was for-to suspend the Covenant for a certain
time. It had worked during the Great War, just barely. This time around, things
moved so fast that just talking about a Plebiscite might precipitate a war. And a
major nuclear exchange could be over in less than a day.
General Smith accepted the platitudes with considerable patience. Then it
was Belga's turn. She went through the usual catalogue of domestic threats.
Things were under control, more or less. There were significant minorities that
loathed the modernization. Some were already out of the picture, asleep in their
own deepnesses. Others had dug themselves deep redoubts, but not to sleep in;
these would be a problem if things went really bad. Hrunkner Unnerby had
f

worked more of his engineering miracles. Even the oldest towns in the Northeast
had nuclear electricity now, and-just as important-weatherized living space. "But
of course not much of this is hardened. Even a light nuclear strike would kill
most of these people, and the rest wouldn't have the resources for a successful
hibernation." In fact, most of those resources had been spent on creating the
power plants and underground farms.
General Smith gestured at the others. "Comments?" There were several.
Public Relations suggested buying in to some of the hardened enterprises; he
was already planning for after the end of the world, the bloody-minded little
wimp. The chief just nodded, assigned Belga and the wimp to look into the
possibility. She checked the Domestic Intelligence report off her copy of the
agenda.
"Ma'am?" Belga Underville raised a hand. "I do have one more item I'd like
to bring up." "Certainly."
Underville brushed her eating hands nervously across her mouth. She was
committed now. Damn. If only the Finance Minister weren't here. "I-Ma'am, in
the past you have been very, um, generous in your management of subordinate
operations. You give us the job, and let us do it. I have been very grateful for
that. Recently though, and very likely this is without your precise knowledge,
people from your inner staff have been making unscheduled visits"-midnight
raids, actually-"on domestic sites in my area of responsibility."
General Smith nodded. "The Lighthill team."
"Yes, ma'am."Your own children, running around as though they werethe
King's Inspectors General. They were full of crazy, irrational demands, shutting
down good projects, removing some of her best people. More than anything, it
made her suspect that the chief's crazy husband still had great influence. Belga
hunkered down on her perch. She really didn't have to say more. Victory Smith
knew her well enough to see she was upset.
"On these inspection visits, did Lighthill find anything significant?"
"In one case, ma'am." One fairly serious problem that Belga was sure she
would have pounced on herself inside of another ten days. Around the table,
Underville could see that most of the others were simply surprised by the
complaint. Two nodded faintly in her direction-she already knew about them.
Thract tapped an angry tattoo on the table; he seemed about to jump into the
fray. It was no surprise that he had been targeted by the chief's nepotistic crew,
butplease God, grant him the cleverness to keep hismaw shut. Thract was
already in such poor standing that his support would be about as much help as a
steel anvil to a racing-climber.
The chief inclined her head, waited a polite moment for anyone else to
t Th
"C l
l

comment. Then, "Colonel
Underville, I understand that this can hurt your people's morale. But we are
entering very critical times, far deadlier than a declared war. I need special
assistants, ones who can act very quickly and who I understand completely. The
Lighthill team acts directly for me. Please tell me if you feel their behavior is out
of line-but I ask you to respect their delegated authority." Her tone seemed
sincerely regretful, but the words were uncompromising; Smith was changing
policy of decades' standing. Belga had the sinking feeling that the chief knew all
her cobblies' depredations.
The Finance Minister had looked almost bored so far. Nizhnimor was a war
hero; she had walked through the Dark with Sherkaner Underhill. You might
forget that when you saw her; Amberdon Nizhnimor had spent all the decades of
this generation climbing up the Other Side of the royal service, as a court
politician and arbitrator. She dressed and moved like an old coot; Nizhnimor was
a cartoon caricature of a Finance Minister. Big, lank, frail. Now she leaned
forward. Her wheezy voice sounded as harmless as she looked. "I fear this is all
a bit outside my realm. But I do have some advice. Though we can't have a
Plebiscite, we are very much at war. Internal to the government, we are moving
to a war footing. Normal chains of appeal and review are in suspension. Given
this extraordinary situation, it's important for you to realize that both I and-more
importantly-the King have complete faith in General Smith's leadership. You all
know that the chief of Intelligence has special prerogatives. This is not
outmoded tradition, ladies and gentleman. This is considered, royal policy, and
you must all accept it."
Wow. So much for "frail" finance ministers. There were sober nods from all
around the table and no one had anything more to say, least of all Belga
Underville. In a strange way, Belga felt better for getting so definitively
squashed. Things might be on a road straight to Hell, but she didn't have to
worry about who was on the driver's perch.
After a moment, General Smith returned to her agenda. ". . .We have one
item left. It is also the most critical problem we're up against. Colonel Thract,
will you tell us about the Southland situation?" Her tone was courteous, almost
sympathetic. Nevertheless, poor Thract was in for it.
But Thract showed some hardshell. He bounced off his perch and walked
briskly to the podium.
"Minister. Ma'am." He nodded at Nizhnimor and the chief. "We believe the
situation has stabilized somewhat in the last fifteen hours." He poked up the
recon pictures that Belga had seen him studying before the meeting. Much of
Southland was shrouded in a swirl of storm, but the launch sites were high in the
Dry Mountains and mostly visible Thract tapped away at his pictures analyzing

Dry Mountains and mostly visible. Thract tapped away at his pictures, analyzing
the supply situation. "The long-range Southlander rockets are liquid fueled, very
fragile things. Their parliament has seemed insanely bellicose these last few
days-their 'Ultimatum for Cooperative Survival,' for instance-but in fact, we
don't think that more than a tenth of their rockets are launch-ready. It will take
three or four days for them to get all the tanks topped off."
Belga: "That seems awfully stupid on their part."
Thract nodded. "But remember, their parliamentary system makes them less
decisive than either us or the Kindred. These people have been tricked into
thinking that they must either fight a war now, or be murdered in their sleep. The
Ultimatum may have been a mistake in timing, but it was also an attempt by
some in Parliament to make the prospect of war so frightening that their
colleagues would back down."
The Director of Air Defense: "So you figure things will stay peaceful until
they complete fueling?"
"Yes. The crunch will be the Parliament meeting at Southmost in four days.
That's where they review our response-if we've made one-to the Ultimatum."
The wimp from Public Relations asked, "Why not just accede to their
demands? They aren't asking for territory. We are so strong that giving in would
scarcely be a loss of prestige."
There was a rattle of indignation from around the table. General Smith
answered in terms a good deal milder than the question merited. "Unfortunately,
it's not a matter of prestige. The Southland Ultimatum requires us to weaken
several of our military arms. In fact, I doubt that it would make the Southlanders
any safer in their deepnesses-but it would increase our vulnerability to a Kindred
first strike."
Chezny Neudep, Director of Rocket Offense: "Indeed. Now the
Southlanders are simply Kindred puppets. Pedure and her bloodsuckers must be
happy. No matter how this comes out, they win."
"Maybe not," said Minister Nizhnimor. "I know many of the top
Southlanders; they are not evil, or insane, or incompetent. We have come down
to a matter of trust here. The King is willing to go to
Southmost for this next meeting of the Southlander Parliament, and stay
there for the remainder of this session. It's hard to imagine a greater expression
of trust on our part-and I think the Southlanders will accept it, no matter what
Pedure may wish."
Of course, this is what Kings were for. Nevertheless, the Minister's offer
was a shock; even "Old
Megadeath" Neudep seemed taken aback. "Ma'am. . .I know it's the King's

power to do such things, but I can't agree that this is a problem of trust.
Certainly, there are honorable people in high positions in the South. A year ago,
the Southland was nearly an ally. We had sympathizers at all levels of
government. Colonel Thract told us that we had-to be blunt-spiesin positions of
power there. If not for that, I don't think General Smith ever would have
encouraged the technical growth of Southland.. . .But in less than a year, it
seems we have lost all our advantage there. What I see now is a state thoroughly
infiltrated by the Kindred. Even if the majority of Parliament is honorable,it
doesn't matter. " Neudep shot two arms in Thract's direction. "Your analysis,
Colonel?"
Blame-assignment time. It had been part of each of the recent staff
meetings, and each time Thract had been more the target.
Thract gave a little bow in Megadeath's direction. "Sir, your assessment is
generally correct, though I see little infiltration of the Southland rocket forces,
per se. We had a friendly government there-and one that I would swear was
carefully 'instrumented' with Accord agents. The Kindred were active, but we
had them stymied. Then, step by step, we lost ground. At first, it was bungled
surveillance, then fatal accidents, then assassinations we weren't quick enough to
block. Lately there have been trumped-up criminal prosecutions.. . .Our enemy is
clever."
"So the Honored Pedure is a genius beyond our ken?" asked the Director of
Air Defense. Sarcasm dripped.
Thract was silent for a moment. His eating hands twisted back and forth. At
earlier meetings, this was where he would counterattack with statistics and fine
new projects. Now-something seemed to break inside him. Belga Underville had
counted Thract as a bureaucratic enemy ever since the chief's children were
kidnapped, but now she felt embarrassed for him. When Thract finally spoke, his
voice came out an anguished squeak. "No!Don't you know I. . .I've had friends
die; I've lost others because I began mistrusting them. For a long time, I thought
there must be a Kindred agent high in my own organization. I shared critical
information with fewer and fewer people, not even with my own superior-" He
nodded at General Smith. "In the end, there were secrets plucked from us that
only I knew and which I communicated with my own crypto equipment."
There was silence, as the obvious consequence of these claims hardened in
the minds of his audience.
Thract's attention seemed to turn inward, as if he didn't care that others
thought he might be the Father of All Traitors. He continued more quietly, "As
far as one person can be a paranoid and be everywhere, so I have been. I have
used different comm paths, different crypto. I have used differential frauds.. .

.And I tell you, our enemy is something more than any single 'Honored Pedure.'
Somehow, all of our clever science is working against us."
"Nonsense!" said Air Defense. "My department uses more of what you call
'clever science' than anyone, and we are entirely satisfied with the results. In
competent hands, computers and networks and satellite reconnaissance are
incredibly powerful tools. Just look at what our deep analysis did with the
unidentified radar sightings. Certainly, networks can be abused. But we are the
world's leaders in these technologies. And no matter what else may be broken we
have a completely robust encryption technology.. . .Or do you claim the enemy
can break our crypto?"
Thract swayed slightly from his place behind the podium. "No, that was my
first great suspicion, but we had penetrated to the heart of the Kindred's
encryption establishment-and we were safely there until very recently. If I trust
anything, it is that they can't break our encryption." He waved at them all. "You
really don't understand, do you? I tell you, there is some force in our networks,
something that is actively opposing us. No matter what we do, It knows more
and It is supporting our enemies. . . ."
The scene was pathetic, a kind of abject collapse. Thract was left with
nothing but phantoms to explain his failures. Maybe Pedure really was clever
beyond all imagination; more likely, Thract was a Father Traitor.
Belga watched the chief with half her attention. General Smith was deep in
the King's trust. No doubt she could survive Thract's collapse simply by starkly
disowning him.
Smith beckoned the guard sergeant by the door. "Help Colonel Thract to the
staff office. Colonel, I'll be along to talk to you in a few minutes. Consider
yourself as still on duty."
It seemed to take a second for the words to penetrate Thract's funk. He was
headed out the door, but apparently not for arrest or even imminent quizzing by
underlings. "Yes, ma'am." He straightened to a semblance of smartness and
followed the sergeant out.
The room was very quiet after Thract's departure. Belga could tell that
everyone was watching everyone else, and thinking very dark thoughts. Finally,
General Smith said, "My friends, the Colonel has a point. No doubt we are
infested with deep-cover Kindred agents. But they are effective across much too
large a range of our departments. There is some systematic flaw in our security,
and yet we have no idea what it is.. . .Now you see the reason for the Lighthill
team."

FORTY-SEVEN
It was forty years since the OnOff star had last come to life. Ritser Brughel
had not been on-Watch all that time, yet still the Exile had consumed years of his
life. And now it was drawing to an end. What had been years was now a matter
of days. In less than four days, he would be vice-ruler of a world.
Brughel hung over the shoulder of the ziphead operating the remote lander,
and quietly watched what the tiny device was sending back. A few seconds
earlier, the lander had come out of its brake and spread its meter-wide wings.
Still forty kilometers up, they had ghosted over an unending carpet of lights,
threaded by a glowing webwork that refined itself into recursive infinity. Greater
Kingston South was the ziphead name for the place. A Spider supercity. This
world was cold and freezing colder, but it was no wasteland. The Spiders'
megalopolises looked almost Frenkisch. This was a real civilization, crowned by
forty years of sustained progress. Its capital technology was still short of
Humankind's highest standards, but with ziphead guidance, that could be
corrected in a decade or two.Forforty years, I have been reduced to a
Master of Tens, and soon I will beMaster of Tens of Millions. And beyond
that. . .if the Spider world really held clues to a Higher Technology. . .someday
he and Tomas Nau would return to Frenk and Balacrea to rule there too.
In the space of three seconds, the picture fragmented into a dozen copies,
and then a dozen dozen. "What-"
"The lander just broke into submunitions, Podmaster." Reynolt's
explanation was cold, almost mocking. "Almost two hundred mobiles-we'll get
some into Southmost." She turned from the display and almost looked him in the
eyes. "Strange that you are suddenly so interested in operational details,
Podmaster."
He felt a flicker of the old rage at her impudence, but it was a mild thing,
not affecting his breathing, much less his vision. He gave a little shrug at the
question.Nowadays I can get along even with Reynolt. Maybe Tomas Nau was
right; maybe he was growing up. "I want to see what the creatures really look
like." Know your slaves. Soon they would fry Spiders by the hundred million,
but somehow he must learn to tolerate those that were spared.
The spylets arced silently downward, across a frozen strait. A few were still
spinning, and Ritser had a glimpse of clouds, the topside of a-hurricane? Two
hundred thumb-sized pellets. Over the next thousand seconds they all came
down, many in deep snow, some on rocky wasteland. But there were successes,

too.
Several ended up on some kind of roadway, drenched in blue streetlight.
One of the views showed snow-draped ruins in the distance. Heavy, closed
vehicles lumbered by. Reynolt's ziphead wiggled his spylets out onto the road.
He was trying to hitch a ride. One by one, they ceased transmitting, squashed
flat. Ritser glanced at an inventory window. "This better work, Anne. We only
have one more multi-lander."
Reynolt didn't bother to reply. Ritser pulled himself down to tap her
specialist on the shoulder. "So, are you going to be able get one indoors?"
The odds were against any answer; a Focused mind in a control loop is
usually unreachable. But after a moment the zip nodded. "Probe 132 is doing
well. I've got three hundred seconds left on the high-gain link. We're just a few
meters this side of the weather door. This one is getting in-" The fellow hunched
lower over the controls. He swayed back and forth like an addict playing a hand-
eye game, which in a sense was exactly the situation. One of the pictures panned
up and down as he wiggled the device into traffic.
Brughel looked back at Reynolt. "That damn time lag. How can you expect
to-"
"Running a remote like this isn't the worst. Melin"-the ziphead operator-
"has very good delayed coordination. Our main problem is operations on the
Spiders' networks. We can dredge for data, but very soon we'll be interacting in
tight real time. A tensecond turnaround is longer than some network timeouts."
As she spoke, a flashing tread flew past the little camera. By some magic of
ziphead intuition, Melin had flipped the gadget onto the side of the vehicle. The
image spun madly for several seconds as Melin synched the rotation with the
view. A door opened in the wall ahead of them, and they drove on through.
Thirty seconds passed. The walls seemed to slide upward. Some kind of
elevator? But if the scale information were true, the room was wider than a
racquetball court.
Seconds passed, and Brughel found himself caught by the scene. For years
now, everything they had gotten about the Spiders had been secondhand, from
Reynolt's ziphead translators. Some large precentage of that had to be fairy-tale
crap; it was just too cute. Real pictures were what he needed. Microsat optical
reconnaissance produced some pictures, but the resolution was awful. For
several years, Ritser had thought that when the Spiders finally invented hi-res
video, he would get a good look. But the visual physiologies were just too
different. Nowadays, about five percent of all Spider military comm was this
extremely hi-res stuff that Trixia Bonsol called "videomancy." Without heavy
interpretation, it was just a jumble to humans. He would have been very

suspicious that it was a steganographic cover, except that the translators had
proven to Kal's snoops that it was innocent video-all quite impressive if you
were a Spider.
But now, in a very few seconds, he would get to see how the monsters
looked from a human pov.
No motion was visible. If this was an elevator, they were going down a long
way. That made sense, considering what the south pole weather was like. "Are
we going to lose signal?"
Reynolt didn't answer immediately. "I don't know. Melin's trying to get
relays into that elevator shaft. I'm more worried about it being discovered. Even
if the meltdown-triggers work-"
Brughel laughed. "Who cares? Don't you see, Reynolt? We're less than four
days from grabbing it all."
"The Accord is beginning to panic. They just sacked a senior manager. I've
got meeting logs that show Victory Smith now suspects network corruption."
"Their Intelligence boss?" The news stopped Brughel for a moment. This
must have happened very recently. Still, "They have less than four days. What
can they do?"
Reynolt's gaze was the usual stone thing. "They could partition their net,
maybe stop using it altogether. That would stop us."
"And also lose them the war against the Kindred."
"Yes. Unless they could provide the Kindred with solid proof of 'Monsters
from Outer Space.' "
And that was not bloody likely. The woman was obsessive. Ritser smiled at
her frowning face.Of course. That's how we made you.
The elevator doors had opened. The camera was giving them only one
frame a second now, with low resolution. Damn.
"Yes!" That was Melin, triumphant about something. "He's got a relay in
place."
Suddenly the picture turned crisp and smooth. As the spylet crept out from
the elevator doors, Melin turned its eyes to look down an incredibly steep set of
stairs, more like a ladder really. Who knew what this area was, a loading garage?
For now, the little camera hid in corners and looked out upon the Spiders. From
the scale bar, he could see that the monsters were of the expected size. A grown
one would come up to about Brughel's thigh. The creatures stretched far across
the ground in a low posture, just as in the library pictures retrieved before
Relight. They look very little like the mental picture that the ziphead translators
evoked. Did they wear clothes? Not like humans. The monsters were swathed
with things that looked like banners with buttons. Huge panniers hung from the

sides of many of them. They moved in quick, sinister jerks, their bladelike
forelegs cutting this way and that before them. There was a crowd here,
chitinous black except for the mismatched colors of their clothing. Their heads
glittered as with large flat gemstones. Spider eyes. And as for the Spider mouth-
there the translators had used the proper word:maw. A fanged depth surround by
tiny claws-was that what Bonsol & Co. called "eating hands"?-that seemed to be
in constant, writhing motion.
Massed together, the Spiders were more a nightmare than he'd imagined,
the sort of things you crush and crush and crush and still more of them come at
you. Ritser sucked in a breath. One comforting thought was that-if all went well-
in just under four days, these particular monsters would be dead.
For the first time in forty years, a starship would fly across the OnOff
system. It would be a very short hop, less than two million kilometers, scarcely a
remooring by civilized standards. It was very nearly the most that any of the
surviving starships could manage.
Jau Xin had supervised the flight prep of theInvisible Hand. TheHand had
always been Ritser Brughel's portable fiefdom, but Jau knew it was also the only
starship that had not been wholly cannibalized over the years.
In the days before their "passengers" embarked, Jau had drained the L1
distillery of hydrogen. It was just a few thousand tonnes, a droplet in the million-
tonne capacity of the ramscoop's primer tanks, but enough to slide them across
the gap between L1 and the Spider world.
Jau and Pham Trinli made a final inspection of the starship's drive throat. It
was always strange, looking at that two-meter narrowness. Here the forces of
hell had burned for decades, driving the Qeng Ho vessel up to thirty-percent
lightspeed. The internal surface was micrometer smooth. The only evidence of
its fiery past was the fractal pattern of gold and silver that glittered in the light of
their suit lamps. It was the micronet of processors behind those walls that
actually guided the fields, but if the throat wall cavitated while under way, the
fastest processors in the universe wouldn't save them. True to form, Trinli made
a big deal of his laser-metric inspection, then was contemptuous of the results.
"There's ninety-micron swale on the port side-but what the hell. There's no new
pitting. You could carve your name in the walls here, and it wouldn't make any
difference on this flight. What are you planning, a couple hundred Ksecs at
fractional gee?"
"Um. We'll start with a long gentle push, but the braking burn will be a
thousand seconds at a little more than one gravity." They wouldn't brake till they
were low over open ocean. Anything else would light Arachna's sky brighter
than the sun, and be seen by every Spider on the near side of the planet.

Trinli waved his hand in an airy gesture of dismissal. "Don't worry about it.
Many times, I've taken bigger chances with in-system flight." They crawled out
the bow side of the throat; the smooth surface widened into the beginnings of the
forward field projectors. All the while, Trinli continued with his bogus stories.
No. Most of the stories could be true, but abstracted from all the real adventurers
the old man had ever known. Trinli did know something about ship drives. The
tragedy was that they didn't have anyone who knew much more. All the Qeng
Ho flight engineers had been killed in the original fighting-and the pod's last
ziphead engineer had fallen to mindrot runaway.
They emerged from the bow end of theHand and climbed a mooring strand
back to their taxi. Trinli paused and turned. "I envy you, Jau my boy. Take a
look at your ship! Almost a million tonnes dryweight! You won't be going far,
but you'll be bringing theHand to the treasure and the Customers it sailed fifty
light-years to find."
Jau followed his broad gesture. Over the years, Jau had realized that Trinli's
theatrics were a cover. . .but sometimes they reached out and plucked at your
soul. TheInvisible Hand looked quite starworthy, hundred meter after hundred
meter of curving hull sweeping off into the distance, streamlined for speeds and
environments at the limit of all human accomplishment. And beyond the stern
rings-1.5 million kilometers beyond-the disk of Arachna showed pale and dim.A
First Contact, and I will bethe Pilot Manager. Jau should have been a proud
man. . .
Jau's last day before departure was busy, filled with final checks and
provisioning. There would be more than a hundred zipheads and staff. Jau didn't
learn just which specialties were represented, but it was obvious that the
Podmasters wanted to manipulate the Spiders' networks intensively, without the
tensecond time delay of L1 operations. That was reasonable. Saving the Spiders
from themselves would involve some incredible frauds, perhaps the taking over
of entire strategic weapons systems.
Jau was coming off his shift when Kal Omo appeared at Xin's little office
just off theHand' s bridge. "One more job, Pilot Manager." Omo's narrow face
broke into a humorless grin. "Call it overtime."
They took a taxi down to the rockpile, but not to Hammerfest. Around the
arc of Diamond One, embedded in ice and diamond, was the entrance to L1-A.
Two other taxis were already moored by the arsenal's lock.
"You've studied theHand' s weapon fittings, Pilot Manager?"
"Yes." Xin had studied everything about theHand, except Brughel's private
quarters. "But surely a Qeng Ho would be more familiar-"
Omo shook his head. "This isn't appropriate work for a Peddler, not even
M
T i li " I
k
d
h
h h
i l
k
i
b

Mr. Trinli." It took some seconds to get through the main lock security, but once
inside they had a clear passage into the weapons area. Here they were confronted
by the noise of fitting machines and cutters. The squat ovoids racked along the
walls were marked with the weapons glyph-the ancient Qeng Ho symbol for
nukes and directed-energy weapons. For years, the gossip had speculated just
how much survived at L1-A. Now Jau could see for himself.
Omo led him down a crawl line past unmarked cabinets. There was no
consensual imagery in L1-A. And this was one of the few places left at L1 that
did not use the Qeng Ho localizers. The automation here was simple and
foolproof. They passed Rei Ciret, supervising a gang of zipheads in the
construction of some kind of launch rack. "We'll be moving most of these
weapons to theInvisible Hand, Mr. Xin. Over the years we've cobbled together
parts, tried to make as many deliverable devices as possible. We've done the best
we could, but without depot facilities, that's not a hell of a lot." He waved at
what looked like Qeng Ho drive units mated to Emergent tactical nukes. "Count
'em. Eighteen short-range nukes. In the cabinets we have the guts of a dozen
weapon lasers."
"I-I don't understand, Podsergeant. You're an armsmen. You have your own
specialists. What need is there for-"
"-For a Pilot Manager to be concerned with such things?" Again the
humorless smile. "To save the
Spider civilization, it's entirely possible that we'll have to use these things,
from theInvisible Hand in low orbit. The fitting and engagement sequences will
be very important to your pilots."
Xin nodded. He'd been over some of this. The most likely start of a planet-
killer war was the current crisis at the Spiders' south pole. After they arrived,
they'd be in position over that site every fifty-three hundred seconds, with near-
constant coverage from smaller vehicles. Tomas Nau had already announced
about the lasers. As for the nukes. . .maybe they could help with bluffing.
The podsergeant continued the tour, pointing out the limitations of each
resurrected device. Most of the weapons were shaped charges, and Omo's
zipheads had converted them into crude digger bombs. ". . .and we'll have most
of the network zipheads on board theHand. They'll supply fire-control
information for your maneuvers; we may have to make substantial orbit changes
depending on the targets."
Omo talked with an ordnanceman's enthusiasm, and quickly left Jau with no
place to hide. For a year, Jau had watched the preparations with increasing fear;
there were details that could not be disguised from him. But for every
treacherous possibility, there had always been some reasonable explanation. He
had held to those "reasonable explanations" so fiercely They allowed him to feel

had held to those "reasonable explanations" so fiercely. They allowed him to feel
a shred of decency; they made it possible for him to laugh with Rita as they
planned what the future would be like with the Spiders, and with children she
and he would have.
The horror must have shown on Jau's face. Omo stopped his parade of
murderous revelation, and turned to looked at him. Jau asked, "Why. . .?"
"Why must I spell it out for you?" Omo jabbed a finger at Jau's chest,
pushing him away from the crawl line and into the wall. He jabbed again. His
hard face showed an angry indignation. It was the righteous indignation of
Emergency authority, what Jau had grown up with on Balacrea. "It shouldn't
really be necessary, should it? But you're like too many of our pod. You've gone
bad inside, become a kind of Peddler. The others we can let drift for a while
longer, but when theHand reaches low orbit, we need your intelligent, instant
obedience." Omo jabbed him once more. "Do you understand now?"
"Y-yes. Yes!"Oh Rita! We will always be part of the Emergency.

FORTY-EIGHT
More than a hundred zipheads were leaving Hammerfest's Attic. Genius
that he was, Trud Silipan had scheduled the transfer as a single move. As Ezr
headed for Trixia's cell, he was swimming against a current of humanity. The
Focused were being herded in groups of four and five, first out of the little
capillary hallways that led to their roomlets, then into the tributary halls and
finally into the main corridors. The handlers were gentle, but this was a difficult
maneuver.
Ezr pulled himself sideways, into a utility nook, a back-eddy in the flow.
There were people drifting past that he hadn't seen in years. These were Qeng
Ho and Trilander specialists, Focused right after the ambush, just like Trixia. A
few of the handlers were friends of the Focused they guided. Watch on Watch
they had come to visit the lost ones. At first there had been many such people.
But the years passed and hope had dimmed. Maybe someday. . .they had Nau's
promise of manumission. In the meantime, the zipheads seemed beyond caring;
a visit was at most an irritation to them. Only rare fools kept at it for years.
Ezr had never seen so many zipheads moving about. Corridor ventilation
was not as good as in the little cells; the smell of unwashed bodies was strong.
Anne kept the pod's property healthy, but that didn't mean they were clean and
pretty.
Bil Phuong hung on a wall strap by a confluence of streams, directing his
team handlers. Most teams had a common specialty. Vinh caught scraps of
agitated conversation. Could it be that they cared about what was planned for the
Spider world?. . .But no, this was impatience and distraction and technical
gibberish. An older woman-one of the network protocol hackers-pushed her
handler, actually spoke directly to him. "When then?" Her voice was shrill.
"When do we get back to work?"
One of the woman's team members shouted something like "Yeah, the
stackface is stale!" and moved in on the handler from the other side. Away from
their inputs, the poor things were going nuts. The entire team began screaming at
the handler. The group was the nucleus of a growing clot in the stream.
Suddenly, Ezr realized that something like a slave revolt could really happen-if
the slaves were taken from their work! This was clearly a danger the Emergent
team handler understood. He slid to the side, and yanked the stun lanyards on the
two loudest zipheads. They spasmed, then went limp. Deprived of a center, the
others' complaints subsided into diffuse irritability.

Bil Phuong arrived to calm the last of the combative zipheads. He spared a
frown for the team handler. "That's two more I have to retune." The team handler
wiped blood from his cheek and glared back. "Tell it to Trud." He grabbed the
lanyards and floated the unconscious zipheads out over their fellows. The crowd
moved on, and in a few seconds Vinh had a clear jump to the end of the corridor.
The translators weren't going with theInvisible Hand. Their section of the
Attic should have been peaceful. But when Ezr arrived, he found the cell doors
open and the translators clogging the capillary corridor. Ezr wormed his way
past the fidgeting, shouting zipheads. There was no sign of Trixia. But a few
meters up the hall he ran into Rita Liao coming from the other direction.
"Rita! Where are the handlers?"
Liao raised both hands in irritation. "Busy elsewhere, of course! And now
some idiot has opened the translators' doors!"
Trud had really outdone himself, though most likely this was only a related
glitch. Ironically, the translators-who weren't supposed to go anywhere-had
needed no urging to leave their cells, and now were loudly demanding
directions. "We want to go to Arachna!" "We want to get in close!"
Where was Trixia? Ezr heard more shouting from around an upward corner.
He followed the fork, and there she was, with the rest of the translators. Trixia
looked badly disoriented; she just wasn't used to the world outside of her cell.
But she seemed to recognize him. "Shut up! Shut up!" she shouted, and the
gabble quieted. She looked vaguely in Ezr's direction. "Number Four, when do
we go to Arachna?"
Number Four?"Um. Soon, Trixia. But not on this trip, not on theInvisible
Hand. " "Whynot ? I don't like the time lag!"
"For now, your Podmaster wants you close by." In fact, that was the official
story: only lower network functions were needed in close orbit of Arachna.
Pham and Ezr knew a darker explanation. Nau wanted as few people as possible
on theHand when it performed its real mission. "You'll go when it's safe, Trixia.
I promise." He reached out toward her. Trixia didn't flinch away, but she held
tight to a wall stop, resisting any effort to draw her back to her cell.
Ezr looked over his shoulder at Rita Liao. "What should we do?"
"Wait one." She touched her ear, listened. "Phuong and Silipan will be here
to stuff 'em back in their holes, just as soon as they get the others settled down
on theHand. "
Lord, that could take a while. In the meantime, twenty translators would be
loose in the Attic maze. He gently patted Trixia's arm. "Let's go back to your
room, Trixia. Uh, look, the longer you're out here, the more you're out of touch.
I'll bet you left your huds in your room. You could use them to ask fleet net your
f
ff

questions." Trixia had probably left her huds behind because they were offline.
But at this point, he was just trying to make reasonable noises.
Trixia bounced from wall stop to wall stop, full of indecision. Abruptly she
pushed past him and flitted back to the downward fork that led to her little room.
Ezr followed.
The cell reacted to Trixia's presence, the lights coming to their usual dim
glow. Trixia grabbed her huds, and Ezr synched to them. Her links weren't
completely down. Ezr saw the usual pictures and splashes of text; it wasn't quite
live from groundside, but it was close. Trixia's eyes darted from display to
display. Her fingers pounded on her old keyboard, but she seemed to have
forgotten about contacting the fleet information service. Just the sight of her
workspace had drawn her back to the center of her Focus. New text windows
popped up. Glyphics nonsense shifted so fast across it that it must be a
representation of spoken Spider talk, some radio show or-considering the current
state of affairs-a military intercept. "I just can't stand the time lag. It's not fair."
Again a long silence. She opened another text screen. The pictures beside it went
through a flickering series of colors, one of the Spiders' video formats. It still
didn't look like a real picture, but he recognized this pattern; he had seen it often
enough in Trixia's little room. This was a Spider commercial newscast that
Trixia translated daily. "They're wrong. General Smith will go to Southmost
instead of the King." She was still tense, but now it was her usual, Focused
absorption.
A few seconds later, Rita Liao stuck her head into the room. Ezr turned,
saw a look of quiet amazement on her face. "You're a magician, Ezr. How'd you
get everyone calmed down?"
"I. . .I guess Trixia just trusts me." That was an innermost hope phrased as
diffident speculation.
Rita pulled her head out of the doorway to look up and down the corridor.
"Yeah. But you know, after you got her back to work? All the others just quietly
returned to their rooms. These translator types have more control functionality
than military zips. All you have to do is convince the alpha member, and
everyone falls into line." She grinned. "But I guess we've seen this before, the
way the translators can control the rote-layer zips. They're the keystone
components, all right."
"Trixia is a person!"All the Focused are people, you damn slaver!
"I know, Ezr. Sorry. Really, I understand.. . .Trixia and the other translators
do seem to be different. You have to be pretty special to translate natural
languages. Of all-of all the Focused, the translators seem the closest to being real
people.. . .Look, I'll take care of buttoning things down and let Bil Phuong know
thi
d
t
l "

things are under control."
"Okay," Ezr replied, his voice stiff.
Rita backed out of the room. The cell door slid shut. After a moment, he
heard other doors thumping shut along the corridor.
Trixia sat hunched over her keyboard, oblivious of the opinions just
rendered. Ezr watched her for some seconds, thinking about her future, thinking
about how he would finally save her. Even after forty years of Lurk, the
translators couldn't masquerade real-time voice comm with the Spiders. Tomas
Nau would gain no advantage by having his translators down by Arachna. . .yet.
Once the world was conquered, Trixia and the others would be the voice of the
conqueror.
But that time will not come.Pham and Ezr's plan was proceeding down its
own schedule. Except for a few old systems, a few electromechanical backups,
the Qeng Ho localizers could have total control. Pham and Ezr were finally
moving toward real sabotage-most important the Hammerfest wireless-power
cutoff. That switch was an almost pure mechanical link, immune to all subtlety.
But Pham had one more use for localizers. True grit. These last few Msecs, they
had built up layers of grit near that switch, and set up similar sabotage in other
old systems, and aboard theInvisibleHand. The last hundred seconds would
involve flagrant risk. It was a trick that they could try only once, when Nau and
his gang were most distracted with their own takeover.
If the sabotage worked-whenit worked-the Qeng Ho localizers would
rule.And our time will come.

FORTY-NINE
Hrunkner Unnerby spent a lot of time at Lands Command; it was essentially
the home base of his construction operations. Perhaps ten times a year he visited
the inner sanctums of Accord Intelligence. He talked with General Smith every
day by email; he saw her at staff meetings. Their meeting at Calorica-was that
five years ago already-had been not cordial but at least an honest sharing of
anxiety. But for seventeen years. . .for all the time since Gokna died. . .he had
never been in General Smith's private office.
The General had a new aide, someone young and oophase. Hrunkner barely
noticed. He stepped into the silence of the chief's den. The place was as big as he
remembered, with open-storied nooks and isolated perches. For the moment he
seemed to be alone. This had been Strut Greenval's office, before Smith. It had
been the Intelligence chief's innermost den for two generations before that.
Those previous occupants would scarcely recognize it now. There was even
more comm and computer gear than in Sherk's office in Princeton. One side of
the room was a full vision display, as elaborate as any videomancy. Just now it
was receiving from cameras topside: Royal Falls had stilled more than two years
ago. He could see all the way up the valley. The hills were stark and cooling;
there was CO2frost in the heights. But nearby. . .the colors beyond red leaked
from buildings, flared bright in the exhaust of street traffic. For a moment,
Hrunk just stared, thinking what this scene must have been like just one
generation earlier, five years into the last Dark. Hell, this room would have been
abandoned by then. Greenval's people would have been stuck up in their little
command cave, breathing stuffy air, listening for the last radio messages,
wondering if Hrunk and Sherk would survive in their submarine deepness. A
few more days and Greenval would have closed down his operation, and the
Great War would have been frozen in its own deadly sleep.
But in this generation, we just go on and on, headed for the most
terriblewar of all time.
Behind him, he saw the General step silently into the room. "Sergeant,
please sit down." Smith gestured to the perch in front of her desk.
Unnerby pulled his attention away from the view, and sat. Smith's -shaped
desk was piled with hardcopy reports and five or six small reading displays,
three alight. Two showed abstract designs, similar to the pictures that Sherkaner
had lost himself in.So she does still humor him.
The General's smile seemed stiff, forced, and so it might be sincere. "I call

,
,
g
you Sergeant. What a fantasy rank. But. . .thank you for coming."
"Of course, ma'am."Why did she call me down here? Maybe his wild
scheme for the Northeast had a chance. Maybe- "Have you seen my excavation
proposals, General? With nuclear explosives we could dig shielded caves, and
quickly. The Northeast shales would be ideal. Give me the bombs and in one
hundred days I could protect most of the agri and people there." The words just
tumbled out. The expense would be enormous, out of range of the Crown or free
financing. The General would have to take emergency powers, Covenant or no.
And even then, it would not make a happy ending. But if-when-the war came, it
could save millions.
Victory Smith raised one hand, gently. "Hrunk, we don't have a hundred
days. One way or another, I expect things will be settled in less than three." She
gestured to one of the little displays. "I just got word that Honored Pedure is
actually at Southmost in person, orchestrating things."
"Well, damn her. If she lights off a Southmost attack, she'll fry too." "That's
why we're probably safe until she leaves."
"I've heard rumors, ma'am. Our external intelligence is in the garbage?
Thract has been cashiered?" The stories just grew and grew. There were terrible
suspicions of Kindred agents at the heart of Intelligence. Deepest crypto was
being used on the most routine transmissions. Where the enemy had not
succeeded with direct threats, they might now win simply because of the panic
and confusion that were everywhere.
Smith's head jerked angrily. "That's right. We've been outmaneuvered in the
South. But we still have assets there, people who depended on me. . .people I
have let down." That last was almost inaudible, and Hrunk doubted it was
addressed to him. She was silent for a moment, then straightened. "You're
something of an expert on the Southmost substructure, aren't you, Sergeant?"
"I designed it; supervised most of the construction." And that had been
when the South and the Accord had been as friendly as different nation-states
ever got.
The General edged back and forth on her perch. Her arms trembled.
"Sergeant. . .even now, I can't stand the sight of you. I think you know that."
Hrunk lowered his head.I know. Oh, yes.
"But for simple things, I trust you. And, oh, by the Deep, just now I need
you! An order would be meaningless. . .but will you help me with Southmost?"
The words seemed to be wrung from her.
You have to ask?Hrunkner raised his hands. "Of course."
Evidently, the quick response had not been expected. Smith just gobbled for
a second. "Do you understand? This will put you at risk, in personal service to

me."
"Yes, yes. I have always wanted to help."I've always wanted to makethings
right again.
The General stared at him a moment more. Then: "Thank you, Sergeant."
She tapped something into her desk. "Tim Downing"-that young new aide?-"will
get you the detailed analysis later. The short of it is, there's only one reason
Pedure would be down there in Southmost: The issue there is not decided. She
doesn't have all the key people entrapped. Some members of the Southland
Parliament have requested I come down to talk."
"But. . .it should be the King that goes for something like this."
"Yes. It seems that a number of traditions are being broken in this new
Dark."
"You can't go, ma'am." Somewhere in the back of his mind, something
chuckled at the violation of noncom etiquette.
"You aren't the only person with that advice.. . .The last thing Strut
Greenval said to me, not two hundred yards from where we're sitting now, was
something similar." She stopped, silent with memories. "Funny. Strut had so
much figured out. He knew I'd end up on his perch. He knew there would be
temptations to get into the field. Those first decades of the Bright, there were a
dozen times when I know I could have fixed things-even saved lives-if I'd just go
out and do what was necessary myself. But Greenval's advice was more like an
order, and I followed it, and lived to fight another day." Abruptly she laughed,
and her attention seemed to come back to the present. "And now I'm a rather old
lady, hunkered down in a web of deceit. And it's finally time to break Strut's
rule."
"Ma'am, General Greenval's advice is right as ever. Your place is here."
"I. . .let this mess happen. It was my decision, my necessary decision. But if
I go to Southmost now, there's a chance I can save some lives."
"But if you fail, then you die and we certainly lose!"
"No. If I die things will be bloodier, but we'll still prevail." She snapped her
desk displays closed. "We leave in three hours, from Courier Launch Four. Be
there."
Hrunkner almost shrieked his frustration. "At least take special security.
Young Victory and-" "The Lighthill team?" A faint smile showed. "Their
reputation has spread, has it?"
Hrunkner couldn't help smiling back. "Y-yes. No one knows quite what
they're up to. . .but they seem to be as wacko as we ever were." There were
stories. Some good, some bad, all wild.
"You don't really hate them, do you, Hrunk?" There was wonder in her

voice. Smith went on. "They have other, more important things to do during the
next seventy-five hours.. . .Sherkaner and I created the present situation by
conscious choice, over many years. We knew the risks. Now it's payoff time."
It was the first she had mentioned Sherkaner since he'd entered the room.
The collaboration that had brought them so far had broken, and now the General
had only herself.
The question was pointless, but he had to ask. "Have you talked to Sherk
about this? What is he doing?" Smith was silent, but her look was closed. Then,
"The best he can, Sergeant. The best he can."
The night was clear even by the standards of Paradise. Obret Nethering
walked carefully around the tower at the island's summit, checking the
equipment for tonight's session. His heated leggings and jacket weren't
especially bulky, but if his air warmer broke, or if the power cord that trailed
behind him was severed. . .Well, it wasn't a lie when he told his assistants that
they could freeze off an arm or a leg or a lung in a matter of minutes. It was five
years into the Dark. He wondered if even in the Great War there had been people
awake this late.
Nethering paused in his inspection; after all, he was a little ahead of
schedule. He stood in the cold stillness and looked out upon his specialty-the
heavens. Twenty years ago, when he was just starting at Princeton, Nethering
had wanted to be a geologist. Geology was the father science, and in this
generation it was more important than ever, what with all mega-excavations and
heavy mining. Astronomy, on the other hand, was the domain of fringe cranks.
The natural orientation of sensible people must be downward, planning for the
safest deepness in which to survive the next Darkness. What was there to see in
the sky? The sun certainly, the source of all life and all problems. But beyond
that nothing changed. The stars were such tiny constant things, not at all like the
sun or anything else one could relate to.
Then, in his sophomore year, Nethering had met old Sherkaner Underhill,
and his life was changed forever-though, in that, Nethering was not unique.
There were ten thousand sophomores, yet somehow Underhill could still reach
out to individuals. Or maybe it was the other way around: Underhill was such a
blazing source of crazy ideas that certain students gathered round him like
woodsfairies round a flame. Underhill claimed that all of math and physics had
suffered because no one understood the simplicity of the world's orbit about the
sun or the intrinsic motions of the stars. If there had been evenone other planet to
play mind games with-why, the calculus might have been invented ten
generations ago instead of two. And this generation's mad explosion of
technology might have been spread more peaceably across multiple cycles of

Bright and Dark.
Of course, Underhill's claims about science weren't entirely original. Five
generations ago, with the invention of the telescope, binary star astronomy had
revolutionized Spiderkind's understanding of time. But Underhill brought the old
ideas together in such marvelous new ways. Young Nethering had been drawn
further and further away from safe and sane geology, until the Emptiness Above
became his love. The more you realized what the stars really were, the more you
realized what the universe must really be. And nowadays, all the colors could be
seen in the sky if one knew where to look, and with what instruments. Here on
Paradise Island, the far-red of the stars shone clearer than anywhere in the world.
With the large telescopes being built nowadays, and the dry stillness of the upper
air, sometimes he felt like he could see to the end of the universe.
Huh?Low above the northeast horizon, a narrow feather of aurora was
spreading south. There was a permanent loop of magnetism over the North Sea,
but with the Dark five years old, auroras were very rare. Down in Paradise
Town, what tourists were left must be oohing and aahing at the show. For Obret
Nethering, this was just an unexpected inconvenience. He watched a second
more, beginning to wonder. The light was awfully cohesive, especially at the
northern end, where it narrowed almost to a point. Huh. If it did wreck tonight's
session, maybe they should just fire up the far-blue scope and take a close look
at it. Serendipity and all that.
Nethering turned back from the parapet and headed for the stairs. There was
a loud rattle and bang that might have been a troop of one hundred combateers
coming up the stairs-but was more likely Shepry
Tripper and his four hiking boots. A moment passed, and his assistant
bounced out onto the open. Shepry was just fifteen years old, about as far out-of-
phase as a child could be. There had been a time when Nethering couldn't
imagine talking to, much less working with, such an abomination. That was
another thing that had changed for him at Princeton. Now-well, Shepry was still
a child, ignorant of so many things. But there was something starkly strong
about his enthusiasm. Nethering wondered how many years of research were
wasted at the end of Waning Years because the youngest researchers were
already in early middle age, starting families, and too dulled to bring intensity to
their work.
"Dr. Nethering! Sir!" Shepry's voice came muffled by his air warmer. The
boy was gasping, losing whatever time his dash up the stairs had gained him.
"Big trouble. I've lost the radio link with North Point"-five miles away, the other
end of the interferometer. "There's blooming static all across the bands."
So nothing would be left of his plans for tonight. "Did you call Sam on the

ground line? What-" He stopped, Shepry's words slowly sinking in:static all
across the bands. Behind him the strange auroral "spike" moved steadily
southward. Irritation merged silently into fear. Obret Nethering knew the world
was teetering on the edge of war. Everyone knew that. Civilization could be
destroyed in a matter of hours if the bombs started falling. Even out-of-the-way
places like Paradise Island might not be safe.And that light? It was fading now,
the bright point vanished. A nuke burst in the magnetopatch might look like
aurora, but surely not so asymmetrical and not with such a long rise time. Hmm.
Or maybe some clever physics types had built something more subtle than a
simple nuclear bomb. Curiosity and horror skirmished in Nethering's head.
He turned and dragged Shepry back toward the stairs.Slow down. How
many times had he given Shepry that advice? "Step by step, Shepry, and watch
your power cord for snags. Is the radar array up tonight?"
"Y-yes." Shepry's heavy boots clomped down the stairs just behind him.
"But the log will just be noise."
"Maybe." Bouncing microwaves off ionization trails was one of the minor
projects that Nethering and Tripper managed. Almost all the reflections could be
tied to returning satellite junk, but every year or so they'd see something they
couldn't explain, a mystery from the Great Empty. He'd almost gotten a research
article out of that. Then the damn reviewers-the ubiquitous T. Lurksalot-ran their
own programs, and didn't buy his conclusions. Tonight there would be another
use for the array. The pointed end of the strange light-what if it were a physical
object?
"Shepry, are we still on the net?" Their high-rate connection was optical
fiber strung across the ocean ice; he'd intended to use mainland supercomputers
to guide tonight's run. Now"I'll check."
Nethering laughed. "We may have something interesting to show
Princeton!" He poked up the radar log, began scanning. Was it Nature or War
that was talking to them tonight? Either way, the message was important.

FIFTY
Nowadays, flying made Hrunkner Unnerby feel very old. He remembered
when piston engines spun wood propellers, and wings were fabric on wood.
And Victory Smith's aircraft was no ordinary executive jet: They were
flying at nearly one hundred thousand feet, moving south at three times the
speed of sound. The two engines were almost silent, just a high thready tone that
seemed to bury itself in your guts. Outside, the star-and sunlight together were
just bright enough so colors could be seen in the clouds below. Deck upon deck,
the clouds layered the world. From this altitude, even the highest of the clouds
seemed to be low, crouching things. Here and there canyons opened in the air,
and they glimpsed ice and snow. In a few more minutes they would reach the
Southern Straits and pass out of Accord airspace. The flight communications
officer said there was a squadron of Accord fighter craft all around them, that
they would be in place all the way to the embassy airfield at Southmost. The
only evidence Unnerby saw for the claim was an occasional glint in the sky
above them. Sigh. Like everything important nowadays, they moved too fast and
too far to be seen by mere mortals.
General Smith's private craft was actually a supersonic recon bomber, the
sort of thing that was becoming obsolete with the advent of satellites. "Air
Defense practically gave it to us," Smith had remarked when they came on
board. "All this will be junk when the air begins to snow out." There would be a
whole new transportation industry then. Ballistic vehicles, maybe? Antigravity
floaters? Maybe it didn't matter. If their current mission didn't work out, there
might not be any industry at all, just endless fighting among the ruins.
The center of the fuselage was filled with rack on rack of computer and
communications gear. Unnerby had seen the laser and microwave pods when
they came aboard. The flight techs were plugged into the Accord's military net
almost as securely as if they'd been back at Lands Command. There were no
stewards on this flight. Unnerby and General Smith were strapped into small
perches that seemed awfully hard after the first couple of hours. Still, he was
probably more comfortable than the combateers hanging on nets in the back of
the aircraft. A ten-squad; that was all the General had for bodyguards.
Victory Smith had been quiet and busy. Her assistant, Tim Downing, had
carried all her computer gear aboard: heavy, awkward boxes that must be very
powerful, very well shielded, or very obsolete. For the last three hours she had
sat surrounded by half a dozen screens, their light glittering faintly off her eyes.

Hrunkner wondered what she was seeing. Her military networks combined with
all the open nets must give her an almost godlike view.
Unnerby's display showed the latest report on the Southmost underground
construction. Some of it was lies-but he knew enough of the original designs to
guess the truth. For the nth time, he forced his attention back to the reading.
Strange; when he was young, back in the Great War, he could concentrate just
like the General was now. But today, his mind kept flitting forward, to a
situation and a catastrophe that he couldn't see any way around.
Out over the Straits now; from this altitude, the broken sea ice was an
intricate mosaic of cracks. There was a shout from one of the comm techs.
"Wow! Did you see that?" Hrunkner hadn't seen a damn thing.
"Yes! I'm still up though. Check it out." "Yes, sir."
On their perches ahead of Unnerby, the techs crouched over their displays,
tapping and poking. Lights flickered around them, but Unnerby couldn't read the
words on their screens-and the display format wasn't anything he'd trained on.
Behind him, he saw that Victory Smith had risen off her perch and was
watching intently. Apparently her gear was not linked with the techs'. Huh. So
much for the "godlike view" he'd been imagining.
After a moment she raised a hand, signaled one of them. The fellow called
back to her. "It looks like somebody went nuclear, ma'am."
"Hm," said Smith. Unnerby's display hadn't even flickered.
"It was very far away, probably over the North Sea. Here, I'll set up a slave
window for you." "And for Sergeant Unnerby, please."
"Yes, ma'am." The Southmost report in front of Hrunkner suddenly was
replaced by a map of the North Coast. Colored contours spread concentrically
about point twelve hundred kilometers northeast of Paradise Island. Yes, the old
Tiefer refueling depot, a useless chunk of seamount except when you wanted to
project force across ice. Thatwas far away, almost the other side of the world
from where they were right now.
"Just one blast?" said Smith.
"Yes, very high up. A pulse attack. . .except that it wasn't more than a
megaton. We're building this map off satellites and ground analysis from the
North Coast and Princeton." Legends scattered across the picture, bibliographic
pointers to the network sites that contributed to the analysis. Hah. There was
even an eyewitness report from Paradise Island-an academic observatory,
according to the code.
"What did we lose?"
"No military losses, ma'am. Two commercial satellites are offline, but that
may be temporary. This was barely a jab."

What then?A test? A warning? Unnerby stared at the display.
Jau Xin had been here less than a year before, but that had been on a six-
man pinnace, sneaking in and out in less than a day. Today he managed the
piloting of theInvisible Hand, a million tonnes of starship.
This was the true arrival of the conquerors-even if those conquerors were
duped into thinking they were rescuers. Next to Jau, Ritser Brughel sat in what
had once been a Peddler Captain's seat. The Podmaster spouted an unending
stream of trivial orders-you'd think he was trying to manage the pilots himself.
They'd come in over Arachna's north pole, skirting the atmosphere, decelerating
in a single strong burn, nearly a thousand seconds at better than one gee. The
decel had been over open ocean, far from Spider population centers, but it must
have been enormously bright to those few who saw it. Jau could see the glow
reflected in the ice and snow below.
Brughel watched the icy waste rolling out before them. His features were
pursed with some intense feeling. Disgust, to see so much that looked totally
worthless? Triumph, to arrive on the world that he would co-rule? Probably
both. And here on the bridge, both triumph and violent intent leaked into his
tone, sometimes even his words. Tomas Nau might have to keep the fraud going
back on L1, but here
Ritser Brughel was shedding his restraint. Jau had seen the corridors that
led to Brughel's private quarters. The walls were a constant swirl of pink,
sensuous in a heavy, threatening way. No staff meetings were held down those
corridors. On the way from L1, he heard Brughel brag to Podcorporal Anlang
about the special treat he would bring out of the freezer to celebrate the coming
victory.No,don't think on it. You know too much already.
The voices of Xin's pilots spoke in his ear, confirming what he already saw
on his tracking display. He looked up at Brughel and spoke with the formality
the other seemed to like. "The burn is complete, sir. We're in polar orbit, altitude
one hundred fifty kilometers." Any lower and they would need snowshoes.
"We were visible across thousands of kilometers, sir." Xin matched his
words with a concerned look.
He'd been playing naive idiot on the trip down from L1. It was a dangerous
game, but so far it had given him some leeway.And maybe, maybe there is some
way I can avoid mass murder.
Brughel grinned back smug superiority. "Of course we were seen, Mr. Xin.
The trick is to let them see-and then corrupt how they interpret the information."
He opened the comm channel to theHand' s ziphead deck. "Mr. Phuong! Have
you cloaked our arrival?"
Bil Phuong's voice came back from theHand' s ziphead hold. The place had

been a madhouse the last time Jau looked, but Phuong sounded cool: "We're on
top of the situation, Podmaster. I've got three teams synthesizing satellite reports.
L1 tells me they look good." That would be Rita's team talking to Bil. She
should be going off duty any moment now, for what Nau would probably claim
was a rest break before the heavy work. Jau had known for a day that that "lull"
was when the killing would begin.
Phuong continued, "I must warn you, sir. Eventually the Spiders will sort
things out. Our disguise won't last for more than a hundred Ksec, less if someone
down there is clever."
"Thank you, Mr. Phuong. That should be more than enough." Brughel
smiled blandly at Jau.
Part of their horizon-spanning view disappeared, replaced by Tomas Nau
back on L1. The senior
Podmaster was sitting with Ezr Vinh and Pham Trinli in the lodge in Lake
Park. Sunlight sparkled on the water behind them. This would be a public two-
way conversation, visible to all the Followers and Qeng Ho. Nau looked out
across theHand' s bridge and his gaze seemed to find Ritser Brughel.
"Congratulations, Ritser. You are well placed. Rita tells me you have
already achieved a close synch with the ground nets. We have some good news
of our own. The Accord Intelligence chief is visiting Southmost. Her opposite
number in the Kindred is already there. Short of accidents, things should be
peaceful for a while more."
Nau sounded so sincere and well-meaning. The amazing thing was that
Ritser Brughel was almost as smooth: "Yes, sir. I'm setting up for the
announcement and network takeover in-" He paused, as if checking his schedule.
"-in fifty-one Ksec."
Of course, Nau didn't reply immediately. The signal from theHand had to
be bounced out of radio shadow to a relay and then across five light-seconds of
space to L1. Any reply would take at least another five seconds coming the other
way.
Sharp on ten seconds, Nau smiled. "Excellent. We'll set the pacing here so
everybody will be fresh when the workload spikes. Good luck to all of you down
there, Ritser. We're depending on you."
There were a couple more rounds in their dance of deception; then Nau was
gone. Brughel confirmed that all comm was local. "The go codes should come
down any time, Mr. Phuong." Brughel grinned. "Another twenty Ksec, and we
fry some Spiders."
Shepry Tripper gaped at the radar display. "It's-it's just like you said.
Eighty-eight minutes, and there it is coming out of the north again!"

Shepry knew plenty of math and had worked for Nethering almost a year.
He certainly understood the principles of satellite flight. But like most people, he
still boggled at the notion of "a rock that gets thrown up and never comes down."
The cobblie would chortle delight when some comsat came trucking over the
horizon at the time and azimuth that the math had predicted.
What Nethering had done tonight was a prediction of a different order, and
he was just as awed as his assistant-and a whole lot more frightened. They had
had only two or three clear radar bearings on the narrow end of the aurora. The
thing had been decelerating even though it was well outside of the atmosphere.
The Air Defense site at Princeton had not been impressed by his report.
Nethering had a longterm relationship with those people, but tonight they treated
him like a stranger, their autoresponse thanking him for his information and
assuring that the matter was being taken care of. The world network was full of
rumors of a high-altitude nuke. But this had been no bomb. Departing
southward, it had appeared to be in low orbit. . .and now it was coming back
from the north, right on schedule.
"Do you think we'll be able to see it this time, sir? It's gonna pass almost
right over us."
"I don't know. We don't have any scope that can slew fast enough to track it
overhead." He started back toward the stairs. "Maybe we could use the ten-inch."
"Yeah!" Shepry raced around him"Button your breather! Watch the power
cords!" -and was out of sight, banging up the stairs.
But the little cobblie was right! There were fewer than two minutes until the
object was directly overhead, then a couple more before it was gone again. Huh.
Maybe not even time for the scope. Nethering paused, grabbed a widefield 4-
ocular from his desk. Then he was running up the stairs after Tripper.
Topside, there was a faint breeze, a cold that bit like tarant fangs, even
through his electric leggings. The sun would rise in about seventy minutes; dim
though its light was, the best part of his observing time would be gone. For once
it just didn't matter. Serendipity was up from the good cold earth this night.
There was at most a minute until the mystery came overhead. It should be
well above the horizon now, gliding southward toward them. Nethering moved
around the curved wall of the main dome, and stared into the north. From the
equipment closet ahead of him, he heard Shepry struggling with the ten-inch, the
little scope they showed the tourists. He should be helping the child, but there
was really no time.
Familiar starfields extended crystal clear down to the horizon. That clarity
was, for Obret Nethering, what made this little island truly paradise. There
should be a fleck of reflected sunlight rising slowly across the sky. It would be
f i
h d
d
h
l
hi
N h i
d
d
d

very faint; the dead sun was such a pale thing. Nethering stared and stared,
straining for the slightest motion-triggered gleam.. . .Nothing. Maybe he should
have stuck with the radar, maybe right now they were missing their one chance
to get really good data. Shepry had the ten-inch out of the closet now. He was
struggling to get it aligned. "Help me, sir!"
They both had guessed wrong. Serendipity might be an angel, but she was a
fickle one. Obret turned back to Shepry, a little ashamed for ignoring him. Of
course, he was still watching the sky, the swath just short of the zenith where
there should be a tiny speck of light. A bite of blackness flickered across the
glowing pile of the Robber's Cluster. A bite of blackness. Something. . .huge.
All dignity forgotten, Nethering fell on his side, brought the 4-ocular up to
his lesser eyes. But tonight it was all he had.. . .He turned slowly, tracking along
his guess at a sky-path, praying he could recapture his target.
"Sir? What is it?"
"Shepry, look up. . .just look up."
The cobblie was silent for a second. "Oh!"
Obret Nethering wasn't listening. He had thething in the 4-ocs field and all
his attention was on keeping up with it, on seeing and remembering. And what
he saw was an absence of light, a silhouette that raced across the galactic swath
of star clouds. It was almost a quarter of a degree across. In the gap between star
clouds it was invisible again. . .and then he saw it for another second. Nethering
almost had a sense of the shape of it: a squat cylinder, downward-pointing, with
a hint of complexity sticking out amidships.
Amidships.
The rest of its track crossed lonely starfields down to the southern horizon.
Nethering tried in vain to follow it all the way. If it hadn't been for its crossing
the Robber's Cluster, he might not have latched on to it at all.Thank you,
Serendipity!
He lowered the 4-ocs and stood. "We'll keep watch a few more minutes."
What other junk might be flying along with the thing?
"Oh, please, let me go below and put this on the net!" said the cobblie.
"More than ninety miles up, and so big I could see its shape. It must be half a
mile long!"
"Okay. Go ahead."
Shepry disappeared down the stairs. Three minutes passed. Four. There was
a glint sliding across the southern horizon, most likely a Low-Comm S satellite.
Nethering pocketed his 4-ocs and climbed slowly down the stairs. This time, Air
Defense would have to listen to him. A good part of Nethering's contract money
came from Accord Intelligence; he knew about the floater satellites the Kindred

had recently begun launching.This is not oneof ours, and not one of the
Kindred's. And all our warfare is reduced to
pettysquabbling by this arrival. The world had been so close to nuclear war.
And now. . .what? He remembered how old Underhill had gone on about the
"deepness in the sky." But angels should come from the good cold earth, never
from the empty sky.
Shepry met him at the bottom of the stairs. "It's no good, sir. I can't-" "The
link to the mainland is down?"
"No. It's up. But Air Defense brushed me off just like they did on the first
pass." "Maybe they already know."
Shepry jerked his hands in agitation. "Maybe. But something perved is
happening on the gossips, too. The last few days, crank postings have pounded
the ceiling. You know, end-of-the-world claims, snow-troll sightings. It's been
kind of a laugh; I even did some counter-crapping of my own. But tonight the
cranks have totally pounced." Shepry paused, seemed to run out of jargon.
Suddenly he looked very young and uncertain. "It's. . .it's not natural, sir. I found
two postings that described just what we saw. That's about what you'd expect for
something that just happened over midocean. But they're lost in all crazy crap."
Hmm. Nethering walked across the room, settled down on his old perch
beside the control bays. Shepry fidgeted back and forth, waiting for some
judgment.When I first came to the observatory, the controls covered threewalls,
instruments and levers, almost all analog. Now most of the gear was tiny,
digital, precise. Sometimes he joked with Shepry, asking him whether they
should really trust anything they couldn't see the guts of. Shepry had never
understood his lack of faith in computer automation. Until tonight.
"You know, Shepry, maybe we should make some phone calls."

FIFTY-ONE
Hrunkner had been in a dry hurricane once before, during the Great War.
But that had been on the ground-underground most of the time-and about all he
remembered was the ceaseless wind and the fineness of the snow that swirled
and piled, and penetrated every crevice and gap.
This time he was in the air, descending through forty thousand feet. In the
dim sunlight, he could see the swirl of the hurricane spread across hundreds of
miles, its sixty-mile-per-hour winds brought to stillness by distance. A dry
hurricane could never equal the fury of a Bright Time water hurricane. Yet this
kind of storm would last for years, its eye of cold widening and widening. The
world's heat balance had paused on a kind of thermal plateau, water's energy of
crystallization. Once past this plateau, temperatures would fall steadily toward
the next, much colder level, where the air itself began to dew out.
Their jet slid down toward the walls of cloud, bucking and slewing on
invisible turbulence. One of the pilots remarked that the air pressure was less
now than it had been at fifty thousand feet back over the Straits. Hrunkner tilted
his head up to a window, looked almost directly ahead. In the hurricane's eye,
sunlight glinted off motley snow and ice. There were also lights, the hot reds of
Southland industry just below the surface.
Far ahead, a ragged edge of mountains pierced the clouds and there were
colors and textures he hadn't seen since he and Sherkaner took their long-ago
walk in the Dark.
• • •
The Accord Embassy at Southmost had its own airport, a four-mile-by-two-
mile property just outside the city core. Even this was just a fragment of the
enclave that colonial interests had held in previous generations. The remnant of
empire was alternately an obstacle to friendly relations and an economic boost
for both nations. To Unnerby it was just an overly short, oil-smudged strip of
ice. Their converted bomber made the most exciting landing of Hrunkner's
career, a rolling skid past an unending blur of snowcovered warehouses.
The General's pilot was good, or very lucky. They came to a stop just a
hundred feet short of snowdrifts that marked the no-more-excuses end of the
runway. In minutes, beetle-shaped vehicles had driven up and were pulling them
toward a hangar. Not a single person walked about in the open. Away from their

path, the ground glittered with CO2frost.
Inside the cavernous hangar, the lights were bright and-once the doors were
shut-ground crews rushed out with stairs. There were a few fancy-looking
cobbers down there, waiting by the base of the stairs. Very likely the Accord
ambassador and the head of the embassy guards. Since they were still on Accord
ground, it was unlikely that any Southlanders would be here.. . .Then he saw the
parliamentary ensign on the jackets of two of the VIPs. Someone was eager
beyond the bounds of clever diplomacy.
The mid-hatch was opened; a bolus of frigid air spilled into the cabin.
Smith had already gathered up her gear and was climbing back to the hatch.
Hrunkner remained on his perch a moment longer. He waved at one of the
Intelligence techs. "Have there been any more nukes?"
"No, sir, nothing. We've got confirmation up and down the net. It was an
isolated, one-megaton burst."
The NCO Club at Lands Command was a bit out of the ordinary. Lands
Command was more than a day's drive from civilian entertainment, and the post
had a fat budget compared to most out-of-the-way places. The average noncom
at Lands Command was likely to be a tech with at least four years of academic
training, and many of the troopers here worked at the deepmost Command and
Control Center, several stories beneath the club. So, there were the usual game
tables and gym sets and fizzbar, but there were also a good book collection and a
number of net-connected arcade games that could also be used as study stations.
Victory Lighthill slouched in the dimness behind the fizzbar and watched
the panorama of commercial video on the far wall. Maybe the most unusual
thing about the club was that she was allowed in. Lighthill was a junior
lieutenant, the natural bane and antagonist of many NCOs. Yet the tradition here
was that if an officer covered her rank and was invited in by a noncom, then that
officer's presence was tolerated.
Tolerated, but in Lighthill's case, not really welcomed. Her team's
reputation for inspection raids and its special connection with the Director of
Intelligence made the average cobber uneasy about her and the team. But hey,
the rest of the team were noncoms. Right now they were scattered around the
club, each with a bulging departure pannier. For once, the other NCOs were
talking to them, if not actually socializing. Even the ones who weren't in
Intelligence knew that things were teetering on the edge-and the ever-mysterious
Lighthill team must surely have inside knowledge.
"It's Smith down there at Southmost," said a senior sergeant sitting at the
bar. "Who else could it be?" He tipped his head in the direction of one of
Lighthill's corporals and waited for some reaction. Corporal Suabisme just

g
p
p
j
shrugged, looking very innocent and-by trad standards-indecently young. "I
wouldn't be knowing, Sergeant. I truly wouldn't."
The senior sergeant waved his eating hands in a sneer. "Oh? So how come
you Lighthill flunkies are all carrying departure bags? I'd say you're just waiting
to hop on a plane for someplace."
It was the sort of probing that would normally bring Viki into action, either
to withdraw Suabisme or-if necessary-to shut the senior sergeant down. But in
the NCO club, Lighthill had zero authority. Besides, the point of being here was
to keep the team out of official sight. But after a moment, the senior sergeant
seemed to realize he wasn't going to provoke any slips from the young soldier;
he turned back to his buddies at the bar.
Viki let out a quiet sigh. She hunkered down until just the tops of her eyes
were above the level of the fizzbar. The place was getting busy, the ping of spit
in cuspidors a kind of background music. There was little talk, and even less
laughter. Off-duty NCOs should be a more lively lot, but these cobbers had
plenty on their minds. The center of attention was the television. The NCO
cooperative had bought the latest variable-format video. In the dimness behind
the bar, Viki smiled in spite of herself. If the world could survive even a few
more years, such gear would be as good as the videomancy gear Daddy played
with.
The TV was sucking from a commercial news site. One window was a
crude image from some rent-a- camera at the embassy airport at Southmost: the
aircraft coasting down the embassy runway was a type that Lighthill herself had
seen only twice before. Like many things, it was secret and obsolete all at the
same time. The press scarcely commented on it. On the main window, an
editorialist was congratulating herself on this journalistic coup, and speculating
just who was aboard the daggercraft.
". . .It's not the King himself, despite what our competitors may claim. Our
coverage around the palace and at the Princeton airfields would have detected
any movement of the Royal Household. So who is this now arriving at
Southmost?" The announcer paused and the cameras moved closer, surrounding
her forebody. The picture expanded to spill over the nearby displays. The
maneuver gave the impression suddenly of intimate conversation. "We now
know that the emissary is the head of the King's Own Intelligence Service,
Victory Smith." The cameras backed off a little. "So, to the King's Information
Officers, we say: You can't hide from the press. Better to give us full access. Let
the people see Smith's progress with the Southlanders."
Another camera, from inside a hangar: Mom's daggercraft had been towed
all the way into the embassy hangar, and the clamshell doors were being pulled

shut. The scene looked like a diorama built from children's toys: the futuristic
aircraft, the closed-body tractors chugging around the hangar's wide floor. No
people were visible.Surely they don't have to pressurize the hangar? Even at the
eye of the dry hurricane, the pressure couldn't be that low. But after a moment,
soldiers popped out of a van. They pushed a stairway up to the side of the
dagger. Everyone in the NCO Club became suddenly very quiet.
A soldier climbed to the aircraft's mid-hatch. It cracked open, and. . .the
embassy rent-a-camera feed went dead, replaced by the King's seal.
There was startled laughter, then applause and hooting. "Good for the
General!" someone shouted. As much as anyone, these cobbers wanted to know
what was happening at Southmost, but they also had a long-standing dislike for
the news companies. They regarded these latest, very open discussions as a
personal affront.
She looked at her team members. Most had been watching the television,
but without great interest. They already knew what was going on, and-as Senior
Sergeant Loudmouth had speculated-they expected to see action themselves very
soon. Unfortunately, the television couldn't help them with that. At the back of
the room, far from the fizzbar and the television, a few hard-core gamers hung
around their arcade boxes. That included three of Lighthill's people. Brent had
been there since they began to loiter. Her brother was hunched down under a
custom game display, the helmet covering most of his head. To look at him,
you'd never guess that the world was teetering on the edge of destruction.
Viki slipped off her perch and walked quietly back toward the arcade
machines.
In all its thirty-five-year existence, this was the booze parlor's finest
moment.But, who knows, maybe
after this we'll carry on, turn into a realbusiness. Stranger things had
happened. Benny's parlor had been the social center of their strange community
at L1. Very soon that community would include another race, the first high-tech
alien race Humankind had ever met. The parlor might well be the centerpiece of
the marvelous combination.
Benny Wen floated from table to table, directing his helpers, greeting
customers. Yet still occasionally his attention was off in a fabulous future, trying
to imagine what it would be like to cater to Spiders.
"The bottom wing is out of brew, Benny." Hunte's voice came in his ear.
"Ask Gonle, Papa. She promised she'd cover whatever is needed." He
looked around, caught a glimpse of Fong down a tunnel of flowers and vines,
over in the east wing of the parlor.
Benny didn't hear his father's reply. He was already talking to the party of

Emergents and Qeng Ho that floated down around the just-prepped table.
"Welcome, welcome. Lara! I haven't seen you in so many Watches." Pride at
showing off the parlor and pleasure at meeting old friends mixed all together,
warming him.
After a moment's chat he drifted away from the table, to the next, and the
next, all the time keeping track of the overall service situation. Even with Gonle
and Papa both on duty, they were just barely keeping their helpers coordinated.
"She's here, Benny." Gonle's voice sounded in his ear.
"She came!" he replied. "I'll meet her at the front table!" He drifted in from
the tables, toward the central cavity. All six cardinal points had customer wings.
The Podmaster had allowed, encouraged, them to knock out walls and consume
the volume that had been meeting rooms. The parlor was now the biggest single
space on the temp. Except for the Lake Park, it was the biggest single living
space at L1. Today, almost three-quarters of all the Emergents and Qeng Ho
were on-Watch simultaneously, the climax of the rushed preparations for the
Spider Rescue. And for a short time before the final push, virtually everyone was
here at Benny's. The affair was as much a reunion as it was a rescue and a new
beginning.
The central core of the parlor was an icosahedron of display devices, a tent
of their best remaining video wallpaper. It was primitive and warmly communal
at the same time. From all directions, his customers would look inward at the
shared views. Benny glided quickly across the empty space, his feet just missing
a corner of the displays. In the directions outward from here, he could see the
hundreds of his customers, dozens of tables nestled among the vines and flowers.
He grabbled a vine and brought himself to a graceful stop at a table on the up
wing, at the edge of the empty core. "The table of honor" was how Tomas Nau
had put it.
"Qiwi! Please, sit and be welcome!" He flipped over the table to float
beside her.
Qiwi Lisolet smiled hesitantly back at Benny. By now she was five or six
years older than him, but suddenly she seemed very young, uncertain. Qiwi was
holding something close at her shoulder; it was one of the North Paw kittens, the
first that Benny had ever seen outside of the Lake Park. Qiwi looked around the
parlor, as if surprised to see the crowds. "So almost everyone is here."
"Yes we are! We're so glad you could come. You can give us the inside
view of what's going on." A goodwill ambassador from the Podmaster. And
Qiwi looked the part. No pressure-coveralls for Qiwi today. She wore a lacey
dress that floated in soft swirls as she moved. Even at the Lake Park open house
she hadn't looked so beautiful.
Qi i
h
i
l
h
bl
B
d
f

Qiwi sat hesitantly at the table. Benny sat down for a moment too, a
courtesy. He handed her a control wand. "This is what Gonle gave me; sorry we
don't have better." He pointed out the display and link options. "And this gives
you voice access to all the parlor. Please use it. More than anyone here, you
know what's going on."
After a moment, Qiwi took the wand. Her other hand held tight to the
kitten. The creature wriggled its wings into a more comfortable position, but
didn't otherwise complain. For years Qiwi had been the most popular of the
Podmaster's inner circle. She wasn't really an ambassador; she was more like a
princess. That was how Benny had once described her to Gonle Fong. Gonle had
smirked cynically at the word, and then agreed with him. Qiwi was trusted by
all, a gentle restraint on tyranny.. . .And yet there were times when she seemed
to be lost. Today was one of those times. Benny sat back in his seat. Let the
others do some hustling for a bit. Somehow he knew that Qiwi needed his time
more.
She looked up after a moment, a little of the old smile on her face. "Yes, I
can run the show. Tomas showed me how." She loosened her grip on the kitten
and patted his hand. "Don't worry, Benny. This rescue is a tricky thing, but we'll
bring it off."
She played with the wand, and the display core of the parlor flared into
announcement colors, the light splashing back onto the flowered vines. When
she spoke, her voice came from a thousand microspeakers, phased so that she
seemed at everyone's side. "Hello, everybody. Welcome to the show." Her voice
was happy and confident, the Qiwi they all knew.
The display core was sorting itself into multiple views: Qiwi's face,
Arachna as seen from theInvisible
Hand, Podmaster Nau working at his lodge at North Paw, schematics of
theHand' s orbit and the military configuration of the various Spider nations.
"As you know, our old friend Victory Smith has just arrived in Southland.
In a few moments she'll be at their parliament, and we'll have a treat none of us
have experienced before-a direct human-camera view from the ground. Finally,
after all these years, we'll be seeing firsthand." On the big center display, Qiwi's
face opened into a smile. "Think of it as a taste of things to come, the beginning
of our life with the people of Arachna.
"But before we get to that point, you know we have a war to prevent, and
our presence finally to reveal." She looked down at the displays, and her voiced
hesitated, as if she were suddenly struck by the enormity of what they were
attempting. "We have planned to announce ourselves in just over forty Ksec,
when our low-orbit network manipulations are in place, and theHand' s orbit

takes it over the capitals of both Kindred and Accord. I think you know how
tricky it will be. The Spiders, our hoped-for friends, are poised on more
dangerous ground than most human civilizations can survive. But I know you
have prepared for this day well. When the time for announcement and contact
comes, I know we will succeed.
"So, watch for now. Soon we will be very busy."

FIFTY-TWO
Oddly enough, Rachner Thract retained his rank of colonel, not that former
colleagues would trust him to scrape out their latrines. General Smith had treated
him gently. They couldn'tprove he was a traitor, and apparently she was
unwilling to use extreme interrogation on him. So Colonel Rachner Thract,
formerly of the unnamed service, found himself with a salary and per diem
worthy of full duty. . .and nothing whatsoever to do.
It had been four days since that terrible meeting at Lands Command, but
Thract had seen his disgrace building for almost a year. When it finally
overcame him. . .it had been such a relief, except for the unhappy detail that he
survived it, a living ghost.
Old-time officers, especially Tiefers, would decapitate themselves after
such ignominy. Rachner Thract was one-half Tiefer, but he hadn't cut off his
head with a weighted blade. Instead, he'd numbed his brain with five straight
days of fizz, chewing his way round and round the Calorica Strip.An idiot right
to the end. Calorica was the only place in the world where it was too warm to
lapse into fizz coma.
So he'd heard the reports that someone-Smith, it had to be Smith-was flying
to Southmost, was trying to recover something of what Thract had lost. As the
hours counted down toward Smith's arrival at Southmost, Rachner had eased off
on the fizz. He sat staring at the news feeds in the public houses. Sat and prayed
that somehow Victory Smith could succeed where Thract's life effort had failed.
But he knew that she would fail. No one believed him, and even Rachner Thract
didn't know the how and why. But he was sure: There was something backing up
the Kindred. Even the Kindred didn't know about it, but it was there, twisting
every one of the Accord's technical advantages back on itself.
On the multiple screens, live from Southmost, Smith passed through the
Great Doors of Parliament Hall. Even here, the rowdiest public house on the
Strip, the clientele was suddenly very silent. Thract settled his head upon the bar,
and felt his stare become glazed.
And then his telephone began ringing. Rachner hauled it out of his jacket.
He held it by his head, stared at it with uninterested disbelief.Itmust be broken.
Or someone was sending him an advertisement. Nothing important could ever
come over this unsecured piece of junk.
He was about to throw it to the floor when the cobber on the next perch
whacked him across the back.

"Damn military bum! Get out!" she shouted.
Thract came off his perch, not sure if he was about to follow the other's
demand, or defend the honor of Smith and all the others who tried to keep the
peace.
In the end, house management decided the issue; Thract found himself out
on the street, cut off from the television that might have shown him what his
General was attempting. And his telephone was still ringing. He
stabbedACCEPT and snarled something incoherent into the microphone.
"Colonel Thract, is that you?" The words were jerky and garbled, but the
voice was vaguely familiar. "Colonel? Is your end a secure comm?"
Thract swore loudly. "The bleeding hellno !"
"Oh thank goodness!" came the almost-familiar voice. "There's a chance
then. Surely eventhey can't meddle with all the world's idle talk."
They.The emphasis cut through Thract's fizz hangover. He brought the
microphone close his maw, and his next words came out almost casually curious.
"Who is this?"
"Sorry. Obret Nethering here.Please don't hang up. You probably don't
remember me. Fifteen years ago, I taught a short course on remote sensing. At
Princeton. You sat in."
"I, ah, remember." In fact, it had been a rather good course.
"You do? Oh good, good! So you'll know I'm not a crank. Sir, I know how
busy you must be right now, but I pray you'll give me just a minute of your time.
Please."
Thract was suddenly aware of the street and the buildings around him.
Calorica Strip stretched around the bottom of the volcanic bowl, perhaps the
warmest place left on the surface of the world. But the Strip was just a faded
memory of the time when Calorica had been a playground for the super-rich.
The bars and hotels were dying. Even the snowfalls were long ended. The snow
piled up in the alley behind him was two years old, littered with fizz barf and
streaked with urine.My high-tech command center.
Thract hunkered down, out of the wind. "I suppose I can give you a
moment."
"Oh, thank you! You're my last hope. All my calls to Professor Underhill
come up blocked. Not surprising, now that I understand . . ." Thract could almost
hear the cobber collecting his wits, trying not to blather. "I'm an astronomer out
on Paradise Island, Colonel. Last night I saw"-a spaceship as big as a city, its
drives lighting the sky. . .and ignored by Air Defense and all the networks.
Nethering's descriptions were short and blunt, and took just under a minute. The
astronomer continued. "I'm no crank, I tell you. This is what we saw! Surely
f

there are hundreds of eyewitnesses, but somehow it's invisible to
Air Defense. Colonel, you've got to believe me." His tone segued into
uncomfortable self-realization, an understanding that no one in his right mind
could buy such a story.
"Oh, I believe you," Rachner said softly. It was a floridly paranoid vision. .
.and it explained everything.
"What did you say, Colonel? Sorry, I can't send you much hard evidence.
They cut our landline about half an hour ago; I'm using a hobbyist's packet radio
to reach rout-" Several syllables were jumbled into incoherence. "So that's really
all I had to tell you. Maybe this is some Deepest Secret plot on the part of Air
Defense. If you can't say anything, I'll understand. But I had to try to get
through. That ship was so large, and-"
For a moment, Thract thought the other had paused, overcome. But the
silence continued for several seconds, and then a synthetic voice blatted from the
telephone's tiny speaker: "Message 305. Network error. Please retry your call
later."
Rachner slowly tucked the telephone back in his jacket. His maw and eating
hands were numb, and it wasn't just the cold air. Once upon a time, his network
intelligence cobbers had done a study on automated snooping. Given enough
computing power, it was in principle possible to monitorevery in-the- clear
communication for keywords, and trigger security responses. In principle. In
fact, development of the necessary computers always lagged behind the size of
the contemporary public networks. But now it looked like someone had just that
power.
A Deep Secret plot on the part of Air Defense? Not likely. Over the last
year, Rachner Thract had watched the mysteries and the failures encroach from
all directions. Even if Accord Intelligence and Pedure and all the intelligence
agencies of the world hadcooperated, they could not have produced the seamless
lies that Thract had sensed. No. Whatever they faced was larger than the world, a
grander evil than anything Spiderly.
And now at last he had something concrete. His mind should climb into
combat alertness; instead he was filled with panicked confusion.Damnthe fizz. If
they were up against an alien force so deep, so crafty-what did it matter that
Obret Nethering and now Rachner Thract knew the truth? What could they do?
But Nethering had been permitted to talk for more than a minute. He'd spoken a
number of keywords before the connection was chopped. The aliens might be
better than Spiders-but they weren't gods.
The thought brought Thract to a halt. So they weren't gods. The word of
their monster ship must be percolating across the civilized world, slowed and

suppressed to one-on-one contacts between little people without access to
power.But that couldn't hide the secret more than a few hours. And that meant. .
.whatever the purpose of this vast fraud, it must be headed for consummation in
the next few hours. Right now the chief was risking her life down at Southmost,
trying to bail them out from a disaster that was actually a trap.If I could get
through to her, to Belga, to anybody at thetop.. .
But telephones and network mail would be worse than useless. He needed
some direct contact. Thract ran a weaving course down the deserted sidewalk.
There was a bus stop somewhere beyond the corner. How long until the next one
came through? He still had his private helicopter, a rich cobber's toy. . .that
might be too network-smart. The aliens might simply take it over and crash him.
He pushed the fear away. Just now, the chopper was his only hope. From the
heliport he could reach any place within two hundred miles. Who would be in
that range? He skidded around the corner. Grand Boulevard extended off
beneath an endless row of trichrome lights, down from the Strip and through the
Calorica forest. The forest was long dead, of course. Not even its leaves were
left to spore, the ground beneath being too warm. The center had been cleared
flat for a heliport. From there he could fly to. . .Thract's gaze reached across the
bowl. The boulevard lights dwindled to tiny sparkles. Once upon a time, they
had ascended the caldera walls, to the mansions of the Waning Years. But the
truly rich had abandoned their palaces. Only a few were still occupied,
inaccessible from below.
But Sherkaner Underhill was up there, back from Princeton.At least that
had been the word in the last situation report he had seen, the day his career had
ended. He knew the stories about Underhill, that the poor cobber had lost it
mentally. No matter. What Thract needed was a sidewise path into Lands
Command, maybe through the chief's daughter, a path that did not pass through
the net.
A minute later the city bus pulled up behind Thract. He hopped aboard, the
only passenger, even though it was midmorning. "You're in luck." The driver
grinned. "The next one isn't until three hours after noon."
Twenty miles an hour, thirty. The bus rumbled down the Grand Boulevard
toward the Dead Forest
Heliport.I can be on his doorstep in tenminutes. And suddenly Rachner was
aware of the fizz barf that crusted his maw and eating hands, of the stains on his
uniform. He brushed at his head, but there was nothing he could do about the
uniform. A madman come to see a senile old coot. Maybe it was fitting. It also
might be the last chance any of them had.
A decade earlier, in friendlier times, Hrunkner Unnerby had advised the

Southlanders in the design of New Southmost Under. So in a strange way, things
became more familiar after they left the Accord Embassy and entered Southland
territory. There were lots of elevators. The Southland had wanted a Parliament
Hall that would survive a nuclear strike. He had warned them that future
ordnance developments would likely make their goal impossible, but the
Southlanders hadn't listened, and had wasted substantial resources that could
have gone to Dark Time agriculture.
The main elevator was so large that even the reporters could get aboard, and
they did so. The Southland press was a privileged class, explicitly protected by
Parliament law-even on government property! The General did all right with the
mob. Maybe she had learned from watching Sherkaner deal with journalists. Her
combateers hulked innocuously in the background. She made a few general
remarks, and then politely ignored their questions, letting the Southland police
keep the reporters out of her physical way.
A thousand feet underground, their elevator started sideways on an electric
polyrail. The elevator's tall windows looked out on brightly lit industrial caves.
The Southlanders had done a lot here and on the
Coastal Arc, but they didn't have enough underground farms to support it
all.
The two Elected Representatives who had greeted her at the airfield had
once been powerful in the South. But times had changed: there had been
assassinations, subornations, all Pedure's usual tricks-and lately a near-magical
good luck on the Kindred side. Now these two were, at least publicly, alone in
their friendliness for the Accord. Now they were regarded as toadies of a foreign
king. The two stood close to the General, one close enough that he could talk
with her behind a screen. Hopefully, only the General and Hrunkner Unnerby
could hear.Don't count on it, Unnerby thought to himself.
"No disrespect, ma'am, but we had hoped that your king would come in his
own person." The politico wore a finely tailored jacket and leggings-and an air
of spiritual bedragglement.
The General nodded reassuringly. "I understand, sir. I'm here to make sure
the right things can be done, and done safely. Will I be allowed to address
Parliament?" In the present situation, Hrunk guessed that there was no "inner
circle" to speak to-unless you counted the group that was firmly controlled by
Pedure. But a parliamentary vote could make a difference, since the strategic
rocket forces were still loyal to it.
"Y-yes. We have set that up. But things have gone too far." He waved his
watch hand. "I wouldn't put it past the Other Side to cause an elevator wreck
and-"
"Th
l
hi f
If I
lk
P li
I hi k h
ill b

"They let us get this far. If I can talk to Parliament, I think there will be an
accommodation." General Smith smiled at the Southlander, an almost
conspiratorial look.
Fifteen minutes later, the elevator had deposited them at the main
esplanade. Three sides and the roof simply lifted off.That was an embellishment
he hadn't seen before. Unnerby the engineer couldn't resist: He froze and stared
up into the glaring lights and darkness, trying to see the mechanism that had
such a large and silent effect.
Then the crush of police and politicians and reporters swept him off the
platform . . . . . .and they were climbing up the stairs of Parliament Hall.
At the top, Southland security finally separated them from the reporters and
Smith's own combateers. They passed by five-ton timbered doors. . .into the hall
itself. The hall had always been an underground affair, in earlier generations
squatting just above the local deepness. Those early rulers had been more like
bandits (or freedom fighters, depending on your source of propaganda) whose
forces roamed the mountainous land.
Hrunkner had helped design this incarnation of Parliament Hall. It was one
of the few projects he'd worked on where a major design goal was awesome
appearance. It might not really be bombproof, but it looked damned spectacular:
The hall was a shallow bowl, with levels connected by gently curving stairs,
each level a wide setback with rows of desks and perches. The rock walls curved
in an enormous arch that carried fluorescent tubes-and a half-dozen other
lighting technologies. Together those lights had almost the brightness and purity
of a mid-Bright day, a light rich enough to show all the colors in the walls.
Carpeting as deep and soft as father's-pelt covered the stairs and aisles and
proscenium. Paintings were hung on the polished wood that faced each level,
paintings done with a thousand dyes by artists who knew how to exploit every
illusion. For a poor country, they had spent much on this place. But then, their
parliament was their greatest pride, an invention that had ended banditry and
dependence, and brought peace. Until now.
The doors swung closed behind them. The sound returned deep echoes from
the dome and the far walls. In here, there would be just the Elected, their
visitors, and-high above, Hrunker could see clusters of lenses-the news cameras.
Across the curves of desks, almost every perch was filled. Unnerby could feel
the attention of half a thousand Elected.
Smith and Unnerby and Tim Downing started down the steps that led to the
proscenium. The Elected were mostly quiet, watching. There was respect here,
and hostility, and hope. Maybe Smith would have her chance to keep the peace.
For this day of triumph, Tomas Nau had set North Paw's weather to be its
sunniest the kind of warm afternoon that could extend all the summer day

sunniest, the kind of warm afternoon that could extend all the summer day
round. Ali Lin had grumbled, but made the necessary changes. Now Ali was
weeding in the garden beneath Nau's study, his irritation forgotten. So what if
the park's patterns were upset; fixing the problem would be Ali's next task.
And my task is to manage everything together,Tomas thought. Across the
table from him sat Vinh and
Trinli, working with the site monitoring he had assigned them. Trinli was
essential to the cover story, the only Peddler that Tomas was confident would
support the lies. Vinh. . .well, a credible excuse would take him offline for
critical moments, but what he did see would corroborate Trinli. That would be
tricky, but if there were any surprises. . .well, that was what Kal and his men
were here to handle.
Ritser's presence was just a flat image, showing him sitting in the Captain's
chair aboard theHand. None of his words would be heard by innocent ears. "Yes,
Podmaster! We'll have the picture in a moment. We got a functioning spybot into
Parliament Hall. Hey, Reynolt, your Melin got something right."
Anne was up in the Hammerfest Attic. She was present only as a private
image in Tomas's huds, and a voice in his ear. At the moment, her attention was
split in at least three directions. She was running some kind of ziphead analysis,
watching a Trixia Bonsol translation on the wall above her, and tracking the data
stream from theHand. The ziphead situation was as complicated as it had ever
been. She didn't respond to Ritser's words.
"Anne? When Ritser's spy pics come, pipe them directly to Benny's. Trixia
can do overlay translation, but give us some true audio, too." Tomas had already
seen some of the spybot transmissions. Let the people at Benny's see living
Spiders up close and in motion. That would be a subtle help in the postconquest
lies.
Anne didn't look away from her work. "Yes, sir. I see that what you say is
heard by Vinh and Trinli." "Quite so."
"Very well. Just want you to know. . .our internal enemies have stepped up
the pace. I'm seeing meddling all through our automation.Watch Trinli. I'll bet
he's sitting there diddling his localizers." Anne's gaze flicked up for an instant,
catching the question in Nau's eyes. She shrugged. "No, I'm still not sure it's him.
But I'm very close. Be ready."
A second passed. Anne's voice came again, but now publicly audible here
and in the Peddlers' temp.
"Okay. Here we have live video from Parliament Hall at Southmost. This is
what a human would actually see and hear."
Nau looked to the left, where his huds showed Qiwi's pov in the temp. The
main facets of Benny's display flickered For an instant it wasn't clear what they

main facets of Benny s display flickered. For an instant it wasn t clear what they
were seeing. There was a jumble of reds and greens, actinic blues. They were
looking into some kind of a pit. Stone ladders were cut into the walls. Moss or
hairy pelts grew from rock. The Spiders crowded like black roaches.
Ritser Brughel glanced up from the pictures of Parliament and shook his
head almost in awe. "It's like some Frenkisch prophet's vision of Hell."
Nau gave a gave a silent nod of acknowledgment. With the ten-second time
lag, casual chitchat was to be avoided. But Brughel was right; seeing so many
together was even worse than the earlier spybot videos. The zipheads' cozy,
humanesque translations gave a very unreal view of the Spiders.I wonder how
much we are missing about their minds. He called up a separate image of the
scene, this one synthesized by ziphead translators from a Spider news feed. In
this picture, the steep pit became a shallow amphitheater, the ugly splashes of
color were orderly mosaics worked into the carpet (which no longer looked like
scraggly hair). The woodwork was everywhere glistening with polish (not
stained and pitted). And the creatures themselves were somehow more sedate,
their gestures almost meaningful in human body language.
In both displays, three figures appeared at the Parliament's entrance. They
climbed (walked) down the stone stairs. The air was full of hissing and clicking,
the true sound of these creatures.
The threesome disappeared into the bottom of the pit. A moment passed
and they reappeared, climbing the far side. Ritser chuckled. "The midsized one
in front must be the spy chief, that's what Bonsol calls 'Victory Smith.' " One
detail of the ziphead story was accurate: The creature's clothing was dead black,
but it was more a pile of interlocking patches than a uniform. "The hairy creature
behind Smith, that must be the engineer, 'Hrunkner Unnerby.' Such quaint names
for monsters."
The three climbed out onto an arching spike of stone. A fourth Spider,
already on the precarious structure, clambered to its pointed end.
Nau turned from the Spiders' hall to look at the crowd at Benny's. They
were silent, watching in vast shock. Even Benny Wen's helpers were motionless,
their gaze captured by the images from the Spider world.
"Introductions by the Parliamentary Speaker," spoke a ziphead voice. "The
Parliament will come to order. I have the honor to-" Around the sensible words,
Ritser's spy robot sent back the reality, the hissing clatter, the stabbing gestures
with forelegs that ended in rapier points. In truth, these creatures did look like
the statues the Qeng Ho had seen at Lands Command. But when they moved it
was the chilling grace of predators, some gestures slow, some very very fast.
Strangest of all, for all their superior vision, it wasn't easy to identify their eyes.
Across the fluted ridges of the head there were patches of smooth glassiness

Across the fluted ridges of the head, there were patches of smooth glassiness,
bulbous here and there, with extensions that might be the cool-down points for
its thermal infrared vision. The front of the Spider body was a nightmarish eating
machine. The razor mandibles and clawlike helper limbs were in constant
motion. But the creature's head was almost immobile on the thorax.
The Speaker left the tip of the stone needle, and General Smith climbed up,
negotiating a tricky passage around the other. Smith was silent for a moment,
once she reached the point. Her forelegs waved in a little spiral, as if
encouraging foolish persons to get close to her maw. Hiss and clatter came from
the speaker. On the "translated" image, a legend appeared over her
representation:SMILING GENTLY AT THE
AUDIENCE.
"Ladies and gentlemen of the Parliament." The voice was strong and
beautiful-Trixia Bonsol's voice. Nau noticed Ezr Vinh's head jerk slightly at the
sound of her. The diag traces on Vinh rose with the usual conflicted
intensity.He'll be usable, just long enough, thought Nau.
"I come here speaking for my King, and with his full authority. I come here
hoping I can offer enough to win your trust."
"Ladies and gentlemen of the Parliament." Rank on rank, the Elected
looked back upon Victory Smith. All their attention was hers, and Hrunkner felt
the power of the General's personality flowing as strongly as ever it had done. "I
come here speaking for my King, and with his full authority. I come here hoping
I can offer enough to win your trust.
"We are at a point in history where we can destroy all progress that has
been made-or we can make good on all the efforts of the past and achieve an
unbounded paradise. These two outcomes are the two sides of our one situation.
The bright outcome depends on trust for one another."
There were scattered hoots of derision, the Kindred partisans. Unnerby
wondered if all of those had tickets off Southland. Surely they must realize that
any lesser payoff would leave them as dead as the country they were betraying,
once the bombs started falling.
The General had told him that Pedure was down here herself.Iwonder. . .
Unnerby looked in all directions as the General spoke, his gaze most intensely
upon the shadows and sergeants-at-arms.There. Pedure was sitting on the
proscenium, not a hundred feet from Smith. After all these years, she was more
confident than ever.Wait a little longer, dear HonoredPedure. Maybe my
General can surprise you.
"I have a proposal. It is simple but it has substance-and it can be put into
place very quickly." She motioned for Tim Downing to pass the data cards to the
Speaker's clerk. "I think you know my position in the force structure of the

Spea e s c e
.
t
you
ow
y pos t o
t e o ce st uctu e o t e
Accord. Even the most suspicious of you will grant that, while I am here, the
Accord must show the restraint it has publicly promised. I am authorized to offer
a continuance of this state. You of the Southland Parliament may pick any three
persons of the Accord-including myself, including the King himself-for
indefinite residence at our embassy here at Southmost." It was the most primitive
peacekeeping strategy, though more generous than ever in the past, since she
was offering the choice of hostages to the other side. And more than ever in
history, it was practical. The Accord Embassy at Southmost was plenty big
enough to house a small city, and with modern communications it would not
even cripple the important activities of the hostage. If the Parliament was not
totally corrupted, this might stick a bar between the legs of onrushing disaster.
The Elected were silent, even Pedure's buddies. Shocked? Facing up to the
only real options they had? Listening for instructions from their boss?Something
was going on. In the shadows behind Smith, Hrunkner could see Pedure talking
intensely to an aide.
When Victory Smith's speech ended, Benny's parlor rang with applause.
There had been stark shock when the speech began, when everyone saw how
living Spiders really looked. But the words of the speech had fit the personality
of Victory Smith, and that was something most people were familiar with. The
rest would take a lot of getting used to, but . . .
Rita Liao caught Benny's sleeve as he sailed by with drinks for the ceiling.
"You shouldn't have Qiwi up front all by herself, Benny. She can squeeze in
here, and still talk to everyone."
"Um, okay." It was the Podmaster who had suggested the front-row
solitude, but surely it couldn't matter when things were going so well. Benny
delivered the drinks, listening to the happy speculations with half his attention.
"-between that speech and our meddling, they should be safe as temps at
Triland-"
"Hey, we could beon the ground in less than four Msecs! After all these
years-"
"Space or ground, who cares? We'll have the resources to dump the birth
bans-"
Yes, the birth bans. Our own, human version of the oophase taboo. MaybeI
can finally ask Gonle- Benny's mind shied away from the thought. It was
tempting fate to act too soon. Nevertheless, he suddenly felt happier than he had
in a long time. Benny avoided the tables by diving across the central gap, a quick
detour in Qiwi's direction.
She nodded at Rita's suggestion. "That would be nice." Her smile was
tentative, and her eyes had barely flicked away from the parlor's display screens.

,
y
y
y
p
p y
General Smith was climbing down from the speaker's platform.
"Qiwi! Things are working out just like the Podmaster planned. Everyone
wants to congratulate you!"
Qiwi petted the kitten in her arms gently, but with a kind of intense
protectiveness. She looked at him and her expression was oddly puzzled. "Yes,
it's all working out." She rose from the table and followed Benny across the
space to Rita's table.
"I have to talk to him, Corporal.Immediately. " Rachner drew himself up as
he spoke the words, projecting fifteen years of colonelcy into his manner.
And for a moment the young corporal wilted before his glare. Then the
oophase cobblie must have noticed the traces of fizz barf on Thract's maw and
the bedraggled state of his uniform. He shrugged, his gaze watchful and closed.
"I'm sorry, sir, you're not on the list."
Rachner felt his shoulders droop. "Corporal, just ring down to him. Tell him
it's Rachner, and it's a matter of. . .of life and death." And as soon as he said the
words, Thract wished he hadn't asserted this absolute truth. The cobblie stared at
him for a second-debating whether to throw him out? Then something like sick
pity seemed to rise in his aspect; he opened a comm line and spoke to someone
inside.
A minute passed. Two. Rachner paced the visitor holding box. At least it
was out of the wind; he'd frozen the tips of two hands just climbing the stairs
from Underhill's helipad. But. . .an external guard, and a holding box?
Somehow, he hadn't expected such security. Maybe some good had come out of
his losing his job. It had wakened the others to the need for protection.
"Rachner, is that you?" The voice that came from the sentry's comm was
frail and querulous. Underhill. "Yes, sir. Please, I've got to talk to you."
"You-you lookterrible, Colonel. I'm sorry, I-" His voice faded. There was
mumbling in the background. Someone said, "The speech went well. . .plenty of
time now." Then he was back, and sounding much less drifty. "Colonel, I'll be up
in a few minutes."

FIFTY-THREE
"An excellent speech. It could not have been better if we had scripted it." In
the flat video from theHand, Ritser rattled on, well pleased with himself. Nau
just nodded, smiling. Smith's peace proposal was strong enough to bring the
Spider militaries to a pause. It would give the humans time to announce
themselves, and propose cooperation. That was the official story, a risky plan
that would leave the Podmasters in a second-class position. In fact, about 7Ksec
from now, Anne's zipheads would initiate a sneak attack by Smith's own
military. The resulting Kindred "counterattack" would complete the planned
destruction.And we'll step in and pickup the pieces.
Nau looked out over North Paw's afternoon brightness, but his huds were
filled with a view of Trinli and Vinh, sitting in the flesh just a couple meters
from him. Trinli had a faintly amused expression, but his fingers never stopped
their flickering work on his assignment, monitoring the nuclear munitions in
Kindred territory. Vinh? Vinh looked nervous; the diagnostic tags that hovered
by his face showed that he knew something was up but hadn't quite figured out
what it was. It was time to move him out of the way, a few brief errands. When
he came back events would be in motion. . .and Trinli would back up the
Podmaster's story.
Anne Reynolt's voice came tiny in Nau's ear. "Sir, we have an emergency."
"Yes, go ahead." Nau spoke easily, not turning away from the lake. Inside,
though, something froze in his guts. This was the closest he had ever heard Anne
come to panicky sharpness.
"Our pet subversive has stepped up the pace. There's much less masking.
He's grabbing everything that's loose. A few thousand more seconds and he can
shut us zipheads down.. . .It's Trinli, sir, ninety percent probability."
But Trinli is sitting right here, before my very eyes! And I need him toback
up the post-attack lies."I don't know, Anne," he said aloud. Maybe Anne was
freaking. It was possible, though he had been tracking her meds and MRI tuning
more closely than ever before.
Anne shrugged, didn't reply. It was the typical dismissive gesture of a
ziphead. She had done her best, and he was welcome to ignore her advice and go
to hell.
This was not a distraction he needed when forty years' work was coming to
a cusp.Which was exactly why an enemy might pick this moment finallyto act.
Kal Omo was standing right behind Nau, and was on the private link with

Reynolt. Of the other three guards, only Rei Ciret was actually in the room. Nau
sighed. "Okay, Anne." He gave Omo an invisible signal to get the rest of his
team into the room.We'll put these two on ice, deal with themlater.
Nau had given his targets no warning, yet-from the corner of his vision, he
saw Trinli's hand flicker in a throwing gesture. Kal Omo gave a gargling scream.
Nau pulled himself under the table. Something slammed into the thick
wood above him. There was a chatter of wire-gun fire, another scream.
"He's getting away!"
Nau slid across the floor and bounced up toward the ceiling on the far side
of the table. Rei Ciret was in midair, flailing at Ezr Vinh. "Sorry, sir! This one
jumped me." He pushed the bleeding body away; Vinh had bought Trinli the
instant he needed to escape. "Marli and Tung will get him!"
Indeed they were trying. The two sprayed wire-fire up the hillside, toward
the forest. But Trinli was way ahead of them, flying from tree to tree. Then he
was gone, and Tung and Marli were halfway to the forest in hot pursuit.
"Wait!" Nau's voice roared over the lodge speakers. A lifetime of obedience
stopped their reckless pursuit. They came carefully back down the hillside,
scanning for threats all the way. Shock and rage were strong in their faces.
Nau continued in a lower voice. "Get inside. Guard the lodge." It was the
sort of basic direction a podsergeant would give, but Kal Omo was. . .Nau
floated back to the meeting table, the etiquette of consensual gravity set aside for
the moment. Something sharp and shiny was wedged in the edge of the table,
just at the point where he had dived for cover. A similar blade had slashed across
Omo's throat; its butt end protruded from the podsergeant's windpipe. Omo had
stopped twitching. Blood hung all around him, drifting only slowly toward the
floor. The podsergeant's wire gun was half out of its holster.
Omo was a useful man.Do I have time to put him on ice? Nau thought a
second more on tactics and timing. . .and Kal Omo lost.
The guards hovered around the lodge's windows, but their eyes kept
straying back to their podsergeant. Nau's mind raced down chains of
consequences. "Ciret, get Vinh tied down. Marli, find Ali Lin."
Vinh moaned weakly as they shoved him onto a chair. Nau came over the
table to look more closely at the man. It looked like he'd taken a wire-gun nick
across the shoulder. It was bloody, but it wasn't spouting. Vinh would live. .
.long enough.
"Pus, that Trinli was fast," Tung said, blabbering with released tension. "All
these years he was just a loud old fart and then-bam-he scragged the
podsergeant. Scragged him and then got clean away."
"Wouldn't have been clean if this one hadn't gotten in the way." Ciret

prodded Vinh's head with the muzzle of his wire-gun. "They were both fast."
Too fast.Nau slipped the huds off his eyes, and stared at them for a moment.
Qeng Ho huds, driven by data off the localizer net. He crumpled the huds into a
wad, and dug out the fiberphone that Reynolt had insisted upon as backup.
"Anne, can you hear me? Did you see what happened?"
"Yes. Trinli was in motion the moment you signaled Kal Omo."
"Heknew. He could hear your side of the conversation." Pestilence! How
could Anne detect the subversion and not notice that Trinli had broken into their
comm?
". . .Yes. I only guessed a part of what he was up to." So the localizers were
Trinli's customized weapon. A trap built across millennia.Who am Ifighting?
"Anne. I want you to cut the wireless power to all the localizers." But
localizers were the backbone of Plague knew how many critical systems.
Localizers maintained the stability of the lake itself. "Inside North Paw, leave the
stabilizers on. Have your zipheads manage them directly, over the fiber."
"Done. Things will be rough, but we can manage. What about the ground
ops?"
"Get in touch with Ritser. Things are too complicated to be subtle. We have
to advance the groundside time line."
He could hear Anne punching out instructions to her people. But gone was
his view of the orders and the threads of ziphead processing assigned to each
project. This was like fighting blind. They could lose while they were staggering
around in shock.
A hundred seconds later, Anne was back to him. "Ritser understands. My
people are helping him set up a simple attack run. We can fine-tune the results
later." She spoke with her old, calm impatience. Anne Reynolt had fought battles
much harder than this, won a hundred times against overwhelming odds. If only
all enemies could be so used.
"Very good. Have you spotted Trinli? I'll bet he's in the tunnels."Ifhe isn't
circling back for a second ambush.
"Yes, I think so. We're hearing movement off the old geophones."
Emergent equipment.
"Good. Meantime, patch together some synthetic voice to keep the people
at Benny's happy."
"Done," came her immediate reply. Already done.
Nau turned back to his guards and Ezr Vinh. A very small breathing space
had been created. Long enough to get new orders to Ritser. Long enough to find
out a little about what he was really up against.
Vinh had regained consciousness. There was a glaze of pain in his eyes-and
li
f h
d N
il d b
k
hi
H
d f
Ci
i
Vi h'

a glitter of hatred. Nau smiled back at him. He gestured for Ciret to twist Vinh's
maimed shoulder. "I need a few answers, Ezr."
The Peddler screamed.
Pham boosted himself faster and faster up the diamond corridor, guided by
green images that smeared and wobbled. . .and dimmed toward total darkness.
He coasted blind for a few seconds, still not slowing. He patted at his temples,
trying to reset the localizers there. They were in place, and he knew there were
thousands of localizers drifting through the length of the tunnel. Anne must have
cut off the wireless power pulses, at least in this tunnel.
The woman is unbelievable!For years, Pham had avoided direct
manipulation of the ziphead system. Yet somehow Anne had still noticed. The
mindscrub had slowed her progress for a while, but this last year she had
tightened the noose and tightened it, until. . .We were so close to disablingthe
power cutoff, and now we've lost everything.Almost everything. Ezr had died to
give him one more chance.
The tunnel turned somewhere just ahead. He reached into the dark,
touching the walls lightly, then harder, breaking his dive and turning himself feet
first. The maneuver was a fraction of a second late. Feet, knees, hands, smashed
into the unseen surface, about like a bad fall groundside-except that he bounced
back, spinning into another wall.
He caught himself and finger-walked back to the turn. Four separate
corridors branched from here. He felt for the openings, and started down the
second one, but very quietly this time.Anne hadn't known for sure untila few
seconds ago. The cache he had set in this tunnel should still be in place.
After a few meters, his hands touched a cloth bag tacked to the wall.Ha.
Planting the cache had been a big risk, but endgame maneuvers usually are, and
this one had paid off. He slipped the bag open, found the ring light inside. A
glint of yellow glowed up around his hand. Pham grabbed at the rest of the gear,
the light following his hands, rainbows and shadows hurtling back and forth
around him. There were tiny balls in one of the packages. He bounced one of
them down a side tunnel. It flew silently for a second, and then there was a thud
and miscellaneous banging-a decoy for Anne's listening zipheads.
So our cover was blown, just a few Ksecs too soon.But screwups happen
more often than not when plans finally meet reality. If things had gone right, he'd
never have needed this pack-which was just why he'd planted it. One by one,
Pham considered the contents of the pack: the respirator, the amplifying
receiver, the medikit, the trick dart gun.
Nau and Company had some choices. They might gas the tunnels or dump
them into vacuum-though that last would destroy a lot of valuable equipment.

They might try to chase him around in here. That would be fun; Nau's goons
would find just how dangerous their tunnels had become.. . .Pham felt the old,
old enthusiasm rising in him, the rush he always got when the crunch came,
when the planning and thought became action. He tucked the gear into his
pockets as the plan-of-the-moment grew sharper in his mind.Ezr, we'll win, I
promise. We'll win despite Anne. . .and forher.
Quiet as a fog, he started up the tunnel, his ring light just bright enough for
him to see the side tunnels up ahead. It was time to pay Anne a visit.
TheInvisible Hand coasted 150 kilometers above the Spiders' world. It was
so low that only a limited ground swath of Spiders might directly see them, yet
when the time came it would pass precisely over the ordained targets. And
whatever the lies they were telling Rita and the others at L1, aboard theHand the
Spider sites were calledtargets.
Jau Xin sat in the Pilot Manager's chair-once, when the Qeng Ho had
owned this ship, it had been the executive officer's-and surveyed the gray curve
of the horizon. He had three ziphead pilots on this, but only one was actually
monitoring flight. The others were plugged into Bil Phuong's ordnance systems,
plotting options. Jau tried to ignore the words he heard from the Captain's chair
beside him. Ritser Brughel was enjoying this, giving his boss on Hammerfest a
running account of what was happening on the ground.
Brughel paused in his perverse analysis, was mercifully silent for some
seconds. Abruptly, the VicePodmaster swore. "Sir! What-" Suddenly he was
shouting. "Phuong! There's shooting at North Paw. Omo is down and-pus, I've
lost my huds link. Phuong!"
Xin turned in his chair, saw Brughel pounding on his console. The man's
pale face was flushed. The VicePodmaster listened on his private channel for a
moment. "But the Podmaster survived? Okay, put Reynolt on then. Put her on!"
Apparently Anne Reyolt was not immediately available. One hundred
seconds passed. Two hundred. Brughel steamed and fumed, and even his goons
backed away. Jau turned to his own displays, but they flowed by him
meaninglessly.This wasn't in Tomas Nau's script.
"Slut! Where have you been? What-" Then Brughel was silent again. He
grunted occasionally, but did not interrupt what must have been a monologue.
When he spoke again, he sounded more thoughtful than enraged. "I understand.
You tell the Podmaster he can count on me."
The long-distance conversation continued through one more exchange, and
Jau began to guess what was coming. Jau couldn't help himself; his gaze slid
sideways, toward the VicePodmaster. Brughel was looking back at him. "Pilot
Manager Xin. Our present position?"

"Sir, we're southbound over the ocean, about sixteen hundred kilometers
from Southmost."
Brughel glanced over his head, taking in a more precise view coming up on
his huds. "So, and I see on this pass we'll overfly the Accord's missile fields as
we progress north."
There was a hard lump in Xin's throat. This moment had been inevitable,but
I thought I had more time. ". . . We'll pass some hundreds of kilometers east of
the fields, sir."
Brughel gestured dismissively. "A main torch burn would correct that.. .
.Phuong, you're tracking this?
Yes, we're advancing things by seven Ksec. So? Maybe they will notice us,
but it'll be too late to matter. Have your people generate a new ops sequence. Of
course it'll mean more direct involvement. Reynolt is diverting all her loose zips
to your disposal. Synch 'em up as best you can.. . .Good."
Brughel relaxed on his Qeng Ho Captain's chair, and smiled. "The only
drawback to all this is we won't have time to get Pedure out of Southmost.
Pedure we had figured out; I think she would have made a good native viceroy.. .
.But, you know, for myself I'm not fond of any of them." He saw that Xin was
following his words with undisguised horror. "Careful, careful, Pilot Manager.
You've been too long with your Qeng Ho friends. Whatever they just tried,
itfailed. Do you have that straight? The Podmaster survived and still has his
resources." He looked beyond Jau, seeing something in his huds. "Synch your
pilots with Bil Phuong's zipheads. You'll have concrete numbers in a few
seconds. Over Southmost we won't fire any of our own weapons. Instead you'll
locate and trigger the short-range rockets the Kindred have offshore, the 'Accord
sneak attack' we already had planned. Your real job will come a few hundred
seconds later. Your people will take out the Accord's missile fields." That would
involve using the small number of rockets and beam weapons that remained to
the humans. But those weapons were quite sufficient against the Spiders' more
primitive antimissile defenses. . .and after that, thousands of Kindred missiles
would murder cities across half the planet.
"I-" Xin choked, horror-struck. If he didn't do this, they would murder Rita.
Brughel would kill Rita and then Jau. But if he followed orders. . .I know too
much.
Brughel watched him intently. It was a look Jau had never seen in Ritser
Brughel before. . .a cool, assessing, almost Nauly look. Brughel cocked his head,
and spoke mildly. "You have nothing to fear in following orders. Oh, maybe a
mindscrub; you'll lose a little. But weneed you, Jau. You and Rita can serve us
for many years, a good life. If only you follow orders now."
B f
hi
bl
R
l h d b
i
h A i
Ph
d

Before everything blew up, Reynolt had been in the Attic. Pham guessed
she'd be there even now, camped in the grouproom with Trud and every bit of
comm access she could manage, doing her best to protect and manage her
people. . .and use their combined genius to do Nau's will.
Pham flitted upward through the darkness, easing through tunnels that
finally narrowed to less than eighty centimeters across. These had been machine-
carved over decades, beginning when Hammerfest's roots were driven into
Diamond One. Sometime in the third decade of the Exile, Pham had penetrated
the Emergents' architecture programs, and the tunnels-some of them-had simply
been lost; other connections had been added. He was betting that not even Anne
knew all the places he could go.
At every turning point, he slowed himself with easy hand presses, and
flickered his light briefly.
Searching, searching. Even without external power, the localizers'
capacitors could drive a last, brief computation. With the amplifying receiver he
could still get clues-he knew he was high in the Hammerfest tower, on the
grouproom side of the structure.
But the nearby localizers were almost exhausted. He drifted around a
corner, past what he'd thought was the most likely spot. The walls glittered dim
rainbows, unblemished. A few more meters.There! A faint circle etched in the
wall of diamond. He coasted up to it and gently touched a control code to the
surface. There was a click. Light blazed all around the disk as it turned back,
revealing a storeroom beyond. Pham slipped through the opening. There were
racks of food rations and toiletries.
He came around the racks, was almost across the room, almost to its more
official entrance-when someone opened that door. Pham dove to the side of the
doorway, and as the visitor stepped through, he reached out and lightly plucked
off his huds. It was Trud Silipan.
"Pham!" Silipan looked more surprised than frightened. "What the devil-do
you know, Anne is having a fit about you? She's gone nuts, says you've killed
Kal Omo and taken over North Paw." His words guttered to a stop as he realized
that Pham's presence here was equally unlikely.
Pham grinned at Silipan, and shut the door behind him. "Oh, the stories are
all true, Trud. I've come to take back my fleet."
"Your. . .fleet." Trud just stared for a moment, fear and wonder playing
across his face. "Pus, Pham. What are you on? You look strange."Alittle
adrenaline, a little freedom. Amazing what it can do for you. Silipan shrank
before the smile that was growing on Pham's face. "You're crazy, man. You
know you can't win. You're trapped here. Give up. Maybe we can pass this off

as-as temporary insanity."
Pham shook his head. "I'm here to win, Trud." He raised his little dart gun
up where Silipan could see. "And you're going to help. We're going out to the
grouproom, and you're going to cut off all ziphead support-"
Silipan brushed irritably at Nuwen's gun hand. "Impossible. There's a
critical need for them, supporting the ground op."
"Supporting Nau's Spider-extermination program? All the better to cut them
off right now. It should have an interesting effect on the Podmaster's lake, too."
Pham could almost see the Emergent balancing the risks in his mind: Pham
Trinli, his old drinking buddy and fellow-braggart, now armed with a debatably
effective dart gun-against all the Podmasters' lethal power. "No way, Pham. You
got yourself into this, and now you're stuck with it."
The huds that Pham held crumpled in his right hand were making muffled,
angry noises. There was a final squawk, and the door to the storeroom popped
open. "What's the matter with you, Silipan? I told you we need-" Anne Reynolt
slid into the room. She seemed to take in the tableau instantly, but she had
nothing to bounce out on.
And Pham was just as fast as she. His hand turned, the little dart gun fired,
and Reynolt convulsed. An instant later, a strange thudding rocked her body.
Pham turned back to Trud, and now his smile was broader. "Explosive darts,
don't you know? They get inside, then-bam-your guts are hamburger."
Trud's complexion turned a pale shade of ash. "Unh-unh . . ." He stared at
the body of his former boss/slave, and he looked about ready to puke.
Pham tapped Silipan's chest with the little dart gun. Trud stared down,
horror-frozen, into the muzzle. "Trud, my friend, why so glum? You're a good
Emergent. Reynolt was just a ziphead, a piece of furniture." He gestured at
Reynolt's body, its convulsions fading toward the limpness of fresh death. "So
let's stow this garbage out of the way, and then you can show me how to
disconnect the zipheads' comm." He grinned and moved back to snag the body.
Trud was visibly trembling as started toward the door.
The instant Silipan turned away from him, Pham's casual grip on Anne
became gentle, careful.Lord, that sounded like the real thing, not a stundart and
a noisemaker. It had been half a lifetime since he'd used this trick; what if he'd
botched it? For the first time since the action started, panic seeped through the
adrenaline rush. He slipped one hand to the side of her throat. . .and found a
strong, steady pulse. Anne was thoroughly stunned and nothing more.
Pham pasted the predatory smile back on his face and followed Trud into
the zipheads' grouproom.

FIFTY-FOUR
The news companies had had the last laugh after all. So what if Accord
Security had blacked out Mom's getting off the daggercraft? Within minutes, she
was on Southland territory-and the local news services were more than willing to
show Victory Smith and every person in her entourage. For a few minutes, the
cameras were so close that she could see the inner expression of the General's
eating hands. Mom looked as calm and military as ever. . .but for a few minutes
Victory Lighthill felt more like a small child than a lieutenant in the Intelligence
Service. This was as bad as the morning Gokna had died.Mom, why are you
taking this risk? But Viki knew the answer to that. The General was no longer
essential to the great counterlurk that she and Daddy had created; now she could
help those she had put in greatest peril.
The NCO Club was crowded with cobbers who normally would have been
on sleep shift or at other amusements. It was the closest place they could come to
being back on the job. And for once "the job" was clearly the most important
thing any cobber could be doing.
Victory drifted among the arcade games, discreetly signaled her people that
things were cool. Finally, she hopped on a perch next to Brent. Her brother had
not taken off his game helmet. His hands were in constant motion across the
games console. She tapped him on a shoulder. "Mom will be talking any second
now," she said softly.
"I know," was all Brent said. "Critter nine sees our op, but it still is fooled.
It thinks the problem is local."
Viki almost grabbed her brother's helmet off his head.Damn. I mightas well
be deaf and blind. Instead, she took a telephone from her jacket and poked out a
number. "Hi, Daddy? Mom has started talking."
The speech was short. It was good. It blocked the threat from the South.And
so what? Going down there was still too much of a risk. On the displays over the
fizz bar, Viki could see the General handing her formal offer to Tim to pass out
to Parliament. Maybe that end of things would work out. Maybe the trip was
worth it. Several minutes passed. The cameras at Parliament Hall scanned back
and forth across growing tumult. Mom had departed the platform with Uncle
Hrunk. A scruffy little cobber in dark clothes approached them.Pedure. They
were arguing. . .
And suddenly none of it mattered anymore. Brent shrugged against her.
"Bad news," he said, still not pulling the game display off his head. "I've lost

them all. Even our old friend."
Lighthill jumped off her game perch and signaled the team. Her gesture
could have been a shrill whistle for the effect it had. Her team was on its feet,
saddled up with panniers, and all headed for the door. Brent pulled up his game
hat and hustled out just ahead of Lighthill.
Behind them, she saw curious glances, but most of the club's clientele were
too stuck on the television to pay them much attention.
Her team had bounced down two stories before the attack alarums started
screaming.
"What do you mean, we've lost ziphead support? Was the fiber cut?" Trinli
had somehow found all the fibers?
"N-no, sir. At least I don't think so." Podcorporal Marli was competent
enough, but he was no Kal Omo. "We can still ping through, but the control
channels don't respond. Sir. . .it's as though somebody just took the zips offline."
"Hm. Yes." This could be another Trinli surprise, or maybe there was a
traitor in the Attic. Either way. . .Nau looked across the room at Ezr Vinh. The
Peddler's eyes were glazed with pain. There were important secrets behind those
eyes, but Vinh was as tough as any that he and Ritser had interrogated to death.
It would take time or some special lever to get real information out of him. Time
they didn't have. He turned back to Marli. "Can I still talk to Ritser?"
"I think so. We've got fiber to the laser station on the outside." He tapped
hesitantly at the console. Nau suppressed the impulse to rage at his clumsiness.
But without ziphead support, everything was clumsy.We mightas well be Qeng
Ho.
Marli grinned suddenly. "Our session link to theInvisible Hand is still
active, sir! I just keyed audio to your collar mike."
"Very good.. . .Ritser! I don't know how much you've got of this, but-" Nau
gave a quick rehash of the debacle, finishing with: "I'll be out of touch for the
next few hundred seconds; I'm evacuating to L1-A. The bottom-line question:
Without our zipheads, can you still prosecute the ground operation?"
It would be at least ten seconds before an answer came back on that. Nau
glanced at his second surviving guard. "Ciret, get Tung and the ziphead. We're
going to L1-A."
From the arsenal vault, they would have direct power of life and death over
everyone in L1 space, with no intervening automation. Nau opened the cabinet
behind him and touched a control. A section of the parquet floor slid aside,
revealing a tunnel hatch. The tunnel went directly through Diamond One to the
arsenal vault, and it had never been automated with localizers or cut with cross
tunnels. The security locks at both ends were keyed to his thumbprint. He

touched the reader. The tiny access light stayed red.How could Trinli sabotage
that? Nau forced down panic, and tried the thumb pad again. Still red. Again.
The light shifted reluctantly to pass-green, and the hatch beneath the floor
rotated to unlocked position. The software must be correlating on his blood
pressure, concluding he was under coercion.We could still be balked at the other
end. He keyed his thumbprint for the far lock. It took two tries, but that one
finally showed pass-green, too.
Ciret and Tung were back, pushing Ali Lin ahead of them. "You're breaking
the rules," the old man scolded them. "We shouldwalk, like this, with our feet on
the floor." Ali's face was a mix of irritation and puzzlement. Zipheads never
liked to be taken off their Focused task. Very likely, weeding the Podmaster's
garden had been as important in Ali's mind as the most delicate gene-splicing.
Now suddenly he was being forced indoors and all the fake-gravity etiquette of
his park was being ignored.
"Just stand still, and keep quiet. Ciret, unlatch Vinh. We're taking him, too."
Ali stood still, his feet planted firmly on the tacky floor. But he did not
remain silent. He stared past Nau with a typical far gaze, and just went on
complaining. "You're ruining everything, can't you see?"
Abruptly, Ritser Brughel's voice filled the room. "Sir, the situation here is
under control. TheHand' s zipheads are still online. We won't really need the
high-latency services till after the nukes have fallen. Phuong says that short-
term, we may be better off without L1. Just before they dropped out, some of
Reynolt's units were getting very erratic. Here's the attack schedule. Southmost
gets burned in seven hundred seconds. Soon after that, theHand will be
overflying the Accord's antimissile fields. We'll scrag them ourselves-"
Brughel's reply was turning into a report, the usual fate of long-distance
conversation. Lin had quieted. Nau felt a coolness on his back, the sunlight
fading. A cloud? He turned-and saw that for once, a ziphead's far gaze was
meaningful. Tung stepped around Lin to look out the den's lake-facing windows.
"Pus," the guard said, softly.
"Ritser! We have more problems. I'll get back to you."
The voice from theInvisible Hand blathered on, but now no one was
listening.
Like some undine of Balacrean myth, the waters of North Paw had slowly
gathered themselves, rising and spreading from Ali Lin's carefully designed
shore. "Sunlight" wavered through the million tonnes of water that billowed over
them. Even without controls, the park lake should have stayed approximately in
place. But the enemy had left the lakebed servos running in rhythm. . .and the
sea had quietly oscillated into catastrophe.

Nau dived for the tunnel hatch. He braced himself and pulled on the
massive security cover. The wall of water touched the lodge. The building
groaned and the windows shattered before a mountain of water moving
implacably at something more than a meter per second.
And the wall of water became a thousand arms seeking through the
breaking wall, swarming chill around his body, tearing him away from the hatch.
Screams and shouts, quickly drowned, and for a moment Nau was completely
submerged. The only sound was the rumbling crumbling of his lodge as it was
torn to rubble. He had a last glimpse of his den, his burl-surfaced desk, the
marble fireplace. Then the slow tsunami broke out the far wall and Nau was
lifted up and up in the swirl.
Still submerged, lungs burning. The water was numbing cold. Nau twisted,
trying to make sense of the blurs he could see. The clearest view was downward.
He saw the green of the forest behind the lodge. Nau swam down, toward the air.
He broke free, sending threads of water skittering ahead of the main
surface, and launching himself into the open space beyond. For a second or two,
Nau floated alone, drifting just fast enough to stay ahead of the flying sea. The
air was filled with a sound Nau had never imagined, an oleaginous rumble, the
sound of a million tonnes of water turning, spreading, falling. The surge had hit
the cavern's roof, and now the sea was coming down, and he beneath it. In the
forest below, the butterflies had for once stopped their song. They huddled in
massive clusters in the largest groteselms. But far away,something was in the air.
Tiny dots hovered near the side of the towering sea. The winged kittens! They
seemed not the least frightened of it-but then Qiwi claimed they were an old sky
breed. He saw one splash into the side of the undine. It was gone for a moment,
and then emerged, and dived in again. The damn cats might be just agile enough
to survive.
He turned again and looked back through the water, into the park's sunlight.
It glittered golden on rubble, on human figures trapped like flies in amber. The
others were paddling his way, some weakly, some with emphatic force. Marli
dove into the air. An instant later Tung breached the water wall, then Ciret with
Ali Lin in his arms.Good man!
There was one more figure, Ezr Vinh. The Peddler came half out of the
water, about ten meters from the rest of them. He was dazed and choking, but
more awake than he had seemed during the interrogation. He looked down upon
the treetops they were falling toward, and made a sound that might have been a
laugh. "You're trapped, Podmaster. Pham Nuwen has outsmarted you."
"Phamwho ?"
The Peddler squinted at him, seemed to realize that he had let slip
i f
i
h
h h d b
d i
N
d
M li "F
h hi

information that he had been dying to protect. Nau waved at Marli. "Fetch him
here."
But Marli had nothing to bounce against. Vinh splashed against the water,
drawing himself back within-to drown, but out of their reach.
Marli turned, firing his wire gun into the forest and propelling himself back
toward the falling water. Nau could see Ezr Vinh silhouetted in the sunlight,
flailing weakly, but now several meters deep in the water.
The treetops were brushing up around them. Marli looked around wildly.
"We have to get out of the way, sir!"
"Just kill him then." Nau was already grabbing at the treetops. Above him,
Marli fired several short bursts. The flying wire was designed to tear and mangle
flesh; its range in water was almost zero. But Marli was lucky. A haze of red
bloomed around the Peddler's body.
And then there was no more time. Nau pulled himself from branch to
branch, diving through the open spaces beneath the forest canopy. All around
was the sound of breaking tree limbs as the water pushed through the groteselms
and oleenfirn, a sound that conjured fire and wetness all at once. The water wall
shredded into a million fractal fingers, twisting, reeling, merging. It touched the
edge of a butterfly horde, and there was an instant of piping song, louder than
Nau had ever heard-and then the cluster was swallowed.
Marli boosted ahead of him, and turned. "The water is between us and the
general entrance, sir." Trapped,just as the Peddler said.
The four of them moved along the groundwort, parallel to the wall of the
park. Above them, the roof of water came lower and lower, well past the forest
crown and still descending. The sunlight was a glow from all directions, through
dozens of meters of water. There had only been so much water in the lake. There
would be enormous air pockets throughout the park-but they had not been lucky.
Their space was a not-so-large cave, water on four sides of them.
Ali Lin had to be dragged from branch to branch. He seemed fascinated by
the undine, and totally oblivious of the danger.
Maybe. . ."Ali!" Nau said sharply.
Ali Lin turned toward him. But he wasn't frowning at the interruption; he
wassmiling. "My park, it's ruined. But I see something better now, something no
one has ever done. We can make a true micrograv lake, bubbles and droplets
trading in and out for dominance. There are animals and plants I could-"
"Ali. Yes! You'll build a better park, I promise. Now. I have to know, is
there any way we can get out of the park-without drowning first?"
Thank goodness the ziphead could see an upside to this. Ali's central
interests had been frustrated again and again in the last few hundred seconds.
Normally ziphead loyalty was unbreakable but if they thought you were getting

Normally, ziphead loyalty was unbreakable, but if they thought you were getting
between them and their specialty. . .After a moment, Ali shrugged and said, "Of
course. There's a sluiceway behind that boulder. I never welded it shut."
Marli dived for the rock. A sluiceway here? Without his huds, Nau didn't
know. But there were dozens of them opening into the park, the channels they'd
used to bring the ice down from the surface.
"The zip's right, sir! And the open codes work."
Nau and the others moved around the rock, looked into the hole that Marli
had uncovered. Meantime, the walls of their cave of air-their bubble-were
moving. In another thirty seconds, this would be under water too. Marli looked
across at Nau, and some of the triumph leaked out of his expression. "Sir, we'll
be safe from the water in there, but-"
"But there's nowhere to go from there. Right. I know." The channel would
end in a sealed hatch, with vacuum beyond that. It was a dead end.
A slowly curling stalactite of water splashed across Nau's head, forcing him
to crouch beside Marli. The lowering mound of water retreated, and for a
moment their ceiling rose.Step by step, I've lost almost everything. Unbelievable.
And suddenly Tomas knew that Ezr Vinh's blurted claim must be true. Pham
Trinli was not Zamle Eng; that had been a convenient lie, tailored for Tomas
Nau. All these years, his greatest hero-and therefore the deadliest possible
enemy-had been within arm's reach. Trinliwas Pham Nuwen. For the first time
since childhood, Nau was gripped by paralyzing fear.
But even Pham Nuwen had had his flaws, his abiding moral weakness.I've
studied the man's career all my life, taking the good parts for my own.As much
as anyone, I know his flaws. And I know how to use them. He looked at the
others, cataloguing them and their equipment: an old man that Qiwi loved, some
comm gear, some weapons, and some gunmen. It would be enough.
"Ali, isn't there a fiber headpoint at the outer end of these sluices? Ali!"
The ziphead turned away from his inspection of the ceiling's undulation.
"Yes, yes. We needed careful coordination when we brought down the ice."
He waved Marli into the sluiceway. "It's okay. This will work fine." One by
one, they slipped through the narrow entrance. Around them, the bottom of the
bubble broke free of the ground. Now there was half a meter of water covering
the ground, and it was rising. Tung and Ali Lin came through in a shower of
water. Ciret dived through last, and slammed the hatch shut behind them. A few
dozen liters of undine came in too, now just a mess of spilled water. But on the
other side of the hatch, they could hear the sea piling deep.
Nau turned to Marli, who was shining his comm laser as a diffuse light.
"Let's hike up to the headpoint, Corporal. Ali Lin is going to help me make a
phone call "

phone call.
Pham Nuwen had come close to winning, but Nau still had a mind and the
ability to reach out and manipulate others. As they coasted up the sluiceway, he
thought on just what he should say to Qiwi Lin Lisolet.
General Smith retired from the speaker's perch. The information on Tim
Downing's cards had been distributed to the Elected, and now five hundred
heads were thinking over the deal. Hrunkner Unnerby stood in the shadows
behind the perch and wondered. Smith had made another miracle. In a just world
it would surely work. So what would Pedure invent to counter this?
Smith stepped back until she was even with him. "Come with me, Sergeant.
I saw someone I've been wanting to talk to for a long time." There would be a
vote called later in the day. Before that there could well be follow-up questions
for the General. There was plenty of time for political maneuver. He and
Downing followed the General to the far end of the proscenium, blocking the
exit. A scruffy cobber in extravagant leggings was coming toward them. Pedure.
The years had not been kind to her-or maybe the stories about the attempted
assassinations were true. She made to sidle around Victory Smith, but the
General stepped into her path.
Smith smiled at her. "Hello, Cobblie Killer. So nice to meet you in person."
The other hissed. "Yes. And if you don't move from my path, I will be very
pleased to kill you." The words were heavily accented, but the tiny knife on her
hand was clear enough.
Smith stretched her arms sideways, an extravagant shrug that would catch
notice all across the hall. "In front of all these people, Honored Pedure? I don't
think so. You're-"
Smith hesitated, raised a pair of hands to her head, and seemed to listen. To
her telephone?
Pedure just stared, her entire aspect full of suspicion. Pedure was a small
female with galled chitin, and gestures that were just a bit too quick. A totally
untrustworthy picture. She must be so used to killing from afar that personal
charm and facility with language were long-discarded talents. She was out of her
element here, managing things directly. It made Unnerby just a shade more
confident.
Something buzzed in Pedure's jacket. Her little knife disappeared and she
grabbed her phone. For a moment, the two spy chiefs looked like old friends,
communing with their memories.
"No!"Pedure spasmed; her voice was a scream. She grabbed the phone with
her eating hands, all but stuffed it into her maw. "Not here! Not now!" The fact
that they were a sudden spectacle did not seem to matter to her.

General Smith turned toward Unnerby. "Everyone's schemes just went
down the toilet, Sergeant. Three ice-launched missiles are coming our way.
We've got about seven minutes." For an instant, Unnerby's gaze caught on the
dome above them. It was a thousand feet underground, proof against tactical
fission bombs. But he knew the Kindred fleet had progressed to much bigger
things. A triple launch would most likely be a deep-penetration strike. Even so. .
.I helped design this place.There were stairs nearby, access to much deeper
places. He reached for one of Smith's arms. "Please, General. Follow me." They
started back across the proscenium.
Villains and good guys, Unnerby had seen courage and cowardice among
them all. Pedure. . .well,
Honored Pedure was almost twitching with panic. She twisted this way and
that in little hops, screaming Tiefic into her telephone. Abruptly she stopped and
turned back to Smith. Terror warred with incredulous surprise. "The missiles.
They'reyours ! You-" With a shriek, she launched herself toward Smith's back,
her knife a silver extension of her longest arm.
Unnerby slipped between them before Smith could even turn. He gave
Honored Pedure the hard of his shoulders, sending her flying off the stage.
Around them everything was confused. Pedure's people swarmed up from the
floor, and were met by Smith's combateers swinging down from the visitors'
gallery. Shock spread across the hall as cobbers lifted their heads from their
readers and noticed just who was fighting. Then from high at the back there was
a scream. "Look! The network news! The Accord has launched missiles on us!"
Unnerby led the combateers and his General out a side entrance. They raced
down stairs toward the hidden shafts that dropped to the security core. Seven
minutes to live? Maybe. But suddenly Hrunkner's heart soared free. What was
left was so simple, just as it had been with Victory long ago. Life and death, a
few good troops, and a few minutes to decide it all.

FIFTY-FIVE
Belga Underville was senior in the Command and Control Center. That
really didn't count for much;
Underville was Domestic Intelligence. What happened here could change
her job forever, but she was out of this chain of command, just a link to civil
defense and the King's household forces. Belga watched Elno Coldhaven, the
shiny new Director of External Intelligence, the acting CO of the center.
Coldhaven knew the firestorm of failures that had ended the career of his
predecessor. He knew that Rachner Thract was no dummy and probably no
traitor. And now Elno had the same job, and the chief was out of the country. He
was operating very much without a safety net. More than once in last few days
he had taken Underville aside and earnestly asked her advice. She suspected that
this had been the chief's reason for having her stay down here rather than return
to Princeton.
The CCC was more than a mile inside the promontory headrock of Lands
Command, beneath the old Royal Deepness. A decade ago, the Center had been
a huge thing, dozens of intelligence techs with the funny little CRT displays of
the era. Behind them had been glassed-in meeting rooms and oversight bridges
for the presiding officers. But year by year, computer systems and networks
improved. Now Accord Intelligence had better eyes and ears and automation,
and the CCC itself was scarcely bigger than a conference room. A quiet, strange
conference room of outward-sitting perches. The air was fresh, always lightly
moving; bright lighting left no shadows. There were data displays, but now the
simplest ones were twelve-color-capable. And there were still technicians, but
each of them managed a thousand nodes scattered across the continent and into
the near-space recon system. Indirectly, each had hundreds of specialists
available for interpretation. Eight technicians, four field-rank officers, a
commanding officer. Those were all that need be physically present.
The center screen showed the chief being introduced to Parliament. It was
the same commercial feed that the rest of the world saw-External Intelligence
had decided not to try to sneak special video into Parliament Hall. One of the
techs was working with freeze-frames from the video. He popped up a
composite of a dozen snippets, fiddled with the lighting. A scruffy-looking
character appeared on the screen, the details of her dark clothing vague. Beside
Belga, General Coldhaven said softly, "Good. That's a positive identification. Ol'
Pedure herself.. . .She can't very well act when her own head is on the line."

Underville listened with half her attention. There was so much going on.. .
.The General's speech was even more a shock than seeing Pedure. When Smith
made the hostage offer, several of the technicians looked from their work, their
eating hands frozen in their maws. "God!" she heard Elno Coldhaven mutter.
"Yeah," Belga whispered back. "But if they go for it, we might have a way
out."
"If they pick the King as hostage. But if they want General Smith-" If Smith
had to stay down South, things would get very complicated, especially for Elno
Coldhaven. Coldhaven couldn't quite conceal his stark discomfort.So this is news
to him, too.
"We can manage," said Kred Dugway, the Director of Air Defense.
Dugway was the only other general officer present. The AD director had been
one of poor Thract's biggest critics, and Elno Coldhaven's former superior. And
Dugway seemed to think he was still Elno's boss.
In the video from Southland, General Smith had climbed down from the
speaker's perch. She handed her formal proposal to Tim Downing. The camera
followed Smith offstage. "She's headed for Pedure!"
Dugway chuckled. "Now,this will be interesting."
"Damn." The camera had turned back to watch Major Downing hand out
copies of the General's proposal.
"Can you give me anything on the chief? Does she still have audio?"
"Sorry, sir. No."
Attention colors lit the Air Defense displays. The technician hunched down,
hissed something over his voice link. Then, "Sir, I don't understand quite what is
happening, but-"
Dugway jabbed a hand at the composite situation map of Southland. "Those
are launches!"
Yes. Even Belga recognized the coding. Crosses marked the estimated
launch sites. "A launch of three.Not Southland-based; those are from ice subs.
They could be-" They couldn't be anything but Kindred. Accord and Kindred
were the only nations with missile-launching ice-tunnelers.
And now the first target estimates had appeared on the display. The three
circles were all near the south pole.
Coldhaven made a chopping gesture at the attack-management technicians.
"Go to condition Most
Bright." On the main display, the news cameras were still panning around
Parliament Hall, soaking up the reactions to General Smith's speech.
One of the attack-management techs rose from her perch. "Sir! Those
missiles are ours. They're from the Seventh, theIcedug andCrawlunder !"
f

"Says what?" General Coldhaven's voice cut through whatever his former
boss had been about to say.
"Autologs from the ships themselves. I'm trying to get through to their
captains right now, sir-we're still bidding each other's crypto."
Dugway pounced on the report. "And until we talk to them direct, I don't
believe anything. I know those commanders. Something strange is going on
here."
"We have real launches and real targets, sir." The technician tapped the
crosses and circles. Dugway: "You have nothing but pretty lights!"
"It's across the secure net, sir, direct from our launch-detection satellites."
Coldhaven motioned both of them to be quiet. "This seems a bit like the
problems my predecessor ran into."
Dugway glared at his former protégé. . .and slowly the significance seemed
to sink in. "Yes. . . ."
Coldhaven grunted. "It's not just us. There have been rumors going around
on the unswitched analog radio." There were still people who used such things;
Underville had rural agents who resisted all upgrades. The surprise was that
anyone at Lands Command would seriously listen to such comm. Coldhaven
noticed Belga's expression. "My wife works in the technical museum out front."
A smile flitted across his aspect. "She says her old-time radio friends aren't
cranks. And now we're seeing the impossible, too. In the past we could blame
the contradictions on someone else's idiocy. Now . . ." The arrival time on the
shrinking target circles was barely three minutes away. The targeting satellites
all agreed on their destination now: Southmost.
Underville boggled for a moment. All Rachner's paranoia-true? "So maybe
the launch is a fake. Anything we see-"
"At least anything we see on the net-"
"-could be a lie." It was a technophobe's most extravagant nightmare.
The point was finally getting through to Dugway. A faith built over twenty
years was being shattered. "But the encryption, the cross-checking. . .what can
wedo, Elno?"
Coldhaven seemed to wilt. His theory was accepted, and that left them with
disaster. "We-we can shut down. Disassociate command and comm from the net.
I've seen it as a war-game option-onlythat was on the net, too!"
Belga put a hand on his shoulders. "I say do it. We can use analog radio
from the museum. And I've got people, couriers. It will be slow-" Far too slow,
but at least they would discover what they were up against.
There were others a moment away across the net-Nizhnimor, the King
himself-and now nothing seemed trustable. Dugway was present, but Elno
C ldh
th CCC
di
ffi

Coldhaven was the CCC commanding officer.
Coldhaven hesitated, but didn't defer to Dugway. He called to his chief
sergeant. "Plan Network Corrupt. I want the notice hand-carried to the museum."
"Yes, sir!" The tech had been following the conversation, and seemed not
quite as dumbfounded as his seniors. The target circles showed two minutes to
impact. On the video from Parliament Hall, stark chaos reigned. For an instant,
Underville was caught by the horror of the scene. The poor cobbers. Before, war
had been an ominous cloud on the horizon; now the Southland Elected found
themselves at ground zero with less than two minutes to live. Some sat frozen,
staring upward at where megatons would burst. Others were stampeding down
the carpeted stairs, searching for some way out, some way downward. And
somewhere beyond their view, General Smith was facing the same fate.
By some miracle, the senior sergeant had hardcopies of Plan Network
Corrupt. He handed them to his techs and started the procedures for opening the
CCC's blast doors.
But the doors were already opening. Belga stiffened.Nothing was supposed
to come in until the shift ended, or Coldhaven gave the release code. A CCC
guard entered with a confused backwards gait, his rifle held at an uneasy port
arms. "I saw your clearance, ma'am, but no one is allowed-"
An almost familiar voice followed him. "Nonsense. We have clearance, and
you saw that the doors opened. Please stand aside." A young lieutenant strode
into the room. The plain black uniform, the slender, deadly build. It was as if
Victory Smith had not only escaped from the South but had returned as young as
the first time Underville had ever seen her. After the lieutenant came a huge
corporal and a team of combateers. Most of the intruders carried stubby assault
rifles.
General Dugway spouted indignant rage at the young lieutenant. Dugway
was a fool. More than anything, this looked like a decapitating strike-but why
weren't they shooting? Elno Coldhaven edged back around his desk, his hands
reaching for some unseen drawer. Belga stepped between him and the intruders
and said, "You're Smith's daughter."
The lieutenant snapped Underville a salute. "Yes ma'am. Victory Lighthill,
and this is my team. We're authorized by General Smith to make inspections per
our best judgment. With all respect, ma'am, that's what we're here for now."
Lighthill sidled past the frothing Director of Air Defense; old Dugway was
angry beyond words. Behind Belga, and mostly shielded by her body, Elno
Coldhaven was tapping out command codes.
Somehow Lighthill realized what was going on. "Please step away from
your console, General
Coldhaven " Her big corporal waggled his assault rifle in Coldhaven's

Coldhaven.  Her big corporal waggled his assault rifle in Coldhaven s
direction. Now Underville recognized the corporal. Smith's retarded son. Damn.
Elno Coldhaven stepped back from his desk, his hands raised slightly in the
air, acknowledging that they were far beyond any "inspection." The two techs
nearest the door sprinted past the intruders. But these combateers werefast. They
turned, pouncing on the techs, dragging them back into the CCC.
The blast doors swung slowly shut.
And Coldhaven made one more try, the most frail of all: "Lieutenant,
there's massive corruption in our signals automation. We have to get our
Command and Control off the net."
Lighthill stepped close to the displays. There was still a picture from
Parliament Hall, but no one was behind the camera: the view wandered
aimlessly, finally centering on the ceiling. Across the other displays, Most Bright
lights had blossomed, queries to the Command Center, launch announcements
from the King's Rocket Offense forces. The world coming to an end.
Finally, Lighthill spoke. "I know, sir. We are here to prevent you from
doing that." Her combateers had spread around the now crowded Command and
Control Center. Not a single tech or officer was out of their reach now. The big
corporal was pulling open a cargo pannier, setting up additional equipment. .
.game displays?
Dugway finally found his voice. "We suspected a deep-cover agent. I was
sure it was Rachner Thract. What fools we were. All along it was Victory Smith
working for Pedure and the Kindred."
A traitor at the heart. It explained everything, but-Belga looked at the
displays, the network-massaged reports of Accord launches coming in from all
directions. She said, "What of it is really true, Lieutenant? Is it all a lie, even the
attack on Southmost?"
For a moment Underville thought the lieutenant wouldn't answer. The target
circles at Southmost had shrunk to points. The news camera view of Parliament
Hall dome lasted a second longer. Then Belga had a fleeting impression of the
rock bulging downward, of light beyond-and the display went blank. Victory
Lighthill flinched, and when she finally answered Belga, her voice was soft and
hard. "No. That attack was very real."

FIFTY-SIX
"You're sure she'll be able to see me?"
Marli looked up from his gadgets. "Yes, sir. And I've got a clear-to-talk
from her huds." You're on, Podmaster. The greatest performance of your
life."Qiwi! Are you there?"
"Yes, I-" and he heard Qiwi's quick intake of breath. Heard. There was no
video coming back this way; the desperation of this situation was no fake.
"Father!"
Nau cradled Ali Lin's head and shoulders in his arms. The ziphead's wounds
were gouges, oozing a swamp of blood through makeshift bandages.Pest, I hope
the guy isn't dead. But above all, this had to look real; Marli had done his best.
"Tas Vinh, Qiwi. He and Trinli jumped us, killed Kal Omo. They would
have killed Ali if. . .if I hadn't let them get away." The words tumbled out, fueled
by true rage and fear and guided by the tactical necessities. The savage attack of
traitors, timed for when everything was most critical, when an entire civilization
stood at risk. The destruction of North Paw. "I saw two of the kittens drown,
Qiwi. I'm sorry, we couldn't get close enough to save them-" Words failed him,
but artfully.
He heard small choking sounds from the other end of the connection, the
sounds Qiwi made in moments of absolute horror. Damn, that could start a
memory cascade. He pushed down his fear and said, "Qiwi, we still have a
chance. Have the traitors shown themselves at Benny's?"Has PhamNuwen gotten
through to the parlor?
"No. But we know something has gone terribly wrong. We lost the video
from North Paw, and now it looks like war down on Arachna. This is a private
link, but everyone saw me leave Benny's."
"Okay. Okay. This is good, Qiwi. Whoever are in this with Vinh and Trinli
are still confused. We have a chance, the two of us-"
"But surely we can trust-" Qiwi's protest trailed off, and she didn't give him
any argument. Good. This soon after a scrubbing, Qiwi was most unsure of
herself. "Okay. ButI can help. Where are you hiding? One of the sluiceways?"
"Yes, trapped behind the outer hatch. But if we can get out, we can rescue
the situation. L1-A has-" "Which sluiceway?"
"Uh." He looked at the face of the hatch. A number was just visible in
Marli's light. "S-seven-four-five. Does that-"
"I know where it is. I'll see you in two hundred seconds. Don't worry,

Tomas."
Lord.Qiwi's recovery was awesome. Nau waited a moment, then glanced
questioningly at Marli. "The connection is down, sir."
"Okay. Realign. See if you can punch through to Ritser Brughel." This
might be his last chance to check on the ground operation before everything was
settled, one way or another.
TheInvisible Hand was over the horizon from Southmost when the missiles
arrived there. Nevertheless, Jau's displays showed flashes against the upper
atmosphere. And their trailing satellites relayed a detailed analysis of the
destruction. All three nukes were on target.
But Ritser Brughel was not entirely happy. "The timing wasn't right. They
didn't get the best penetration."
Bil Phuong's voice came over the bridge-wide channel. "Yes, sir. That
depended on high-level ordnance knowledge-things that are up on L1."
"Okay. Okay. We'll make do. Xin!"
"Yes, sir?" Jau looked up from his console.
"Are your people ready to hit the missile fields?"
"Yes, sir. The burn we just completed will put us over most of them. We'll
take out a good part of the Accord's forces."
"Pilot Manager, I want you to personally-" A tone sounded on Brughel's
console. There was no video, but the Vice-Podmaster was listening to something
incoming. After a moment, Brughel said, "Yes, sir. We can make up for that.
What is your situation?"
What's happening up there? What's happening to Rita?Jau forced his
attention away from the longdistance conversation, and looked at his own
situation board. In fact, he was pushing his zipheads to the limit. They were
beyond finesse now. There was no way they could disguise this operation from
the Spider networks. The Accord missile fields stretched across a swath of the
northern continent, and they only approximately followed the track of
theInvisible Hand. Jau's pilots were coordinating a dozen ordnance zipheads.
TheHand' s patchwork of battle lasers could take out near-surface launchpads,
but only if they were given a fifty-millisecond dwell time. Hitting everything
would be a miracle ballet of firepower. Some of the deepest targets, offensive
sites, would be hit by digger bombs. Those had already been launched, were now
arcing down behind them.
Jau had done everything he could to make this work.I didn't have
anychoice. Every few seconds, the mantra floated up through his consciousness,
the response to the equally persistentI am not a butcher.
But now. . .now there might be a safe way to evade Brughel's terrible

orders.Be honest, you're still a butcher. But of hundreds, not millions.
Without the detailed geographic and ordnance advice from L1, any number
of small errors might be made. The Southmost strike showed that. Jau's fingers
drifted over his keyboard, sending last-second advice to his team. The mistake
was very subtle. But it would introduce a tree of random deviations into their
attack on the antimissiles. Many of those strikes would now be way off target.
The Accord would have a chance against the Kindred nukes.
Rachner Thract paced back and forth in the visitor holding box. How long
could it take Underhill to come out? Maybe the cobber had changed his mind, or
simply forgotten what he was about. The sentry looked upset, too. He was
talking on some kind of comm line, his words inaudible.
Finally, there was the whine of hidden motors. A moment later the old
wood doors slid aside. A guidebug emerged, closely followed by Sherkaner
Underhill. The guard came racing around his sentry box. "Sir, could I have a
word with you? I'm getting-"
"Yes, but let me talk to the Colonel here for just a moment." Underhill
seemed to sag under the weight of his parka, and every step took him steadily to
the side. The sentry fidgeted by his post, not sure what to do. The guidebug
patiently dragged Underhill back onto a more or less straight path headed for
Thract.
Underhill reached the visitor holding box. "I have a few free minutes now,
Colonel. I'm very sorry about your losing your job. I want to-"
"That's not important now, sir! I have to tell you." It was a miracle that he
had gotten through to
Underhill.Now, if I can just convince him beforethat sentry gets up the
courage to intervene. "Our command automation is corrupt, sir. I have proof!"
Underhill was raising his arms in protest, but Rachner rumbled on. This was his
last chance. "It sounds crazy, but it explains everything: There's an-"
The world exploded around them. Colors beyond color. Pain beyond the
brightest sun of Thract's imagination. For a moment the color of pain was all
there was, squeezing out consciousness, fear, even startlement.
And then he was back. In agony, but at least aware. He was lying in snow
and random wreckage. His eyes. . .his eyeshurt. The afterimages of Hell were
burned all across his foreview, blocking his vision. The afterimages showed
stark silhouettes against a beam of utter darkness: the sentry, Sherkaner
Underhill.
Underhill! Thract came to his feet, pushed aside the flatboards that had
fallen on him. Now other pains were surfacing. His back was a single massive
ache.Getting punched through walls will do that to you. He took a few shaky

steps, but nothing seemed broken.
"Sir? Professor Underhill?" His own voice seemed to be coming from a
great distance. Rachner turned his head this way and that, like a child still with
its baby eyes. He had no choice; his forevision was filled with burning
afterimages. Downhill, along the curve of the caldera wall, there was a row of
smoking holes. But the destruction here was enormously greater. None of the
Underhill outbuildings still stood, and fire was spreading across all that was
flammable. Rachner took a step toward where the sentry had been standing. But
now that was the edge of a steep, steaming crater. The hillside above him was
blown out. Thract had seen something like this before, but that had been a
terrible accident, an ammo dump struck by penetrating artillery.What hit us?
What was Underhill storing below? Something in the back of his mind was
asking the questions, but he had no answers and plenty of more immediate
concerns.
There was an animal hissing sound, right at his feet. Rachner turned his
head. It was Underhill's guidebug. Its fighting hands were poised to stab, but its
body lay twisted in the wreckage. The poor beast's shell must be cracked. When
he tried to sidle around it, the bug shrieked more fiercely and made a ghastly
effort to pull its crushed body out from the flatboards.
"Mobiy! It's okay. It's okay, Mobiy." It was Underhill! His voice was
muffled, but so were all sounds just now. As Thract slipped past the guidebug, it
pulled its broken body from the flatboards and followed him toward Underhill's
voice. But the bug's hissing was no longer a threat. It was more a sobbing
whimper.
Thract walked along the edge of the crater. The edge was piled deep with
debris that had been thrown up. The glassy sides were already slumping,
collapsing inward. And still there was no sign of Underhill.
The guidebug pulled himself past Thract. There, right ahead of the bug: a
single Spiderly arm stuck sharp and high from the mangle. The guidebug
shrilled, and started feebly digging. Rachner joined him, pulling boards out of
the way, shoveling the warm splatter dirt to the side. Warm? It was hot as the
Calorica bottomland. There was something especially horrifying about being
buried in warm earth. Thract dug desperately faster.
Underhill was buried rear-end down, his head just a foot below the air. In
seconds, they had him free down past his shoulders. The ground lurched, sliding
with the rest of the crater's edge. Thract reached out, twined his arms around
Underhill's-and pulled. An inch, a foot. . .the two of them fell onto the high
ground just as Underhill's grave slid into the pit.
The guidebug crawled around them, his arms never letting go of his master.

Underhill patted the animal gently. Then he turned, weaving his head about in
the same silly way Thract had been. There were blisters in the crystal surfaces of
his eyes. Sherkaner Underhill had shaded the blast from Thract's eyes; the whole
top of the old cobber's head had been directly exposed.
Underhill seemed to be looking toward the pit. "Jaybert? Nizhnimor?" He
said softly, disbelievingly. He came to his feet, and started for the drop-off. Both
Thract and the bug held him. At first, Underhill let them guide him back over the
crest of the splatter. It was hard to tell under the heavy clothes, but at least two
of his legs seemed to be cracked.
Then: "Victory? Brent? Can you hear me? I've lost-" He turned and started
back toward the pit. This time, Rachner actually had to fight him. The poor
cobber was drifting in and out of delirium.Think! Rachner looked downslope.
The helipad was tilted but the ground above had shielded it from the flying
debris. His chopper still sat there, apparently undamaged. "Ah! Professor-there's
a telephone in my helicopter. Come on, we can call the General from there." The
improvisation was thin, but Underhill was drifting in and out of delirium. He
swayed for a moment, almost collapsed. Then a moment of false lucidity: "A
helicopter? Yes. . .I have a use for that."
"Okay. Let's go down there." Thract started for the top of the stairs, but
Underhill still hesitated. "We can't leave Mobiy. Nizhnimor and the others yes.
They are surely dead. But Mobiy . . ."
Mobiy is dying.But Thract didn't say that aloud. The guidebug had stopped
crawling. Its arms waved gently in Underhill's direction. "It's an animal, sir,"
Thract said softly.
Underhill chuckled, delirious. "That's all a matter of scale, Colonel."
So Thract took off his outer jacket and made a sling for the guidebug. The
creature seemed like about eighty pounds of very dead weight. But they were
going downhill, and now Sherkaner Underhill followed without further
complaint, needing only occasional help to keep on the stairs.Sowhat better
could you be doing now, eh, Colonel? The lurking Enemy had finally pounced.
Thract looked out across the caldera at the pattern of smoking destruction.
Likely it was repeated on the altiplano, trashing the King's strategic defenses.
Doubtless, the High Command had been nuked.Whatever it was I came to do, it's
too late now.

FIFTY-SEVEN
The taxi floated up from the L1 jumble. Below them, the mouth of S745
was open, exhausting air and ice particles. If not for Qiwi, they would still be
trapped behind the sluiceway's pressure hatch. Qiwi's landing and ad hoc lock
work were something that even well-managed zipheads might not have
accomplished.
Nau slid Ali Lin gently into the front seat beside Qiwi. The woman turned
from her controls, and her face twisted in grief. "Papa? Papa?" She reached to
feel for his pulse, and her expression eased a fraction.
"I think he'll make it, Qiwi. Look, there's medical automation at L1-A, and-
"
Qiwi pulled back into her seat. "The arsenal. . . ." But her gaze stayed on
her father, and the horror was shading toward thoughtfulness. Abruptly, she
looked away and nodded. "Yes."
The taxi boosted on its little reaction jets, sending Nau and his men on a
quick scramble for handholds. Qiwi was overriding the taxi's sedate automation.
"What happened, Tomas? Do we have a chance?"
"I think so. If we can get into L1-A." He related the story of treachery,
almost the truth except for Ali Lin.
Qiwi's slewed the taxi smoothly into its braking approach. But her voice
was near sobbing. "It's the Diem Massacre all over again, isn't it? And if we
don't stop them this time, we'll all die. And the Spiders too."
Bingo.If Qiwi hadn't been so freshly scrubbed, this would be a very
dangerous line of thought. A few days more and she'd have a hundred little
inconsistencies to piece together; she'd quickly see through it all. But now, for
the next few Ksecs, the analogy with Diem played in his favor. "Yes! But this
time we have a chance to stop them, Qiwi."
The taxi descended swiftly across Diamond One. The sun was like a dim
red moon, its light glistening here and there off the last of their stolen snow.
Hammerfest had disappeared around the corner. Most likely, Pham Nuwen was
trapped in the Attic there. The fellow was a genius, but he'd achieved only half a
victory. He had cut off ziphead services, but he hadn't stopped the Arachna
operation, and he hadn't reached allies.
And in this game, half a victory was worth nothing.In a few
hundredseconds, I'll have the firepower at L1-
A. Strategy would crystalize in assured destruction, and Pham Nuwen's own

moral weakness would give all the game to Tomas Nau.
Ezr never lost consciousness; if he had, there would have been no waking.
But for a time, all awareness was centered within himself, on the numbing cold,
the tearing pain in his shoulder and down his arm.
The urge to gasp air into his lungs became overpowering. Somewhere there
must be air; the park had as much breathable space as ever. Butwhere ? He
turned in the direction where the fake sunlight was brightest. Some remnant of
reason noted that the water had come out of that direction. It would be falling
now.Swim toward the brightness. He kicked feebly and as hard as he was able,
guiding with his good hand.
Water. More water. Water forever. Reddish in the sunlight.
He burst through the surface, coughing and vomiting, andbreathing at last.
The sea lay around him. It writhed and climbed, with no horizon. It was like
something from a Canberra swords-and-pirates story he had watched as a child;
he was a sailor trapped in a final maelstrom. He stared up and up. The water
curved around and closed above his head. His seascape was a bubble, perhaps
five meters across.
With orientation came something like rational thought. Ezr twisted, looked
down and behind him. No sign of pursuers. But maybe it didn't matter. The
water around him was stained with his own blood; he couldtaste it. The cold that
had slowed the flow of blood and numbed some of the pain was also paralyzing
his legs and his good arm.
Ezr stared through the water, trying to estimate how far his air bubble was
from the outer surface. The water on the sun side did not seem deep, but. . .He
looked down and back toward what had been the forest. Through the blur and
the flow, he could see the ruins of the trees. Nowhere was this water more than a
dozen meters deep.I'm out of the main mass. His bubble was itself part of a free
droplet, drifting slowly across North Paw's sky.
Driftingdownward, by some combination of microgravity and the sea's
collision with the cavern roof. Ezr watched numbly as the ground came up
around him. He would hit the lake bed, just off the lodge's moorage.
When it came, the collision was dreamlike slow, less than a meter per
second. But the water swept swiftly around him, spraying and streaming. He hit
on his legs and butt and bounced upward, sharing space with a tumble of
jiggling, spinning blobs of water. All around him was a clacking sound, a
mindless mechanical applause. The stone casement of the seawall was less than
a meter away. He reached out, almost stopped his spin. Then his bad shoulder
touched the casement, and everything disappeared in a blaze of agony.
He was gone for only a second or two. When consciousness returned, he

saw that he was about five meters above the seabed. Near him, the stones of the
casement were covered with a line of moss and stain, the old sea level. And the
clacking applause. . .he looked across the seabed. He could see them in their
hundreds, the stabilizer servos, pursuing the same sabotage that had set the sea to
marching.
Ezr climbed the rough-cut stone of the seawall. It was only a few meters to
the top, to the lodge. . .to where the lodge had been. There were recognizable
foundations. The stubs of wall frames still stood. But a million tonnes of water,
even moving slow, had been enough to sweep the place away. Here and there,
rubble swayed up, snagged in the deeper wreckage.
Ezr moved from point to point, using his good hand to climb across the
ruins. The sea had settled into a deep layer that hugged the forests and climbed
the far walls of the cavern. It still roiled and shifted. Tenmeter blobs of water
still coasted across the sky. Much of the sea might eventually pool back in the
basin, but Ali Lin's masterpiece was destroyed.
Things were getting fuzzy and dim; he didn't hurt as much as before.
Somewhere out there in the drowned forest, Tomas Nau was trapped along with
his merry men. Ezr remembered the triumph he had felt when he saw them
sinking into the trees beneath the water.Pham, we won. But this wasn't the
original plan. In fact, Nau had somehow seen through them, almost killed them
both. Nau might not be trapped at all. If he could get out of the cavern, he could
track down Pham or get to L1-A.
But the fear was far away, receding. Ribbons of sticky red water floated
around him now. He bent his head to look at his arm. Marli's wire gun had
shattered his elbow, opening an artery. The previous wound in his shoulder, and
the torture, had created a kind of accidental tourniquet, butI'm bleeding out.
Logically, the thought was cause for frantic alarm, but all he really wanted to do
was let loose of the ground and rest awhile.And then you die,and then maybe
Tomas Nau wins.
Ezr forced himself to keep moving. If he could stop the bleeding. . .but no
way could he even take off his jacket. His mind drifted away from the
impossible. Grayness crept in around the edges of his mind.What canI do in the
seconds I have left? He picked his way across the wreckage, his vision narrowed
down to the ground just centimeters from his face. If he could find Nau's den,
even a comm set.At least I could warn Pham. There was no comm set, just
endless rubble. The fine woods that Fong had grown were all kindling now, their
spiral grain shattered.
A naked white arm reached from beneath a crushed armoire. Ezr's mind
stumbled on the horror and the mystery.Who did we leave behind? Omo, yes.

But this limb was naked, glistening, bloodless white. He touched the hand at the
end of the arm. It twitched, slid around his fingers. Ah, not a corpse at all, just
one of those full-press jackets that Nau favored. An idea floated up from the
dimness,Maybe to stop the bleeding. He tugged on the jacket sleeve. It slid,
caught, and then floated free. He lost his grip on the ground, and for a moment it
was a dance between himself and the jacket. The left sleeve slit open, forking
down through the fingers. He slipped his arm along its length and the jacket
closed from fingers to shoulder. He pulled the fabric across his back, and fit the
right side loosely around his mangled arm. Now he could bleed to death, and no
one would see another drop.Tighten the fabric. He shrugged it snug.Tighter, a
real tourniquet. He slid his left hand down the cover of his ruined arm, squeezing
agony from the flesh beneath. But the full-press fabric responded, stiffening. Far
away, he heard himself groan with pain. He lost consciousness for a moment,
woke lying lightly on his head.
But now his right arm was immobilized, the full-press sleeve at maximum
tension. Such a painful extreme of fashion, but it might be enough to keep him
alive.
He drank from drifting water, and tried to think.
There was a querulous mewing sound behind him. The sky-kitten slid into
view, settled onto his chest and good arm. He reached up, felt the trembling
body. "You in trouble too?" he asked. His words came as croaks. The kitten's
great dark eyes peered back at him and it burrowed deeply at the space between
his chest and left arm. Strange. Normally, a sick kitten would go off and hide;
that had caused Ali lots of problems, even though the creatures were tagged. The
sky-kitten was soaked, but it seemed alert. Maybe, "You came to comfort me,
Little One?"
He could feel it purring now, and the warmth of its body. He smiled; just
having someone to listen made him feel more alert.
There was a thutter of wings. Two more kittens. Three. They hung above
him and meowed irritably as if to say, "What have you done with our park," or
maybe "We want dinner." They swirled around him, but didn't chase the little
one from his arms. Then the largest, a rag-eared tom, swooped away from Ezr
and settled on the highest point in the ruin. He glowered down at Ezr, and began
grooming his wings. The damn creature didn't even look wet.
The highest point left in the ruin. . .a diamond tube almost two meters
across, surmounted by a metal cap. Ezr suddenly realized what he was looking
at: a tunnel head in Tomas Nau's den, most likely a direct route to L1-A. He
coasted up the hill to the metal-topped pillar. The tom hunkered down, reluctant
to move out of Ezr's way. Even now the creatures were as possessive as ever.

The control lights on the hatch glowed pass-green.
He looked at the big tom. "You know you're sitting on the key to
everything, don't you, fellow?"
He gently disengaged the littlest kitten from his jacket, and shooed them all
away from the hatch mechanism. It slid back, locked itself open. Would the little
stupids try to follow? He gave them a last wave. "Whatever you may think, you
really don't want to come with me. Gun wire hurts."
The Attic grouproom was crammed with extra seating; there was scarcely
room to maneuver around the edges. And the moment Silipan turned off the
zipheads' comm links, the place turned into a madhouse. Trud dived away from
the reaching arms, retreated to the control area at the top of the room. "They
reallyreally don't like to be taken off their work."
It was worse than Pham had thought it would be. If the zipheads hadn't been
tied down, he and Trud would have been attacked. He looked back at the
Emergent. "It had to be done. This is the core of Nau's power, and now it's
denied him. We're taking over all across L1, Trud."
Silipan's stare was glassy. There had been too many shocks. "All over L1?
That's impossible.. . .You've killed us all, Pham. You've killed me." Some
alertness returned; no doubt he was imagining what Nau and Brughel would do
to him.
Pham steadied him with his free hand. "No. I intend to win. If I do, you'll
survive. So will the Spiders."
"What?" Trud bit his lip. "Yeah, cutting off support will slow Ritser. Maybe
those damned Spiders will have a chance." His gaze became distant, then
snapped back to Pham's face. "What are you, Pham?"
Pham answered softly, pitching his voice just over the shouted demands
from the zipheads. "Just now, I'm your only hope." He drew Silipan's confiscated
huds from his jacket pocket, and handed them to the man.
Trud carefully straightened the crumpled material and slipped them over his
eyes. He was silent for a moment, then: "We have more huds. I can get you a
pair."
Pham smiled the foxy grin that Silipan had never seen till two hundred
seconds ago. "That's okay. I have something better."
"Oh." Trud's voice was small.
"Now I want you to do a damage assessment. Is there any way you can get
work from your people here, with Nau cut off?"
Trud shrugged angrily. "You know that's imposs-" He looked up again at
Pham. "Maybe, maybe there are some trivial things. We do offline computing. I
might be able to trick the numerical control zipheads. . . ."
"G
d
C l
h
l d
if
f h
ill h l
"

"Good man. Calm these people down, see if any of them will help us."
They parted. Silipan descended to the zipheads, talked soothing words,
bagged the floating vomitus that the sudden upset had generated. The shouting
only got louder:
"I need the tracking updates!"
"Where are the translations on the Kindred response?" "You stupids, you've
lost the comm!"
Pham slid sideways across the ceiling, looking downward through the ranks
of seated zipheads, listening to the complaints. On the far wall, Anne and her
other assistant floated motionless on grabfelt rests. She should be safe and out of
it.Your final battle is being fought, just a century or twoafter you thought all was
lost.
The vision behind Pham's eyes faded in and out. In most of the Attic, he'd
been able to restart the microwave pulse power. He had perhaps one hundred
thousand localizers in reach and alive. It was a bright meta-light extending his
vision in disjoint fingers through the Attic, to wherever a cloud of localizers had
come alive and could find a thread of links back to him.
Status, status. Pham scanned across the readouts on zipheads in the
grouproom and beyond. There were only a few still locked in their roomlets in
the capillary tunnels, specialists that hadn't been needed in the current operation.
Many of them had gone into convulsive tantrums when their job stream was
blocked. Pham eased into the control system and opened some of the incoming
communications. There were things he had to know, and it might ease the
discomfort of the Focused. Trud looked up uneasily; he could tell that someone
was messing with his system.
Pham reached beyond the Attic, searching for some glimmer from
localizers on the rockpile's surface. There! One or two isolated images, low-rate
and monochrome. He had a glimpse of a taxi coming down on naked rock, near
Hammerfest. Damn, sluiceway S745. If Nau could negotiate that lockless hatch,
there was no doubt where he'd go next.
For a fleeting moment Pham felt the overwhelming fear of facing an
unstoppable adversary.Ah, it's like being young again. He had perhaps three
hundred seconds before Nau got to L1-A. No point in holding anything back.
Pham sent out the command to bring all reachable localizers online-even the
ones without power. Their tiny capacitors held enough charge for a few dozen
packets each. Used cleverly, he could get a fair amount of I/O.
Behind his eyes, pictures slowly formed, bit by bit by bit.
Pham slid around three walls, staying carefully beyond the zipheads' reach,
occasionally dodging a thrown keyboard or drinking bulb. But the renewed

incoming data flow was having some calming effect. The translator section was
almost quiet, their talk mostly directed at one another. Pham drifted down next
to Trixia Bonsol. The woman was hunched over her keyboards with fierce
intentness. Pham plugged into the data stream that was coming up from
theInvisible Hand. There should be some good news there, Ritser and company
bogged down just when they were ready to commit mass murder. . .
It took him an instant to orient to the multiplex stream. There was stuff for
the translators, trajectory data, launch codes.Launch codes? Brughel was going
ahead with Nau's sucker punch! The execution was awkward; the Accord would
be left with a good fraction of its weapons. Ballistics were arcing up, dozens of
launches per second.
For a moment, Pham's attention was swallowed by the horror of it. Nau had
conspired to kill half the people in a world. Ritser was doing his best to
accomplish the murders. He stepped through the log of Trixia Bonsol's last few
hundred seconds. The log had gone berserk when her job stream had been cut
off, a metaphorical upchuck. There were pages of disordered nonsense, a gabble
of files that showed no last-access date. His eyes caught on a passage that almost
made sense:
It is an edged cliché that the world is most pleasant in the years of a Waning
Sun. It's true that the weather is not so driven, that everywhere there is a sense of
slowing down, and most places experience a few years where the summers do
not burn and the winters are not yet overly fierce. It is the classic time of
romance. It's a time that seductively beckons higher creatures to relax, postpone.
It's the last chance to prepare for the end of the world.
By blind good fortune, Sherkaner Underhill chose the most beautiful days
in the years of the Waning for his first trip to Lands Command.. .
It was clearly one of Trixia's translations, the sort of "human-colored"
description that irritated Ritser Brughel so much. But Underhill's "first trip to
Lands Command"? That would be before the last Dark. Strange that Tomas Nau
had wanted such retrospectives.
"It's all messed up now."
"What?" Pham's mind came back to the Attic grouproom, the irritable
voices of the zipheads. It was
Trixia Bonsol who had just spoken. Her eyes were distant and her fingers
still twitched across her keys.
Pham sighed. "Yeah, you got that right," he replied. Whatever she was
talking about, the comment was appropriate.
His low-rate synthesis from the unpowered net was complete: He had a
view down on L1-A. If he could trigger a little more connectivity, he might

reach the ejets near L1-A. No great processing power there, but those sites were
on the ejet power grid. . .and more important,Maybe we canuse the electric jets
themselves! If they could target a few dozen of them on the Podmaster. . ."Trud!
Have you had any luck with the numerical people?"

FIFTY-EIGHT
Rachner Thract's helicopter lifted clean of the tilted landing pad, its turbine
and rotor sounds healthy. By turning his head this way and that, Thract was able
to keep track of the terrain. He took them eastward, along the caldera wall. The
punched-hole craters marched off ahead of them, a line of destruction that
disappeared over the top of the far wall. In the city below, there were emergency
lights now, and ground traffic heading for the craters that had been apartments
and occupied mansions.
On the perch beside him, Underhill was moving feebly, pulling at the
panniers on his guide-bug's back. The animal was trying to help, but it was
injured far worse than its master. "I need to see, Rachner. Can you help me with
Mobiy's pack?"
"Just a minute, sir. I want to bring us around to the heliport."
Underhill pushed a few inches up from his perch. "Just put it on autopilot,
Colonel. Please, help me."
Thract's helicopter contained dozens of embedded processors, themselves
hooked into traffic control and information nets. Once he had been very proud of
this fancy aircraft. He hadn't flown it on automatic since that last staff meeting at
Lands Command. "Sir. . .I don't trust the automatics."
Underhill gave a gentle laugh, then broke into liquid coughing. "It's okay,
Rach. Please, I have to see what's happening. Help me with Mobiy."
Yes! By the Dark, what did it matter now! Rachner slammed four hands
into the control sockets, and wiggled on full auto. Then he turned to his
passengers and quickly unzipped the bag on the top of Mobiy's broken back.
Underhill reached in and removed the gear within as if it were some King's
crown jewels. Rachner turned his head for a closer look. What. . .a bloody
computer game helmet, it was!
"Ah, it looks okay," Underhill said softly. He started to settle the helmet
across his eyes, then winced away. Rachner could see why; there were blisters
all across the cobber's eyes. But Underhill didn't give up. He held the device just
off his head, then turned on the power.
Glittering light splashed out and around his head. Rachner jerked back
reflexively. The cabin of the heli was suddenly awash in a million shifting
colors, bright and plaid. He remembered the rumors about Underhill's crazy
hobbies, the videomancy. So it had all been true; this "gaming helmet" must
have cost a small fortune.

Underhill mumbled to himself, shifting the helmet this way and that, as if to
see around the blind spots in his burned eyes. There really wasn't much to see,
just an incredibly beautiful shifting of lights, the mesmerizing power of
computers in the service of quackery. It seemed to satisfy Sherkaner Underhill.
He stared and stared, petting his guide-bug with a free hand. "Ah. . .I see," he
said softly.
And the helicopter's turbines suddenly began a banshee twistup, well past
their redline. The power was like magic, and would burn them out in a matter of
an hour or two. That's why no reasonable controls would allow such
performance.
"What the devil-" The words caught in Thract's throat as the turbine windup
finally reached the blades above. His aircraft suddenly became a maniac,
clawing its way up and up, over the caldera ridge.
The turbines briefly idled as the helicopter soared over the top, five hundred
feet, a thousand feet above the altiplano. Rachner had a glimpse of the flatlands.
The single row of destruction they had seen at Calorica was actually part of a
grid. Stretched out south and west of them were hundreds of steaming
plumes.The antimissile fields. But the crappers had missed! Wave after wave of
interceptor rockets were sweeping up from their silos across the altiplano.
Hundreds of launches, quick and profligate as short-range rocket artillery-except
that the silos were dozens of miles away. Those rocket plumes were pushing
smart payloads toward long-range intercepts thousands of miles away, and
scores of miles up. It was awesome beyond all the staff-meeting hype that Air
Defense had ever shilled. . .and it must mean that the Kindred had just launched
everything they had.
Sherkaner Underhill didn't seem to notice. He moved his head back and
forth under the helmet's light show. "There has to be some reconnect. There has
to be." His hands twitched at the game controls.
Seconds passed. "It's all messed up now," he sobbed.
Trud left his numerical-control zipheads and rejoined Pham Trinli by the
translators. "The pure numericals I can manage, Pham. I mean I can get answers.
But for control-"
Trinli just nodded, brushing the objections aside.Trinli looks so different.
I've known him years of Watch time, and now he's a different person. The old
Pham Trinli had been loud and arrogant, a bluster that you could argue and joke
with. This Pham was quieter, but his actions were like knives.Killing us all.
Trud's eyes slid unwillingly to where Anne Reynolt's body hung like meat on a
hook. And even if he could conceive a scheme to betray Pham, it probably
wouldn't save him. Nau and Brughel were Podmasters, and Trud knew he had

passed beyond foriveness.
"-still a chance, Trud." Pham's voice cut through his fear. "Maybe we could
open things a little further, fool the zipheads into-"
Silipan shrugged. Not that it mattered, but, "Do that and the Podmaster will
be down our throat instantly. I'm getting fifty service requests a second from Nau
and Brughel."
Pham rubbed his temples and his eyes got a faraway look. "Yeah, I see
what you're saying. Okay. What do we have? The temp-"
"The cameras at Benny's show a lot of very puzzled people. If they're lucky
they'll stay where they are." And afterward the Podmasters would have no claim
of vengeance on them.
One of the zipheads-Bonsol-interrupted, the typical irrelevance of the
Focused: "There are millions of people on the ground. They will start dying in a
few seconds."
The comment actually seemed to derail Pham. Even the new Pham Trinli
was still an amateur when it came to dealing with zipheads. "Yeah," he said,
more to himself than to Silipan or the ziphead. "But at least the Spiders have a
chance. Without our zipheads, Ritser can't tighten the screws any more." Of
course, Bonsol ignored the reply, just went on tapping at her keys.
Trinli's attention snapped back to Silipan. "Look. Nau is in a taxi, coming in
on the L1-A site. There are electric stab jets all over the area. If we can get a few
zipheads to work them-"
Trud felt anger sweeping up. Whatever he was, Pham Trinli was still a fool.
"Plague take you! You just don't understand Focused loyalty! We need to-"
Bonsol interrupted. "Ritser can't tighten the screws, but we can't loosen
them either." She was laughing, almost inaudibly. "What an intriguing thing. We
have a deadlock."
Trud motioned for Pham to move back toward the ceiling, out of range of
this random ziphead commentary. "They'll go on like that forever."
But Pham turned back to the ziphead, abruptly giving her all his attention.
"What do you mean 'we have a deadlock'?" he said quietly.
"Pus take it, Pham! What does it matter!" But Trinli jerked his hand up,
commanding silence. The gesture had the peremptory confidence of a senior
Podmaster-and Silipan's protests died on his lips. Inside, his fear just grew and
grew. So much for miracles. If there had been any chance for keeping Nau out of
L1-A, it was vanishing in this delay. And Silipan knew what was in L1-A. Oh
yes. Beyond all automation and subtlety, L1-A would give the Podmaster back
his absolute power. The clock at the corner of Trud's vision counted mercilessly
on, the seconds of life dribbling out. And of course, the ziphead wasn't even

paying attention to Pham, much less his question.
The silence stretched for ten or fifteen seconds. Then, abruptly, Bonsol's
head snapped up and she stared directly into Pham's eyes-the way a ziphead
almost never did, except when role-playing. "I mean you're blocking us and
we're blocking you," she said. "My victory thought you were all monsters, that
we couldn't trust any of you. And now we are all paying for that mistake."
It was ziphead nonsense, just more portentous than most. But Pham pulled
himself down to Bonsol's chair. His mouth was half-open as if in unutterable
surprise, the look of a man whose world has suddenly been blown apart, who is
falling headlong into insanity. And when he finally spoke, his words were crazy,
too. "I-mostly we're not monsters. If the deadlock were to end, can you run
everything? And afterwards. . .we would be at your mercy afterwards. How can
we trust you?"
Bonsol's gaze had wandered. She didn't answer, and her hands roamed her
console. Silent seconds ticked by, but now a cold surmise stole up Trud's
spine.No.
Sharp on ten seconds, Trixia Bonsol spoke again: "If you restore full
access, we can control the most important things. At least that was the plan. As
for trust . . ." Bonsol's face twisted in a strange smile, mocking and wistful all at
once. "Well, you know us much better than the reverse. You must choose your
own monsters."
"Yes," said Pham. He rubbed his temple and squinted at something invisible
to Trud. He turned to
Silipan, and he was smiling the same feral smile as when he had popped up
in the supply closet, the smile of someone who is risking everything-and expects
to win. "Let's restore all the comm links, Trud. It's time to give Nau and Brughel
the ziphead support they deserve."

FIFTY-NINE
Nau watched Qiwi guide their taxi in; ahead and below were the snow
mounds that he had piled around the L1-A lock. With only the automation
aboard the taxi, Qiwi had found the sluiceway, overridden the hatch safeties, and
rescued them-all in a few hundred seconds. If only she would last a few more
seconds, he would have an absolute whip hand. If only she would last that few
more seconds. . .He saw the looks she was giving her father. The sight of Ali
was somehow pushing her toward the edge of understanding.Pestilence! Just get
us safely down, that's all I ask. Then he could kill her.
Marli looked up from his comm gear. There was surprised relief on his
face. "Sir! I'm getting acks back from the ziphead channels. We should have full
automation in a few seconds."
"Ah." Finally some unexpected good news. Now he could limit the
destruction necessary to regain control.Except this is Pham Nuwen you'reup
against, and almost anything is possible. This could be some incredible
masquerade. "Very good, Podcorporal. But for the moment, don't use that
automation."
"Yes, sir." Marli sounded puzzled.
Nau looked out the taxi's window. Strange to be seeing raw nature with no
enhancement. The L1-A lock was about seventy meters away now, deep in
shadow. There was something strange about it. . .the lip of metal was highlighted
in red.But I'm not wearing huds.
"Qiwi-"
"I see it. Someone is-"
There was a loud snapping sound. Marli screamed. His hair was on fire.
The hull by his seat was glowing red.
"Shit!" Qiwi boosted the taxi up. "They're usingmy electric jets!" She spun
the taxi even as she jinked it back and forth. Nau's stomach crawled up his
gut.Nothing is supposed to fly like this.
The glow on the L1-A lock, the hot spot in the hull behind him-the enemy
must be using all the stab jets within line of sight. Each jet by itself could only
be an accidental, local danger. Somehow, Nuwen had ganged dozens of them to
shine precisely on the two targets that mattered.
Marli was still screaming. Qiwi's piloting jammed Nau up into his
restraints, turned him as he came back down. He had a glimpse of the
podcoporal in the arms of his fellows. As least he wasn't burning anymore. The

other guards' eyes were wide. "X-rays," one of them said. The splash from those
electron beams could fry them all. A long-term peril, all things consideredStill
spinning the taxi, Qiwi swung them close to the hillsides of Diamond One. The
craft was precessing now, a wild triple spin. No way could the enemy keep their
guns on one spot. And yet, the glow in the wall grew brighter with each
rev.Pestilence. Somehow Nuwen had full system automation.
The nose and then the butt of the taxi smashed into the ground, splashing
snow up from the surface. The hull groaned but held. And now, in the floating
haze of rising volatiles, Nau could see the beams of the ejets. The ice and air in
their way exploded into incandescence. Five beams, maybe ten, they shifted in
and out as the taxi spun, and several were always on the glowing spot in their
hull.
Around them the swirl of vapor and ice grew thicker. The glowing spot in
the hull began to dim as the snows soaked and diffused the murderous beams.
Qiwi damped their spin with four precise bursts of attitude control, at the same
time snaking their craft over the boiling snows toward the L1-A airlock.
Peering forward, Nau saw the lock approach from dead ahead, a certain
crash. But somehow Qiwi was still in control. She flipped the taxi up, slamming
the docking collar into its mate on the lock. There was the sound of bending
metal, and then they were stopped.
Qiwi tapped at the lock controls, then bounded out of her chair, to the
forward hatch mechanism. "It's jammed, Tomas! Help me!"
And now they were locked down, trapped like dogs in a pit shoot. Tomas
rushed forward, braced himself, and pulled with Qiwi at the taxi hatch. It was
jammed. Almost jammed. Together, they pulled it partway open. He reached
through, spent precious seconds clearing security on the L1-A hatch.All right!
He looked over Qiwi's head at the hull behind them. The red spot was more
like a bull's-eye now, a ring of red, a ring of orange, and glaring white in the
middle. It was like standing in front of an open kiln.
The white-hot center bubbled outward, and was gone. All around them was
a cascading thunderclap of departing atmosphere.
• • •
Things had been very quiet since Victory Lighthill took the Command and
Control Center. The
Intelligence techs had been moved away from their perches. They and the
staff officers had been herded back against Underville, Coldhaven, and
Dugway.Like bugs at a slaughter-suck, thought Belga. But it didn't matter. The

situation map showed that much of the world was going down to slaughter now:
The tracks of thousands of Kindred missiles curved across the map, and
more were being launched each second. There were target circles drawn across
every Accord military site, every city-even the trad deepnesses.
And the strangeAccord launchings that had showed just after Lighthill
arrived-those had disappeared from the maps. Lies, no longer needed.
Victory Lighthill walked up and down the line of perches, gazing briefly
over the shoulders of each of her techs. She seemed to have forgotten Underville
and the others. And strangely, she seemed just as horrorstruck as CCC's proper
occupants. She wheeled on her brother, who seemed quite in another world,
entertaining himself with his game helmet. "Brent?"
The big corporal groaned. "I'm sorry, I'm sorry. Calorica is still down. Sis. .
.I think they hit Dad." "But how? There's no way they could know!"
"I dunno. Only the low-level ones are talking, and by themselves, they're
never very helpful. I think it happened a while ago, just after we lost contact
with the High Perch-" He paused, communing with his game? Light leaked from
the edges of his helmet, flickering. Then: "He's back! Listen!"
Lighthill brought a phone to the side of her head. "Daddy!" Joyous as a
cobblie home from school.
"Where-?" Her eating hands clasped each other in surprise and she shut up,
listening to some extended speech. But she was almost bouncing with
excitement, and her renegades were suddenly pounding on their consoles.
Finally: "We copy all, Daddy. We-" She paused, watching her techs for an
instant. "-we're getting control, just like you say. I think we can do it, but for
God's sake, route through someplace closer. Twenty seconds is just too long. We
need you now more than ever!" And then she was talking to her techs. "Rhapsa,
target only the ones we can't stop from above. Birbop, fix this damn routing-"
And on the situation map. . .the missile fields across High Equatoria had
come alive. The map showed the colored traces of dozens, hundreds of
antimissiles, the long-range interceptors arcing up to meet the enemy. More lies?
Belga looked across the suddenly joyous aspects of Lighthill and the other
intruders, and felt hope climbing into her own heart.
The first contacts were still half a minute away. Belga had seen the
simulations. At least five percent of the attacking missiles would get through.
The deaths would be a hundred times more than during the Great War, but at
least it wasn't annihilation.. . .But other things were happening on the map. Well
behind the leading wave of the attack, here and there, enemy markers
werevanishing.
Lighthill waved at the display, and for the first time since the takeover

addressed Underville and the others. "The Kindred had callback capability on
some of their missiles. We're using that wherever we can. Some of the others, we
can attack from above."From above? As if by an invisible eraser, sweeping
northward over the continent, a swath of missile markers disappeared. Lighthill
turned toward Coldhaven and the other officers, and came to full attention. "Sir,
ma'am. Your people might be best at managing the amissiles. If we can
coordinate-"
"Damn, yes!" chorused Dugway and Coldhaven. The techs rushed back to
their places. There were precious lost moments, re-upping target lists, and then
the first of the amissiles scored.
"Positive EMP!" shouted one of the AD techs. Somehow it seemed more
real than all the rest.
General Coldhaven dipped a hand at Lighthill, an odd sort of reverse salute.
Lighthill said quietly, "Thank you, sir. This isn't quite what the chief planned,
but I think we can make it work.. . .Brent, see if you can make the situation map
completely truthful."
. . .Hundreds of new markers glittered across the board. But they weren't
missiles. Belga knew the tags well enough to recognize satellites, though these
looked like broken graphics. There were missing data fields and there were
fields that contained nonsense strings. Moving off the north edge of the display
was a strange rectangle. It pulsed with chevron modifiers. General Dugway
hissed. "That can't be true. A dozen size-chevrons. That would make it a
thousand feet long."
"Yes, sir," said Lieutenant Lighthill. "The standard display programs can't
quite handle this. That vehicle is almost two thousand feet long." She didn't seem
to notice the look that came over Dugway. She contemplated the apparition a
second longer. "And I think it has just about outlived its usefulness."
Ritser Brughel seemed pleased with himself. "We've done pus good even
without Reynolt's people." The Vice-Podmaster came over from his Captain's
chair to hover beside his Pilot Manager. "Maybe we launched a few more nukes
than precisely needed, but that balanced your botch of the amissile fields, eh?"
He slapped Xin familiarly on the shoulder. Jau had the sudden realization that
his single, frail treason had been detected.
"Yes, sir" was all he could think to say. Ahead, the curve of the planet
glittered with a web of lights, the cities they had come to call Princeton,
Valdemon, Mountroyal. Maybe the Spiders weren't the people Rita imagined,
maybe that was a fraud of translation. But whatever the truth, those cities were in
the last seconds of their existence.
"Sir." Bil Phuong's voice came across bridge-wide comm. "I've got a high-

level ack from Anne's people. We'll have full automation in a matter of seconds."
"Ha. About time." But there was a note of relief in Ritser Brughel's voice.
Jau felt a thutter of vibration. Again. Again. Brughel's head snapped up, and
he gazed off at a virtual display. "That sounds like our battle lasers, but-"
Jau's eyes flickered across the status listings. The weapons board was clean.
Core power had jagged as if charging capacitors-but now that was level, too.
And, "My pilots aren't reporting any fire, sir."
Thutter. Thutter. They had passed over the great cities, were coasting north
into the arctic, over tiny lights scattered across an immensity of dark, frozen
land. Nothing there, but behind them. . .Thutter.The sky lit with three pale
beams, diverging, fading. . .the classic look of battle lasers in upper atmosphere.
"Phuong! What the fuck is going on down there!"
"Nothing, sir! I mean-" Sounds of Phuong moving among his zipheads.
"Uh, the zips are working on valid target lists from L1."
"Well, they're totally out of synch withmy target list. Pull your head out,
man!" Brughel cut the connection and turned back to his Pilot Manager. The
Podmaster's pale face was ruddy with building anger. "Shoot the bloody zips and
get new ones!" He glared at Jau. "So what's your problem?"
"I-maybe nothing, but we're being illuminated from below."
"Hunh." Brughel, squinted at the electronic intelligence. "Yeah. Ground
radars. But this happens several times on every rev. . .oh."
Xin nodded. "This contact has lasted fifteen seconds. It's like they're
tracking us."
"That's impossible. Weown the Spider nets." Brughel bit his lip. "Unless
Phuong has totally screwed up the L1 comm."
The radar tag faded for a moment. . .and then it was back, brighter, focused.
"That's a targeting lock!"
Brughel jerked as if the image had turned into a striking snake. "Xin. Take
control. Main torch if it will help. Get us out of here."
"Yes, sir." There weren't many missile sites in the Spiders' far north. But
what there were would be nuke armed. Even a single hit could cripple theHand.
Jau reached to enable his pilots-and the rumble of auxiliary thrusters filled the
bridge.
"That wasn't me, sir!"
Brughel had been looking right at him when the sound began. He nodded.
"Get through to your pilots. Get control!" He bounced up from his place beside
Xin and waved to his guards toward the aft hatch. "Phuong!"
Jau pounded frantically on his controls, shouted the command codes over
and over. He saw scattered diagnostics, but no response from his pilots. The

horizon had tilted slightly. TheHand' s auxiliaries were being run full-out, but
not by Jau. Slowly, slowly, the ship seemed to be coming back to a nose-down,
cruise attitude. Still no response from his pilots, but-Jau noticed the rising trace
from the power core.
"Main torch burn, sir! I can't stop it-"
Brughel and his guards grabbed for hold-ons. The torch subsonics were
unmistakable, vibrating out from bones and teeth. Slowly, slowly, the
acceleration ramped up. Fifty milligees. One hundred. Loose junk floated faster
and faster sternward, spinning and bouncing off obstacles. Three hundred
milligees. A huge gentle fist pressed Jau back into his chair. One of the guards
had been in open space, unable to reach a hold-down. He drifted past now, hefell
past, crashing into the aft wall. Five hundred milligees, and still increasing. Jau
twisted in his harness and looked back, up, at Brughel and the others. They were
pinned aft, trapped by the acceleration that went on and on. . .
And then the torch sound faded, and Jau floated up in against his restraints.
Brughel was shouting to his guards, gathering them together. Somewhere in the
action he had lost his huds. "Status, Mr. Xin!"
Jau stared at his displays. The status board was still a random jumble. He
looked out, forward along theHand' s orbit. They had passed through a sunrise.
Dim lit, the frozen ocean stretched to the horizon. But that wasn't what mattered.
The horizon itself looked subtly different.Not your classicalde-orbit burn, but it
will do. Jau licked his lips. "Sir, we'll be in the soup in one or two hundred
seconds."
For a moment, horror registered in Brughel's face. "You get us back up,
mister." "Yes, sir." What else was there to say?
Brughel and his goons coasted across the bridge to the aft hatch. Phuong:
"Sir. I have a voice transmission from L1." "Well, put it on."
It was a woman's voice, Trixia Bonsol. "Greetings to the humans
aboardInvisible Hand. This is
Lieutenant Victory Lighthill, Accord Intelligence Service. I have taken
control of your spacecraft. You will be on the ground shortly. It may be some
time before our forces arrive on the scene. Do not, I repeat, do not resist those
forces."
Stark, gape-mouth surprise held everyone on the bridge. . .but Bonsol said
nothing more. Brughel recovered first, but his voice wavered. "Phuong. Shut
down the L1 link. All the protocol layers."
"Sir. I-I can't. Once up, the interconnect-"
"Yes you can. Get physical. Take a club to the equipment, but get
yourselfoffline. "

"Sir. Even without the local zipheads. . .I think L1 has workarounds." "I'll
take care of that. We're coming down."
The guard by the hatch looked up at Brughel. "It won't open, sir."
"Phuong!"
There was no answer.
Brughel jumped to the wall beside the hatch, began pounding the direct
opener. He might as well have been pounding a rock. The Podmaster turned, and
Jau saw that the red was gone from his face. He was dead white and his eyes
were wild. He had a wire gun in his hand now, and he looked around the bridge
as if in search of a target. His gaze locked on Jau. The gun twitched up.
"Sir, I think I've gotten through to one of my pilots." It was an absolute lie,
but without his huds, Brughel couldn't know.
"Ah?" The gun muzzle slipped a fraction. "Good. Keep at it, Xin. It's your
neck, too." Jau nodded, turned back to diddle fiercely with the dead controls.
Behind him, the search for the hatch's manual override was frantic and
obscene and incompetent. . .and finally terminated by the chatter of gunfire.
Tumbling wires caromed around the bridge. "Bloody hell. That won't do it,"
Brughel said. There was the sound of a cabinet opening, but Jau kept his head
down, doing his best to look desperately busy. "Here. Try this." There was a
pause, then a string of ear-numbing detonations.Lordy! Brughel kept that kind of
ordnance on a starship's bridge?
Triumphant shouts were faint behind the ringing in his ears. Then Brughel
was shouting. "Go! Go! Go!"
Jau turned his head slightly, got a sidelong look at the bridge behind him.
The hatch was still closed, but now there was a ragged hole punched in it.
Twisted metal and less identifiable junk floated up from it.
And now Jau Xin was all alone on theHand' s bridge. He took a deep breath
and tried to make sense of his displays. Ritser Brughel was right about one thing.
It was Jau's neck on the line here.
The core power trace was still high. He looked out across the curving
horizon. No question now.
TheHand was down, consistent with the eighty-thousand-meter altitude on
the status board. He heard the rumble of the aux thrusters.Did I get through? If
he could orient properly and somehow fire the main torch. . .But no, they weren't
turning in the right direction! The great ship was aligning on their direction of
flight, rear end first. To the left and right of the aft view, parts of the starship's
outer hull could be seen, angular spidery structures that were meant for the flows
of interstellar plasma but never the atmosphere of a planet. Now their edges were
glowing. Soft yellows and reds splashed out around them, cascading like

glowing ocean spray. The sharpest edges glowed white and sloughed away. But
the aux thrusters were still firing, a pattern of tiny bursts. On off. On off.
Whoever was running his pilots was making a perverse attempt to keep theHand
oriented. Without such precise control, the flow past the ship's irregular hull
would send them into a long tumble, a million tonnes of hardware torn apart by
forces it had never been designed to face.
The glow across the stern was a spreading sheet of light, clear only in a few
places where the shock was not hot enough to vaporize the hull. Jau drifted back
into his chair, the acceleration growing gently, inexorably. Four hundred
milligees, eight hundred. But this acceleration was not caused by the ship's torch.
This was a planetary atmosphere, having its way with them.
And there was another sound. Not the rumble of the aux. It was a rich,
growing tone. From its throat to its outer hull, theHand had become a vast organ
pipe. The sound fell from chord to chord as the ship rammed deeper, slower.
And as the glow of ionization trembled and faded, theHand' s dying song rose in
a crescendo-and was gone.
Jau stared out the aft view, at a scene that should have been impossible. The
angular hull structures were smoothed and melted by their passage through the
heat. But theHand was a million tonnes, and the pilots had kept it precisely
oriented in the flow, and most of its great mass had survived.
Nearly a standard gee pressed him against his chair, but this was almost at
right angles to the earlier acceleration. This was planetary gravity. TheHand was
a kind of aircraft now, a disaster skidding across the sky. They were forty
thousand meters up, coming down at a steady hundred meters per second. Jau
looked at the pale horizon, the ridges and blocks of ice that swept beneath his
view. Some of those were five hundred meters high, ice pressed upward by the
slow freezing of the ocean depths. He tapped at his console, got a flicker of
attention from one of the pilots, a scrap of further information. They would clear
that ridgeline and the three beyond it. Beyond that, near the horizon, the shadows
were softer. . .a deception of distance, or maybe snow piled deep on the jagged
ice.
Echoing up through theHand' s corridors, Jau heard the rapid pounding of
Brughel's heavy gun. There was shouting, silence, then the pounding again,
farther away.Every hatch must be sealed. And Ritser Brughel was punching
through every one. In a way, the Podmaster was right; he controlled the physical
layer. He could reach the hull optics, knock out the link to L1. He could
"disconnect" whatever local zipheads still offended. . .
Thirty thousand meters. Dim sunlight reflected off the ice, but there was no
sign of artificial lights or towns. They were coming down in the middle of the

Spiders' grandest ocean. TheHand was still making better than mach three. The
sink rate was still one hundred meters per second. His intuition plus the few
hints from the status board told him they would smear across the landscape at
more than the speed of sound. Unless-the core power was still rising-if the main
torch could be fired once more, and fired at precisely the right instant. . .a
miracle touch might do it. TheHand was so big that its belly and throat might be
used as a cushion, shredded across kilometers of crash path, leaving the bridge
and the occupied quarters intact. Pham Trinli's silly bragging had included such
an adventure.
One thing was certain. Even if Jau were given full control at this instant,
and all his pilots' skills, there was no way he could accomplish such a landing.
They had cleared the last line of ridges. The aux thrusters burned briefly, a
one-degree yaw, guiding them as if with special knowledge of conditions ahead.
Ritser Brughel's time for killing had shrunk down to a few seconds. Rita
would be safe. Jau watched the tumbled land rise toward him. And with it came
the strangest feeling of terror, and triumph, and freedom. "You're too late, Ritser.
You're just too late."

SIXTY
Belga Underville had rarely seen joy or fear so strong, and never attached to
the same events by the same people. Coldhaven's techs should have been
cheering as wave after wave of their long-range interceptors scored against the
Kindred ballistics, and hundreds of other enemy missiles blew themselves up or
otherwise aborted. The success rate was already nearing ninety-nine percent.
Which left thirty live nuclear warheads arcing into Accord territory. It was the
difference between annihilation and mere isolated disaster. . .and the technicians
chewed on their eating hands as they struggled to stop those last, straggling
threats.
Coldhaven walked down his row of techs. One of Lighthill's people, an
oophase corporal, was by his side. The General was hanging on Rhapsa
Lighthill's every word, making sure his techs got the benefit of all the new
intelligence that was flooding across their displays. Belga hung back. There was
nothing she could do but get in the way. Victory Lighthill was deep in some
weird conversation with the aliens, every few sentences punctuated by long
delays, time for side conversations with her brother and Coldhaven's people. She
paused, waiting, and gave Belga a shy smile.
Belga gave her a little wave back. The cobblie wasn't quite the same as her
mother-except, perhaps, where it mattered.
Then Lighthill's phone came alive again-some relatively near collaborator?
"Yes, good. We'll get people out there. Five hours maybe.. . .Daddy, we're back
on track. Critter Number Five is playing fair.
You were right about that one. Daddy?. . .Brent, we've lost him again! That
shouldn't happen now.. . .Daddy?"
Rachner's helicopter had stopped its zigzag, evasive course, though not
before Thract became thoroughly lost. Now the heli flew low and fast across the
altiplano, as if fearless of hostile observation from above.
A passenger on his own pilot's perch, Thract watched the sky show with an
almost hypnotized wonder, only partly aware of Sherkaner Underhill's delirious
mumbling, and the strange lights coming from his game helmet.
The sheets of amissile launches were long gone, but all across the horizon
the evidence of their mission was lighting the sky.At least we foughtback.
The timbre of the rotor noise changed, bringing Thract back from his
terrible, far vision. The heli was sliding down through the dark. Shading his eyes
against the sky lights, Thract could see that they were headed for a landing on a

random stretch of naked stone, hills and ice all around.
They touched down, roughly, and the turbines idled till the rotors were
spinning slow enough to see. It was almost quiet in the cabin. The guide-bug
stirred, pushed insistently at the door beside Underhill.
"Don't let him out, sir. If we lose him here, he might stay lost."
Underhill's head bobbed uncertainly. He set down the game helmet; its
lights flickered and died. He patted his guide-bug, and pulled shut the closures of
his jacket. "It's okay, Colonel. It's all over now. You see, we won."
The cobber sounded as delirious as ever. But Thract was beginning to
realize: delirious or not, Underhill had saved the world. "What happened, sir?"
He said softly. "Alien monsters controlled our nets. . .and you controlled the
monsters?"
The old, familiar chuckle. "Something like that. The problem was, they
aren't all monsters. Some of them are both clever and good. . .and we almost
squashed each other with our separate plans. That was terribly expensive to fix."
He was silent for a second, his head wavering. "It will be okay, but. . .just now I
can't see much." The cobber had taken a full head of the aliens' killer beam. The
blisters on Underhill's eyes were spreading, a pervasive, creamy haze. "Maybe
you can take a moment and tell me what you see." The cobber jerked a hand
skyward.
Rachner pushed his best side close to the south-facing window. The
shoulder of the mountain cut off part of the view, but there were still one
hundred degrees of horizon. "Hundreds of nukes, sir, glowing lights in the sky. I
think those are our interceptors, way far off."
"Ha. Poor Nizhnimor and Hrunk. . .when we walked in the Dark, we saw
something similar. Though it was much colder then." The guide-bug had the
trick of the door. It popped it open a crack, and a slow draft of coldest air licked
into the cabin.
"Sir-" Rachner started to complain about the draft.
"It's okay. You won't be here long. What else do you see?"
"Lights spreading out from the hits. I guess that's ionization in the
magnetopatches. And-" Rach's voice caught in his throat. There were other
things, and these he recognized. "I see reentry traces, sir. Dozens of them.
They're passing overhead, and to our east." Rach had seen similar things in Air
Defense tests. When the warheads finally came down through the atmosphere,
they left trails that glowed in a dozen colors. Even in the tests, they'd been
horrible things, the stabbing hands of a spirit tarant, pouncing from the sky. A
dozen traces, more coming. Thousands of missiles had been stopped, but what
remained could destroy cities.
f
f

"Don't worry." Underhill's voice came softly from Thract's blind side. "My
alien friends have taken care of those. Those warheads are dead carcasses now, a
few tonnes of radioactive junk. Not much fun if one drops directly on your head,
but otherwise no threat."
Rachner turned, followed the tracks anxiously across the sky.My
alienfriends have taken care of those. "What are the monsters really like,
Sherkaner? Can we trust them?"
"Heh. Trust them? What a thing for an Intelligence officer to ask. My
General never trusted them, any of them. I've studied thehumans for almost
twenty years, Rachner. They've been traveling in space for hundreds of
generations. They've seen so much, they've done so much.. . .The poor crappers
think they know what is impossible. They're free to fly between the stars, and
their imagination is trapped in a cage they can't even see."
The glowing streaks had passed across the sky. Most had faded to far-red or
invisibility. Two converged toward a point on the horizon, probably the High
Equatoria launch site. Thract held his breath, waiting.
Behind him, Underhill said something like, "Ah, dear victory," and then
was very quiet.
Thract strained to watch the north. If the warheads were still live, the
detonations would be visible even from over the horizon. Ten seconds. Thirty.
There was silence and cold. And to the north, there was only the light of the
stars. "You're right, sir. What's left is just falling junk. I-" Rachner turned,
suddenly conscious of just how cold the heli's cabin had become.
Underhill was gone.
Thract lunged across the cabin to the half-open door. "Sir!Sherkaner! " He
started down the outside steps, turning his head this way and that, trying to catch
a glimpse of the other. The air was still, but so cold that it cut. Without a heated
breather, he'd have burned lungs in a matter of minutes.
There! A dozen yards from the heli, in the shade of both stars and sky glow,
two far-red blotches.
Underhill limped slowly behind Mobiy. The guide-bug tugged him gently
along, at every step probing the hillside with its long arms. It was the instinctive
behavior of an animal in hopeless cold, trying to the last to find an effective
deepness. Here, in a random nowhere, the critter didn't stand a chance. In less
than an hour he and his master would be dead, their tissues desiccated.
Thract scrambled down the steps, shouting at Underhill. And above him,
the heli's blades began to spin up. Thract cringed beneath the frigid wash. As the
turbines ramped up and the blades began to provide real lift, he turned and
pulled himself back into the cabin. He pounded on the autopilot, poking at every
di
t

disconnect.
It didn't matter. The turbines hit takeoff power and the heli lifted. He had
one last glimpse of the shadows hiding Sherkaner Underhill. Then the craft tilted
eastward and the scene was lost behind him.

SIXTY-ONE
Blowouts in small volumes were normally fatal. Quickly fatal. It was one of
his guards who unintentionally saved Tomas Nau. Just as the hull melted
through, Tung released his harness and dived up toward the hatch. The blowout
clawed at all of them, but Tung was loose and closest to the hole. He rammed
headfirst into the wall melt, sucked through to his hips.
Somehow Qiwi had kept her place by the jammed taxi hatch. Now she had
the L1-A hatch open, too. She turned back, grabbed her father, and boosted him
into the lock beyond. The action was a single smooth motion, almost a dance.
Nau had scarcely begun to react when she turned a second time, hooked a foot
into a wall loop, and reached out to snag his sleeve with the tips of her fingers.
She pulled gently, and as he came closer, grabbed him by main force and shoved
him through to safety.
Safe. And I was as good as dead just five seconds ago.The hiss of escaping
air was loud. The damaged docking collar could blow in a second.
Qiwi dropped back from hatchway. "I'll get Marli and Ciret."
"Yes!" Nau came back to the opening, and cursed himself for losing his
wire gun in the chaos. He looked into the taxi. One guard was clearly dead:
Tung's legs weren't even twitching. Marli was probably dead too, certainly out of
it, though Qiwi was struggling to get both him and Ciret free. In a second she
would have them out, as quick and effectively as she had saved himself and Ali
Lin. Qiwi was just too dangerous, and this was his last sure opportunity to get
her out of the picture.
Nau pushed on the L1-A hatch. It turned smoothly, pressed by the air
currents, and slammed shut with an ear-numbing crash. His fingers danced
across the access control, tapping out the code for an emergency jettison. From
the other side of the wall there was the explosivewhump of exhausting gas, the
banging of metal on metal. Nau imagined the airless taxi, floating out from the
lock.Let Pham Nuwen take his target practice on the dead.
The lock's pressure rose quickly to normal. Nau popped the inner hatch and
took Ali Lin through, into the corridor beyond. The old man mumbled,
semiconscious. At least his bleeding had stopped.Don't die on me, damnit. Ali
was worthless meat right now, but in the long run he was a treasure. Things
would be expensive enough without losing him.
He coasted Ali gently up the long corridor. The walls around him were
green plastic. This had been the security vault aboardCommon Good. Its

irregular shape had made sense there; nowadays its value lay in its monolithic
construction and its shielding, several meters of composites with the melting
point of tungsten. All the firepower Pham Nuwen possessed couldn't get him in
here.
Till a few days ago, the vault had held most of the surviving heavy weapons
in the OnOff system. Now it was almost empty, stripped to support the mission
of theInvisible Hand. No matter. Nau had been very careful that enough nukes
remained. If necessary, he could play the old, old game of total disaster
management.
So what can be salvaged?He had only the vaguest idea how much Pham
Nuwen controlled. For an instant, Nau quailed. All his life he had studied such
men, and now he was pitted against one.But in
winning, Iwill be all the more. There were a dozen things to be done, and
only seconds to do them. Nau let Ali loose, free to slowly fall in the rockpile's
microgravity. A comm set and local huds were tacked to grabfelt by the door. He
snatched them up and spoke brief commands. The automation here was
primitive, but it would do. Now he could see out from the vault. The Peddlers'
temp was above his horizon, and there was no taxi traffic, there were no suited
figures approaching around the rockpile's surface.
He dove across the open space, unshipped a small torpedo. The flag at the
corner of his view told him that his call to Hammerfest had made it through. The
ring pattern disappeared, and Pham's voice came in his ear.
"Nau?"
"Right the first time, sir." Nau floated the nuke across to the launch tube
that Kal Omo had installed just thirty-five days ago. It had seemed a maniac
precaution then. Now it was his last chance.
"It's time that you surrendered, Podmaster. My forces control all of L1
space. We-"
Pham's voice held quiet certainty, with none of the bluster of Old Pham
Trinli. Nau could imagine ordinary people gripped by that voice, led. But Tomas
Nau was a pro himself. He had no trouble interrupting: "On the contrary, sir. I
hold the only power that is worth noting." He touched the panel by the launch
tube. There was a thump as compressed air blew out the top end and cleared the
snow. "I've programmed and loaded a tactical nuclear weapon. The target is the
Peddlers' temp. The weapon is ad hoc, but I'm sure it's sufficient."
"You can't do that, Podmaster. Three hundred of your own people are over
there."
Nau laughed gently. "Oh, Ican do it. I lose a lot, but I still have some
people in coldsleep. I-are you really Pham Nuwen?" The question slipped out,

almost uncalculated.
There was a pause, and when Nuwen spoke, he sounded distracted,
"Yes."And you're handling everything yourself, aren't you? It made sense. An
ordinary conspiracy would have been detected years ago. It had been just Pham
Nuwen and Ezr Vinh, right from the beginning. Like a single man pulling his
wagon across a continent, Nuwen had persevered, had almost conquered. "It's an
honor to meet you, sir. I've studied you for many years." As he spoke, Nau
popped up a view of the torpedo's diagnostics. He was looking straight down the
launch rail; the tube was clear. "Perhaps your only mistake is that you have not
fully understood the Podmaster ethos. You see, we Podmasters grew out of
disaster. That is our inner strength, our edge. If I destroy the temp, it will be an
enormous setback for the L1 operation. But my personal situation willimprove. I
will still have the rockpile. I will still have many of the zipheads. I will still have
theInvisibleHand. " He turned away from the launch tube. He looked across the
equipment bays, at the remaining torpedoes; he might have to knock out the
Hammerfest Attic, too.That had not been part of even the most extreme disaster
plans. Maybe there was some way to do it that would leave some of the zipheads
alive. Another part of his mind waited curiously for what Pham Nuwen would
say. Would he cave in like an ordinary person, or did he have the true heart of a
Podmaster? That question was the essence of Pham Nuwen's moral weakness.
Abruptly, there was a clattering sound that echoed through the vault. Ali
Lin had fallen beyond his view, into the downward end. But the sound came
again and again, a million metal plates crashing together.Maybe theinward
entrance? That was at the lowest point in the vault. Nau moved silently toward
the edge of the drop-off.
Pham Nuwen's voice was faint against the racket: "You're wrong,
Podmaster. You don't have the-" Nau cut the audio with a swipe of his hand and
moved slowly forward. He did a manual traverse of the vault's fixed cameras.
Nothing. The primitive automation was a salvation and a pest. Okay. Weapons.
Was there anything smaller than a nuke around here? The database wasn't set up
for such trivia. He let the catalogue listings stream by his huds, and he moved
close to wall, still out of sight from below. The clanking and banging
continued.Ah, that was the lake-bed servos, theirnoise channeled down the
tunnel! Quite a fanfare for a secret break-in.
The ambusher, such as he was, floated up into sight. "Ah, Mr. Vinh. I
thought you were well drowned."
In fact, Vinh looked semiconscious, his face pasty pale. There was no sign
of his wire-gun wounds.No, he stole one of my jackets. The full-press was trim
and perfectly creased, but the right arm was subtly twisted, lumpy. Vinh held Ali

gently against his left shoulder. He looked back at Nau, and hatred seemed to
bring him more alertness.
But the downward end of the vault was empty of further intruders. And
Nau's catalogue search had completed: there were three wire guns in the cabinet
immediately behind him! Nau breathed a sigh of relief and smiled at the Peddler.
"You did well, Mr. Vinh." A few seconds' difference and Vinh would have been
here first, setting a real ambush. Instead. . .the fellow appeared to be unarmed,
one-armed, weak as a kitten. And Tomas Nau stood between him and the wire
guns. "I don't have time to talk, I'm afraid. Stand aside from Ali, please." He
spoke mildly, but didn't take his eyes off the two. His left hand moved up to
open the gun cabinet. Maybe the calm style would work on Vinh, and he would
have a clean kill.
"Tomas!"
Qiwi stood above them, at the entrance to the vault's open space.
For an instant, Nau just stared. She had a nosebleed. Her lacy dress was
torn and splattered. But she was alive.The jettison must have jammedalong with
the taxi hatch. With the taxi still in place, lock security would not reset-and
somehow she had clawed her way back in.
"We were trapped, Tomas. Somehow the lock was defective."
"Oh, yes!" The anguish in Nau's voice was completely sincere. "It slammed
shut and I heard venting. I-I was so sure you were dead."
Qiwi came down from the ceiling, guiding the body of Rei Ciret onto a
grabfelt rest. The guard might be alive, but he was clearly of no use just now. "I-
I'm sorry, Tomas. I wasn't able to save Marli." She came across the room to hug
him, but there was something tentative about the gesture. "Who are you talking
to?" Then she saw Vinh and Ali."Ezr?"
For once, some good luck: Vinh was perfect, his full-press jacket stained
like a butcher's smock, with
Ali's blood. From behind Vinh came the banging of the ruined park. The
Peddler's voice was gasping and harsh. "We've taken over L1, Qiwi. Except for a
few of Nau's thugs, we haven't hurt anyone"-this while her own father lay
bleeding in his arms! "Nau is using you like he always does. Only this time, he's
going to kill us all. Look around! He's going to nuke the temp."
"I-" But Qiwi did look around, and Nau didn't like what he saw in her eyes.
"Qiwi," said Nau, "look at me. We're up against the same group that was
behind Jimmy Diem." "You murdered Jimmy!" shouted Vinh.
Qiwi wiped her bloody nose on the fine white fabric of her sleeve. For a
moment she looked very young and lost, as lost as when he'd first taken her. She
caught her foot on a wall stop and turned toward him, considering. Somehow, he

had to make time, just a handful of seconds:
"Qiwi, think who's saying these things." Nau gestured in the direction of
Vinh and Ali Lin. It was a terrible risk he was taking, a desperate manipulation.
But it was working! She actually turned a bit, her gaze shifting away from him.
He slipped his hand into the cabinet, feeling for the butt of a wire gun.
"Qiwi, think who's saying these things." Nau gestured in the direction of
Ezr and Ali Lin. Poor Qiwi actually turned to look. Behind her, Ezr saw a smile
flicker across Tomas Nau's face.
"You know Ezr. He tried to kill your father back at North Paw; he thought
he could get at me through Ali. If he had a knife, he would be cutting into your
father right now. You know what a sadist Ezr Vinh is. You remember the
beating he gave you; you remember how I held you afterwards."
The words were for Qiwi, but they hit Ezr like battering rams, horrid truths
mixed with deadly lies.
Qiwi was motionless for a moment. But now her fists were clenched; her
shoulders seemed to hunch down with some terrible tension. And Ezr
thought,Nau is going to win, and I'm the reason. He pushed back the grayness
that seemed to close on him from all sides and made one last try: "Not for me,
Qiwi. For all the others. For your mother. Please. Nau has lied to you for forty
years. Whenever you learn the truth, he scrubs your mind. Over and over again.
And you can never remember."
Recognition and stark horror spread across Qiwi's face. "This time Iwill
remember." She turned as Nau pulled something from the cabinet behind them.
Her elbow jabbed into his chest. There was a sound like snapping branches; Nau
bounced back against the cabinet and floated outward, into the vault's open
space. A wire gun floated after him. Nau lunged for the weapon, but it was
centimeters beyond his reach and he had only thin air to brace upon.
Qiwi stood out from the wall, stretched, and snagged the wire gun. She
pointed the muzzle at the Podmaster's head.
Nau was slowly tumbling; he twisted about to track on Qiwi. He opened his
mouth, the mouth that had a persuasive lie for every occasion. "Qiwi, you can't-"
he began, and then he must have seen the look on Qiwi's face. Nau's arrogance,
the smooth cool arrogance that Ezr had watched for half a lifetime, was suddenly
melted away. Nau's voice became a whisper. "No,no. "
Qiwi's head and shoulders trembled, but her words were stony hard. "I
remember." She shifted her aim away from Nau's face, to below his waist. . .and
fired a long burst. Nau's scream became a shriek that ended as the wire-fire spun
him around and struck his head.

SIXTY-TWO
Things were very dark, and then there was light. She floated upward toward
it.Who am I? The answer came quickly, on a crest of terror.AnneReynolt.
Memories. The retreat into the mountains. The final days of hide-and-seek,
the Balacrean invaders finding her every cave. The traitor, unmasked too late.
The last of her people ambushed from the air. Standing on a mountain hillside,
circled by Balacrean armor. The stench of burnt flesh was strong even in the
chill morning air, but the enemy had stopped shooting. They had captured her
alive.
"Anne?" The voice was soft, solicitous. The voice of a torturer, building the
mood toward greater horror. "Anne?"
She opened her eyes. Balacrean torture gear bulked large around her, just at
the limits of her peripheral vision. It was all the horror she expected, except that
they were in free fall.For fifteen years, they've owned our cities.Why take me
into space?
Her interrogator drifted into view. Black hair, typical Balacrean skin tone, a
young-old face. This must be a senior Podmaster. But he wore a strange fractille
jacket, like no Podmaster Anne had ever seen. There was a look of false anxiety
pasted on his face.A fool; he's overacting. He floated a bouquet of soft white
flowers into her lap, as though making a gift. They smelled of warm summers
passed.There must be some way to die. Theremust be some way to die. Her arms
were tied down, of course. But if he came close enough, she still had her teeth.
Maybe, if he was enough of a foolHe reached out, gently touched her shoulder.
Anne twisted hard around, caught a bite from the
Podmaster's groping hand. He pulled back, leaving a trail of tiny red drops
floating in the air between them. But he wasn't enough of a fool to kill her on the
spot. Instead, he glared across the ranked equipment at someone out of sight.
"Trud! What the devil have you done to her?"
She heard a whiny voice that was somehow familiar. "Pham, I warned you
this was a difficult procedure. Without her guidance, we can't be sure-" The
speaker came into view. He was a small and nervouslooking fellow in a
Balacrean tech's uniform. His eyes widened as he saw the blood in the air. The
look he gave Anne was satisfyingly-and inexplicably-full of fear. "Al and I can
do only so much. We should have waited till we get Bil back.. . .Look, maybe it's
just temporary memory loss."
The older fellow flared into anger, but he seemed afraid, too. "I wanted a

deFocus, not a god-damned mindscrub!"
The little man, Trud. . .Trud Silipan,retreated. "Don't worry. I'm sure she'll
come around. We didn't touch the memory structures, I swear." He shot another
fearful glance her way. "Maybe. . .I don't know, maybe the deFocus worked fine
and we're seeing some kind of autorepression." He came a little closer, still
beyond her hands and teeth, and gave her a sickly smile. "Boss? You remember
me, Trud Silipan? We've worked together for years of Watch time, and before
that back on Balacrea, under Alan Nau. Don't you remember?"
Anne stared at the round face, the weak smile. Alan Nau. Tomas Nau. Oh. .
.dear. . .God.She had wakened to a nightmare that had never ended. The torture
pits, and then the Focus, and then a lifetime ofbeing the enemy.
Silipan's face had blurred, but his voice was suddenly cheerful. "See, Pham!
She's crying. She does remember!"
Yes. Everything.
But now Pham Nuwen's voice sounded even angrier. "Get out, Trud. Just
get out." "It's easy to verify. We can-"
"Get out!"
She didn't hear Silipan after that. The world had collapsed into pain,
sobbing grief that took away her breath and senses.
She felt an arm across her shoulders, and this time she knew it wasn't the
touch of a torturer.Who am I? That had been the easy question. The real
question,What am I?, had eluded her a few seconds more, but now the memories
were flooding in, the monstrous evil she had been since that day in the
mountains above Arnham.
She shuddered from Pham's arm, only to encounter the straps that held her
down.
"Sorry," he muttered, and she heard the shackles fall away. And now it
didn't matter. She curled up into a ball, barely aware of his comfort. He was
talking to her, simple things, repeated over and over in different ways. "It's all
right now, Anne. Tomas Nau is dead. He's been dead for four days. You're free.
We're all free. . . ."
After a while, he was quiet, only the touch of his arm on her shoulders
announcing his presence. Her tearing sobs wound down. There was no terror
now. The worst had happened, over and over, and what was left was dead and
empty.
Time passed.
She felt her body slowly relax, unbend. She forced open her tight-shut eyes,
forced herself to turn and face Pham. Her facehurt with the crying, and how she
wished she could be hurt a million times more. "You. . .damn you for bringing

me back. Let me die now."
Pham looked back at her quietly, his eyes wide and attentive. Gone was the
bluster she had always guessed was a fake. In its place, intelligence. . .awe? No,
that couldn't be. He reached down beside her and laid the white andelirs back in
her lap. The damn things were warm, furry. Beautiful. He seemed to consider
her demand, but then he shook his head. "You can't go yet, Anne. There are
more than two thousand Focused persons left here. You can free them, Anne."
He gestured to the Focusing gear behind her head. "I got the feeling that Al Hom
was playing roulette when he worked on you."
I can free them.The thought was the first lightness in all the years since that
morning in the mountains. It must have leaked out into her expression, because a
hopeful smile appeared on Pham's lips. Anne felt her eyes narrow down. She
knew as much about Focus as any Balacrean. She knew all the tricks of
reFocusing, of redirecting loyalty. "Pham Trinli-Pham Whoever-You-Really-
Are-I've watched you for many years. Almost from the beginning, I thought you
were working against Tomas. But I could also see how much you loved the idea
of Focus. You lusted after that power, didn't you?"
The smile left his face. He nodded slowly. "I saw. . .I saw it could give me
what I had spent a lifetime fighting for. And in the end, I saw the price was too
high." He shrugged, and looked down, as if ashamed.
Anne stared into that face, thinking. Once upon a time, not even Tomas Nau
could deceive her. When Anne was Focused, the edges of her mind had been
sharp as razors, unencumbered by distraction and wishful thinking-and knowing
Tomas's true intent was no more use to her than a hatchet knowing it is for
murdering. Now, she wasn't sure. This man could be lying, but what he asked of
her was what she yearned to do more than anything else in the world. And then,
having paid back as best she could, then she could die. She returned his shrug
with one of her own. "Tomas Nau lied to you about deFocus."
"He lied about many things."
"I can do better than Trud Silipan and Bil Phuong, but still there will be
failures." The greatest horror of all: There would be some who would damn her
for bringing them back.
Pham reached across the flowers and took her hand. "Okay. But you will do
your best."
She looked down at his hand. Blood still oozed from the gash she had
opened on the side of his palm. Somehow the man was lying, but if he let her
deFocus the others. . .Play along."You're running things now?"
Pham chuckled. "I have some say. Certain Spiders have a bigger say. It's
complicated, and it's still in chaos. Four hundred Ksec ago, Tomas Nau was still

running things." His smile widened with enthusiasm. "But a hundred Msec from
now, two hundred Msec, I think you are going to see a renaissance. We'll have
our ships repaired. Hell, we may have new ones. I've never seen an opportunity
like this."
Just play along."And what do you want of me?"How long till I
amreFocused as your tool?
"I-I just want you to be free, Anne." He looked away. "I know what you
were before, Anne. I've seen the story of what you did on Frenk, your final
capture. You remind me of someone I knew when I was a child. She also stood
up against impossible odds, and she also was crushed." His face half-turned back
to her. "There were times I've feared you more than Tomas Nau. But ever since
I've known you were the Frenkisch Orc, I've prayed you could have another
day."
He was such a very good liar. Too bad for him that his lie was so bald-
faced, so pandering. She felt an overwhelming urge to push it over the edge: "So
in a few years we'll have functioning starships again?"
"Yes, and probably better-equipped than we came with. You know the
physics we've discovered here. And it looks like there are other things-"
"And you will control those ships?"
"Several of them." He was still nodding, blundering his deception forward.
"And you just want to help. Me, the Frenkisch Orc. Well, sir, you are
uniquely qualified. Lend me those ships. Come with me to Balacrea and Frenk
and Gaspr. Help me freeall the Focused."
It was amusing to see Pham's smile freeze as he boggled on her words.
"You want to take down a starfaring empire, an empire with Focus, with just a
handful of ships? That's . . ." Words for such insanity failed to come, and he just
stared at her for a moment. Then, amazingly, his smile was back. "That's
marvelous! Anne, give me time to prepare, time to make alliances here. Give me
a dozen of your years. We may not win. But I swear, we'll make the attempt."
Whatever she asked he simply agreed to. It had to be a lie. Yet if true, it
was the only promise that could make her want to live. She stared into Pham's
eyes, trying to see behind the lie. Maybe the inevitable destruction of deFocus
had taken her sharpness, for however deeply she looked, she only saw awed
enthusiasm.He's a genius. And lie or truth, now he has mefor twelve years. For
just a moment she relaxed into belief. For just a moment she fantasized that this
man was not a liar.The Frenkisch Orc might yetfree them all. The strangest thrill
flowed out from her heart, tingling through her body. It took her a moment to
recognize something that had been lost to her for so very long: joy.

SIXTY-THREE
Pham sent Ezr Vinh groundside to negotiate.
"Why me, Pham?" This was the most extraordinary trade situation in the
history of Humankind. It was also a war waiting to happen. "You should-"
Nuwen held up his hand, interrupting. "There are reasons for sending you.
You know the Spiders better than any of our other unFocused people, certainly
better than me."
"I could be staff. I could help you."
"No, I'll be onyour staff." He paused, and Ezr saw a glint of worry. "You're
right, son, this is tricky. In the short run they hold the whip hand, and they have
plenty of reason to hate us. We think the Lighthill faction still has the ear of the
King, but-"
There were other factions in the Accord regime. Some of them thought
Focused translators were a negotiable commodity.
"That's why it's even more important you go, Pham."
"It's not our choice. You see, they've asked for you specifically." "What?"
"Yeah. I guess over the years, working with Trixia, they think they've got
you figured out." He grinned. "They want to see you close up."
That almost made sense. "Okay." He thought a moment. "But they're not
getting Trixia. I go down with some other translator." He glared at Pham. "She's
the star; Underville's crew would love to get their hands on her."
"Hm. Maybe someone down there is thinking the same way. The King
asked for Zinmin to accompany you." He noticed the expression on Ezr's face.
"There's more?"
"I-yes. I want Trixia deFocused. Soon."
"Of course. I've given you my word. I've given Anne the same promise."
Ezr stared at him for a moment.And you've changed inside; given upthat
dream. After all that had happened, Ezr didn't doubt. But suddenly he couldn't
wait anymore. "Move her to the front of the queue, Pham. I don't care that you
need her translations. Move her up. I want her deFocused by the time I get
back."
Pham raised an eyebrow. "An ultimatum?" "No. Yes!"
The older man sighed. "You got it. We'll start on Trixia immediately. I-I
confess. We've been holding back on the translators. We need them so much."
He pursed his lips. "Don't expect perfection, Ezr. This is just another place
where Nau lied to us. Some of the deFocused are almost as sharp as Anne.

Some-"
"Iknow. " Some came back vegetables, the mindrot in an explosive
runaway, triggered by the deFocus process. "But sooner or later we have to try.
Sooner or later you have to give up using them." He bounced up and left Pham's
office. More talk would have just torn them both.
The transport to Arachna was a humble thing, Jau Xin's pinnace with ad hoc
software revised specially by Qiwi. Humankind had the high ground and the
remnants of high technology-and precious little in the way of physical resources
or automation. As their zipheads were deFocused, the Emergent software
became useless junk-and it would be some time before the Qeng Ho automation
could be adapted to the hybrid jumble that remained at L1. They were trapped in
a nearly empty solar system, with the only industrial ecology down on Arachna.
They might drop a few rocks on the planet, or even a few nukes, but Humankind
was nearly toothless. The Spiders were powerless, too, but that would change.
They knew about the invaders now, and they knew what could be done with
technology. They had large parts of theInvisible Hand intact. Sometime soon, the
Spiders would be out here in force. Pham thought they had maybe a year to turn
things around, to establish some basis of trust. Qiwi said that ifshe were a
Spider, she could do it in far less than a year.
The temp's axial corridor was filled from end to end when Ezr and Zinmin
entered the taxi lock. Almost every unFocused human at L1 was here.
Pham and Anne were there. They floated close, a pair that Ezr Vinh would
never have guessed in years past. "We've started the deFocus prep," Anne said.
She didn't have to say who she was talking about. "We'll do our best, Ezr."
Qiwi wished him luck, as solemn as he had ever seen her. She seemed
uncertain for a moment, then abruptly shook his hand, another thing she had
never done before. "Come back safe, Ezr."
Somehow Rita Liao had put herself right before the hatch, blocking his
way. Ezr reached out to comfort her. "I'll bring Jau back, Rita."I'll do mybest was
what he thought, not having the courage to show his doubts.
Rita's eyes were bloodshot. She looked even more distracted than when
they had talked a few Ksecs before. "I know, Ezr. I know. The Spiders are good
people. They'll know Jau didn't want to harm them." She had spent much of her
lifetime enamored with the life on Arachna, but her faith in the translations
seemed to be slipping away. "But, but if they won't let you have him. . .Please.
Give him . . ." She pushed a clear little box into his hand. It had a thumb lock,
presumably keyed to Jau Xin. He saw a 'membrance gem inside. She broke off
and melted back into the crowd.

SIXTY-FOUR
It was 200Ksec to Lands Command. On the ground, the Spiders drove them
up that long valley road.
Eerie memories floated through Ezr's mind. Many of the buildings here
were new, butI was here before it all began. It had been so unknowable then.
Now there was the superficial gloss of information on everything. Zinmin Broute
bounced from window to window and boggled with enthusiasm, naming
everything he saw. They passed the library he had raided with Benny Wen. The
Museum of the Dark Time. And the statues at the head of King's Way, that was
Gokna's Reaching for Accord. Zinmin could tell you about every one of the
twisted figures.
But today they were not lurkers stealing through someone else's sleep.
Today the lights were very bright, and when they finally moved underground, it
was as stark and alien as Ritser Brughel's Spiderish nightmares. The stairs were
steep as ladders, and ordinary rooms were so low-ceilinged that Ezr and Zinmin
had to crouch to move from place to place. Despite ancient drugs and millennia
of gengineering, the full pull of planetary gravity was a constant, debilitating
distraction. They were housed in what Zinmin claimed were royalty-class
apartments, rooms with hairy floors and ceilings high enough to stand in. The
negotiations began the next day.
• • •
The Spiders they had known in the translations were mostly absent. Belga
Underville, Elno
Coldhaven-those were names that Ezr recognized, but they had always been
at a distance. They had not been part of Sherkaner Underhill's counterlurk. They
must be consulting Victory Lighthill, though. As often as not during the
negotiations, Underville would withdraw and there would be hissing
conversations with persons unseen.
After the first couple of days, Ezr realized that some of those persons
werevery far away: Trixia. Back in their rooms, Ezr called L1. Of course, the
link went through Spider control. Ezr didn't care. "You told me that Trixia was
in deFocus."
The pause seemed much longer than ten seconds. Suddenly Ezr couldn't
wait for the excuses and the evasions. "Listen, damn you! The promise was that
h
ld b i d F
S
l t
h
t
t
i
h !"

she would be in deFocus. Sooner or later you have to stop using her!"
Then Pham's voice came back. "I know, Ezr. The problem is, the Spiders
have insisted that she be available, still Focused. It's a dealbreaker if we refuse. .
.and Trixia refuses to cooperate with us in deFocus. We'd have to force it on
her."
"I don't care. I don't care! They don't own her any more than Tomas Nau."
He choked on the fear, and almost started bawling. Across the room, Zinmin
Broute looked as happy as any ziphead Ezr had ever seen. He was sitting cross-
legged on the hairy carpet, paging through some kind of Spider picture
book.We're using him, too. We have to, just for a short while more.
"Ezr, it's only for a short time. This is breaking Anne up, too, but it's the
only sure insight the Spiders have on us. They almost trust the Focused.
Everything we say, every assertion, they are talking over with the zips. We don't
have a chance of getting theHand people back without that trust. We don't have a
chance of undoing Nau's work without that."
Rita and Jau. The thumb-locked box sat at the top of Ezr's kit. Strange. The
Spiders had not insisted on getting into it or his other things. Ezr crumpled.
"Okay. But, after this meeting, no oneowns anyone. The deal dies-I kill the deal-
otherwise." He cut the connection before any answer could come back. After all,
it didn't matter what the other replied.
Almost every day, they took the tortuous climb down to the same ghastly
conference room. Zinmin claimed that this was the chief of Intelligence's private
office, a "bright and open-storied room, with nooks and isolated perches." Well,
there were nooks, dark fluting chimneys with hidden lairs at the top. And the
video along the walls was a constant nonsense. He and Zinmin had to cross cold
stone to sit on piled furs. Four or five Spiders were usually present, and almost
always Underville or Coldhaven.
But the negotiations were actually going well. With the Focused to back up
his story, the Spiders seemed to believe what Ezr had to say. They seemed to
understand how good things could become with only a little cooperation.
Certainly, the Spiders could have a presence at the rockpile. Technology would
be transferred downward without restriction, in return for human access to the
ground. In time, the rockpile and the temps would be moved into high Arachna
orbit and there would be joint construction of a shipyard.
Sitting with the Spiders for Ksecs each day was a wearing experience. The
human mind was not designed to warm to such creatures. They seemed not to
have eyes, just the crystal carapaces that saw better than any human vision. You
could never tell what they were looking at. Their eating hands were in constant
motion, with meanings that Ezr was only beginning to understand. And when

they gestured with their principal arms, the movement was abrupt and
aggressive, like a creature on the attack. The air had a bitter, stale smell, which
was strongest when extra spiders crowded around.And next time, we bring our
own toilets. Ezr was getting bowlegged trying to accommodate himself to the
local facilities.
Zinmin did most of the interactive translations. But Trixia and the others
were there, and sometimes when the greatest precision was desired, it was her
voice that would speak Underville's or Coldhaven's words: Underville the
implacable cop, Coldhaven the sleek young general officer. Trixia's voice,
others' souls.
At night, there were dreams, often more unpleasant than the reality he faced
in the day. The worst were the ones he could understand. Trixia appeared to him,
her voice and thoughts slipping back and forth between the young woman he
once knew and the alien minds that owned her now. Sometimes her face would
morph into a glassy carapace as she spoke, and when he asked about the change
she would say he was imagining things. It was a Trixia who would remain
forever Focused, ensorcelled, lost. Qiwi was in many of the dreams, sometimes
the bratling, sometimes as she had been when she killed Tomas Nau. They
would talk, and often she would give him advice. In the dreams it always made
sense-and when he woke he could never remember the details.
One by one, the issues were resolved. They had gone from genocide to
commerce in less than one million seconds. From L1, Pham Nuwen's voice was
filled with pleasure at the progress. "These guys negotiate like Traders, not
governments."
"We're giving up plenty, Pham. Since when have Customers had a site
presence like we'll be giving the Spiders?"
The usual long pause. But Pham's tone was still bright: "Even that may
work out, son. I'll wager some of these Spiders may eventually want to be
partners." Qeng Ho.
". . .One other thing," Pham continued. "Get through the POW
negotiations"-the single remaining agenda item-"and we'll be able to take Trixia
off the case. Lighthill got that as a promise from the Underville faction."
The last day of negotiation started like the others. Zinmin and Ezr were
guided down a-"spiral staircase" was what Zinmin called it. In human terms, it
was a vertical shaft cut straight downward through the rock. An endless draft of
warm air swept up past them. The shaft was almost two meters across, the walls
set with five-centimeter ledges. Their guards had no trouble; they could reach
from one side of the shaft to the other, supporting themselves on all sides. As
they descended, the Spiders slowly turned round and round with the spiral.

Every ten meters or so, there was an offset, a "landing" for them to catch their
breath. Ezr was both grateful for and uneasy about the harness/leash outfit the
guards insisted he wear.
"These stairs are really just to intimidate us, aren't they, Zinmin?" He'd
asked the question on earlier climbs, but Zinmin Broute had not deigned to
answer.
The Focused translator was even more unsteady than Ezr on the narrow
ledges, especially since he tried to imitate the splayed stance that made sense
only for Spiders. Today he responded to the question. "Yes.. . .No. This is the
main staircase down to the Royal Deepness. Very old. Traditional. An honor-"
He slipped, swung out over the chasm, for a moment suspended by his rope and
harness from the guard above them. Ezr hugged the damp wall, was almost
knocked loose himself as Broute regained his footing.
They reached the final landing. The ceiling was low even by Spider
standards, just over a meter high.
Surrounded by their guards, they stooped and hobbled toward wide, wide
doors. Beyond, the lighting was faint and blue. The Spiders could see across
such a wide range. You'd think their preferred lighting would be sun-spectrum
broad. But as often as not they went in for faint glimmers-or lights beyond where
a human could see.
There was a familiar hiss from the dimness ahead of them.
"Come in. Sit down," Zinmin Broute said, but the thought was from the
Spider within the room. Ezr and Zinmin crossed the stone flags to their
"perches." He could see the other now, a large female on a slightly higher perch.
Her smell was strong in the closed air. "General Underville," Ezr said politely.
• • •
The POW issue should have been simple compared with the problems
already solved. But he noticed that this time they were alone with Underville.
There were no comm links to the outside here; at least none were offered. They
were alone, almost in the dark, and Zinmin Broute's phrasing drifted into
threatening turns of phrase. Frightening. . .yet somewhere out of the depths of
Ezr Vinh's Trader childhood, insights drifted up. This was deliberately
intimidating. Underville had promised Lighthill that the translators would be
freeafter the POW negotiations were complete. She had been beaten down on so
many things; this was her last stab at saving face.
He opened his pack and put on a pair of huds. According to the Spiders, all
the humans aboard theHand had survived its forced landing. The starship's

wreckage was strewn across twenty thousand meters of ocean ice, the occupied
crew decks virtually the only intact pieces of the vehicle. That anyone had
survived was a miracle of Pham's advice to the ziphead pilots. Once on the
ground, however, there had been numerous fatalities. Against all sanity, Brughel
and his goons started a firefight with the arriving Spider troops. The goons had
all died. With the agility of a true Podmaster, Brughel had abandoned them at the
last moment, and attempted to hide among the surviving crew. The Spiders
claimed there had been no fatalities after that initial shootout.
"The zipheads you can have back," said Underville via Zinmin. "We know
that they are not responsible, and some of them made our victory possible."
Zinmin's tone was irritable. "The rest are criminals. They killed hundreds. They
attempted to kill millions."
"No, only a small minority were in on that. The rest resisted-or were simply
lied to about the operation."
Ezr went down the crew list, explaining the roles of the different members.
There had been twenty poor souls in coldsleep, Ritser's special toys. Clearly,they
were victims, but Underville didn't want to give up the equipment. One by one,
Ezr got Underville's permission for release, contingent on access to specialists
who could explain the ruins that her agency now owned. Finally, they were
down to the toughest cases. "Jau Xin. Pilot Manager."
"Jau Xin, the trigger man!" said the general. Ezr had pumped up the
amplification in his huds. His view was not as dim as before. All through the
conversation, Underville had sat very still, the only movement being the
ceaseless play of her feeding hands. It was a posture that Zinmin represented as
face-forward alertness. "Jau Xin was charged with initiating the actual attacks."
"General, we've looked at the records. Your interviews with Jau's Focused
pilots are probably even more complete. It's clear to us that Jau Xin sabotaged
much of the Emergent attack. I know Jau, ma'am. I know his wife. Both wish
your people well." The ziphead analysts, Trixia among them, thought that such
family references might mean something. Maybe. But Belga Underville might be
much more the classical "national interest" type.
Zinmin Broute tapped away on his tiny console, putting Ezr's words into an
intermediate language and then guiding the audio output. Ghostly hissing came
from Broute's soundbox, Ezr's thoughts as a Spider might speak them.
Underville was silent for a moment, then gave forth a shrill squeak. Ezr
knew that counted as a disdainful snort.
But this interview could ultimately be shown to other Spiders.I'm notletting
you off the hook, Underville. Ezr reached into his pack and held up Rita's tiny
box.

"And what is that?" said Underville. There was no hint of curiosity in
Broute-as-Underville's voice. "A gift to Jau Xin from his wife. A remembrance,
in case you still refuse to free him."
Underville was sitting almost two meters away, but even now Ezr didn't
realize just how far a Spider's forearms could reach. Four spearlike black arms
flashed out at him, plucking the box from his grasp. Undervile's arms flickered
back, held the box close to first one part and then another of her glassy carapace.
Her stiletto hands made little scritching noises as she pried at box's top and
thumb lock.
"It's keyed to Jau Xin. If you force it open, the contents will be destroyed."
"So be it then." But the Spider stopped pressing the pointed tips of her
limbs into the box. She held it a moment more, then gave a screeching hiss, and
flung it back at Ezr's chest.
The ugly screeching continued as Zinmin Broute began translating. "Damn
your cobblie eyes!" Broute's voice was tight and angry. "Take back this gift for a
murderer. Take back Xin and the other staff."
"Thank you, General. Thank you." Ezr scrambled to recover Rita's gift.
The Spider's voice tumbled into silence, then resumed more quietly,
sounding somehow like drops of water spatting off hot metal. "And I suppose
you think to rescue Ritser Brughel also?"
"Not to rescue him, ma'am. Over the years, Ritser Brughel has probably
killed more of our people than ever he did of yours. He has much to answer for."
"Indeed. But there is no way we will give that one up to you." Now Broute's
voice was smug, and Ezr guessed this was one point where there were no
divisions on the Spider side.
And maybe that was for the best. Ezr shrugged. "Very well. It is for you to
punish him."
The Spider had become very still, even unto her eating hands. "Punish?
You misunderstand. This silly negotiation has left us with only a single
functioning human. Any punishment will necessarily be incidental. We're
learning much from dissecting the human corpses, but we desperately need a
living experimental subject. What are your physical limitations? How do you
creatures respond to extremes of pain and fear? We want to test with stimuli we
don't see in your databases. I intend that Ritser Brughel live a long, long time."
Ritser Brughel is about as weird a human type as you can find.But
somehow that might not be the wisest thing to say here and now. Instead, Ezr
simply nodded. And for the first time he saw how Ritser might find a fate to
match his crimes. The Podmaster's nightmare of Spiders would be the rest of his
life.

SIXTY-FIVE
Ezr Vinh returned a hero to L1. It was possible that no owner or fleet
partner had every been greeted with the enthusiasm he saw at the rockpile. He
brought with him the first of the released prisoners, including Jau Xin. He also
brought with him the first of their new partners: The first Spiders to fly in space.
Ezr scarcely noticed. He smiled, he talked, and when he saw Rita and Jau
together he felt a distant pleasure.
Last out of the pinnace was Floria Peres. She had been one of the coldsleep
victims in Ritser's hidden cache, saved up unused until the very end. Even after
200Ksec, the woman had a terrible, lost look about her. As Ezr guided her out
into the open, a silence came upon the crowd in the corridor. Qiwi glided
forward. She had asked to help the victims, but when she came to a stop just
short of Floria, Qiwi's eyes got very wide and her lips trembled. The two stared
at each other for a moment. Then Qiwi offered Floria her hand, and the crowd
opened behind them.
Ezr watched them depart, but his mind's eye was elsewhere: Anne Reynolt
had begun Trixia's deFocus a Ksec after he left Arachna. During the 200Ksec of
transit back to the rockpile, Pham had reported regularly on her progress. This
time there was no backing out. Trixia was beyond the prep stage. First, the
mindrot had been rendered quiescent, and then Trixia had been put into an
artificial coma. From there, the rot's pattern of drug release was slowly altered.
"Anne has done this hundreds of times now, Ezr," said Pham. "She says this is
going well. She should be out of the clinic just a few Ksecs after you get back
here."
No more delays. Trixia would finally be free.
Two days later, the word came.Trixia is ready.
Ezr visited Qiwi before he went to the deFocus clinic. Qiwi was working
with her father, remaking the lake park. Most of the trees had died, but Ali Lin
thought he could bring them back. Even deFocused, Ali had wonderful ideas for
the park. But now the man could love his daughter, too.Trixiawill be like this, as
free as before the nightmare.
Qiwi was talking to the Spiders when Ezr came down the path through the
ruined forest. Kittens circled high above them, curiosity battling with
arachnophobia.
"We want to do something new with the lake, some kind of free form, with
its own special ecology." The Spiders stood a little taller than Qiwi. In

microgravity, they were no longer low, wide creatures. The natural tension in
their limbs produced a Spider version of zero-gee crouch; their arms and legs
extended long beneath them, making them tall and slender. The smallest one-
probably Rhapsa Lighthill-was talking now. The hissing voice was almost
musical compared to Belga Underville's voice.
"We'll watch, but I doubt if many will want to live here. We want to
experiment with our own temps." Broute Zinmin was translating, his tone happy
and conversational. As of now, he might be the last of the Focused translators.
Qiwi grinned at the Spider. "Yeah, I'm so curious about what you'll finally
do. I-" She looked up, saw Ezr.
"Qiwi, can I talk to you?"
She was already moving toward him. "A moment, Rhapsa, please?"
"Sure." The Spiders tiptoed away, Zinmin continuing to spout questions at
Ali Lin.
Ezr and Qiwi faced each other across thirty centimeters. "Qiwi. They
deFocused Trixia about two thousand seconds ago."
The girl smiled, a bright gesture. There was still a childlike intensity about
her. Somehow through it all, Qiwi had remained an open human being. And now
she was at the center of their dealings with the Spiders, the engineer they sought
over all others. Now he could truly see how bright her wits extended, from
dynamics to bioscience to very sharp trading. Qiwi was very much like the spirit
of the Qeng Ho.
"Is-is she going to be okay?" Qiwi's eyes were large, and her hands were
tightly clasped in front of her. "Yes! A little disorientation, Anne says, but her
mind and personality are intact, and. . .and I can go see her later today."
"Oh, Ezr! I'm so happy for her." Qiwi's hands let go of each other, and
reached out to his shoulders. Suddenly her face was very close and lips brushed
across his cheek.
"I wanted to see you before I talked to her-"
"Yes?"
"I-I just wanted to thank you for saving my life, for saving us all."Iwant to
thank you for giving me back my soul. "If Trixia and I can ever do anything to
help you . . ."
And she was back at arm's length, and her smile seemed a little odd.
"You're welcome, Ezr. But. . .no thanks needed. I'm glad you have a happy
ending."
Ezr let go, and was already turning toward the guide ropes Ali had installed
for his reconstruction work. "It's more a happy beginning, Qiwi. All these years
have been dead time, and now finally. . .Hey, I'll talk to you later!" He waved
f f
f

and pulled himself faster and faster, back toward the cavern's entrance.
Reynolt had converted the Attic grouproom into a recovery ward. Where
zipheads had spent Watch after Watch Focused in Podmaster service, now they
were being freed.
Anne stopped him in the corridor just outside the grouproom. "Before you
go in, keep in mind-" Vinh was already edging around her. He stopped. "You
said she was coming out okay."
"Yes. Total affect is normal. General cognition is as good as before; she has
even retained her specialized knowledge. We're doing almost three thousand
deFocus operations, more manumissions than any team in Emergent history.
We're getting very good." She frowned, but it was not the impatient gesture of
her old Focus. This was a frown of pain. "I-I wish we could redo the first ones. I
think I could do better now."
Ezr could see the pain, and he felt shame for his sudden joy:So thedelay has
been for the best. Trixia had had the benefit of all the earlier experience. Maybe
she would have been okay anyway. After all, Reynolt had come through all
right. But either way, things had worked out. And just beyond Reynolt, down the
cool green corridor, was Trixia Bonsol, the princess now finally wakened. He
slipped past Reynolt, flew down through the blueness.
Behind him Anne called, "But, Ezr. . .Look, Pham wants to talk to you
when you get done."
"Okay. Okay." But he wasn't really listening now. And then he was into the
grouproom. Part of it was still open, and ten or fifteen of the chairs were even
occupied, people sitting in little circles, talking.
Heads turned in his direction, eyes filled with curiosity that would have
been impossible before. Some of the faces were fearful. Many had the sad, lost
look of Hunte Wen after he was deFocused. The Emergents among them had no
one to go back to. They woke to freedom, but a lifetime and light-years from
everything they had known.
Ezr smiled embarrassment and slipped past them.Things have turnedout
right for Trixia and me, but these lost ones must be helped.
The far side of the room had been partitioned into cubicles. Ezr flitted past
the opened doors, stopped at the closed ones just long enough to read the patient
labels. And finally. . .TRIXIA BONSOL.His headlong rush suddenly ended, and
he realized he was wearing work clothes and his hair floated all spiky. Like
some ziphead, he had ignored everything except his focus.
He brushed his hair down as best he could. . .and tapped on the light plastic
of the privacy hatch. "Come in."
. . ."Hi, Trixia."
Sh fl
t d i
h
k
t
h diff
t f
di
b d

She floated in a hammock not much different from an ordinary bed.
Medical instrumentation was a fine haze around her head. It didn't matter, Ezr
had been expecting it. Anne had begun instrumenting the patients, using the data
to guide the deFocusing, and afterward to monitor for stroke and infection.
It made it hard to hug someone as thoroughly as Ezr Vinh wanted. He
floated near, looking into Trixia's face, lost in it. Trixia looked back-not around
him, not impatient that he was blocking her data-but directly into his eyes. A
faint, tremulous smile hovered on her lips.
"Ezr."
And then she was in his arms, her hands reaching up to him. Her lips were
soft and warm. He held her for a moment, gently encircling her within her
hammock. Then he backed his head away, angling carefully around the medical
gear. "So many times I thought we'd never make it back. Do you remember all
the times"-years of life time, literally-"that I sat with you in your damn little
cell?"
"Yes. You suffered far more than I. For me, it was a kind of dream, and
time was a slippery thing.
Everything outside of Focus was a blur. I could hear your words but they
never seemed to matter." Her hand came up to the side of his neck, gently
stroking, a gesture from their real time together.
Ezr smiled.We're talking. Really. Finally. "And now you're back, and we
can live again. I have so many plans. I've had years to think on them, what we
might do if Nau could be destroyed and you could be saved. After all the death,
the mission is turning out to be a greater treasure than we ever imagined." Great
risks, great treasure. But the risks had been taken, the sacrifices made, and now-
"With our share of the mission bounty we. . .we can do anything. We could set
up our own Great Family!" Vinh.23.7, VinhBonsol, Bonsol.1, it didn't matter; it
would be theirs.
Trixia was still smiling, but there was the beginning of tears in her eyes.
She shook her head. "Ezr, I don't-"
Vinh rushed on. "Trixia, I know what you're going to say. If you don't want
a Family-that's okay too." In the years under Tomas Nau, there had been plenty
of time to think things through, to see what sacrifices were really not sacrifices
at all. He took a deep breath and said, "Trixia, even if you want to go back to
Triland. . .I'm willing to go there, to leave the Qeng Ho." The Family wouldn't
like it; he was no longer a junior heir. This expedition would make the Vinh.23
Family fabulously richer, but. . .he knew that Ezr Vinh had scarcely been
responsible for that. "You can be whatever you want, and we can still be
together."
He leaned closer but this time she pushed him gently back "No Ezr that's

He leaned closer, but this time she pushed him gently back. No, Ezr, that s
not it. You and I, we're years older. I-it's been a long, long time since we were
together."
Ezr's voice came out high-pitched. "It's been years for me! But for you?
You said Focus is like a dream, where time didn't matter."
"Not exactly. For some things, for the things at the center of my Focus, I
probably remember the time better than you."
"But-" She raised her hand, and he was silent.
"I had it easier than you. I was Focused, and something more, though I
never consciously realized it and-thank goodness-neither did Brughel or Tomas
Nau. I had a world to escape to, a world that I could build out of my
translations."
Despite himself: "I wondered. There was so much that seemed to be Dawn
Age fantasy. So. . .that was fiction, not the real Spiders?"
"No. It was as close as we could come to the Spider viewpoint in a human
mind. And if you read carefully, you get hints of where it can't be literally true.. .
.I think you guessed, Ezr. Arachna was my escape. As a translator, everything
about being a Spider was within my Focus. Knowing what it was to be a free
Spider consumed us. And when dear Sherkaner understood, even at the
beginning when he thought we were machines, it was suddenly a world that
accepted us, too."
That was what had undone Nau, and saved them all, but-"But now you are
back, Trixia. This isn't the nightmare anymore. We can be together, better than
we ever thought!"
She was shaking her head again. "Don't you see, Ezr? We both have
changed, and I have changed even more than you, even though I was-" She
thought a second. "-even though I spent the years 'ensorcelled.' See? I do
remember what you used to say to me. But Ezr, it's not the same anymore. I and
the Spiders, we have a future-"
He tried to keep his voice in an even, persuasive tone, but what came out
sounded half-panicked even to his own ears.Dear Lord of Trade, I can'tlose her
now! "I know. You're still identifying with the Spiders. We're the aliens to you."
She touched his shoulder. "A little. During the first stages of the deFocus, it
was like wakinginto a nightmare. I know how humans look to Arachnans. Pale,
soft, grublike. There are pests and food animals like that. But we aren't as
gruesome to them as the reverse." She looked up at him and her smile was
momentarily wider. "The way you have to turn your head to see is endearing.
You don't realize it, but any Arachnan with paternal fur on his back, and most
females too, are enthralled when they talk to you close up."
Like the dreams he had had groundside In Trixia's mind she was still part

Like the dreams he had had groundside. In Trixia s mind, she was still part
Spider. "Trixia, look. I'll come and see you every day. Things will change. You'll
get over this."
"Oh, Ezr, Ezr." Her tears floated into the air between them, but she was
crying for him and not for herself or for the two of them. "Thisis what I want to
be, a translator, a bridge between you all and my new Family."
A bridge.She's not out of Focus. Somehow Pham and Anne had frozen her
partway between Focus and freedom. The realization was like a fist in the belly.
. .nausea, followed by rage.
He caught Anne in her new office. "Finish the job, Anne! The mindrot is
still running Trixia."
Reynolt's face seemed even paler than usual. He suddenly guessed that
she'd been waiting for him. "You know there's no way we can destroy the virus,
Ezr. Tune them down, make them dormant, yes, but . . ." Her voice was
tentative, utterly unlike the Anne Reynolt of times past.
"You know what I mean, Anne.She's still in Focus. She's still fixed on the
Spiders, on her Focused mission."
Anne was silent. She knew.
"Bring her all the way back, Anne."
Reynolt's mouth twisted, as if stifling physical pain. "The structures are so
deep. She'd lose knowledge she's gained, probably her born language talent.
She'd be like Hunte Wen."
"But she would befree ! She could learn new things, just like Hunte has."
"I-I understand. Till yesterday, I thought we could bring it off. We were
down to triggering the last restructuring-but Ezr, Trixia doesn't want us to take it
any further!"
That was just too much, and suddenly Ezr was shouting. "By damn, what
do you expect? She's Focused!" He brought his voice down, but the words had
the intensity of deadly threat. "I know. You and Pham still need slaves,
especially ones like Trixia. You never meant to free her."
Reynolt's eyes grew wide and her features flushed bright red. It was
something he had never seen in her, though Ritser Brughel had always turned
that shade when he climbed into a towering rage. Her mouth opened and shut but
no words came out.
There was a solidthump on the office wall, someone arriving in a hell of a
hurry. An instant later, Pham came through the door. "Anne, please. Let me
handle this." His voice was gentle. After a moment, Anne sucked in a breath.
She nodded, seemed to be coughing. She came over her desk without saying
anything, but Ezr noticed how fiercely she grasped Pham's hand.
Pham shut the door quietly behind her. When he turned back to Ezr, his

Pham shut the door quietly behind her. When he turned back to Ezr, his
expression was not gentle. He jerked a finger at the seat in front of Reynolt's
desk. "Tie down, mister."
There was something about his voice that froze Ezr's rage, and forced him
to sit down.
Pham settled himself by the other side of the desk. For a moment, he just
stared at the younger man. It was strange. Pham Nuwen had always had a
presence, but suddenly it felt like before this, he had never really turned it on.
Finally, Pham said, "A couple of years ago you gave me some straight talk. You
forced me to see that I was wrong and that I must change."
Ezr stared back coldly. "Looks like I failed."You're in the slave
businessanyway.
"You're wrong, son. You succeeded. Not many people have turned me
around. Even Sura couldn't do it." A strange sadness seemed to flicker across
him, and he was silent for a moment. Then, "You've done Anne a great
disservice, Ezr. I think someday you'll want to apologize to her for it."
"Not likely! You two have things so neatly rationalized. DeFocusing is just
too expensive for you."
"Um. You're right, it's expensive. It's been a near calamity. Under the
Emergent system, the zipheads were supporting virtually all of our automation,
their work mixed seamlessly with the real machines'. Worse, all the maintenance
programming in the fleet has been done by Focused persons; we're left with
millions of lines of incoherent junk. It will be some time before we have our old
systems working well.. .
.But you know that Anne is the Frenkisch Orc, the 'monster' in all the
diamond friezes."
"Y-yes."
"Then you know that she would die to give the Focused freedom. It was her
one nonnegotiable demand of me when she came back from Focus. It is her life's
meaning." He stopped, looked away from Ezr. "You know the most evil thing
about Focus? It's not that it's effective slavery, though Lord knows that puts it
worse than most any other villainy. No, the greatest evil is that the rescuers
become a type of killer themselves, and the original victims are mutilated a
second time. Even Anne didn't fully understand that, now it's tearing her apart."
"So because they want to be slaves, we leave them that way?"
"No! But a Focused person is a still a human being, not too different from
certain rare types that have always existed. If they can live on their own, if they
can clearly express their wishes-well at that point, you have to listen.. . .Until
about half a day ago, we thought everything was going to be okay with Trixia
Bonsol. Anne had prevented the rot from doing a random runaway. Trixia

p
g
y
wasn't going to be one of the psychotics or one of the vegetables. She was free of
Emergent loyalty fixation. She could be talked to, evaluated, comforted. But she
absolutely refuses to give up any more deep structure. Understanding the Spiders
is the center of her life, and she wants it to stay that way."
They sat in silence for a moment. The most terrible thing was, Pham might
not be lying. He might not even be rationalizing. Maybe they were just talking
about one of life's tragedies. In that case, Tomas
Nau's evil would ride Ezr for the rest of his life.Lord, this is hard. And even
though Reynolt's office was brightly lit, it reminded him of that dark time in the
temp's park, right after Jimmy was murdered. Pham had been there too, and
giving comfort that Ezr couldn't understand. Ezr wiped his face with the back of
his hand. "Okay. So Trixia is free. Then she's also free to change in the future."
"Yes, of course. Human nature will always be beyond analysis." "I waited
half my life for her. As long as it takes, I'll wait for her." Pham sighed. "I'm just
afraid you might do that."
"Huh?"
"You're one of the more dedicated types I've met. And you have a talent for
people. More than most, it was you who kept the Qeng Ho going in the face of
Nau's thuggery."
"No! I could never stand up to the man. All I could do was nibble around
the edges, try to make things a little less hellish. And it still got people killed. I
had no backbone, no admin ability; I was just an idiot that Nau could use to keep
better people in line."
Pham was shaking his head. "You were the only person I trusted for
conspiracy, Ezr." He stopped abruptly, grinned. "Of course, part of that was you
were the only one clever enough to figure out who I was. You didn't bend, and
you didn't break. You even jerked my chain.. . .You know how far I go back."
Ezr looked up. "Of course. So?"
"I've seen a lot of hotshots." A lopsided grin. "Sura and I founded many of
the Great Families in this end of Qeng Ho space. But you measure up, Ezr Vinh.
I'm proud we are related."
"Hmm." Ezr didn't quite think that Pham would lie about something like
this, but what he was saying was just too-extravagant-to be true.
But the other wasn't finished. "There's a downside to your virtues, though.
You had the patience to play a role for hundreds of Msecs. You stuck to your
goals when lots of other people had started whole new lives. Now you're talking
about waiting for Trixia however longthat may take. And I believe you really
would wait. . .forever. Ezr, have you ever thought, you don't always need the

mindrot to get Focused? Some people can get fixated all by themselves. I should
know! Their will is so strong-or their mind is so rigid-that they can exclude
everything outside of the central fixation. That's what you needed during the
years under Nau and Brughel. It was the thing that saved you, and helped carry
the rest of the Qeng Ho along. But think now, recognize the problem. Don't
throw your life away."
Ezr swallowed. He remembered the Emergents' claims that society had
always depended on people who "didn't have a life." But, "Trixia Bonsolis a
worthwhile goal, Pham."
"Agreed. But you're talking about a very high price, waiting the rest of your
life for something that may never happen." He stopped, cocked his head to one
side. "It's a shame youaren't Focused with the Emergent bug; that might be
easier to undo! You're so fixated on Trixia that you can't see what's going on
around you, can't see the people that you are hurting, or the person who could
love you."
"Huh. Who?"
"Think, Ezr. Who engineered the rockpile stability system? Who persuaded
Nau to loosen the leash? Who made Benny's parlor and Gonle's farms possible?
And did it in spite of repeated mindscrubs? Who saved your butt when the
crunch finally came?"
"Oh." The word came out small and embarrassed. "Qiwi. . .Qiwi is a good
person."
Real anger showed in Pham's face, the first time he'd seen that since the fall
of Tomas Nau. "Wake up, damn you!"
"I mean she's smart, and brave, and-"
"Yes, yes, yes! Fact is, she's a flaming genius in almost every department.
I've only seen a couple like her in all my life."
"I-"
"Ezr, I don't believe you're a moral idiot or I wouldn't be talking to you
now, and I certainly wouldn't be telling you about Qiwi. Butwake up ! You
should have seen it years ago-but you were too fixed on Trixia and your own
guilt trips. And now Qiwi is waiting for you, but without much hope since she's
so honorable she respects what you want for Trixia. Think about what she has
been like, since we got rid of Nau."
". . .She's been into everything.. . .I guess I see her every day." He took a
deep breath. Thiswas like deFocus-seeing what you saw before, in a totally new
way. It was true, he depended on Qiwi even more than he did Pham or Anne.
But Qiwi had her own burdens. He remembered the look on her face when she
greeted Floria Peres. He remembered her smile when she said she was happy for

his happy ending. It was strange to feel shame for something you'd been totally
unaware of a moment before. "I'm so sorry.. . .I just. . .never thought."
Pham eased back. "That's what I hoped, Ezr. You and I, we have this little
problem: We're long on high principles and short on simple human
understanding. It's something we have to work on. I praised you a second ago,
and it wasn't a lie. But, truly, Qiwi is the wonder."
For a moment, Ezr couldn't say anything. Someone was rearranging the
furniture inside his soul. Trixia, the dream of half a lifetime, wasslippingaway.. .
. "I've got to think."
"Do so. But talk to Qiwi about it, okay? You're both hiding behind walls.
You'd be amazed what can come from just talking straight out."
Another idea that was like a new sun.Just talk to Qiwi about it. "I will. . . .I
will!"

SIXTY-SIX
Time passed, but Arachna still had a long way to cool. The last dry
hurricanes still blew fitfully through the midlatitudes, edging ever nearer to the
world's equator.
Their flyer had no wings, no jets or rockets. It came down along a ballistic
arc, and slowed to a gentle touchdown on the naked rock of the altiplano.
Two space-suited figures emerged, one tall and slim, the other low, with
limbs spreading in all directions. Major Victory Lighthill tapped at the ground
with the tips of her hands. "Our bad luck that there is no snow cover here. No
footprints to track." She waved at the rocky hillside a few dozen yards away.
There was snow there, caught in crevices, lying in the windshade of the moment.
It glimmered ghostly reddish in the sunlight. "And where there is snow, the wind
is always blowing it around. Can you feel wind?"
Trixia Bonsol leaned into the breeze. She could hear it singing beyond her
hood. She laughed. "More than you. I've got to stand up in it with only two legs."
They walked toward a hillside. Trixia had her net-link audio turned way
down. This was a place and a time she wanted to experience firsthand, without
interruptions. Yet the buzz of sound and the displays at the upper corners of her
vision kept her in tenuous contact with what was going on in space, and at
Princeton. In the real world beyond her hood display, the light was barely
brighter than Trilander moonlight, and the only movement was the low scudding
of the frost dust beneath the wind. "And this is our best guess where Sherkaner
left the helicopter?"
"It was, but there's no sign of him here. The log files are all jumbled. Daddy
was controlling Rachner's aircraft through the net. Maybe he was going
someplace special. More likely he was heading for random nowhere." Trixia was
not hearing Little Victory's true voice. Those sounds were down-shifted and
processed in Trixia's hood. The result was not a human speech and certainly not
Spider sound, but Trixia could understand it as easily as Nese, and listening left
her eyes and hands free for other things.
"But . . ." Trixia waved her arm at the tumbled land ahead of them.
"Sherkaner sounded rational to me, even at the end when everything was coming
apart." She spoke in the same intermediate language she listened to. The suit
processor took care of the routine shifting of sounds to what Viki could hear.
"Wanderdeep can be like that," said Victory. "He had just lost Mom.
Nizhnimor and Jaybert and the counterlurk center had just been blown out from

under him."
At the bottom of her view, Trixia saw the twitch in Viki's forearms. That
was the equivalent of pursed lips, of a person confronting pain. In her years of
Focus, she had always imagined herself talking to them head to head, on the
same level. In free fall, that was more or less how things worked. But on the
ground. . .well, human bodies extended upward, and Spider bodies sideways. If
she didn't keep a downward view, she missed out on "facial" expressions-and
even worse, she might walk into her best friends.
"Thanks for coming with me, Trixia." The cues in the intermediate
language showed that Viki's voice was tremulous. "I've been here and at
Southmost before, officially, and with my brothers and sister. We promised each
other we'd leave it alone for a while, but. . .I can't. . .and I can't face it alone
either."
Trixia waggled her hand in a way that meant comfort, understanding. "I've
wanted to come here ever since I came out of Focus. I feel like I'm a person
finally, and being with you I feel I have a family."
One of Viki's free arms reached up to rub Trixia's elbow. "You were always
a person to me. I can remember when Gokna died, when the General told us
about you. Daddy showed us the logs, all the way back to when you first
contacted him. Back then, he still thought you translators were some kind of AI.
But you seemed to be a person to me, and I could tell you liked Dad very much."
Trixia gestured a smile. "Dear Sherk was so sure of impossible things like
AI. For me, Focus was like a dream. My mission was to understand you Spiders
perfectly, and the emotions just came along with it. It was the side effect Tomas
Nau never expected." Personhood as a Spider had come slowly, growing with
each advance in language knowledge. The radio debate had been the turning
point, where Trixia and Zinmin Broute and the others had actually transformed
and taken sides in the perfection of their craft.I'm so sorry, Xopi. We were
Focused and suddenly you were the enemy. Whenwe scrambled your MRI codes,
we didn't really know we'd murdered you.Any of us could have been the Pedure
translator, any of us could have beenin your place. And that had been when
Trixia first reached down across the comm links and revealed herself to
Sherkaner Underhill.
The smooth rock was broken now, rising into the hillside. Here there were
patches of snow, and clefts shadowed from sun-and starlight. Victory and Trixia
scrambled over the lower rocks of the hill, and peered into the shadows. This
wasn't a serious search; it was more an act of reverence. Air and orbit surveys
had been completed many days before.
"Do-do you think we'll ever find him, Victory?" During most of her years
f

of Focus, Sherkaner
Underhill had been the center of Trixia Bonsol's universe. She'd been
scarcely aware of Anne Reynolt or Ezr's hundreds of faithful visits, but
Sherkaner Underhill had been real. She remembered the old cobber who needed
a guide-bug to keep from walking in circles. How could he be gone?
Victory was silent for a moment. She was several meters up the hillside,
poking around beneath an overhang. Like all of her race, she was more than
humanly good at rock climbing. "Yes, eventually. We know he's not on the
surface. Maybe. . .I think Mobiy must have lucked out, found a hole more than a
few yards deep. But even that wouldn't be a viable deepness; Dad's body would
dry to death in a short time." She pulled out from under the rock. "It's funny.
When the Plan was coming apart, I thought it was Mom we had lost and Dad we
could save. But now. . .you know the humans just made new sonograms of the
bottom of Southmost? The Kindred nukes crushed Parliament Hall and the upper
layers. Below that there are millions of tons of fractured bedrock-but there is
open space, what's left of the Southlanders' superdeepness. If Mother and Hrunk
made it alive to one of those. . ."
Trixia frowned; she had seen the news. "But the report says it's too
dangerous to dig, that it would just crush the open spaces." And when the New
Sun came, those millions of tons of rock would surely collapse upon the
deepness.
"Ah, but we have time to plan. We'll improve on the humans' digging
technology. Maybe we can come in from miles out and tunnel really deep,
maintaining the balance with cavorite. Someday before the next New Sun, we'll
know what's in those superdeeps. And if Mother and Hrunk are down there, we'll
rescue them."
They walked northward, around the hillock. Even if this were the hill where
Sherkaner left Thract, they were well away from where Rachner could have
landed. Still, Victory peeped into every shadow.
Trixia couldn't keep up. She straightened and looked away from the
hillside. The sky above the southern horizon glowed, as if over a city. And it
almost was. The old missile fields were gone, but now the world had a better use
for the altiplano. Cavorite mines. Companies from all over the waking world had
descended on it. From orbit, you could see the open pit mines stretching from the
original Kindred operation, a thousand miles across the wasteland. A million
Spiders worked there now. Even if they never figured out how to synthesize the
magic substance, cavorite would revolutionize local spaceflight, partly making
up for the lack of other bodies in this solar system.
Victory seemed to notice that Trixia's pace had faltered. The Spider found a
d d k
b f
k
h d d f
th
i d
d
ttl d
it T i i
t d

rounded knob of rock, shaded from the wind, and settled on it. Trixia sat down
beside her, pleased that they could be on the same level. Across the plains to the
south, they could see hundreds of hillocks, any one of which might mark
Sherkaner's final rest. But in the sky glow beyond the horizon, tiny dots of light
drifted slowly upward, antigrav freighters hauling mass into space. In all human
histories, antigravity had been one of the Failed Dreams. And here it was.
Viki didn't speak for a time. A human who didn't know the Spiders might
think she was asleep. But Trixia could see the telltale movements of eating
hands, and she heard untranslated keening. Every so often Viki would be like
this; every so often she had to shed the image that she projected to her team and
Belga Underville and the aliens from space. Little Victory had done very well, at
least as well as her mother could have done, Trixia was sure. She had managed
the final triumph of her parents' Great Lurk. In her own huds, Trixia could see a
dozen calls pending for Major Lighthill. An hour or two alone, that was all
Victory could spare these days. Outside of Brent, Trixia was probably the only
person who knew the doubts that lived inside Victory Lighthill.
OnOff climbed into the sky, turning the shadows across the tumbled lands.
This was the warmest High
Equatoria would be for the next two hundred years, yet the best that OnOff
could do was raise a soft haze of sublimation.
"I hope for the best, Trixia. The General and Dad, they were so very clever.
They can't both be dead. But they-and I-had to do so many hard things. People
who trusted us died."
"It was a war, Victory. Against Pedure, against the Emergents." That was
what Trixia told herself now, when she thought about Xopi Reung.
"Yeah. And the ones who survived are doing well. Even Rachner Thract.
He's never coming back to the King's Service. He feels betrayed. Hewas
betrayed. But he's up there with Jirlib and Didi now"-she jerked a hand in the
direction of L1-"becoming a kind of Spiderish Qeng Ho." She was quiet, then
abruptly slapped at the rock of her perch. Trixia could hear that her real voice
was angry, defensive. "Damn it, Mother was a good general! I could never have
done what she did; there's too much of Daddy in me. And in the early years it
worked; his genius and hers multiplied together. But it got harder and harder to
disguise the counterlurk. Videomancy was a great cover, it let us have
independent hardware and a covert data stream right under the humans' snouts.
But if there were evenone slip, if the humans ever guessed, they could kill us all.
That corroded Mom's heart."
Her eating hands fluttered aimlessly and there was a choked hissing sound.
Victory was weeping. "I just hope she told Hrunkner. He was the most loyal
friend we ever had He loved us even though he thought we were a perversion

friend we ever had. He loved us even though he thought we were a perversion.
But Mother just could not accept that. She wanted too much from Uncle Hrunk,
and when he couldn't change she-"
Trixia slid her arm across the other's midback. It was the closest a human
could come to giving a multiarm hug.
"You know how much Daddy wanted to tell Hrunk about the counterlurk.
That last time in Princeton,
Daddy and I thought we could manage it, that Mother would go along. But
no. The General was so. .
.unforgiving. In the end. . .well, she wanted Hrunk along on her trip to
Southmost. If she trusted him with that, surely she would tell him the rest.
Wouldn't she? She'd tell him that it was not all in vain."

EPILOGUE
SEVEN YEARS LATERThe Spiders' world had a moon; the L1 rockpile
had been coaxed into a synchronous orbit on Princeton's longitude. By the
standards of most habitable worlds, it was a pitiful moon, barely visible from the
ground. Forty thousand kilometers out, the lump of diamonds and ice glinted
dimly in the light of the stars and the sun. Yet it reminded half the world that the
universe was not what they had thought.
Fore and aft of the rockpile stretched a string of tiny stars, beads that grew
brighter year by year: the Spiders' temps and factories. In the early years, they
were the most primitive structures ever to fly in space, cheap and overbuilt and
overcrewed, hoisted on cavorite wings. But the Spiders learned fast and well. . .
There had been state dinners in the Arachnan Grand Temp before. The
King himself had ascended to orbit for the departure of the fleet to Triland. That
had been four starships, refurbished by the new capital industries of his empire
and the entire world. And that fleet had carried not just Qeng Ho and Trilanders
and former Emergents. Two hundred Spiders had been aboard, led by Jirlib
Lighthill and Rachner Thract. They carried first implementations of the
improved ramdrives and coldsleep equipment. More important, they carried the
keys for the encrypted knowledge beamed earlier across the light-years to
Triland and
Canberra.
For that departure, nearly ten thousand Spiders had come into space, the
King on one of the first allArachnan ferries, and that "dinner" had stretched
across more than 300Ksec. Since that time, there had been more Spiders in near
Arachna space than humans.
To Pham Nuwen, that was only fitting. Customer civilizations should
dominate the territory around their planets. Hell, to the Qeng Ho, it was the
locals' most important function-to be havens where ships could be rebuilt and
refurnished, to be the markets that made trekking across interstellar distances a
profitable thing.
For this second departure, the Grand Temp was almost as crowded as at the
Triland Farewell, but the actual dinner was much smaller, ten or fifteen people.
Pham knew that Ezr and Qiwi and Trixia and Viki had engineered this affair to
be small enough that people could talk and be heard. This might be the last time
so many of the surviving players might ever see each other in one place.
The ballroom of the Arachnan Grand Temp was something new in the

universe. The Spiders had been in space only 200Msec now, scarcely seven of
their years. The ballroom was their first attempt at grandeur in free fall. They
weren't up to the bioengineering of Qeng Ho parks. In fact, most Spiders hadn't
yet realized that for starfarers, a living park is the greatest symbol of power and
ability in space. Instead, the King's designers had borrowed from Qeng Ho
inorganic construction and tried to adapt their own architectural traditions to free
fall. Doubtless, within another century they would regard the effort as laughable.
Or maybe the mistakes would become part of tradition:
The outer wall was a tesselation of hundreds of transparent plates, held in a
grid of titanium. Some were diamond, some were quartz, some were almost
opaque to Pham's eyes. The Spiders still preferred direct views. Video wallpaper
and human display technologies didn't come close to matching the range of their
vision. The polyhedral surface swept outward to form a bubble fifty meters
across. At its base the Spider designers had built a terraced mound, rising to the
dining tables at the top. The slope was gentle by Arachna standards, with broad
sweeping stairs. To human eyes, the mound was a cliff-walled pinnacle and the
stairs were strange, broad ladders. But the overall effect was-for humans or
Spiders-that wherever you were sitting around the dining table, you could look
out on half the sky. The Grand Temp was a long structure, tidally stabilized, and
the ballroom was on the Arachna-facing end. To someone looking straight up,
the Spiders' world filled much of the view. To someone looking off to the side,
the rockpile and human temps were an orderly jumble, every year longer than
before. In the other direction, you could see the Royal Shipyards. At this
distance, the Yards were an undistinguished cluster of lights, flickering now and
then with tiny flashes. The Spiders were building the tools to build the tools. In
another year or so they would lay the spine for their first ramscoop vessel.
Anne and Pham arrived at precisely the appointed time. Small this banquet
might be, but the hosts had specified formality. They floated up past tier after
tier of the mound, touching the stairs here and there to guide themselves to the
circular table at the top. The hosts were already present, Trixia and Viki, Qiwi
and Ezr, as were all the other guests, both Arachnan and human. Anne and Pham
were last to arrive, the guests of Farewell.
After they were settled, Spider attendants came out from the base of the
mound, carrying a mix of Spider and human dishes. The two races could actually
eat together, even if each found the other's food mostly grotesque.
They ate the welcoming appetizers in the Spider-traditional silence. Then
Trixia Bonsol rose from her place among the Spiders and made a set speech as
stately as anything at Jirlib's Farewell. Pham groaned to himself. Except for
Belga Underville, all here were close friends. He knew they were scarcely more
f
f

formal than himself. Yet there was a sadness in this occasion and it seemed
greater than even a normal leavetaking should be. He sneaked a look around the
table. So solemn, the humans in freefall formal dress that went back at least a
thousand years. But it was not like they had to follow diplomatic niceties here.
Underville was probably the prickliest creature here, but even she wasn't big on
formalities. Now if someone didn't speak up, they might go the whole dinner
without really talking.
So when Trixia finished and sat down, Pham gently dumped a halfliter of
wine into the air above his place at the table. The dark red liquid wobbled back
and forth upon itself, an embarrassing spill that would be even more
embarrassing depending on who it splashed onto. Pham stuck his finger into the
bobbling wetness, and wiggled it just so. The blob stretched out, braided itself
with its own surface tension. He definitely had their attention now, the Spiders
even more than the humans. Pham waved off an attendant who floated close with
a vacuum napkin. He grinned at his audience. "Neat trick, isn't it?"
Qiwi leaned forward, to look across at him. "It'll be a neater trick if you can
land that thing clean." She was also grinning. "I should know; my daughter plays
with her food, too."
"Yes. Well, I'll keep it in one piece as long as I can." His hand formed the
spinning braid back into a wobbling sphere. So far he hadn't even stained the
lace on his cuffs. Qiwi was watching with intent, professional interest. This was
the sort of trick she had once done with billion-tonne rocks. He didn't doubt that
little Kira Vinh-Lisolet played with her food; Qiwi probably encouraged the
little devil.
He left the red bauble floating above his place, and waved for the attendants
to bring the next course. "I'll show you some other tricks later; just watch me."
Victory Lighthill rose a little from her perch. Her mouth hands modulated
her voice into a sad chirping. "Tricks. . .long sad gone. . . drexip." At least that's
what Pham thought she said. Even after all this time-even with the downshifter
gadget to make all the phonemes audible-Spidertalk was harder than any human
language he knew of. Sitting next to Lighthill, Trixia smiled and gave her own
translation. "We will miss your tricks, Magician." Her voice held the same
sadness that he recognized in the Spider's sounds.Damn. They make this sound
like awake.
So Pham smiled brightly and pretended to miss the point. "Yes. In less than
a megasecond, Anne and I will be gone." Along with a thousand others,
Emergents, exFocused, even some Qeng Ho. Three starships and a thousand
crew. "When we return, perhaps two centuries will have passed. But hey! There
are often longer partings among the Qeng Ho. I know there are ships a-building
i
d " H
d t th fli k i
i th f
k b hi d Vi t

in your yards." He waved at the flickering in the far sky behind Victory
Lighthill. "Many of you will be 'faring, too. Very likely some of us will meet
again-and when we do we'll have new stories to exchange, just like Qeng Ho and
people from starfaring worlds always have."
Ezr Vinh was nodding. "Yes, there will be future times, even if we don't
know quite how we will meet, or where. But for many of us this will be the last
meeting." Ezr didn't quite meet his eye.At bottom, even Ezrdoubts. And Ezr had
given half his mission bounty to help Pham and Anne prepare.
But Qiwi laid her hand on Ezr's shoulder. "I say we setup some meeting
marks, just like the Great
Families do." A time and a place, and a space of life span passed. She
looked across at Anne and smiled. Now Qiwi was a mother as well as an
engineer. Most times she seemed to be the happiest person around. But Pham
still saw a shadow sometimes, perhaps when she thought of her own mother, the
other Kira. Qiwiapproved this sending to Balacrea. Hell, he was sure she would
be aboard if not for Ezr, and her children, and the new world she was creating
here. Ezr had learned much about managing people, even more since he was
truly the Fleet Manager for all the humans. But Qiwi's genius was the framework
that Ezr depended on. She was the person who could figure out just what
technology the Spiders would value most. If not for the deals she had worked
out, the Spiders' shipyard would still be a dream. Ezr had always thought of
himself as a failed younger son.I wonder if he and Qiwi really understand what
theyare creating. They had children, and so had Jau and Rita, and many others.
Gonle and Benny had built a nursery for all the new little ones, a place where
kids and cobblies played while their parents worked together. The human-Spider
enterprise grew every year. Like Sura Vinh long ago, Qiwi and Ezr might not
fare much themselves, but this end of Qeng Ho space was due for an explosion
of light, a nascence that would dwarf Canberra and Namqem.
An explosion of light. Yes! "We'll set a marker, then! The next New Sun-or
maybe a few Msecs after, since I seem to remember things being a bit unpleasant
right when the sun lights up." About two centuries.Thatwill fit well with my other
plans.
Victory via Trixia: "Yes, just after the next Brightness. Here in the Grand
Temp-however grander it may be." A gentle laugh. "I'll make a note not to be
asleep or light-years away."
"Agreed." "Agreed!" The voices went round the table.
Belga Underville buzzed and hissed, and as usual Pham didn't understand a
thing she said, except that her tone was full of truculent incredulity. Fortunately,
as the King's chief of Intelligence, she rated a full-time translator. Zinmin Broute
sat beside her listening to her with a faint smile Broute actually seemed to like

sat beside her, listening to her with a faint smile. Broute actually seemed to like
the old biddy. When she finished, he wiped the smile from his face and put on a
good glower. "This is rank foolishness, or human insanity I don't yet understand.
You have three ships, and with them you intend to bring down the Emergent
empire? But for the last seven years, you have been saying that we
Spiders have nothing to fear from outside invasion, that a planetary
civilization with high technology can always mount a successful defense. The
Emergents must have thousands of military vessels in their home territories, yet
you talk of overthrowing them. Have you been lying to us, or are you just very
wishful thinkers?"
Victory Lighthill buzzed a question, put so simply and clearly that Trixia
didn't have to translate. "But, maybe. . .you get help. . .from far Qeng Ho?"
"No," said Ezr. "I. . .I'll tell you frankly, Qeng Ho don't like to fight. It's
much easier just to let tyrannies alone. 'Let them trade with themselves,' as the
old saying goes."
Anne Reynolt had been quiet through all this. Now she said, "It's okay, Ezr.
Youhave helped us. . . ." She turned to Belga Underville. "Madame General,
someone has to do this. The Emergents and Focus are something new. Leave
them alone and they will just grow stronger-and someday they'll come to eat
you."
Incredulity was patent in the flick of Underville's longest arms. "Yes, more
contradictions. Over the last years you have persuaded us to go beyond trade in
helping to arm and outfit you." A human speaker might have cast a look in
Victory Lighthill's direction; Victory had the ear of the King in this. "But what
does it serve that you commit suicide? That is how I see the odds."
Anne smiled, but Pham could tell the questions made her tense. Belga had
pounded on these questions in more official forums, and it was unlikely she
would receive any satisfaction here. The questions haunted Anne as well. But
Belga did not understand that, for Anne Reynolt, this mission gave better odds
than she had ever had. "Not suicide, Madame General. We have special
advantages, and Pham and I know how to use them." She put her hand on
Pham's. "I employ one of the few commanders in human histories who has
succeeded at such a thing."
Yeah, the Strentmannian thing was similar. God help me.No one said
anything for a moment. The halfliter of wine had drifted upward. Pham poked
his finger into its center of rotation and slid it gently back in front of where he
sat. "We have advantages more concrete than my fearless leadership. Anne
knows as much as any Podmaster about how the inner system works." And their
little fleet would carry some surprising hardware, the first products of

human/Spider new technology. But that wasn't the fleet's greatest strength. The
crews of their three ships were mostly exFocused who understood the
mechanisms of the Emergents' automation and who wanted as much as Anne to
overthrow it. There were even a few of the original unFocused Emergents. As he
spoke, Pham saw Jau Xin watching him intently-and Rita Liao watching Jau.
They would come if they didn't have their three little ones. And even now, there
was a chance. Pham still had four days to persuade them. Xin had been Pilot
Manager for Nau's uncle before the voyage to Arachna. And the latest comm
from Balacrea showed the Nau clique was back at the top of the heap.
Pham looked from face to face as he described the plans. Ezr and Qiwi,
Trixia and Victory, certainly Jau and Rita:They don't really thinkthis is a wake.
They understand we have a good chance, but they worry
forus. "And we've been studying Nau's records and the transmissions that
he received-that we're still receiving from Balacrea. We've spoofed them into
thinking the Emergents won here. We plan on being able to get in-system before
they realize that we aren't friendly. We understand alot about the internal
factions at the top of their society. All together-" All together, it might not be
something he should undertake. But Anne was right about Focus, and Anne
wanted this more than anything. And afterward, well, there washis great project,
and having Anne in on that would be worth all the risks. "All together, we have a
chance. It will be a gamble, an adventure. I wanted to call our flagship theWild
Goose, but Anne wouldn't let me."
"Hah!" said Anne. "I thinkEmergents' Reward is a much more proper name.
After we win,then you can name it theWild Goose !"
The first course of the banquet was already arriving, and Pham didn't have a
chance to answer her back. Instead, he showed the others that you really can tuck
a halfliter of wine back into a drinking bulb without creating any smaller
droplets. He grinned to himself. Even the other Qeng Ho hadn't seen that. It was
just one of the advantages of being well traveled.
The banquet lasted a number of Ksecs. They had time to talk of many
things, to remember where they had been and the friends who had died in
making the present day. But the greatest surprise didn't come until right at the
end, when Anne pointed out something that none of the Spiders, not even
Victory Lighthill, had guessed at.
Anne had relaxed as the dinner progressed. Pham knew she still was uneasy
with groups of people. She couldact almost any role, but inside there was a
shyness that didn't come out except when she was being open. She had learned
to trust these people; as long as the conversation stayed clear of what she must
do with the Emergency, she could genuinely enjoy herself. And Anne Reynolt

still had many things that her friends here needed. More than anyone, she
understood the exFocused. Pham listened to her chat with Trixia Bonsol and
Victory Lighthill, suggesting ways they might get even more translation
services.From the first moment I saw you,you seemed very special. The flaming
red hair, the pale, almost pink skin. Such a contrast to his own black hair and
smoky complexion. On this side of Human Space, her looks were rare indeed.
But then he had learned what was behind those looks, the brains, the courage.. .
.Following her to
Balacrea would be worth it even if there were no plans for afterward.
After-dinner drinks were floated around to the humans. The Spider
equivalent were little black balls to puncture and suck and spit into elaborate
cuspidors.
Pham found himself toasting to the success of each group's endeavor-and
the meeting they had set for two centuries later.
Ezr Vinh leaned around Qiwi to look at him. "And after our remeeting?
After you free Balacrea and
Frenk? What then? When will you finally tell us about that?"
Anne smiled at Pham. "Yes, tell them about your wild-goose chase."
"Hmmpf." Pham wasn't entirely pretending embarrassment. Except with
Anne, he hadn't talked about this. Maybe it was because the scheme was
grandiose even compared with his grandiose scheming of the past. ". . .Okay.
You know why we came to Arachna: the mystery of the OnOff star and the
existence of intelligent life here. We spent forty years with Tomas Nau's boot on
our necks, but still we learned amazing things."
Ezr: "True. In one single place, Humankind has never found so many
different kinds of wonderful things."
"We humans thought we knew what was impossible. Only a few nut cases
still wondered otherwise, mainly astronomers watching far enigmas. Well,
OnOff was the first of those that we've seen close up. And look at what we
found: a stellar physics we still don't properly understand; cavorite, which we
understand even less-"
Pham broke off, noticing the look in Qiwi's eyes. She was remembering
something from a nightmare. She looked away, but Pham didn't continue, and
after a moment she spoke very softly. "Tomas Nau used to talk like this. Tomas
was an evil man, but-" But evil men, the most dangerous of them, often have
sharp ideas. She swallowed, and continued more firmly, "I remember when the
Focused ran DNA analysis on the ocean ice we had brought up. The variety-it
was greater than a thousand worlds. The analysts thought it was caused by the
variety of life niches on Arachna. Tomas. . .Tomas thought instead that there

was so much variety because once, very long ago, Arachna had been a
crossroads."
Ezr took Qiwi's hand. "Not just Tomas Nau. We've all wondered about
these things. There's way too much crystal carbon around-the diamond forams,
the rockpile. Somebody's computers? But the forams are too small, and our L1
mountains are too big. . .and they're all just dead stone now."
From across the table, Jau Xin said, "Maybe not quite. Thereis cavorite."
Belga Underville rasped something that did not sound impressed; Victory
was buzzing laughter. After a moment, Zinmin's translation came. "So the
Distorts of Khelm have a new believer, except that now our world is a junkyard
and we Spiders are evolved from the gods' garbage-vermin. If this is true, where
is the rest of the super-empire?"
"I. . .I don't know. Remember this was fifty to one hundred million years
ago. Maybe they had a war. One of the easiest explanations for your solar system
is that it was a war zone, with a sun destroyed, and all planets but one
volatilized." And that one survivor protected by some great magic. "Or maybe
the empire grew into something else, or is leaving us to develop at our own
pace." Some of the possibilities sounded very foolish when he said them out
loud.
Underville's eating hands spread in a gesture that Pham recognized as a
doubting smile. "You do sound like Khelm! But see, your theory 'explains' all
sorts of things without helping to do anything, much less providing tests for
itself."
Gonle Fong jabbed at the air with her hand, a Spiderish gesture
unconsciously adopted. "So what's to disagree? 'Arachna was a place where once
all the Failed Dreams were true.' Fine. It's a simple, unifying assumption. At the
same time, we live in the here and now, a few hundred light-years, a few
thousand years. Whatever the explanation, there is a lifetime of profit to be made
just playing with what we see on Arachna now!"
Pham nodded politely. "Yes. A good Qeng Ho attitude. But, Gonle-I was
born in a civilization of castles and cannon. I've lived a long time-not counting
coldsleep-and I've seen a lot. Since the Dawn Age, we humans have learned a
little here, a little there-but mainly we've learned of limits. Planetary civilizations
rise and fall. At the height they're wonderful things, but there is so much
darkness." Castles and cannon, and worse. "And even the Qeng Ho-we survive
and prosper, but we've found limits that we can only edge toward, like lightspeed
itself. I broke myself on those limits at Brisgo Gap. When I learned about Focus,
I thought it might be the way to end the darkness between civilizations. I was
wrong." He looked into Anne's eyes. "So I gave up my dream, the dream of my

whole life. . .and then I looked around. Here at Arachna, we've finally found
something fromoutside all our limits. It's a tiny glimpse, shreds and dregs of
brightest glory. Gonle, there are planning horizons and there are planning
horizons.. . .Ezr asked me what I was going to do after we bring down the
Emergents, after we all meet again. Well, just this: I'm going whence Arachna
came."
Trixia's translation of his words rattled on a moment longer, and then there
was absolute silence all around the table. Ezr sat transfixed. Pham had kept this
between himself and Anne; considering all else that was happening, it had been
an easy secret to keep. But Ezr Vinh had lived his whole life admiring the Dawn
Age and the Failed Dreams, and now he saw how they might yet be attained.
The boy stared for a moment, enraptured. Then critical thought came awake
again. His words weren't complaints; hewanted Pham's plan to succeed, but"But
what bearing will you take? And-"
"What bearing? That's the easy question, though we'll have a couple of
centuries to think it over. But look, Humankind has been staring at the stars with
high technology for thousands of years. At one time or another, almost every
Customer civilization has mounted arrays of hundred-meter mirrors, and
undertaken all the other clever ways to snoop on things far away. We see some
far enigmas. Here and there across this galaxy we see ramscoops and ancient
radio transmissions."
"So if there were anything more, we would have seen it," said Ezr, but he
clearly knew what was coming. The arguments were ancient history.
"Only if it's a place we can look. But parts of the galactic core are plenty
shrouded. If our supercivilization doesn't use radio, if they have something better
than ramscoops. . .down by the core is the one place they might have escaped
our detection." And OnOff's eccentric orbit had at least passed through those
unseen depths.
"Okay, Pham. I agree, it all fits. But you're talking about thirty thousand
light-years to the core, almost that far to the umbral clouds."
Gonle: "That's a hundred times farther than anything the Qeng Ho have
tried. Without depot civilizations in between, your ramscoops will fail in less
than a thousand years. We can dream of such a mission, but it's totally beyond
our ability."
Pham grinned at them all: "It's totally beyond our ability now." "That's what
I said! It's always been beyond us."
But the light was beginning to come on in Ezr's eyes. "Gonle, he means that
it may not be beyond us in the future."
"Yes!"Pham leaned forward, wondering how many of them he could

capture in this dream. "Do a little mind experiment. Put yourself back in the
Dawn Age. Back then, for a few brief centuries, peopleexpected things to
become radically improved in the future. With Arachna, you will bring a little bit
of that spirit back. Maybe you don't believe it now. You don't see the civilization
that you are building. Ezr and Qiwi, you're founding a Great Family that will
outshine any in Qeng Ho history. Trixia and Victory and all the Spiders will be
the greatest thing that ever happened to our business. And you're just beginning
to understand the contradictions of Arachna. You're right; today, talk of 'faring
toward the core is like a child wading in the surf and talking of crossing an
ocean. But I'll lay you a wager: By the next Bright Time, you'll have the
technology I need."
He looked at Anne beside him. She smiled back, a grin that was both happy
and a little mocking. "Anne and I and those on our fleet of three intend to take
down the Emergent system. If we succeed there-whenwe succeed-what's left will
still be a high-tech civilization. We'll make a larger fleet, at least a fleet of
twenty. And Anne will let me rename her flagship theWild Goose. And we will
return here and outfit to go. . .a-searching." And would Anne really come with
him then? She said she would. Would tearing down the Emergents' tyranny lift
thegeas that drove her? Maybe not. Winning would leave whole worlds like the
deFocus ward in Hammerfest's Attic. Maybe she would find it impossible to
leave the people she had rescued. What then?I don't know. Once upon a time, he
was very good at being alone. Now,how strangely I have changed.
Anne's smile was gentle now. She squeezed his hand and nodded at the pact
he had just described. Pham glanced from face to face: Qiwi looked stunned. Ezr
looked like someone who desperately wanted to believe, but had more than a
life-full of other endeavors to distract him. As for the Spiders, their aspects
ranged from Underville's truculent "show me" toThroughout his speech, Victory
Lighthill had sat still and silent, even her eating hands motionless. Now she
spoke, a burring warble, soft and sad and wondering, that needed Trixia to
translate the words: "Daddy would have loved this plan."
"Yes." Pham's voice caught. Underhill had been a genius and a dreamer,
straight out of the Dawn Age.
Pham had long since read Trixia's "videomancy diaries," the story of
Underhill's counterlurk. The cobber had dug deep into the Emergents'
automation, sometimes so deep that the Focused Anne Reynolt had noticed the
tampering and thought it evidence of human conspiracy. At the end, Underhill
knew what Focus was; he knew the humans didn't have AI or any technology
enormously beyond his own. Sherkaner Underhill must have been very
disappointed to learn the limits of progress.

Beside him, Anne started to nod, hesitated. And that was when she
surprised them all, herself included, but the Spiders most of all. She cocked her
head, and a slow smile started across her face. "And what makes you think he
didn't survive? He had as much information as any of us-and a good bit more
imagination. What makes you think this isn'this plan, too?"
"Anne, I've read the diaries. If he were alive, he'd be here."
She shook her head. "I wonder. Wanderdeep is something we humans aren't
built to understand, and Sherkaner thought sure that Smith was dead. But
Sherkaner Underhill confounded both humans and Spiders more than once. He
took Spiderness in unthought directions-he saw the deepness in the sky. I think
he's down there somewhere, and he intends to outlast all the mysteries."
"It could be. . .it could be." The words, ultimately Trixia's or Victory's,
Pham could not tell, were spoken in soft awe. "We don't really know where he
landed on the altiplano. If it was something he had scouted out before, he would
have a chance."
Pham looked outward, at Arachna. The planet spread across thirty degrees,
a vast, black pearl. Traceries of gold and silver gleamed all across the continent
into the southern hemisphere, and across the faint luster of the eastern sea. And
yet, there were still large areas of unrelieved dark, protected lands that would
remain still and cold until the end of the Dark. Pham felt a sudden thrill of
understanding.Yes. Somewhere down there the old Spider might still sleep,
waiting for his lady lost. . .and beginning on his greatest Lurk of all.
So high, so low, so many things to know.
The End

