Paul Skandera 
Peter Burleigh 
A Manual of 
English Phonetics 
and Phonology 




Paul Skandera / Peter Burleigh 
A Manual of English 
Phonetics and Phonology 
Twelve Lessons with an Integrated 
Course in Phonetic Transcription 
Gunter Narr Verlag Tübingen 

Bibliografische Information der Deutschen Bibliothek 
Die Deutsche Bibliothek verzeichnet diese Publikation in der Deutschen Nationalbibliografie; 
detaillierte bibliografische Daten sind im Internet über <http://dnb.ddb.dc> abrufbar. 
© 2005 • Narr Francke Attempto Verlag GmbH + Co. KG 
Dischingerweg 5 • D-72070 Tübingen 
Das Werk einschließlich aller seiner Teile ist urheberrechtlich geschützt. Jede Verwertung 
außerhalb der engen Grenzen des Urheberrechtsgesetzes ist ohne Zustimmung des Verlages 
unzulässig und strafbar. Das gilt insbesondere für Vervielfältigungen, Übersetzungen, Mikro-
verfilmungen und die Einspeicherung und Verarbeitung in elektronischen Systemen. 
Gedruckt auf chlorfrei gebleichtem und säurefreiem Werkdruckpapier. 
Internet: http://www.narr.de 
E-Mail: info@narr.de 
Satzsystem: CompArt, Mössingen 
Druck: Guide, Tübingen 
Bindung: Nadele, Nehren 
Printed in Germany 
ISSN 0941-8105 
ISBN 3-8233-6125-2 

Contents 
A note to students and instructors 
IX 
LESSON O N E : T H E PRELIMINARIES 
1 
What is linguistics? 
1 
Presciptivism and descriptivism 
1 
Parole vs. langue and performance vs. competence 
1 
The four core areas of linguistics 
1 
Other branches of linguistics 
2 
What are phonetics and phonology? 
3 
Phonetics 
3 
Phonology 
5 
Whose pronunciation 
are we describing? 
6 
The notion of a standard variety 
6 
Received Pronunciation: An accent 
6 
How do we write down spoken language? 
7 
Traditional spelling
 
7 
Phonetic transcription 
7 
The International Phonetic Alphabet 
8 
LESSON T W O : T H E DESCRIPTION O F SPEECH SOUNDS 
9 
Purely phonetic features 
9 
Loudness 
' 
Pitch
 
1 0 
Tone of voice 
1 0 
Duration and length 
1 0 
Air-stream mechanism 
1 1 
Voicedness and voicelessness: The state of the glottis 
12 
Phonologically relevant features: Distinctive features 
1 2 
Intensity of articulation I: Lenis and fortis 
1 2 
Place of articulation I 
13 
Manner of articulation I 
1 4 
Exercises 
LESSON THREE: C O N S O N A N T S 
1 9 
The phoneme 
1 9 
The English consonant phonemes 
2 0 
Place of articulation II 
2 0 

VI 
Contents 
Manner of articulation II 
22 
The consonant table 
25 
The problem cases 
25 
Of semi-vowels, contoids, and vocoids ... 
25 
... and more terminological confusion 
26 
Exercises 
27 
LESSON F O U R : VOWELS 
3 1 
The description of vowels 
31 
Manner of articulation III 
32 
The vowel chart I 
33 
The cardinal vowels 
33 
The English vowel phonemes 
35 
Long vowels 
35 
Short vowels 
36 
The vowel chart II 
37 
Intensity of articulation II: Lax and tense 
37 
Diphthongs and triphthongs 
38 
The shortening of vowels, nasals, and the lateral 
40 
Exercises 
41 
LESSON FIVE: A L L O P H O N I C VARIATION 
43 
The alio-/ erne relationship 
43 
Allophone vs. phoneme 
43 
The two allophone criteria 
44 
Allophones in free variation 
45 
Allophones in complementary distribution 
45 
Devoicing 
46 
Fronting and retraction 
47 
Two (or three) types of phonetic transcription 
49 
Phonetic transcription proper 
49 
Phonemic transcription 
49 
Broad phonetic transcription: An intermediate type 
50 
Unstressed i- and w-sounds 
50 
A brief excursion into morphophonology 
51 
The regular plural, the possessive case, and the third-person singular 
morphemes 
52 
The regular past tense and past participle morphemes 
52 
The pronunciation of the letter sequence <ng> 
53 
Exercises 
54 

Contents 
VII 
LESSON SIX: C O N N E C T E D SPEECH 
5 7 
Linking 
5 7 
Liaison 
5 7 
Linking r and intrusive r: Two cases of liaison 
5 8 
Non-rhotic and rhotic accents 
5 9 
Juncture 
6 0 
Exercises 
6 3 
LESSON SEVEN: T H E SYLLABLE 
6 5 
A phonetic approach to the syllable 
6 5 
Phonotactics 
6 7 
A phonological approach to the syllable 
6 7 
Syllabic consonants 
6 8 
Stressed and unstressed syllables vs. strong and weak syllables 
71 
Stress patterns in polysyllabic words 
73 
Exercises 
76 
LESSON EIGHT: S T R O N G A N D W E A K FORMS 
7 9 
What are strong and weak forms? 
79 
Grammatical words 
8 0 
The distribution of strong and weak forms 
8 0 
The forms 
8 1 
Exercises 
*>5 
LESSON NINE-. C O N N E C T E D SPEECH, C O N T D . 
8 7 
Rhythm
 
8
7 
What is rhythm? 
8 7 
Two types of rhythm 
8 7 
Assimilation 
8 9 
What is assimilation? 
8 9 
Various types of assimilation 
90 
The opposite of assimilation: Dissimilation 
9 4 
Elision 
9 4 
What is elision? 
94 
Various types of elision 
9 5 
The opposite of elision: Intrusion 
9 7 
Exercises 
9 9 
LESSON T E N : A L L O P H O N I C VARIATION, C O N T D . 
101 
Aspiration 
101 
Secondary articulation 
103 

VIII 
Contents 
Main types of secondary articulation 
104 
Exercises 
1 0 7 
LESSON ELEVEN: M O R E A L L O P H O N E S 
1 0 9 
r-sounds 
1 0 9 
r-sounds 
112 
/-sounds 
1 1 5 
Exercises 
1 1 8 
LESSON TWELVE: I N T O N A T I O N 
I 1 9 
What is intonation? 
1 1 9 
Pitch 
120 
The tone unit 
120 
Intonation patterns 
121 
Tone unit structure 
122 
Functions of intonation 
123 
Exercises 
125 
Appendix I: Solutions to the exercises 
127 
Appendix II; Glossary of linguistic terms 
151 

A note to students and instructors 
This book is a manual of English phonetics and phonology intended for students of 
English in undergraduate university courses in the German-speaking region. The book 
is motivated by the fact that there is currently no textbook which satisfactorily com-
bines an introduction to the theory of phonetics and phonology with the practice of 
transcription even though at nearly all universities both fields are mandatory subjects 
of study. Thus the book has been designed to be used either as seminar material in the 
classroom or for self-study. 
The book is tailored to the workload of one semester, spanning twelve weeks or 
more. Its breadth, therefore, does not compete with other, more extensive introduc-
tions to phonetics and phonology. In fact, the spirit of the book is revealed in the word 
manual: Our introduction is a compendium, a handbook that can be worked through 
from cover to cover, giving the pedagogic gratification of completeness and achieve-
ment, and avoiding the recurrent questions of which chapters or sections from a longer 
work are relevant to a course, or rather an exam. 
The manual is entirely self-explanatory and requires absolutely no prior knowledge 
of linguistics. The first lesson begins, then, with the basic question of what linguistics is. 
It gives a short overview of the various branches of linguistics, and locates phonetics 
and phonology in this broad context. This approach is especially advantageous for stu-
dents who begin their English studies with phonetics and phonology before taking 
other, more general linguistics courses. As the manual progresses, terminology and 
knowledge are advanced in a carefully staged manner, with each lesson building on pre-
vious lessons. Complementary exercises in a separate section after each lesson give stu-
dents the opportunity to put the theory they have learnt into practice. 
Technical terms that are introduced first appear in bold type, and are often followed 
by common alternative terms and a gloss in German. Thus new terms and concepts can 
be clearly identified, which facilitates progression in the course, and is useful for revi-
sion and exam preparation. The alternative terms are given because it is one of the aims 
of this manual to prepare students for the array of (sometimes confusing and contra-
dicting) terminologies used in other textbooks, which they will be reading in more ad-
vanced courses. This aim can only be achieved by acquainting the readers with a variety 
of different terms for the same concept, and, conversely, with different definitions of 
the same term. At the same time, this approach pre-empts the widely held expectation 
that, in technical jargon, there must be a one-to-one correspondence between concept 
and term. While this would certainly be desirable, it is far from the academic reality. A 
glossary of most of the technical terms is provided at the end of the manual. 
Most importantly, the exercises in the separate sections constitute a fully integrated 
course in phonetic transcription, including annotated model solutions at the end of the 
book. They develop in a carefully graded way from the transcription of simple written 
texts to the more difficult transcription of naturally spoken dialogue. All spoken texts 

X 
A note to students 
are provided on the accompanying CD. The exercises are meant to be done parallel to 
each lesson, thus steadily building students' confidence and skill in transcription. 
The authors worked together for several years in the Department of English at the 
University of Basel, and the manual is based on teaching material developed for the In-
troduction to English Phonetics course taught there. Special thanks are therefore due, 
first and foremost, to Professor D.J. Allerton, whose lecture shaped the subject matter 
of our manual. Thanks are also extended, however, to the large number of students who 
contributed to the development of the exercises and model solutions over the years. 
Paul Skandera, 
Innsbruck 
Peter Burleigh, 
Basel 

LESSON 
1 
THE PRELIMINARIES 
What is linguistics? 
Prescriptivism and descriptivism 
From ancient times until the present, language purists have believed that the task of the 
grammarian is to/prescribe (rather than describe) correct usage that all educated people 
should use in speaking and writing. Prescriptive language scholars have laid down 
rules that are often based on Latin and Greek, on a classical canon of literary works, on 
the origin of particular words, on logic, or simply on their personal likes and dislikes. 
Prescriptivists have been criticised for not taking sufficient account of ongoing lan-
guage change and stylistic variation. By contrast, the aim of linguistics is to describe 
language objectively and systematically. Descriptive linguists observe and analyse lan-
guage as it is used naturally in any given speech community [Sprachgememschaft], 
and 
they attempt to discover the rules and regularities of the underlying language system, 
or code. 
Parole vs. langue and performance vs. competence 
In order to separate the two meanings of the word language illustrated in the last sen-
tence of the previous paragraph, the Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure (1857-1913) 
proposed the French terms parole to refer to actual language use (i.e. to concrete utter-
ances) and langue for a speech community's shared knowledge of a language (i.e. for 
the language system). 
A similar dichotomy was put forward by the American linguist Noam Chomsky 
(b. 1928), who used the terms performance and competence to refer to largely the 
same concepts. Chomsky, however, put more emphasis on the individual nature of lan-
guage. Performance, then, is the actual language use of an individual speaker, and com-
petence is that individual speaker's knowledge of the language. Chomsky later replaced 
these terms with E(xternalised)-language and I(nternalised)-language, but the new 
terms are rarely used. 
The four core areas of linguistics 
The system or structure of a language (langue or competence) can be described at four 
different levels, which form the core areas of linguistics, sometimes called microlinguis-

2 
Lesson O n e 
tics: ( 1 ) Phonetics and phonology deal with pronunciation, or, more precisely, with 
speech sounds and the sound system. (2) Morphology covers the structure of words. 
(3) Syntax explains sentence patterns. (Morphology and syntax, often combined into 
morphosyntax, 
have traditionally been referred to as grammar.) (4) Lexicology and se-
mantics describe the vocabulary, or lexicon, and explore different aspects of meaning. 
Other branches of linguistics 
Utilising the core areas are various other branches of linguistics, sometimes referred to 
as macrolinguistics. 
Most of these are interdisciplinary fields because they overlap with 
other sciences. The first four branches arc concerned with language variation, and are 
therefore often subsumed under the label variational linguistics: (1) Dialectology is at 
the interface between linguistics and geography. It is the study of regional variation 
within a language. (2) Sociolinguistics connects linguistics with sociology. It is con-
cerned with language variation according to age, sex, social class, etc. (3) Ethno-
linguistics overlaps with anthropology and investigates language variation and the part 
language plays in ethnic groups. These three branches study the way language is used in 
different speech communities. They are therefore often referred to as 
sociolinguistics, 
which is then used in a broader sense as a superordinate term. The language variety 
[Varietät] spoken in a particular speech community is referred to as a lect. Thus w e 
speak of dialects, sociolects, and ethnolects. The characteristic speech of an individual 
person is called an idiolect. 
(4) Discourse analysis, text linguistics, and stylistics are related branches that also 
deal with language variation. Unlike the first three branches, however, they do not look 
at the way language is used in different speech communities, but rather at the language 
characteristics of different text types, especially beyond the sentence level. The 
language of these text types is communicated either through the medium of speech 
(e.g. personal conversations, broadcast discussions, lectures) or through the medium of 
writing (e.g. personal letters, newspaper articles, academic papers). And even though 
linguists are primarily interested in spoken language, one important field of study, 
which connects linguistics with literary science, is the characteristic use of language in 
works of literature. 
The next four branches of linguistics are not concerned with language variation: 
(5) Contrastive linguistics describes the similarities and differences between two or 
more modern languages, especially in order to improve language teaching and transla-
tion. (6) Psycholinguistics overlaps with psychology and explores mental aspects of 
language, such as language learning. (7) Neurolinguistics overlaps with medical 
science and investigates the connection between language and the nervous system. It is 
especially interested in the neurological processes necessary to produce speech sounds 
and in language disorders [Sprachstörungen]. 
(8) Computational linguistics 
[Com-
puterlinguistik] 
overlaps with artificial intelligence. Some of its concerns are machine 
translation, automatic speech recognition, and speech simulation. 
The four core areas and all the other branches of linguistics mentioned so far extend 
their insights to various other domains. The practical application of these linguistic 

The preliminaries 
3 
findings, for example to the field of foreign language teaching, is called (9) applied lin-
guistics. This term is contrasted with general or theoretical linguistics, which denotes 
a more theoretical orientation, but is not usually considered a separate branch. 
In the four core areas and in branches (1) to (4) above, linguists usually study the 
state of a language or variety at one particular period of time (e.g. present-day English 
or English at the time of Shakespeare). This approach is called synchronic linguistics 
[from Greek sun khronos, 'together with time']. But they may also study and compare 
the states of a language or variety at different points in time. This approach constitutes a 
branch of linguistics in its own right and is called (10) historical or diachronic linguis-
tics [from Greek did khronos, 'through time']. It connects linguistics with history and 
is concerned with language change and with the origin of words. Diachronic linguistics 
overlaps with (11) comparative linguistics, which also compares the states of lan-
guages or varieties at different points in time, but uses its findings to study the historical 
relations between different languages. 
Finally, it is important to note that the various linguistic subdisciplines can hardly 
be kept apart, and that the borders between them are often blurred. If, for example, we 
were doing a study of the use of the s-genitive (as in the girl's father) and the o/-genitive 
(as in the father of the girl) in working-class speech in London over the past two hun-
dred years, we would be doing morphology, syntax, sociolinguistics, dialectology, and 
historical linguistics at the same time. 
All the different branches of linguistics are recapitulated in Figure 1. 
What are phonetics and phonology? 
We have already learnt that phonetics and phonology are concerned with speech 
sounds and the sound system. We also know that linguists analyse actual language use 
(parole or performance), and then try to infer the underlying language system (langue 
or competence). 
Phonetics 
Phonetics first of all divides, or segments, concrete utterances into individual speech 
sounds. It is therefore exclusively concerned with parole or performance. Phonetics 
can then be divided into three distinct phases: (1) articulatory phonetics, (2) acoustic 
phonetics, and (3) auditory phonetics. 
(1) Articulatory phonetics describes in detail how the speech organs, also called 
vocal organs or articulators [Sprechwerkzeuge], 
in the vocal tract [Mundraum] 
are used 
in order to produce, or articulate, speech sounds. (2) Acoustic phonetics studies the 
physical properties of speech sounds, i.e. the way in which the air vibrates as sounds 
pass from speaker to listener. A spectrograph is a machine that measures the sound-
waves [Schallwellen] and depicts them as images, called spectrograms or sonograms, 
showing the duration, frequency, intensity, and quality of the sounds. (3) Auditory 
phonetics investigates the perception of speech sounds by the listener, i.e. how the 
sounds are transmitted from the ear to the brain, and how they are processed. 


The preliminaries 
5 
Owing to its close association with physics (and also with medicine), phonetics is 
sometimes considered a natural science, rather than a branch of linguistics in the nar-
row sense. But no matter how we classify it, phonetics is an indispensable prerequisite 
for phonology, and is therefore an integral part of all introductions to linguistics. In the 
language departments of most universities, however, the study of phonetics is largely 
restricted to articulatory phonetics because of its applications to the learning and teach-
ing of pronunciation. For that reason, this manual, too, will only be concerned with 
articulatory phonetics, and phonology. 
Phonology 
Phonology deals with the speakers' knowledge of the sound system of a language. It is 
therefore exclusively concerned with langue or competence, (Phonology, then, is not the 
study of telephone manners, as one student once jokingly suggested.) Phonology can be 
divided into two branches: (1) segmental phonology and (2) suprasegmental phonology. 
(1) Segmental phonology is based on the segmentation of language into individual 
speech sounds provided by phonetics. Unlike phonetics, however, segmental phonol-
ogy is not interested in the production, the physical properties, or the perception of 
these sounds, but in the function and possible combinations of sounds within the 
sound system. (2) Suprasegmental phonology, also called prosody, is concerned with 
those features of pronunciation that cannot be segmented because they extend over 
more than one segment, or sound. Such features include stress [Betonung], rhythm, and 
intonation (also called pitch contour or pitch movement 
[Tonbdhenbewegung]}. 
The three phases of phonetics and the different spheres of phonetics and phonology 
are illustrated by the speech chain in Figure 2. 
It is often not easy for students beginning the study of linguistics to understand the 
difference between phonetics and phonology. It is therefore advisable to return to 
the above explanations from time to time as you work through this manual. 
Fig. 2 The speech chain. 

6 
Lesson O n e 
W h o s e pronunciation are we describing? 
The notion of a standard variety 
In all linguistic research, we have to define the language variety that we are concerned 
with by delineating the speech community and/or the text type. For example, we can 
investigate the Manchester dialect, the language used in e-mail messages, or the speech 
of children in conversations with their peers. 
In language teaching, on the other hand, it is customary to use a more idealised 
standard variety, or simply standard [hocbsprachliche 
Variante], as a model. A stan-
dard variety is the form of a language that is generally associated with educated speak-
ers. And even though it may have a regional base, we regard it as regionally neutral in 
that it can be found anywhere in a country. A standard is therefore a sociolect, rather 
than a dialect. The standard variety of English in Great Britain is called Standard 
British 
English (popularly referred to by such non-linguistic terms as King's English, 
Queen's 
English, BBC English, or Oxford English). The standard variety spoken in the United 
States is called General American (English) or Standard American 
English. 
Received Pronunciation: An accent 
A standard variety has a fixed grammar and vocabulary, but its pronunciation may vary 
according to the regional origin, social group, or ethnicity of the speaker. We use the 
term accent to refer to the way a variety is pronounced. It is quite possible, then, that a 
standard variety is spoken in different accents. One of these accents usually carries the 
most prestige, and is used as a model in the teaching of pronunciation. The most presti-
gious accent of Standard British English, for example, was first called Public 
School 
Pronunciation 
and renamed Received Pronunciation, or simply RP, in the 1920s. 
There is no widely used term for the most prestigious accent of General American, but 
it is sometimes referred to as Network 
Standard or Network 
English. 
Received Pronunciation is associated with the dialect spoken in the south-east of 
England. The word received may seem awkward in this construction, but it is used here 
in the sense 'generally accepted as proper'. RP was initially described by the British 
phonetician Daniel Jones (1881-1967) in the first edition of his English 
Pronouncing 
Dictionary in 1917. And although RP is probably the most discussed accent around the 
world, it is important to note that it is a minority pronunciation unlikely ever to have 
been used by more than 3 to 4 per cent of the British population. Most educated speak-
ers of British English speak a modified RP or near RP. 
In this manual, we use RP, or near RP, as our model to illustrate English phonetics 
and phonology. RP is also the accent used in practically all British dictionaries and in-
troductory textbooks. 

The preliminaries 
7 
How do w e write down spoken language? 
Traditional spelling 
In order to describe somebody's individual pronunciation or the sounds of a language 
variety, we need a method of writing down sounds as accurately as possible. The first 
method that comes to mind is the traditional alphabetical spelling system, also called 
orthography. It does, after all, relate speech sounds to letters. In most languages, how-
ever, the relationship between speech and writing is not very consistent. In English, one 
particular sound may be represented by different letters or combinations of letters. The 
second sound in the word he, for example, is represented differently in see, sea, seize, 
people, key, Caesar, believe, amoeba, machine, and silly. Conversely, the same letters 
may indicate different sounds, such as the a in dad, father, many, call, village, and 
Dame. According to one statistical analysis, there are 13.7 different spellings per sound, 
and 3.5 sounds per letter. And some letters, like the b in debt, have no sound at all in 
certain words. 
The rather confusing nature of English spelling can be explained by the long tradi-
tion of printing in England. When in 1476 William Caxton, who had learnt the art of 
printing in Cologne, set up the first printing house just outside London, the orthogra-
phy became less variable, and many subsequent sound changes were not accompanied 
by changes in the spelling. The spellings of many words in English today are therefore 
based on the pronunciation used in the time from Chaucer to Shakespeare. Another 
factor that contributed to the discrepancy between sound and spelling is the unusually 
high number of loanwords which have entered the English language throughout its his-
tory and retained their original spelling. On the other hand, one study suggests that 
there are fewer than 500 words in English whose spelling is wholly irregular. If this is 
true, it seems that many of these words are among the most frequently used words in 
the language. 
Attempts to eliminate spelling irregularities can be traced back to the 16th century. 
Spelling reform has been promoted by such illustrious people as Benjamin Franklin, 
Charles Darwin, Alfred Lord Tennyson, Andrew Carnegie, Theodore Roosevelt, and 
George Bernard Shaw, in addition to numerous language professionals. In Britain, the 
Simplified Spelling Society advocates changes in the spelling system, as does the Re-
formed Spelling Association in the United States. So far, however, no attempt to change 
English orthography has shown any sign of success. 
Phonetic transcription 
If we want to write down speech sounds as accurately as possible, we cannot depend on 
traditional spelling. We need a method that relates sounds to letters or symbols more 
systematically: Each sound must be represented consistently by the same symbol, and, 
conversely, there must be a separate symbol for each distinctive sound. Such a one-to-
one correspondence between speech and writing is referred to as a phonographic rela-
tionship. The symbols that we use to represent speech sounds in this manner are pho-

8 
Lesson O n e 
netic symbols. A whole set of them form a phonetic alphabet. Marks that we can add 
to indicate slight alterations to the usual value of a phonetic symbol are called diacritics 
[diakritiscbe 
Zeicben]. 
The term phonetic transcription [from Latin 
transcriptio, 
'writing over'; pbonetiscbe 
Umschrift, 
Lautscbrift] 
refers to the process of writing 
down spoken language in phonetic symbols as well as to the resultant written text. 
The International Phonetic Alphabet 
The most widely used phonetic alphabet, and one that provides suitable symbols for 
the sounds of any language, is the International Phonetic Alphabet, or IPA. This is 
the phonetic alphabet used in this manual. It was first published in 1889 by the Interna-
tional Phonetic Association in France, and has since then been revised and corrected in 
various ways, most recently in 1996. It was initially developed by a group of phoneti-
cians, including Daniel Jones, from a concept proposed by the Danish linguist O t t o 
Jespersen (1860-1943). (The abbreviation IPA stands for both the alphabet and the as-
sociation. The association's German name, Weltlautschriftverein, 
is almost never heard.) 
The International Phonetic Alphabet is used, with minor modifications, in almost all 
English-language dictionaries, except for American publications. The IPA does not, 
however, provide the means for a prosodic transcription, i.e. it cannot indicate 
suprasegmental features [Suprasegmentalia, 
Prosodeme] 
like rhythm or intonation. 
Apart from a mark to indicate stress, there is no generally agreed system for writing 
down the prosody of speech. 
While some IPA symbols have been specially devised, quite a few of them look like 
ordinary Roman letters. They have probably been included for purely practical rea-
sons, such as the facilitation of the printing process, but their inclusion has one serious 
disadvantage: The Roman letters used in the IPA may be misleading because they do 
not always represent the sounds that a speaker of English or German would expect. 
When memorising the symbols of the IPA and the corresponding sounds, it is therefore 
not advisable to be guided by your knowledge of the conventional ABC. Learn every 
symbol as though you had never seen it before! 
In order to distinguish phonetic symbols from letters, phonetic symbols are en-
closed either in square brackets, [ ], if they are used to represent a concrete utterance 
(parole or performance), or in slashes, //, when they indicate speech sounds as part of 
the sound system (langue or competence). Letters are enclosed within pointed brack-
ets, <>, or they appear in single quotation marks, or in italics. Thus [p] represents an ac-
tual sound, /p/ indicates an abstract sound and our shared knowledge of its function 
within the sound system, and <p>,
 £p', or p is an ordinary letter. Those IPA symbols 
that represent English sounds are listed on the inside front cover of this book. 

LESSON 2 
THE DESCRIPTION OF SPEECH SOUNDS 
If we want to describe the pronunciation of a particular speaker or a speech commu-
nity, we begin by describing all the individual sounds that occur in the lect of that 
speaker or speech community. In this manual, we count nine features that are relevant 
to the description of speech sounds, even though the exact number may vary in differ-
ent linguistic textbooks. These nine features fall into two broad categories: The first 
category contains those characteristics that are only relevant if we want to describe the 
physical aspects of English sounds as precisely as possible. They have no bearing on the 
function of the sounds within the sound system of RP or any other English accent. 
These features are therefore only phonetically relevant. They have no relevance to the 
segmental phonology of English. The second category contains those features that are 
both phonetically and phonologically relevant in English. For example, they explain 
the difference between the final sounds in word pairs like cab and cap_ or serve, and surf. 
The features in the second category, then, can distinguish meaning and are therefore 
called distinctive or relevant features [distinktive 
oder relevante Merkmale], They are 
relevant to the function of sounds within the sound system. 
Purely phonetic features 
Loudness 
Loudness is one of the main phonetic properties of spoken language and of individual 
sounds. It is related to the breadth, or amplitude, of the vibration of the vocal folds, or, 
to use an older term, the vocal cords [Stimmbänder, 
Stimmlippen]. 
The vocal folds are 
located behind the Adam's apple in the voice box, also called the larynx [Kehlkopf], at 
the top of the windpipe, or trachea [Luftröhre]. The greater the amplitude of the vibra-
tion, the louder the sound. 
As a suprasegmental feature, or prosodic feature, loudness can distinguish meaning: 
It is one component of stress (together with pitch [Tonhöhe], duration, and sound 
quality), and thus contributes to the distinction between the noun record and the verb 
record, for example. It can also convey an emotional state such as anger. In the segmen-
tal phonology of English accents, however, it cannot distinguish meaning: The function 
of an individual sound within the sound system does not change with the loudness of 
its pronunciation. Loudness is therefore not a distinctive feature. 

1 0 
Lesson T w o 
Pitch 
Pitch is also an important phonetic characteristic. It is related to the frequency of the v i -
bration of the vocal folds: The faster the vocal folds vibrate, the higher the pitch. 
Like loudness, pitch can distinguish meaning at a suprasegmental level: It is a c o m -
ponent of stress, and it shapes the intonation of connected speech. Stress and pitch 
movement tell us, for example, whether a sentence like She speaks English is meant t o 
be a statement or a question. Pitch cannot, however, change the function of an individ-
ual sound within the sound system of English. By contrast, in over half the languages o f 
the world, a change of pitch can change the function of a sound, i.e. the basic meaning 
of a word can be changed simply by varying the pitch of one of its sounds. These lan-
guages are called tone languages. Many Asian and native American languages are t o n e 
languages, and there are more than 1,000 tone languages in Africa alone. English b e -
longs to the non-tone languages. Pitch is therefore not a distinctive feature in the seg-
mental phonology of RP or any other English accent. 
Tone of voice 
We must distinguish between sound quality and tone of voice. We use the term sound 
quality to refer to the quality that is characterised by the distinctive features, listed in 
the second category below. This means that the final sound in the word see, for exam-
ple, has the same quality irrespective of the loudness, pitch, or duration with which it is 
pronounced. Tone of voice, also called voice quality, tonal quality, or timbre, refers t o 
the difference in "colour" that we hear between two voices when they produce a sound 
with otherwise exactly the same phonetic features (purely phonetic and distinctive). 
This can be compared with the difference that we hear between two musical instru-
ments. The different tones of voice are produced by different patterns of vibration of 
the vocal folds, which, in turn, cause different combinations of soundwaves that never-
theless result in the same sound quality. 
Tone of voice, like loudness and pitch, is a feature of spoken language as well as of 
the pronunciation of individual sounds. Because it is less important in the communica-
tion of meaning, however, it is not usually considered a suprasegmental feature. By 
contrast, some linguists call it a paralinguistic feature. The tone of voice makes us 
characterise the voice of a speaker as female, feminine, male, masculine, harsh, breathy ) 
murmured, creaky, or thin, for example. It enables us to recognise a particular speaker 
or to describe the speaker as female or male, young or old, angry or exhausted, etc. But 
the tone of voice does not change the function of individual speech sounds. Like the 
other characteristics in this category, it is not a distinctive feature in the segmental 
phonology of English accents. 
Duration and length 
Duration and length both refer to the span of time during which a sound is sustained. The 
term duration is usually restricted to phonetics, and is used for the absolute or actual 
time taken in the articulation of a sound. The final sound in the word see, for example, 

The description of speech sounds 
1 1 
can be held for different spans of time depending on the speaker, on the emphasis that is 
given to the word in the particular utterance, and on a number of other chance factors. 
Even though it is usually considered a long sound, it can actually be given a rather short 
pronunciation. The difference here is one of duration. It is a purely phonetic concept 
because the function of the sound, and with it the sound quality, remains the same. 
The term length is usually restricted to phonology. It refers to the relative time a 
sound is sustained as perceived by the listener. For example, the middle sounds in the 
words fool and full are commonly described as a long it and short u, respectively. The 
difference here is one of length. It can be seen as a phonological concept because the 
long it and short u have different functions within the English sound system. In other 
words, the difference in length can distinguish meaning, or at least it can help to distin-
guish meaning. Many linguists therefore count length among the distinctive features. 
Why, then, do we not regard length as a distinctive feature in this manual, and list it 
with the phonologically relevant features below? If we listen carefully to the way the 
words fool and full are pronounced, we realise that it is not just the length that distin-
guishes the two middle sounds, but also their quality. A difference in length is almost 
always accompanied by a difference in sound quality, and it appears that the different 
quality is much more significant for our different perception of the sounds. In fact, it is 
quite possible to pronounce the long u in fool shorter than the short u in full. Labels like 
"long u" and "short u" can therefore be misleading. Thus, in this manual, we count 
length among the features that are only phonetically relevant. 
Air-stream mechanism 
All speech sounds are made with some movement of air. The majority of sounds used 
in the languages of the world are produced with air that is pushed up from the lungs 
through the windpipe, or trachea, and leaves the body through the mouth and some-
times through the nose. This movement of air is called an egressive pulmonic air-
stream [egressive, 'outwards';pulmonic, 
'of the lungs']. Virtually all English sounds are 
produced by such an egressive pulmonic air-stream mechanism. The air-stream mecha-
nism is therefore not a distinctive feature in English. 
The egressive pulmonic air-stream mechanism is the only air-stream mechanism 
that uses lung air. All languages make use of it, but many languages additionally also 
have sounds that are produced by a different air-stream. In those languages, the 
air-stream mechanism may well be a distinctive feature. Three other air-stream mecha-
nisms which are encountered in many languages, especially in Africa, use the air in the 
mouth, rather than lung air, to produce speech sounds: If air is pushed up from the 
space between the vocal folds, known as the glottis [Stimmritze], 
we speak of an 
egressive glottalic air-stream mechanism. A sound produced in this way is called 
ejective. If the glottis makes the air move inwards, we speak of an ingressive glottalic 
air-stream mechanism, and the sound is called implosive. If air is sucked in as a result of 
movements against the back part of the roof of the mouth, known as the velum or soft 
palate [weicher Gaumen], we speak of an ingressive velaric air-stream mechanism. A 

12 
Lesson T w o 
sound produced in this way is called click, and a language that has click sounds is often 
referred to as a click language. 
Voicedness and voicelessness: The state of the glottis 
All sounds that are produced by an egressive pulmonic air-stream mechanism, a n d 
therefore all English sounds, pass through the glottis, which we have defined as t h e 
space between the vocal folds, located behind the Adam's apple in the voice box, or larynx. 
If the glottis is narrow, i.e. if the vocal folds are together, the air-stream forces its 
way through and causes the vocal folds to vibrate. Sounds produced in this way are 
called voiced [stimmbaft]. You can check whether a sound is voiced either by placing a 
finger on either side of the larynx or by closing your ears with your fingers while y o u 
speak. When you say the word zeal, for example, you should be able to sense the vibra-
tion of the vocal folds for the entire time that you take to pronounce the word because 
all three sounds are voiced. 
If the glottis is open, i.e. if the vocal folds are apart, the air passes through without 
causing the vocal folds to vibrate. Sounds produced in this way are called voiceless 
[stimmlos]. When you use the two tests to check which sounds in the word seal are voiced 
and which are voiceless, you will find that you do not sense any vibration of the vocal 
folds on the first sound, and that the vibration sets in on the second sound. This means 
that the first sound in seal is voiceless, and the other two are voiced. When we whisper, w e 
are making all speech sounds voiceless, even the sounds in zeal and the final two in seal. 
A third possibility is that the glottis is closed, i.e. the vocal folds are firmly pressed 
together, and the air-stream is stopped completely. Such a glottal closure 
[Kebl-
verschluss] can produce only one sound, which is called a glottal stop or glottal plosive 
[Kehlkopfverschlusslaut, 
(Kehlkopf)knacklaut\ 
Strictly speaking, the glottal stop is of 
little importance in the description of RP as it is usually associated with a non-standard 
London accent. It seems to be spreading in educated speech, however, and we therefore 
occasionally include it in our discussion. 
The difference in meaning between zeal and seal can be solely attributed to the dif-
ference between their initial sounds, and it appears that the only difference between 
these two sounds is one of voicing. In this particular case, the voiced/voiceless contrast 
certainly distinguishes meaning, or at least it helps to distinguish meaning. Some lin-
guists therefore consider the voiced/voiceless contrast a distinctive feature in English. 
The reason why we list it among the purely phonetic features is that the voiced/voice-
less contrast cannot always distinguish meaning, as we shall see shortly. 
Phonologically relevant features: Distinctive features 
Intensity of articulation 1: Lenis and fortis 
The voiced/voiceless contrast discussed above is usually accompanied by a difference 
in the force with which the air-stream is pushed up. Voiced sounds are usually made 
with a relatively weak breath force, or little muscular tension. This is called a lenis articu-
lation [Latin, 'soft'; ungespannt]. Voiceless sounds, on the other hand, are made with 

The description of speech sounds 
13 
more force, or higher tension. This is called a fortis articulation [Latin, 'hard'; ge-
spannt]. You may occasionally hear the terms "soft" and "hard" in popular usage to 
describe speech sounds or their articulation (as in "soft s" or "hard s"), but they have 
been abandoned in linguistics. 
The symmetrical relationship between voiced/voiceless and lenis/fortis does not al-
ways hold. Whereas fortis sounds are indeed always voiceless in English, lenis sounds, 
which are usually voiced, may also occur as voiceless variants, i.e. they can be devoiced. 
We have already seen one example in the discussion of zeal and seal above. We said that 
apparently the only difference between these two words is the voiced/voiceless con-
trast of their initial sounds, and that we are making all speech sounds voiceless when we 
whisper. Why, then, do we still perceive a difference between zeal and seal even when 
the words are whispered? The answer is that the voiced/voiceless contrast is not the 
only difference between the two words, or their initial sounds. There is another differ-
ence, namely the intensity with which the initial sounds are articulated: Although the 
initial sound in zeal is made voiceless when whispered, it retains its lenis articulation. In 
other words, the first sound in zeal is always articulated with a weaker breath force 
than the first sound in seal, no matter whether the words are whispered or not. 
Some lenis sounds can also be devoiced in certain environments. For example, they 
are partly devoiced in word-initial position, and almost entirely devoiced word-finally 
[Auslautverhartung], 
as in the words cab and serve. The final sounds, here, are 
devoiced, but we still perceive them as the same (voiced) sounds because of their lenis 
articulation. We still hear the words cab and serve. If, however, we increase the breath 
force, or muscular tension, when producing the final sounds, i.e. if we pronounce these 
sounds with a fortis articulation, we hear the words cap and surf. All this suggests that it 
is not really the voiced/voiceless contrast, but the lenis/fortis contrast that can distin-
guish meaning and must therefore be considered a distinctive feature. 
Place of articulation ! 
We already know that virtually all English sounds are made with air that is pushed up 
from the lungs. In the production of approximately two thirds of these sounds, the 
air-stream is obstructed in the throat, technically called the pharyngeal cavity or phar-
ynx [Rachenraum, 
Racben], or in the vocal tract before it leaves the body through the 
mouth or nose. These sounds are called consonants. An important feature for the de-
scription of consonants is the exact place where the air-stream is obstructed. The place 
of articulation [Artikulationsstelle, 
Artikulationsort] 
names the speech organs that are 
primarily involved in the production of a particular sound. 
To produce a consonant, there is usually one active, mobile, lower speech organ that 
moves and makes contact with a passive, immobile, upper speech organ. For example, 
in the articulation of the last sound in the word surf, the air-stream is obstructed by 
the contact of the lower lip with the upper teeth. This sound is therefore called a 
"labiodental consonant", or simply a "labiodental" [from Latin labialis, 'of the lips', 
and dentalis, 'of the teeth']. You will find a diagram showing all the speech organs re-
ferred to in this manual on the inside front cover. 

1 4 
Lesson T w o 
Manner of articulation I 
Another important feature for the description of speech sounds is the type or degree o f 
closure of the speech organs involved. Thus the manner of articulation 
[Artikn-
lationsart] refers mainly to the degree to which the air-stream is obstructed at the p l a c e 
of articulation of consonants. When pronouncing the last sound in surf, for example, 
the gap between the lower lip and the upper teeth is narrowed to the point w h e r e 
friction is caused as the air passes through. The resultant consonant is therefore called a 
"fricative". If we wanted to describe this sound using all three distinctive features, w e 
would say that it is a "fortis labiodental fricative". There is no other sound in the E n g -
lish sound system that fits this description. 
The places and manners of articulation will be discussed in greater detail in the n e x t 
lesson, and we shall return to the intensity of articulation in Lesson Four. 

Exercises 
1 5 
EXERCISES 
These discovery exercises are designed to help you discover the way the sounds of Eng-
lish are made, and how some of the features discussed in this lesson contribute to the 
distinction of word meaning. Exercises 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3 focus on purely phonetic fea-
tures whereas exercises 2.4, 2.5, and 2.6 focus on the distinctive features, following the 
same order as in the text. Try the exercises at least twice to really familiarise yourself 
with the feature that is being considered. 
2.1 Loudness and pitch 
2.1a Loudness and pitch, as has already been mentioned, are components of stress. If 
you place stress at the beginning of some words, or alternatively towards the end, their 
meaning changes. Try the words below, noting whether they are verbs or nouns ac-
cording to where the stress is placed. Can you identify any regularity? 
refuse 
rebel 
produce 
contract 
conflict 
compact 
extract 
project 
conduct 
2.1b Try varying the loudness and pitch movement when you say the phrases below, so 
that they sound like neutral statements, questions, or expressive utterances. 
She did it. 
Have you finished? 
It's your turn to pay. 
Actually, I don't like whisky. 
We're not going there again. 
These exercises illustrate the function of loudness and pitch as suprasegmental features. 
Although they can change meaning, it is important to realise that this occurs on a 
suprasegmental, and not a segmental, level. 
2.2 Length 
From the list of words below, match those that sound similar into pairs, for example 
cheap and chip. In each pair, identify which word has the longer middle sound. In the 
example just given, it is cheap. N o w try to reverse the lengths. So make the middle 
sound in cheap short, and the one in chip long. Does the swapping of length swap the 
meaning of the words, or is the difference in the quality of the middle sounds the cue 
which distinguishes these aberrant forms from each other? 
long 
who'd 
ship 
seat 
pot 
wheel 
cooker 
boon 
did 
deed 
sit 
port 
lawn 
will 
cougar 
hood 
book 
sheep 

1 6 
Lesson 
T w o 
2.3 Voicedness and voicelessness 
Use the tests mentioned in this lesson - placing your finger and thumb around the lar-
ynx or closing your ears with your fingers - to match pairs of words with similar 
sounds that are either voiced or voiceless. There are two sets of words focusing on e i -
ther the sound at the beginning or the sound at the end of the word. For example, t h e 
initial sound in do is voiced whereas the one in to is voiceless; the final sound in bag is 
voiced whereas the one in back is voiceless. 
initial: 
pat 
this 
dill 
zed 
zoo 
that 
fat 
cream 
fine 
shed 
bat 
vat 
thin 
thank 
Sue 
green 
till 
vine 
final: 
mat 
lop 
leave 
of 
mad 
cop 
lob 
bet 
bed 
cloth 
tooth 
pluck 
off 
cob 
leaf 
plug 
teethe 
cloth 
2.4 Intensity of articulation: Lenis and fortis 
Try saying the following pairs of words while holding your hand in front of y o u r 
mouth, or placing a small, light, flat object, such as a dried leaf or a feather, on the palm 
of your hand held near your mouth: bad/pad, van/Ian, this/thin, zoo/shoe, ga
You will notice, by either feeling the air or seeing the object move, that with each of t h e 
pairs "extra" air is forced out at the underlined initial sound of one of the words c o m -
pared with the other. Which ones are they? This difference can still be noticed even 
when you whisper the words. This exercise demonstrates the difference in the intensity 
of the articulation, i.e. the difference between lenis and fortis sounds. Remember that 
the lenis/fortis distinction also occurs between other pairs of sounds in English. 
2.5 Place of articulation 
Try the exercises below, and notice where there is an obstruction in the flow of air 
through the mouth. 
2.5a Prepare to pronounce the first sound in the word pan, but do not actually say 
anything. Notice how there is a build-up of air pressure in the mouth. Which parts of 
your mouth are doing the most work to hold back the pressure? When you release t h e 
sound and say the word, which parts move? Try the same with tan and can. 
2.5b N o w repeat the exercise with the words/kr, other, and cash, this time concentrat-
ing on the first, middle, and final sounds, respectively, trying to prolong them. Notice 
where the sound is made in your mouth. Where do you feel a stream of air passing 
through? 

Exercises 
1 7 
2.5c Again trying to prolong the initial sounds, say the words might, light, right. Com-
pare this with the prolonged final sounds in ram, ran, rang. Think about the places 
where you can feel the sounds being made. What parts of the vocal tract are in contact 
or close proximity? 
These three exercises show you some of the variety of place of articulation. There are 
many other places of articulation, which we shall discuss in the next lesson. 
2.6 Manner of articulation 
2.6a Try saying the initial sounds in the words pad and mad, the middle sounds in utter 
and usher, and the final sounds in thing and thick. Notice with each set that the sounds 
are made in approximately the same place, but your mouth is doing different things, i.e. 
the sounds are articulated in a different manner. Can you describe - even if only 
impressionistically - what is happening in these different articulations? Think about 
whether the articulators are in contact, or are close together. Where is the air-stream 
flowing through? 
2.6b Prepare to say the initial sounds in mood, nude, lewd, and rude. N o w hold your 
articulators in these positions, and try to blow out some extra air without either open-
ing or closing your mouth. You should notice that the air in the words mood and nude 
passes through the nose, while in lewd and rude it passes through the mouth. In fact, 
with the latter pair, you can also feel that the air passes over the side of the tongue in 
lewd, and over the centre of the tongue in rude. 
In the next lesson, we shall discuss how these and other articulations can be described 
formally, and give them their technical names. 


LESSON 
CONSONANTS 
The phoneme 
Those speech sounds that we have so far rather elaborately referred to as "having a 
function within the sound system", or as "part of the speakers' langue or competence", 
are called phonemes [from Greek pbonema, 
'sound']. The phoneme is a concept used 
in phonology, which is why the subdiscipline is sometimes calledphonemics in the US. 
We saw in Lesson Two that a single phoneme can distinguish the word cab from cap, 
serve from surf, fool from full, and zeal from seal. A phoneme can therefore be defined 
as the smallest distinctive, or contrastive, unit [kleinste 
bedeutungsunterscheiden.de 
Einheit] in the sound system of a language. To put it in other words, a phoneme con-
trasts meaningfully with other speech sounds. We also saw in Lesson Two that the con-
trast between two phonemes lies solely in those characteristics that are phonologically 
relevant, and that it is therefore sufficient to describe phonemes only in terms of their 
distinctive features. Thus a phoneme has also been defined as a bundle of distinctive 
features (illustrated nicely by labels such as "fortis labiodental fricative"). The various 
definitions emphasise different aspects of the phoneme, but they all mean more or less 
the same thing. 
It is important to remember that phonemes are abstract, idealised sounds that are 
never pronounced and never heard. Actual, concrete speech sounds can be regarded as 
the realisation of phonemes by individual speakers, and are referred to as phones [from 
Greek phone, 'voice']. The phone, then, is a concept used in phonetics. We learnt in 
Lesson One that phonetic symbols which represent phonemes are enclosed in slashes, //. 
Strictly speaking, they are then phonemic symbols, rather than phonetic symbols, but 
unfortunately this terminological distinction is not always observed. Phones, the true 
phonetic symbols, occur in square brackets, [ ]. 
If we want to establish what phonemes there are in a sound system, also called a 
phonemic system or phoneme inventory [Phoneminventar], 
we need to find pairs of 
words that differ in meaning and in only-one sound. Linguists do this, for example, 
when they record a previously unknown language. Each of the two contrasting sounds 
in such a minimal pair [Minimalpaar] 
is a distinct phoneme. We have shown, then, that 
the final sounds in cab and cap are phonemes because the two words are a minimal pair. 
The same is true of the final sounds in serve/surf, the middle sounds in fool/full, 
and the 
initial sounds in zeal/seal. Note that orthography is absolutely irrelevant here: The 
words write and rhyme, even though very different in their spelling, contrast only in 

20 
Lesson T h r e e 
their final sounds and are therefore a minimal pair. The spelling of week and weak, 
o n 
the other hand, differs in only one letter, but the two words are pronounced identically 
and are therefore not a minimal pair. 
Every language has its own phoneme inventory, of course, but the phonemes s o m e -
times also vary from dialect to dialect or from accent to accent. The phoneme i n v e n t o r y 
of most American English accents, for example, does not include the sound that m o s t 
British speakers pronounce as the second sound in the word shop. Instead, A m e r i c a n 
speakers usually use sounds with the quality of the second sound in father or the s e c -
ond sound in saw. 
The English consonant p h o n e m e s 
We already know that consonants are sounds that are produced by an obstruction of a n 
air-stream either in the pharynx or in the vocal tract. There are 24 consonant p h o n e m e s 
in RP and in most other accents of English. The aim of this lesson is to describe t h e s e 
consonant phonemes to a point where there is only one phoneme in the sound s y s t e m 
of English that fits each description, as we did with the final sound in surf'm 
L e s s o n 
Two. We have learnt that loudness, pitch, tone of voice, and duration are suitable c r i t e -
ria only to describe concrete speech sounds, or phones, but these features cannot d i s -
tinguish phonemes. Length and voicing have proved to be rather unreliable features, 
and since all English sounds are made with egressive pulmonic air, the air-stream m e c h -
anism is not a suitable criterion either. For the description of English consonant p h o -
nemes, we therefore use only the distinctive features: the intensity of articulation, t h e 
place of articulation, and the manner of articulation. 
Place of articulation II 
There are thirteen possible places of articulation in the languages of the world, but n o t 
all of them are utilised in English. They are usually labelled according to the immobile, 
upper speech organ used in their production. The mobile, lower speech organ always 
lies directly opposite. In this section, all the places of articulation, progressing from t h e 
lips to the glottis, are briefly described, and the relevant English consonant phonemes 
for each category are given as IPA symbols. The underlined letters in the example 
words illustrate the sound a symbol represents. Remember that there is a list of all t h e 
phonetic symbols used in this manual and a diagram showing all the relevant speech o r -
gans on the inside front cover. 
(1) Bilabial sounds are produced with both lips. There is only one fortis bilabial i n 
English, namely /p/ as in peach, whereas there are two lenis bilabials, /b/ as in banarici 
and /ml as in mango. 
(2) Labiodental sounds are produced by a movement of the lower lip against the upper 
teeth. There is one fortis labiodental in English, ffl as in film, and one lenis labiodental, 
/v/ as in video. 

Consonants 
21 
The bilabials and labiodentals form one larger group, the labials, because they all make 
use of the lips. 
(3) Dental, or interdental, sounds are made with the tongue tip and rims between the 
upper and lower teeth or against the upper teeth. The two dentals in English are often 
popularly called "teeaitch" because of their spelling. They are the fortis /©/ as in thin 
and the lenis 161 as in this. 
(4) Alveolar sounds are made with the tongue tip coming near or touching the bony ridge 
behind the upper teeth, called the alveolar ridge [Zahndamm, 
Zahnfdcher, 
Zabnfort-
satz]. The two fortis alveolars are /t/ as in tiger and /s/ as in snake. The four lenis 
alveolars are /d/ as in dolphin, Izl as in zebra, In/ as in nightingale, and l\l as in leopard. 
(5) Postalveolar sounds are made with the tongue tip approaching or touching the rear 
of the alveolar ridge or the area just behind it. There is only one postalveolar in English, 
namely the lenis Ixl as in red. 
(6) Retroflex sounds [from Latin retroflexus, 
'bent backwards'] are produced when 
the tip of the tongue is curled back to approach or make contact with the front part of 
the roof of the mouth, called the hard palate [barter Gaumen, 
Gaumendach\ 
just be-
hind the alveolar ridge. There are no retroflex phonemes in RP or any other accent of 
English. There is, however, a retroflex pronunciation variant (pertaining to parole or 
performance) of the Ixl phoneme in most American accents, in Irish English, and in ac-
cents of south-west England in words like worse and hard. This retroflex Ixl is phoneti-
cally transcribed as [ \ \ 
The dentals, alveolars, postalveolars, and retroflex sounds all involve the tip of the 
tongue, and are therefore grouped together as apical sounds [from Latin apex, 'point']. 
(7) Palatoalveolar sounds are made with the tongue tip touching the alveolar ridge, 
and with a simultaneous raising of the blade of the tongue [Zungenblatt] 
towards the 
hard palate. They therefore belong to the group of laminal sounds [from Latin lamina, 
'thin plate*]. The two fortis palatoalveolars in English are /tJV as in cheese and l\l as in 
sherry. The two lenis palatoalveolars are /oV as in gin and /$/ as in measure. 
(8) Palatal sounds are produced when the body of the tongue comes near or touches 
the (hard) palate. The lenis 1)1 as inj.es is the only palatal in English. An example from 
another language is the final sound in the High German pronunciation of the word ich, 
transcribed as [c]. 
(9) Velar sounds are made by placing the back of the tongue [Hinterzunge] 
against or 
near the velum, or soft palate [weicher Gaumen, 
Gaumenseget], 
There is one fortis ve-
lar in English, namely /k/ as in Canada, whereas there are three lenis velars, Igl as in 
Greenland, In/ as in England, and /w/ as in Wales. An example from another language 
is the last sound in the High German word ach, transcribed as [x]. 
The Av/ phoneme is different from the other English velars in that it is labialised, 
which means that it is pronounced with rounded lips. The lips, then, are a secondary 
place of articulation. The Av/ phoneme is therefore more specifically described as a 

22 
Lesson T h r e e 
labiovelar. A place of articulation which adds some quality to the main articulation i
s 
called secondary articulation. Some linguists speak of coarticulation or double a r t i c -
ulation, but these terms are usually reserved for the simultaneous use of two places o f 
obstruction of equal importance, which hardly ever occurs in English. 
(10) Uvular sounds are made by moving the root or back of the tongue against t h e 
uvula [Gaumenzdpfchen], 
which is the appendage that hangs down from the v e l u m . 
There are no uvular phonemes in English. 
(11) Pharyngeal, also pharyngal, sounds are made when the root of the tongue 
i
s 
pulled back in the pharynx. There are no pharyngeal consonant phonemes in English. 
The palatal, the velar, the uvular, and the pharyngeal sounds are grouped together 
a
s 
dorsal sounds because they all use the body of the tongue [from Latin dorsalis, 'of t h e 
back']. 
(12) Epiglottal sounds are produced by a movement of the epiglottis 
[Kehldecket] 
against the lower pharynx. Such sounds do not exist in English. 
(13) Glottal sounds are produced in the larynx when air passes through the glottis. 
The only English phoneme that is articulated in this way is the fortis /h/ as in hat. T h e 
glottal stop, [?], which we briefly discussed in Lesson Two, would also belong in t h i s 
category, but it is not an English phoneme. In some non-standard British accents, it is 
a 
pronunciation variant of the Itl phoneme in certain phonetic environments, as in t h e 
words better and butter. 
Manner of articulation II 
The manner of articulation, as we learnt in Lesson Two, refers to the type or degree o f 
closure of the speech organs. There are eight different manners of articulation that u s e 
an egressive pulmonic air-stream mechanism, plus an additional one that has become a 
conventional category in the description of some languages, including English. In t h i s 
section, we look at all nine categories, progressing from total closure of the speech o r -
gans to a fairly wide opening between them. 
(1) Plosives, or stops [Verschlusslaute], are sounds for which the speaker makes a c o m -
plete closure at some point in the vocal tract, builds up the air pressure while the closure 
is held, and then releases the air explosively through the mouth. English has three f o r t i s 
plosives, namely /p/ as in peach, Itl as in tiger, and /k/ as in Canada. The three l e n i s 
plosives are (hi as in banana, 16/ as in dolphin, and Iql as in Greenland. The glottal s t o p 5 
[?], is a fortis plosive, but we have already noted that it is not an English phoneme. 
(2) Affricates [Affrikata] are sounds that consist of two elements. The first element is 
a 
plosive. This means that affricates, too, require a complete closure in the vocal tract, b u t 
the air is released slowly enough to produce friction, which we hear as a hissing s-like 
sound. This second element is articulated in the same place, i.e. with the same speech 
organs, as the preceding plosive. We therefore say that the two elements are h o m -

Consonants 
23 
organic sounds. There are two affricates in English: the fortis /t|7 as in cheese and the 
lenis lö^l as in gin. (An affricate, then, is represented by one symbol consisting of two 
characters.) 
Affricates are the additional category ^mentioned above. There is no compelling reason 
why we should analyse the two elements of an affricate as a single phoneme. The sequen-
ces Itxl and /dr/, for example, are also homorganic sounds, but only very few linguists 
would recognise them as independent phonemes. Nevertheless, this analysis is usual 
for /tJ7 and /dj/, so that the word judge consists of three phonemes, rather than five. 
(3) Nasals [Nasale] have a complete closure in the vocal tract as well. They stand out 
from all other English phonemes, however, in that the velum, or soft palate, is lowered, 
so that air escapes through the nose. In the production of English nasals, usually all the 
air escapes through the nose. Other languages have nasals where some air also passes 
through the mouth, as in the final sound in the French word bon. The three English 
nasals are all lenis sounds: /m/ as in mango, Ixxl as in nightingale, and /rj/ as in England. 
All other English phonemes are usually produced with the velum raised, so that the 
passage to the nasal cavity [Nasenraum] 
is blocked, and the air escapes only through 
the mouth. In order to distinguish them from nasals, these sounds are sometimes called 
orals. We cannot actually feel our velum moving, but there is a simple test that shows us 
whether the velum is lowered or raised, and the effect that the position has on the sound 
quality: While you are pronouncing one of the three English nasals, stop your nose and 
release it again. You will hear how the quality changes when the air-stream through the 
nose is blocked. Try the same with any other English sound and you will find that the 
sound quality does not change a bit. Why? Because in oral sounds, the passage through 
the nose is already blocked at the velum. 
Another terminological distinction that is sometimes made and that we should 
mention at this point is the contrast between non-continuant and continuant sounds. 
Non-continuants are produced with a complete closure of the speech organs. Plosives 
and affricates are non-continuants because the passage through both the mouth and the 
nose is blocked. By contrast, all other speech sounds, including nasals, are made with-
out a complete closure of the speech organs, and are therefore called continuants 
[Dauerlaute]. 
Some linguists count English nasals among the non-continuants, how-
ever, because the passage through the mouth is always closed. 
(4) Rolls, or trills [gerollte Laute, Schwing- oder Vibrationslaute], 
involve an intermit-
tent closure of the speech organs in the vocal tract. Rolls are produced when one 
articulator vibrates against another. There are no rolled phonemes in RP or any other 
accent of English, but some dialects have a rolled pronunciation variant of the Ixl pho-
neme. The typical Scottish Ixl, for example, is produced by a vibration of the tongue 
against the alveolar ridge. Such an alveolar roll sometimes also occurs in stylised speech, 
for example on stage. The phonetic symbol for this pronunciation variant is the same as 
the one for the underlying phoneme, namely [r]. 
(5) Flaps, or taps [einschlägige 
oder geschlagene Vibrationslaute], 
involve a single flap 
by one articulator against another. There are no flapped phonemes in English, but there 

2 4 
Lesson T h r e e 
are some pronunciation variants that are produced in this way. For example, in s o m e 
accents of British English, including RP, the Ixl phoneme in words like very is s o m e -
times realised as a single flap of the tongue tip against the alveolar ridge. It sounds a l -
most like a very fast [d]. Such an alveolar flap, transcribed as [r], is also very c o m m o n 
i
n 
American English, where it is a pronunciation variant of the III and Idl phonemes 
i
n 
words like latter and ladder, which are then pronounced identically. 
(6) Fricatives [Reibelaute] are made when air forces its way through a very narrow g a p 
between two speech organs, thereby producing audible friction. The fricatives fall i n t o 
two subcategories, slit fricatives and groove fricatives, according to the width 
a n d 
depth of the air passage. 
There are four slit fricatives [slit, German 'Schlitz'] in English: the fortis If/ as i n 
film and Id/ as in thin, and the lenis Ivl as in video and 16/ as in this. The fortis Ihl as i n 
hat is usually also grouped together with the slit fricatives, but is best described as 
a 
cavity fricative as it has no point of narrowing. 
Groove fricatives are made by forming a groove [German 'Rinne, Furche'] a l o n g 
the front part of the tongue [Vorderzunge]. They are made with more intensity than t h e 
slit fricatives, and have a sharper, 5-like sound. They are therefore also called sibilants 
[from Latin sibilans, 'hissing']. The second element in affricates, which we discussed 
above, is a groove fricative, or sibilant. The four groove fricatives in English are t h e 
fortis /s/ as in snake and l\l as in sherry, and the lenis Izl as in zebra and / j / as i n 
measure. Because of their fricative element, the two English affricates, ll\l and / d 3 / , c a n 
also be regarded as groove fricatives. 
(7) Lateral fricatives [lateral, German 'seitlich'] are made with air that escapes a r o u n d 
the sides of a partial closure of the speech organs. There are no lateral fricatives in R P 
0
r 
any other accent of English. 
(8) Laterals, or more specifically lateral approximants [Laterale, laterale 
Approxi-
manten], are also made with air that escapes around the sides of a partial closure of t h e 
speech organs, but the air passage is not quite as narrow as in lateral fricatives. EngHsj^ 
has only one lateral, namely the lenis IV as in leopard, where the tip of the t o n g u e 
touches the centre of the alveolar ridge. 
(9) Approximants [Approximanten] 
are generally made with a wider gap between t h e 
speech organs than is the case in the production of fricatives. The speech organs a p ^ 
proach each other, but they do not touch each other. The three English approximants 
are all lenis phonemes: Ixl as in red, 1)1 as in yes, and /w/ as in Wales. 
It should be noted here that no other consonant phoneme of English is as variable i
n 
its actual pronunciation as the Ixl phoneme. It has several different realisations, three o f 
which we have already encountered in this lesson. Only one of these three, the r e t r o f i t 
is also an approximant, like the underlying phoneme. The manner of the articula-
tion of the other two pronunciation variants is not the same as that of the underlyi n 
phoneme: As we already know, [r] is a roll, and [r] is a flap. 

Consonants 
2 5 
Lateral approximants and approximants are grouped together and referred to as 
frictionless continuants [geräuschlose Dauerlaute] 
because none of them involves au-
dible friction. 
The consonant table 
We can now use the three distinctive features to describe all English consonant pho-
nemes. It is easier, however, if we first arrange the relevant phonetic symbols in a coor-
dinate system with the places of articulation on the horizontal axis, the manners of ar-
ticulation along the vertical axis, fortis sounds positioned on the left side of the grid 
squares, and lenis sounds on the right. You will find such a table containing all English 
consonant phonemes on the inside back cover of this manual. 
If we now look at the consonant table, we can easily see that the HI in surf is a fortis 
labiodental fricative, as we have already learnt in Lesson Two, or that In/ is a lenis alve-
olar nasal, and Ixl a lenis postalveolar approximant. But the table reveals much more 
than that. It shows that sixteen consonant phonemes form pairs within which the only 
distinguishing feature is the intensity of the articulation. For example, Ipl and lb/ are 
both bilabial plosives, and the only difference between them is that Ipl is produced 
with fortis articulation, and lb/ with lenis articulation. Similarly, the only difference be-
tween III and Id/, Ikl and /g/, AJ7 and M3/, HI and /v/, IB/ and 161, Is/ and Izl, and /J/ 
and / j / is that the first phoneme within each pair is fortis, and the second is lenis. There 
is also only one difference between Ibl and /m/, for example, but here the difference lies 
in the manner of articulation: Both sounds are lenis bilabials, but Ibl is a plosive 
whereas /ml is a nasal. Furthermore, the consonant table makes it easy to see that other 
sounds are differentiated by two distinctive features. For example, l\l and Izl are both 
groove fricatives, or sibilants, but they differ in the place as well as in the intensity of ar-
ticulation. Finally, the table also shows that there are sounds that do not share a single 
distinctive feature. For example, HI and Id/ differ in place, manner, and intensity. 
The problem cases 
Of semi-vowels, contoids, and vocoids ... 
All consonants generally have two things in common: (a) They are made with an ob-
struction of air, and (b) they typically occur at the margins of syllables. By contrast, the 
sounds that (a) are produced without any obstruction of air, and (b) usually occur at the 
centre of syllables are called vowels. The English frictionless continuants, i.e. the lateral 
approximant, IM, and the approximants, /r, j , w/, however, do not fit neatly into the 
consonant category nor into the vowel category. We have so far regarded them as con-
sonants because they always appear at the margins, and never at the centre, of syllables. 
This can be illustrated by words like lot, car, yes, and wax, and by the fact that tip or trp, 
for example, are not possible words in English. We learnt in Lesson One that phonol-
ogy, more precisely segmental phonology, is concerned with the function and possible 
combinations of sounds. We see, therefore, that the frictionless continuants are conso-

2 6 
Lesson T h r e e 
nants from a phonological point of view. On the other hand, they are produced w i t h a l -
most no obstruction of air. In the case of / j / , for example, the obstruction is only g r e a t 
enough to cause audible friction after /p, t, k/ at the beginning of a syllable, as in t h e 
words pupil, tune, and queue. In the case of /w/, we hear friction only after /t, k/, as 
i
n 
twin or quite. From a purely phonetic point of view, then, the frictionless c o n t i n u a n t s 
are (almost) vowels. 
In order to reflect their intermediate status, all frictionless continuants may be r e -
garded as semi-vowels [Halbvokale] 
(or semi-consonants, of course, but this t e r m 
i
s 
hardly ever used). They are sometimes also called glides [Gleitlaute] because, when a r -
ticulating these sounds as parts of actual words, the tongue moves in gliding fashion e i -
ther towards or away from a neighbouring vowel. Most linguists, however, refer o n l y 
to /j, w/ as semi-vowels, or glides. 
Alternatively, we can reserve the traditional terms consonant and vowel to r e f e r 
only to the phonological properties of sounds. This would mean that we refer to t h o s e 
sounds that typically occur at the margins of syllables as consonants, and to those t h a t 
usually occur at the centre as vowels. In order to refer to the phonetic properties, w
e 
then need another set of terms. We can call sounds that are produced with an o b s t r u c -
tion of air contoids (rather than consonants), and those that are produced without a n y 
obstruction vocoids (rather than vowels). Thus all consonants except the frictionless 
continuants are contoids, all frictionless continuants are vocoids, and so are all v o w e l s . 
We should note, however, that this terminology has not been universally a d o p t e d . 
Most linguists use the concept of semi-vowel, or glide, and subsume this category u n -
der the broader consonant category, as we did above. 
... and more terminological confusion 
This section would be unnecessary if it were not one of the aims of this manual to a c -
quaint you with as many different terms for the same concept as possible, or, c o n -
versely, with different definitions of the same term. This is done in order to make it e a s -
ier for'you to read a wide range of linguistic texts with varying theoretical a n d 
terminological approaches. It is important to be aware that not all linguists use all t h e 
terms introduced in this lesson in the same way. 
In connection with groove fricatives, or sibilants, note that some linguists r e g a r d 
only /z, s/ as belonging in this category whereas here we also include li, d3, J, tJV. 
Some linguists restrict the group of approximants to /l, j / , others to / j , w/. I
n 
a 
broader sense, the term sometimes covers the same group of sounds that we call 
frictionless continuants, i.e. /I, r, j , w/. Very few linguists also include the three nasals, 
/m, n, n/, in this group because the nasals can, in certain phonetic environments, s o u n d 
continuously without audible friction. 
We have learnt that semi-vowels, or glides, encompass either all frictionless c o n -
tinuants or, more commonly, only /j, w/. Occasionally, /h/ is also put in this category. 
Finally, /l, r/ are sometimes referred to as liquids [from Latin liquidus, 
'flowing^ 
clear'] because of their "flowing" sound quality. It is a traditional term that is not o f t e n 
used anymore, and should best be avoided. 

Exercises 
27 
EXERCISES 
3.1 Intensity of articulation 
As in exercise 2.4 from the previous lesson, say the pairs of words below with your 
hand in front of your mouth. Pay attention to the sensation of the "extra" air forced out 
as you say the sounds represented by the underlined letters. 
zoo, Sue 
maze, mass 
lose, loose 
measure, mesh 
treasure, trash 
pleasure, lash 
gin, chin 
midge, match 
judge, church 
You will notice that with the sounds [s, J, tj] you feel extra air forced out compared 
with the sounds [z, 3, d3]. The first word in each pair has a lenis fricative, with less in-
tense articulation. Pairing of the words, and thus comparing individual sounds in those 
words, demonstrates the difference in intensity of articulation between lenis and fortis 
sounds. Remember that the lenis/fortis distinction also occurs in other consonant 
sounds in English. 
3.2 Place of articulation 
By keeping two of the three distinctive features of English consonants constant, we can 
discover the effect of the third. In exercise 3.2a, the sounds all have a plosive articula-
tion and their intensity is fortis; we thus focus on the place where these sounds are ar-
ticulated. In exercise 3.2b, the sounds all have fricative articulation and their intensity is 
lenis; again, place is the feature which varies. 
3.2a Prepare to pronounce a [p] as in the word pin, but do not actually say anything. 
Notice how there is a build-up of air pressure in the mouth. Which parts of your mouth 
are doing the most work to hold back the pressure? When you do release the sound and 
say the word? Which parts move? Try the same with [t] in tin and [k] in king. These will 
show you how the place where an obstruction is made varies. Describe the places of ar-
ticulation of these three sounds. 
3.2b Try saying a long [v] as in the word very. Where do you feel a stream of air passing 
through? Try saying the sounds [5] as in the, and [z] as in zip. Where do you feel the 
stream of air now? This again shows variation in place of articulation. Describe the 
place of articulation of these three sounds. 
3.3 Manner of articulation 
In this exercise, although intensity and place of articulation do vary, try to consider 
only the manner of articulation. Group the sounds represented by the underlined let-
ters in the words below according to the degree of obstruction, using the terms you 
have learnt in this lesson. 
door 
shore 
saw 
jaw 
nor 
chore 
war 
gore 
four 
more 
paw 
law 
raw 
bore 
core 
your 
vote 
tore 
zoom 
think 
sing 
there 
horse 
treasure 

28 
Lesson T h r e e 
3.4 Combining distinctive features 
Taking the sound groups from exercise 3.3, arrange them from left to right with t h e 
sounds articulated closest to the front of the mouth on the left, and those a r t i c u l a t e d 
furthest back on the right. When you have completed this task, compare 
y o u r 
arrangment with the solution at the end of this manual, and then with the English c o n -
sonant table on the inside back cover. 
3.5 Relating IPA symbols to sounds 
3.5a Consider how the sounds represented by the underlined letters are made in t h e 
following pairs of words. Which features (intensity, place, or manner) distinguish t h e 
sounds and hence the words from each other? Write the IPA symbol for each of t h e s e 
sounds. 
rope 
robe 
right 
ride 
home 
hope 
link 
sing 
leave 
leap 
word 
bird 
think 
zinc 
yeast 
feast 
3.5b In the next two sets of words, the distinctive differences between the sounds r e p -
resented by the underlined letters are even greater. Think about how the sounds d i f f e r 
and write the IPA symbol for the sounds. Can you think of any other sets of m i n i m a l 
pairs which show how sounds contrast meaning? 
home 
Rome 
comb 
rice 
vice 
nice 
your 
four 
jaw 
ship 
hip 
lip 
thin 
shin 
chin 
source 
force 
course 
horse 
tap 
map 
nap 
g
aP 
3.6 IPA symbols 
Write only the consonants and semi-vowels that occur in the following words as I P j \ 
symbols. For example, dogs should be transcribed [dgz]. Do a set, then check your a n -
swers before you do the next set. 
3.6a 
dot 
top 
hot 
path 
log 
post 
girl 
cat 
age 
stop 
able 
sport 
thumb 
break 
few 
vine 
waste 
north 
song 
zebra 
wash 
measure 
bottle 
mum 
itch 
than 
five 
wrong 

Exercises 
29 
3.6b 
3.6c 
even 
leave 
very 
cuff 
fine 
tough 
awful 
this 
brother 
choir 
thin 
seen 
easy 
breathe 
ozone 
witches 
ducks 
hens 
foxes 
bus 
bust 
weather 
away 
sow 
pure 
faith 
mouth 
morning 
new 
thank 
rabbit 
car 
kite 
tablet 
judge 
church 
switch 
gin 
dreamed 
atlas 
logging 
stick 
unit 
ache 
smash 
treasure 
ice 
pleasure 
eyes 
finger 
singer 
cure 
other 
thought 
broth 
the 


LESSON 
VOWELS 
The description of vowels 
We briefly introduced the notion of the vowel [from Latin vocalis, 'vocal'] in Lesson 
Three. Thus we already know that, (a) phonetically, vowels are produced without any 
obstruction of air, and, (b) phonologically, vowels usually occupy the centre of a sylla-
ble. Even though most languages have over twice as many consonants as vowels, in a 
way, vowels can be seen as predominant: They carry most of the loudness, pitch, and 
tone of voice that we perceive in concrete utterances, and since their sound quality var-
ies considerably from region to region, vowels make up most of the characteristics that 
distinguish different accents of the same language. Different accents may even have dif-
ferent vowel systems. The typical Scottish pronunciation of English, for example, has 
only 10 vowel phonemes whereas RP has 12. The predominance of vowels is also re-
flected in the origin of the word consonant: It comes from the Latin word 
consonans, 
which means 'sounding together'. This implies that consonants do not comfortably oc-
cur alone. They usually sound together with vowels. 
What are the criteria that we use to describe English vowel phonemes? We noted in 
Lesson Two that loudness, pitch, tone of voice, and duration are suitable criteria only 
to describe concrete speech sounds, or phones, but these features cannot distinguish 
phonemes. Length has proved to be a rather unreliable feature, and so has voicing. It is 
important to note, here, that all English vowels are typically voiced, so that voicing 
would not count as a distinctive feature anyway. The same is true of the air-stream 
mechanism since all English sounds are made with egressive pulmonic air. Even the 
place of articulation, which is one of the three distinctive features for the description of 
consonant phonemes, is of no relevance here because the air-stream is not obstructed 
by the speech organs. The intensity of articulation, on the other hand, does contribute 
to the distinction between vowel phonemes, as we shall see later, but it is not nearly as 
important as it is for the description of consonants, and most linguists therefore neglect 
this feature altogether. 
What we are left with, then, and what we solely rely on is the manner in which the 
English vowels are articulated. In our discussion of the manners of articulation of con-
sonants in the previous lesson, we moved from total closure of the speech organs to a 
narrowing between them. Since vowels are produced without any obstruction of air, 
none of the nine categories in that progression applies here. Furthermore, we have 

3 2 
Lesson F o u r 
learnt that all English sounds, except the three nasal consonants, are usually o r a l 
sounds, which are produced with the velum raised and air escaping only through t h e 
mouth. It follows that all English vowels are orals, and that this feature can t h e r e f o r e 
not distinguish different vowel phonemes either. But apart from the raising of the v e -
lum, the different manners of vowel articulation also involve slight movements of t h e 
tongue and lips, as we shall see below. 
Manner of articulation III 
Tongue and lip movements result in varying shapes of the mouth, which can be d e -
scribed in terms of ( 1 ) closeness/openness, (2) frontness/backness, and (3) the shape o f 
the lips. These are the three criteria for the description of vowel phonemes. 
(1) Closeness/openness, or tongue height in American terminology, refers to the d i s -
tance between the tongue and the palate (and at the same time to the position of t h e 
lower jaw). If the tongue is high, as in the last sound of the word bee, it is close to t h e 
palate, and we therefore speak of a close vowel [geschlossener Vokal]. If the tongue i s 
low, as in the third sound of the word starling, the gap between it and the palate is m o r e 
open, and we speak of an open vowel [offener Vokal]. Between these extremes, t h e r e 
are three intermediate levels: If the tongue is in a mid-high position, i.e. a bit lower t h
a
r
i 
high, the resultant sound is a mid-close vowel, or half-close vowel 
[halbgeschlossener 
Vokal]. If it is mid-low, i.e. a bit higher than low, we hear a mid-open vowel, 
0
r 
half-open vowel [halboffener 
Vokal]. A vowel that is made with a tongue height s o m e -
where between mid-high and mid-low is simply called a mid vowel. 
(2) Frontness/backness refers to the part of the tongue that is raised highest. If it is t h e 
front of the tongue (in which case the body of the tongue is pushed forward), as in t h e 
last sound in bee, we speak of a front vowel \Vor der zungenvokal]. 
If the back of t h e 
tongue is raised highest (in which case the body of the tongue is pulled back), as in t h e 
middle sound in goose, the resultant sound is a back vowel [Hinterzungenvokal]. 
B e -
tween these extremes, we recognise one intermediate position: If the centre of t h e 
tongue is raised highest, as in the second sound of the word bird, we speak of a central 
vowel 
[Mittelzungenvokal]. 
(3) The shape of the lips can be either spread, neutral, or round. English does not u t i -
lise this contrast very much. As in most other languages, the spreading of the lips u s u -
ally correlates with frontness, and lip-rounding with backness. This means that t h e r e 
are no two vowel phonemes in English that differ only in the shape of the lips. M a n y 
linguists therefore do not regard this criterion as relevant in English. The effect that t h e 
shape of the lips has on the vowel quality can be heard when we compare the second 
sound in hurt (which is the same as the one in bird above) with the second sound of t h e 
German word hört: Both sounds are mid central vowels, i.e. they are identical with r e -
spect to closeness/openness and frontness/backness. The only difference between 
them is that the English vowel is produced with the lips in a neutral shape, and the G e r -
man vowel with rounded lips. 

Vowels 
33 
The vowel chart I 
Since the spreading or rounding of the lips cannot distinguish vowel phonemes in Eng-
lish, there are only two distinctive features for the description of all English vowels: 
closeness/openness and frontness/backness. Just as we have arranged the symbols for 
consonant phonemes in a table, we can also arrange the symbols for vowels schemati-
cally on the basis of these two criteria. Depending on the particular language under de-
scription, the vowel symbols are superimposed on the space within a triangle or a quad-
rilateral. Such a vowel chart, or vowel diagram, was first devised by Daniel Jones. It 
reflects roughly the space in the centre of the mouth, where the vowels are articulated. 
You will find a vowel chart containing the symbols for all RP vowel phonemes on the 
inside back cover of this manual, and it is recommended that you refer to it as you con-
tinue reading this lesson. 
The closeness or openness of a vowel is shown by the vertical position of the sym-
bol in the vowel chart: The higher the symbol, the closer the tongue is to the palate 
when articulating the corresponding sound. Conversely, the lower the symbol, the 
more open the gap between the tongue and the palate. In other words, close vowels oc-
cupy the upper part of the vowel chart, and open vowels the lower part. Two horizontal 
lines mark the mid-close and mid-open positions. 
Frontness or backness is indicated by the horizontal position of the symbols: The 
further left the symbol, the more front the part of the tongue that is raised highest when 
articulating the corresponding sound. Thus the symbols on the left of the vowel chart 
represent front vowels. The further right the symbol, the more back the part of the 
tongue involved. The symbols on the right, then, represent back vowels. It goes with-
out saying that the vowels in the central area of the chart are central vowels. 
The vowel systems of most languages of the world can be represented by symbols 
that are evenly distributed within the vowel chart. This phenomenon is called vowel 
dispersion. Most vowel systems are arranged within a triangle. English belongs to the 
less than 10 per cent of the languages whose vowel systems have a more or less quadri-
lateral shape. The vowel chart is then sometimes called a vowel quadrilateral [Vokal-
viereck]. More specifically, the English vowel chart has the form of a trapezium, which 
is reflected in the German term Vokaltrapez, 
but there is no equivalent term used in 
English. 
The cardinal vowels 
In order to describe the vowels of any given language, and compare the vowel systems 
of different languages more precisely than is possible by using only the distinctive fea-
tures, Daniel Jones invented 18 reference vowels, called cardinal vowels 
[Kardinal-
vokale]. They illustrate the extremes of vowel quality that the vocal tract is able to pro-
duce. It is important to understand that the cardinal vowels are not sounds of a 
particular language. Phoneticians (and only they) have to learn to recognise and articu-
late these artificial sounds, so that they can describe all natural vowels in relation to the 
nearest cardinal vowel. A vowel chart with all cardinal vowels is given in Figure 3. 

34 
Lessonjour 
close 
(1) i (9) y 
front 
central 
back 
(17)1(18)« 
(16)UI(8)« 
mid-close 
(2) e (1 
mid-open 
open 
(15) Tf (7)° 
(14) A (6) 3 
(4) a (12) CE 
(5) a (13)D 
Fig. 3 Cardinal vowel chart 
Since the cardinal vowels are extremes, they occupy the very edges of the vowel 
chart. They are numbered counter-clockwise, beginning in the upper left corner. The 
vowels 1 to 8 are the primary cardinal vowels. They can be described as close front, 
mid-close front, mid-open front, open front, open back, mid-open back, mid-close 
back, and close back. We have already mentioned that, in English and most other lan-
guages, the spreading of the lips usually correlates with frontness, and lip-rounding 
with backness. This is also roughly true of the primary cardinal vowels: Vowels 1 to 5 
are produced with unrounded, and vowels 6 to 8 with rounded lips. For this reason, the 
primary cardinal vowels generally sound somewhat familiar to speakers of European 
languages, and they are, of course, more relevant when describing these languages. 
The secondary cardinal vowels are the vowels 9 to 16. They occupy the same posi-
tions as the primary cardinal vowels in the vowel chart, but they sound less familiar to 
us because the shape of the lips is reversed: Vowels 9 to 13 are produced with rounded, 
and vowels 14 to 16 with unrounded lips. The two remaining cardinal vowels 17 and 
18 
are close central vowels with unrounded and rounded lips, respectively. 
All cardinal vowels can be represented by phonetic symbols. Unfortunately, some 
of these symbols are identical with the symbols that we use to represent English vowels 
even though the quality of the sounds is quite different. Because the cardinal vowels are 
not part of a sound system of a language, their symbols are usually enclosed in square 
brackets, hke any other concrete sound. It is therefore important that we gather from 
the context whether a vowel symbol in square brackets represents a cardinal vowel or 
concrete vowel of a particular language. 

1 form pairs whose mem-
we have seen that the primary and ^
f
^
J
d 
can only be ^ j ^ c u s t o m a r y 
bers occupy the same position in the vowel c b , 
^ the same ^ ' 
^ 
for 
t h e 
^ P e o f t n I u P s . I f a l h h e c a r d W v o w ^ ^ 
to put the symbol for the unrounded mem 
q { c a r d i n a l v 
i o n . 
rounded counterpart on the right. Thus 
i n t h e visual pres 
the distinction between them is not usually 
1 different sets of 
« English vowel phonemes 
^ 
{ a C t t h a t 
s
e ^
u
t
h
o
r
s who claim 
The study of vowels is s o r n ^ o r ^ J ^ 
c
j
*
^ g
0 
b e V ^ e 
Phonetic vowel symbols are used in the 1*8 
r
e
a
s
o
n
S fo ^ ^ 
p r 0 n u n 
« 
scope of an introductory t
e
x
t
o
f 
the VPA J 
a l , we us ^ 
^ 
has made it necessary to modify * least 
m this m 
tf 
^ pro** 
. 
Signed to represent the sounds 
on duration 
* 
d 
Proposed by A. C. Gimson in the f i
r
s
t
^ 
^ 
c U o 
^ 
long 
- f H n g ^ flom 1962. We learnt 
are 
sound 
^ 
*at the difference between two vowels 
^ 
more s 
. f l both le b 
"short" lies not only in their relative length 
t
h
e dift 
^ separate 
S ^ 
Vantage of GhJon's symbols i s * * ^ 
l e n g t ^ ^ A ^ f a r 
« t y between long and short vowels by 
^ o s t o t h e r ^ f ^ w i t h ^ 
ffA 
Of the 12 vowel phonemes in RP ^
d
 
t
h
e
r
e 
l S a v o j 
a
n
d a h * of * U 
K 
and 7 typically short. Remember d
*
^ 
rf ^ 
^ u 
a ll KP vowel phonemes on the inside 
c
o
v
e
r 
symbols that we use here on the insiO 
^ 
R o w e l s 
,
b
v
a l e n g t h ^ ^ ^ 
^ ^
o
l
s
f
o
r
l
o
n
g v o w a s a
r e f o u ^ 
e
.
^
^
»
b
^
*
* 
^ i s length mark is not really necessary b
^ 
, 
and 
s, de 
^minds us that some vowels are usually ^ 
& long v o ^ P
d i s t i n C t l v e feat 
^ l f as an agreed standard. We 0 0 « ^ 
[
Q l h e C* 
0 th 
^nner of articulation, and label them acc ^ 
^ ^ 
.0J_/i. ^ ^ 
s p r e a 
W The last sound in the word 
*
e P ^ ' ** ' ' 
, 
. e l l known as a 
tong U e is raised so that it almost too 
. g a l s 0 we 
, 
A close front vowel. 
«ted h y / 3 : A 
f Ae tongue is 
i dcentral 
<2) The second sound in bird, 
°
f ^
1 
^
 
A 
hesitation sound, usually spelt e • 
U
p
S a
r
e i 
^ die 
mid-close and mid-open position, 
^ ^ «,ngO ^ a 
n c U t r a l 
vowel 
r p 4 by / °
: / -
1 
« and the hp s 
^ The third sound in starUng, represented 
^ 
centre and the back is lowered t o ^ 
shape. An open central-back vo 

36 
Lesson F o u r 
(4) The second sound in horse, represented by /o:/. The back of the tongue is raised b e -
tween mid-close and mid-open position, and the lips are rounded. A mid back 
vowel. 
(5) The middle sound in goose, represented by /u:/. The back of the tongue is raised s o 
that it almost touches the palate, and the lips are moderately rounded. A close back 
vowel. 
Short vowels 
We now do the same for the 7 short vowel phonemes: 
(1) The middle sound mfisb, 
represented by l\l. The part of the tongue between t h e 
front and the centre is raised to just above mid-close position, and the lips are 
slightly spread. A mid-close front-central vowel. 
(2) The first sound in egg, represented by /e/. The front of the tongue is raised between 
mid-close and mid-open position, and the lips are slightly spread. A mid front 
vowel. 
(3) The first sound in apple, represented by /se/. The front of the tongue is raised be-
tween mid-open and fully open position, and the lips are slightly spread. A m i d -
open-open front vowel. 
(4) The second sound in butter, represented by / A / . The centre of the tongue is raised 
between mid-open and fully open position, and the shape of the lips is neutral. A 
mid-open-open central vowel. 
(5) The first sound in olive, represented by / D / . The back of the tongue is lowered to al-
most fully open position, and the lips are slightly rounded. An open back vowel. 
(6) The second sound in pudding, 
represented by lul. The part of the tongue between 
the centre and the back is raised to just above mid-close position, and the lips are 
rounded. A mid-close central-back vowel. 
(7) The third sound in spaghetti, the first sound in ago, or the last sound in mother, rep-
resented by hi. The centre of the tongue is raised between mid-close and mid-open 
position, and the lips are in a neutral shape. A mid central vowel. 
This last vowel, hi, is called schwa. It stands out from all other vowels, and requires 
some further comment. The term schwa comes originally from Hebrew, where it means 
'emptiness' and designates a Hebrew vowel of the same quality. You may have noticed 
that the schwa is articulated in practically the same manner as the long vowel h:l, 
and 
therefore the quality of the two sounds is also virtually the same. This is the only excep-
tion to the general observation that a difference in length is accompanied by a differ-
ence in sound quality. (We should note, however, that there is considerable variation in 
the way speakers produce the schwa. For example, it is usually more open in word-final 
position.) But even if the quality of the schwa and h:l is more or less identical, the func-
tion of these two sounds is quite different: Whereas h:l occurs only in stressed sylla-
bles, the schwa occurs solely in unstressed syllables. 

Vowels 
37 
The short III and /u/ also often occur in unstressed syllables, but, unlike the schwa, 
they may occur in stressed syllables as well. Most unstressed syllables contain a schwa, 
which makes this vowel the most frequently occurring sound in English. One study has 
shown that almost 11 per cent of the sounds uttered in an English conversation are 
schwas. The l\l makes up around 8 per cent, whereas /u7 occurs much less frequently 
with less than 1 per cent. For comparison, the most frequent consonant is Inl with 
around 8 per cent. Such a frequency count shows the important function that the schwa 
fulfils in unstressed syllables, and underlines the predominance of vowels over conso-
nants. Many languages do not have a sound that occurs in most unstressed syllables. 
The speakers of these languages may thus find it difficult to pronounce unstressed 
syllables when they learn English. 
It should be added that some linguists analyse the schwa as a pronunciation variant 
(pertaining to parole or performance) of all English vowel phonemes in unstressed syl-
lables, rather than as a phoneme in its own right. They prove the validity of their ap-
proach with word pairs like compete/competition 
or analysis/'analyse, 
where I'v.l and 
/ae/ seem to be neutralised, or reduced, to a schwa. The schwa is therefore sometimes 
called a neutral vowel, or reduced vowel. 
The vowel chart II 
If we now look at the English vowel chart again, we can easily see how certain vowels 
are similar to each other, and how they differ. We have already noted that 13:1 and hi 
are both mid central vowels. The vowel chart also tells us, for example, that IV.I and In:/ 
are both articulated with the tongue almost touching the palate, i.e. they are both close 
vowels, but they differ in the part of the tongue that is raised highest (and in the shape 
of the lips, but since this is not a distinctive feature in English, we do not always need to 
mention it). Conversely, /o/ and h:l are both produced with the back of the tongue 
raised highest, i.e. they are both back vowels, but the significant difference between 
them is that /o/ is more open. (Incidentally, /o/ is the sound, referred to in Lesson 
Three, that does not exist in most American English accents. American speakers usu-
ally use /a:/ or h:l instead.) 
When we compare the English vowel chart with the cardinal vowel chart (in Figure 3), 
we can also describe the English vowel phonemes in relation to the cardinal vowels. For 
example, the articulation of English III is more close and more central than cardinal 
vowel number 2, or [e]. And when articulating English /ae/, the front of the tongue is 
raised highest, but not as high as in cardinal vowel number 3, or [e]. 
Intensity of articulation II: Lax and tense 
We mentioned at the beginning of this lesson that the intensity of articulation also con-
tributes to the distinction between vowel phonemes. It is not nearly as important here, 
however, as it is for the description of consonants, where it is one of the distinctive fea-
tures. In fact, the intensity of vowel articulation has never received much attention in 
British linguistics. American linguists distinguish between lax vowels 
[ungespannt], 

3 8 
Lesson F o u r 
which are articulated with relatively weak breath force, and tense vowels 
[gespannt], 
which are produced with more energy. These labels correspond to the terms lenis a n d 
fortis, which we use to describe the intensity of consonant articulation. 
Since all English vowels are typically voiced, it goes without saying that there c a n -
not be a correlation between the intensity of vowel articulation and voicing, as there is 
with consonants. There is, however, a correlation between the intensity of vowel artic-
ulation and vowel length: All lax vowels are short vowels, and all tense vowels are long. 
Another interesting regularity is that all five tense, long vowels have lax, short counter-
parts that are roughly articulated in the same manner. We have already encountered o n e 
such pair, namely 
o/, where there is practically no difference in the manner of artic-
ulation (and sound quality) at all. The difference between these two sounds, in terms of 
articulatory phonetics, lies merely in their length and, as we now know, in the intensity 
of their articulation. We also know, however, that a difference in length is normally a c -
companied by a difference in sound quality. Thus the members within the remaining 
four pairs are not articulated in exactly the same way. In the pair /a:, A / , the tense, long 
member is articulated with a slightly lower tongue position than its lax, short counterpart. 
This seems to be another exception, since the tense, long members in the last three pairs, /i: 
i/, /o:, D / , and /u:, u/, are all produced with the tongue slightly higher. In the vowel chart 
on the inside back cover, the tense-long/lax-short pairs are indicated by ovals. 
Diphthongs and triphthongs 
The quality of the English long and short vowels remains relatively constant while they 
are being pronounced, i.e. the speech organs do not usually change their position dur-
ing articulation. These vowels are therefore called pure or plain vowels, or monoph-
thongs [from Greek monopbtbonggos, 
'single sound']. In addition to these monoph-
thongs (note the correct pronunciation /mDnof6onz/), RP and most other English 
accents have 8 vowel sequences consisting of two sounds. More precisely, they start 
with a monophthong, and the quality then changes towards, but never quite reaches, 
another monophthong through a gliding movement of the tongue. These vowel se-
quences are called gliding vowels, vowel glides, or diphthongs [from 
Greek 
diphthonggos, 
'double sound'; Doppellaut, 
Zwielaut]. 
A vowel chart indicating the 
starting points and tongue movements of all English diphthongs (note again the correct 
pronunciation /dif0Dnz/) is given in Figure 4, and the diphthongs are also included in 
the list of English sounds on the inside front cover. 
Diphthongs can be divided into three groups: (1) Centring diphthongs move t o -
wards schwa. There are 3 centring diphthongs in English, namely /eo/ as in the word 
air, /ia/ as in ear, and /oW as in tour. The starting points of the last two diphthongs are 
usually slightly higher than the position of the monophthongs i\l and /u/, but we nev-
ertheless use the same symbols, just as we use our familiar symbols for the second ele-
ments of diphthongs although the corresponding sounds (in this case the schwa) are 
not actually reached. The last diphthong, /os/, is not used very much in RP. It is often 
replaced with h:l. (2) Closing diphthongs move towards a closer vowel. Of the 5 clos-

Vowels 
39 
front 
central 
back 
close 
mid-close 
mid-open 
open 
Fig. 4 English diphthongs. 
ing diphthongs in English, 3 move towards /i/, namely /ei/ as in face, /ai/ as in mind, 
and hi/ as in voice. The symbols representing the first elements of /ai/ and h\i are new 
to us because the corresponding sounds are not monophthong phonemes of RP. The 
articulation of [a] is similar to / A / , except that it is more open and more front. And [o] is 
articulated exactly like h:l, but it is shorter, as the missing length mark indicates. The 2 
remaining closing diphthongs move towards hi, namely hd 
as in nose and /ao/ as in 
mouth. The symbol representing the first element of /ao/ may be quite misleading. It 
looks as though it is identical with the first element of /ai/, and this is what we would 
expect from a consistent phonetic alphabet. Unfortunately, however, even though we 
use the same symbol, the [a] in /ao/ is somewhat different from the [a] in /ai/. The first 
element in /au/ is very similar to /a:/, but slightly more close and more front. (3) Open-
ing diphthongs move towards a more open vowel. They do not exist in English. 
Another categorisation of diphthongs divides them into diminuendo, descending, 
or falling diphthongs and crescendo, ascending, or rising diphthongs [fallende und 
steigende Doppellaute]. 
In falling diphthongs, the first element is longer and louder 
than the second. All English diphthongs are usually falling diphthongs. Rising diph-
thongs, where the second element is more prominent, rarely occur in English. One of 
the rare examples may be the diphthong /is/ in words like period or serious, which is 
sometimes pronounced as rising. 
It is important to note that a diphthong is conventionally analysed as one vowel 
phoneme. We would say, then, that words like face, voice, and mouth consist of three 
phonemes. This means that, strictly speaking, RP and most other English accents have 

20 vowels, rather than just 12. We should also note, however, that the conventional 
analysis of a vowel sequence as a single vowel is to a certain extent arbitrary (just l i k e 
the analysis of a homorganic consonant sequence as an affricate). For example, t h e 
words cue and view are usually transcribed as /kju:/ and /vju:/ even though there is n o 
reason why we should not interpret the middle and final sounds of both words as a 
diphthong (in which case it would be a rising diphthong) represented by /io/. For this 
reason, we hardly ever say that English has 20 vowels. We usually say that it has 12 
monophthongs and 8 diphthongs. 
English also has typical vowel sequences that consist of three sounds. They a r e 
called triphthongs [from Greek triphthonggos, 
'tripple sound
5]. The 5 English triph-
thongs (pronounced /tnfGorjz/) are /eis/ as in player, /aia/ as in fire, /oia/ as in royal^ 
/sua/ as in lower, and /aos/ as in flour. Unlike diphthongs, however, triphthongs are n o t 
analysed as separate vowel phonemes. They are interpreted as closing diphthongs followed 
by a schwa. The word royal, then, consists of four phonemes: Ixl, hi/, hi, and III. 
The shortening of vowels, nasals, and the lateral 
To round off this lesson on vowels, we should point out briefly that the duration of a 
vowel, and also that of a nasal and the lateral, is usually shortened when followed b y a 
fortis plosive, affricate, or fricative (except Ihl) - in other words, when followed by / p s 
t, k, tj, f, 9, s/ or l\l - at the end of a syllable. This is most noticeable if the shortened 
sound is a long vowel or a diphthong. Compare, for example, the different durations of 
the otherwise identical sounds represented by the underlined letters within the w o r d 
pairs bead /bird/ and beat Ibv.tl, and nose /nouz/ and note /nsut/, and also within the 
pairs bumble /bAmbl/ and bump /bAmp/, and bells /belz/ and belt /belt/. In the second 
member of each pair, the duration of the sound in question is shortened through the in-
fluence of the following fortis consonant. 
This is especially important for the distinction between words like bead /bi:d/ and 
beat IbvAl, or cab /kaeb/ and cap /kasp/, and serve /s3:v/ and surf /s3:f/, to give two more 
examples, where the only difference in terms of distinctive features is the intensity of 
articulation of the final consonants. We know from Lesson Two that some lenis conso-
nants are almost entirely devoiced in word-final position, and this is precisely the case 
with Id/ in bead, Ibl in cab, and hi in serve. We learnt in that lesson that we still recog-
nise these sounds (and we may even wrongly perceive them as voiced) because of their 
lenis articulation. N o w we know that there is a second feature that helps us distinguish 
between word-final Id/ and It/, for example, and consequently also between bead and 
beat, namely the duration of the preceding vowel. 

Exercises 
4 1 
EXERCISES 
4.1 Closeness vs. openness 
Try saying the sounds [i:, ae, u:, a:] represented by the underlined letters in the words 
below, prolonging the vowel so that you can feel the position of the tongue. Notice 
how [i:, u:] are both close vowels, that is, the tongue is quite close to the palate. With [ae, 
a:] your tongue is further from the palate and your jaw is lowered. 
key, cap, cool, car 
sheet, shack, shoot, shark 
4.2 Frontness vs. backness 
Try saying the sequence of close vowels [i:, u:, i:, u:, i:, u:, i:, u:], and notice how your 
tongue moves backwards and forwards. You could also repeat the words he and who. 
Do the same with the open sounds [33, a:, ae, a:, ae, a:, ae, a:]. This time, you could repeat 
the words bad and bard. Again, you should be able to notice the movement of the 
tongue from the front of your mouth to the back. 
4.3 Transcription 
Write the IPA symbols for the monophthongs, diphthongs, and triphthongs repre 
sented by the underlined letters in the following words: 
heel, nb, leg, back, thumb, arm, body, jaw, foot, tooth, girl, finger 
hajr, ear, cure, eye, face, boy, nose, brow 
iron, player, employer, mower, shower 
4.4 Transcription 
4.4a Write the monophthongs in the following words as IPA symbols and categorise 
them as close, open, or mid. Then categorise them as either front, back, or central vow-
els. (In the case of upper, which has two monophthongs, transcribe the underlined 
sound only.) 
peak, pork, park, pack, perk, peck, pick, put, spook, pot, upper, puck 
bid, bad, bog, bored, bard, bed, boot, bud, wood, about, bird, bead 
eat, drink, work, cook, chat, fuss, rest, start, walk, wash, food, sofa 
4.4b Write down the diphthongs in the following words as IPA symbols and group 
them according to whether they are centring, closing to III, or closing to /u/. 
boat, bay, beer, moor, by, boy, bear, bound 
pie, poison, pier, poor, paste, poke, pair, pound 
tour, waist, toast, care, fear, write, boil, house 

42 
Lesson F o
U
r 
4.5 Reading and writing 
Read or write in normal orthography the short text below: 
[d3Dn saet bai 5i aopan da: hiz braokan fut restid on a Jo:l pi:s D V wod hiz b r A &
3 
tja:lz traid to kri:p pa:st wiSaot weikirj him b\t tja:lziz Ju:z haed ven shpan s a o l z 
aend hiz leisiz wa AndAn hi slipt aova nDkt 5a wod aend waok \p pus d3on bao6 m e n 
wa Dn 5s flo: wen d3il keim in la:firj laodh fi sed Ji 6a:t Sea had bi:n SAm k a m d 
a
v 
aeksidant nao it waz tja.lz hu: wod haev ta spend 5a dei restii] on 5a saofaj 
87 words 

LESSON 
ALLOPHONIC VARIATION 
The allo-/-eme relationship 
The prefix alio- [from Greek all-, 'be different from'] is generally used in linguistics to 
refer to two or more concrete, particular forms of an abstract linguistic unit, which is 
denoted by the suffix -erne. The concrete, particular forms show noticeable variation 
among themselves - they are different from each other - but they do not affect the 
underlying linguistic unit's function. This can be illustrated by a simple example: In 
graphology, i.e. the study of the writing system of a language, the abstract linguistic 
unit is the letter, technically termed grapheme. A letter may appear in several different 
ways, depending on such factors as position within a word or sentence, typeface 
chosen, and handwriting style. The letter <a>, for instance, may appear as a lower-case 
'a', a capital 'A, or an italic 'a'; it may be badly scribbled, or in the writer's best 
copybook handwriting. Irrespective of the precise shape, each of these characters is a 
variant form, or an allograph, of the same grapheme <a>. That the function of the 
grapheme is not affected is illustrated by the fact that the meaning of the word car stays 
the same even if it is written cAr or car (although the latter two are, of course, not 
equally acceptable). 
The first relationship of this kind was established in the field of phonetics and 
phonology in the 1930s. The notion was later also introduced into morphology, where 
it is now an essential element. More allo-/-eme relationships have been postulated in 
other areas of linguistic analysis (such as graphology), and they have even been 
extended to the classification of units of dance, song, or taste. Yet the application of the 
concept to some such areas seems questionable and is not undisputed, to say the least. 
Allophone vs. p h o n e m e 
In phonetics and phonology, the abstract linguistic unit is the phoneme, which we de-
fined in Lesson Three as the smallest distinctive, or contrastive, unit in the sound sys-
tem of a language, i.e. a unit that contrasts meaningfully with other speech sounds. In 
the same lesson, we learnt that a concrete form, or realisation, of a phoneme is called a 
phone. When two or more concrete forms, or realisations, of a phoneme are compared, 
each of these forms is referred to as an allophone, rather than a phone. An allophone 
can therefore be defined as one realisation of a phoneme among others. Like phones, al-

44 
Lesson Five 
lophones are enclosed within square brackets, [ ], because they represent a concrete u t -
terance. The terms phone and allophone, then, pertain to phonetics because they are r e -
lated to parole or performance, and the term phoneme pertains to phonology because it 
is related to langue or competence. 
The relationship between allophone and phoneme can be exemplified by the place 
of articulation of the English phoneme /n/, which, as we know from Lesson Three, is 
normally articulated at the alveolar ridge (behind the upper teeth), as in ten. Its place o f 
articulation shifts forward to the upper teeth, however, if the sound occurs before t h e 
dental /8/, as in tenth. We thus speak of the alveolar and dental allophones of t h e 
alveolar phoneme /n/. 
It should be pointed out, here, that the concept of allophone is not entirely new t o 
us: We have already encountered allophones in previous lessons, but have so far simply-
referred to them as "pronunciation variants" or "realisations" of a phoneme. In Lesson 
Two, for example, we briefly touched on the fact that lenis sounds, which are usually-
voiced, may also occur as voiceless variants; and in Lesson Three, we had the glottal 
stop, [?], as a variant of the /t/ phoneme, and we learnt that the Ixl phoneme can b e 
realised in different ways. All these variants and realisations are allophones, and w e 
shall look at them more systematically later in this lesson and in Lesson Eleven. 
The two allophone criteria 
We now turn to the question of how allophones can be identified. As a starting point, it 
is useful to recapitulate briefly the criterion used for identifying phonemes, which w e 
discussed in Lesson Three: A phoneme of a language is identified through a minimal 
pair, i.e. a pair of words that differ in meaning and in only one sound, such as cabjcag 
and serve/surf. A minimal pair shows us that each of the two contrasting sounds can 
differentiate words, and is therefore a phoneme. More precisely, we should say that 
each of the two contrasting phones can differentiate words, and is therefore a reali-
sation of a separate phoneme. Through minimal pairs, we established in Lesson Three 
that /b, p, v, f, u:, u, z, s, t/ and /m/ are phonemes of English. 
Conversely, we can deduce from the foregoing that, if no minimal pair can be found 
for two particular phones, these phones cannot differentiate words, and are therefore 
allophones of the same underlying phoneme. The single most important criterion for 
identifying allophones, then, is the absence of a minimal pair. Through the presence or 
absence of minimal pairs, we can determine, for example, that /s/ and /6/ are two 
separate phonemes in English, because they can differentiate words like link and think, 
but allophones of the same phoneme in German, because there are no two German 
words that are differentiated by them. Furthermore, a lisped pronunciation of German 
words like Post and Kasper, where [s] is replaced by [0], does not endanger intelligibil-
ity, which shows that the function of the underlying phoneme /s/ is not - at least not 
seriously - affected. 
There are two phones in English, however, for which no minimal pair can be found, 
and which consequently should be regarded as allophones, although it would be clearly 

Allophonic Variation 
45 
wrong to do so: N o minimal pair can be found for [h] and [rj] because the former occurs 
only before a vowel in stressed syllables (as in behave) while the latter never occurs 
before a vowel in stressed syllables (as in sing). Yet they cannot be considered allo-
phones of the same phoneme because they are too dissimilar with respect to the 
intensity, place, and manner of their articulation, and the resultant sound quality. 
Replacing one with the other does endanger intelligibility, which shows that the 
function of the underlying phoneme is affected. Because of this one case, phoneticians 
have introduced a second necessary criterion for identifying allophones, namely that 
they must exhibit articulatory similarity, or phonetic similarity. 
Allophones in free variation 
If two or more allophones can replace one another, i.e. if they can occur in the same 
position, these allophones are said to be free variants [freie oder fakultative 
Varianten] 
or in free variation. Some of the allophones we have already encountered in previous 
lessons can be used to illustrate this phenomenon. In Lesson Two, for example, in the 
section on the intensity of articulation, we saw that the phoneme Izl in zeal can be 
realised as a voiceless, or devoiced, allophone when whispered, or as a voiced allophone 
when pronounced "normally". And in Lesson Three, in the section on the place of 
articulation, we learnt that the phoneme Iii in butter can be realised as a glottal stop, [?], 
by speakers of some non-standard British accents, but the same speakers may realise 
the phoneme as [t] when they aim at a more standard pronunciation. The examples 
show that the choice of one allophone rather than another may depend on such factors 
as communicative situation, language variety, and social class, and the example of the 
lisped [9] in German shows that the choice can even be determined by a language 
handicap. Yet when we consider the wide range of possible realisations of any given 
phoneme (even by a single speaker), it becomes clear that we owe the vast majority of 
allophones in free variation to idiolects or simply to chance, and that the number of 
such allophones is virtually infinite. 
The expressions free variants and free variation are also, but probably less com-
monly, used in the few exceptional cases where two phonemes can replace each other 
without causing any change of meaning. We know that phonemes usually do cause a 
change of meaning - in fact, they distinguish meaning by definition - but in some 
words, two normally contrasting phonemes are both acceptable. Examples of pho-
nemes in free variation include I'v.l and Id as the initial sound in the words economics 
and evolution, and I'v.l and /ai/ as the initial sound in either. 
Allophones in complementary distribution 
If two or more allophones cannot replace one another, i.e. if they do not occur in the 
same position, because their occurrence is determined by the surrounding sounds, 
these allophones are said to be contextual variants [kombinatorische 
Varianten] or in 
complementary distribution [komplementäre 
Verteilung]. In other words, comple-
mentary distribution is a systematic relationship between two or more allophones, 

4 b 
Lesson Five 
whereby one allophone can only occur in a phonetic environment in which none of t h e 
others can: They are mutually exclusive. Again, some of the allophones we have already 
encountered so far can be used to illustrate this phenomenon. In Lesson Two, for 
example, we learnt that some lenis phonemes (which are usually voiced) can be realised 
as largely voiceless allophones not only when whispered, but also word-finally, as in 
the word cab, a position in which the corresponding voiced allophones never occur. 
And earlier in the present lesson, we saw that the alveolar phoneme /n/ can be realised 
either as an alveolar allophone, as in ten, or as a dental allophone, as in tenth, depending 
on the following sound, or the lack of a following sound. 
/ / allophones in complementary distribution did replace one another for some 
reason (most likely because of a slip of the tongue), the resultant pronunciation would 
merely sound odd, or the articulation would feel awkward, but this would not cause a 
change of meaning. Both free variation and complementary distribution are thus 
relationships of non-contrastive distribution. (The only relationship of contrastive 
distribution in phonetics and phonology is the one between phonemes.) The next t w o 
sections and several more sections in Lessons Ten and Eleven will introduce the major 
types of allophonic variants, both free and contextual. 
Before you continue with the next section, it is advisable to reread the sections 
"Voicedness and voicelessness: The state of the glottis" and "Intensity of articula-
tion I: Lenis and fortis" in Lesson Two. 
Devoicing 
If an intrinsically voiced, or underlyingly voiced, sound is articulated with less voice 
than usual or with no voice at all, i.e. without vibration of the vocal folds during part or 
all of its duration, that sound is said to be partly or fully devoiced [verhärtet, 
ver-
schärft]. Since devoicing is usually conditioned by the phonetic environment, a devoi-
ced allophone and its corresponding voiced allophone are usually in complementary 
distribution. We already know from Lesson Two that some lenis consonants are partly 
devoiced in word-initial position. The reason is that the vocal folds do not usually 
begin to vibrate at the onset of speaking. The time that elapses between the onset of 
speaking and the point at which the vocal folds begin to vibrate is called voice onset 
time, or VOT. The lenis consonants referred to in Lesson Two are the lenis plosives, /b, 
d, g/, the lenis affricate, /dj/, and the lenis fricatives, /v, Ö, z, 3/. Because of the voice 
onset time, they are partly devoiced in words like bill, joy, and van. There are numerous 
other cases of partial devoicing, but we want to confine ourselves here to giving an 
overview of the three main processes whereby lenis consonants are being fully, or 
almost fully, devoiced. Full devoicing, or almost full devoicing, can be indicated in the 
IPA by a small circle, [ J , under the relevant symbol, as in the transcription [kasb] for 
the word cab. 

Allophonic Variation 
47 
(1) /b, d, g, d3, v, 5, z, 3/. The vibration of the vocal folds generally diminishes at the end 
of speaking, so that all lenis plosives, the lenis affricate, and all lenis fricatives can be 
fully devoiced in word-final position, as in cab [M?], lid [lid], bag [baeg], judge 
[d3Adj], leave [li:y], breathe [bri:5], freeze [fri:z], and rouge [ruij]. 
(2) /l, r,°w/. The lenis lateral and these two lenis approximants can be fully devoiced 
when they follow any one of the fortis plosives, /p, t, k7, in stressed syllables, as in 
please [p]i:z], try [trai], and quick [kwik]. 
(3) /}/. Thislenis approximant can be fully devoiced when it follows any one of the 
fortis plosives, /p, t, k/, or the fortis glottal fricative, /h/, in stressed syllables. While 
the first two devoicing processes do not significantly affect the intensity of the artic-
ulation (i.e. lenis consonants remain lenis), full devoicing here produces a sound 
that is not only voiceless, but also fortis, namely a fortis palatal fricative. We have al-
ready encountered this sound in Lesson Three, in the High German pronunciation 
of the word ich. It is transcribed as [5], as in [pcu:] iorpew, 
[tcu:n] for tune, [kcu:b] 
for cube, and [hcu:] for hue. Since the symbol [9] already indicates voicelessness, we 
do not attach the usual small circle to it. 
The opposite process, the voicing of an intrinsically voiceless sound, does not occur very 
often. If it occurs, it can be indicated by the diacritic [ J under the relevant symbol. The 
fortis glottal fricative, /h/, to give only one example, may be somewhat voiced between 
voiced sounds, as in the word anyhow, which can then be transcribed as [enihau]. 
Fronting and retraction 
If a sound is articulated further forward in the mouth than the underlying phoneme, 
usually under the influence of the surrounding sounds, that sound is said to be fronted, 
or advanced. Conversely, if a sound is articulated further back in the mouth than the 
underlying phoneme, again usually under the influence of the surrounding sounds, that 
sound is said to be retracted, or, less commonly, backed. Since fronting and retraction 
are usually conditioned by the phonetic environment, a fronted or retracted allophone 
and its corresponding "normal" allophone are usually in complementary distribu-
tion. We saw earlier in this lesson, for example, that the alveolar phoneme /n/ can be 
realised as an alveolar allophone, as in ten, or as a dental allophone before the dental /G/, 
as in tenth. When fronting results in a dental sound, articulated with the tongue tip and 
rims touching the teeth, we speak of dentalisation. This process is subsumed under the 
first of the two main types of fronting and retraction outlined below. Dental articula-
tion can be indicated in the IPA by the diacritic [ J under the relevant symbol, as in the 
transcription [ten6] for the word tenth; other fronting processes can be indicated by a 
small cross, [J, as in [ki:] for key; and retraction can be indicated by an underbar, [_], as 
in [ko:d] for cord. 
(1) /t, d, n/. The alveolar plosives and the alveolar nasal may be fronted, or, more specif-
ically here, dentalised, through the influence of the place of articulation of a follow-
ing consonant, particularly the dental fricatives, /6, 5/. The dentalisation process 
can be exemplified by the word pairs eight [eit] / eighth [eitB], wide [waid] / width 

48 
Lesson Five 
[wide], and ten [ten] / tenth [ten6]. Similarly, /t, d, n/ may be retracted through t h e 
influence of the place of articulation of a following consonant, namely the post-
alveolar approximant, hi. The retraction process can be exemplified by adding t h e 
words try [trai], dry [drai], and unrest [Anrest] to the word pairs above. Each of the 
three alveolar phonemes, then, has one "normal", alveolar allophone (e.g. [t] in 
[eit]), one fronted, dental allophone (e.g. [t] in [eit8]), and one retracted, post-
alveolar allophone (e.g. [t] in [t rai]). When contrasting the three allophones by p r o -
nouncing their respective example words (e.g. eight, eighth, try), we can actually 
feel how our tongue moves forwards and backwards. For the sake of simplicity, w e 
mainly use examples here that illustrate how fronting and retraction, and other p h o -
netic processes discussed earlier and later in this manual, take place within single 
words. It should be noted, however, that these processes also operate across w o r d 
boundaries, in connected speech. For example, It, d, n/ may be dentalised in such se-
quences as not thin [not 6m], had then [haed Sen], and when they [wen Sei]. 
(2) Ik, g/. The velar plosives are often fronted through the influence of a following 
front vowel, and retracted through the influence of a following back vowel. (It 
should be remembered, here, that front and hack, in connection with vowels, are 
strictly speaking not associated with a place of articulation, as is the case with con-
sonants, but refer to the part of the tongue that is raised highest, and to the direction 
in which the body of the tongue is pushed or pulled.) Thus each of the velar plosives 
has three allophones: A "normal", or "central", [k] or [g] as in curb [k3:b] and gun 
[gAn], a fronted [k] or [g] as in key [ki:] and get [get], and a retracted [k] or [g] as in 
cord [ko:d] and goose [gu:s]. 
Yet fronting and retraction are sometimes also conditioned by social factors, such as the 
dialect spoken or the age and sex of the speaker, in which case the resultant allophones 
are in free variation. In Irish English (also referred to as Hiberno-English), for exam-
ple, the alveolar plosives, It, dl, are usually dentalised. In some varieties of Scottish Eng-
lish, the close back vowel, /u:/, is fronted, so that words like moon and use are heard 
with [y] (as in the final sound in the French word tu), and are written in such spellings as 
mum and yuise. In New Zealand English, the mid-close front-central vowel, III, is re-
tracted, so that it sounds like a schwa. And in Canadian English, one study suggests 
that, especially among younger female speakers, the first element of the diphthong /au/ 
in words like out is not just articulated in a more central position than in RP, so that out 
sounds more like oat (which is referred to as "Canadian raising", and is one of the main 
identifying features of that variety), but that it is now often fronted. These examples 
show that the choice between two allophones is, of course, not always as "free" as the 
term free variation 
suggests. Theoretically, however, one and the same speaker can, 
consciously or unconsciously, choose to realise a particular phoneme as a dialectal 
variant in one situation, and as a more standard variant in another. 
Finally, we should point out that the term fronting 
is also used to refer to a type of 
sound change in historical linguistics, and in the description of children's language, 
which may contain sounds that are articulated further forward in the mouth than is re-

Allophonic Variation 
49 
quired by adult speakers' norms. It is also a term in syntax, where it refers to the un-
usual placing of a sentence element in initial position. 
Two (or three) types of phonetic transcription 
In the section "Phonetic transcription" in Lesson One, we learnt that we use phonetic 
symbols in order to write down speech sounds as accurately as possible, and that both 
the process of writing down spoken language in this way and the resultant written text 
are referred to as phonetic transcription. Later on, however, in the section "The pho-
neme" in Lesson Three, we saw that the term phonetic symbol is sometimes used in a 
broader sense, covering not only phonetic symbols (i.e. IPA symbols representing 
phones or allophones), but also phonemic symbols (i.e. IPA symbols representing pho-
nemes). In general, we can say that the terminological distinction between the adjec-
tives phonetic and phonemic, 
or phonological, 
is not always strictly observed, and that 
phonetic is sometimes used generically. This is also true of the terms phonetic 
transcrip-
tion and phonemic transcription 
although there is, of course, a distinction between the 
two that is worth observing, as we shall see below. 
Phonetic transcription proper 
A phonetic transcription in the narrower sense aims to represent actual speech sounds, 
i.e. concrete utterances of an individual speaker on a particular occasion. It does so with 
a high degree of accuracy, showing a lot of articulatory details. This type of transcrip-
tion is also called narrow transcription [enge Umschrift]. 
It is occasionally also re-
ferred to as impressionistic transcription, or said to be "objective", because the tran-
scriber simply writes down what he hears (even if he does not know what the utterance 
means). It is a phonetic transcription proper because it represents spoken language at 
the level of phonetics, through a wide range of phonetic symbols for phones or 
allophones. The transcribed text is therefore enclosed in square brackets, [ ]. As we 
saw earlier in this lesson, slight alterations to the usual value of a phonetic symbol can 
be indicated by diacritics, showing such processes as devoicing, voicing, fronting, and 
retraction. The diacritics used in this manual are listed together with the list of phonetic 
symbols on the inside front cover. Examples of phonetic transcriptions of words with a 
considerable degree of accuracy are [kcu:b] for cube and [ko:d] for cord. 
Phonemic transcription 
A phonetic transcription in the broadest sense, on the other hand, aims to represent ab-
stract speech sounds, i.e. idealised utterances conforming to a speech community's 
shared knowledge of the sound system of a language. It does so with a moderate degree 
of accuracy, showing only those articulatory details that can distinguish meaning, i.e. 
only the distinctive features. This type of transcription is also called broad transcrip-
tion [weite Umschrift]. Here, the transcriber does not write down what he hears, but 
what he expects he would hear. It is best referred to as a phonological transcription 

50 
Lesson Five 
[phonologische 
Umschrift) or phonemic transcription [phonematische 
Umschrift] 
b e -
cause it represents spoken language at the level of phonology, through "phonetic" s y m -
bols that are taken to represent phonemes, and are thus better regarded as p h o n e m i c 
symbols. The transcribed text is therefore enclosed in slashes, //. Allophonic variation 
is ignored entirely, and the only mark attached to phonemic symbols is the length m a r k 
(which is not regarded as a diacritic in IPA terminology) after the symbols for the five 
long vowel phonemes. 
The difference between a narrow, phonetic transcription and a broad, phonemic 
transcription can be illustrated by our tried and trusted example cube. As we saw above, 
the phonetic transcription proper, [keu:p], contains the symbol for the fortis palatal 
fricative [9] and a diacritic indicating a devoiced lenis bilabial plosive, [b]. We k n o w 
from Lesson Three, however, that there is no palatal fricative phoneme in English, a n d 
that the lenis bilabial plosive is intrinsically voiced. The two sounds represented, then, 
are devoiced allophones of the phonemes / j / and /b/, respectively, and it is these latter 
symbols, therefore, that are used in the phonemic transcription, /kju:b/. A phonemic 
transcription, possibly with minor modifications, is the type of transcription used in 
most British dictionaries, probably because it is simpler than a phonetic transcription. 
The disadvantage is, however, that it requires a fair knowledge of, or intuition for, the 
allophonic variation of the language if it is to be read aloud with a high degree of accuracy. 
Broad phonetic transcription: An intermediate type 
For the learning and teaching of English pronunciation, the phonetic transcription 
proper certainly shows too many fine details whereas a phonemic transcription often 
does not seem detailed enough. For that reason, it has become customary, for peda-
gogic purposes, to use an intermediate type of transcription, which is largely phonemic, 
but shows several more articulatory details. It shows, for example, linking r-sounds, 
syllabic consonants, and stress, all of which will be discussed in later lessons. It does not 
usually show allophonic variation, caused by such processes as devoicing, voicing, 
fronting, and retraction. This type of transcription is best regarded as a broad phonetic 
transcription. Although it is largely phonemic, we cannot use the word phonemic 
in 
the label because two of the symbols that are commonly used are not phonemes of Eng-
lish, as we shall see in the next section. Consequently, the transcribed text must be en-
closed in square brackets, [ ]. A broad phonetic transcription is used in most university 
courses in phonetics and phonology, and in the transcription course integrated with 
this manual. 
Unstressed f- and u-sounds 
A good example to illustrate the intermediate status of a broad phonetic transcription is 
the representation of i- and ^-sounds in some unstressed syllables. In stressed syllables, 
it is relatively easy to distinguish the long I'vJ (as in bee) from the short l\l (as in fish), 
and the long /u:/ (as in goose) from the short /o/ (as in pudding). 
In some unstressed syl-
lables, however, the distinction is not so clear. In words like easy, react, evaluate, 
and 

Allophonic Variation 
51 
actual, the i- and «-sounds in the unstressed syllables seem to be intermediate between 
the respective long and short vowels. What symbols, then, do we use to transcribe these 
sounds? Neither Iv.l nor /i/, and neither /u:/ nor /o/, seem to be wholly satisfactory 
here. In a broad phonetic transcription, therefore, the sounds in question are often rep-
resented by [i] or [u], using the basic symbols for the long vowels, but without a length 
mark. This compromise suggests that the two sounds have the quality of the respective 
long vowels, and the length of the respective short vowels. You may have noticed that 
we have already used the symbol [i] in the transcription of the word anyhow, [enihao], 
in the section on devoicing earlier in this lesson. As indicated above, a transcription us-
ing [i] and [u] cannot be regarded as phonemic because the symbols represent sounds 
that are not phonemes of English. 
We said that the distinction between the long and the short i- and w-sounds is not so 
clear in "some" unstressed syllables. More specifically, the intermediate [i] usually oc-
curs in unstressed syllables in the following phonetic environments: 
- 
in wordTinal position (if the final z'-sound is not the second element of one of the 
three closing diphthongs moving towards A/), as in easy [i:zi] or hurry [h/vri], even 
when followed by suffixes beginning with a vowel, as in easiest [kziost] or hurrying 
[hArim]; 
- 
in prefixes like re-, pre-, and de- when followed by a vowel, as in react [riaekt] or 
preoccupied 
[priDkjupaid]; 
- 
in suffixes like -tal, -iate, and -IOUS when they are pronounced as two syllables, as in 
appreciate [aprkfieit] or hilarious [hileorios]; 
- 
in the words he, she, we, me, be, and the when followed by a vowel, as in the enemy 
[5i enami]. 
In most other phonetic environments, an z-sound in an unstressed syllable can be inter-
preted as a short [i], as in resist [rizist] or orchestra [oikistrs]. 
The intermediate [u] is much less common, but if it occurs, it usually occurs in un-
stressed syllables in these phonetic environments: 
- 
in the words you, to, into, and do when followed by a vowel or pause, as in 
particle-infinitive sequences like to eat [tu i:t]; 
- 
in the words through and who in all positions; 
- 
before a vowel within a word, as in evaluate [ivaeljueit] or actual [aektfuol]. 
A brief excursion into morphophonology 
We have already encountered the notion of morphology twice in this manual: We 
know from Lesson One that morphology is concerned with the structure of words, 
and we learnt at the beginning of the present lesson that it also employs the allo-/-eme 
relationship. In morphology, the abstract linguistic unit is the morpheme, which can be 
defined as the smallest unit of meaning within the words of a language. Examples of 
morphemes are prefixes meaning 'not' or 'the opposite of (so-called negative prefixes), 

52 
Lesson Five 
suffixes denoting participles, and roots like cat, dog, and fox. When a morpheme h a s 
only one concrete form, or realisation, that form is called a morph. The present partici-
ple morpheme, for example, is always realised by the morph -ing. When a m o r p h e m e 
has two or more realisations, however, each of these forms is called an allomorph. F o r 
example, one type of negative prefix can be realised by il-, im-, in-, or ir- (as in 
illogical, 
immoral, infinite, and irrelevant). 
Irrespective of the exact forms, all of these concrete 
prefixes are allomorphs of the same morpheme. 
Although we learnt in Lesson One that morphology is a separate level of language 
description, it overlaps with phonetics and phonology when the choice of one allomorph 
rather than another is determined by the surrounding sounds (as is the case with the al-
lomorphs of the negative prefix above). The overlap between the two core areas of lin-
guistics is referred to as morphophonology, morphonology, or, in American termi-
nology, morphophonemics. If the choice between allomorphs is determined by the sur-
rounding sounds, i.e. if the choice is rule-governed, the allomorphs can be said to be in 
complementary distribution (the term being used here analogously to its use in c o n -
junction with allophones). There are several cases of allomorphs in complementary dis-
tribution that are important to know when making a phonetic or phonemic transcrip-
tion. The rules governing the choices will be briefly discussed in the next two sections. 
The regular plural, the possessive case, and the third-person singular morphemes 
The morpheme for the regular plural, the morpheme for the possessive case, and the 
morpheme for the third-person singular in the simple present tense are all convention-
ally symbolised by {S}. We also speak of the "plural -s", the "possessive ' 5 " , and the 
"third-person singular -s". These morphemes are realised by three allomorphs, tran-
scribed as /s, z, iz/. The allomorphs are distributed according to the following rules: 
- 
/s/ after fortis (voiceless) consonants, except after the fortis sibilants, /s, f, tl/; 
- 
IzJ after vowels and lenis (voiced) consonants, except after the lenis sibilants, /z, 3, 
d 3/; 
- 
iv/J after the sibilants, /s, z, J, 3, tj, d3/. 
These rules, and the different allomorphs, can be illustrated by the following words: 
cats /kaets/, dogs /dogz/, and foxes /foksiz/ illustrate the allomorphs of the regular plural 
morpheme; dentist's /dentists/, children's Afildranz/, and waitress's /weitrosiz/ illustrate 
the allomorphs of the possessive case morpheme; and writes /raits/, goes /gooz/, and 
reaches /ri:tjiz/ illustrate the allomorphs of the third-person singular morpheme. 
The regular past tense and past participle morphemes 
The morpheme for the regular past tense and the morpheme for the regular past partici-
ple are conventionally symbolised by {D}, and are usually - but not always - written as 
-ed. These morphemes, too, are realised by three allomorphs, transcribed as A, d, id/. 
Here are the rules according to which the allomorphs are distributed: 

Allophonic Variation 
5 3 
- 
/t/ after fortis (voiceless) consonants, except after /t/; 
- 
/riV after vowels and lenis (voiced) consonants, except after /d/; 
- 
/id/ after /t, d/. 
These rules, and the different allomorphs, can be illustrated by the words looked /lokt/, 
turned /t3:nd/, and pointed /pomtid/. 
The pronunciation of the letter sequence < n g > 
Another morphophonological phenomenon, though not another case of an allomorph 
in complementary distribution, is the pronunciation of the letter sequence <ng>. The 
pronunciation of <ng> always involves the velar nasal, A]/, but the question here is 
whether or not that A]/ is followed by a /g/. Neither the letter sequence <ng> nor the 
phoneme /rj/ can occur at the beginning of an English word, and <ng> is simply pro-
nounced /rj/, without a following /g/, when it occurs at the end, as in sing I sin/ or long 
/lDrj/. But how is <ng> pronounced when it occurs word-internally, as in singer or 
finger} 
The rules governing the pronunciation of word-internal <ng> in RP are as follows: 
When <ng> occurs at the end of a morpheme, i.e. at the end of a minimal unit of mean-
ing, it is simply pronounced /rj/. For example, the words singer and longish consist of 
the morphemes sing (root) + er (suffix meaning 'person concerned with') and long 
(root) + ish (suffix meaning 'fairly'), and are therefore pronounced /siqs/ and /lorjiJA 
When, however, <ng> occurs in the middle of a morpheme, i.e. in the middle of a mini-
mal unit of meaning, it is pronounced /ng/. The words finger and anger, for example, 
consist of one morpheme each (because fing and ang have no meaning), and are there-
fore pronounced /ftngo/ and AeqgsA 
The only exception to these rules is the pronunciation of <ng> in comparative and 
superlative forms of adjectives and adverbs: Even when <ng> occurs at the end of a 
morpheme, it is pronounced /ng/ when it is followed by the comparative suffix -er or 
the superlative suffix -est. This means that, although long /ton/ and longish /lorjij/ are 
pronounced without a /g/, the comparative and superlative forms are pronounced 
longer /tonga/ and longest /lonaast/. 

5 4 
Lesson Five 
Exercises 
In this manual, we use a broad phonetic transcription. This type of transcription has al-
ready been explained, but it is worth repeating a few key points here. 
As was highlighted in this lesson, the exact quality of unstressed i- and w-sounds in 
English is phonetically determined. That means we can tell whether [i] will be p r o -
nounced depending on its position in a word, and the sounds around it. It will be p r o -
nounced, for example, in word-final position often represented by the spelling <y>, as 
in city [siti] or quality [kwohti], or in pronouns before a vowel, such as she is [fi iz]. T h e 
same holds true for [u], an example being you ought to ask [ju a:t tu a:sk]. 
Simply because we include [i] and [u], our transcriptions must strictly be considered 
phonetic. As the lessons progress, we will include some more phonetic features of E n g -
lish which are important for natural and correct pronunciation. Nonetheless, our tran-
scription remains broad, since we will not include every phonetic detail. For example, 
you are not expected to include the phenomena of devoicing, fronting, and retraction, 
all of which you have learnt about in this lesson. 
Thus the exercises in this manual require a little more than purely phonemic tran-
scription since you should show certain features of English that are relevant to h o w it 
actually sounds. To get a better representation of English, then, we ask you to include 
some "narrow" features, such as the intermediate [i] and [u] along with other particular 
phenomena, such as the linking r-sound and syllabic consonants (details you will learn 
about in Lessons Six and Seven). We enclose the transcriptions in square brackets t o 
indicate that they are phonetic. 
Another point to note is that you should always think of the written texts as repre-
senting speech. Thus, from the start, there are some natural features of spoken English 
which appear in the solutions at the end of this manual before they are covered in the 
lessons. For example, the word the is rarely pronounced as [5i:] although it is listed like 
this in most dictionaries. Rather it is pronounced in one of its weak forms, for example 
as [9a]. Similarly, and, for, had, of, that, and to, which all appear in the texts below, nor-
mally occur as weak forms, for example as [and, fa, had, av, Sat, ta]. You will learn more 
about weak forms in Lesson Eight. For now, you should at least be aware that many 
so-called grammatical words in English have such weak forms, and you should try to 
use them from the start in your transcriptions. 
You do not punctuate your transcriptions with normal orthographic marks. Thus 
you should not include full stops, commas, semicolons, exclamation marks, question 
marks, etc. As was mentioned above, you only need to use square brackets. 
The transcription of written texts in this manual conforms to standard RP English, 
as does the pronunciation of most of the spoken texts appearing from Lesson Seven on. 
However, there may also be some variation from the norm on the part of individual 
speakers. Where this is perceptually relevant, it is indicated in the annotations to the 
model solutions. 
The model solutions, which you will find at the end of this manual, have been care-
fully prepared and annotated to give you the best guidance in completing and correct-

ing your own transcriptions. Even so, it is quite possible that you may arrive at a differ-
ent transcription, especially of the spoken texts. There are a number of factors to 
consider here: 
• 
Your own pronunciation of a sound, a word, or a sequence of words will affect how 
you perceive the way others pronounce those sounds or words. In this case, you 
should be aware of the differences in varieties of English, and remember that in this 
manual we use standard RP as the model pronunciation. 
• 
When you listen closely for transcription, you may concentrate on some features 
that you would not normally pay attention to in normal conversation with native 
speakers. Although we ask you to attend to some particular traits of English, as was 
mentioned above, the exercises train you in broad phonetic transcription, and the 
focus of the exercises is on transcribing the overall phonemic patterns correctly 
with some additional phonetic details. 
• 
It may be that you yourself incorrectly pronounce a word or words, or have diffi-
culty in correctly articulating a particular phoneme of English. In this case, the 
model transcriptions should be taken as a standard which your pronunciation too 
should approach, for example in the case of the phonemes /5, 9/ or /v, w/. 
As a reminder, in this lesson you have covered the following features which you should 
include in your transcriptions: 
feature 
I PA symbols 
intermediate z'-sound 
[i] 
intermediate a-sound 
[u] 
regular plural morpheme 
[s, z, iz] 
possessive case morpheme 
[s, z, iz] 
third-person singular morpheme 
[s, z, iz] 
regular past-tense morpheme 
[t, d, id] 
regular past participle morpheme 
[t, d, id] 
letter sequence <ng> 
[q, qg] 
5.1 Reading and writing 
Read or write in normal o r t h o g r a p h y the short text below: 
[T*ran wa:kt akros 5 , hv.q ru:m WAndariq wot f i Jod du abaot 5a n £ z j i h £ d^vst 
nsr.vd Ji traid tu apia ko:m and nzist getin aengri faeranz jAqga brASa b*Lftwd 
u 
are,nd 3 h,z ste, wi6 hs: nekst wi:k 5 , problam woz Sat Ji wontid tu iskeip 5a hot 
fa 5a wr.kend and Saet wod mi:n lirvin d 3 a : d 5 a:l alaun wiSaut em kAmpani 
hi naoz sao fju: frendz av mam hi dAzant laik filmz a: konsats and hi heits pleisiz 
wen Sei a: empti 9a:t Jaeran 

56 
Lesson Five 
5ea iz nA0irj ai kan du abaut it iksept stei his 5is wkkend a: parhaeps if hi jir.ziz keits 
baifrendz flaet msted aim Jo: tjadziz pleis iz big onAf fa: tu: Ji aja:d h3:self 
jes av ka:s tja:lz wodant maind potirj him Ap in 5a gest ru:m wi5 5a siqgal bed 
rait aim gooirj ta nrj him streit awei] 
147 words 
5.2 Transcribe the following text into IPA symbols 
Joyce had cooked supper, but Hamish wanted nothing to eat. He needed time to think. 
He wondered what had happened to all the pictures and books he had placed so care-
fully around the flat. 
"Joyce always tidies things away," he said to himself. 
"I stacked all the new bits and pieces you had scattered everywhere in the hall," she 
answered his thoughts. 
"Those works of art, journals, and diaries are precious to me even if Joyce thinks 
they're out of fashion now and not worth much," he muttered quietly to himself. 
All manner of objects from Hamish's famous brother's huge output in his s h o r t 
time as a fine artist now turned pop singer clogged up every inch of space in t h e 
cramped flat. Now he had stopped and lingered in front of his favourite picture: H e 
adored it. His finger traced a faint line across the image. For too long he had waited for 
something to occur in his life. 
"David gets on with things and manages to enjoy life. So does Joyce," he enviously 
thought. 
She opted to leave him alone and hoped he would return to the table later. For hours 
she had been mobbed by unrelenting crowds of admiring fans egged on by a crazed m e -
dia. Her latest novel "wept, no sobbed with emotion," read one review. Hamish was 
sick with envy; Joyce was over the moon. 
230 words 

LESSON 
CONNECTED SPEECH 
|J 
As was pointed out in the previous lesson, the phenomena discussed in this manual so 
far have been illustrated, for the sake of simplicity, mainly by single-word examples, 
rather than by words in connected speech. However, although speakers and listeners 
are able to distinguish the separate words of an utterance, much spoken language actu-
ally consists of a continuous sequence of words, i.e. words run together with only a few 
pauses between them (despite what the written language, with its spaces between the 
words, might suggest). This running together of words often results in pronunciations 
that are markedly different from the way the words are pronounced in isolation, i.e. in 
their citation form. While the pronunciation of individual sounds and words was the 
subject matter of Lessons Two to Five, we now turn our attention to the changes 
sounds and words undergo when they are used in connected speech. The various as-
pects of connected speech can be grouped together under five headings: linking, strong 
and weak forms, rhythm, assimilation, and elision. Linking will be discussed in this les-
son, and we shall return to the other aspects in Lessons Eight and Nine. 
Linking 
Liaison 
Different authors use the term liaison [French, 'link'] in different ways, but all agree 
that it refers to a transition or link between sounds or words. A rather broad and some-
what vague definition, then, sees liaison merely as a transition between words in con-
nected speech, particularly when this involves an unusual phonetic feature. A fre-
quently cited example is the carrying over of a word-final consonant to a word 
beginning with a vowel in a stressed syllable. This type of liaison is sometimes heard be-
tween at and all in the sequence not atoll, which could be transcribed in broad phonetic 
transcription as [not a to:l]. 
More narrowly, liaison has been defined as a link between words through the articu-
lation of a normally unarticulated word-final consonant, which is articulated only 
when preceded by a vowel in the same word, and followed by an initial vowel in the 
next word. In other words, liaison here refers to a process whereby a word that ends in 
a vowel when pronounced in isolation acquires a final consonant when followed by a 
word beginning with a vowel. This type of liaison is a notable feature of French, and, in 
fact, the term is sometimes restricted to the description of that language. The final con-

58 
Lesson Six 
sonants in the French words les and est, for example, are articulated only when f o l -
lowed by a vowel, as in the sequences lei amis and c'est une maison. A sound that is a b -
sent in a word when that word is pronounced in isolation, but present in the same w o r d 
in certain phonetic environments in connected speech - usually for ease of p r o n u n c i a -
tion - is called a linking sound. The final consonants in les, and est, then, are linking 
sounds. In English, the most prominent example is the so-called linking r, which will b e 
discussed in the next section. 
According to another definition, liaison is a link between sounds or words t h r o u g h 
the insertion of an additional sound, again usually for ease of pronunciation. This t y p e 
of liaison often links two consecutive vowels belonging to different syllables or w o r d s 
(i.e. not two elements of a diphthong), in which case the articulatory break, or gap, a t 
the syllable or word boundary is referred to as a hiatus [Latin, 'gap'], and the consecu-
tive vowels are said to be "in hiatus". A hiatus, then, can be heard in words like 
playoffs 
reassure, skiing, and cooperate, 
and in sequences like he is silly and stupid and 
to 
England. Of course a hiatus does not necessarily have to be removed, i.e. the vowels in 
question do not necessarily have to be linked. On the contrary, the hiatus in 
playoffs 
reassure, and skiing is likely to be present whereas the hiatus in cooperate, heis silly 
and 
stupid, and to England 
may be removed, i.e. the vowels in question may be linked, 
through the insertion of a glottal stop, as in [kou'bpsreit], or a semi-vowel, as in [hi
j iz 
sili
J an stju:pid] and [tu
w iqgland]. As these transcriptions show, a symbol representing a 
linking sound usually appears as a small superscript and, if the sound links words, is at-
tached to the preceding word (but transcription practice here may vary). The m o s t 
prominent example of a linking sound removing a hiatus is the so-called intrusive r, 
which will be discussed together with the linking r in the next section. 
Linking r and intrusive r: Two cases of liaison 
As has already been mentioned, in English, or at least in some accents of it, the most 
prominent example of the second type of liaison described above is the linking r. T h e 
term refers to a link between words through the articulation of a normally unarti-
culated word-final Ixl, which is articulated only when preceded by a vowel in the same 
word, and followed by an initial vowel in the next word. In the words jar, four, and 
czar, for example, the r-sounds suggested by the spelling are not normally pronounced, 
so that the words usually end in vowels: [fa:], [fo:], [za:]. The r-sounds are pronounced 
only when followed by words beginning with a vowel, as in the sequences far 
away 
[fa:r awei], four eggs [fa:r egz], and czar of Russia [za:r av T A J O ] . A S the transcriptions 
show, a symbol representing a linking r usually appears in normal size and position, 
contrary to the common transcription practice for other linking sounds. 
Wc speak of a linking r only when the r-sound in question occurs in the spelling in 
the form of the letter <r>. In Lesson One, we learnt that, in the history of the English 
language, many sound changes were not accompanied by changes in the spelling, and 
that the orthography in general became less variable after William Caxton had brought 
the art of printing to England in 1476. Consequently, we said that the spelling of many 

Connected Speech 
59 
words in present-day English reflects the pronunciation used in the time from Chaucer 
to Shakespeare. This is precisely the case with words containing a normally unarticu-
lated final /r/, like far, four, and czar: In the past, these words were pronounced with a 
final Ixl in all phonetic environments, they then lost their final Ixl in the course of the 
centuries, and the final Ixl now reappears as a linking r only when followed by a 
word-initial vowel. As was indicated at the beginning of this section, however, this is 
only true of "some" accents of English, namely of the non-rhotic accents, which will be 
discussed in the next section. 
Yet many English speakers use an r-sound in a similar way even when that sound 
does not occur in the spelling in the form of the letter <r>. Such an r-sound is called an 
intrusive r. More specifically, the term refers to a link between two consecutive vowels 
belonging to different words or, less commonly, to different syllables within the same 
word through the insertion of an Ixl that has no historical justification. As has already 
been mentioned, the intrusive r is the most prominent example of the third type of liai-
son described in the previous section, the type removing a hiatus. The hiatus in the se-
quences media event, visa application, and shah of Persia and in the word drawing, 
for 
example, may be removed through the insertion of an intrusive r, as in [mi:dia
r went], 
[vi:za
r aeplikeijn], [fa:
r av p 3:Ja], and [dra:
riq]. Transcription practice varies here, but we 
suggest that the symbol representing an intrusive r appears as a small superscript and, if 
the intrusive r links words, is attached to the preceding word (as is the common tran-
scription practice for all linking sounds except the linking r). 
The intrusive r - especially the word-internal one - is widely stigmatised by language 
purists, who regard it as a non-standard pronunciation, or simply as incorrect. It is quite 
commonly heard, however, ironically also in the speech of those who criticise it. Many 
(overly) careful speakers nevertheless try to avoid it, and, in fact, some try so hard to 
avoid an intrusive r that they even seem to be afraid to use a linking r. Instead, they use a 
glottal stop or a semi-vowel as a linking sound, or no linking sound at all, producing 
such pronunciations as [mo:
? an mo:] and [mo: on mo:] for the sequence more and more, 
rather than the more natural [mo:r an ma:]. Such an over-correction, resulting from an 
attempt to adjust one's speech to a prestige norm, is called hypercorrection, or hyper-
urbanism [Hyperkorrektur, 
Hyperurbanismus]. 
O n the other hand, the intrusive r is 
sometimes used purposefully to achieve a humorous effect, as when the phrase law_and 
order [la:
r an a:da] is personified as Laura Norder [la:ra na:da], a friend of the police. 
Whereas the linking sounds in the examples in the previous section (such as the glottal 
stop in [kau
VD Pareit] and the /w/ in [tu
w iqgland]) are usually recorded only in a phonetic 
transcription proper, the linking r and the intrusive r are also recorded in a broad pho-
netic transcription (the linking r is recorded even in a phonemic transcription), and 
they are therefore relevant to the transcription course integrated with this manual. 
Non-rhotic and rhotic accents 
We said in the previous section that, in "some" accents of English, the linking r is the 
most prominent example of the second type of liaison described earlier, namely of liai-
son through a normally unarticulated consonant. These are accents that have lost the Ixl 

60 
Lesson Six 
phoneme almost entirely over the centuries (although it still occurs in the spelling), e x -
cept when followed by a vowel, either in the same or in the next word, but only if that 
vowel follows immediately, without a pause in between. In other words, the Ixl p h o -
neme in these accents is articulated only before a vowel, not before a consonant o r 
pause. Such an accent is called a non-rhotic accent [from Greek rbo, name of the G r e e k 
letter <r>, and -ic, 'connected with'], an r-less accent, or a non-r-pronouncing accent. 
We have already encountered examples of non-rhotic pronunciations in connection 
with the linking r above: far [fa:], four [fo:], and czar [za:] do not have a final r-sound 
when pronounced in isolation, because the unarticulated Ixl is not followed by a vowel, 
but they do have a final r-sound in the sequences far away [fa:r swei], four eggs [fo:r 
egz], and czar of Russia [za:r sv T A J S ] , because here the normally unarticulated Ixl is fol-
lowed by a vowel. For the same reason, bird [b3:d], farther 
[fa:53], and hard [ha:d] d o 
not have a word-internal r-sound in non-rhotic accents whereas barrel [baersl],pressure 
[prefe], and worry 
[ W A D ] do. In non-rhotic accents, then, farther 
is pronounced the 
same as father, and far rhymes with shah. 
Conversely, a rhotic accent, an r-ful accent, or an r-pronouncing accent is o n e 
that has not lost the Ixl phoneme over the centuries (not even when followed by a c o n -
sonant or pause). To put it simply, the Ixl phoneme in rhotic accents is articulated wher-
ever it occurs in the spelling. (It becomes clear now that, in rhotic accents, the linking r 
cannot be a prominent example of liaison through a normally unarticulated consonant 
because the Ixl in these accents is not normally unarticulated, and the linking r there-
fore, strictly speaking, does not exist.) The same words that were used above to exem-
plify non-rhotic pronunciations can be used again here to exemplify rhotic pronuncia-
tions:/dr [fa:r], four [fo:r], and czar [za:r] have a final r-sound in rhotic accents even 
when pronounced in isolation, and bird [b3:rd], farther 
[fa:r59r], and hard [ha:rd] have 
a word-internal r-sound although it is followed by a consonant. 
The distinction between non-rhotic accents and rhotic accents forms the basis for 
one of the fundamental categorisations of varieties of English. Non-rhotic accents are 
typical of varieties spoken in the larger part of England, in Wales, on the east coast and 
in the south of the United States, in parts of the Caribbean (e.g. Trinidad and Tobago), 
in Australia, New Zealand, and most parts of sub-Saharan Africa. Rhotic accents, on 
the other hand, are typical of varieties spoken in the south-west of England and parts of 
the north in Scotland, Ireland, Canada and most of the United States, in much of the 
Caribbean (e.g. Barbados and Jamaica), and in India. RP is a non-rhotic accent. Since 
we use RP, or near RP, as our model in this manual, you should pay especial attention in 
your transcriptions to where r-sounds are appropriate, and where they are not. 
Juncture 
We pointed out at the beginning of this lesson that speakers and listeners are able to dis-
tinguish the separate words of an utterance despite the fact that much spoken language 
actually consists of a continuous sequence of words, with only a few pauses between 
them. But how is that possible? If, for the purpose of demonstration, we transcribed an 
utterance without the conventional spaces between the words, i.e. if we depicted con-

Connected Speech 
61 
nected speech the way it really is, namely as an uninterrupted string of sounds, then 
how could we identify where one word ends, and the next word begins? It is certainly 
relatively easy to see, for example, that /shaos/ consists of the words a and home, but 
what about /aneim/? Does it consist of a and name, or of an and aim} To give another 
example, /naitjift/ is easily recognisable as night and shift, but what about /naitreit/? Is 
it night rate or just one word, nitrate} These examples show that a phonemic, or pho-
nological, transcription cannot always disambiguate potentially ambiguous utterances. 
There are, nevertheless, phonological and, in actual speech, also phonetic features that 
mark the beginning and the end of linguistic units, i.e. they signal the boundary be-
tween syllables, words, and clauses, thus enabling us to distinguish between a name and 
an aim, and between night rate and nitrate. Such boundary signals are collectively 
termed juncture [from Latin iunctura, 'joint'; Junktur, 
Grenzsignal]. 
There are principally four different ways of realising juncture. Firstly, the most ob-
vious junctural features, or boundary signals, are of course pauses, including pauses 
filled with hesitation noises such as er and um. But pauses, as has already been indicated 
above, are far less common than is widely assumed. Secondly, at the phonological level, 
linguistic boundaries are marked by restrictions on the possible positions and combi-
nations of phonemes. Certain phonemes and phoneme combinations never occur at the 
beginning or at the end of a syllable or word, for example, and certain phoneme combi-
nations do not occur within a word at all. The part of phonology that deals with the 
rules governing the possible positions and combinations of phonemes is called 
"phonotactics", and will be discussed in more detail in the next lesson. Thirdly, back at 
the phonetic level, linguistic boundaries are signalled by the suprasegmental features of 
loudness, pitch, and duration, which are components of stress, and thus shape the into-
nation of connected speech. And fourthly, what may be the most reliable boundary sig-
nals are the rule-governed phonetic processes that take place when phonemes occur at 
the beginning or end of linguistic units, such as the partial devoicing of some lems con-
sonants in word-initial position, and the full devoicing of these consonants in word-fi-
nal position. In other words, maybe the most reliable clues as to how to distinguish the 
separate words of an utterance come from allophones in complementary distribution. 
Juncture through allophones can be exemplified by the sequence /SaetstAf/. (Re-
member that we leave out the space between the words here only for demonstration 
purposes. Common transcription practice requires spaces between words even though 
they might be mistaken as signalling pauses.) It is the allophonic realisation of the pho-
nemes preceding and following the word boundary which makes that word boundary 
perceptible, and helps us recognise the sequence as either that stuff'or 
that's tough. In 
that stuff the word-final hi is unaspirated, i.e. not accompanied by an audible release 
of air, and the word-initial /s/ is articulated with its usual fortis intensity. In that S 
tough, on the other hand, the word-final /s/ is articulated with less intensity (although 
it is still a fortis sound), and the word-initial /t/ is aspirated, i.e. accompanied by an au-
dible release of air. Further examples of unaspirated or aspirated plosives signalling 
word boundaries are keep sticking vs. keeps ticking, all that I'm after today vs. all the 

62 
Lesson Six 
time after today, and / scream vs. ice cream. We shall return to aspiration and discuss it 
in greater detail in Lesson Ten. 
There have been several attempts to establish a typology of junctures. The m o s t 
common one is based on the notions of "open" and "close". Junctural features at a 
word boundary are referred to as open juncture, or plus juncture (because, in a phonetic 
transcription proper, it may be represented by a plus sign). If that word boundary is n o t 
preceded or followed by a pause, i.e. if the words on both sides of the boundary are r u n 
together, we speak of internal open juncture. The sequence night rate, for example, 
has internal open juncture between It/ and /r/, and it is the location of the internal o p e n 
juncture that distinguishes a name from an aim. If the word boundary is preceded o r 
followed by a pause, i.e. if the word boundary occurs at the beginning or at the end of 
an utterance, we speak of external open juncture. The "normal" transitions between 
sounds within a word, on the other hand, are referred to as close juncture. (The use of 
the term juncture 
here is justified only by the fact that there is a kind of "boundary" 
even between sounds.) The word nitrate, then, has close juncture between /t/ and IT/. 
It should be noted that the concept of juncture is not undisputed. It is often argued, 
for example, that the different types of juncture are blurred in rapid speech, so that se-
quences like a name and an aim, or that stuff and that's tough, seem to have the same 
close juncture between all their sounds. In that case, of course, it is not the boundary 
signals, but the context that helps us distinguish the separate words. Also, juncture 
docs not always demarcate linguistic units, as it has in the examples given in this section 
so far. In beetroot and bedroom, 
for example, (which are regarded here as sequences 
consisting of two words, despite the fact that they are written without a space) there is 
internal open juncture before It/ and Idl, respectively, and the sequence at all, as we al-
ready know from the section on liaison, sometimes has the same internal open juncture 
as a tall. 
Finally, it should also be noted that juncture is sometimes defined not only as 
boundary signals between syllables, words, or clauses, but also more broadly as a tran-
sition between them. Such a broad concept of juncture overlaps considerably with the 
concept of liaison, and, in fact, some linguists include liaison as a part of juncture. It 
seems more appropriate, however, to use the narrower definition of juncture, and to re-
gard juncture and liaison as related concepts, without much overlap. 

Exercises 
63 
EXERCISES 
The exercises in this lesson focus on liaison in connected speech, and continue to prac-
tise the intermediate [i] and [u], various endings, and the letter sequence <ng>, which 
you learnt about in Lesson Five. Remember that there are two types of r-sound used to 
link words in connected speech: the linking r and the intrusive r. 
The linking r occurs between two words. The final sound in the first word is a schwa 
or any of the back vowels, the following word begins with a vowel, and the spelling at 
the end of the first word must contain the letter <r>. The intrusive r occurs in exactly 
the same phonetic context, but there is no historical justification for the sequence to be 
pronounced with /r/, i.e. there is no letter <r> in the spelling. 
linking r 
intrusive r 
orthography 
I PA 
orthography 
JFVK 
The chair in the corner 
5s t j e a r in 5s k o . n a 
The sofa in the corner 
5a s a u f a r in 5a ko:na 
She works on the fourth ji W 3 : k s Dn 5a fo:6 
It's a flaw in the design 
its 3 f b :
r in 5a d i z a i n 
floor in design 
f b . r in d i z a i n 
In this manual, we use RP as our model, and you should use the following guidelines 
for transcribing linking r and intrusive r: 
• 
In written texts, you should always transcribe a linking r and an intrusive r. Al-
though many speakers of RP, in careful speech, consciously try to avoid both link-
ing and more so intrusive liaison in many contexts, most will produce these forms in 
natural speech nevertheless. 
• 
In spoken texts, you should transcribe a linking r and an intrusive r only if you hear 
them. Some speakers do avoid liaison in the recorded exercises that follow. All cases 
of linking and intrusive r are both transcribed and annotated in the model solutions 
at the end of the manual. Linking r is transcribed as [r] attached to the preceding 
word, intrusive r as a small superscript [
r ] , also attached to the preceding word. 
This practice is shown in the table above. 
6.1 Reading and writing 
Read or write in normal orthography the short text below: 
[mesriz lu:s tjemd3 d3aeqgld in ha pokits 3 stroqif kAp sv kofi wsz wot Ji ni:did nau 
evri 03:zdei mo:niq Ji gsoz ts 5a djim and przektisiz har araubik teknkk and streq-
6snz ha tendsnz sins Ji iz tremiq far a ton, distans reis ma:r Dftan San not Ji mi:ts Ap 
wiS hsreks bos djem hu: bitoqz t 3 5a seim spa:ts kUb 
5a kaefi:n sta:tid ta w 3:k and mean felt mAtJ betaro:fta 5a strenjuas wa.kaot d 3ein 
had araivd faiv mimts bifa: mean and waz adredi sitirj on 3 saufa
r snd stAdiiq Ss 
menju: wail sipiq 
D n ha maerjgau d 3u:s kokteil wen meari had wa:kt in and ptonkt 
haself daon nekst t 3 hs 

64 
Lesson Six 
ai fi:l beta fa 5aet meari sed braitli po/ii) 5a tami kAp meid av tjaina' akros 5a trei a n d 
steam] aut av 5a kaefei windau at 5a sta:r Dpazit 
Ji nAdjd d3ein 
ai d3Ast sa:
r rend3ala
r apiarirj fram d3aonsiz fu:z akros 5a raud ai 6a:t Ji w a z m 
d3ani:va
r a: SAmwear in switsaland fi wispad tu ha frend] 
1 70 words 
6.2 Transcribe the following text into IPA symbols 
Deborah opened her eyes and then blinked again. 
"There must be something wrong or I'm dreaming," she murmured to herself. 
She seemed to be hungry, thirsty and tired all together at once. On the ceiling she 
could make out a small triangle directly above her of a darker orange against the rest of 
the rusty coloured paint. 
"How are you feeling today?" echoed a voice from the sofa in the corner of the 
room. 
"Well there's a tingling in my toes, my fingers are stinging and my head's buzzing 
like crazy; my jaw and neck still ache, but overall I'm better than yesterday," she replied 
unconvincingly. 
Deborah's doctor often visited just after evening mealtime and asked a number of 
questions before assessing whether or not to prescribe any new pills or tablets. He took 
his time, he lingered: He liked to draw out the agony. 
"Alright! Two extra injections of morphine," he decided. "But for no longer than 
three days." 
Despite her hunger and thirst, Deborah was relieved when the odd shape above her 
receded into the rest of the ceiling and she drifted into another deep sleep. 
188 words 

LESSON 
^ 
THE SYLLABLE 
/ 
One notion that we have used freely in previous lessons without giving any explanation 
is the notion of the syllable [from Latin syllaba, Greek sulla.be, 'taken, brought, or put 
together'; Silbe]. The reason why we have been able to do so is that most people have an 
intuitive sense of what a syllable is, and they can probably define a syllable vaguely as 
the smallest rhythmic unit of spoken language, for example, or a unit that is typically 
larger than a single sound and smaller than a word. Even without being able to give an 
exact definition, most people feel they can count syllables, and say how many syllables 
there are in a given word or sequence of words. On the other hand, studies have shown 
that, when English speakers are asked to count the syllables of a concrete utterance, 
there is bound to be considerable disagreement among them. It becomes clear, then, 
that the notion of the syllable is more elusive than is widely thought. In this lesson, we 
shall therefore discuss the syllable in some detail. 
A phonetic approach to the syllable 
We learnt in Lesson Three that consonants and vowels can be described both from a 
phonetic point of view, i.e. in terms of how they are produced, and from a phonological 
point of view, i.e. in terms of where they occur. The same is true of the syllable. Phonet-
ically, a syllable can be described as having a centre, also called peak or nucleus 
[SUbenkern, SUbengipfel, Nukleus], which is produced with little or no obstruction of 
air, and is therefore usually formed by a vowel (either a monophthong or a diphthong). 
The minimal syllable, then, is typically a single, isolated vowel, as in the words are /a:/, 
err /3:/, and / /ai/. The few consonants that can occur in isolation, such as the interjec-
tions mm /m/ (used to express agreement) and sh l\l (used to ask for silence), are not re-
garded as minimal syllables by all linguists. 
In many syllables, the centre is preceded by an onset [Kopf], which is produced 
with greater obstruction of air, and is therefore always formed by one or more conso-
nants. Such syllables are exemplified by words like bar /ba:/, stir /sta:/, and my /mai/. 
A syllable that ends in a vowel, i.e. one that ends with the centre, is commonly referred 
to as an open syllable [offene Silbe]. In many other syllables, there is no onset, but the 
centre is followed by a coda [Koda], which is also produced with greater obstruction of 
air, and is therefore also formed by one or more consonants. Such syllables are exempli-
fied by words like art /a:t/, urge h:dz/, and ice /ais/. Most syllables, however, have both 
an onset and a coda, like bath /ba:Q/,perk 
/p3:k/, and mine /mam/. (If they do not, we 

66 
Lesson Seven 
also speak of a zero onset and a zero coda.) A syllable that ends in a consonant, i.e. o n e 
that ends with a coda - irrespective of whether it has an onset or not - is commonly r e -
ferred to as a closed syllable [gescblossene Silbe]. It is sometimes also termed a checked 
syllable, and the vowel forming the centre is then a checked vowel. The centre and the 
coda (if there is one) together account for the rhyming potential of a syllable, as can be 
illustrated by word pairs like mine/fine 
and err Istir, and they have therefore collec-
tively been referred to as the rhyme. 
From the point of view of auditory phonetics, which was defined in Lesson O n e as 
investigating the perception of speech sounds by the listener, the centre of a syllable is 
perceived to be more prominent than the margins, i.e. onset and coda. The prominence 
of a syllable centre (and the prominence of a particular sound in relation to its sur-
rounding sounds in general) can be attributed mainly to a combination of greater loud-
ness, higher (or sometimes lower) pitch, and greater duration, but also to sound qual-
ity: Each phoneme has, besides the absolute loudness of its phonetic realisation, an 
intrinsic, relative loudness (or "carrying-power"), referred to as its sonority, and, ac-
cording to a common sonority hierarchy, vowels are more sonorous (i.e. they "carry 
further") than consonants. 
On the basis of what we have just learnt, we can say that the word knowing consists 
of two syllables: the open syllable /nao/, ending in a diphthong, and the closed syllable 
/in/, without an onset. Here, syllable boundary and morpheme boundary clearly coin-
cide (in other words, syllables and morphemes in this example are identical), but this is 
not usually the case. The word standing, for example, is commonly divided into the syl-
lables /staen/ and /din/ (although its morphemes are stand and -ing). This analysis is 
probably guided by the desire to have two evenly balanced syllables, namely two 
closed syllables with an onset, but the word could theoretically also be divided into the 
syllables /staend/ and /in/ if that were "felt" to be more appropriate. (Incidentally, sylla-
ble boundaries and morpheme boundaries are the two competing criteria for hyphen-
ating a word at the end of a line, with American English favouring the former, and Brit-
ish English favouring the latter.) The example shows, then, that the division of words 
into syllables, referred to as syllabification or syllabication, is based to a considerable 
extent on intuition - certainly to a greater extent than is desirable for a science that aims 
to be exact and objective. 
The difficulty of determining the exact boundaries between consecutive syllables 
can be further exemplified by words like master and extra. Most English speakers feel 
that master consists of two syllables, but should the word be divided as /ma:-sta/ (with 
two evenly balanced open syllables in non-rhotic accents), /ma:s-tar/ (with two evenly 
balanced closed syllables in rhotic accents), or maybe even /ma:st-a(r)/ (because the 
word mast consists of one syllable when it occurs alone)? The word extra is also felt 
to have two syllables, but should it be divided as /ek-stra/, /eks-tra/, /ekst-ra/, or 
/ekstr-a/? While it is simply not possible to say which of these syllabifications is "cor-
rect", /ek-stra/ and /eks-tra/ are certainly the most common. 
The answer to such questions is influenced by factors like accent, rapidity of speech, 
level of formality, and communicative situation. The examples nevertheless suggest 

The Syllable 
6 7 
that a description of the syllable merely in terms of how its segments are produced (or 
perceived) is less than sufficient. In order to give a more satisfactory description, we 
also have to investigate the possible positions and combinations of particular pho-
nemes within a syllable. In other words, the syllable must be described not only from a 
phonetic, but also from a phonological point of view. 
Phonotactics 
As was briefly mentioned in the previous lesson, the part of phonology that deals with 
the rules governing the possible positions and combinations of phonemes is called 
phonotactics [Phonotaktik]. The range of environments in which a linguistic unit can 
occur is referred to as its distribution [Distribution, 
Verteilung], a term we are already 
somewhat familiar with from the concept of complementary distribution, discussed in 
Lesson Five. Every language has restrictions on the distribution of phonemes within a 
syllable, morpheme, or word. In English, for example, /rj/ occurs only after some short 
vowels, more specifically after /i, as, A, D / , and no word ends with the sequence /aeh/. 
Especially important, here, are the rules governing the possible sequences of conso-
nants, i.e. consonants pronounced consecutively without an intervening vowel or 
pause, such as the initial /st/ in stir. Such a consonant sequence is technically termed 
consonant cluster, or simply cluster. (It goes without saying that the term cannot be 
applied to a mere sequence of letters. The word scythe /sai5/, for instance, does not 
contain a cluster, despite its spelling, and perk contains the cluster /rk/ only in rhotic ac-
cents.) Languages differ considerably in their tolerance for clusters: Hawaiian, for ex-
ample, permits no clusters at all, and Japanese allows only very few clusters word-mter-
nally. English, on the other hand, has numerous clusters, and many of them are quite 
complex. Some phonotactic rules governing the distribution of consonants and vowels 
will be explored in the next section. 
A phonological approach to the syllable 
Concerning the possible positions of phonemes within a syllable, we already know that 
one or more consonants can occur at each margin, and that either a monophthong or a 
diphthong usually occurs at the centre, which could mean in the middle, but also at the 
beginning (if there is no onset), at the end (if there is no coda), or alone (if there is neither 
onset nor coda). As far as the possible positions of particular phonemes and their com-
binations are concerned, there are many more restrictions than can be outlined here. In 
this section, we shall therefore look at the particular phonemes and phoneme combina-
tions that can occur at the beginning of a word, or more precisely of a word-initial syl-
lable, in some detail, and shall touch on those that can occur at the end only briefly. 
A word begins either with the centre or with the onset of its first syllable. If it begins 
with the centre (as in art /a:t/), that centre can be formed by any vowel (although /o/ 
occurs rarely in word-initial position). If it begins with the onset, that onset can be 
formed either by one consonant or by a cluster consisting of two or three consonants. 
If the onset is formed by one consonant (as in bar /bo:/), that consonant can be any 

68 
Lesson Seven 
consonant except /rj/ (although iy is also rare word-initially). If the onset is formed by 
two consonants (as in stir /st3:/), the two-consonant cluster must be one of the follow-
ing: /pi, pr, pj, bl, br, bj, tr, tj, tw, dr, dj, dw, kl, kr, kj, kw, gl, gr, mj, nj, fl, fr, fj, vj, 6r, 6w, sp, 
st, sk, sm, sn, sf, si, sj, sw, Jr, hj, lj/, plus a few unusual clusters in some proper names, in 
some archaic or otherwise rare words (such as /vr/ in vrpom), and in certain pronuncia-
tion variants of words (such as /sr/ in syringe when that word is pronounced /snnd3/ in-
stead of /smnaV). We note that, with the exception of clusters beginning with /s/, the 
second (or last) element of a word-initial two-consonant cluster is always one of the 
four frictionless continuants, /l, r, j , w/. If the onset is formed by three consonants (as in 
street /stri.t/), the three-consonant cluster must be one of the following: /spl, spr, spj, 
str, stj, ski, skr, skj, skw/. Here, we note that the first element is always /s/, the second 
element is always one of the three fortis plosives, /p, t, k/, and the third (or last) ele-
ment is again always one of the four frictionless continuants, /l, r, j , w/. No English 
word, and no English syllable, for that matter, begins with more than three consonants 
and many consonant combinations, such as /tl/, /fs/, and /spm/, are not possible in 
word-initial position. 
A word ends either with the centre or with the coda of its last syllable. If it ends with 
the centre (as in my /mai/), that centre can be formed by any vowel except /e, as, A, D / , 
or it can be formed by a syllabic consonant, which will be explained in the next section. 
If it ends with the coda, that coda can be formed either by one consonant or by a cluster 
consisting of up to four consonants. If the coda is formed by one consonant (as in mine 
/main/), that consonant can be any consonant except /h/, the semi-vowels, /j, w/, and in 
non-rhotic accents Ixl. If the coda is formed by two, three, or four consonants (as in 
bc[p_ /help/, next /nekst/, and glimpsed /glimpst/), there are numerous restrictions simi-
lar to those applying to clusters at the beginning of a word-initial syllable. No English 
word, and, again, no English syllable, ends with more than four consonants, and, as be-
fore, many consonant combinations are not possible in word-final position. 
Phonologically, the English syllable can thus be described (with a capital ' C repre-
senting a consonant, and a capital 'V representing a vowel) as having the maximal 
structure CCCVCCCC (as in strengths /strerjgBs/), the minimal structure V (as in are 
/a:/), or any structure in between, such as CCVC (as in stop /stop/), CVCC (as in cats 
/kacts/), and CCCVCC (as in streets /stri:ts/). 
Syllabic consonants 
In the previous sections, we said that the centre of a syllable is "usually" formed by a 
vowel. This is true, without exception, in words consisting of only one syllable, like art 
/o:t/, my /mai/, help /help/, and most of the other example words given in this lesson so 
far. As the tentative wording suggests, however, there are syllables whose centre is not 
formed by a vowel, but by a consonant instead. Such syllables contain no vowel at all, 
and the consonant forming the centre is termed syllabic consonant. This is the case in 
some words consisting of two or more syllables, as we shall see shortly. 
Before we proceed, however, a brief note on terminology: A word that consists of a 
single syllable is referred to as a monosyllabic word, or simply as a monosyllable. One 

The Syllable 
69 
that consists of two syllables, like clever /klev-a/ and delay /di-lei/, is referred to as a 
disyllabic or bisyllabic word, or as a disyllable or bisyllable, and one that consists of 
three syllables, like compulsive /ksm-pAl-srv/ and delicious /di-lij-ss/, is referred to as a 
trisyllabic word, or as a trisyllable. Less specifically, a word that consists of two or 
more syllables is also called a polysyllabic word, or a polysyllable. 
The word student /stju:dnt/, then, could theoretically be analysed as a monosyllable 
with a vowel as its centre, a three-consonant cluster as its onset, and another three-con-
sonant cluster as its coda. Most English speakers feel that student consists of two sylla-
bles, however, and the word is therefore commonly analysed as a disyllable with 
/stju:d/ as the first syllable, and /nt/ as the second, and with /u:/ and /n/ as the syllable 
centres. One just ification for such an analysis might be that student is pronounced 
/stjuidant/, with a schwa, when it is pronounced very slowly, in which case it is the 
schwa that forms the centre of the second syllable. In "normal" speech, when the schwa 
is omitted, the centre simply shifts to the following sound. 
In more general terms, we could say that a syllabic consonant can occur in certain 
phonetic environments where, in very slow speech, there would be a schwa, or where 
we imagine there could be a schwa, as a syllable centre. The time needed to pronounce 
the (real or imaginary) schwa is then added to the duration of the following consonant, 
thus transforming that consonant into a syllabic consonant. As a syllabic consonant al-
ways forms the centre of a syllable, it has the phonological characteristics of a vowel, 
but, of course, it retains the phonetic characteristics of a consonant. 
A syllabic consonant and a corresponding non-syllabic consonant cannot usually 
distinguish meaning, or differentiate words, which means that they must be regarded as 
allophones of the same phoneme. We learnt in Lesson Five that allophones are not re-
corded in a phonemic transcription, and the transcription /stju:dnt/ is therefore correct 
and sufficient for that degree of accuracy. In a phonetic transcription proper, on the 
other hand, and, to a very limited extent, in a broad phonetic transcription, allophones 
are recorded. In those types of transcription, a syllabic consonant is indicated by a 
small vertical line, [, ], under the relevant symbol, as in [stju:dnt]. There are five conso-
nants that can be transformed into syllabic consonants. They are, roughly in order of 
frequency: /l, n, m, n, r/. The specific environments in which they occur as syllabic con-
sonants will be described below. 
0 ) [}]• The syllabic [1] is probably the most frequent of the five. It is most noticeable 
when it is represented in the spelling by the letter sequence <le> at the end of a word, 
and is preceded by a consonant, as in table [teibl], double [d\bl], and coddle [kodl]. 
Each of these words, or roots, consists of two syllables, with a syllabic [j] as the centre 
of the second: table [tei-bl], double [ckb-1], and coddle [kod-1]. The [1] remains syllabic 
even when a suffix is added, as in tables [teibjz], doubled [dAty'd], and coddling [kodhn . 
Whereas tables and doubled still consist of two syllables, [tei-blz] and [dAb-ld] cod-
dling now consists of three, [knd-l-in], because the vowel in the suffix -tng must form 
the centre of a syllable too. Alternatively, and less frequently, the l\l in coddling could 
be pronounced, or perceived, as having lost its syllabic quality, and as forming the onset 

7 0 
Lesson Seven 
of a syllable, rather than the centre, and the word would then consist of two syllables as 
well: [kDd-lin]. 
It should be pointed out that, although spelling is regarded as largely irrelevant in 
linguistics, it is certainly helpful to resort to it here because phonetically similar words 
whose roots do not end with the letter sequence <le> do not have a syllabic [{]. For ex-
ample, the word codling [kodhrj], 'small cod', is derived by adding the diminutive suffix 
-ling to the root cod, and its pronunciation differs from that of coddling only in that the 
l\l is always, necessarily, pronounced as a "normal", non-syllabic [1]. Thus codling al-
ways consists of the two syllables [kDd-lirj]. 
The syllabic [1] also occurs when it is represented in the spelling by the letter se-
quences <al> or <el> at the end of a word, and is preceded by a consonant, as in 
proposal [prspauzl], pedal [pedl], and shovel [f A V I ] . A S before, it forms the centre of the 
syllable in which it occurs, and it usually remains syllabic even when a suffix is added, 
as in proposals [pra-pau-zlz], pedalled [ped-ld], and shovelling 
[fAV-l-irj]. 
In most cases, the syllabic [1] is obligatory. In other words, pronouncing the word 
table as [teibal], with a schwa, would be plain wrong, except perhaps in very slow 
speech. It is optional mainly in those cases where it is followed by a suffix with a vowel, 
as was seen above, and in some less common or more technical words, such as 
acquittal 
[akwitl / akwital], missal [misj / misal], and shrapnel [fraepnl / Jraepnal]. 
(2) [n]. The syllabic [n] often occurs when Iwl is preceded by a plosive or fricative (not 
by an affricate) in unstressed syllables, but not usually in word-initial position. It is es-
pecially frequent when preceded by an alveolar plosive or fricative, as in button [bAtn] 
and horizon [haraizn], and in contracted negations like hadn't [haednt] and isn't [iznt]. It 
is also frequent when preceded by a labiodental fricative, but here the /n/ can also be 
pronounced as [an]. The words hyphen and seven, for example, are usually pronounced 
[haifn] and [sevn], but less commonly also [haifan] and [sevan]. Otherwise, however, 
the syllabic [n] is largely obligatory in this environment. Pronouncing a schwa here 
would usually sound odd or, at best, overcareful. 
In other environments, the syllabic [n] is relatively rare. After bilabial and velar con-
sonants, [n] and [on] seem to be virtually interchangeable, or in free variation, as in 
happen [haepn / haepan], ribbon [nbn / nban], and thicken [6ikn / Bikan]. After velar con-
sonants, when it is represented in the spelling by the letter sequences <an> or <on>, as 
in wagon, and after the phoneme sequence nasal or /s/ or l\l plus plosive, as in 
London, 
the syllabic [n] may be acceptable, resulting in such pronunciations as [waegn] and 
[lAiidn], but pronunciations with [an], as in [waegan] and [Undan], are certainly much 
more common. 
(3,4) [m, n]. Although the syllabic [m] and [rj] are not uncommon, they can occur only 
as a result of phonetic processes such as assimilation and elision, which will be dis-
cussed in detail in Lesson Nine. When they occur in words like happen and thicken, for 
example, these words are pronounced [haepm] and [Bikn], but, as we saw above, the pro-
nunciations [haepn / haepan] and [0ikn / 9ikan] are also possible. 

T h e Syllable 
71 
(5) [r]. While the syllabic [r] is very c o m m o n in many rhotic accents, it is rare in 
non-rhotic accents, where the hi phoneme has disappeared almost entirely (except be-
fore a vowel). The words particular and perhaps, for example, are often pronounced 
[prtikjalr] and [prhaeps] in General American English whereas in RP they are usually 
pronounced [patikjala] and [pahaeps]. There are only two environments in which the 
syllabic [r] can occur in RP, and even in those environments it is usually optional. 
Firstly, it can occur when III is preceded by one consonant (and followed by a vowel) in 
unstressed syllables, as in flattery [flaetri] and watering [wo:trirj]. Here, the syllabic [r] is 
usually interchangeable with [ar], and the example words would then be pronounced 
[flaetari] and [wa:tann]. Secondly, the syllabic [r] can occur when hi is preceded by two 
or more consonants (and followed by a vowel) in unstressed syllables, as in history 
[histri] and wanderer [wDndra]. Here, the syllabic [r] is usually interchangeable with a 
non-syllabic [r], without a schwa. The example words would then be pronounced 
[histri] and [wDndra], the only difference being that a syllabic consonant always has a 
greater duration than its non-syllabic counterpart. 
As was mentioned earlier in this section, a syllabic consonant and a corresponding 
non-syllabic consonant cannot usually distinguish meaning, i.e. there are few minimal 
pairs in which they appear to be contrasting sounds. One such minimal pair seemed to 
be coddling [kodhq] / codling [kDdliq], but we said that coddling is occasionally also 
pronounced [kDdhrj], in which case the two words have the same pronunciation (and 
are then termed homophones). All in all, there is not enough reason to regard a syllabic 
consonant and its non-syllabic counterpart as two separate phonemes. They are, as 
mentioned before, allophones of the same phoneme. 
Finally, it should be noted that neither the choice between the various pronuncia-
tion variants discussed here nor their exact pronunciations are usually as clear-cut as 
the description of the environments and a neat transcription might suggest. The word 
veteran, for example, can be pronounced [vetaran] with [ar], [vetran] with a syllabic [r], 
less commonly also [vetran] with a non-syllabic [r], [vetarn] with a syllabic [n], possibly 
even [vetrn] with two consecutive syllabic consonants, or some way in between. When 
we transcribe spoken language, the choice is therefore often arbitrary, and the represen-
tation through IPA symbols is often only approximate. 
Stressed and unstressed syllables vs. strong and weak syllables 
We learnt earlier in this lesson that, at the level of auditory phonetics, the prominence 
of a sound can be attributed mainly to a combination of loudness, pitch, duration, and 
sound quality. Just as there are more prominent and less prominent sounds within a 
syllable (the most prominent being the syllable centre), there are more prominent and 
less prominent syllables within a (polysyllabic) word. Furthermore, we learnt in Les-
son Two that, at the level of articulatory phonetics, the same four features mentioned 
above - loudness, pitch, duration, and sound quality - are also the main components of 
stress. Prominence in the perception of speech, then, results from stress in its produc-
tion, and we therefore speak of a stressed syllable and an unstressed syllable. These 

72 
Lesson Seven 
terms seem to be largely self-explanatory (which is the reason why we have been able to 
use them from Lesson Four onwards), but when we look at stressed and unstressed syl-
lables more closely, we see that they need more explanation than their simple labels 
might suggest. One aspect in particular that must be explained is the sound quality of 
the vowels in stressed and unstressed syllables. An important role is played, here, by 
the schwa, and it is therefore advisable to reread the relevant passage in the section 
"Short vowels" in Lesson Four, which describes this phoneme in some detail. 
While stressed syllables can contain any vowel (monophthong or diphthong) ex-
cept /a/, unstressed syllables contain 
- 
mainly /a/, III, and /u/ (in order of frequency), as in agree /agri:/, regard /nga:d/, 
and neighbourhood 
/neibahod/ (including, at the phonetic level, the intermediate [i] 
and [u], described in the section "Unstressed i- and a-sounds" in Lesson Five); 
- 
less commonly, other vowels such as / A / in unsafe /Anseif/and /ao/ in obese /aobi:s/; 
- 
and, in a sense, also the syllabic consonants, [j, n, m, rj, r], because, as we said earlier 
in this lesson, they are vowels from a phonological point of view. 
And while the vowels in stressed syllables always have their "full", original sound qual-
ity, it can be demonstrated that most /a/ and III phonemes in unstressed syllables result 
from a reduction, or weakening, of such full vowels owing to a shift in stress. For ex-
ample, the /ae/ in land /laend/ remains an /ae/ in landing /laendirj/ because it occurs in a 
stressed syllable, but it is reduced to /a/ in England /irjgland/ because here it occurs in 
an unstressed syllable. Similarly, the /e/ in the noun present /preznt/ is reduced to hi in 
the verb present /pnzent/ because the shift in word class is accompanied, or rather 
brought about, by a shift in stress, from the first syllable to the second. (Sometimes the 
reduced vowels in unstressed syllables cannot be clearly identified as either /a/ or / i / , 
and the choice between the two symbols is then largely arbitrary.) But there are, of 
course, also cases where the vowels in unstressed syllables retain their original sound 
quality. The la:/ in art /a:t/, for example, remains an la:/ in artistic la:tistikl although in 
the latter word it occurs in an unstressed syllable, and the In:/ in stupid /stju:pid/ re-
mains an ln:l in stupidity /stju:pidati/. 
Any vowel that has its full, original sound quality, except /a/, is referred to as a 
strong vowel, and the syllable of which it forms the centre, irrespective of whether it is 
stressed or unstressed, is called a strong syllable. The first syllable in unsafe /Anseif/, 
for example, is strong and unstressed, and the second syllable is strong and stressed. A 
vowel that results from a reduction (as is often the case with /a/ and III) or one that oc-
curs solely in unstressed syllables (i.e. again /a/, but also [i], [u], and the syllabic conso-
nants) is referred to as a weak vowel, and the syllable of which it forms the centre is 
called a weak syllable. The first syllable in the verb present /pnzent/, for example, is 
weak because the III is reduced from /e/, and the second syllable in England /ingland/ is 
weak not only because the /a/ is reduced from /ae/, but also because /a/ generally oc-
curs only in unstressed syllables. 
It is important to note, then, that there is no one-to-one correspondence between 
stressed syllable and strong syllable (and, by extension, strong vowel), or between un-

The Syllable 
73 
stressed syllable and weak syllable (and weak vowel): 
,„ 
also strong (as in fending /Ixndn,/), strong syllables can be e the stresed ( g 
W »
8 ) or unstressed (as In artistic /a:usuk/). And wbde -
»
«
^ 
a
r
e 
a l . 
ther strong (again, as in site) or weak (as in England / n g t a o d / ) , weak syl 
ways unstressed (again, as in England). 
REMEMBER 
Weak syllables - i.e. syllables containing hi, N when that vowel results from 
a reduction, [i], [u], or a syllabic consonant - are always unstressed in English. 
We pointed out in the section on short vowels in Lesson Four that many languages do 
not have a sound, like the English schwa, that occurs in most unstressed syllables. This, to-
gether with the reduction of vowels in unstressed syllables, is one of the most important 
distinguishing features of English, and is particularly important for foreign learners. Es-
pecial attention must therefore be paid to it in the teaching of English as a foreign language. 
Stress patterns in polysyllabic words 
The stress carried by a syllable within a word is referred to as word stress, or lexical 
stress. It must be distinguished from the stress carried by a word within an utterance, 
which is (strictly speaking, not quite appropriately) referred to as sentence stress. This sec-
tion, and, in fact, much of this lesson, is concerned with word stress. Sentence stress de-
termines the occurrence of strong and weak forms, which will be discussed in the next 
lesson, and is closely related to intonation, which will be the topic of Lesson Twelve. 
Word stress in many languages is fairly predictable, i.e. it is governed by rules that 
apply to almost the entire vocabulary, or lexicon. These languages are said to have fixed 
stress, or to be fixed-stress languages. In French, for example, the stress usually falls on 
the last syllable, in Polish and Welsh on the last but one, and in Czech on the fust. In 
other languages, word stress is more difficult to predict, i.e. it is rule-governed only to a 
very limited extent. These languages are said to have free stress, less commonly also 
called movable stress, or to be free-stress languages. English is a free-stress language. 
Although some linguists propose numerous rules which English word stress suppos-
edly follows, these rules seem to have even more numerous exceptions, and thus give 
the impression that they do not do justice to the complexity of the phenomenon. Eng-
lish word stress is therefore best considered a feature of the individual word, and for-
eign learners must learn it as such. Nevertheless, there are some very broad tendencies 
that can be observed, relating to word origin, word class, and the presence of suffixes, as 
we shall see shortly. Before we look at these tendencies, however, we shall look at how 
word stress can be indicated in a phonetic transcription. 
Stress in polysyllabic words can be indicated by a small, raised vertical line, [' ], just 
before the stressed syllable, as in the transcription flaendirj] for the word landing, and 
[a:'tistik] for artistic. (In many older publications, however, the line is placed after the 
stressed syllable, as in [laen'diq] or [a:tis'tik].) If a word has two or more stressed sylla-
bles, the strongest stress is referred to as primary stress [Hauptton], and can be indi-

74 
Lesson Seven 
cated in the way just described. The second-strongest stress is referred to as secondary 
stress [Nebenton], and can be indicated by a small, lowered vertical line, [, ], just before 
(or, in many older publications, after) the stressed syllable. Examples of transcriptions 
showing primary and secondary stress are [fauto'graefik] for photographic, 
and [,vaek-
si'neijn] for vaccination. The line used to indicate stress, irrespective of whether it is 
raised or lowered, is called a stress mark [Betonungszeichen]. 
A transcription that in-
cludes stress marks cannot, strictly speaking, be a purely phonemic transcription any 
more, and the transcribed text should therefore be enclosed in square brackets, [ ] 
Some linguists also recognise a third-strongest stress, referred to as tertiary stress, but 
this need not concern us here. We recommend that, from now on, you indicate in your 
transcriptions only one stress per word (in words that have two or more stressed sylla-
bles, that would be the primary stress), but only if that stress is not predictable. For ex-
ample, while the stress in agree [ogri:] and react [riaekt] is predictable (because the 
schwa and the intermediate z-sound cannot occur in stressed syllables), and therefore 
does not have to be indicated, the stress in regard [n'go:d] is not predictable (because 
both l\l and la:/ can occur in stressed syllables), and therefore should be shown in the 
transcription. 
As we have already said above, factors that influence stress are word origin, word 
class, and the presence of suffixes, but they influence stress only in non-compound 
words (not in words like bookcase and home-made, which are compounds). Word ori-
gin influences stress in that words of Germanic origin (mainly from Old English and 
Old Norse, the language of the early Scandinavians) tend to have first-syllable stress as 
in answer [o:nsa] and brotherhood [brAoahud], while words of Romance origin (mairilv 
from French and Latin) tend to have their stress on later syllables, as in 
respond 
[nspond] and fraternity 
[fratemati]. Word class influences stress in that nouns tend to 
have first-syllable stress, as in present [preznt] and record ['reka:d], while verbs tend to 
have second-syllable stress, as \npres_ent [pn'zent] and record [n'ko:d]. And the presence 
of suffixes influences stress in that some suffixes usually attract stress, other suffi X e s 
usually determine which of the syllables of a word carries (or carry) stress, and still 
other suffixes usually effect a shift in stress. For example, syllables containing the suf-
fixes -ee, -eer, -ese, -esque, and -ette usually carry the (primary) stress regardless of 
which syllable was stressed before the suffix was added, as in mountaineer 
[,maunto'ni 3i 
derived from mountain 
[maontan], and kitchenette 
[JkitJYnet], derived from 
kitchen 
[kitfm]. Syllables containing the suffix -ate also usually carry the stress (although 
l
n 
American English they usually don't) when they occur in disyllabic verbs, as in dictate 
[dik'teit] and frustrate 
[frAS'treit] (in American English ['dikteit] and [frAStreit]); buTiri 
longer verbs, they carry secondary stress at most: In trisyllabic verbs, the (primary) 
stress is usually on the first syllable, as in dominate [domineit] and fluctuate 
['ilAktfueitF 
and in four-syllable verbs, the (primary) stress is usually on the second syllable, as i I 
deliberate [di'libarat] and facilitate [fa'siliteit]. And the suffixes -ial, -(i)an, -ic, and -it 
usually shift the stress from the syllable that carried the stress before the suffix 
w a s 
added to the syllable immediately preceding the suffix, as in tutorial [tju:'ta:rial], de 
rived from tutor [tju:ta], and climatic [klai'maetik], derived from climate [klaimat]. (Not, 
e-
:e 

The Syllable 
75 
that suffixes may extend over two syllables: This is the case in tutorial [tju:-'tD:r-i-3l], but 
not, for example, in official [s-fij-l ].) There are also suffixes, however, that do not usu-
ally influence stress at all. Among such stress-neutral suffixes are -isb, -ite, -less, -ment, 
-ness, -ous, and -y. They usually keep the stress on the same syllable that carried the 
stress before the suffix was added, as in involvement 
[m'vDlvmont], derived from 
involve [in'vDlv], and mountainous 
[maontonos], derived from mountain [maontsn]. 
As we have already seen above, the noun present [preznt] and the verb present 
[pn'zent], and the noun record [reko:d] and the verb record [n'ko:d], are related disyl-
labic words with identical spelling, which are differentiated most obviously by their 
stress patterns, i.e. they have contrastive stress. Words that have the same spelling, but 
differ in meaning (and sometimes also in pronunciation), are termed homographs. 
English has several dozen pairs of related disyllabic homographs of this type, where the 
word with first-syllable stress is either a noun or an adjective (or both), and the word 
with second-syllable stress is a verb. Other examples are abstract, conduct, contest, con-
tract, contrast, decrease, desert, escort, export, import, increase, insult, perfect, rebel, and 
transfer. Pairs of awrelated disyllabic homographs with contrastive stress, like the noun 
content [kontent], 'subject matter of a book, speech, programme, etc.', and the adjective 
content [kon'tent], 'satisfied with what one has', are rare, and so are pairs of unrelated 
disyllabic words whose pronunciation differs solely in their stress patterns, like billow 
['biloo] and below [bi'lsu]. 

76 
Lesson Seven 
EXERCISES 
In this lesson, we discussed the role of syllabic consonants in the normal pronunciation 
of English: A syllabic consonant can occur in certain phonetic environments where, in 
very slow speech, there would be a schwa, or where we imagine there could be a schwa, 
as a syllable centre. The time needed to pronounce the (real or imaginary) schwa is then 
added to the duration of the following consonant, transforming that consonant into a 
syllabic consonant. As a syllabic consonant always forms the centre of a syllable, it has 
the phonological characteristics of a vowel, but, of course, retains the phonetic charac-
teristics of a consonant. The syllabic consonants you will need to transcribe here are the 
syllabic [1] and the syllabic [n]. The other syllabic consonants occur much less fre-
quently, and you do not need to consider them in your transcriptions. The occasional 
occurrence of syllabic [r] is noted in the model solutions at the end of the manual. 
In the exercises up to this lesson, no stress marks were placed in the transcriptions. 
In fact, there have been few words where stress needed to be marked since nearly all the 
disyllabic words which have appeared up to now have schwa as one of their syllable 
centres, and schwa is always unstressed. Stress will fall on the other syllable in such 
cases. From now on, however, you should mark the stress of two-or-more-syllable 
words where the stress cannot be determined from the rules discussed in the lesson. 
There are now two types of exercises for each lesson: transcription from a written 
text, and transcription from a spoken monologue or dialogue on the CD. Each spoken 
exercise is presented as a continuous text and then as a text with tracks to make it easier 
to break your listening down into shorter lengths. We recommend that you first listen 
to the whole recording for that lesson, then work on transcribing the shorter tracks. 
From now on, we no longer annotate the following forms in the solutions unless 
there is a special reason for doing so: intermediate [i] and [u], regular plural, possessive 
case, third-person singular, regular past-tense, and regular past participle morphemes, 
and the letter sequence <ng>. 
7.1 Transcribe the following text into IPA symbols 
Joseph was seated on his balcony in the feeble illumination of the nearly extinguished 
sun. The day was no longer hot and exotic birds mingled with the dying rays, swooping 
after clouds of hovering midges. He looked out over the river raging in the valley filled 
with huge rocks below. The roar of gushing water deafened his ears and a fine spray 
permeated the cool air. Normally he mixes a drink, sits unperturbed and wishes away 
the hours. But this evening happened to be unlike any other evening. 
"I've finished chapter seven," he thought "and written the beginning of section two." 
He was supremely pleased, since his daily efforts for a good few months had often 
ended in disappointment and frustration. For some reason, the raw ideas he was toying 
with had formed themselves into a concrete and convincing whole that really worked. 
"All I have to do is keep on going like this, in this perfect situation and I'll be fin-
ished by June next year." 
166 words 

Exercises 
7.2 Transcribe the spoken monologue on the CD into I PA symbols 
Track 1 and tracks 2-6 
121 words 


LESSON 
Q 
STRONG AND WEAK FORMS 
O 
What are strong and weak forms? 
Just as there are more prominent and less prominent sounds within a syllable, and more 
prominent and less prominent syllables within a word, there are also more prominent 
and less prominent words within an utterance or a sentence. We already know from the 
previous lesson that the prominence, or the stress, of some words in relation to others 
shapes the sentence stress. In the sentence John had ordered a pint of beer, for example, 
the words John, ordered, pint, and beer are normally stressed whereas bad, a, and of are 
normally unstressed. The latter group of words would typically be pronounced 
hdl, 
hi, and hvl although, when they occur in isolation, as citation forms, they are pro-
nounced /haed/, /ei/, and hwl. There are a number of monosyllabic words in the Eng-
lish language, like had, a, and of, that can undergo a reduction, or weakening, of the 
vowel to hi or hi, or an omission, technically termed elision, of one or more sounds, 
or both, when they occur in non-prominent positions. These changes are not normally 
represented in the spelling. 
A strong form, then, is that pronunciation variant of a given word which contains a 
strong vowel, and from which no sounds have been omitted (or elided), like /haed/, /ei/, 
and /nv/. Strong forms, like strong syllables, can occur in both prominent and non-
prominent positions, i.e. they can be either stressed or unstressed. A weak form, on the 
other hand, is a pronunciation variant which contains a weak vowel, or from which one 
or more sounds have been omitted, or both, like /ad/, hi, and hsl. Some words have 
more than one weak form: The word had, for example, has /hod/, hdl, and Id/, and of 
has hvl, hi, and hi. The degree to which a word is weakened, or, in other words, the 
choice between two or more weak forms, depends on such factors as communicative 
situation and social class. Weak forms, like weak syllables, can occur only in non-prom-
inent positions, i.e. they are always unstressed. 
In the previous lesson, we encountered the reduction of vowels in isolated words, 
owing to a shift in stress. In this lesson, we shall see that reduction is also an aspect of 
connected speech, which we began to discuss in Lesson Six, and shall continue to dis-
cuss in Lesson Nine. In fact, you may have noticed that, in Lesson Six, we transcribed 
monosyllables such as at and and as htl and /on/, instead of /aet/ and /aend/, in se-
quences like not at all [not o to:l] and silly and stupid [sili
j on stju:pid]. 

Lesson Eight 
Grammatical words 
We said above that there are "a number of monosyllabic words" that have strong and 
weak forms. More specifically, these are words that primarily fulfil a grammatical func-
tion, but have little or no lexical content. (We might also say they have little or no 
" meaning" although this is not entirely correct because the term meaning includes both 
lexical and grammatical meaning.) Such a word is called a grammatical word, or func-
tion word [Funktionswort], 
less commonly also form word, structural word, struc-
ture word, empty word, or functor. In terms of word classes, grammatical words 
comprise determiners (including articles), pronouns, prepositions (including particles), 
conjunctions, auxiliary verbs, and a few adverbs, such as not and there. With the excep-
tion of adverbs, these word classes are closed, i.e. the number of words they contain is 
limited and largely fixed, and new words are rarely or never added. (Numerals and in-
terjections are closed word classes as well, but they are not counted among the gram-
matical words.) 
By contrast, a word that does have lexical content (or "meaning") is called a lexical 
word, or content word [Inhaltswort]. 
Lexical words comprise nouns, full (or lexical) 
verbs! adjectives, and the vast majority of adverbs. These word classes are open, i.e. the 
number of words they contain is, in principle, unlimited because new words are contin-
ually added. 
_ 
... 
All determiners, pronouns, prepositions, conjunctions, and auxiliary verbs are 
grammatical words, but not all of them have strong and weak forms. The words it and 
mine, for example, are both pronouns, but each has only one form: /it/ and /mam/. Fur-
thermore, many grammatical words are polysyllabic, like the preposition above /SDAV/ 
and the conjunction whereas /weoraez/, and therefore (theoretically) cannot have strong 
and weak forms although there is the occasional exception, like the conjunction because, 
which has the strong form /bikoz/ and the weak forms /bikoz/ and /ksz/. The number 
of grammatical words that do have strong and weak forms is usually put at around fifty. 
The distribution of strong and weak forms 
We already know that strong forms can occur in both prominent and non-prominent 
positions, i.e. they can be either stressed or unstressed, and that weak forms can occur 
only in non-prominent positions, i.e. they are always unstressed. This means that 
prominent positions are always occupied by strong forms while non-prominent posi-
tions can be occupied by either strong or weak forms. As grammatical words usually 
do not express most of the message of an utterance, they are not often made prominent 
through stress. O n the contrary, they usually (but not always) occur in non-prominent 
positions, and are therefore usually unstressed. Although we have just noted that 
non-prominent positions can be occupied by either strong or weak forms, weak forms 
are much more common - so common, in fact, that they can be regarded as the "usual" 
pronunciation variants. When discussing the distribution of strong and weak forms, it 
is therefore sufficient to describe the relatively few environments in which strong 
forms usually occur. In all other environments, weak forms predominate. 

Strong and weak forms 
• 
— 
strong form 
weak form(s) 
«« 
/ei/ 
/ a / 
am
 
(2)(3) 
/aem/ 
/(a)m/ 
an
 
(1)(3) 
/aen/ 
/(o)n/ 
and
{i) 
/aend/ 
/(a)n(d)/ 
are
 
(1)(2)^ 
/o:(r)/ 
/or, a, r/ 
as 
/ _ / 
/az/ 
at 
/aet/ 
/at/ 
be® 
/bi:/ 
/bi/, [bi] 
because 
/bikDz/ 
/(bi)kaz/ 
The rules governing the occurrence of strong (and weak) forms are not hard and 
fast, but they may serve as a general guideline for foreign learners, and for your tran-
scriptions. Strong forms usually occur in the following environments: 
- 
in isolation, as in Who? /hu:/ (as opposed to / wonder who did it /ho/); 
- 
when being quoted, as in / said "of", not "off" /ov/ (as opposed to He is a friend of 
mine /av/); 
- 
at the end of a phrase or sentence, as in What are you looking at? /aet/ (as opposed to 
/ am looking at the wall /at/); 
- 
as the first of two consecutive auxiliary verbs without a full verb, as in / would 
have 
/wud/ (as opposed to / would have liked it /wad/); 
- 
in coordinations, as in He travels to and from London a lot /tu:, from/ (as opposed to 
He travels to London /to/ and He travels from London 
/from/); 
- 
in contrasts, as in / have a message from Ike, not for Ike /from, fo:r/ (as opposed to / 
have a message from Ike /from/ and / have a message for Ike /for/); 
- 
and when used to emphasise a particular aspect of the message for whatever reason, 
as in London is the place to be /6i:/ (as opposed to London is the place where I met 
my wife /5a/). 
The forms 
This section lists frequently used grammatical words that have strong and weak forms, 
and it lists the transcriptions of these forms as they are pronounced in RP. Several of the 
transcriptions of the weak forms are enclosed in square brackets because these tran-
scriptions indicate the intermediate [i] and [u]. The annotations following the list in-
clude more detailed information on the specific distribution of some of the forms than 
was given in the previous section, which was restricted to fairly general rules. It is im-
portant to note that words which belong to more than one word class only have weak 
forms when they are indeed used as grammatical words. The word can, for example, 
has no weak form when it is used as a noun, as in a can of fish /kaen/, or as a full verb, as 
in The factories along the coast can fish /kaen/, but it does have a weak form when it is 
used as an auxiliary verb, as in / can see /kon/. 

8 2 
Lesson Eight 
strong form 
weak form(s) 
been
 (2) 
/bi:n/ 
/bin/ 
but 
/bAt/ 
/bat/ 
can <
2)(3) 
/kaen/ 
/k(a)n/ 
could®® 
/kud/ 
/k(a)d/ 
do
 
(2)(3)(4) 
/du:/ 
/da, du, d/, [du] 
¿0^(2) (3) (5) 
/dAz/ 
/daz, z, s/ 
y-ord)(3) 
/fa:(r)/ 
/fa(r), fr/ 
from
 
(3) 
/from/ 
/fn>)m/ 
W<
2 ) ( 3 ) ( 6 ) 
/haed/ 
/(h)ad, d/ 
has <
2><
J><
5><
6) 
/haez/ 
/(h)sz, z, s/ 
have
 
(2)(3)(6) 
/haev/ 
/(h)av, a, v/ 
he
 
(6)(7) 
/hi:/ 
/(h)., i:/, [(h)i] 
her
(l)[b) 
(7) 
/h 3:(r)/ 
/(h)3(r), 3:(r)/ 
him«
){7) 
/him/ 
/im/ 
his
 (6) 
/hiz/ 
/iz/ 
is ffl(3)(5) 
/iz/ 
/z, s/ 
me 
/mi:/ 
/mi/, [mi] 
must
wm 
/niAs(t)/ 
/ni3s(t)/ 
not
w 
/nDt/ 
/n(t)/ 
of® 
/ov/ 
/ 3 V , 3, V/ 
shall
(2){i) 
/Jael/ 
/J(s)l/ 
she
 (7> 
/Ji:/ 
/Ji/, [Ji] 
should
(2)<3) 
/Jud/ 
/J(3)d/ 
so 
/S3u7 
/S9/ 
some
( 3 ) ( 8 ) 
/sAm/ 
/s(3)m/ 
such 
/SAtJ/ 
/S3tj/ 
than
 
(3) 
/Saen/ 
/a(a)n/ 
( 9 ) 
/5aet/ 
/53t/ 
/5i:/ 
/5s, 6i/, [5i] 
t/bem
 ( 3 ) ( 7 ) 
/5em/ 
/(5)3m, m/ 
there
 
(I>
(7)(10) 
/5es(r)/ 
/5a(r)/ 
they 
/oei/ 
/5s/ 
to
 
(4)<7) 
/to:/ 
/t3, tu/, [tu] 
«5 
< 3 ) ( 7 ) 
/ A S / 
/ ( 3 ) S / 
/WDZ/ 
/W3Z/ 
we
 ( 7 ) 
/wi:/ 
/wi/, [wi] 
owe 0)0) 
/w3:(r)/ 
/W3(r)/ 
/hu:/ 
/(h)u, u:/, [(h)u] 
will
(2){i) 
/wil/ 
/(3)1/ 
would®® 
/wud/ 
/(w) 9d, d/ 
you
 
(7) 
/ju:/ 
/ju/, Du] 
/jo:(r)/ 
/Mr)/ 

Strong and weak forms 
83 
Annotations: 
(1) The strong and weak forms of several grammatical words end in a linking sound, i.e. a 
sound that is absent when the word is pronounced in isolation, but present in cer-
tain phonetic environments in connected speech. A case in point is the indefinite ar-
ticle a and its variant an: The former occurs only before consonants, the latter only 
before vowels. It is probably the most prominent example because here the absence 
or presence of the linking sound, Id, is represented in the spelling through separate 
word forms (which is the reason why they appear as separate entries in the above 
list). In most cases, however, the linking sound is a linking r (which was discussed in 
detail in Lesson Six), as in are, for, her, there, were, and your. A related case is that of 
must: The final Itl is a kind of linking sound because it is usually absent before con-
sonants, and present before vowels, as in He must go /mas/ and He must eat /mast/. 
But it differs from other linking sounds in that it is always present when must is pro-
nounced in isolation. 
(2) The auxiliary verbs am, are, be, been, can, could, do, does, had, has, have, is, must, 
shall, should, was, were, will, and would are usually used in their strong forms when 
they occur in negations with not, as in are not la: not/, cannot /kaenDt/, and have not 
/hasv not/. The same is true of these auxiliary verbs when they occur in contracted 
negations with -n't, as maren't /a:nt/ and haven't [haevnt] (remember that the sylla-
bic [n] typically occurs after plosives and fricatives). But can, do, shall, and W/have 
separate strong forms specifically for this construction, which combine with -n't /nt/ 
to form can't /ka:nt/, don't /daunt/, shan't /Joint/, and won't /waunt/. The auxiliary 
verbs are of course not used in their strong forms - irrespective of whether they 
occur in negations or not - when they themselves are contracted, as in I've /aiv/ (for / 
have) and he's /hi:z/ (for he is). Here they are used in their weak forms, and, as an 
exception to the rule, these weak forms are, or rather can be, represented in the 
spelling. 
(3) The words am, an, and, are, can, could, do, does, for, from, had, has, have, is, not, of, 
shall, should, some, than, them, us, will, and would can be weakened to a degree 
where there is no vowel left. The remaining consonant or one of the remaining con-
sonants may be non-syllabic (e.g. the hi of the word have in I've /aiv/), or, in the 
case of /l, n, m, r/, it may be syllabic (e.g. the Inl of the word not in haven't [haevnt]), 
depending on the phonetic environment and the individual pronunciation. The 
weak forms of an and are, then, may consist merely of a linking sound, and that of 
for may consist of another consonant plus a linking sound, but of course only when 
followed by a vowel, as in they're excellent /oar eksalant/. In a transcription, as we 
have seen here and under (2) above, a weak form without a vowel is normally at-
tached to the preceding word. 
(4) The words do, the, and to each have a weak form that ends in a schwa, and one that 
ends in an i- or a-sound (either 111 or Id, or [i] or [u], depending on the actual pro-
nunciation and the type of transcription). The weak form ending in a schwa occurs 
before consonants, as in the door /5a do:/ and to go /ta gau/, and that ending in an 
i- or «-sound occurs before vowels, as in the end [5i end] and to eat [tu i:t]. 

8 4 
Lesson Eight 
(5) The words does, has, and is each have two weak forms that consist of a single 
sound- /z/ as in there's /Saz/, and /s/, as in it's /its/. While the former is an unal-
tered remnant of the strong forms (MAZ/, /haez/, and /.z/), the latter ,s a result of 
the process of assimilation, which will be discussed in the next lesson 
(6) The weak forms of had, has, have, he, and her usually drop their initial /h/ except 
when they occur at the beginning of a sentence. In principle, this is also true of the 
weak f orm(s) of who, but the dropping of the /h/ here is not quite so common. The 
weak forms of him and his do not have an initial /h/ at all. When these words occur 
at the beginning of a sentence, they are therefore always used in their strong forms, 
with an /hi In the case of his, the occurrence of the weak form is further restricted 
bv word class: The weak form is used only as a determiner, i.e. when followed by a 
noun, as in / like hji car IvzJ, but never as a pronoun, i.e. when replacing a noun, as 
in This car is his /hiz/. 
(7) Although we said in the previous section that strong forms usually occur at the 
end of a phrase or sentence (and, by extension, weak forms usually don't), the 
weak forms of he, her, him, she, them, there, to, us, we, and you also commonly oc-
cur in that environment, as in I've met her /a/ and We saw all of them /5am/, typi-
cally also in question tags, such as wasn't he? hi and aren't we? /wi/. 
(8) The word some is always used in its strong form when it is a pronoun, as in Some 
like it hot /sAm/, or a determiner referring to certain members of a group or certain 
types of a thing, but not all of them, as in Some people like it hot /sAm/. It can only 
be used in its weak form when it is a determiner referring to an unspecified quan-
tity as in There are some people waiting outside Isam/. 
(9) The word that is always used in its strong form when it is a determiner, as in Look 
at that car! /5aet/, or a demonstrative pronoun, as in Look at that! /5<et/. It can 
only be used in its weak form when it is a relative pronoun, as in This is the car that 
was looked at /Sat/, or a conjunction, as in She said that she had looked at the car 
(10) The word there is always used in its strong form when it is an adverb of place, as in 
Look over there! /Sea/. It is always used in its weak form when it is an existential 
there (i.e. a dummy subject plus a form of he), as in There's noplace like home /5a/. 
We said earlier in this lesson that words which have strong and weak forms are
 
K p r i _ 
marily" grammatical words. Two examples of lexical words with strong and weak 
forms are the nouns saint /semt, s(a)n(t)/ and sir /s 3:(r), sa(r)/. The former is used in its 
weak form(s) mainly in British English when it is part of proper names, as in St. 
An-
drews /sant aendruiz/. In American English, the strong form is more typical, as i n 
St. Louis /semt lu:is/. 
^ 
. 
Finally, it is important to emphasise that weak forms are not per se a teature of care-
less or perhaps even sloppy speech. Although they may be slightly more common in in-
formal situations, they are a typical feature of any kind of spoken English. 

Exercises 
85 
EXERCISES 
In this lesson, we have discussed strong and weak forms, and considered their distribu-
tion. Remember that strong and weak forms have been included in our transcriptions 
from the start, but now you can transcribe them with more certainty. The following ex-
ercises focus on strong and weak forms while continuing to practise features that you 
are now familiar with from the previous lessons. Remember always to mark linking r 
and intrusive r, the syllabic consonants [1] and [n], and stress in polysyllabic words 
when it cannot be determined from the rules you have learnt. 
8.1 Transcribe the following dialogue into IPA symbols 
A: "There is little time to lose. Come on, we must hurry. The train leaves in half an 
hour." 
B: "Don t panic, we'll easily get there by taxi. I've just rung for one now." 
A: "I had told Jeffrey we'd be there on time for once. Judging from the traffic this 
morning we should be leaving more or less now. You never know what can happen 
on the way to the station." 
, 
B: "You know what Jeffrey says though; he decided that he would do exactly what he 
always wanted on this holiday. So no rush; no hassle; no pressurizing." 
A: "Yes, but if we're not there by ten, that's precisely how he'll be feeling. And unpre-
dictability of the traffic is the flaw in your plans." 
B: "Do stop meddling with Jeffrey's affairs; I'm sure he can manage perfectly well on 
his own." 
137 words 
8.2 Transcribe the spoken monologue on the CD into IPA symbols 
Track 7 and tracks 8-12 
111 words 


LESSON 
CONNECTED SPEECH, CONTD. 
The aspects of connected speech discussed so far are linking, in Lesson Six, and
 s *
r o n g 
and weak forms, in Lesson Eight. It was seen that the latter is closely interrelated with 
reduction, a process that involves the reduction of vowels, or the elision of sounds, or 
both. (We also encountered the reduction of vowels, albeit in isolated words, in Lesson 
Seven.) In this lesson, then, we shall discuss further aspects of connected speech, 
namely rhythm and assimilation, and we shall look at elision more systematically. 
Rhythm 
What is rhythm? 
The rhythm of a language is the recurrence of prominent elements of speech at what 
are perceived to be regular intervals of time. Depending on the particular language the 
prominent elements are usually either stresses or syllables, but they can also be high 
pitches, for example, as is the case in many oriental languages. Yet whatever the 
prominent elements are, the time that passes from one prominent element to the next 
is always of approximately equal duration. The type of rhythm is a characteristic 
suprasegmental feature, or prosodic feature, of the pronunciation of any given lan-
guage, and therefore forms the basis for one of the fundamental categorisations of the 
languages of the world. 
Two types of rhythm 
If the prominent elements that determine the rhythm of a language are stresses, as is the 
case in English, Russian, and Modern Greek, we speak of a stress-timed language, or of 
an isochronous rhythm, or simply of stress-timing, or isochrony or isochronism 
(pronounced [ai'sokrani, -nizom, -nos]) [from Greek isos, 'equal', and khronos 'time ; 
hochronie]. In stress-timed languages, then, strong stresses tend to occur at relatively 
equal intervals of time, irrespective of the number of the lesser-stressed syllab es or 
words between them. In other words, the amount of time between strong stresses is ajways 
roughly the same, and the more intervening lesser-stressed syllables or words thHelre, 
the faster they are pronounced in order to fit them into rb P time span available 
The distance beginning with (and including) a strong stress and ending right before 
(and excluding) the next strong stress is called a foot (a term more commonly used in 
the study of poetry). That all feet are of approximately equal duration in English can be 

8 8 
Lesson Nine 
i l l u s t r a t e d b y s e n t e n c e s (1), (2), a n d (3) b e l o w , w h e r e w o r d - i n t e r n a l s y l l a b l e b o u n d a r i e s 
a l e T n d L a t e d b y h y p h e n s , f o o t b o u n d a r i e s b y v e r t x c a l h u e s , a n d s t r o n g stresses a p p e a r 
i n i t a l i c s : 
(1) What a r e t h e 1 plans f o r to-1 -morr-o^, 
\John} 
(2) Allot 
theseareloMlpfcot-o-graphs. 
(3) The I c o n - s e - q u e n - c e s of h i s I a c - t i o n a r e I o ^ - v i - o u s . 
f i n e f i r s t f o o t of a s e n t e n c e s o m e t i m e s b e g i n s w i t h a p a u s e , as i n (3). The h e r e , is c o m -
o a r a b l e to an u p b e a t in a p i e c e of m u s i c . ) If t h e s e s e n t e n c e s a r e r e a d a l o u d , w e see t h a t 
What are the in (1), f o r e x a m p l e , o c c u p i e s a p p r o x i m a t e l y t h e s a m e a m o u n t of t i m e as 
John Likewise, All of these are in (2) is of m o r e or less e q u a d u r a t i o n as old, a n d consc-
IENCE 
of Us m (3) s o u n d s r o u g h l y as l o n g as obvious. It f o l l o w , . t h a t : Ae t e m p o o p r o , 
i i o n of t h e t h r e e s y l l a b l e s of What are the is g r e a t e r t h a n t h a t of t h e m o n o s y l l a b l e 
X 
h e e m o ^ f p r o n L c i a t i o n o f 
t h a t o t h e m o n o s y l l a b l e old, a n d t h e t e m p o of p r o n u n c i a t i o n of t h e stx s y l l a b l e s of con-
seauncesofhis 
is g r e a t e r t h a n t h a t of t h e t h r e e s y l l a b l e s of obvious^ The f a c t that one 
f o o t c a n c o n t a i n t w o , t h r e e , or f o u r t i m e s as m a n y s y l l a b l e s as a n o t h e r f o o t in the same 
en e n c e c a n be a c h i e v e d t h r o u g h compression, ,e 
t h r o u g h the r e d u c t i o n of v o w e l s 
a n d 1 
e l i s i o n of s o u n d s in u n s t r e s s e d s y l l a b l e s , a n d c o n s e q u e n t l y a l s o ^ t h r o u g h ^ t h e use 
T w e a k f o r m s of g r a m m a t i c a l w o r d s , l i k e are, the, for, of, a n d his. Without r e d u c t i o n 
a n l w e a k f o r m s , an i s o c h r o n o u s r h y t h m w o u l d b e i m p o s s i b l e to m a i n t a i m 
H o n the o t h e r h a n d , t h e p r o m i n e n t e l e m e n t s t h a t d e t e r m i n e t h e r h y t h m of a lan-
' a
r
e s y l l a b l e s ( b o t h stressed a n d u n s t r e s s e d ) , as is t h e case in French, Spanish, and 
I n a n e s e w e s p e a k of a syllable-timed language, or of an isosyllabic rhythm, o r sim-
nlv of syllable-timing, or isosyllabicity or isosyllabism ( p r o n o u n c e d [aisasilabisiti, 
L b i z a m -sitebik]) [ f r o m Greek isos, ' e q u a l ' , a n d sullabe 
' t a k e n b r o u g h t , o r put to-
" J t h e r ' - Isosyllabismus]. In s y l l a b l e - t i m e d l a n g u a g e s , t h e n , a l l s y l l a b l e s t e n d t o o c c u r at 
r L v e l v e q u a l i n t e r v a l s of t i m e , i r r e s p e c t i v e of w h e t h e r t h e y a r e s t r e s s e d or unstressed 
frhus c r e a t i n g a rat-a-tat-a-tat 
i m p r e s s i o n t h a t h a s also b e e n d e s c r i b e d as a « < m a _ 
W 
e u n ' e f f e c t " ) In o t h e r w o r d s , t h e a m o u n t of t i m e t a k e n t o p r o n o u n c e a syllable is 
! w v s r o u g h l y t h e s a m e , a n d s i n c e g e n e r a l l y no s y l l a b l e s or w o r d s a r e p r o n o u n c e d 
(Iter 
t h a n o t h e r s , t h e r e is no n e c e s s i t y f o r c o m p r e s s i o n . This t y p e of r h y t h m is also 
T 
c t e n s t i c of t h e p r o n u n c i a t i o n of s o m e s e c o n d - l a n g u a g e v a r i e t i e s of Enghsh, f
Q
r 
m o l e those s p o k e n i n sub-Saharan Africa a n d India, o w i n g to t h e i n f l u e n c e o f l 0 c a l 
e
X
a
t h e r t o n e u e s The r e s u l t a n t l a c k of r e d u c t i o n a n d w e a k f o r m s in s u c h varieties 
m f e h t a t f i r s t s i g h t , s e e m to m a k e t h e p r o n u n c i a t i o n clearer. Yet b y d i s t o r t i n g the natu-
r a l i s o c h r o n o u s r h y t h m of English, s e c o n d - l a n g u a g e v a r i e t i e s ( l a r g e l y ) sacrifice those 
a r t s of t h e m e s s a g e of an u t t e r a n c e t h a t a r e ( m a i n l y ) expressed b y strong s t r e s s e s , and 
thereby r e d u c e i n t e l l i g i b i l i t y (at least f o r n a t i v e speakers). 
We s a i d a b o v e t h a t t h e p r o m i n e n t e l e m e n t s t h a t d e t e r m i n e t h e r h y t h m o t a l a n
g
U
a
g
e 
a r e " p e r c e i v e d " to r e c u r , or " t e n d " to r e c u r , a t " r e l a t i v e l y " e q u a l i n t e r v a l s o f t i
m
e . 
As t h e t e n t a t i v e w o r d i n g suggests, s t r e s s - t i m i n g a n d s y l l a b l e - t i m i n g ( a n d o t h e r , rarer 
t y p e s of r h y t h m n o t d i s c u s s e d h e r e ) are m o r e an i d e a l t h a n a r e a l i t y . We o f t e n speak 

Connected speech, contd. 
89 
arhythmically, i.e. with a very low degree of rhythmicality or without any rhythm 
at all, for example when we are hesitant or excited. Given the many variations heard 
in speech, the types of rhythm can only indicate very general tendencies, not absolute 
distinctions. Nevertheless, the subjective impression of characteristic rhythmic pat-
terns remains. 
Assimilation 
What is assimilation? 
The fact that, in stress-timed languages like English, several syllables may have to be fit-
ted into a relatively short time span requires various means of making the pronuncia-
tion easier (and thus faster). Among them are not only the processes of reduction and 
elision, but also a process whereby one sound, usually a consonant, becomes more like, 
or identical with, a neighbouring sound regarding one or more of the distinctive fea-
tures (which were discussed in detail in Lessons Two, Three, and Four). More specifi-
cally, the articulation of one sound is influenced by the articulation of a neighbouring 
sound in that a speech organ either prolongs a distinctive feature of a preceding sound 
or anticipates a distinctive feature of a following sound. This process is called assimila-
tion [from Latin assimilatio, 'making one thing like another']. 
For example, we know that /n/ is an alveolar sound, i.e. its place of articulation is the 
bony ridge behind the upper teeth, and Ipl is a bilabial sound, i.e. its place of articula-
tion is the lips. When producing the /n/ in a sequence like ten pigs, however, the hps, 
which are not primarily involved in the production of /n/, often anticipate the place of 
articulation of the following /p/, thus changing the /n/ into a bilabial sound. The new 
place of articulation is identical with the place of articulation of /m/ (/m/ is also a 
bilabial), and since the intensity and manner of articulation of Ixxl and I ml are also iden-
tical (both are lenis nasals), the Ixxl now sounds like /ml, or we could say that the Ixxl has 
been substituted with Iml. The sequence ten pigs, then, is often pronounced [tern pigz] 
instead of /ten pigz/. (Note that the former transcription is enclosed in square brackets 
because, even though it only contains symbols representing phonemes, the assimilation 
suggests actual, concrete speech, rather than an idealised utterance.) 
Like reduction and elision, assimilation is not per se a feature of careless or perhaps 
even sloppy speech, but a typical feature of any kind of spoken English. Its degree and 
frequency, however, usually depend to a greater extent than is the case with reduction 
and elision on such factors as tempo of pronunciation, communicative situation, and 
social class. In other words, assimilation goes much further and is much more common 
in rapid speech, in informal situations, and in working-class accents than in slow 
speech, formal situations, and upper-class accents. 
Assimilation frequently occurs across word boundaries, as when ten pigs is pro-
nounced [tern pigz], but it can also occur within a word, as when the plural -s in pigs is 
pronounced Izl, thus prolonging the intensity of articulation, or the voicing, of the pre-
ceding lenis consonant, Iql. If assimilation occurs within a word, the resultant pronun-
ciation is often the only possible standard, as in pigs /pigz/. It is sometimes difficult to 

9 0 
Lesson Nine 
say, however, whether assimilation within a word can be considered an aspect of con-
nected speech, especially when, as in pigs /pigz/, it occurs even if the word is spoken in 
isolation. The position taken in this manual is that, because assimilation is an important 
means of making the pronunciation easier, and consequently of maintaining the natu-
ral, isochronous rhythm of English, it should be considered an aspect of connected 
speech not only when it occurs across word boundaries, but also usually when it occurs 
within a word. 
Various types of assimilation 
Assimilation can be described in terms of four (hierarchically unrelated) categorisa-
tions, based on the distance between the two sounds involved, the direction of the in-
fluence exerted, the particular distinctive feature affected, and the degree to which one 
sound assimilates to another. 
The first categorisation (although there is of course no logical order) distinguishes 
(a) assimilation between two consecutive sounds, called contiguous assimilation, or 
contact assimilation [Kontaktassimilation], 
from (b) assimilation between two sounds 
further apart, known as non-contiguous assimilation, or distance assimilation, or 
distant assimilation [Fernassimilation]. 
(a) The former type, illustrated by our two examples ten pigs [tern pigz] and pig^ 
/pigz/, is so much more common in English that we were able to say in the preceding 
section that assimilation makes one sound more like "a neighbouring sound", implying 
that assimilation is always contiguous. This is, strictly speaking, not quite correct, but 
(b) non-contiguous assimilation is so rare in English that it can safely be neglected. O n e 
example that is cited in some linguistic textbooks is the idiom turn up trumps, in which 
the /n/ in turn is supposedly sometimes articulated bilabially, as /m/, under the influ-
ence of the later bilabial sounds /p/ and /m/. The example could probably also be taken 
to show, however, that non-contiguous assimilation, if indeed it occurs, is barely 
distinguishable from a simple slip of the tongue. 
The second categorisation distinguishes between (a) assimilation brought about by 
the influence of a preceding sound, called progressive assimilation 
[vorauswirkende 
Assimilation], or perseverative assimilation, (b) assimilation brought about by the in-
fluence of a following sound, known as regressive assimilation [rückwirkende 
Assimi-
lation], or anticipatory assimilation, and (c) assimilation brought about by the infhj 
ence of two sounds upon each other, termed coalescent assimilation, or reciprocal 
assimilation [reziproke Assimilation], or mutual assimilation. 
(a) Progressive assimilation within a word largely determines the choice between 
the various endings for the regular plural, the possessive case, the third-person singular 
the regular past tense, and the regular past participle (which were all described in detail 
in Lesson Five). This can be illustrated by our familiar example pigs /pigz/, but also b 
words like dentist's /dentists/, goes /gouz/, looked /lokt/, and turned /t3:nd/, where the 
choice between /s/ and Izl, or Iii and Id/, is influenced by the intensity of articulation 
or by the voicing, of the respective preceding sounds. 

Connected speech, contd. 
9 1 
Progressive assimilation across word boundaries can be illustrated by sequences 
like shut your mouth and Church Street. In the former, the 1)1 in your can become 
identical with the preceding Ixl in shut regarding its intensity of articulation, and it 
can become more like the Ixl regarding its place and manner of articulation: The 1)1 can 
be articulated with more force, slightly further forward, and with a narrower gap be-
tween the speech organs, thus changing from a lenis palatal approximant to a fortis 
palatoalveolar fricative. In other words, the l\l can be substituted with /J/, and the 
whole sequence would then be pronounced [JAt Jo mau6]. In the latter, the /s/ in Street 
can become identical with the preceding /tj/ in Church regarding its place of articula-
tion, while its intensity and manner of articulation remain unchanged: The Isl can be 
articulated slightly further back, thus changing from a fortis alveolar fricative to a fortis 
palatoalveolar fricative. In other words, the Isl can again be substituted with /J/, and 
the whole sequence would then be pronounced [tj3:t[ Jtri:t]. A s these examples suggest, 
progressive assimilation across word boundaries is not very common. 
(b) Regressive assimilation across word boundaries occurs much more often. In the 
most typical case, the place of articulation of a word-final alveolar consonant is influ-
enced by that of a following, word-initial consonant. This can be illustrated by our 
original example ten pigs [tern pigz], but also by sequences like that case, when it is pro-
nounced [Saekjceis], where the Ixl in that is articulated further back, thus changing to 
/k/, and good boy, when it is pronounced [gubjboi], where the /d/ in good is articulated 
further forward, thus changing to Ihl. If an assimilation process results in two identical 
sounds, as in the last two examples, the two sounds are usually pronounced as one, but 
with greater duration, and are then transcribed with a lowered, swung horizontal line, [ _ ], 
connecting them. In another typical case, it is the intensity of articulation, or the voic-
ing, that is influenced. This can be illustrated by the sequences have to, when it is pro-
nounced [haef to], and I've seen, when it is pronounced [aif si:n], where the hi in have 
and I've is articulated with more force, or less voicing, as If/, under the influence of the 
following fortis Ixl and /s/, respectively. 
Regressive assimilation within a word can be illustrated by words like 
statement, 
when it is pronounced [steipmont], where the second Ixl changes to Ipl under the influ-
ence of the place of articulation of the following /ml, and width, when it is pronounced 
[wit9], where the lal changes to Ixl under the influence of the intensity of articulation, 
or the voicing, of the following 181. 
(c) Coalescent assimilation always merges two sounds to form a single, new sound, 
or rather phoneme. The new phoneme is often an affricate, and it is therefore important 
to remember, here, that an affricate, although it consists of two elements, is convention-
ally analysed as one unit. If coalescent assimilation occurs across word boundaries, the 
two words involved are usually transcribed without a space between them. All this can 
be illustrated by the sequences don't you /doont jo/, where the Ixl and the l\l can merge 
into lx\l, resulting in the pronunciation [dountju], could you /kud ju/, where the /d/and 
the I)/ can merge into /d3/, resulting in the pronunciation [kodju], and What 
d'you 
want? /wot dju wont/, where the lal and the 1)1 can merge into l\l, resulting in the pro-
nunciation [wot Ju wont]. 

Lesson Nine 
Coalesced assimilation within a word can be illustrated by the words INTUITION 
/mriu-i.n/ where the III and the /j/ can merge into /tf/, resulting in the pronunciation 
r.ntru-iml and DUEL /dju:ol/, where the /d/ and the /j/ can merge into /d_/, resulting in 
the pronunciation [d 3u:al]. Coalescent assimilation is often regarded AS VERY colloquial 
or even non-standard except when it constitutes a historical sound change that took 
olace within a word, and is now firmly established. This can be illustrated by the words 
PICTURE which used to be pronounced with internal /tj/ before the two sounds merged 
into the single phoneme /tf/, SOLDIER, which used to be pronounced with internal /dj/ 
before the two sounds merged into /d 3/, and SUGAR, which used to be pronounced with 
initial /si/ before the two sounds merged into /J/. When It, d, SI or Izl merges with /j/ -
either across word boundaries or within a word - to form /tf, d 3, V or / 3/, respectively, 
we speak of yod coalescence. 
_ 
The third categorisation distinguishes between (a) assimilation regarding the inten-
sity of articulation, in short assimilation of intensity, (b) assimilation regarding the 
lace of articulation, in short assimilation of place, and (c) assimilation regarding the 
manner of articulation, in short assimilation of manner. All three types have already 
been illustrated by examples given earlier in this section. 
, 
. 
. 
(a) Assimilation of intensity across word boundaries always results in a tortis, or 
voiceless sound, and is typically regressive, as we saw in HAVE TO, where the lenis HI can 
ha 
tQ f o r t i s FA under the influence of the following fortis III, and I'VE SEEN, where 
the lenis HI can change to fords If I under the influence of the following fortis HI. But it 
can also be progressive, as we saw in SHUT YOUR MOUTH, where the lenis / j / can change to 
fortis /J/ under the influence of the preceding fortis III. This kind of assimilation is of-
ten not very noticeable because, as we know from Lessons Two and Five, some lenis 
(voiced) sounds are at least partly devoiced in word-initial and word-final positions 
anyway. The word HAVE, for example, is often fully devoiced at the end even when it is 
pronounced in isolation. 
Assimilation of intensity within a word, as was seen earlier in this section, de-
termines the choice between I SI and Izl, or III and Id/, as endings for the regular plu-
ral the possessive case, the third-person singular, the regular past tense, and the regular 
r ast participle. We encountered a similar phenomenon within certain contractions 
(which can legitimately be regarded as single words) in the previous lesson, w h e n 
we said that the grammatical words DOES, HAS, and IS each have two weak forms that 
consist merely of HI, as in IT'S /its/, and Izl, as in THERE'S /5oz/. The choice, here, between 
TSL and Izl, and III and /d/, is again determined by the intensity of articulation, or the 
voicing, of the preceding sound. 
_ 
It is difficult to say whether assimilation of intensity affects only voicing, or 
whether it affects also the force with which the air-stream is pushed up. Voicing, as w e 
know from Lessons Two and Four, is closely connected with the lenis/fortis contrast of 
consonants, but not with the lax/tense contrast of vowels (which are usually voiced). It 
might be seen as one aspect of intensity, but it is strictly speaking not a distinctive fea-
ture in its own right. If assimilation of intensity affects only voicing, the sequence HAVE 
TO for example, is best transcribed as [haev to], with a small circle indicating a devoiced 

Connected speech, contd. 
93 
hi. If it affects also the force of the air-stream, we can postulate a complete substitution 
of phonemes, and transcribe have to as [haef to]. But this subtle distinction need not 
concern us here. 
(b) Assimilation of place typically occurs across word boundaries, is regressive, 
and affects alveolar consonants, as we saw in ten pigs, where the alveolar Inl can be ar-
ticulated further forward under the influence of the following bilabial Ipl, thus chang-^ 
ing to bilabial /ml, good boy, where the alveolar Idl can be articulated further forward 
under the influence of the following bilabial lb/, thus becoming identical with lb/, and 
that case, where the alveolar III can be articulated further back under the influence of 
the following velar Ikl, thus again becoming identical with Ikl. There are of course also 
other, less typical cases of assimilation of place, as we saw in shut your mouth, where the 
palatal l\l can be articulated slightly further forward (and undergo other alterations) 
under the influence of the preceding alveolar III, thus changing to palatoalveolar /J/, 
Church Street, where the alveolar /s/ can be articulated slightly further back under the 
influence of the preceding palatoalveolar /tj/, thus changing to palatoalveolar l\l, and 
statement, where the second alveolar l\l can be articulated further forward under the 
influence of the following bilabial /ml, thus changing to bilabial Ipl. 
(c) Assimilation of manner is usually heard only in very rapid speech, or very infor-
mal situations. The only example we have encountered so far was in shut your 
mouth, 
where the approximant l]l can be articulated with a narrower gap between the speech 
organs (and undergo other alterations) under the influence of the preceding plosive III, 
thus changing to fricative /[/. Another case of progressive assimilation of manner af-
fects a word-initial fricative 16/ when it is preceded by a word-final plosive or nasal. In 
that environment, the 16/ can again be articulated with a narrower gap between the 
speech organs, and become identical with the preceding sound, but both sounds to-
gether are then usually fronted, or, more specifically, dentalised (a process that was de-
scribed in detail in the section "Fronting and retraction" in Lesson Five). This can be il-
lustrated by the sequences get them /get Sam/, when it is pronounced [get _ jam], and in 
the /in Sa/, when it is pronounced [injp]. In general, however, assimilation of manner 
tends to be regressive, and to result in a sound that is articulated with a wider gap be-
tween the speech organs, i.e. with less obstruction of air. This can be illustrated by the 
sequences that side, when it is pronounced [Saesjsaid], where the plosive It/ becomes 
fricative /s/, and good night, when it is pronounced [gunjtait], where the plosive /d/ be-
comes nasal In/. 
The fourth categorisation distinguishes between (a) partial assimilation, where the 
two sounds involved remain distinguishable through at least one of the distinctive fea-
tures, and (b) total assimilation, where the two sounds involved become wholly iden-
tical. These two types, too, have already been illustrated by examples given earlier in 
this section. 
(a) We saw partial assimilation in ten pigs [tern pigz], for example, where the origi-
nal Inl has become identical with the following Ipl regarding the place of articulation, 
but still differs from it in the intensity and manner of articulation, shut your mouth [fM 
fa mau8], where the original l\l has become identical with the preceding III regarding 

94 
Lesson Nine 
the intensity of articulation, has become more like it regarding the place and manner of 
articulation but still differs from it in those two respects, and / ve seen [aif si:n], where 
the original'/v/ has become identical with the following /s/ regarding the intensity of 
articulation, has always been identical with it regarding the manner of articulation, but 
still differs from it in the place of articulation. 
(b) We saw total assimilation only in that case [5aek keis] and good boy [ g u b > i ] , 
where the original N and /d/ have become identical with the following /k/ and /b/ re-
pardine the place of articulation, and have always been identical with them regarding 
the intensity and manner of articulation. In both cases, the two sounds involved are 
now wholly identical. 
' 
;•' 
Admittedly it could be seen as naive to regard changes like the one from /n/ to /m/ 
in the sequence ten pigs, for example, as substitutions of phonemes as we have 
throughout this and the previous section. Many linguists would regard the [n] and [m] 
here as radically different allophones of the same Inl phoneme. In that approach, then, 
all the examples given above illustrate not only assimilation, but also allophonic 
variation. 
The opposite of assimilation: Dissimilation 
A process whereby, conversely, one sound becomes less like a neighbouring sound or a 
sound in close proximity is called dissimilation [from Latin dissimilatw, 
making 
something unrecognisable']. The purpose, here, of making two similar or identical 
sounds different from each other is, as before, to achieve greater ease of pronunciation, 
but also greater clarity. (Just think of the difficulty of pronouncing the accumulation of 
similar or identical consonants in tongue-twisters, like truly rural or She sells seashells 
on the seashore.) Dissimilation has played an important part in the historical develop-
ment of English pronunciation, but is largely irrelevant in present-day English. 
Elision 
What is elision? 
We already know from the previous lesson that the omission of one or more sounds i n 
spoken language is technically termed elision [from Latin elisio, 'pushing out']. We also 
know from that lesson that sounds are frequently omitted from certain grammatical 
words when they occur as weak forms in non-prominent positions, and that the p r o -
cess of omitting, or eliding, sounds is not normally represented in the spelling. (But w e 
saw that elision can be represented in the spelling of contractions, like I've and he's.) \
n 
the present lesson, we have learnt so far that elision (together with reduction and assim-
ilation) is an important means of making the pronunciation easier, and consequently 
Q f 
maintaining the natural, isochronous rhythm of English. We have also learnt in this les-
son that (as with reduction and assimilation) elision is not necessarily a feature of care-
less or sloppy speech (although it is certainly more common in rapid speech, informal 
situations, and working-class accents). In the next section, then, we shall describe eli-
sion in some more detail. 

Connected speech, contd. 
95 
As was the case with assimilation, however, it is sometimes difficult to say whether 
elision influenced by a sound or sounds belonging to the same word can be considered 
an aspect of connected speech, especially when it occurs even if the word is spoken in 
isolation. As before, the position taken here is that, because elision is instrumental i n 
maintaining an isochronous rhythm, it should be considered an aspect of connected 
speech not only when it is influenced by a sound or sounds belonging to a neighbour-
ing word, but also usually when it is influenced by a sound or sounds belonging to the 
same word. 
Various types of elision 
Elision can be described in terms of two (hierarchically unrelated) categorisations, 
based on the kind and the position of the sound(s) omitted. Elision in grammatical 
words, resulting in weak forms (and often in contractions), should be seen as a separate 
type, which is left out of the discussion here because all the relevant weak forms were 
listed as transcriptions in the previous lesson. 
The categorisation based on the kind of sound(s) omitted distinguishes between (a) 
elision of consonants, (b) elision of vowels, and (c) elision of whole syllables. 
(a) Elision of consonants often occurs in order to simplify consonant clusters 
(which may or may not stretch across word boundaries). The consonants elided are 
most typically plosives and fricatives, as in old man /sold m a e n / , when i t is pronounced 
[aul maen], acts /aekts/, when it is pronounced [aeks], clothes /klaoBz/, when it is pro-
nounced [kbuz], and months / n i A n O s / , when it is pronounced [niAns]. (Note, here, that 
the elision of N and /d/ can result in the neutralisation of the distinction between past 
tense and present tense, as in looked back /lokt baek/, when it is pronounced [lok baek].) 
Often affected are ordinal numbers, like twelfth 
/twelfB/, when it is pronounced 
[twel9], and the possessive case of ordinal numbers, like sixth's /siksBs/, when it is pro-
nounced [siks]. Elision is particularly common in a larger accumulation of consonants, 
as in the cluster /kstpl/ in next, please, which is usually pronounced [neks pli:z]. (Pro-
nouncing the cluster /ksBsBr/ in Henry 
the Sixth's three advisers borders on the 
impossible.) 
In t h e historical development of the English language, some words have omitted 
consonants from clusters permanently in speech although the corresponding letters 
still occur in the spelling. In the following words, for example, pronouncing the conso-
nants represented by t h e underlined letters was correct in earlier times, but would be 
incorrect today: knife, knight, lamb, listen, whistle, and wrong. A letter in the written 
form of a word that is not sounded in speech is called a silent letter. 
(b) Elision of vowels can occur in unstressed syllables of polysyllabic words, most 
typically just before or after a stressed syllable, and after one of the fortis plosives, /p, t, 
k/. In the following words, for example, we often do not hear the vowels represented 
by the underlined letters: perhaps, potato, today, and tomato. Here, the gap left by the 
elided vowels is filled by a puff of breath, or a brief ^-sound, stemming from the sudden 
release of air in t h e articulation of the preceding plosive. Such a puff of breath is r e f e r -
red to as aspiration, and it can be indicated by a small, raised h-\ike symbol, [
h]. (Note 

^rtf r
p
r
o
p
e
r 
as 
and [ tMe,, 
X
n 
e l ï o n is compensated for with aspiration « always results ,n 
.
t
h
e 
u 
If wllables The word potato, for example, can be pronounced with a schwa as 
Un tided vowel is followed by /n, 1/ or A/, however, the gap is sometimes filled, or the 
i i a n e u u 
transforming that consonant into a syllabic consonant 
( 
nTth s a i l but the syllable boundary usually moves. This can be illustrated by the 
T o X t 
"Atnan/, when It Is pronounced [tn-a«], PÇFIA, £ . 1 1 , s , when it is pro-
T u n c e d [plr.s], and correct /ka-rekt/, when it is pronounced [kr-ekt]. 
^before some words have omitted vowels permanently i n the course of tame al-
though the corresponding letters still o c c u r in the spelling. The vowels represented by 
he underlined letters in evening, dictionary, and secretary for^example, are not pro-
nounced in present-day English, or rather in present-day Bntisk Enghsh I n American 
EngHsh which, contrary to popular belief, is in many respects m o r e old-fashioned, die 
tionaryznd 
secretary have retained the vowels. 
^ E l i s i o n of whole syllables can occur when the syllables are unstressed, most 
villv lust before or after a stressed syllable, especially when the elided syllable con-
tins a consonant that is repeated in the following syllable. This can be illustrated.by the 
ords library /laib-re-n/, when it is pronounced without the middle syllable as [laibri], 
Id 
particularly /pa-tik-jo-b-h/, when it is pronounced without the penultimate sylla-
ble as rpatikpli] (although here the stressed syllable is further away). Pronunciations 
resulting from this type of elision are, again, often firmly established today This is the 
case with the disyllabic pronunciation of library, for example, which could therefore 
eouallv well be transcribed i n phonemic transcription, as /laibri/. 
The categorisation based on the position of the sound(s) omitted distingmsh.es be-
t w e e n (a) elision at the beginning of a word, (b) elision in the middle of a word, and ( c ) 
elision at the end of a word. All three types have already been illustrated by examples 
^ ( a ^ h l i o n at the beginning of a word is technically termed aph(a)eresis ( p r o _ 
ced [aefiarasis], and spelt in American English without the second a) [from Latin 
Zlaeresis Greek aphairesis, 'a taking away'; Apharese, Destination]. 
We saw aphae-
sis in thé historical omission of the initial consonant i n knife, knight, and wrong. If 
the omitted initial sound is a vowel (in which case it has to occur, as we know, in an u n -
stressed syllable of a polysyllabic word), aphaeresis is sometimes termed, more specifi-
cally aphesis (pronounced ['aefasis]) [from Greek aphesis, 'letting go']. Aphesis can be 
illustrated by the omission of the initial vowel in apprentice, resulting i n prentice, and 
opossum resulting mpossum. Sometimes aphesis results in a word with a new meaning 
nd use as when ahne becomes lone ('without a husband, wife, or partner to share the 
* 
o
f Children', as in a lone mother), or when Esquire becomes squire (used informally 
Thumorously by a man as a friendly way o f addressing another man). When w h o l e 

Connected speech, contd. 
97 
syllables or entire parts of words are omitted, we also speak of clipping, here more pre-
cisely of fore-clipping because a syllable or part is taken from the beginning of a word. 
Fore-clipping can be illustrated by the change from alligator to gator, from omnibus to 
bus, and from telephone to phone. 
(b) Elision in the middle of a word is technically termed syncope, or syncopation 
(pronounced [sinkopi, sinko'peijn]) [from Greek sunkope, 'a cutting off; Synkope]. The 
term most commonly refers to the elision of vowels (which, again, can only occur in 
unstressed syllables of polysyllabic words), as we saw, for example, in today, 
tonight, 
evening, dictionary, and secretary. But the term can also refer to the elision of conso-
nants, as we saw, for example, in clothes and twelfth, and, historically, in listen and 
whistle, and it can refer to the elision of whole syllables, as we saw in library and 
particularly. Syncope is sometimes represented in the spelling by an apostrophe, as in 
t'day and t'night, in an attempt to reflect spoken language as closely as possible, espe-
cially in poetry. 
(c) Elision at the end of a word is technically termed apocope, or apocopation (pro-
nounced [spDkapi, opDkspeiJn]) [from Greek apokope, 'a cutting off; Apokope}. We 
saw apocope in old man, looked back, next, please, and, historically, in lamb. When 
whole syllables or entire parts of words are omitted, we can again speak of clipping, 
here more precisely of back-clipping because a syllable or part is taken from the end of 
a word. Back-clipping can be illustrated by the change from advertisement 
to ad, from 
hippopotamus to hippo, from laboratory to lab, and from margarine to marge. It also 
frequently results in nicknames, as when David becomes Dave, and William becomes 
Will. Aphaeresis and apocope often occur together, and when whole syllables or entire 
parts of words are omitted, we can speak of fore-and-aft clipping, as when influenza 
becomes flu, and Elizabeth becomes Liz. 
There are many words in English that have undergone several of the processes de-
scribed in this lesson and earlier in this manual. Two of the most prominent examples 
are the informal words gonna [gono], from going to, and wanna [wono], from want to 
or want a, which seem to be the result of reduction, assimilation, and elision all at once. 
The opposite of elision: Intrusion 
A process whereby, conversely, a sound that is not represented in the spelling and has 
no historical justification is added to a word or sequence in spoken language is called 
intrusion. By far the most common example is the intrusive r, discussed in Lesson Six 
in connection with linking, and illustrated there by examples like media event [medio' 
ivent], visa application [vi:zo
r aephkeijn], and drawing [dro:
rin], but we also saw other 
examples in that lesson, namely the intrusion of a glottal stop in cooperate [koo'ttporeit], 
and the intrusion of semi-vowels in he is silly and stupid [hi
J iz sili' on stju:pid] and to 
England [tu
w iqglond]. Linking sounds, then, are one type of intrusion. We said in Les-
son Six that symbols representing linking sounds usually appear as small superscripts, 
and the same is true of symbols representing other types of intrusion, such as the intru-
sion of a schwa between two consonants, as in athletics, when it is pronounced 
[ae^'letiks], and please, when it is pronounced [p
3li:z]. 

In traditional rhetoric, an intrusion in word-initial position, which does n o t u s u a l l y 
occur in English, is termed prothesis, or, less commonly, prosthesis ( p r o n o u n c e d 
S o e o s i s 'prosBasis]) [from Greek PROTHESIS, 'a placing before , PROSTHESIS 
a d d i t i o n ' ; 
PMTHESE 'PROSTHESES An intrusion in word-internal position, as m DRAwing [dro:'m] a n d 
ZLse 
\v
:\vzl 
is termed epenthesis (pronounced [epentìas.s]) [from Greek 
epénthesis, 
'nuttine in'" Epenthese]. Linguists therefore sometimes refer to an inserted v o w e l like 
the schwa in PLEASE as an "epenthetic vowel" although there is an even m o r e specific 
term available that can be used when a vowel is inserted between two c o n s o n a n t s , 
namely anaptyxis (pronounced [asnaptiksis]) [from Greek ANAPTYXTS 
' u n f o l d i n g ' ; 
ANAPTVXE] 
An intrusion in word-final position, as in media EVENT [mr.d.o went] a n d to 
England [tu
w ingbnd], is termed paragoge (pronounced [psra'goodji]) [from 
G r e e k 
PARAGÓGÉ, 'addition'; Epithese] 
Intrusive sounds are usually recorded only in a phonetic transcription p r o p e r O 
1 
; intrusive r is also recorded in a broad phonetic transcription. Therefore, of all t h 
intrusive sounds described in this section, only the intrusive r is relevant to t h e t
 
C 
scription course integrated with this manual.
 
n ~ 

Exercises 
99 
EXERCISES 
In this lesson, assimilation was introduced as a feature of connected speech, and you 
should try to include this feature in your transcriptions. Remember that, if an assimila-
tion process results in two identical sounds, the two sounds are usually pronounced as 
one, and are then transcribed with a lowered horizontal swung line, [_], connecting 
them. You should use this swung line accordingly in your transcriptions. 
Elision was also introduced in this lesson. From now on, elision will be marked in 
the model solutions by enclosing the elided sounds in parentheses. The only exception 
is where schwa is elided, and this is compensated for by a syllabic consonant. 
In the solutions, we continue to annotate linking r and intrusive r, but no longer an-
notate syllabic consonants unless there is a special reason for doing so. These features 
should, of course, still be included in your transcriptions. 
9.1 Transcribe the following text into IPA symbols 
Early on Thursday morning just before eight o'clock, the first ten groups arrived, ready 
to start their new training regime. Within four hours few of the participants were able 
to resist the temptation of sitting, even though the only space left uncluttered with 
equipment was the freezing cold stone floor. 
They were all completely surprised to find that their months of preparation had 
been useless. Mental stamina and physical agility were required for this kind of exer-
cise, but no one expected such gruelling tasks to be assigned from the start. Now the 
length of the hall was littered with young students, puzzled, exhausted, and depressed. 
"Frankly, the whole thing is a total shambles; today's been a complete write-off," 
said their trainer. 
"Tomorrow I anticipate more, and I'll get them working non-stop," was her only 
idea of how to improve their awful performance. 
143 words 
9.2 Transcribe the spoken monologue on the CD into IPA symbols 
Track 13 and tracks 14-20 
124 words 


LESSON 
ALLOPHONIC VARIATION, CONTD. 
We have now discussed all the phonetic and phonological phenomena relevant to the 
type of transcription you are asked to perform in the transcription course integrated 
with this manual. For example, you should now be able to transcribe unstressed i- and 
w-sounds, endings for the regular plural, the possessive case, the third-person singular, 
the regular past tense, and the regular past participle, the letter sequence <ng>, linking 
r- and intrusive r-sounds, syllabic consonants, unpredictable stress in polysyllabic 
words, strong and weak forms of grammatical words, assimilation, and elision. These 
are the elements of a broad phonetic transcription. Everything we shall discuss in this 
and in the next lesson is relevant only to a phonetic transcription in the narrower sense, 
i.e. a phonetic transcription proper. 
To recapitulate briefly, we learnt in Lesson Five that an allophone is one of two or 
more pronunciation variants of a phoneme, and that the two criteria for identifying al-
lophones are the absence of a minimal pair and articulatory similarity. Furthermore, we 
distinguished between allophones in free variation, which can occur in the same envi-
ronment, and allophones in complementary distribution, which cannot occur in the 
same environment. The allophones we have encountered so far include various t- and 
r-sounds (in Lessons Three, Five, and Seven), devoiced, fronted, and retracted sounds 
(in Lesson Five), aspirated and unaspirated plosives (in Lessons Six and Nine), and syl-
labic consonants (in Lesson Seven). As this list shows, allophonic variation can be de-
scribed in terms of the particular phonemes 
that appear in different variants (such as 
t-sounds and r-sounds), and in terms of the processes that result in these variants (such 
as devoicing and fronting). The next lesson will be concerned with the former. More 
specifically, it will describe the allophones of the III and hi phonemes (more systemati-
cally and comprehensively than was done in the earlier lessons) as well as those of the 
III phoneme. The present lesson, on the other hand, will shed more light on the latter. 
In other words, it will continue with the description of the major processes resulting in 
allophones begun in Lesson Five. 
Aspiration 
We know from Lessons Six and Nine that aspiration [from Latin aspirare, 'breathe 
out'; Behauchung] is the audible puff of breath, or the brief /?-sound, stemming from 
the sudden release of air in the articulation of a plosive. We also know that aspiration 
can be indicated in a phonetic transcription proper by the diacritic P
1] after the symbol 

for the plosive i n question. We have seen that aspiration can make the word boundary 
in a sequence like /SaetstAf/ perceptible, helping us recognise i t as either THAT STUFF [6aet 
stAf] or that's tough [Saets t
hAf]. And we have seen that aspiration can fill the gap left b y 
an elided vowel, as in potato [ p
h t e i t 3 u ] and today [t
hdei]. 
What needs to be added, here, is that it is mainly the fortis plosives, /p, t, k/, that are 
aspirated. The lenis plosives are usually unaspirated, or, at most, scarcely aspirated. T h e 
fortis plosives, then, are aspirated most typically in the following environments: 
- 
when they are pronounced i n isolation, which hardly ever happens, of course, b u t 
which shows that the aspiration o f /p, t, k/ is intrinsic, i.e. it is part of the "real* n a -
ture of these sounds, i f you will; 
- 
when they occur at the onset o f a stressed syllable immediately before a v o w e l , as i n 
pin [p
hm], tough [t
hAf], and key [k
hi:], except when preceded by /s/, as in spin [spm], 
stuff'[suf], 
and ski [ski:] (note that phonologically, or phonotactically, no consonant 
other than /s/ can precede a fortis plosive in a syllable-initial cluster); 
- 
when they occur at the onset of a stressed syllable immediately before one of t h e 
four frictionless continuants, /l, r, j , w/, in which case the aspiration usually results 
in the devoicing of these continuants (because they are articulated while t h e vocal 
folds are still apart), as in please [p
h\i:z], try [t
hrai], tune [t
hju:n], and quick 
[kSyik] 
except, again, when preceded by /s/, as in spleen [spli:n] and squiggle 
[ s k w i g l ] ° ( r e ^ 
member that we have already encountered the devoicing of the frictionless continu 
ants in Lesson Five, and that it is explained there why, in a phonetic transcription 
proper, tune is better transcribed as [tcu:n]). 
Despite the fact that /p, t, k7 are intrinsically aspirated, they are usually ««aspirated o r 
scarcely aspirated, in most other environments, and the aspiration in potato 
["p^enai i 
and today [t
hdei] must therefore be regarded as not quite typical. Note also, in this c o n 
nection, that here it is an intrinsic feature which is indicated by a diacritic whereas 
diacritics usually indicate features that are not intrinsic. There does exist a diacritic i n d i 
eating the absence of aspiration, namely a raised equal sign placed after the relevant 
symbol, as in [f], but it is hardly ever used. 
As we know from Lesson Five, the lenis plosives, /b, d, g/, the lenis affricate, 
and the lenis fricatives, /v, 5, z, 3/, are partly devoiced in word-initial position because 
of the voice onset time. The difference, therefore, between the /b/ in bin [bin] and t h e 
/p/ in spin [spm], for example, is barely noticeable: Besides the fact that both sounds are 
bilabial plosives, both have little or no voicing, and both are unaspirated, Experiments 
have shown that most people actually hear [sbin] for spin because our perception o f 
plosives (which is the realm of auditory phonetics) seems to be influenced to a high d e 
gree by the presence or absence of aspiration. The difference that remains is, of cour 
that the /p/ is produced with more force, i.e. with fortis articulation, and the correct 
transcription of spin is therefore still [spin]. The difference between the /b/ in bin 
r K
m i 
and the /p/ in pin [p^n], on the other hand, is very noticeable even though, again, b o t h 
sounds are bilabial plosives and have little or no voicing. However, it is not just t h e 
fortis articulation, here, that enables us to recognise the initial sound in pin as /p/^ j
t • 
is 

Allophonic variation, contd. 
103 
first and foremost the aspiration. We can say, then, that the most significant difference 
between an initial lenis plosive and an initial f ortis plosive is the aspiration of the latter. 
But, if aspiration is so vital for distinguishing meaning, and consequently for differ-
entiating words, as was clearly illustrated by bin and pin, how can we avoid the conclu-
sion that an aspirated fortis plosive and an unaspirated fortis plosive are two separate 
phonemes in English, rather than two allophones of the same phoneme? After all, even 
the sequences that stuff and that's tough could be seen as a kind of minimal pair (be-
cause they differ mainly in the presence or absence of aspiration of the second /t/), and 
the presence of minimal pairs is, as we learnt in Lesson Three, the sole criterion for 
identifying phonemes. The answer is that the realisation of a fortis plosive as either as-
pirated or unaspirated is determined by the phonetic environment, i.e. it is rule-gov-
erned. Aspirated fortis plosives and unaspirated fortis plosives are therefore allophones 
in complementary distribution. 
Secondary articulation 
If a sound is produced by obstructing an air-stream simultaneously in two different 
places (i.e. with different speech organs), the two overlapping articulations in these 
places are referred to as coarticulation [from Latin coarticulare, 'articulate together'], 
or double articulation. Most linguists, however, use these terms in a narrower sense, to 
refer to the simultaneous use of two places of obstruction only if the two overlapping 
articulations are equally important (i.e. if they contribute equally to the quality of the 
resultant sound). Coarticulation in this sense is found in some West African languages, 
for example, but not usually in English. If, on the other hand, one articulation is more 
important than the other, the more important one (i.e. the one that contributes most of 
the quality of the resultant sound) is usually called primary articulation, and the less 
important one (i.e. the one that merely adds a nuance to the quality of the resultant 
sound) is usually called secondary articulation. In common linguistic parlance, then, 
coarticulation and primary/secondary 
articulation are complementary although, strictly 
speaking, coarticulation is the more general, superordinate term. 
We have already encountered one case of secondary articulation in this manual, 
namely in Lesson Three, when we classified the /w/ phoneme as a velar even though it 
is labialised, which means that it is produced with rounded lips. The velum, then, is the 
place of the primary articulation, and the lips are the place of the secondary articula-
tion. It is unusual, however, that an English phoneme has a secondary articulation 
when it is pronounced in isolation. In other words, secondary articulations are not usu-
ally intrinsic to English phonemes, and the /w/ phoneme must therefore be regarded as 
an exception. In English, secondary articulations are almost always brought about by 
the influence of a neighbouring sound, as will be seen in the next section. 
By the same token, it will be seen that a secondary articulation is usually not only 
the cause of allophonic variation, but also the effect of assimilation, i.e. the process 
whereby one sound becomes more like another. In fact, secondary articulation and 
allophonic variation are so closely interrelated with assimilation that the two sections 
on secondary articulation in this lesson can be seen as a continuation of the three sec-

104 
Lesson Ten 
tions on assimilation in the previous lesson. Like assimilation, a secondary articulation 
involves a speech organ that is not normally used in the production of a given sound, 
but still remains in a position needed for the articulation of a preceding sound, or be-
gins to move to a position needed for the articulation of a following sound. Like assimi-
lation, a secondary articulation can consequently be categorised as either progressive, 
i.e. influenced by a preceding sound, or regressive, i.e. influenced by a following sound, 
although the latter is much more common. And like assimilation, a secondary articula-
tion can be influenced either by a sound belonging to a neighbouring word, or by a 
sound belonging to the same word, and in both cases it can usually be considered an as-
pect of connected speech because it makes the pronunciation easier, and is therefore in-
strumental in maintaining an isochronous rhythm. The difference between secondary 
articulation and assimilation is threefold: The former is more associated with the pro-
duction of speech sounds whereas the latter is more associated with their quality. More 
importantly, the former (usually) affects only the place of articulation whereas the lat-
ter can affect all the distinctive features. And, consequently, the former usually adds 
just a nuance to the quality of a phoneme whereas the latter can not only add a nuance, 
but also change the quality of a phoneme altogether. We can say, then, that a secondary 
articulation is almost always effected by assimilation, but assimilation only sometimes 
effects a secondary articulation. The term assimilation therefore has a wider range of 
applications than the term secondary 
articulation. 
In this manual, however, we have chosen to restrict the term assimilation to a pro-
cess that changes the quality of a phoneme altogether, i.e. one that results in a complete 
substitution of phonemes, rather than using the term, like most linguists, also for a pro-
cess that adds just a nuance to the quality of a phoneme, i.e. one that results merely in an 
alteration of phonemes, or in allophones. This choice may seem arbitrary, but it was 
made for clarity of presentation, and thus, ultimately, for better comprehension. We 
must make perfectly clear, however, that all the examples of secondary articulation 
given below are also examples of assimilation. 
Main types of secondary articulation 
We shall now discuss the main types of secondary articulation, namely labialisation, 
retroflexion, palatalisation, velarisation, and nasalisation. The last of these, nasalisation, 
does not quite belong here, as we shall see later. Before you continue reading, it may be 
advisable to reread the sections on the place of articulation in Lessons Two and Three. 
Labialisation is a type of secondary articulation whereby a sound, usually a consonant, 
is produced with an unusual degree of lip-rounding in addition to the primary articula-
tion. It is usually influenced by (the rounded lips of) a neighbouring /w/ or /o:, u:, D , o/. 
(Remember from Lesson Four that back vowels usually have lip-rounding in English.) 
Labialisation can be indicated in a phonetic transcription proper by a small w-like sym-
bol, which is either placed under the symbol for the labialised sound, or raised and 
placed after it. Labialisation is usually regressive, i.e. influenced by a following sound, 
as is illustrated by the labialised alveolar /s/ in soon [s
wu:n], the labialised postalveolar 

Allophonic variation, contd. 
105 
Ixl mrude [r
wu:d], the labialised palatoalveolar /[/ in shoe [f
wu:], and the labialised velar 
Ikl in quite [k
wwait]. But occasionally it is also progressive, i.e. influenced by a preced-
ing sound, as is illustrated by the labialised alveolar III in boot [bu:t
w]. (Compare the 
quality of these labialised sounds with that of the "purely" alveolar /s/ i n snake, 
postalveolar Ixl in red, palatoalveolar / J / in sherry, velar /k/ in Canada, and alveolar III 
in tiger, all of which are made without lip-rounding.) 
Retroflexion is a type of secondary articulation whereby a sound, more specifically a 
vowel, is produced with a curled-back tongue tip approaching or touching the hard 
palate in addition to the primary articulation. Retroflexion is also referred to as 
r-colouring or rhotacisation [from Latin rhotacismus, Greek rhotakismos, 'making an 
r-sound']. It is only important in rhotic accents, for example in most American accents, 
because it is influenced by a retroflex allophone of the Ixl phoneme, which rarely oc-
curs elsewhere. Furthermore, as we know from Lesson Six, non-rhotic accents like RP 
have lost the Ixl phoneme almost entirely. Retroflexion can be indicated in a phonetic 
transcription proper by a small, raised r-like symbol, which is upside down and placed 
after the symbol for the retroflexed (or r-coloured or rhotacised) vowel, and the 
retroflex Ixl that influences retroflexion can be transcribed as [l]. Retroflexion is usu-
ally regressive, as is illustrated by the retroflexed Is:/ in bird [b3:
J|d] or world [w3:
J4.ld] 
in American English. If a retroflex Ixl is elided, which occasionally happens for example 
to simplify consonant clusters, the unarticulated sound may still exert its influence, and 
words like bird and world may then be pronounced with a retroflexed vowel neverthe-
less. (Compare the quality of the retroflexed h:l with that of the "normal" te'J i n bird 
or world in RP.) 
Palatalisation is a type of secondary articulation whereby a sound, usually a conso-
nant, is produced with the body of the tongue coming near or touching the hard palate 
in addition to the primary articulation. I n most cases, this involves a shift of the place of 
obstruction backwards. In the case of velars and the glottal, however, which are (nor-
mally) made in the back part of the mouth, it involves a shift forward. Palatalisation is 
often influenced by a neighbouring palatal, /)/, or by a front vowel, l\:, I, e, as/. It can be 
indicated in a phonetic transcription proper in several ways, most commonly by a 
small, raised ;-like symbol after the symbol for the palatalised sound, or by an apostro-
phe. Palatalisation is usually regressive, as is illustrated by the palatalised alveolar III i n 
tea [tJi:] and the palatalised velar /k/ in keep [kJi:p]. (Compare the quality of these palat-
alised sounds with that of the "purely" alveolar It/ in tiger and velar /k/ in Canada.) 
Palatalised consonants are sometimes described as "soft", and non-palatalised conso-
nants as "hard". The use of these labels here is not related to the use of the same labels 
for describing the lenis and fortis articulation of consonants (as in "soft s" and "hard s"), 
but it must be equally discouraged. 
Velarisation is a type of secondary articulation whereby a sound, almost always l\i, is 
produced with the back of the tongue coming near or touching the soft palate, or ve-
lum, in addition to the primary articulation. It is influenced by a following consonant 

106 
Lesson Ten 
(any consonant except / j / in the same or in the next word) or pause, which means that it 
is always regressive. Velarisation can be indicated in a phonetic transcription proper by 
the diacritic [
Y] after the symbol for the velarised sound, as in [1
Y], or, formerly and 
probably still more commonly, by a tilde placed through the symbol, as in [f]. The vela-
rised alveolar /l/, then, is found in words like help [hefp], milk [milk], cool [ku:f], and 
sail [seit]. (Again, compare the quality of the velarised l\l with that of the "purely" al-
veolar l\l in leopard, which is made with the back of the tongue much further forward.) 
Nasalisation is a process whereby a sound, usually a vowel, is produced with a lowered 
velum, which opens the passage to the nasal cavity, so that air escapes not only through 
the mouth (as is usually the case with vowels), but also through the nose. In English, 
nasalised sounds differ from "real" nasals, then, in that the latter involve a complete 
closure in the vocal tract, so that no air escapes through the mouth. (Other languages 
have nasals where the escape of some air through the mouth is intrinsic.) Nasalisation is 
influenced by a neighbouring nasal, /m, n, n/, and can be indicated in a phonetic tran-
scription proper by a tilde above the symbol for the nasalised sound. It is often regres-
sive, as is illustrated by the nasalised Iv.l in beam [bi:m], the nasalised l\i in bin [bin], 
and the nasalised /ae/ in bang [baerj]. But it can also be progressive, as is illustrated by the 
nasalised /ae/ in mat [maët], or regressive and progressive at the same time, as is illus-
trated by the nasalised /as/ in man [maèn], (As before, compare the quality of these 
nasalised vowels with that of the "normal" /i:/ in bee, l\l in fish, and /ae/ in apple, all of 
which are made with the velum raised and air escaping only through the mouth.) 
Nasalisation is often grouped together with the various types of secondary articulation 
for the sake of convenience, but it is, strictly speaking, a different process because it af-
fects the manner of articulation, not the place. 
It has been shown here that secondary articulations (including nasalisation) usually oc-
cur only in specific environments. Consequently, the resultant pronunciation variants 
also usually occur only in specific environments, or we can say that the realisations of 
the underlying phonemes are rule-governed. The sounds discussed in this section, like 
virtually all the sounds discussed in this lesson, are therefore allophones in complemen-
tary distribution. 

Exercises 
107 
EXERCISES 
We have now covered all the features that we include in our broad phonetic transcrip-
tion, and the exercises in this and the following lessons give further practice on all these 
features. Your transcriptions should not, however, include the narrower phonetic phe-
nomena discussed in these lessons. 
10.1 Transcribe the following text into IPA symbols 
The story started nine months ago after all the trouble and unrest had faded away. Little 
did Amanda apprehend then that her life would dramatically change and for the better. 
Her training had been in theatre and performance; with these skills she had been able to 
land a dream position in a respectable company. There she had been given a number of 
understudies, minor parts, and two starring roles. In short she hadn't wasted a second 
in making a name for herself. 
After appearing as a witch in Macbeth, Amanda asked for a short break "to recover 
from a particularly nasty bout of influenza," she explains. "I said goodbye to the thea-
tre wishing that I could be back as soon as possible." 
"All of a sudden I was snapped up from feeling terribly ill to the whirlwind of Hol-
lywood by a film producer who had seen my final night in Macbeth." 
151 words 
10.2 Transcribe the spoken dialogue on the CD into IPA symbols 
Track 21 and tracks 22-27 
111 words 


LESSON *É*É 
MORE ALLOPHONES 
In Lessons Five and Ten, we described allophonic variation in terms of processes that 
result in allophones (such as devoicing, aspiration, and the various types of secondary 
articulation). In the present lesson, on the other hand, we shall describe it in terms of 
particular phonemes that appear as different allophones. The phonemes chosen here 
are /t/, /r/, and III because they are among the English sounds which are most variable, 
and consequently most important with respect to the learning and teaching of English 
pronunciation. But this is certainly not to mean that all other English sounds are much 
less variable (or much less important). On the contrary, we know from Lesson Five that 
the number of allophones of any given phoneme is, at least theoretically, virtually infi-
nite. Many other sounds, then, could have been included in this lesson, and the descrip-
tion of /t, r, 1/ and their most important allophones should therefore be seen as merely 
exemplary of the variability of the majority of English sounds. 
f-sounds 
Of the 12 most important allophones of the Ixl phoneme, the following 8 have already 
been described in previous lessons. 
- 
What could be called a neutral t was first described in Lesson Three as a fortis alveolar 
plosive, and we later learnt in Lesson Ten that it is aspirated. It is the sound we hear 
word-initially in tiger [t
haigo], or when Ixl is pronounced in isolation. (Remember 
that, as an exception, it is an intrinsic feature here that is indicated by a diacritic.) 
- 
The glottal stop was described in Lessons Two and Three. In some non-standard 
British accents, most notably Cockney, it is often used as an allophone of Ixl when it 
occurs after a vowel either word-internally, especially when followed by another 
vowel, /n/, or /I/, or word-finally, as in butter [bA?s], button [t>A?n], bottle [bo?l], 
and but [DA?]. The use of a glottal stop in these environments is referred to as glottal 
replacement, or T-glottalling, or simply glottalling. Because of this particular 
use, the glottal stop in general is widely stigmatised by speakers of RP even though 
other uses of the glottal stop (as a linking sound, for example) are certainly entirely 
acceptable. 
- 
The alveolar flap, or alveolar tap, was also described in Lesson Three. In American 
English, it is commonly used as an allophone of Ixl when it occurs after a vowel in a 
stressed syllable and before another vowel, as in latter [laeror], writing ['rainrj], and 

110 
Lesson Eleven 
atom [aeram] (but not in atomic [a't
ha:mik], for example, because here the /t/ occurs 
after a vowel in an wrcstressed syllable). Thus latter, writing, and atom often have the 
same pronunciation in American English as ladder [laedar], riding [taidirj], and 
Adam [aedam]. Another way of describing this allophone, therefore, is to say that 
the III has undergone a process of voicing, and now resembles a fast /d/. The words 
latter, writing, and atom could then be transcribed as [laetar], ['raitirj], and [aetam]. 
- 
The fronted t was described in detail in Lesson Five, including the environments in 
which it occurs. It can be illustrated by the dental realisation of the normally alveo-
lar III in eighth [eit6] and not thin [nDt Oin]. 
- 
The retracted t was also described in detail in Lesson Five, again including the envi-
ronment in which it occurs. It can be illustrated by the postalveolar realisation of 
the normally alveolar Kl in try [trai] and fit right [fit rait]. 
- 
The unaspirated t was described in detail in Lesson Ten. In that lesson, we looked at 
the environments in which its opposite, the aspirated t, typically occurs, and we said 
that the unaspirated t occurs in most other environments. It can be illustrated by the 
Kl in stuff [st\f] and string [stnrj]. (Remember that the absence of aspiration is not 
usually indicated by a diacritic even though it constitutes an alteration to the neutral 
sound quality.) 
- 
The labialised t was also described in Lesson Ten, including the environments in 
which it occurs. It can be illustrated by the / t / in boot [bu:t
w] and twice [t
wwais], 
- 
And the palatalised t was described in Lesson Ten as well, again including the envi-
ronments in which it occurs. It can be illustrated by the Kl in tea [t-ii:] and text 
[t-iekst]. 
The next four allophones of It/ have not yet been described in this manual. We encoun-
ter them here for the first time. 
- 
The nasally released t is produced with the usual complete closure at the alveolar 
ridge, which is maintained throughout the duration of the sound, so that no air es-
capes through the mouth, but with a lowered velum, so that air escapes through the 
nose instead. This kind of release is called nasal release, or nasal plosion, and it can 
be indicated in a phonetic transcription proper by a small, raised w-like symbol after 
the main symbol, as in [t
n]. A nasal release typically occurs in the production of a 
plosive when that plosive is followed by a nasal with the same place of articulation. 
This means that Kl is usually nasally released when it is followed by In/, as in button 
[bAt
nn], eaten [i:t
nn], and not now [not" nau]. (Note that a nasal release is not a case of 
nasalisation, a process which was discussed in the previous lesson, because nasalisa-
tion involves the escape of air both through the mouth and through the nose.) 
- 
The laterally released t is produced, initially, with the usual complete closure at the 
alveolar ridge, but the sides of the tongue are then lowered, so that air escapes 
around the sides of the central closure that still remains. This kind of release is called 
lateral release, or lateral plosion, and it can be indicated in a phonetic transcription 
proper by a small, raised /-like symbol after the main symbol, as in [t
1]. A lateral re-
lease typically occurs in the production of / t / and Idl when they are followed by /!/, 

More allophones 
111 
as in bottle [bot'l], cattle [kaet'l], and little [ht'l]. Note, here, that the central closure, 
i.e. the contact between the tongue tip and the alveolar ridge, is maintained through-
out the duration of the /tl/ sequence. 
- 
The inaudibly released r, or unreleased r, is also produced with the usual complete 
closure at the alveolar ridge, but the complete closure is maintained throughout the 
duration of the III and an immediately following plosive or /m/, so that the air used 
for the production of both sounds is released at the end of the second sound. More 
generally, we can say that an inaudible release can occur in the sequence plosive 
plus plosive or plosive plus /m/. It can be indicated in a phonetic transcription 
proper by a small, raised right angle, [""], after the symbol for the first sound in the 
sequence (i.e. the sound that is actually inaudibly released). An inaudibly released t 
can be illustrated by words like catkin [kaef kin], hatband [haefbasnd], and atmos-
phere ['aef mosfia]. 
- 
The glottalised t is produced with a tightly closed glottis (in effect, resulting in a si-
multaneous glottal stop), so that no more air can be pushed up from the lungs. The 
glottis remains closed throughout the duration of the /t/, thus trapping a body of air 
between it and the usual closure made for the III higher up in the vocal tract, at the 
alveolar ridge. (We could say that the air is trapped between a lower, glottal closure 
and an upper, alveolar closure.) This air is then compressed by a sharp upward 
movement of the larynx (which contains the glottis), and released, by opening the 
upper closure, through the mouth. Thereafter, the glottis opens, so that new air can 
be pushed up from the lungs for the production of the next sound. Not just III can 
undergo such a process of glottalisation, but also the other two fortis plosives, Ipl 
and Ik/. (Note that the term glottalisation 
is used here in a rather specific sense. It is 
often used more broadly to refer to all kinds of activity in the glottis during sound 
production.) Glottalised fortis plosives differ from all other English sounds de-
scribed in this manual in that they are not made with lung air. In other words, they 
are not produced by an egressive pulmonic air-stream mechanism. The air-stream 
used here is an egressive glottalic air-stream, and a sound produced by such an 
air-stream is referred to as a glottalic sound, or as an ejective. (Note that glottalic 
sounds can only be allophones in English whereas in many American Indian and 
African languages, such as Quechua, Amharic, and Hausa, they can also be pho-
nemes.) A glottalic sound (such as the glottalised i) can be indicated in a phonetic 
transcription proper by a small, raised glottal stop symbol after the main symbol, as 
in [rj, or by a normal-sized glottal stop symbol before the main symbol, as in [?t] 
(or, in some publications, by an apostrophe, but this is not recommended because 
an apostrophe is also used to indicate palatalisation). Glottalic sounds, or rather 
glottalic fortis plosives, typically occur after a vowel and before a consonant, as in 
department 
[á\'pa\?mznt], football [
lfút
?bo:l], and quite good [kwait' god], or before a 
pause, usually at the end of words, as in mat [maef'] and what [wDt^. This kind of 
glottal isation is referred to as glottal reinforcement, or sometimes as glottalling 
(but the latter term is more commonly used as a synonym for glottal replacement). 
Glottalised fortis plosives, or glottalic fortis plosives, are common in everyday spoken 

112 
Lesson Eleven 
English. Without them, the language would probably sound pedantic or stilted, as 
can be illustrated by the pronunciation [di"pa:t
hni9nt] for department. 
If the glottali-
sation, or the glottal reinforcement, is overdone, however, it sounds rather clipped, 
as though the speaker wanted to pronounce something very precisely, or to "spit" 
out the sound at the end of a word, which is sometimes done for humorous effect. 
All the allophones of lil listed above usually occur in clearly defined environments, i.e. 
the choice between them is largely rule-governed, and they are therefore commonly re-
garded as contextual variants, or allophones in complementary distribution. But, as 
was pointed out in Lesson Five, speakers of a non-standard British accent who nor-
mally realise the lil in butter 
as a glottal stop may occasionally realise it as an 
unaspirated t to sound more formal. Similarly, speakers of RP, who normally realise the 
III in butter as an unaspirated t, may occasionally realise it as a glottal stop to sound 
more colloquial. And any single speaker may at various times and for various reasons 
(or for no reason at all) realise the lit in eat as a neutral t, an unaspirated £, or a 
globalised t. These examples show that the choice between several of the allophones of 
flf may also depend on such factors as language variety, social class, communicative sit-
uation, or simply on chance. In such cases, the allophones of ft/ must be regarded as 
free variants, or allophones in free variation. 
r-sounds 
We said in Lesson Three that no other consonant phoneme of English is as variable in 
its actual pronunciation as the fx/ phoneme. This statement seems to contradict what 
we said in Lesson Five and at the beginning of the present lesson, namely that the num-
ber of allophones of any given phoneme is virtually infinite, and it must therefore be 
further qualified: The Ixl is the most variable consonant phoneme of English in the 
sense that several of its allophones are, from a phonetic point of view, significantly dif-
ferent from one another, and it is only from a phonological point of view that they can 
be regarded as allophones of the same phoneme. This is underlined by the fact that the 
major pronunciation variants of Ixl can be represented in a phonetic transcription 
proper by separate symbols, rather than being indicated merely by diacritics. Of the 9 
allophones of Ixl listed below, 5 (including what could be called a neutral r) are such 
major pronunciation variants. The remaining 4 are variants of the neutral r. The follow-
ing 7 have already been described in previous lessons. 
- 
The neutral r (neutral in RP, that is) was first described in Lesson Three as a lenis 
postalveolar approximant (or frictionless continuant), and we later learnt in Lesson 
Seven that it is non-syllabic. It is the sound we hear word-initially in red, or when 
Ixl is pronounced in isolation, and it can be represented in a phonetic transcription 
proper by an r-like symbol turned upside down and reversed, [J], as in [jed]. 
- 
The retroflex r was also described in Lesson Three. More specifically, it is a lenis 
retroflex approximant, and it can be represented in a phonetic transcription proper 
by the symbol \ \ \ It typically occurs in rhotic accents, for example in most Ameri-
can accents, after a vowel and before an alveolar consonant, as in bird [b3:^d] and 

More allophones 
113 
world [w3:jjd] (transcribed more accurately as [b3:
J4.d] and [w3:
J.dd] if we want to in-
dicate the retroflexion of the vowels influenced by the retroflex r). It does not occur 
in RP. (Note that there is another principally American allophone of It/, referred to 
as a molar r, or bunched r, which is perceptually almost indistinguishable from a 
retroflex r, but has a different articulation.) 
The rolled r, or trilled r, was described in Lesson Three as well. More specifically, it 
is a lenis alveolar roll, or trill, and is represented in a phonetic transcription proper 
by the same symbol used for the underlying phoneme, [r]. It does not occur in RP, 
but it is typical of Scottish and Irish accents, and it is sometimes used in stylised 
speech, for example on stage or to convey jocular stereotypes. It is also common 
in the varieties of German spoken in the north of Germany, in Bavaria, and in 
Austria. The rolled r is sometimes called a lingual roll, or lingual trill [from Latin 
lingua, 'tongue'], as opposed to the uvular roll, or uvular trill, which will be described 
below. 
The flapped r, or tapped r, was the last r-sound described in Lesson Three. More 
specifically, it is a lenis alveolar flap, or tap, and it can be represented in a phonetic 
transcription proper by the symbol [r]. (Note that this is the same sound that was 
described in the previous section as an allophone of the It/ phoneme in American 
English.) It is similar to the rolled r, but it involves only one flap of the tongue tip 
against the alveolar ridge, rather than a vibration. It occurs in RP and in several 
other accents of British English, typically between two vowels, as in very 
American 
[veri o'menkon]. Because the flapped r resembles a fast /d/, it is sometimes (face-
tiously) spelt as dd by writers who want to represent spoken language as closely as 
possible, as in veddy 
Ameddican. 
The devoiced r was described in Lesson Five. It is a variant of the neutral r, and does 
not, therefore, have a separate symbol, but can be indicated by the diacritic [ J 
added either to the symbol [r] or to the symbol [j], depending on the degree of accu-
racy of the transcription. However, the devoiced r is no longer an approximant, like 
the neutral r, because the gap between the tongue tip and the rear of the alveolar 
ridge has become narrower, and the air now produces audible friction when forcing 
its way through. The devoiced r can therefore more specifically be described as a 
devoiced postalveolar fricative. We said in Lesson Five that it typically occurs after a 
fortis plosive, /p, t, k/, in stressed syllables. The example word given in that lesson, 
try, was transcribed as [trai], but could also be transcribed more accurately as [Uai] 
or, if we want to indicate the aspiration of the preceding plosive, [t
hjai]. 
- The syllabic r was described in detail in Lesson Seven, including the environments 
in which it occurs. It is a lenis postalveolar approximant, like the neutral r, of which 
it is a variant, and it can be indicated by the diacritic [, ] added either to the symbol 
[r] or to the symbol [x], depending on the degree of accuracy of the transcription. 
We already know from Lesson Seven that the syllabic r is very common in many 
rhotic accents, but rare in non-rhotic accents, such as RP. 
- 
The labialised r was described in Lesson Ten, again including the environments in 
which it occurs. It is also a lenis postalveolar approximant (postalveolar because the 

1 1 4 
Lesson Eleven 
rear of the alveolar ridge is still the place of the primary articulation), like the neutral 
r, of which it is a variant. It can be indicated by the diacritic [
w] added either to the 
symbol [r] or to the symbol [J], depending on the degree of accuracy of the tran-
scription. If the labialisation is overdone, i.e. if the lip-rounding is too strong, the 
labialised r begins to resemble a /w/. Such a sound is frequently used to satirise the 
(affected) speech of the upper classes, and it is sometimes (facetiously) spelt as ww 
by writers who want to represent it as closely as possible in traditional orthography, 
as in I'm awfully sowwy. Ironically, this is also the sound most English children 
make until they have learnt to articulate /r/ properly, and if adults make it, it is 
sometimes regarded as a language disorder. 
The next two allophones of Ixl have not yet been described in this manual. We encoun-
ter them here for the first time. 
- 
The fricative r is the second fricative among the r-sounds. It differs from the 
devoiced r only in that it has retained the intrinsic voicedness of Ixl, and it can there-
fore more specifically be described as a voiced postalveolar fricative. It is another 
variant of the neutral r, and can be indicated by the diacritic [ J added to the symbol 
[J] (not usually to [r]). The fricative r only occurs after Idl, as in dread [died], dream 
[dji:m], and drive [dtaiv]. 
- 
The uvular r is produced by moving the back of the tongue against the uvula. It is 
less technically also referred to as a back r, or informally as burr. It is not a variant of 
the neutral r, but comes itself in two distinct variants. One variant is the uvular roll, 
or uvular trill. Unlike the lingual roll, which is produced by a vibration of the 
tongue tip against the alveolar ridge, the uvular roll is produced by a vibration of the 
back of the tongue against the uvula. It is a common sound in German (except in the 
varieties spoken in the north of Germany, in Bavaria, and in Austria), and a presti-
gious allophone of Ixl in French, which is why it is informally also referred to as the 
Parisian r. It can be represented in a phonetic transcription proper by an 7?-like 
symbol, [R]. The other variant is the uvular fricative. It is the third fricative among 
the r-sounds of English, and the friction here is produced by air forcing its way 
through a narrow gap between the back of the tongue and a tensed uvula. It can 
be represented in a phonetic transcription proper by an i?-like symbol turned 
upside down, [K]. Both variants of the uvular r are very rare in English. They are 
stigmatised by speakers of RP, and in the past were even regarded as language disor-
ders. They are typical only of some accents of north-east England and south-east 
Scotland. 
Any r-sound is technically termed a rhotic. Most of the nine rhotics listed here usually 
occur in clearly defined environments, i.e. the choice between them is largely rule-
governed, and they are therefore commonly regarded as contextual variants, or allo-
phones in complementary distribution. There are of course many more rhotics in Eng-
lish. For example, we might add, just for the sake of curiosity, the bilabial roll we pro-
duce to signal that we are freezing, or to imitate a car engine, as in brrr. This sound is 
transcribed as [B]. 

More allophones 
115 
/-sounds 
The first instance of variation regarding /-sounds was encountered in Lesson Four, 
when we said that the duration of l\l is usually shortened when followed by /p, t, k, tj, f, 
0, s/ or l\l at the end of a syllable, exemplified by the shortened duration of the III in 
belt /belt/ as opposed to the "normal" duration of the l\l in bells /belz/. The two 
/-sounds cannot differentiate words, and are phonetically similar, which means that 
they must be regarded as allophones. They are not usually counted among the most im-
portant allophones of III, but they remind us once again that the number of allophones 
of any given phoneme is virtually infinite. The most important allophones of III are the 
five listed below, all of which (with one possible exception) have already been described 
in previous lessons. 
- 
The neutral / (neutral in RP) was first described in Lesson Three as a lenis alveolar 
lateral (or lateral approximant), and we later learnt in Lesson Seven that it is 
non-syllabic. It is the sound we hear word-initially in leopard [lepad], or when III is 
pronounced in isolation, and it is represented in a phonetic transcription proper by 
the same symbol used for the underlying phoneme. The neutral / is sometimes de-
scribed as palatalised because it is often produced not merely with the tip of the 
tongue touching the alveolar ridge, but also simultaneously with the whole front of 
the tongue coming near or touching the hard palate (but with the back of the tongue 
held low). Such a palatalised / is impressionistically called a clear /. The raising of the 
front of the tongue gives the clear / a slight front-vowel quality, akin to an i-sound. 
In RP, the neutral / or clear / typically occurs only before a vowel or before 1)1 (in the 
same or in the next word)*/that vowel or / j / follows immediately, i.e. without even 
the slightest pause in between (in all other environments, it yields to the velarised /, 
which will be listed below). Further examples of the neutral / or clear / can be heard 
in love [Uv], silly [sili], failure [fedjs], million [imYpn], fall in [fo:l in], and fill it [fil 
it]. In many accents of Ireland (especially in the south) and Wales, it occurs in all en-
vironments whereas it virtually never occurs in many northern English, southern 
Scottish, and American accents. It also occurs in all environments in most German 
accents (including the most prestigious accent of Standard German) although l\l in 
the accents of the north of Germany in particular is often even more front, or more 
/-coloured, than the English clear /. In several non-standard accents of German, III 
is so much more front, or /-coloured, that /-sounds are frequently substituted with 
/-sounds, for example in words like ages and Gold, which are then sometimes (face-
tiously) spelt as ois and Gold in an attempt to capture the accent as accurately as 
possible. 
- 
The devoiced / was described in Lesson Five, including the environments in which 
it occurs. It is an alveolar lateral, like the neutral / or clear /, and was illustrated in 
Lesson Five by the devoiced realisation of the normally voiced III in please [pli:z]. 
We must add here, however, that III can be devoiced not only after a fortis plosive in 
stressed syllables, but also after If I and especially after initial /s/, as in/Zy [flai], sleep 
[sji:p], and slender [slenda]. In RP, the devoiced / is usually also a neutral / or clear / 

6 
Lesson Eleven 
(as opposed to a velarised I) because phonologically, or phonotactically, the t w o -
consonant cluster /p, t, k, f/ or /s/ plus l\l at the onset of a syllable can only be fol-
lowed by the vowel that forms the syllable centre, and such a cluster at the coda is 
simply not possible. 
The fronted /, or, more specifically, the dental /, was not mentioned explicitly in o u r 
discussion of fronting and dentalisation in Lesson Five because it is less c o m m o n 
than the examples given there, but it surely deserves a mention here. The normally 
alveolar l\l can be realised as a dental allophone (i.e. it can be articulated with the 
tongue tip and rims touching the teeth) if it is followed by the dental /9/, as in health 
[hel6]. The place of the primary articulation, then, is the teeth, and the /-sound is 
therefore not an alveolar any more, but a lenis dental lateral. Because it is always fol-
lowed by a consonant, the dental / is always velarised, i.e. the velum is the place of 
the secondary articulation, and the word health is thus transcribed more accurately 
as [hefB]. 
The syllabic / was described in detail in Lesson Seven, including the environments in 
which it occurs. It is a lenis alveolar lateral, like the neutral / or clear /, and it was il-
lustrated in Lesson Seven by such words as table [teibl ],proposal [prapoozl], and shovel 
[JAVI ]. What should be added here is that the syllabic / is typically velarised because 
it usually occurs at the end of a root, and is therefore often followed by a suffix consist-
ing of or beginning with a consonant, or by a (slight) pause. The words table, propos-
al, and shovel are thus transcribed more accurately as [teibf], [prapsuzf ], and Q" Avt]. 
The velarised / was described in Lesson Ten, again including the environments in 
which it occurs (for the sake of simplification, we can say that it occurs in all the en-
vironments in which the neutral / or clear / cannot). It was illustrated in Lesson Ten 
by the words help [help], milk [milk], cool [ku:f], and sail [serf], and in the present 
section by health [hefG], table [teibf], proposal [propouzf], and shovel [fAvi]. Fur-
ther examples, involving influence of a following consonant in the next word, are 
channel ferry [tjaent feri] and fall down [fo:f daon]. Like the neutral / or clear /, the 
velarised / is a lenis alveolar lateral (alveolar because the alveolar ridge is still the 
place of the primary articulation). More specifically, it is produced with the tip of 
the tongue touching the alveolar ridge, and simultaneously with the back of the 
tongue coming near or touching the velum (and possibly also with rounded lips). 
The raising of the back of the tongue (and the lip-rounding) gives the velarised / a 
slight back-vowel quality, akin to a w-sound. A w-sound is often described as a 
"dark" vowel probably because w-sounds occur in several "sad" words, like doom 
and gloom. The velarised / is therefore also impressionistically called a dark /. I
n 
many northern English, southern Scottish, and American accents, it occurs in all 
environments whereas it virtually never occurs in many accents of Ireland (espe-
cially in the south) and Wales. In several non-standard accents (particularly in 
Cockney) and in most Australian accents, the tip of the tongue does not quite touch 
the alveolar ridge, which frequently results in the substitution of a a-sound for the 
dark /, for example in words like milk and people, which are then transcribed as 
[miok] and ['pi:po]. 

More allophones 
117 
All the allophones of l\l listed here usually occur in clearly defined environments in RP, 
i.e. the choice between them is largely rule-governed, and they are therefore contextual 
variants in that accent, or allophones in complementary distribution. The same is true 
of the devoiced /, the fronted (or dental) /, and the syllabic / in most other accents. The 
neutral (or clear) / and the velarised (or dark) /, on the other hand, occur in all environ-
ments in some accents, and in these accents the two allophones are therefore not in 
complementary distribution. 
When we say that all the allophones of l\l listed here are allophones in complemen-
tary distribution in RP, we do not mean, of course, that all of them are mutually exclu-
sive. On the contrary, we have seen that the devoiced / is usually a neutral (or clear) /, 
that the fronted (or dental) / is always a velarised (or dark) /, and that the syllabic / is 
typically also a velarised (or dark) /. What we mean, then, is that the allophones of l\l 
form pairs within which there is mutual exclusivity. These pairs can be listed as follows: 
neutral (or clear) / 
vs. 
velarised (or dark) / 
devoiced / 
vs. 
voiced / 
fronted (or dental) / 
vs. 
alveolar / (= neutral /) 
syllabic / 
vs. 
non-syllabic / 
In other words, the neutral (or clear) /, in RP, occurs in all the environments in which 
the velarised (or dark) / cannot, the devoiced / occurs in all the environments in which 
the voiced / cannot, the fronted (or dental) / occurs in all the environments in which the 
neutral, alveolar / cannot, and the syllabic / occurs in all the environments in which the 
non-syllabic / cannot. Such pairs can of course also be postulated for the allophones 
of /t/ and Ivl, and the concept of complementary distribution has to be understood in 
this sense. 
Finally, we know from Lesson Six, from the section on juncture, that allophones in 
complementary distribution may be the most reliable boundary signals, i.e. they often 
enable us to identify where one word ends, and the next word begins. This can also be 
illustrated in the context of the allophones of /l/. For example, the difference between 
he lies /hi: laiz/ and heal eyes /hi:l aiz/, in RP, lies mainly in the allophonic realisation of 
l\l (and, admittedly, in the presence or absence of an ever so slight pause between the 
two words, which influences the realisation). In he lies [hi: laiz], the t\l is a neutral (or 
clear) /, which typically occurs immediately before a vowel, thus signalling that there is 
not necessarily a word boundary between l\l and /ai/, and that the two phonemes may 
well belong to the same word. In heal eyes [hi:! aiz], on the other hand, the III is a vela-
rised (or dark) /, which typically occurs before even the slightest pause, thus signalling 
that a word boundary between /I/ and /ai/ is very likely. 

118 
Lesson Eleven 
EXERCISES 
11.1 Transcribe the following text into IPA symbols 
"We need more oranges and apples before we can collect the soft fruit like strawberries 
and peaches," he bellowed down the phone. 
Despite this rather unpleasant instruction coming up from the kitchen Carla and 
Sammy were in a good mood. They had both risen early, gone jogging and had a 
healthy breakfast. They were determined not to let Marco's foul mood upset their 
afternoon. 
"Being identical twins has certain advantages," thought Carla: She had pretended t o 
be her sister and vice versa on many occasions. 
Now they planned to get their revenge on the angry cook. Sammy carefully 
wrapped four raw eggs in a spotted handkerchief and placed two more under her boss's 
shoes, which stood in the corner. The trap was set. 
123 words 
11.2 Transcribe the spoken dialogue on the CD into IPA symbols 
Track 28 and tracks 29-33 
110 words 

LESSON 
INTONATION 1 2 
In this final lesson, we shall examine intonation, a feature of suprasegmental phonology, 
or prosody. We have already come across other pronunciation features that cannot be seg-
mented because they extend over units that are longer than just one sound. We dis-
cussed stress, for example, in Lessons Seven and Eight, and rhythm in Lesson Nine. 
Here, we shall begin our discussion by asking the question of what intonation is. We shall 
then briefly look at the concept of pitch, which, as we know from Lesson Two, is closely 
related to intonation. We shall proceed to identify the tone unit as the stretch of speech 
over which intonation acts. We shall categorise several intonation patterns, look at the 
structure of the tone unit, and, finally, discuss some of the functions intonation fulfils. 
Intonation is a fundamental property of spoken language. Because of its complex-
ity, however, our discussion can only be considered a basic introduction to this field, 
which necessarily omits or abbreviates some aspects that a more comprehensive book 
would discuss at greater length. 
What is intonation? 
Linguists have found many different ways to characterise intonation, which is also 
called pitch contour or pitch movement. In general, however, they agree on the fol-
lowing basic principles: 
- 
All languages have intonation. 
- 
Intonation is principally the variation of pitch, but also prominence, over a stretch 
of speech. 
- 
Intonation has four functions. The structural function signals the grammatical or 
structural role of an utterance, determining, for example, whether it is a question, a 
request, or an instruction. The accentual function affects the prominence of a sylla-
ble, and thus plays a role in focusing stress on particular words in connected speech. 
The attitudinal function conveys the speakers' personal orientations towards what 
they say, or gives us clues about how the speakers feel - whether they are uninter-
ested, excited, or ironic, for example. And the discourse function marks the turn-
taking processes in an exchange between speakers. 
- 
The set of intonation patterns, or contours, is limited and can be fully determined, 
but linguists are not in full agreement about the actual number of different con-
tours. 

120 
Lesson Twelve 
- 
In order to analyse intonation, continuous speech can be broken down into smaller 
units, but there are different conventions about how to determine these units. 
Pitch 
Intonation, as was indicated above, is mainly shaped by the variation, or modulation, of 
the pitch of the voice. Prominence also plays a role, especially in marking the word that 
carries the main sentence stress. Our discussion, however, will be focused on pitch, 
rather than prominence. 
We already know from Lesson Two that pitch is related to the frequency of the vi-
bration of the vocal folds: The faster the vocal folds vibrate, the higher the pitch. T h u s 
pitch is another way of referring to the fundamental frequency (F 0) of the voice. This 
frequency is also determined by the physical size, and consequently by the sex, of a 
speaker: In general, a male speaker usually has a lower pitch, at around 120 hertz, than a 
female speaker, who has an average pitch at around 210 hertz. We also know from Les-
son Two that pitch is not a distinctive feature in English, so the absolute difference be-
tween the fundamental frequencies of individual speakers, or of men and women, is not 
significant in terms of segmental phonology. 
Nonetheless, all speakers can use intonation to achieve the functions mentioned in 
the previous section, regardless of the absolute value of their own fundamental fre-
quency. Thus an individual speaker can control the pitch of his or her voice, and in so 
doing may transmit information of one sort or another. Although no two speakers have 
the same fundamental frequency, it is the distinctive contrasts in a speaker's pitch level 
and the relative movements that are important to consider, rather than the absolute 
pitch frequency. In other words, the important question to ask when analysing intona-
tion is whether a change in pitch carries linguistic, or communicative, significance. 
The tone unit 
We can normally break connected speech down into utterances, i.e. units that begin 
and end with a clear pause. While utterances may consist of only one syllable, such as 
yes or no, they are normally much longer, as in The other day, while I was in town, I met 
Chris, who I hadn't seen for a couple of weeks. Within an utterance, we can sometimes 
also identify smaller units, over which a single intonation contour extends. Such a 
stretch of speech we call a tone unit, or tone group. For example, the simple question 
(1) below, the longer question (2), and the statement (3) are all utterances. 
(1) When? 
(2) When did you say you would arrive? 
(3) When he finally arrived, he discovered his friends had already left. 
(1) and (2) each consist of a single tone unit whereas (3) is made up of two tone units. A 
tone unit, then, can extend over a stretch of speech as short as a single syllable, as in (1), 
or over a much longer stretch of speech, as in (2). 

Intonation 
121 
As we know from Lesson One, intonation cannot be indicated by 1PA symbols, and 
there is no other generally agreed system for writing intonation down. In this manual, 
therefore, we use conventional orthography, but without any punctuation, and we 
mark off tone units with double slashes, as in the following example: 
// When he finally arrived // he discovered his friends had already left // 
With the notions of utterance and tone unit, we have now introduced the last of the 
units of speech we consider in this manual: We can say that connected speech consists 
of utterances; an utterance is made up of one or more tone units; a tone unit is made up 
of one or more feet; a foot comprises one or more syllables; and a syllable consists of 
one or more phonemes. 
Intonation patterns 
Within a tone unit, one or more syllables are usually more prominent than others. The 
last prominent syllable in a tone unit is called the tonic syllable, or nucleus. The tonic 
syllable is the syllable on which the main pitch movement begins. The pitch movement 
may be restricted to the tonic syllable, but often it continues from the tonic syllable to 
the end of the tone unit. The tonic syllable, as well as being prominent, is said to carry 
tonic stress, or nuclear stress, and it is this tonic stress which determines the particular 
intonation pattern, or tone. The convention we adopt in this manual is that syllables 
which carry stress are written in capital letters, and tonic syllables are written in capital 
letters and are underlined. 
We shall consider five different intonation patterns, or tones, in RP: fall, rise, 
fall-rise, rise-fall, and high key (where the whole intonation contour is at a raised 
pitch). These tones can be indicated by the symbols ^ (for fall), * (for rise), 
(for 
fall-rise), 
(for rise-fall), and 0 (for high key). The symbols are placed before the 
tone unit, as in the following examples: 
// WHERE do you LTVE // 
(neutral question) 
// WHERE have you B E E N / / 
(angry parent to a child) 
II I'll BE there S O O N // 
(reassurance) 
<?W/ The FILM was WONderful // 
(emphatic statement) 
0 
// H O W much did you PAY// 
(question signalling surprise at the price) 
Figures 5 and 6 illustrate a rise tone of a male voice and a fall-rise tone of a female 
voice, respectively, recorded by a spectrograph. Notice how the male voice has a much 
lower fundamental frequency, averaging around 120 hertz, than the female voice, 
which averages around 300 hertz. The contours also show that intonation is not a 
smooth phenomenon, but has many minor local perturbations. These smaller fluctua-
tions play only a minor role in intonation as such, but undoubtably contribute to voice 
quality. 

122 
Lesson Twelve 
F0 (Hz) 
150 H 
100 H 
50 
1 
2 
3 
Time (s) 
I kept lying 
there thinking how it 
might really be true 
Fig. 5 Rise tone of a male voice. 
F0 (Hz) 
400 H 
300 
200 
Would 
0.5 
you 
like 
1.0 
cup 
of 
Fig. 6 Fall-rise tone of a female voice. 
1-5 
Time (s) 
tea? 
Tone unit structure 
In Lesson Seven, we analysed the structure of the syllable, and noted that it has tF, 
components: onset, centre, and coda. In a similar way, the structure of the tone u 
' 
be further analysed into four components. We already know that the tonic syH 
y 
can 

Intonation 
123 
(TS), or nucleus, is the last prominent syllable in a tone unit. The head (H) is that part 
of a tone unit which extends from the first prominent syllable up to, but not including, 
the tonic syllable. The pre-head (PH) spans all the less prominent syllables before the 
head. And the tail (T) comprises all the syllables that occur between the tonic syllable 
and the end of the tone unit. We can mark off the four components of tone units with a 
vertical line, as in the following examples: 
* 
// 
WHERE do you [ LIVE 
// 
H 
| TS 
? 
// 
WHERE have you 
| BEEN 
// 
h 
| t s 
<a& 
II 
I'll | BE there 
SOON 
// 
PH 
| 
H 
| TS 
V<A 
II 
The | FILM was 
| WON- |-derful 
\ II 
PH | 
H 
| TS 
| 
T 
0 
// 
HOW much did you 
| PAY 
// 
H 
I TS 
Functions of intonation 
As was mentioned earlier in this lesson, intonation has four functions. A full descrip-
tion of all the different ways in which intonation works within each of these broad 
functional categories is beyond the scope of this manual. However, it is well worth 
knowing a few general points about what the different contours signal. 
Fall. Apart from being the most neutral tone in RP, the fall can signal finality and defi-
niteness. It is surprising that many textbooks describe the rise as the standard tone for 
questions. In fact, it is the fall that is quite normal for neutral questions beginning with 
a question word. Examples: 
There were three people there. 
That's all I have to say. 
How are you? Where are you going? What time is it? 

1 2 4 
Lesson Twelve 
Rise. The rise is used for yes/no questions, for questions which are requests for a r e p e -
tition of an answer, and for listing items (except the last item in a list, which is normally-
given a fall). When the speaker takes an authoritative or dominant role in the discourse, 
the rise is also commonly used, for example in questions in an aggressive interview, in 
instructions, or in commands. Examples: 
Do you live near here? Can I help you? 
Apples, oranges, bananas, and pears. 
When did your fever start? 
First turn left, then turn right. 
Fall-rise. The fall-rise is generally used to confirm an equal participation in the dis-
course. Thus it is used to refer to shared information, to confirm information, to ask for 
permission, and to reassure. Examples: 
We're leaving at seven, aren't we? 
We can't afford it, it's too expensive. 
May I open the window? 
It'll be alright. 
Rise-fall. The rise-fall is used to express strong personal impression. It can be used t o 
convey a strong positive attitude, or to express surprise. Examples: 
That's a lovely view! 
What a goal! 
High key. The high key is normally used to express surprise, strong disagreement, and 
sometimes strong agreement. Examples: 
Only 28? I thought you were at least 35! 
Actually, I think you're wrong! 
I quite agree! 
These tones can all be identified in the spoken text in the practical section of Lesson 
Twelve. The analysis has been limited to marking the overall tone contour, without 
breaking the tone unit down into pre-head, head, tonic syllable, and tail. As the number 
of theoretically possible combinations of intonation contours that may be applied to 
any exchange is relatively high, we have transcribed only the spoken text. 

Exercises 
125 
EXERCISES 
12.1 Transcribe the following text into I PA symbols 
Yet again he was late. She couldn't put up with it much longer. She was always on time; 
why couldn't he do the same? Travelling from Elephant and Castle at that time of night 
is no joke; waiting at the station was even worse. Yes she'd have to tell him it wasn't any 
good being left to wait for hours in the rain. 
"You're here at last. I've been hanging around getting more and more infuriated 
with thinking about your terrible time-keeping. How would you enjoy it?" 
"Yes sorry. I couldn't get away from the office. Actually, I would get here on time 
every week if it wasn't for the great mess that's always left for me to clear up. Then I 
have to settle the accounts and shut down the whole system. It takes forever." 
"That's no excuse. We're supposed to have this time just for ourselves." 
148 words 
12.2 Transcribe the spoken dialogue on the CD into IPA symbols 
Track 34 and tracks 35-40 
108 words 
12.3 Apply the intonation transcription convention to the spoken dialogue of 12.2 


Appendix I: Solutions to the exercises 
3 3 
door 
four 
vote 
shore 
more 
tore 
saw 
paw 
zoom 
jaw 
law 
think 
nor 
raw 
sing 
chore 
bore 
there 
war 
core 
horse 
gore 
your 
treasure 
/d/ 
/f/ 
NI 
m 
Iml 
III 
Isl 
IVI 
Izl 
m 
III 
IQI 
In/ 
Irl 
Ixil 
Itj/ 
lb/ 
16/ 
Iwl 
Ik/ 
IW 
iQl 
m 
M 
reducing degree of obstruction 
IPA symbol 
plosives 
/d/,/t/,/p/,/b/,/k/, Ig 
affricates 
/dj/, /tf/ 
nasals 
/m/, Ini, /rj/ 
fricatives 
If/, NI, /J/, /s/, Izl, IQI, loi, /h/, hl 
laterals 
III 
approximants 
Ixl, Iwl, 1)1 
3.4 
bilabial labio-
dental 
dental 
alveolar 
post-
dveolar 
palato-
alveolar 
?alatal velar 
I ottal 
plosives )aw bore 
/pi Ibi 
tore door 
Iti Idi 
core gore 
IkJ Iql 
affricates 
chore jaw 
Af/ 
Ate/ 
nasals 
slit 
fricatives 
more 
Iml 
four vote 
/il 
M 
think there 
IQI loi 
nor 
Ini 
sing 
to/ 
horse 
Ihl 
groove 
fricatives 
saw zoom 
Isl Izl 
shore treasure 
III 
til 
laterals 
law 
III 
approxi-
mants 
raw 
Ixl 
your 
Iii 
w a i 
M 

128 
3.5a 
IPA symbol 
distinctive feature 
rope 
robe 
IVI 
lb/ 
right 
ride 
hl 
Idi 
home 
hope 
Imi 
IVI 
link 
sing 
Ikl 
Iti 
leave 
leap. 
hl 
Ini 
word 
bird 
/w/ 
Ibi 
think 
zinc 
IBI 
Izl 
yeast 
feast 
IH 
hi 
3.5b 
home 
Rome 
comb 
rice 
vice 
nice 
your 
four 
jaw 
ship 
hip 
lip 
thin 
shin 
chin 
Ihl 
Ixl 
Ikl 
Ixl 
hi 
In/ 
IY 
Ifl 
Afe/ 
M 
/hi 
IV 
/e/ 
IV 
hi/ 
source 
force 
course 
horse 
tap 
map 
nap 
Is/ 
HI 
Ikl 
Ihl 
Ixl 
/ml 
Ini 
IGI 
intensity 
intensity 
intensity, manner 
intensity, manner 
intensity, place, manner 
place, manner 
intensity, place 
intensity, place, manner 
3.6a 
dot 
cat 
few 
measure 
top 
age 
vine 
bottle 
hot 
stop 
waste 
mum 
path 
able 
north 
itch 
log 
sport 
song 
than 
post 
thumb 
zebra 
five 
/dt/ 
/kt/ 
/fj/ 
lm.2,1 
hp/ 
/ a y 
/vn/ 
/buy 
/ht/ 
/stp/ 
/wst/ 
/mm/ 
IpQI 
Ml 
/nO/ 
h\l 
/lg/ 
/spt/ 
/ S I ] / 
/On/ 
/pst/ 
/Gm/ 
Izbxl 
/fv/ 

Solutions to the exercises 
129 
3.6b 
even 
this 
ozone 
weather 
/vn/ 
/Os/ 
/zn/ 
/wÔ/ 
leave 
brother 
witches 
away 
/lv/ 
/brb/ 
/wtjz/ 
/w/ 
very 
choir 
ducks 
sow 
/vr/ 
/kw/ 
/dks/ 
/s/ 
cuff 
thin 
hens 
pure 
/kf/ 
/0n/ 
/hnz/ 
/pj/ 
fine 
seen 
foxes 
faith 
/fn/ 
/sn/ 
/fksz/ 
/f6/ 
tough 
easy 
bus 
mouth 
Af/ 
/z/ 
/bs/ 
/m9/ 
awful 
breathe 
bust 
morning 
MI 
/br5/ 
/bst/ 
/mnrj/ 
3.6c 
new 
church 
unit 
finger 
/nj/ 
/tftf/ 
/jnt/ 
/%/ 
thank 
switch 
ache 
singer 
/erjk/ 
/swtj/ 
/k/ 
/srj/ 
rabbit 
gin 
smash 
cure 
/rbt/ 
/d 3n/ 
/smjV 
/kj/ 
car 
dreamed 
treasure 
other 
Ikl 
/drmd/ 
/trs/ 
/5/ 
kite 
tablet 
judge 
atlas 
logging 
stick 
ice 
pleasure 
eyes 
thought 
broth 
the 
/kt/ 
libili 
/d 3dV 
/tls/ 
/lgq/ 
/stk/ 
/s/ 
/pfe/ 
/z/ 
/et/ 
/br6/ 
15/ 
4.3 
heel 
hair 
ñb 
leg 
back 
thu 
ear 
cure eye 
iron 
i'v.l III 
Id 
lati 
/ea/ lid 
lud 
/ai/ 
/aio/ 
4.4a 
thumb 
arm 
body 
jaw 
face 
boy 
nose 
brow 
player 
employer mower shower 
/ A / 
/a:/ 
ID/ 
lo:l 
/ei/ 
/oil 
hd 
/ao/ 
leid 
/ais/ 
/aua/ 
/aus/ 
foot tooth girl 
finger 
Id 
/u:/ 
/3:/ 
/a/ 
1. 
close 
3. 
IPA 
1. 
open 
3. 
IPA 
1. 
mid 
3. 
IPA 
peak bead eat 
I'r.I 
spook boot food 
/u:/ 
pick 
bid 
drink HI 
put 
wood cook /o/ 
puck bud 
fuss / A / 
pack bad 
chat 
/ae/ 
pot 
bog 
wash /o/ 
park 
bard 
start 
la:/ 
peck bed 
rest 
/e/ 
perk 
bird 
work 
h:l 
pork bored walk 
h:l 
upper about sofa 
hi 

front 
2. 
3. 
IPA 
2. 
back 
3. 
IPA 
1. 
2. 
central 
3. 
I P A 
peak bead eat 
l\:l 
spool it boot 
food 
Imi 
perk 
bird 
work 
/ 3 : / 
pick 
bid 
drink III 
put 
wood 
cook 
Id 
puck 
bud 
fuss 
Ul 
peck bed 
rest 
Id 
pork bored 
walk 
h:l 
upper 
about 
sofa 
/ a / 
pack bad 
chat Iddi 
pot 
bog 
wash 
Id 
park 
bard 
start 
/a:/ 
4.4b 
centring 
closing to III 
closing to /u/ 
1. 
2. 
3. 
IPA 
1. 
2. 
3. 
IPA 
1. 
2. 
3. 
I P A 
bear 
pair care led 
bay 
paste 
waist 
/ei/ 
boat 
poke 
toast 
beer 
pier fear 
lid 
by 
pie 
write 
/ai/ 
bound pound house / a u / 
moor poor tour lud 
boy 
poison boil 
hit 
/ a u / 
It is useful to familiarise yourself with these vowel tables, and even to write d o w n y o u 
own sets of sounds. Often it helps to think of a group or family of words with r e l a t e d 
senses that can act as a mnemonic. For instance, the group of animals sheep, fish 
fa 
cat would represent the four front vowels, as would cheese, chips, bread, apples if y
Q ' 
chose food as the theme of your example words. Snake, fly, oyster, goat, owl or st 
u 
• 
• ^ ^ 
^ 
. ! 
1 1 
1 
1 
1 - 1 1 
4.5 
e r 
, 
u l 
U l n , 1 , .-pen door; his broken foot rested on a short piece of wood. H i s b r o t K 
Charles tried to creep past without waking him, but Charles s shoes had very 
s l i
p
p
e
r
y 
soles and his laces were undone: He slipped over, knocked the wood and woke u p 
p
o
o
r 
Tohn Both men were on the floor when Jill came in laughing loudly. She said s h e 
thought there had been some kind of accident. Now it was Charles who would h a v e t o 
spend the day resting on the sofa. 

Solutions to the exercises 
131 
5.1 
Sharon worked across the living room wondering what she should do about the news 
she had just received. She tried to appear calm and resist getting angry: Sharon's youn-
ger brother had phoned to arrange his stay with her next week. The problem was that 
she wanted to escape the hot city for the weekend and that would mean leaving George 
all alone without any company. 
"He knows so few friends of mine, he doesn't like films or concerts and be hates 
places when they are empty," thought Sharon. 
"There is nothing I can do about it except stay here this weekend - or perhaps if he 
uses Kate's boyfriend's flat instead. I'm sure Charles's place is big enough for two," she 
assured herself. 
"Yes! Of course Charles wouldn't mind putting him up in the guest room with the 
single bed." 
"Right. I'm going to ring him straight away." 
[faeran wa:kt' akros 5a hvirj ru:m WAndani] wDt J r Jud du
3 abaut 5a
4 nju:z Ji had d3ASt 
nskvd
5 Ji traid
5 tu
3 apia ka:m and nzizt getirj aerjgri
6,7 faeranz
8 JAnga
9 brA5a had faond
5 tu
3 
aremd3 hiz stei wi6 h3: nekst wi:k 5a problam W D Z Sat Ji wDntid
1 0 tu
3 iskeip 5a hDt siti
1 1 
fa 5a wi-.kend and 5aet
12 wud mi:n lirvirj d3a:d3 a:l alaun wiSaut eni" kAmpani
1 1 
hi nauz
1 3 sao fju: frendz
1 4 av mam hi dAzant
1 3 laik filmz
1 4 a: konsats'
5 and hi heits
1 6 
pleisiz
1 7 wen 5ei a: empti 9a:t Jaeran 
Sea iz nAuir] ai kan du
3 abaut it iksept stei hia 5is wi:kend a: parhaeps if hi
1 8 ju:ziz
1 9 keits
2 0 
baifrendz
8 flaet msted aim fa: tfadziz
2 1 pleis iz big anAf fa: tu: fi
2 afa:d h3:self 
jes av ka:s tja:lz wudant maind putirj him Ap in 5a gest ru:m wi5
2 2 Sa sirjgal
6 bed 
rait aim gauirj ta nrj him streit awei] 
1 Past-tense ending [t] after fortis consonants, except after FT/. 
2 
The pronouns HE, SHE, WE, ME are transcribed with [l], unless followed by a vowel or the 
semi-vowel /')/. Then we use intermediate [i]. 
Intermediate [u] before vowels. 
The definite article the is usually transcribed [8s], unless followed by a vowel. 1 hen we use 
intermediate [i]. 
Past-tense ending [d] after vowels and lenis consonants, except after /d/. 
When <ng> occurs in the middle of a morpheme, it is pronounced [ng]. 
In the word ANGRY, the spelling <y> at the end of the word is represented by intermediate 
Possessive'S is transcribed [z] after vowels and lenis consonants, except after the lenis sibi-
lants, IZ, I, D^L. 
r 11 
A 
Even when <ng> occurs at the end of a morpheme, it is pronounced [rjg] when it is followed 
by the comparative suffix -ER. 
Past-tense ending [id] after IT! or ID!. 
As in note 7, intermediate [i] representing the spelling <y> at the end of a word. 

132 
A p p e n d i x ! 
1 2 
When that is demonstrative, it takes the full form [ftaet]. 
1 3 
Third-person singular -s is transcribed [z] after vowels and lenis consonants, except after t h e 
lenis sibilants, /z, 3, D$/. 
1 4 
Plural -5 is transcribed [z] after vowels and lenis consonants, except after the lenis sibilants / z 
3,d 3/. 
1 5 
Plural -s is transcribed [s] after fortis consonants, except after the fortis sibilants, /s, J, tj"/ 
1 6 
Third-person singular -s is transcribed [s] after fortis consonants, except after the fortis sibi-
lants, /s, J, tj7. 
1 7 
Plural -5 is transcribed [iz] after sibilants, /s, z, J, 3, tj", dj/. 
1 8 
Intermediate [i] before the semi-vowel /')/. 
1 9 
Third-person singular -s is transcribed [iz] after sibilants, /s, z, \, 3, tj, d 3/. 
2 0 
Possessive's is transcribed [s] after fortis consonants, except after the fortis sibilants, /s, J" tjy 
2 1 
Possessive 's is transcribed [iz] after sibilants, /s, z, J, 3, tj, (Ì3/. 
2 2 
In this manual, we use the lenis [Ô] in our transcriptions of with. 
r-f « had kokt
1 S A
P
9 bAt heimij wontid
2 OABU] tu
3 i:t hi ni.d.d
2 tarn, to Gink hi W M i d ^ d * 
StpandC' o:l 50 piktjiz
5 and boks> ht had pleist' s,o M h ' - o n d 5 , 
flaet 
d 3ois o-.lwetz taidiz
8'
9 6inz
5
 9wei h. sed te himself 
ai staekt
1 Ò:Ì 09 nju: bits
6 and pi:siz
l° jo hod sksetod* evnweo
11 m ta ho:l f i
1 2 a:ns3d< h i z 
eo:ts
6 
ftauz w3-ks
6
 9v a:t d33:n9lz> ond dai 9riz^
1 J a: PreJ9s to mi
1 2 i:v 9n if dsois O a k s " ô e
3 a u t 
9 V faejon nau 9nd not w 3:6 mMj hi mAt9d< kwaiotli
7 te himself 
- 1 m*n 9 9v obcfeikts"
5 fr 9m heimijiz" feim.s btAÔ.z'
7 hju:d5 autput'
8 in hiz; Jo* t a i m 
3
2 
I \Z amst nau t3:nd< pop sup" klogd* A
P evri
7 tntj 9v speis in 5o kxaempt flaet nau * 
Ld stoof 9nd hng9d^° m frAnt 9v hiz feivnt
15 piktjs hi
1 2
 9do:d it hiz fing9-° treist' 
3 
ÏettZ Tros trnid, fo tu: 1«,» hi h 9d wetttd
2 f9 SMntìirj tu' aks: in hiz laif 
deivid gets
14 on WIÔ 9,nz
5 ond maemd^.z
22 tu
3 end.oi laif s9o dAZ
23 d5ois hi
1 2 e n v i a i ' 9o:t 
n " ootid
2 te H:v him 9l 9on 9nd h.upt' h, wod ntam te 09 teibal leite 
au9z> fi h
3
d b i n 
L b d ' bai Annienta kraodz* ov .dmaiW> f W egd< on ba, * kreizd m u t o h s : l
e
i
t
3
s
t 
rv9l wept' n9u sobd< wiô tmoofon red W A U nvju: heimif w 9z sik wiô envi d 3 o i s w
3
2 
9 U V 9 ô 9 mu:n] 
Past-tense ending [t] after fortis consonants, except after III. 
Past-tense ending [id] after /t/ or LUI. 
Intermediate [u] before vowels. 
Past-tense ending [d] after vowels and lenis consonants, except after lui. 
Plural -s transcribed [z] after vowels and lenis consonants, except after the lenis sibilants, /z, 3 
Plural -s transcribed [s] after fortis consonants, except after the fortis sibilants, /s, f, tf/ 
Intermediate [i] when the spelling is <y> at the end of a word, such as fairly, very, or l a t i 

Solutions to the exercises 
133 
Intermediate [i] because of the underlying spelling <y> in tidy. 
Third-person singular -s transcribed [z] after vowels and lenis consonants, except after the 
lenis sibilants, Iz, 3, d3/. 
Plural -s transcribed [iz] after sibilants, /s, z, f, 3, tj, dj/. 
Intermediate [i] because the underlying spelling is with a <y>: every in everywhere. 
The pronouns he, she, we, me are transcribed with [1], unless followed by a vowel or the 
semi-vowel 1)1. Then we use intermediate [i]. 
The triphthong [aia] occurs here. 
Third-person singular -s transcribed [s] after fortis consonants, except after the fortis sibi-
lants, Is, J, tJV. 
Unstressed vowel occurring as [1], rather than schwa, [3]. 
Possessive's transcribed [iz] after sibilants, /s, z, J, 3, tj, d3/. 
1 7 
Possessive's transcribed [z] after vowels and lenis consonants, except after the lenis sibilants, 
/z, 3, oV. 
Unstressed vowel occurring as [u], rather than schwa, [a]. 
When <ng> occurs at the end of a morpheme, it is simply pronounced [rj]. 
When <ng> occurs in the middle of a morpheme, it is pronounced [rjg]. 
The definite article the is usually transcribed [5a], unless followed by a vowel. Then we use 
intermediate [i]. 
Third-person singular -s transcribed [iz] after sibilants, /s, z, J, 3i
 rf> dy • 
Third-person singular -s transcribed [z] after vowels and lenis consonants, except after the 
lenis sibilants, Iz, 3, d3/. 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
6.1 
Mary's loose change jangled in her pockets. A strongish cup of coffee was what she 
needed now. Every Thursday morning she goes to the gym and practises her aerobic 
technique and strengthens her tendons since she is training for a long distance race. 
More often than not she meets up with her ex-boss Jane, who belongs to the same 
sports club. 
The caffeine started to work and Mary felt much better after the strenuous work-
out. Jane had arrived five minutes before Mary and was already sitting on a sofa and 
studying the menu while sipping on her mango juice cocktail when Mary had walked in 
and plonked herself down next to her. 
"I feel better for that," Mary said brightly, pushing the tiny cup made of china 
across the tray and staring out of the cafe window at the store opposite. 
She nudged Jane. 
"I just saw Angela appearing from Jones's shoes across the road. I thought she was 
in Geneva, or somewhere in Switzerland," she whispered to her friend. 
[meariz
1 2 lu:s tjemds djaeqgld
3'
4 in ha pokits
5 a stroqif kAp av kDfi
7 waz wot f 1 ni:did
8 nao 
evri
1 0 3:zdei ma:mq fi gauz
9 ta 5a d 3im and praektisiz
10 har" araubik tekni.k and 
streqeanz
9'
1 2 ha tendanz
1 3 sins f i
1 4 iz tremiq far
1 1 a loq
6 distans reis ma:r
u Dftan 5an not Ji 
mi:ts
1 5 Ap wi5 har
1 1 eks bos d3em hu: biloqz
6'
9 ta 5a seim spa:ts
5 kUb 

134 
A p p e n d i x l 
Öa kaefi:n sta:tid8 ta W3:k and meari feit niAtJ betar" a:fta öa strenjuas'
6 W3:kaut d 3 e i n 
had araivd 4 faiv minits
5 bafa: meari and waz adredi
1 sitirj nn a saufa
r 1 7 and stAdiirj 1 8 ö
3 
menju: wail sipirj on ha maengau
3 d3u:s kükteil wen meari had wa:kt
1 9 in and plorjkt 1 9 
haself daun nekst ta ha 
ai fi:l beta fa Öaet meari sed braitli1 pufirj Öa taini1 kAp meid av tjaina r 1 7 akros Öa trei a n d 
Stearin 1 1 aut av 5a kaefei WINDAU at 5a sta:r" opazit 
Ji nAd 3d 4 dsem 
ai d3ASt sa: r 1 7 aend3alar17 apiann" fram d3aonsiz 2 0 Ju:z
1 J akros Öa raud ai 6a:t Ji waz 
m 
d3ani:va r 1 7 a: SAmwear
1 1 in switsaland Ji wispad
4 ta ha frend] 
1 
Intermediate [i] when the spelling is <y> at the end of a word, such as fairly, very, or lady 
2 
Possessive's transcribed [z] after vowels and lenis consonants, except after the lenis sibilants 
/z, 3, d3/-
When <ng> occurs in the middle of a morpheme, it is pronounced [rjg]. 
Past-tense ending [d] after lenis consonants, except after /d/. 
Plural -5 transcribed [s] after fortis consonants, except after the fortis sibilants, /s, J, tf/ 
When <ng> occurs at the end of a morpheme, it is simply pronounced [rj]. 
Intermediate [i] for the spelling <ee> at the end of a word when the syllable is unstressed 
8 
Past-tense ending [id] after /t/ or Idi. 
9 
Third-person singular -s transcribed [z] after vowels and lenis consonants, except after the 
lenis sibilants, /z, 3, d3/. 
1 0 
Third-person singular -s transcribed [iz] after the sibilants, Is, z, f, 3, tj, d3/. 
1 1 
Linking r. 
1 2 
When <ng> occurs at the end of a morpheme, it is pronounced [rj]; this is so in the consonant 
cluster [rj9] at the end of the morpheme [strerjG] in the word strengthens. 
1 3 
Plural -s transcribed [z] after vowels and lenis consonants, except after the lenis sibilants, Iz, 3 d^/ 
1 4 
The pronouns he, she, we, me are transcribed with [1] unless followed by a vowel or th 
semi-vowel / j / . Then we use intermediate [TJ. 
Third-person singular -5 transcribed [s] after fortis consonants, except after the fortis sib* 
lants, Is, J, tf/. 
Intermediate [u] for the spelling <u> in <uous>. 
1 7 
Intrusive r. 
1 8 
Intermediate [i] when the spelling is <y> at the end of a word, and this is so in the u n d e r l y i n 
form study. 
^ 
1 9 
Past-tense ending [t] after fortis consonants, except after III. 
2 0 
Possessive's transcribed [iz] after sibilants, Is, z, J, 3, tf, ds/. 
15 
16 

Solutions to the exercises 
135 
6.2 
[debra
r l aopand
2 har
3 aiz
4 and 5en blinkt
5 agen
6 
Öea niAst bi SAmöiq rorj a:r
3 aim drkmin Ji m3:mad
2 ta haself 
Ji si:md
2 ta bi fiArjgri
7'
8 93:sti
8 and taiad
2 o:l tageöar
3 at WAnts on Öa si:lirj Ji kad meik aot 
a sma:l traiaengl
7 dairektli
8 abAv har
3 av a do:kar
3 ormd3 ageinst
9 5a rest av Öa rAsti
8 
kAlad
2 pemt 
hao a jo fhlirj tadei ekaod
2 a vois frani 5a saofa'
1 in Öa kamar
3 av Öa ru:m 
wel Öeaz
1 0 a tirjglirj
7 in mai tauz
4 mai firjgaz
4'
7 a stinirj
1 1 and mai hedz
1 0 bAZirj laik kreizi
8 
mai d 3a:
r l and nek stil eik bat auvarad
3 aim beta Öan jestadei fi nplaid
2 Ankan'vinsinh
8 
debraz
1 2 doktar
3 Dftan vizitid
1 3 d3ASt aiftar
3 i:vnirj mialtaim and a:skt
5 a nAmbar
3 av 
kwestfanz
4 bifair
3 asesirj weoar
3 a: not ta pnskraib
1 4 eni
8 nju: pilz
4 a: taeblats
1 5 hi tok hiz 
taim hi lirjgad
2 7 hi laikt
5 ta dra:
r l aot Öi
16 aegani
8 
adrait tu: ekstra
r l md3ek[anz
4 av ma:fi:n hi disaidid
1 3 bat fa nao honga
1 7 Öan 9ri: deiz
4 
dispart ha fiAngar
3'
7 and 93:st debra waz nli:vd
2 wen öi
1 6 Dd Jeip abAv ha nsi:did
1 3 inta Öa 
rest av Öa si:lirj and Ji dnftid
1 3 Df mtu
1 8 anAÖa di:p sli:p] 
Intrusive r. 
Past-tense ending [d] after lenis consonants, except after IDI. 
Linking R. 
. 
Plural -S transcribed [z] after vowels and lenis consonants, except after the lenis sibilants, /z, 3, d3/. 
Past-tense ending [t] after fortis consonants, except after ITI. 
[sgein] is also possible. 
When <ng> occurs in the middle of a morpheme, it is pronounced [rjg]. 
Intermediate [i] when the spelling is <y> at the end of a word, such as fairly, very, or lady. 
This may also be pronounced [agenst]. 
Short form of auxiliary IS is transcribed [z] after vowels and lenis consonants, except after the 
lenis sibilants, /z, 3, d3/. 
When <ng> occurs at the end of a morpheme, it is simply pronounced [rj]. 
1 2 
Possessive'S transcribed [z] after vowels and lenis consonants, except after the lenis sibilants, 
/z, 3, ay. 
1 3 Past-tense ending [id] after ITI or IDI, 
1 4 Unstressed [1] in the prefix pre-. 
1 5 Plural -S transcribed [s] after fortis consonants, except after the fortis sibilants, IS, J, tj/. 
The definite article THE is usually transcribed [5a], unless followed by a vowel. Then we use 
intermediate [i]. 
. .. 
, 
Even when <ng> occurs at the end of a morpheme, it is pronounced fag] when it is followed 
by the comparative suffix -ER. 
Intermediate [u] before vowels. 
] 1 
16 
17 

136 
A p p e n d i x I 
7.1 
[ckauzif waz sktid Dn hiz baelkani in 5a fi.bl
1 llu:mrne.Jn
2 av 5a mail ik'stiqgwijt
3 SAn 
5 s 
dei waz nau loqga hot and ig'zotik
3 b 3:dz mmgld
1 wi5 5a daurj reiz swu.pin a:fta k l a u d z 
av hDvrin
4 midjiz hi lukt aut auva 5a nva reidjirj in 5a vaeli fild vyio hju:d 3 inks b i l a u 5 a 
ro-r
5 av gAjin wa:ta defnd
6 hiz iaz and a faint sprei ps.mieitid
7 5a ku:l e a n a . m a l i h i 
mdcsiz a drink sits Anpa't3:bd and wifiz awei 5i auaz bAt 6is kvnin
8 haepnd
9 tu b i A n l a i k 
eni A53I-
5 i:vnin
8 
aiv fmift tfaepta sevn
1 0 hi Bo:t and ntn" 5a brginiq av sekjn
2 tu: 
hi waz su:'pri:mli pli:zd sins hiz deili efats far
5 a god fju: niAnBs had Df(t)n
6-
1 2 e n d i d 
m 
disa'pamtmant and frAS'treiJn
2 fa SAIH ri:zn'
3 5a ra:
t M ai'diaz hi waz toiiq wi5 h a d f o :
m
d 
Samselvz mtu a 'korjkri-.t and kanvmsiq haul Sat nali W3.kt 
a:l ai haev
1 5 ta du iz ki:p Dn gaum laik Sis in 5is ' P3:fikt sitjueifn
2 1 6 1 7 and ail bi TINIJT B A I 
dju:n nekst jia] 
Syllabic [j] for the spelling <le> at the end of a word. 
Syllabic [n] because of the preceding palatoalveolar fricative [J]. 
3 
Compare the lenis sequence /igz/ for <ex> in EXOTIC with the fortis sequence /iks/ for <ex> " 
EXTINGUISHED. 
May be pronounced with either a syllabic [r] as indicated, or with a short schwa [hDvarirj] 
Linking r. 
Syllabic [n] in the unstressed syllable, following the labiodental fricative /f/. 
Intermediate [i] in the syllable spelt <iate>. 
Syllabic [n] in the unstressed syllable, following the labiodental fricative /v/. 
Syllabic [n] in the unstressed syllable, following the bilabial plosive /p/. 
Syllabic [n] in this environment after the labiodental fricative /v/. 
Syllabic [n] in this environment after the alveolar plosive /t/. 
There is omission of the alveolar plosive /t/ in the consonant cluster /ftn/. Omitted sounds 
enclosed in parentheses, (). You will learn more about omission of sounds in Lesson INT"
3^ 
but the transcription of often is best learnt like this.
 
1 '
U ' 
Syllabic [n] in this environment after the alveolar fricative /z/. 
1 4 
Intrusive r. 
1 5 
Strong form of HAVE because it is stressed. 
1 6 
The palatoalveolar fricative [f] may be pronounced here: [sitjuei/n]. 
1 7 
Intermediate [u] in the syllable spelt <uate>. 
13 
7.2 
[aopniq
1 5a botl
2 'minam
3 kudnt
4 Anda'staend
5 wai 5ar
í > 7 apiad to bi
8 klaodi 
' s e d i
m 
dnftiq Ap fram 5a botín
9 av 5i ikskwizitli
1 0 sentid traenz'lu^nt" hkwid Ji had b i n
1 2 a j o - ^ 
bai 5a seilzman 5at a nju: metí
1 4 filtreijn
1 5 sistam had auva'kAm
1 6 3:ha problamz a l
a 
wam ta bi
8 pradju:st 5at waz i:zi ta dnqk streit fram 5a bDtl
2 
U
l
l
] 

Solutions to the exercises 
137 
Dn ôis savais Ji had p3:tfast not d 3Ast wAn bat 6ri: keisiz av Ôa fainast auk matjjaid
1 7 red 
nau Ji waz WAndnrj
1 8 az Ji kaerid Dn pa:nrj weôa jet agein Ansa'spektirjli Ji had bin npt of 
bai an An'skru:pjulas
19 inda'vid3ual Ôa fainl
1 4 gnti drop splaejt intu a sevnB
2 0 gla:s miriam 
said and haupt Ôat naubadi wud nautis Ôa kAla li:st av a:l ôa teist av h3: prefas 'vmtid3] 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
Syllabic [n] is probably nearly always used in this context, is given as the pronunciation in 
most dictionaries, and here conforms to our guideline from Lesson Seven: The syllabic [n] is 
especially frequent when /n/ is preceded by an alveolar plosive or fricative in unstressed 
syllables. 
Syllabic [1] for the spelling <le> at the end of a word. 
Stress marked because it falls on "lighter" monophthong, rather than the diphthong. 
Normally pronounced in its weak form with the syllabic nasal [n]. Also conforming to note 1 
above. 
Stress normally falls on the second word in compounds with under-, but stress is sometimes 
used to distinguish two senses of a word. For example, underground, which may be an adjec-
tive meaning 'below the surface of the earth' /Anda'graund/ or a noun meaning 'people in a so-
ciety who are trying new and often shocking or subversive ways of living' /'Andagraond/. This 
exemplifies a contrastive stress distinction in English: Nouns tend to have stress on the first 
syllable, verbs and adjectives on the second (in this case it is the third syllable that carries 
stress because schwa is always unstressed). 
In this context, there is an indefinite adverb, and would normally be pronounced [5a] when 
followed by a consonant, or [6ar] with a linking r when followed by a vowel. When there oc-
curs as a demonstrative adverb, it is pronounced [5ea] when followed by a consonant, as in 
it's over there near the door [its auva 5ea ma 5a do:], or [5ear] with a linking r when followed 
by a vowel, as in there it is [5ear it izj. (See also Lesson Eight on weak forms.) 
Linking r. 
The speaker seems to use intermediate [i] here. 
Syllabic [m] in this environment after the alveolar plosive III. 
Stress on second syllable. 
The ending <ent> is normally transcribed with syllabic [n], especially after alveolar plosives 
or fricatives. 
This pronunciation of been with intermediate [i] rather than [i] seems to be becoming stan-
dard in RP. 
You may hear a slight palatal glide from the palatoalveolar fricative [[] to the back vowel [o:]: 
[Po:]. It is quite possible that you might also perceive this sequence as the diphthong /oa/ also 
preceded by a short glide: [pua]. The interpretation you arrive at is probably dependent on 
your own articulation of the word assured. 
Syllabic [1] for the spelling <al> at the end of a word. 
Syllabic [n] because of the preceding palatoalveolar fricative. 
Stress on final syllable as in note 3 above. 
The speaker here pronounces the fortis affricate, [tj], in the word matured. You may perceive 
the vowel as a long back monophthong [a:], or as a centring diphthong [oa]. 
It seems that a syllabic [r] is pronounced here, rather than a consonant cluster [ndr] or a weak 
syllable with schwa [ndar]. 
Intermediate [u] occurs here in the weak syllable represented by the spelling <pu>. 
Syllabic [n] in this environment after the labiodental fricative HI. 

138 
A p p e n d i x I 
8.1 
[5ar''
2 iz h t l 3 taim ta lu:z kAm Dn
4 wi mas
5 hAri 5a trein li:vz in ha:f an
6 aoa 
daunt paenik w i l 7 i:zili get 5ea
8 bai taeksi aiv d^ast TAI] la WAn nau 
ai had tauld djefri w i d 7 bi Sear
2 , 8 on taim fa WAns d^Adsii] frm 9 5a traefik 5is momirj wi 
Jud
1 0 bi li:virj mair
2 a les nao ja neva nao wot kn" haepn
12 on 5a wei ta 5a steifn
1 3 
ja nau wat djefri sez 5ao hi disaidid 5at hi wad du ig'zasktli wDt hi adweiz WDntid D n 5i 
hDhdei sau nau TAJ nau haesj
3 nau 'prejaraizirj 
jes bat if wia not
1 4 5ea
8 bai ten Saets
15 pnsaisli hau hil
7 bi fi:lirj and Anpndikta'bihti a
v 
5
3 
traefik iz 5a fla: r 1 6 in ja plaenz 
d u : 1 7 strjp medlirj
3 wi5 djefriz afeaz aim Ja: hi kan maenid3 'p3:tektli wel on iz
1 8 a u n ] 
1 
Weak form of there because it is an indefinite adverb, rather than a demonstrative adverb 
2 
Linking r. 
3 
Syllabic [|] for the spelling <le> at the end of a word. 
4 
The preposition on has no weak form. 
5 
Word-final alveolar plosive /t/ is usually absent before consonants in unstressed must 
Y o u 
might transcribe this sequence with stressed must: [niAst IIAIM]. 
6 
Single segment of /n/ is also possible here, in which case it would be transcribed with s y l l a r j j 
M-
7 
Normally, when a pronoun combines with an auxiliary verb, it is pronounced with e i t h e r " 
termediate [i] or intermediate [u]. 
8 
Strong form of there because it is a demonstrative adverb, rather than an indefinite adverb 
When there occurs as a demonstrative adverb, it is pronounced [Sea] when followed h 
consonant, as in it's over there near the door [its auva 5ea nia 6a do:], or [Sear] with a linki
 
& 
when followed by a vowel, as in there it is [Sear it iz]. 
9 
The preposition from is probably very short in this environment, and may be transcrib d 
with syllabic [m]. 
1 0 
Rather than the lexical participle leaving carrying stress, it is more likely that the m o d a l auxT 
iary should is stressed, thus taking a strong form. 
1 1 
The auxiliary verb can is probably very short in this environment, and may be transcrib rl 
with syllabic [n]. 
'
 l l 
1 2 
Syllabic [n] in unstressed syllable, following bilabial plosive /p/. 
1 3 
Again, syllabic [n] in unstressed syllable. This time following palatoalveolar fricative /jy 
1 4 
The full form supposes that not is stressed. 
1 5 
Strong form of that because it is a demonstrative adjective. 
1 6 
Intrusive r. 
1 7 
Strong form of do because it is emphatic. 
1 8 
A much reduced form of his is likely here. 

Solutions to the exercises 
139 
8.2 
[it wDznt
1 An'til öa jDp fainli
2 klauzd öat öa misiq stok waz nautist d 3a:d3 went streit ta öa 
'maenid3o ta tel ha Oast
3 6ru: SAm kau'insidns
4 twenti faiv paondz W 3 : 6 av kampju:ta 
panfrlz
5 had not bin teikn
6 akaont D V
7 Ö I S waz öa Ö3:d dei öat 'sAmGiq had disapiad and 
nau saeli waz bi'kArniq saspijas 
ö e a z 8 ma: ta öis Öan mi:ts öi ai fi
9 wispad to d3a:ds Mida ha bre6 ai daon(t) 1 0 wont ta bnq 
Öa la:
1 1 mta Öis bat ai mei haev
12 nau oltomativ if Giqz ki:p 'vaenijiq wiöau(t) 1 3 treis 
d3a:d 3 w a z 'wArid 1 4 oat hi w a z probabli Öa praim 'sAspekt (a)spejali 1 5 az hi had aunli 
sta:tid W3:kiq ö e a r 1 6 a nunG agau] 
The auxiliary verbs are usually used in their strong forms when they occur in negations with 
not. Here, was is a copula, rather than an auxiliary verb, but the rule still applies that negative 
forms are usually strong. 
It is possible that the alveolar nasal is perceived as syllabic [n]. 
Strong form of that occurs here probably because the speaker pauses before speaking the 
that-chuse, making it the end of a longer stretch of speech. Strong forms are normally used at 
the end of a clause or sentence. 
The spelling <ence> is normally transcribed with syllabic [n], especially after alveolar 
plosives and fricatives. 
There are two consecutive syllabic consonants here, [r] followed by [}]. 
Here, the speaker uses a syllabic [n] in the unstressed syllable. 
Strong form of of because it occurs sentence-finally. 
It is quite possible that you will perceive this sequence as [5e:z]. The vowel is strong, rather 
than weak, and is either a lengthened monophthong or a diphthong with a relatively short 
glide. 
The speaker uses an intermediate [i] in the pronoun. 
There is omission of the alveolar plosive /t/, this time in word-final position, but in the mid-
dle of the consonant cluster /ntw/ running across the word boundary. Omitted sounds are en-
closed in parentheses, (). You will learn more about omission of sounds in Lesson N i n e . 
The speaker here avoids an intrusive r. We could transcribe this phonetically as [la: mtaj. 
The verb have takes a strong form here because it is a lexical verb, rather than an auxiliary. 
The speaker omits the word-final alveolar plosive /t/, or replaces it with a glottal stop, [?]. 
Although this is a participle form of the verb worry, and therefore the second syllable cannot 
be stressed, you might like to mark stress to make the correct stress placement clearer. 
The speaker omits the /a/ from the beginning of the word especially. 
The word there has a demonstrative function, pointing to the place where George works, so it 
takes a full form, and in this instance a linking r precedes the word a. 

140 
Appendix I 
9.1 
[3-.H Dn ea-.zdei
1 ma:nin d3As(t)
2 bifa.r
3 eit aktok Öa f3:s(t)
2 ten
4 gru:ps araivd redi ta sta:t 
Öea nju: tremirj rei'3i:m
5 wiöin
5 fa-.r
3 auas
6 fju: av Öa patisipants war eibl ta n'zist Öa 
tempteijn av sitirj i:vn öau öi aunli speis left Mi'klAtad
7 wiö i'kwipmnt w a z öa fri:zirj kauld 
staum
8 fla: 
öei war
3 a:l krnplktli sapraiz(d)
9 ta fam(d)
9 öat Öea mAn(6)s
1 0 av prepareijn had bin 
ju:slas mentl 'staemina
r11 an fisikl a'd3iliti wa nkwaiad fa Öis kamd av 'eksasaiz bat 
'nauwAn ik'spektid satj gru:alirj ta:sks ta bi asain(d)
1 2 fram Öa sto:t nao Öa len(k)0
1 3 av Öa 
ha:l waz htad wiö JArj stju:dnts pAzld igza:stid and diprest 
frsenkli Öa haül Bin iz a tautl Jaemblz t(a)deiz
1 4 bin a kmplr.t
15 raitüf sad Öea trema 
tamDrau ai aentisipeit mox* and al get^tam
1 6 w3:kn
1 7 nonstop waz har
3 aonli ai'dia"
1 1 a V 
hao tu imprir.v Öear
3 a:f] pafa:mns] 
13 
14 
e 
s , „ . , , . , , ,k, , ,.i ght use intermediate [i] instead of the diphthong 
* E t o n of word-final IV in the consonant cluster /stb/. This occurs later in the middle of the 
cluster /stt/ in first ten. 
< Potibfe regressive assimilation of place: Word-final alveolar nasal to/ in the word ten assim-
ilates to velar nasal, [n], under the influence of the following velar plosive [g] in the word 
groups. Either form would probably be syllabic in fast connected speech with the elision of 
ld\ [t(e)n] or [t(e)n]. 
b 
Stress on the second syllable. 
. 
6 
Possible regressive assimilation of intensity: Word-final lenis alveolar fricative, /z/, m 
th. 
word hours assimilates to the fords alveolar fricative, [s], under the influence of the following 
fords labiodental fricative, [f], in the word/<?«>. Here, we transcribe it with the symbol [s], 
rather than the narrow transcription of [?]. Since our transcription is a broad phonetic one, 
we do not include the devoiced diacritic, [J, but we discussed this feature in Lesson Five. 
7 
Prefix KM- does not carry stress. 
. 
8 
Possible regressive assimilation of place: Word-final alveolar nasal, /n/, in the word stone as-
similates to bilabial nasal, [m], under the influence of the following labiodental fricative [f] 
m 
the word floor. 
9 
Elision of word-final Id in the consonant cluster /zdt/, and later in the consonant cluster 
/nd5/. 
1 0 
Possible elision of /6/ in the consonant cluster /nbs/. 
1 1 
Intrusive r. 
1 2 
Elision of word-final Id in the consonant cluster /ndt/. 
Elision of /k/ in the consonant cluster /qkG/. And internal regressive assimilation of place: Ve-
lar nasal, /rj/, assimilates to alveolar nasal, [n], under the influence of the following dental fri-
cative [6]. 
, 
.. , , 
Elision of schwa in the syllable [ta]. Normally, in this context, the elided segment would be 
replaced by aspiration and would be transcribed phonetically as [t
hdei]. 
Elision of schwa in the syllable [kam]. This is compensated for by making the bilabial 
n
a
s
a
l 
syllabic: [m]. 
15 

Solutions to the exercises 
141 
1 6 
Possible progressive assimilation of manner: Word-initial dental fricative IQI in the word 
them assimilates to the preceding alveolar plosive [t] in get. The two sounds are then articu-
lated as one sound, indicated by the horizontal swung line connecting them. 
1 7 
Possible elision or reduction of III with substitution by the syllabic consonant, and regressive 
assimilation of place: Syllabic velar nasal, lx]l, in the word working assimilates to the follow-
ing alveolar nasal, [n], in the word non-stop. 
9.2 
[dym pamtid tu Öa distnt
1 hilz a Ion. laiq
2 gauiq of inta Öa haraizrr 
Öaets wea wiar
4 eimirj ta get tu
5 bifa: 'sAnse(t)
6 tanait hi
7 niAtad 
it hasdnt bin
8 a gud
9 mamin m öa f 3:s(t)
1 0 pleis h i j „ j 3 : t
n had got snaegd on a wail(d)
1 2 
braembj 5en hi
7 had braukn maiks braen(dLnju:
1 3 kAtnpas hi:
1 4 wDznt at a:(l) 
ph:zd an ta 
kaep it a:l
1 6 hi had paskt 5a rom
1 7 maep 
h i j j u : z
n wa tait his
1 8 fi:t eikt his'
8 paek waz hevi
1 9 hiz
1 8 baek kamplemd 
maik traid ta tfia him A
P
2
0 bat (h)is
1 8 2 1 tjaeti djaoks aunli si:m(d)
2 2 ta meik d 3on i:vm
2 3 
ma:
2 4 obstinat maik inteitid his
1 8 praid wi6
2 5 hiz laitho:tid haepinas d 3on wud fq: ra:Öa bi 
mizrabl 
jes haikirj waz defnitli m>t his
1 8 kAp af
26 ti:] 
May also be transcribed with a weak schwa and nasal [an], where • signals 'extra short', 
though you do not need to use this diacritic in your transcriptions. 
Regressive assimilation of place: Word-final alveolar nasal, Inl, in the word line assimilates to 
velar nasal, [rj], under the influence of the following velar plosive [g] in the word going. 
This may also be heard as having a weak schwa in the final syllable: [haraizan]. 
Linking r. If you listen carefully, you might perceive this as the voiced labiodental approxi-
mant [u], a sound sometimes used by RP speakers. This could then be understood as an in-
stance of the rarely occurring non-contiguous assimilation, with all the initial sounds in 
where we're aiming becoming similar as [wea wia ueimirj]. 
Here, the intermediate [u] marks a difference in the grammatical function of the two words to 
and to in the phrase aiming to get to. The first to is adverbial while the second to is preposi-
tional and is at the end of a unit of meaning, and so it takes a fuller form. 
Elision of word-final Itl in sunset. 
This speaker uses intermediate [i] in all forms of pronouns. 
There seems to be a shorter li:l vowel here, so unstressed [i] is given in the transcription. 
The speaker avoids regressive assimilation here. Often this sequence would be pronounced 
[gob mo:nirj]. 
Elision of word-final III in the consonant cluster /stpl/. 
Regressive assimilation of voice and place: The speaker assimilates word-final voiced alveolar 
fricative, Izl, in the word his to the following voiceless palatoalveolar fricative, [f], in the 

, i n -
16 
17 
, 
'fhe two identical sounds are then merged into one prolonged pronunciation,... 
Icatd bythe lowered horizontal swung line. The same process occurs below in the case of 
» 
E ^ T T O F w o r d ^ 
b
m
n
d 
a
n
d 
l
h
e 
f
o
l
W
m
g 
n
a
s
a
l . n 
n 
El i sion of word-final 
^
J
^
J
£
™ 
t
h
a
n 
n
o
r
m
a
l 
a l v c o l a r n a s a l . This is indicatedby the 
new are pronounced a
s
o
n
e
^
g
h
f
o
r 
t h i s 
e l i s l o n b
e
c
a
u
s
e 
t
h
e 
^ 
even L e d together in some dictionaries as a lexical 
14 ^ L n g form is used here to emphasise thai it is Mike who wasn't at all pleased, 
is t 
Tdnere is elision of the word-final lateral, /l/, in all, especially because ,n this position it 
U be a dark / HI somewhat similar to the dark vowel [o], close in quality to the preceding 
t^loZzWYo* will learn about the dark / in Lesson Eleven 
TnThl case, the lateral sounds "fuller", and there is probably contact between the tongue tip 
^ b ^ 3 ^ t « r f . regressive assimilation of place: Word-final velar nasal, 
L the wlrd wrong is assimilated to the following bdab.al nasal, [m], m the word map. 
t u 
, I E R has a strongly devoiced word-final Izl, and, in fact, seems to pronounce two of 
2
S
3
S
^
5
S
S
W
- 
sequence as M 
while the first is assimilated to the following 
n Altogether these might be taken as possibly another case o non-cont.guous asstrrnUuon. 
The final instance in his back, where the following sound is lems, seems to be slightly l e s s 
Aw^REA however, so it is transcribed with [z]. 
S
H
A
K
E
R seems to pronounce Ae«y with a short [,], despite the rule whereby endings 
soelt as <y> are pronounced with intermediate [i]. 
You might notice strong aspiration here at the end of the word up. You do not have to tran-
scribe this, but we could do so thus: [\p
h]. 
Probable elision of word-initial glottal fricative, /h/, which is common in weak forms of pro-
nouns beginning in <h> when not in sentence-initial position. 
SlUion of word final /d/ in seemed. We might alternatively interpret this as a lengthened [t] 
re ulting from assimilation: The speaker, as already mentioned, has quite strong word-final 
ortis articulation, so in this context there could be regressive assimilation of the regular 
oast-tense morpheme realised as the lenis alveolar plosive, /d/, m the word seemed (because it 
follows the lenis nasal /m/) to the fortis plosive [t] under the influence of the following [ t] 
i
n 
to Then the l\l would be considered lengthened thus: [si:mdj 9]. 
Regressive assimilation of place: The speaker assimilates word-final syllabic alveolar nasal, 
in? in the word even to syllabic bilabial nasal, [in], under the influence of the following 
bilabial nasal, [m], in the word more. 
This speaker avoids the linking r here. 
, 
In keeping with the female speaker's tendency to devoice, the fortis [6 is clearly heard here. 
In keeping with the female speaker's tendency to devoice, the fortis [f] is clearly heard here. 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 

Solutions to the exercises 
143 
10.1 
[5a sta:ri sta:tid naim„niAn(e)s
1 , 2 agau a:ftar
3 o:l Òa trAbl an An'rest
4 had feidid awei liti 
did amaenda
r5 aepn hend òen 5at ha laif wo(d)
6 dramaetikli tjeind3 «nd
7 fa 5a beta ha 
tremirj hab^bin
8 in Biatar
3 an pafo:mans wi5 _5i:z
9 skilz fi had bm eibl te laend a dri:m 
pazifn in a n'spektabl kAmpani 5ea Ji had bm givn a nAmbar
3 av 'AndastAdiz maina pa:ts 
an tu: sta:rm raulz in fa:t Ji haednt weistid a seknd im^meikirj
1 a neim fa haself 
enfiar
3 apiarirj az a witf imjnakbee
1 amaenda
r 5 a:s(k)t
1 0 far
3 a Ja:t breik ta n'kAva fram a 
patikjali na:sti baut av influenza" Ji iksplemz ai seg_gu(b)J)ai
1 2 , 1 3 ta 5a 6iata wijirj 5at 
ai kab_bi
8 baek as_su:n
1 4 az posibl 
3:1 av a SAdn ai wasjsnaept
1 4 Ap fram fi:hn tenbli il ta 5a W3:lwmd av 'hmiwud bai a film 
pradju:sa hu had si:n mai fami nait im^makbeB
1] 
Probable regressive assimilation of place: Word-final alveolar nasal, /n/, in nine assimilates to 
the following bilabial nasal, [m], in months. Then the two sounds are pronounced as one, indi-
cated by the lowered horizontal swung line. This also occurs below in in making and in 
Macbeth. 
Elision of /0/ in the consonant cluster /nGs/. 
Linking r. 
The prefix un- does not carry stress. 
Intrusive r. 
Probable elision of word-final ¡6.1 in the word would. The sequence at the word boundary 
between would and dramatically may also be realised as two sounds pronounced as one, but 
with greater duration, and would then be transcribed with a lowered horizontal swung line 
connecting them: [wud^dra'maetikli]. 
Here, the form of and is likely to be full because it is emphatic. 
Regressive assimilation of place: The word-final alveolar plosive lal in had assimilates to the 
following bilabial plosive [b] in been. Then the two sounds are articulated as one prolonged 
sound, indicated by the lowered horizontal swung line. This also occurs below in the se-
quence could be. 
The sequence at the word boundary between with and these may be seen as the two identical 
sounds pronounced as one, but with greater duration, and thus is transcribed with a lowered 
horizontal swung line connecting them. 
Probable elision of /k/ in the consonant cluster /sktf/. 
Intermediate [u] in second syllable. 
Regressive assimilation of place: Word-final alveolar plosive lal in said assimilates to the fob 
lowing velar plosive [g] in goodbye. Then the two sounds are articulated as one prolonged 
sound, indicated by the lowered horizontal swung line. 
Complete elision of /d/, or assimilation to [b] in goodbye, similar to note 8. 
1 4 
Regressive assimilation of intensity: Word-final lenis /z/ in as assimilates to the following 
fortis [s] in soon. Then the two similar sounds are merged into one prolonged sound, indi-
cated by the lowered horizontal swung line. This also occurs below in was snapped. 
13 

144 
Appendix I 
10.2 
[da ju
1 faensi gaum ta 5a sinama
2 tanait 5az 5<et
3 nju: maen'nelao Jaoin at 5i i i
e
k
t
n
k 
Ja: w a i not ai haevn(t)
4 si:n eni9in di:sn(t)
4 fa(?)
5 eid 3iz 
d3aek wDtjt ha la:s(t)
6 0nla(?)
7 on 5a telavi 3n
8 5i 
A5a dei ja
9 nau hau ha
1 0
 
n 
en(d)lasli
n abau(t)
1 2 5a kUtJ av tem
1 3 praiziz 3iz
1 4 W A H auva 5a j i 9 Z
 
U Z °
n 
au
1 5 jes neva stnp(s)
1 6 simn ha preiziz 5a nju:speipaz a paek(t)
4 fol av 6 3 skamdl ft 
maos(t)
4 rksnt WAII haz ko:zd tu: 
• 
s 
eniwei 'sArnein ikstra:dnri f a r 1 7 a tjeind 3 ad
1 8 bi
1 9 W3:6 tram] 
rait ail nrj 5a 'tiki?
2 0 'hDtlain
2 1 an tjek aveila'bihti Sen wi kud prahaeps
2 2 si: i(f)« s
e 
r24 
aena wDntid ta kAm abrj wi kad]
 
3
r
a 
3
n 
13 
Intermediate [u] occurs here. 
The speaker here uses anRP pronunciation with word-final schwa. Many speakers would use 
the long monophthong [a:] instead. 
The vowel here is short, but since that is demonstrative, it should be [ae], rather than schwa 
You may also perceive this sequence as [5eazaet]. 
Here, the speaker probably elides word-final /t/ in the consonant cluster /nts/, and then in the 
same line in the cluster /sntf/ in decent for. (Also below in the consonant clusters /ktf/ * 
packed full and /str/ in most recent.) 
The female speaker avoids using a linking r. Instead, we hear a very weak glottal stop [?] 
The male speaker definitely elides word-final /t/ in the consonant cluster /st6r/. There is 
1 
movement of the tongue forward from alveolar to dental position. 
The male speaker, too, avoids using a linking r. Instead, we hear a slightly stronger glottal 
than the one used by the female speaker. 
" 
The prefix tele- normally carries stress on the first syllable. 
Here, the speaker uses a very noticeably short schwa in the word you, rather than short \ 
Here, the speaker uses a very noticeably short schwa in the word he, rather than either U 
_ , 
• 
j . 
r*n 
stiort 
[i] or intermediate [ij. 
Elision of /d/ in the consonant cluster /ndl/. 
The male speaker definitely elides word-final III, and may replace it with a weak elr>rt-.l 
[?]: [abao?]. 
8 
a l 
S t ° P > 
Regressive assimilation of place: The speaker assimilates word-final alveolar nasal /n/ ' 
to the bilabial nasal, [m], under the influence of the following [p] in prizes. 
Possible progressive assimilation of intensity, resulting here in a lenis sound: The speaker 
assimilate word-initial fortis palatoalveolar fricative, 
in she to the lenis palatoalveol -f-T 
cative, [3], under the influence of the word-final lenis alveolar fricative, [z], in prizes 
Th" 
relatively unusual process (after all, we learnt in Lesson Nine that assimilation of intens
1*
5 ^ 
across word boundaries always results in a fortis sound), and it is not absolutely d 
whether this assimilation occurs here. You may perceive the palatoalveolar segment as " U** 
voiced or voiceless.
 
r 
You might hear the slight aspiration at the beginning of this diphthong. In fact, acoustic 
ysis shows that the aspiration continues across the schwa segment of the diphthong- [h^hj^" 

Solutions to the exercises 
145 
1 6 
Elision of word-final /s/ in the middle of the consonant cluster /pss/. 
Here, the speaker does use a linking r. 
Very reduced form of would. 
The speaker uses an intermediate [i] here. 
The speaker probably uses a glottal stop, [?], instead of an alveolar plosive. 
The speaker probably uses a laterally released plosive in the word hotline: The alveolar plo-
sive [t] is followed by the homorganic lateral, [1]. The plosive is formed, but not released. In-
stead, the release of the closure occurs through the following segment when the sides of the 
tongue drop to form the articulation for the lateral. We could transcribe this sequence as [t'l], 
where the diacritic [
1 ] indicates a lateral release. (You will learn more about laterally released 
plosives in Lesson Eleven.) Alternatively, the speaker might use a glottal stop instead of an al-
veolar plosive. Either way, there seems to be no release before the lateral. 
The speaker pronounces the word as transcribed, which is a common blend of the two correct 
forms [pahaeps] and [prhaeps]. 
You may perceive elision of the fortis labiodental fricative, lit'. 
Here, the speaker seems to use intrusive r, connecting the words Sarah and and. 
22 
[w,ni:d ma:r' unndjiz and *plz brfo: wi kif kalek(t)> 6* sofitf fruit laik stro.bnz
4 n 
pr.tfiz hi 'belaud
5 daon Sa faon 
dispàit ôis rœSar' An'pleznt' in'str.kfn kAmin A
P frarn ^ ^ ^ Z ^ ^ i 
gub
8 mu:d ôei hab^bauo
1' nzn 3:li gon d 3ogin an haed a helGi brektast oei 
nm ta let 'nur.kauz
5 faul mu:d Apset Ôear
1 u:fta'nu:n 
b o g ardentikl twmz hasj^.tn
1 0 ad'vu:ntid 3iz 9o:t ko:la fi hab" prrtehdid ta b, ha sistar
1 
an(d)
1 2 vais V3:sa
r 7 on meni akei 3nz 
nao ôei plaen(d)
13 ta get ôea n'vend 3 on Si aengri kuk sœmi keafH 
spotid u a W f 
3 n pleisft)" tu: ma:r> Anda ha bosis'
5 fu:z witf stod m Sa ko.na Sa traep 
was^set
1 0] 
Linking r. 
Possible regressive assimilation of place: The alveolar nasal, /n/, assimilates to the velar nasal, 
[q], under the influence of the following velar plosive [k] in the word. Either form would 
probably be syllabic in fast connected speech. 
Elision of IH is likely in the consonant cluster /kt5/. Elision of III in the consonant cluster /ft!/ 
is very likely because the sequence would then be reduced to two identical sounds, and the 
words would be pronounced [sDfwfru:t]. 
Syllabic [r] is often pronounced in the word strawberry. 
Stress falls on the first syllable even though the second syllable is a diphthong; [so] is often 
unstressed in this position. 
The prefixes un- and i- are always unstressed. 
Intrusive r. 

146 
Appendix I 
8 
Possible regressive assimilation of place: The alveolar plosive /d7 assimilates to the bilabial 
plosive [b] under the influence of the following bilabial nasal, [m]. 
9 
Again, possible regressive assimilation of place: The alveolar plosive /d/ assimilates to the fol-
lowing bilabial plosive [b]. The two sounds are then articulated as one prolonged sound, indi-
cated by the lowered horizontal swung line. 
1 0 
Possible regressive assimilation of intensity: The lenis alveolar fricative, /z/, becomes de-
voiced, [s], under the influence of the following fortis alveolar fricative, [s]. The two identical 
sounds are then merged into one prolonged sound, indicated by the lowered horizontal 
swung line. 
" 
Possible regressive assimilation of place: The alveolar plosive /d/ assimilates to the bilabial 
plosive [b] under the influence of the following bilabial plosive [p]. 
1 2 
Possible elision of /d/ in the unstressed and. 
1 3 
Possible elision of /d/ in the consonant cluster /ndt/. 
1 4 
Possible elision of III in the middle of the consonant cluster /stt/. 
1 5 
Possible regressive assimilation of intensity: The lenis alveolar fricative, /z/, becomes de 
voiced, [s], under the influence of the following fortis palatoalveolar fricative, [J], 
11.2 
['eniwei ai fam(d)
1 Óa haul eksplaneifn kmpli:tli Anbalhvabl
2 ai mi:n hu:'eva h3:d av SAI/ 
a n'dikjolas
3 endin tu a pleiq
4 god aul(d)
5 di'tektiv Brila 
jo:r
6 an o:fl skeptik ai fmaed3in(d)
7 sAmOin difrant ma:r
8 aekjarat aiv admitid 5aet
9 bat ai 
8irjk ja rorj
10 ta sad3est its Ato nünsans 
hau kn ju
1 1 sei 5aet
9 sau ka:mli wen streit a:ftawadz jo 'kntisaiz(d)
1 5i aektaz fa bi-irj 
in'sensativ an kri'eitirj
12 a komadi aot av a traed33di" 
jes bot wot
1 4 obaot 5a si:n we9
1 5aentani lets 6o ha:siz is'keip 5en hi imself straidz of wo-ks 
a:l dei ounli lu:ziq hiz wei in 5i end
l h 5aet waz dAn ík'sepfnli wel 
ai sapooz ja rait 5ea bat] 
There is probable elision of the plosive, though you may perceive the [d] because it is ex-
The^inYard pronunciation is with the vowel in the second syllable reduced to [i], but here 
the speaker pronounces unbelievable with a schwa, [a]. 
The weak vowel in the third syllable is actually slightly more close and back than schwa, and 
so it is transcribed as [u]. However, schwa would also be acceptable in your transcription. 
There is regressive assimilation of the alveolar nasal, /n/, to the velar nasal, [n], under the in-
fluence of the following velar plosive [q]. 
Some weak elision of word-final /d/ in the middle of the consonant cluster /ldd/. 
In this line, the female speaker uses the linking r twice (see note 8). In the sequence you. We an 
awful sceptic, the vowel in you're [p:r] is relatively long, but it is certainly a monophthong, 
rather than a diphthong. In more careful speech, the centring diphthong [oa] may be used. 
Some weak elision of word-final /d/ in the consonant cluster /nds/. 

Solutions to the exercises 
147 
We hear a second linking r in the sequence more accurate. 
The vowel in that is not reduced because the word is demonstrative. 
In you're wrong, there is no linking r because the word-final vowel in your [ja] is followed by 
the postalveolar approximant, [r], in wrong. 
Intermediate [u] myou because of emphasis. 
Here, the male speaker uses the intermediate [i] in an interesting way: If you listen carefully, 
you can hear the [i] vowel in the word creating and then at the end of the word comedy. We 
can expect this form in these positions, but he then uses the more careful RP form of [1] at the 
end of the sentence in the word tragedy. 
Careful RP form of [i] at the end of the sentence in the word tragedy, rather than the more 
common intermediate [i] for words with spelling ending in <y>. 
If you listen carefully, you will hear the consonant at the end of what as a tap, [r], rather than 
the alveolar plosive [t]. This is quite typical of rapid connected British English in such 
sequences. 
The female speaker seems to use a very short diphthong and avoids a linking r. Instead, she 
appears to use a very brief glottal stop, which we might transcribe as [wes' ientani]. 
Here, the female speaker uses a glottal stop twice in the sequence way in the end: [wei? in Bi? 
end]. The stop is so noticeable that it would probably be transcribed in the form shown, 
rather than in superscript as a linking sound. Generally, we would expect to hear a linking 
semi-vowel in such a sequence: [weiJ in 5i-i end]. 

148 
Appendix I 
12.1 
[jet agen hi
1 waz leit fi kudnt put Ap wiS ip
2 mAtJ longs Ji
1 waz 'a:lweiz Dn taim wai kudnt 
h i
3 du 5a seim traevlin, tram ehfant n ka.slat 5ae(t) taim
4 av nait iz nau d$3uk weitirj at 5a 
steijn waz i:vn ws:s j e j J i d
5 6 haef
7 ta tel (h)im
8 it wnznt eni gub wbi:in
9 lef(t) ta
4 weit far
1 0 
aoaz in 5a rein 
jua
1 1 hiar
1 0 at la:st aiv bin hasn.ii] araund getin ma:r
1 0 an ma:r
1 0 infjuariertid
1 2 wi6_8irjkin
13 
abautfa:
1 4 'teribl 'taimki:pirj hau wud ju md30i it 
jes sori ai kudn(t)
1 5 get awei fram 5i 'ofis 'ajktjuali ai wag_get
H' hiar
1 0 Dn taim evri wi:k if 
it wDznt fa 5a greip
1 7 mes 5ats a:(l)weiz
1 8 lef(t)jV
9 mi: ta kliar
1 0 Ap Sen ai haev ta set) 5i 
akaunts and jAt
2 0 daun 5a haul sistam it teiks fareva 
5aets nau iks'kju:s wia sapaos(t)
2 1 ta haev 5is taim dsAs(t)
22 far
1 0 aua'selvz] 
Probable intermediate [i] preceding the semi-vowel [w]. 
Possible regressive assimilation of place: The alveolar plosive III assimilates to the bilabial 
plosive [p] under the influence of the following bilabial nasal, [m]. 
Emphasis on HE, so full form is given. 
Elision of word-final /t/. This also occurs below in LEFT TO. 
Possible regressive assimilation of place: The alveolar fricative [s] assimilates to the following 
palatoalveolar fricative [fl.The two identical sounds are then merged into one prolonged pro-
nunciation, indicated by the lowered horizontal swung line. 
Relatively emphatic, so probably with intermediate ft]. 
Even though HAVE is emphatic here, it is likely that there is regressive assimilation of inten-
sity: The lenis labiodental fricative, [v], assimilates to fortis labiodental fricative, [f], under the 
influence of the following fortis alveolar plosive, [t]. Alternatively, we could transcribe this as 
[haev ta], showing devoicing. 
Probable elision of /h/. 
Possible regressive assimilation of place: The alveolar plosive /d/ assimilates to the following 
bilabial plosive [b]. The two sounds are articulated as one prolonged sound, indicated by the 
lowered horizontal swung line. 
Linking R. 
> 
. 
Emphasis in sentence-initial position would mean that the vowel in YOU RE is realised as a full 
diphthong. 
Typically, intermediate [i] in the suffix -iate. 
1 3 
Tendency for regressive assimilation of voice: Word-final lenis dental fricative, /5/, assimi-
lates to the following fortis dental fricative, [8]. The two identical sounds are then merged 
into one prolonged pronunciation, indicated by the lowered horizontal swung line. 
1 4 
Yod coalescence: Word-final /t/ and word-initial L\L merge together to form the affricate [tf]. 
1 5 
Possible elision of word-final III in the consonant cluster /dntg/. 
1 6 
Possible regressive assimilation of place: The alveolar plosive ID/ assimilates to the following 
velar plosive [g]. The two sounds are articulated as one prolonged sound, indicated by the 
lowered horizontal swung line. 
1 7 
Possible regressive assimilation of place: The alveolar plosive III assimilates to the bilabial 
plosive [p] under the influence of the bilabial nasal, [m]. 
12 

Solutions to the exercises 
149 
18 
19 
Possible elision of the lateral, especially because in this position it would be a dark /, [i], close 
in quality to the preceding monophthong [D:] in the syllable <al>. 
Possible elision of /t/ in the consonant cluster /ftf/. The two remaining identical sounds are 
then merged into one prolonged pronunciation, indicated by the lowered horizontal swung line. 
2 0 
It is probable here that there would be no audible release of the word-final alveolar plosive [t] 
because it is followed in the next word by the word-initial alveolar plosive [d]. The whole 
phrase shut down would most likely be voiced from the first vowel in shut. Thus we could 
transcribe the phrase as [fAd^daon], where the diacritic f ] indicates an inaudible release. 
Possible elision of /t/ in the middle of the consonant cluster /stt/. 
Possible elision of III in the consonant cluster /stf/. 
12.2 
[\vud3u1 laik anASa kAp av ti: Dr
2 ai km
3 meik sam kofi ai(v)
4 put 5a ketl Dn 
(a)
5 nau Baenks w A n z rnAf wo(t)
6 di(d)
7 ja
1 Giqk av 5a film
8 wi so: jestadei 
wel aektjali
9 ai haevn(t)
6 disaidid we5ar
1 0 ai laikt it o: not its kwait a dist3:biq V3:|n av a 
veri simpl sto:ri 
aebs3'lu:tli ai agri: la:s(t)" nait ai kudnt ge(t)
1 2 ta slirp at o:(l)
8'
1 J ai kep(t)" lauq 5ear
, c 
a3nkj3s(l)i
13 9irjkiq abau(t)
H hao ip
1 5 mai(t)
1 4 nali bi tru: 
d3Dn sez aena
r16 and hi d:gju:d fa(?)
1 7 auaz abaut we5a 5a mistri tru:li wDS wsDlvd 1 8 
jes ai WAnda bad_5en
1 9 agen 5ei kn nevar
1 0 agri: Dn 'eniOiq rimemba la:st jia] 
In the sequence would you, the female speaker exploits yod coalescence: The alveolar plosive 
/d/ and the palatal approximant, /}/, merge to form the affricate [d$\. Later, in the male 
speaker's sequence what did you, there is no coalescence: The [d] is followed by [j] although 
the plosive may be articulated (and perceived) as a tap, [r]. 
Linking r connects a very short monophthong [D] to the following diphthong [ai]. 
The nasal here is undoubtedly syllabic (although it is very short). There may even be regres-
sive assimilation of [n] to [m] under the influence of the following [m]. 
There is a very faint residue of the elided [v], which would signal the expected present perfect 
tense here. 
Possibly a very short schwa representing oh. 
Probable elision of word-final hi. 
Very weak word-final [d]. 
The male speaker's lateral in film (and later in alt) is actually articulated as a dark back vowel. 
The tongue makes no contact with the roof of the mouth. The sound has been transcribed 
here as a lateral even though it would be closer to transcribe this as [o]. 
Either weakening of diphthong [oa] to [a] or elision of intermediate [u] in the unstressed syl-
lable: [£ktj(u)li]. 
Linking r. 
Elision of word-final /t/ in the consonant cluster /stn/. This also occurs later in the consonant 
cluster /ptl/ in kept lying. 
Elision of word-final III. 

Appendix I 
12.3 
<H& II Would you LIKE another cup of TEA // 
// Or i can MAKE some coffee / / 
// I've PUT the KETTle on // 
<b / / N O thanks// 
II ONE'S e n O U G H // 
<b // What did you T H I N K of the FILM we saw yesterday // 
<^ //Well actually i haven't deCIded// 
// whether i LIKed it or N O T // 
// It's quite a diSJQJRBing version // <n& II of a VERy simple STORy // 
// AbsoLUTEly // it III agree // 
// last N I G H T i COULDn't get to SLEEP at all / / 
// I kept LYing there ANxiously thinking // 
// how it might really be TRTJE / / 
P<II II John says Anna and he argued for H O U R S // 
<n& II about WHETHer the mystery truly WAS solved // 
/ / Y E S / / * // i WONder // 
<b // Rut then aGAIN // <ii // they can NEVer agree on ANything // 
& II ReMEMber last YEAR // 
1 3 
The male speaker here elides the lateral in the word all. This also occurs below in the word 
anxiously. This may be because his laterals tend to be articulated as dark vowels, possibly ow-
ing to influence of such articulation by non-standard speakers. 
1 4 
Here, the word-final alveolar plosive Ixl is either elided or articulated as a short glottal stop, [?]. 
1 5 
Regressive assimilation of place: The speaker assimilates alveolar plosive Ixl to the bilabial 
plosive [p] under the influence of the following bilabial nasal, [m]. 
1 6 
Intrusive r. 
1 7 
Unusually, the female speaker avoids a linking r in the phrase/br hours. Instead, she seems to 
use a short glottal stop, [?]. 
is Regressive assimilation of intensity: The speaker assimilates the lems Izl to a fortis [s]. Then 
the two identical sounds are merged into one prolonged sound, indicated by the lowered hor-
izontal swung line. 
1 9 
Again, regressive assimilation of intensity, but this time resulting i n a lems sound: The 
speaker assimilates fortis 111 to lenis [d] under the influence of the following lenis [6], The 
sounds are almost articulated as one sound, so they are joined by the lowered horizontal 
swung line. We learnt in Lesson Nine that assimilation of intensity across word boundaries 
always results in a fortis sound, but the exception proves the rule. 

Appendix II: Glossary of linguistic terms 
accent The pronunciation features of a language variety. 
accentual function of intonation 
The affect of intonation on the prominence of a 
syllable, which plays a role in focusing stress on particular words in connected 
speech. 
acoustic phonetics 
The study and description of the physical properties of speech 
sounds, and their transmission. 
affricate 
A manner of articulation. Affricate sounds consist of two homorganic ele-
ments: the first is plosive, the second fricative. Affricates have a complete closure 
of the vocal tract, but the air is released slowly enough to produce friction, which 
we hear as a hissing s-like sound. There are two affricates in English: one fortis, 
/tJV, and one lenis, /d^/. 
air-stream mechanism 
The type of air movement used to produce speech sounds. 
allomorph 
One of at least two variant realisations of a morpheme. 
allophone 
One of at least two variant realisations of a phoneme. Allophones do not 
contrast meaning. They occur either in complementary distribution or in free 
variation. 
alveolar 
A place of articulation. Alveolar sounds are made with the tongue tip com-
ing near or touching the bony ridge behind the upper teeth, called the alveolar 
ridge. The sound we transcribe as /t/ is alveolar. 
anaptyxis 
The insertion of a vowel between two consonants, like the schwa in please, 
[palkz]. See also epenthesis. 
aph(a)eresis 
An elision at the beginning of a word. For example, the historical elision 
of the initial consonants in knife, knight, and wrong. 
aphesis A special case of aph(a)eresis, when the elided initial sound is a vowel. For ex-
ample, when alone becomes lone. 
apical A type of articulation that involves the tip of the tongue. Dental, alveolar, and 
postalveolar sounds are apical. 
apocopation, apocope 
An elision occurring at the end of a word. 
applied linguistics 
The practical application of linguistic findings, for example to for-
eign language teaching. 
approximant 
A manner of articulation. An approximant is generally made with a wider 
gap between the speech organs than is the case in the production of fricatives. The 
speech organs approach each other, but they do not touch each other and there is 
no audible friction. The sound transcribed as HI is an approximant. 
articulatory phonetics 
The study and description of how the speech organs, also 
called vocal organs or articulators, in the vocal tract are used in order to produce, 
or articulate, speech sounds. 

152 
Appendix II 
aspiration 
The audible puff of breath, or the brief ^-sound, resulting from the sud-
den release of air in the articulation of a plosive. 
assimilation 
An aspect of connected speech, where one sound, usually a consonant 
becomes more like, or identical with, a neighbouring sound regarding one or more 
of the distinctive features. The opposite of dissimilation. 
attitudinal function of intonation 
The ability of intonation to express speakers' 
personal attitudes towards what they say, for example whether they are uninter-
ested, excited, or ironic. 
auditory phonetics 
The study and description of the perception of speech sounds b y 
the listener. 
back vowel 
A vowel articulated with the back of the tongue raised highest. 
back-clipping 
A special case of clipping, when a syllable or part is taken from the e n d 
of a word, 
backed 
See retraction. 
backness 
One of the three criteria for the description of vowel phonemes. Frontness 
and backness refer to the part of the tongue that is raised highest. 
bilabial 
A manner of articulation. Bilabial sounds are made with both lips. The s o u n d 
we transcribe as /b/ is a bilabial. 
cardinal vowel 
A set of vowel sounds that illustrate the extremes of vowel quality the 
vocal tract is able to produce. Cardinal vowels are not sounds of any particular 
language. 
central vowel 
A vowel articulated with the centre of the tongue raised highest. A n in 
termediate position between the two extremes of front and back vowels. 
centre 
A part of a syllable which is produced with little or no obstruction of air and " 
therefore usually formed by a vowel. Also called peak or nucleus. 
centring diphthong 
A diphthong that moves towards schwa. There are three cen 
tring diphthongs in English: /io/, /ea/, and /us/. 
checked syllable 
See closed syllable. 
checked vowel 
The vowel that forms the centre of a closed, or checked, syllable 
clear / 
A non-syllabic lenis alveolar lateral. The sound we hear word-initially i 
leopard, or when l\l is pronounced in isolation. It is represented in a phonet" 
transcription proper by the same symbol used for the underlying phoneme 
C o n 
trasts with dark /. 
click 
A sound produced by the air being sucked in as a result of movements against 
the back part of the roof of the mouth. Click sounds do not exist in English 
click language 
A language that has click sounds, 
clipping 
The omission of whole syllables or entire parts of words, 
close vowel 
A vowel articulated with the tongue high, close to the palate. 

Glossary of linguistic terms 
153 
closed syllable 
A syllable that ends in a consonant. Sometimes also called a checked 
syllable. 
closed word class 
A category of words whose number is limited and largely fixed. 
Closed word classes are determiners (including articles), pronouns, prepositions 
(including particles), conjunctions, auxiliary verbs, numerals, and interjections. 
closing diphthong 
A diphthong that moves towards a close vowel. There are five 
closing diphthongs in English: 
/ai/, /oi/ 5 /SO/, and /au/. 
cluster 
A sequence of consonants pronounced consecutively, without an intervening 
vowel or pause. 
coarticulation 
The simultaneous use of two places of obstruction, especially when 
these two places of obstruction are equally important. Also called double articula-
tion. 
coda 
A structural element in a syllable that follows the centre, and is produced with 
greater obstruction of air. A coda is, therefore, always formed by one or more 
consonants. 
competence 
The individual speaker's internalised knowledge of the language. Stands 
in contrast to performance, which is the actual language use of an individual 
speaker. A term proposed by the American linguist Noam Chomsky. See also 
langue and parole. 
complementary distribution 
A systematic relationship between two or more lin-
guistic units (mostly allophones or allomorphs), where one unit can only occur in 
an environment in which none of the other units can. The units are mutually ex-
clusive. See also free 
variation. 
consonant 
A class of sound produced by an obstruction of an air-stream either in the 
pharynx or in the vocal tract. All consonants generally have two things in com-
mon: Phonetically, they are made with an obstruction of air, and phonologically, 
they typically occur at the margins of syllables. Contrasts with vowel. 
content word 
See lexical word. 
contextual variant 
A linguistic unit in complementary distribution with other units. 
continuant 
A broad classification of the manner of articulation of speech sounds. 
Continuants are made without a complete closure of the speech organs. All speech 
sounds apart from plosives and affricates are continuants, 
contoid 
A phonetic class of sounds that are produced with an obstruction of air. 
All consonants except the frictionless continuants are contoids. Contrasts with 
vocoid. 
dark / 
A velarised lenis alveolar lateral produced with the tip of the tongue touching 
the alveolar ridge, and simultaneously with the back of the tongue coming near or 
touching the velum. The dark / occurs in all the environments in which the neutral 
I or clear / cannot. It is transcribed as [fj. See also 
velarisation. 

154 
Appendix II 
dental 
A manner of articulation. Dental, or interdental, sounds are made with the 
tongue tip and rims between the upper and lower teeth or against the upper teeth. 
The two dentals in English, /6/ and Ibl, are often popularly called "teeaitch" be-
cause of their spelling. 
dentalisation 
Occurs when fronting results in a dental sound, articulated with the 
tongue tip and rims touching the teeth. Dental articulation can be indicated in the 
IPA by the diacritic [ J under the relevant symbol. 
descriptive linguistics 
The objective and systematic study of language. Descriptive 
linguists observe and analyse language as it is used naturally in any given speech 
community to discover the rules and regularities of the underlying language sys-
tem. Contrasts with prescriptive linguistics. 
devoicing 
Occurs when an intrinsically voiced sound is articulated with less voice 
than usual or with no voice at all. 
diacritic 
Mark added to indicate slight alterations to the usual value of a phonetic 
symbol. 
dialectology 
The study and description of regional variation within a language. 
diphthong 
A vowel sequence starting with a monophthong, whose quality then 
changes towards, but never quite reaches, another monophthong through a glid-
ing movement of the tongue. Also called gliding vowel or vowel glide. A diph-
thong is conventionally analysed as one vowel phoneme. The vowel sequence w e 
transcribe as /ei/ is a diphthong. 
discourse function of intonation 
The role of intonation to signal the turn-taking 
processes in an exchange between speakers. 
dissimilation 
The process whereby one sound becomes less like a neighbouring 
sound or a sound in close proximity, often to achieve greater ease of pronuncia-
tion, and also greater clarity. The opposite of assimilation. 
distinctive feature 
The three features of intensity, place, and manner of articulation 
determine the consonant sounds of a language. 
distribution 
The range of environments in which a linguistic unit can occur. 
dorsal 
A type of articulation that involves the body of the tongue. Palatal and velar 
sounds are dorsal. 
double articulation 
See coarticulation. 
duration 
The absolute or actual time taken in the articulation of a sound. It is a 
purely phonetic feature since it plays no role in determining the phonological 
function of a sound in the language system. Duration is one component of stress 
(together with loudness, pitch, and sound quality). 
egressive glottalic air-stream 
One of the four air-stream mechanisms. Air is pushed 
up from the space between the vocal folds. A sound produced in this way is called 
ejective or glottalic. 

Glossary of linguistic terms 
155 
egressive pulmonic air-stream 
One of the four air-stream mechanisms. The major-
ity of sounds used in human languages are produced with air that is pushed up 
from the lungs through the windpipe, or trachea, leaving the body through the 
mouth and sometimes through the nose. Virtually all English sounds are pro-
duced by an egressive pulmonic air-stream mechanism. 
ejective 
A sound produced by air being pushed up from the space between the vocal 
folds, i.e. by an egressive glottalic air-stream. Also called glottalic. 
elision The omission of one or more sounds in connected speech. The opposite of 
instrusion. 
empty word 
See grammatical word. 
epenthesis 
Insertion of a sound in word-internal position. An inserted vowel like the 
schwa in please [psli:z] is an epenthetic vowel. See also anaptyxis. 
epiglottal 
A manner of articulation. An epiglottal sound is made by a movement of 
the epiglottis against the lower pharynx. Such sounds do not exist in English. 
fall An intonation contour that falls. 
falling diphthong 
A diphthong in which the first element is longer and louder than 
the second. English diphthongs are usually falling diphthongs. 
fall-rise 
An intonation contour that first falls, then rises. 
fixed stress 
In many languages, word stress is fairly predictable. These languages are 
said to have fixed stress, or to be fixed-stress languages. 
flap A manner of articulation. A flap, or tap, involves a single flap by one articulator 
against another. There are no flapped phonemes in English, but there are some pro-
nunciation variants produced in this way. The sound we transcribe as [r] is a flap. 
foot The distance beginning with (and including) a strong stress and ending right be-
fore (and excluding) the next strong stress. 
fore-and-aft clipping 
The omission of whole syllables or entire parts of words from 
the beginning and end of a word. 
fore-clipping 
The omission of whole syllables or entire parts of words from the be-
ginning of a word. 
form word 
See grammatical word. 
fortis 
An intensity of articulation. Fortis consonants are made with stronger breath 
force, or higher tension, than lenis consonants. 
free stress 
In some languages, word stress is difficult to predict; it is rule-governed 
only to a very limited extent. These languages are said to have free stress, less com-
monly also movable stress, or to be free-stress languages. 
free variation 
Occurs when two or more linguistic units (mostly allophones or allo-
morphs) can replace one another without there being any rule governing their dis-
tribution. See also complementary 
distribution. 

156 
Appendix II 
fricative 
A manner of articulation. Fricatives are made when air is forced through a 
very narrow gap between two speech organs, producing audible friction. T h e 
fricatives fall into two subcategories: slit fricatives, where air is released through a 
narrow horizontal opening, and groove fricatives, where the tongue is slightly-
hollowed. The sound we transcribe as /f/ is a slit fricative whereas /s/ is a g r o o v e 
fricative. See also sibilant. 
frictionless continuant 
A phonetic class of sounds. Laterals and approximants are 
categorised as frictionless continuants because neither group involves audible fric-
tion. 
front vowel 
A vowel articulated with the front of the tongue raised highest. 
fronting 
The articulation of a sound further forward in the mouth than the underly-
ing phoneme, usually under the influence of the surrounding sounds. 
frontness 
One of the three criteria for the description of vowel phonemes. Frontness 
and backness refer to the part of the tongue that is raised highest. 
function word, functor 
See grammatical 
word. 
fundamental frequency (F 0) 
A quantitative acoustic measurement mainly of the 
number of times the vocal folds vibrate per second, measured in hertz (Hz). F u n -
damental frequency, or pitch, is affected by the physical size, and consequently b y 
the sex, of a speaker. In general, a male speaker has a lower pitch, at a r o u n d 
120 hertz, than a female speaker, who has an average pitch of around 210 hertz. See 
also pitch. 
glide 
See 
semi-vowel. 
gliding vowel 
See diphthong. 
glottal 
A sound that is produced in the larynx when air passes through the glottis 
The only English phoneme that is articulated in this way is the fortis /h/. The glot-
tal stop is of course also a glottal, but it is not an English phoneme. 
glottal closure 
A sound produced by the closure of the glottis. The vocal folds are 
firmly pressed together, and the air-stream is stopped completely. A glottal clo-
sure can produce only one sound: a glottal stop. 
glottal plosive 
See glottal stop. 
glottal replacement 
The use of a glottal stop as an allophone of Ixl when it occurs af-
ter a vowel either word-internally, especially when followed by another vowel, or 
word-finally. Also called T-glottalling, or simply glottalling. 
glottal stop 
The sound made when the glottis is closed, i.e. the vocal folds are firmly 
pressed together, and the air-stream is stopped completely. Also called glottal plosive 
glottalic 
See ejective. 
glottalisation 
A process whereby a plosive is produced with a tightly closed glottis 
(resulting in a simultaneous glottal stop), so that no more air can be pushed up 
from the lungs. The glottis remains closed for the duration of the plosive, thus 

Glossary of linguistic terms 
157 
trapping a body of air between it and the usual closure made higher up in the vocal 
tract. All three fortis plosives can undergo glottalisation. 
glottalling 
See glottal 
replacement. 
glottis 
The space between the vocal folds, located behind the Adam's apple in the lar-
ynx. 
grammatical word 
A word that primarily fulfils a grammatical function, and has lit-
tle or no lexical content. Also referred to by a number of other terms, such as 
empty word, form word, function 
word, functor, structural word, and structure 
word. Grammatical words comprise determiners (including articles), pronouns, 
prepositions (including particles), conjunctions, auxiliary verbs, and a few ad-
verbs, such as not and there. 
graphology 
The study and description of the writing system of a language. 
head 
In intonation, the part of a tone unit that extends from the first prominent sylla-
ble up to, but not including, the tonic syllable. 
hiatus 
The articulatory break, or gap, between two consecutive vowels belonging to 
different syllables or words linked through the insertion of an additional sound. 
See also liaison. 
high key 
An intonation contour that has an overall raised pitch, 
homograph 
A word that has the same spelling as another word, but differs in mean-
ing (and possibly also in pronunciation). 
homophone 
A word that has the same pronunciation as another word. 
homorganic 
Speech sounds that are articulated in the same place, in other words, 
with the same speech organs, are homorganic. Affricates consist of two hom-
organic sounds. 
hypercorrection, hyperurbanism 
An over-correction of one's language, resulting 
from an attempt to adjust one's speech to a prestige norm, 
implosive 
A sound produced by the glottis making the air move inwards. 
ingressive glottalic air-stream 
One of the four air-stream mechanisms. Air is moved 
inwards by the glottis. 
ingressive velaric air-stream 
One of the four air-stream mechanisms. Air is sucked 
in as a result of movements against the back part of the roof of the mouth. A sound 
produced in this way is called click, and a language that has click sounds is often 
referred to as a click language. 
intensity of articulation 
One of the three distinctive features used for the description 
of consonants. The force with which the air-stream is pushed up from the lungs, 
interdental 
See dental. 
International Phonetic Alphabet 
The most widely used phonetic alphabet, and one 
that provides suitable symbols for the sounds of any language. 

1 5 8 
Appendix II 
intonation 
A suprasegmental feature of spoken language. The variation of pitch a n d 
prominence over longer stretches of speech. 
intrusion 
The insertion of a sound that is not represented in the spelling and has n o 
historical justification. By far the most common example is the intrusive r, b u t 
there is also the intrusion of a glottal stop, and the intrusion of semi-vowels. T h e 
opposite of elision. 
intrusive r 
The link between two consecutive vowels belonging to different w o r d s 
or, less commonly, to different syllables within the same word through the inser-
tion of an Ixl that has no historical justification. The intrusive r - especially t h e 
word-internal one - is widely stigmatised by language purists, who regard it as a 
non-standard pronunciation, or simply as incorrect. 
IPA 
Abbreviation for the International Phonetic Alphabet and the International 
Phonetic Association. 
isochronism, isochronous rhythm, isochrony 
See stress-timing. 
isosyllabicity, isosyllabic rhythm, isosyllabism 
See syllable-timing. 
juncture 
The phonological and phonetic features that mark the boundaries between 
syllables, words, and clauses. More broadly, the term also refers to the transition 
between these units. Such a broad concept of juncture overlaps considerably with 
the concept of liaison, and, in fact, some linguists include liaison as a part of juncture. 
labial 
A type of articulation that involves the lips. Bilabial and labiodental sounds are 
labial. 
labialisation 
A process whereby a sound, usually a consonant, is produced with an 
unusual degree of lip-rounding. It is usually influenced by the rounded lips of a 
neighbouring sound. Labialisation is indicated in a phonetic transcription proper 
by a small w-like symbol, which is either placed under the symbol for the 
labialised sound, or raised and placed after it. 
labiodental 
A manner of articulation. Labiodental sounds are made by a movement of 
the lower lip against the upper teeth. The sound transcribed as /f/ is a labiodental. 
labiovelar 
A more precise label for the English velar phoneme Av/ because it is pro-
nounced with rounded lips. 
laminal 
A type of articulation that involves the blade of the tongue. Palatoalveolar 
sounds are laminal. 
langue 
A speech community's shared knowledge of a language. Stands in contrast to 
parole, which is actual language use. A term proposed by the Swiss linguist 
Ferdinand de Saussure. See also competence and performance. 
larynx 
Hollow muscular organ situated in the upper part of the trachea, or windpipe, 
behind the Adam's apple. Also called the voice box. 
lateral 
A manner of articulation. Laterals, or more specifically lateral approximants, 
are made with air that escapes around the sides of a partial closure of the speech 

Glossary of linguistic terms 
159 
organs, but the narrowing of the air passage does not produce friction. English has 
only one lateral, /I/, where the tip of the tongue touches the centre of the alveolar 
ridge. 
lateral plosion, lateral release 
Occurs when an alveolar plosive initially has the usual 
complete closure at the alveolar ridge, but the sides of the tongue are then lowered, 
so that air escapes around the sides of the central closure that remains. A lateral release 
typically occurs in the production of /t/ and /d/ when they are followed by l\l'. 
lax 
A feature of intensity used by American linguists to describe vowels which are ar-
ticulated with relatively weak breath force. The label corresponds with the term 
lenis, which is used to describe the intensity of consonant articulation. Contrasts 
with tense. 
length 
The relative time a sound is sustained as perceived by the listener. For exam-
ple, the middle sounds in the words fool and full are commonly described as a long 
u and short u, respectively. The difference here is one of length. Length is a phono-
logical concept because the long u and short u have different functions within the 
English sound system. 
lenis An intensity of articulation. Lenis consonants are made with weaker breath 
force, or lower tension, than fortis consonants, 
lexical stress 
See word stress. 
lexical word 
A word that has more lexical content, or meaning, than a grammatical 
word. Lexical words comprise nouns, full (or lexical) verbs, adjectives, and the 
vast majority of adverbs. Also called content word. 
liaison A transition, or link, between sounds or words. See also hiatus. 
linking r A link between words through the articulation of a normally unarticulated 
word-final /r/, which is articulated only when preceded by a vowel in the same 
word, and followed by an initial vowel in the next word. A case of liaison. 
linking sound 
A sound that is absent in a word when that word is pronounced in iso-
lation, but present in the same word in certain phonetic environments in con-
nected speech, usually for ease of pronunciation. 
liquid 
Laterals and approximants are sometimes referred to as liquids because of their 
"flowing" sound quality. It is a traditional term no longer in common use, and 
should be avoided. 
loudness 
A phonetic property of spoken language and of individual sounds. It is re-
lated to the breadth, or amplitude, of the vibration of the vocal folds. Loudness is 
one component of stress (together with pitch, duration, and sound quality). 
manner of articulation 
One of the three distinctive features used for the description 
of consonants. It refers to the type or degree of closure of the speech organs at the 
place of articulation. 
mid vowel 
A vowel articulated with the tongue between close and open positions. 

160 
Appendix II 
minimal pair 
A pair of words that differ in meaning and in only one sound. Each of 
the two contrasting sounds in such a minimal pair is a distinct phoneme. 
monophthong 
A vowel sound during the articulation of which the speech organs d o 
not change their position. Also called pure or plain vowel. 
morph 
An actual, concrete form, or realisation, of a morpheme. 
morpheme 
The smallest unit of meaning within the words of a language. 
morphology 
The study and description of the structure of words. 
morphonology, morphophonemics, morphophonology 
The overlap between m o r -
phology and phonology. 
movable stress 
See free stress. 
nasal 
A manner of articulation. A nasal is made with a complete closure in the vocal 
tract while the velum, or soft palate, is lowered, so that air escapes through the 
nose. In the production of English nasals, usually all the air escapes through the 
nose. Other languages have nasals where some air also passes through the mouth. 
The sound transcribed as I ml is a nasal. Contrasts with oral. 
nasal plosion, nasal release 
Occurs when an alveolar plosive is produced with the 
usual complete closure at the alveolar ridge, which is maintained throughout the 
duration of the sound, so that no air escapes through the mouth, but with a low-
ered velum, so that air escapes through the nose instead. This kind of release is in-
dicated in a phonetic transcription proper by a small, raised «-like symbol after 
the main symbol. A nasal release typically occurs in the production of a plosive 
when that plosive is followed by a nasal with the same place of articulation. 
nasalisation 
A process whereby a sound, usually a vowel, is produced with a lowered 
velum, which opens the passage to the nasal cavity, so that air escapes not only 
through the mouth (as is usually the case with vowels), but also through the nose. 
Nasalisation is influenced by a neighbouring nasal, and can be indicated in a pho-
netic transcription proper by a tilde above the symbol for the nasalised sound. 
neutral vowel 
See schwa. 
non-continuant 
A broad classification of the manner of articulation of speech 
sounds. Non-continuants are produced with a complete closure of the speech or-
gans (both mouth and nose). Plosives and affricates are non-continuants. 
non-contrastive distribution 
A property of allophones. Refers to the fact that allo-
phones do not contrast meaning, as phonemes do. 
non-rhotic accent 
An accent in which the Ixl phoneme is articulated only before a 
vowel, not before a consonant or pause. Also called an r-less accent, or a non-r-
pronouncing accent. Contrasts with rhotic accent. 
non-r-pronouncing accent 
See non-rhotic accent. 
nuclear stress 
See tonic stress. 
nucleus 
See centre and tonic syllable. 

Glossary of linguistic terms 
161 
onset 
A structural element in a syllable which precedes the centre, and is produced 
with greater obstruction of air. An onset is always formed by one or more conso-
nants. 
open syllable 
A syllable that ends with the centre, 
open vowel 
A vowel articulated with the tongue low. 
open word class 
A category of words whose number is, in principle, unlimited be-
cause new words are continually added. Open word classes are nouns, full (or lex-
ical) verbs, adjectives, and, to a great extent, adverbs. 
opening diphthong 
A diphthong that moves towards a more open vowel. There are 
no opening diphthongs in English. 
oral 
A manner of articulation. An oral sound is produced with the velum raised, so 
that the passage to the nasal cavity is blocked, and the air escapes only through the 
mouth. Contrasts with nasal. 
palatal 
A place of articulation. A palatal sound is produced when the body of the 
tongue comes near or touches the palate. There is only one palatal in English, l\l. 
palatalisation 
A process whereby a sound, usually a consonant, is produced with the 
body of the tongue coming near or touching the hard palate in addition to another 
place of articulation. Palatalised consonants are sometimes described as "soft", 
and non-palatalised consonants as "hard". Palatalisation can be indicated in a pho-
netic transcription proper by a small/-like symbol, 
palatoalveolar 
A place of articulation. A palatoalveolar sound is made with the 
tongue tip touching the alveolar ridge, and with a simultaneous raising of the 
blade of the tongue towards the hard palate. The sound transcribed as ITJ is 
palatoalveolar. See also laminal. 
paragoge 
An intrusion in word-final position. 
paralinguistic feature 
A linguistic feature of lesser importance in the communica-
tion of meaning. Tone of voice is a paralinguistic feature. 
parole Actual language use. Stands in contrast to langue, which is a speech commu-
nity's shared knowledge of a language. A term proposed by the Swiss linguist 
Ferdinand de Saussure. See also competence and performance. 
peak See centre. 
performance 
The actual language use of an individual speaker. Stands in contrast to 
competence, which is an individual speaker's internalised knowledge of the lan-
guage. A term proposed by the American linguist Noam Chomsky. See also 
langue and parole. 
pharyngal, pharyngeal 
A place of articulation. A pharyng(e)al sound is made when 
the root of the tongue is pulled back in the pharynx. There are no such sounds in 
English. 
pharyngeal cavity, pharynx 
The throat. 

162 
Appendix 11 
phone 
An actual, concrete speech sound. The realisation of a phoneme by an individ-
ual speaker. 
phoneme 
The smallest distinctive, or contrastive, unit in the sound system of a lan-
guage. A phoneme is an abstract linguistic unit representing a speech sound that 
has a function within the sound system of a language, or as part of the speakers' 
langue or competence. Phonemes are abstract, idealised sounds that are never p r o -
nounced and never heard. A phoneme of a language is identified through a mini-
mal pair. 
phoneme inventory 
The complete set of phonemes in a sound system. Also called 
phonemic system. 
phonemic symbol 
A phonetic symbol that, strictly speaking, represents a phoneme 
rather than a phone, 
phonemic system 
See phoneme 
inventory. 
phonetic alphabet 
A set of phonetic symbols. 
phonetic symbol 
A symbol used to represent a speech sound in a one-to-one corre-
spondence. 
phonetic transcription 
The process of writing down spoken language as accurately 
as possible using phonetic symbols. And the resultant written text. 
phonetics 
The study and description of concrete utterances and concrete, individual 
speech sounds. 
phonographic relationship 
A one-to-one correspondence between speech and writing. 
phonology 
The study and description of the sound system of a language. 
phonotactics 
The part of phonology that deals with the rules governing the possible 
positions and combinations of phonemes. 
pitch 
A phonetic property related to the frequency of the vibration of the vocal folds. 
The faster the vocal folds vibrate, the higher the pitch. Pitch shapes the intonation 
of connected speech, and can distinguish meaning at a suprasegmental level, but 
cannot change the function of an individual sound within the sound system of 
English. Pitch is one component of stress (together with loudness, duration, and 
sound quality). See also fundamental 
frequency. 
pitch contour 
The specific rises and falls in pitch which shape a particular kind of in-
tonation pattern. Also called pitch movement. 
pitch movement 
See pitch contour. 
place of articulation 
One of the three distinctive features for the description of con-
sonants. The place of articulation names the speech organs that are primarily in-
volved in the production of a particular sound. 
plain vowel 
See monophthong. 
plosive 
A manner of articulation. A plosive, or stop, is a sound that has a complete 
closure at some point in the vocal tract, builds up the air pressure while the closure 

Glossary of linguistic terms 
163 
is held, and then releases the air explosively through the mouth. The sound tran-
scribed as /p/ is a plosive. 
postalveolar 
A place of articulation. A postalveolar sound is made with the tongue 
tip approaching or touching the rear of the alveolar ridge or the area just behind it. 
There is only one postalveolar in English, hi. 
pre-head 
In intonation, the part of a tone unit that spans all the less prominent sylla-
bles before the head. 
prescriptive linguistics 
A tradition which prescribes, rather than describes, correct 
usage that all educated people should use in speaking and writing. Prescriptive lin-
guistics does not fully recognise ongoing language change and stylistic variation. 
Contrasts with descriptive linguistics. 
primary articulation 
An articulation of greater importance than any other simulta-
neous articulation. Contrasts with secondary articulation, which merely adds a 
nuance to the quality of the resultant sound. 
prominence 
The combination of greater loudness, higher (or sometimes lower) 
pitch, greater duration, and sound quality that makes a particular sound, or a syllable 
centre, stand out perceptually in relation to its surrounding sounds. Prominence is 
a concept of auditory phonetics. It correlates with stress in articulatory phonetics. 
prosody 
See 
suprasegmentalphonology. 
prosthesis, prothesis 
An intrusion in word-initial position. This does not usually oc-
cur in English. 
pure vowel 
See monophthong. 
r-colouring 
See retroflexion. 
Received Pronunciation 
The most prestigious accent of Standard British English, 
associated with the dialect spoken in the south-east of England. Also called RP. 
reduced vowel 
See schwa. 
reduction 
An aspect of connected speech that involves the modification of a vowel to 
/a/ or hi, or the elision of one or more sounds, or both. Also called weakening. 
retraction 
The articulation of a sound further back in the mouth than the underlying 
phoneme, usually under the influence of the surrounding sounds. Retracted 
sounds are also, though less commonly, called backed. 
retroflex 
A manner of articulation. A retroflex sound is produced when the tip of the 
tongue is curled back to approach or make contact with the front part of the roof 
of the mouth, or hard palate, just behind the alveolar ridge. There are no retroflex 
phonemes in RP or any other accent of English. There is, however, a retroflex pro-
nunciation variant in most American accents, in Irish English, and in accents of 
south-west England, transcribed as [\]. 
retroflexion 
A process whereby a vowel is produced with a curled-back tongue tip 
approaching or touching the hard palate in addition to another articulation. Also 

164 
Appendix II 
called r-colouring or rhotacisation. Retroflexion can be indicated in a phonetic 
transcription proper by a small, raised r-like symbol, which is upside down and 
placed after the symbol for the retroflexed vowel. 
r-full accent 
See rhotic accent. 
rhotacisation 
See retroflexion. 
rhotic 
Pertaining to or characterised by r-sounds. Also: Any r-sound. 
rhotic accent 
An accent that has not lost the Ixl phoneme in the course of the centu-
ries, and in which an Ixl is pronounced whenever it occurs in the spelling. Also 
called an r-ful accent, or r-pronouncing accent. Contrasts with non-rhotic accent. 
rhyme 
A structural element in a syllable comprising the centre and the coda (if there 
is one). Together, these elements account for the rhyming potential of syllables. 
rhythm 
In spoken language, the recurrence of prominent elements at what are per-
ceived to be regular intervals of time. Depending on the particular language, such 
prominent elements are usually either stresses or syllables. The type of rhythm is a 
characteristic suprasegmental feature of the pronunciation of any given language, 
and therefore forms the basis for one of the fundamental categorisations of the 
languages of the world. See also stress-timing and syllable-timing. 
rise 
An intonation contour that rises. 
rise-fall 
An intonation contour that first rises, then falls. 
rising diphthong 
A diphthong in which the second element is more prominent. Ris-
ing diphthongs rarely occur in English, 
r-less accent 
See non-rhotic accent. 
roll 
A manner of articulation. A roll, or trill, involves an intermittent closure of the 
speech organs in the vocal tract. In other words, a roll is produced when one 
articulator vibrates against another. There are no rolled phonemes in RP or any 
other accent of English, but some dialects have a rolled pronunciation variant. 
RP 
Abbreviation for Received Pronunciation. 
r-pronouncing accent 
See rhotic accent. 
schwa 
One of the seven English short vowels. The centre of the tongue is raised be-
tween mid-close and mid-open position, and the lips are in a neutral shape. The 
schwa occurs solely in unstressed syllables. Since most unstressed syllables con-
tain a schwa, this vowel is the most frequently occurring sound in English. Also 
called a neutral vowel or a reduced vowel. 
secondary articulation 
An articulation which is of lesser importance than another 
simultaneous articulation, called primary articulation. In English, the main types 
of secondary articulation are labialisation, retroflexion, palatalisation, and velari-
sation. 
segmental phonology 
The segmentation of language into individual speech sounds 
provided by phonetics. Segmental phonology is not concerned with the produc-

Glossary of linguistic terms 
165 
tion, the physical properties, or the perception of these sounds, but in the function 
and possible combinations of sounds within the sound system. 
semi-vowel 
In a broad sense, all frictionless continuants, /l, r, j , w/. They are conso-
nants from a phonological point of view, and (almost) vowels from a purely pho-
netic point of view. In a narrower sense, only /j, w/. Also called glides. 
sentence stress 
The stress or prominence carried by a word within an utterance. 
sibilant 
Any of the alveolar and palatoalveolar fricatives, /s, z, J, 3/. These fricatives 
have a sharper s-like sound than other fricatives. Also called groove fricatives. 
Sometimes the affricates, /tj, d 3/, are also included in the group of sibilants. See 
also fricative. 
silent letter 
A letter in the written form of a word that is not pronounced, 
soft palate 
See velum. 
sonority 
The intrinsic relative loudness, or "carrying-power", of a phoneme. Ac-
cording to a common sonority hierarchy, vowels are more sonorous than conso-
nants. 
sound quality 
The quality characterised by a sound's distinctive features. A speech 
sound has the same sound quality irrespective of the loudness, pitch, or duration 
with which it is pronounced. 
standard, standard variety 
The form of a language generally associated with edu-
cated speakers. Even though it may have a regional origin, it is regarded as region-
ally neutral in that it can be found anywhere in a country. Thus a standard is a 
sociolect, rather than a dialect. 
stop 
See plosive. 
stress 
The combination of a number of articulatory features which make a speech 
sound, syllable, or word more prominent than others. Loudness, pitch, duration, 
and sound quality are the main components of stress. See also prominence. 
stressed syllable 
Within a word, the syllable which carries stress. A stressed syllable 
can contain any vowel as its centre except /o/, and the vowel always has its "full", 
original sound quality. Contrasts with unstressed syllable. 
stress-timing 
A type of rhythm whereby strong stresses tend to occur at relatively 
equal intervals of time, irrespective of the number of lesser-stressed syllables or words 
between them. English, Russian, and modern Greek are stress-timed languages. 
Also called isochronous rhythm, isochrony, or isochronism. See also rhythm. 
strong form 
The pronunciation variant of a given word which contains a strong 
vowel, and from which no sounds have been elided. Contrasts with weak form. 
strong syllable 
A syllable that has a strong vowel as its centre, irrespective of whether 
it is stressed or unstressed. Contrasts with weak syllable. 
strong vowel 
A vowel that has its full, original sound quality, except /o/, which is al-
ways weak. Contrasts with weak vowel. 

1 6 6 
Appendix II 
structural function of intonation 
The ability of intonation to express a grammatical 
or structural role of an utterance, for example whether an utterance is a question, a 
request, or an instruction. 
structural word, structure word 
See grammatical 
word. 
suprasegmental phonology 
The study and description of those features of p r o n u n -
ciation that cannot be segmented because they extend over more than one seg-
ment, or sound. Such features include stress, rhythm, and intonation. These fea-
tures together are also referred to as prosody. 
syllabic consonant 
A consonant forming the centre of a syllable, instead of a vowel. 
It has the phonological characteristics of a vowel, but retains the phonetic charac-
teristics of a consonant. A syllabic consonant is indicated by a small vertical line, 
[ 1, under the relevant symbol. There are five consonants that can be transformed 
into syllabic consonants: /l, n, m, n, r/. 
syllabication, syllabification 
The division of words into syllables. 
syllable 
A linguistic unit that is typically larger than a single sound and smaller than a 
word. Phonetically, a syllable must have a centre, also called peak or nucleus, 
which is produced with little or no obstruction of air, and is therefore usually 
formed by a vowel. Phonologically, the English syllable has the maximal structure 
C C C V C C C C (with ' C representing a consonant, and ' V representing a vowel), 
the minimal structure V, or any structure in between. 
syllable-timing 
A type of rhythm whereby all syllables tend to occur at relatively 
equal intervals of time, irrespective of whether they are stressed or unstressed. 
French, Spanish, and Japanese are syllable-timed languages. This type of rhythm 
is also characteristic of the pronunciation of some second-language varieties of 
English, owing to the influence of local mother tongues. Also called isosyllabic 
rhythm, isosyllabicity or isosyllabism. See also rhythm. 
syncopation, syncope 
Elision in the middle of a word, most commonly referring to 
the elision of vowels. The term can also refer to the (historical) elision of conso-
nants, and to the elision of whole syllables. Syncope is sometimes represented in 
the spelling by an apostrophe, as in t'day and t'night. 
syntax 
The study and description of sentence patterns and structures. 
tail 
In intonation, the part of a tone unit that comprises all the syllables occurring be-
tween the tonic syllable and the end of the tone unit. 
tap 
See flap. 
tense 
A feature of intensity used by American linguists to describe vowels which are arti-
culated with relatively much breath force. The label corresponds with the term fortis, 
which is used to describe the intensity of consonant articulation. Contrasts with lax. 
T-glottalling 
See glottal 
replacement. 
timbre 
See tone of voice. 

Glossary of linguistic terms 
tonal quality 
See tone of voice. 
tone group 
See tone unit. 
tone language 
A language in which a change of pitch can change the function ol a 
sound. Over half the languages of the world are tone languages. 
tone of voice 
The "colour" of a voice, produced by the specific pattern of vibraiu.n 
of the vocal folds, which, in turn, causes a specific combination of sound u a\ i \ 
without affecting the sound quality. Also called voice quality, tonal quality, or tim-
bre. Sometimes regarded as a paralinguistic feature. 
tone unit 
A stretch of speech over which a single intonation contour extends. A imu 
unit may be either a part of an utterance, or a whole utterance. Also called miu-
group. 
tonic stress 
The stress carried by the tonic syllable, which determines the particulai 
intonation contour. Also called nuclear stress. 
tonic syllable 
In an utterance, the syllabic on which the main pitch nun emcnt begins 
The pitch movement may be restricted to the tonic syllable, but often it continues 
from the tonic syllable to the end of the tone unit. Also called nucleus. 
trill 
See roll. 
triphthong 
A sound sequence that consists of three vowels. There arc live tnph 
thongs in English. Unlike a diphthong, a triphthong is not analysed as one pin. 
neme. It is interpreted as a closing diphthong followed by a schwa. The sequence 
/aus/, then, is a triphthong consisting of two phonemes. 
unstressed syllable 
Within a word, a syllable which is unstressed. Unstressed s\ 11a 
bles contain mainly /o, i, o/ or a syllabic consonant as their centre. Contrasts with 
stressed syllable. 
utterance 
A unit of spoken language that begins and ends with a clear pause, usually 
has a complete syntactic structure, and a complete meaning. An utterance max be-
as short as a single word, or as long as a complex sentence. 
uvular 
A place of articulation. A uvular sound is made by moving the root or back of 
the tongue against the uvula, which is the appendage that hangs down from tin \ e 
lum. There are no uvular phonemes in English. 
velar 
A place of articulation. A velar sound is made by placing the back of the tongue 
against or near the velum, or soft palate. The sound transcribed as IY.I is a velar. 
velarisation 
A process whereby a sound, almost always /I/, is produced with the 
back of the tongue coming near or touching the velum, or soft palate, in addition 
to another place of articulation. It is influenced by a following consonant or pause, 
and can be indicated in a phonetic transcription proper by a tilde placed through 
the relevant symbol, as in [t]. See also dark I. 
velum 
The back part of the roof of the mouth. Also called the soft palate. 
Ii. ' 

168 
Appendix II 
vocal cords, vocal folds 
Two folds of muscle and connective tissue located behind the 
Adam's apple in the larynx, or voice box. They are opened and closed during the 
production of speech. 
vocoid 
A phonetic class of sounds that are produced without any obstruction of air 
All frictionless continuants and all vowels are vocoids. Contrasts with contoid 
voice box 
See larynx. 
voice onset time 
The time that elapses between the onset of speaking and the point at 
which the vocal folds begin to vibrate. Also called VOT. 
voice quality 
See tone of voice. 
voiced 
A feature of sounds produced with the glottis narrow, so the vocal folds are 
together, and the air-stream forces its way through, causing the vocal folds to vi 
brate. Contrasts with voiceless. 
voiceless 
A feature of sounds produced with the glottis open, so the vocal folds are 
apart, and air passes through without causing the vocal folds to vibrate. Contrasts 
with voiced. 
VOT 
Abbreviation for voice onset time. 
vowel 
A class of sound produced with no obstruction of air, and typically occur i 
at the centre of a syllable. Contrasts with consonant. 
^ 
vowel chart, vowel diagram 
A triangle or quadrilateral within which vowels 
schematically represented on the basis of the two criteria closeness/openness and 
frontness/backness. It approximately reflects the space in the centre of the mouth 
where the vowels are articulated. 
! 
vowel dispersion 
The even distribution of the vowels of a language within a v 
chart. Most languages of the world have vowel dispersion.
 
e 
vowel glide 
See diphthong. 
weak form 
A pronunciation variant of a word that contains a weak vowel, or fr 
which one or more sounds have been omitted, or both. Weak forms can 
°
m 
only in non-prominent positions. Thus they are always unstressed. 
QONT^*** 
with strong form. 
'"ists 
weak syllable 
A syllable that has a weak vowel as its centre. Contrasts with 
syllable.
 
S
t
r
o
n g 
weak vowel 
A vowel that results from a reduction (as is often the case with / a / 
A/) or one that occurs solely in unstressed syllables (i.e. mainly /a/, but als 
[u]). The syllable of which it forms the centre is called a weak syllable. C o
 
S ° 
with strong vowel. 
"
n t r * s t s 
weakening 
See reduction. 
word stress 
The stress carried by a syllable within a word. Word stress in m a 
guages is governed by rules that apply to almost the entire vocabulary 
. ~ 
.1 
c~:.\ 
j : 
li 
T 
i 
i 
,
 
rtry> 
arid i s 
icult to 
r 
j 
r rv — 
— .......... • •~"v.<»uuiary 
a r » j 
therefore fairly predictable. In other languages, word stress is more diffi<
 
1 S 

Glossary of linguistic terms 
169 
predict since it is rule-governed only to a very limited extent. Also called lexical 
stress. 
yod coalescence 
The merging of /t, d, s/ or 111 with IJF - either across word bound-
aries or within a word - to form /tf, d3, f/ or / j / , respectively, 
zero coda A structural feature of a syllable that has no coda, 
zero onset A structural feature of a syllable that has no onset. 
; 
-


English consonant table 
3 
2 
J3 ! E 
§ I 
I 8 
Place of articulation 
I 
apical 
laminal 
_dowd 
bilabial J tobiodciml i dem! j ilveobr ' posUlveoUr . palMo^veotar pdAd 
labial 
plosive* 
slil 
groove 
t 
m 
v 0 
I 
t 
ftiteiwiO- of articulation: Symbols on the left of each field represent fortis consonants, those on the right lems. 

