
A Morbid
Taste
 for Bones
The First Chronicle of Brother Cadfael, of the Benedictine Abbey of Saint
Peter and Saint Paul, at Shrewsbury
Ellis Peters

Chapter One
Chapter Two
Chapter Three
Chapter Four
Chapter Five
Chapter Six
Chapter Seven
Chapter Eight
Chapter Nine
Chapter Ten
Chapter Eleven
Chapter Twelve

Chapter One
 
ON THE FINE, BRIGHT MORNING IN EARLY MAY when the whole
sensational affair of the Gwytherin relics may properly be considered to have
begun, Brother Cadfael had been up long before Prime, pricking out cabbage
seedlings before the day was aired, and his thoughts were all on birth, growth
and fertility, not at all on graves and reliquaries and violent deaths, whether of
saints, sinners or ordinary decent, fallible men like himself. Nothing troubled his
peace but the necessity to take himself indoors for Mass, and the succeeding
half-hour of chapter, which was always liable to stray over by an extra ten
minutes. He grudged the time from his more congenial labours out here among
the vegetables, but there was no evading his duty. He had, after all, chosen this
cloistered life with his eyes open, he could not complain even of those parts of it
he found unattractive, when the whole suited him very well, and gave him the
kind of satisfaction he felt now, as he straightened his back and looked about
him.
He doubted if there was a finer Benedictine garden in the whole kingdom,
or one better supplied with herbs both good for spicing meats, and also
invaluable as medicine. The main orchards and lands of the Shrewsbury abbey
of Saint Peter and Saint Paul lay on the northern side of the road, outside the
monastic enclave, but here, in the enclosed garden within the walls, close to the
abbot’s fishponds and the brook that worked the abbey mill, Brother Cadfael
ruled unchallenged. The herbarium in particular was his kingdom, for he had
built it up gradually through the fifteen years of labour, and added to it many
exotic plants of his own careful raising, collected in a roving youth that had
taken him as far afield as Venice, and Cyprus and the Holy Land. For Brother
Cadfael had come late to the monastic life, like a battered ship settling at last for
a quiet harbour. He was well aware that in the first years of his vows the novices
and lay servants had been wont to point him out to one another with awed
whisperings.
“See that brother working in the garden there? The thickset fellow who rolls
from one leg to the other like a sailor? You wouldn’t think to look at him, would
you, that he went on crusade when he was young? He was with Godfrey de
Bouillon at Antioch, when the Saracens surrendered it. And he took to the seas
as a captain when the king of Jerusalem ruled all the coast of the Holy Land, and
served against the corsairs ten years! Hard to believe it now, eh?”

Brother Cadfael himself found nothing strange in his wide-ranging career,
and had forgotten nothing and regretted nothing. He saw no contradiction in the
delight he had taken in battle and adventure and the keen pleasure he now found
in quietude. Spiced, to be truthful, with more than a little mischief when he
could get it, as he liked his victuals well-flavoured, but quietude all the same, a
ship becalmed and enjoying it. And probably the youngsters who eyed him with
such curiosity also whispered that in a life such as he had led there must have
been some encounters with women, and not all purely chivalrous, and what sort
of grounding was that for the conventual life?
They were right about the women. Quite apart from Richildis, who had not
unnaturally tired of waiting for his return after ten years, and married a solid
yeoman with good prospects in the shire, and no intention of flying off to the
wars, he remembered other ladies, in more lands than one, with whom he had
enjoyed encounters pleasurable to both parties, and no harm to either. Bianca,
drawing water at the stone well-head in Venice—the Greek boat-girl Arianna—
Mariam, the Saracen widow who sold spices and fruit in Antioch, and who
found him man enough to replace for a while the man she had lost. The light
encounters and the grave, not one of them had left any hard feelings behind. He
counted that as achievement enough, and having known them was part of the
harmonious balance that made him content now with this harboured,
contemplative life, and gave him patience and insight to bear with these
cloistered, simple souls who had put on the Benedictine habit as a life’s
profession, while for him it was a timely retirement. When you have done
everything else, perfecting a conventual herb-garden is a fine and satisfying
thing to do. He could not conceive of coming to this stasis having done nothing
else whatever.
Five minutes more, and he must go and wash his hands and repair to the
church for Mass. He used the respite to walk the length of his pale-flowered,
fragrant inner kingdom, where Brother John and Brother Columbanus, two
youngsters barely a year tonsured, were busy weeding and edge-trimming.
Glossy and dim, oiled and furry, the leaves tendered every possible variation on
green. The flowers were mostly shy, small, almost furtive, in soft, sidelong
colours, lilacs and shadowy blues and diminutive yellows, for they were the
unimportant and unwanted part, but for ensuring seed to follow. Rue, sage,
rosemary, gilvers, gromwell, ginger, mint, thyme, columbine, herb of grace,
savoury, mustard, every manner of herb grew here, fennel, tansy, basil and dill,
parsley, chervil and marjoram. He had taught the uses even of the unfamiliar to
all his assistants, and made plain their dangers, too, for the benefit of herbs is in
their right proportion, and over-dosage can be worse than the disease. Small of

habit, modest of tint, close-growing and shy, his herbs called attention to
themselves only by their disseminated sweetness as the sun rose on them. But
behind their shrinking ranks rose others taller and more clamorous, banks of
peonies grown for their spiced seeds, and lofty, pale-leaved, budding poppies, as
yet barely showing the white or purple-black petals through their close armour.
They stood as tall as a short man, and their home was the eastern part of the
middle sea, and from that far place Cadfael had brought their ancestors in the
seed long ago, and raised and cross-bred them in his own garden, before ever he
brought the perfected progeny here with him to make medicines against pain, the
chief enemy of man. Pain, and the absence of sleep, which is the most beneficent
remedy for pain.
The two young men, with habits kilted to the knee, were just straightening
their backs and dusting the soil from their hands, as well aware as he of the hour.
Brother Columbanus would not for the world have let slip one grain of his
duties, or countenanced such a backsliding in any of his fellows. A very comely,
well-made, upstanding young fellow he was, with a round, formidable, Norman
head, as he came from a formidable, aristocratic Norman family, a younger son
despatched to make his way in the monastic ranks as next-best to inheriting the
land. He had stiff, upstanding yellow hair and full blue eyes, and his modest
demeanour and withdrawn pallor tended to obscure the muscular force of his
build. Not a very comfortable colleague, Brother Columbanus, for in spite of his
admirable body equipment he had some while since proved that he had a mental
structure of alarming sensitivity, and was liable to fits of emotional stress, crises
of conscience, and apocalyptic visions far removed from the implications of his
solid skull. But he was young and idealistic, he had time to get over his self-
torments. Brother Cadfael had worked with him for some months, and had every
hope for him. He was willing, energetic, and almost too eager to please. Possibly
he felt his debt to his aristocratic house too nearly, and feared a failure that
would reflect on his kin. You cannot be of high Norman blood, and not excel!
Brother Cadfael felt for any such victims as found themselves in this trap,
coming as he did, of antique Welsh stock without superhuman pretensions. So he
tolerated Brother Columbanus with equanimity, and doctored his occasional
excesses philosophically. The juice of the paynim poppies had quieted
Columbanus more than once when his religious fervour prostrated him.
Well, at any rate there was no nonsense of that kind with the other one!
Brother John was as plain and practical as his name, a square young man with a
snub nose and an untamable ring of wiry russet curls round his tonsure. He was
always hungry, and his chief interest in all things that grew in gardens was
whether they were eatable, and of agreeable flavour. Come autumn he would

certainly find a way of working his passage into the orchards. Just now he was
content to help Brother Cadfael prick out early lettuces, and wait for the soft
fruits to come into season. He was a handsome, lusty, good-natured soul, who
seemed to have blundered into this enclosed life by some incomprehensible
error, and not yet to have realised that he had come to the wrong place. Brother
Cadfael detected a lively sense of mischief the fellow to his own, but never yet
given its head in a wider world, and confidently expected that some day this
particular red-crested bird would certainly fly. Meantime, he got his
entertainment wherever it offered, and found it sometimes in unexpected places.
“I must be in good tune,” he said, unkilting his gown and dusting his hands
cheerfully on his seat. “I’m reader this week.” So he was, Cadfael recalled, and
however dull the passages they chose for him in the refectory, and innocuous the
saints and martyrs he would have to celebrate at chapter, John would contrive to
imbue them with drama and gusto from his own sources. Give him the
beheading of Saint John the Baptist, and he would shake the foundations.
“You read for the glory of God and the saints, brother,” Columbanus
reminded him, with loving reproof and somewhat offensive humility, “not for
your own!” Which showed either how little he knew about it, or how false he
could be, one or the other.
“The blessed thought is ever in my mind,” said Brother John with
irrepressible zest, and winked at Cadfael behind his colleague’s back, and set off
enthusiastically along the aisles of shrubs towards the abbot’s gate and the great
court. They followed him more demurely, the slender, fair, agile youth and the
squat, barrel-chested, bandy-legged veteran of fifty-seven. Was I ever, wondered
Cadfael, rolling with his powerful seaman’s gait beside the other’s long, supple
strides, as young and earnest as this? It cost him an effort to recall that
Columbanus was actually fully twenty-five, and the sprig of a sophisticated and
ambitious house. Whose fortunes, surely, were not founded wholly on piety?
This third Mass of the day was non-parochial and brief, and after it the
Benedictine brothers of the abbey of Shrewsbury filed in procession from the
choir into the chapter-house, and made their way to their stalls in due order,
Abbot Heribert leading. The abbott was old, of mild nature and pliant, a gentle
grey ascetic very wishful of peace and harmony around him. His figure was
unimpressive, though his face was beguiling in its anxious sweetness. Novices
and pupils were easy in his presence, when they could reach it, which was by no
means always easy, for the extremely impressive figure of Prior Robert was
liable to loom between.
Prior Robert Pennant of mixed Welsh and English blood, was more than six
feet tall, attenuated and graceful, silver-grey hair at fifty, blanched and beautiful

of visage, with long, aristocratic features and lofty marble brow. There was no
man in the midland shires would look more splendid in a mitre, superhuman in
height and authority, and there was no man in England better aware of it, or more
determined to prove it at the earliest opportunity. His very motions, sweeping
across the chapter-house to his stall, understudied the pontificate.
After him came Brother Richard the sub-prior, his antithesis, large,
ungainly, amiable and benevolent, of a good mind, but mentally lazy. Doubtful if
he would ever become prior when Robert achieved his end, with so many
ambitious and industrious younger men eyeing the prospect of advancement, and
willing to go to a great deal of trouble to secure it.
After Richard came all the other brothers in their hierarchies. Brother
Benedict the sacristan, Brother Anselm the precentor, Brother Matthew the
cellarer, Brother Dennis the hospitaller, Brother Edmund the infirmarer, Brother
Oswald the almoner, Brother Jerome, the prior’s clerk, and Brother Paul, master
of the novices, followed by the commonalty of the convent, and a very
flourishing number they made. Among the last of them Brother Cadfael rolled to
his own chosen corner, well to the rear and poorly lit, half-concealed behind one
of the stone pillars. Since he held no troublesome parchment office, he was
unlikely to be called upon to speak in chapter upon the various businesses of the
house, and when the matter in hand was dull into the bargain it was his habit to
employ the time to good account by sleeping, which from long usage he could
do bolt upright and undetected in his shadowy corner. He had a sixth sense
which alerted him at need, and brought him awake instantly and plausibly. He
had even been known to answer a question pat, when it was certain he had been
asleep when it was put to him.
On this particular May morning he remained awake long enough to enjoy
Brother John’s extraction of the last improbable ounce of drama from the life of
some obscure saint whose day fell on the morrow, but when the cellarer began to
expound a complicated matter of a legacy partly to the altar of Our Lady, partly
to the infirmary, he composed himself to slumber. After all, he knew that most of
the remaining time, once a couple of minor malefactors had been dealt with,
would be given to Prior Robert’s campaign to secure the relics and patronage of
a powerful saint for the monastery. For the past few months very little else had
been discussed. The prior had had it on his mind, in fact, ever since the Cluniac
house of Wenlock had rediscovered, with great pride and jubilation, the tomb of
their original foundress, Saint Milburga, and installed her bones triumphantly on
their altar. An alien priory, only a few miles distant, with its own miracle-
working saint, and the great Benedictine house of Shrewsbury as empty of relics
as a plundered almsbox! It was more than Prior Robert could stomach. He had

been scouring the borderlands for a spare saint now for a year or more, looking
hopefully towards Wales, where it was well known that holy men and women
had been common as mushrooms in autumn in the past, and as little regarded.
Brother Cadfael had no wish to hear the latest of his complaints and
urgings. He slept.
The heat of the sun rebounded from honed new facets of pale, baked rock,
scorching his face, as the floating arid dust burned his throat. From where he
crouched with his fellows in cover he could see the long crest of the wall, and
the steel-capped heads of the guards on the turrets glittering in the fierce light. A
landscape carved out of reddish stone and fire, all deep gullies and sheer cliffs,
with never a cool green leaf to temper it, and before him the object of all his
journeyings, the holy city of Jerusalem, crowned with towers and domes within
its white walls. The dust of battle hung in the air, dimming the clarity of
battlement and gate, and the hoarse shouting and clashing of armour filled his
ears. He was waiting for the trumpet to sound the final assault, and keeping well
in cover while he waited, for he had learned to respect the range of the short,
curly Saracen bow. He saw the banners surge forward out of hiding, streaming
on the burning wind. He saw the flash of the raised trumpet, and braced himself
for the blare.
The sound that brought him leaping wide-awake out of his dream was loud
enough and stirring enough, but not the brazen blast of a trumpet, nor was he
launched from his stillness towards the triumphant storming of Jerusalem. He
was back in his stall in the dark corner of the chapter-house, and starting to his
feet as alertly as the rest, and with the same consternation and alarm. And the
shriek that had awakened him was just subsiding into a series of rending moans
and broken cries that might have been of extreme pain or extreme ecstasy. In the
open space in the centre of the chapter-house Brother Columbanus lay on his
face, threshing and jerking like a landed fish, beating his forehead and his palms
against the flagstones, kicking and flailing with long, pale legs bared to the knee
by his contortions, and barking out of him those extraordinary sounds of
shattering physical excitement, while the nearest of the brothers hovered in
helpless shock, and Prior Robert with lifted hands exhorted and exclaimed.
Brother Cadfael and Brother Edmund, the infirmarer, reached the victim
together, kneeled over him one on either side, and restrained him from battering
his brains out against the stones of the floor, or dislocating his joints in the
flailings. “Falling sickness!” said Brother Edmund tersely, and wedged the thick
cord of Columbanus’ girdle between his teeth, and a fold of his habit with it, to
prevent him from biting his tongue.
Brother Cadfael was less certain of the diagnosis, for these were not the

grunting, helpless noises of an epileptic in an attack, but such as might be
expected from a hysterical woman in a frenzy. But at least the treatment stopped
half the noise, and even appeared to diminish the vigour of the convulsions,
though they resumed again as soon as the restraining grip on him was loosed.
“Poor young man!” fluttered Abbot Heribert, hovering in the background.
“So sudden, so cruel an affliction! Handle him gently! Carry him to the
infirmary. We must pray for his restoration.”
Chapter broke up in some disorder. With the help of Brother John, and
certain others of a practical turn of mind, they got Brother Columbanus securely
but comfortably swathed in a sheet, confining arms and legs so that he would do
himself no injury, wedged his teeth apart with a wooden spit instead of the cloth,
on which he might have gagged and choked, and carried him on a shutter to the
infirmary, where they got him into bed, and secured him there with bandages
round breast and thighs. He moaned and gurgled and heaved still, but with
weakening force, and when they had managed to get a draught of Brother
Cadfael’s poppy-juice into him his moans subsided into pitiful mutterings, and
the violence of his struggles against his confinement grew feebler.
“Take good care of him,” said Prior Robert, frowning anxiously over the
young man’s bed. “I think someone should be constantly by to watch over him,
in case the fit comes again. You have your other sick men to attend to, you
cannot sit by his side day and night. Brother Jerome, I put this sufferer in your
charge, and excuse you from all other duties while he needs you.”
“Willingly,” said Brother Jerome, “and prayerfully!” He was Prior Robert’s
closest associate and most devoted hanger-on, and an inevitable choice whenever
Robert required strict obedience and meticulous reporting, as might well be the
case where a brother of the house succumbed to what might elsewhere be
whispered abroad as a fit of madness.
“Stay with him in particular during the night,” said the prior, “for in the
night a man’s resistance falters, and his bodily evils may rise against him. If he
sleeps peacefully, you may rest also, but remain close, in case he needs you.”
“He’ll sleep within the hour,” said Cadfael confidently, “and may pass into
natural sleep well before night. God willing, he may put this off before
morning.”
For his part, he thought Brother Columbanus lacked sufficient work for
both mind and body, and took his revenge for his deprivation in these excesses,
half-wilful, half-involuntary, and both to be pitied and censured. But he retained
enough caution to reserve a doubt with every conviction. He was not sure he
knew any of his adopted brothers well enough to judge with certainty. Well,
Brother John—yes, perhaps! But inside the conventual life or outside, cheerful,

blunt, extrovert Brother Johns are few and far between.
Brother Jerome appeared at chapter next morning with an exalted
countenance, and the air of one bursting with momentous news. At Abbot
Heribert’s mild reproof for leaving his patient without permission, he folded his
hands meekly and bowed his head, but lost none of his rapt assurance.
“Father, I am sent here by another duty, that seemed to me even more
urgent. I have left Brother Columbanus sleeping, though not peacefully, for even
his sleep is tormented. But two lay-brothers are watching by him. If I have done
wrong, I will abide it humbly.”
“Our brother is no better?” asked the abbot anxiously.
“He is still deeply troubled, and when he wakes he raves.
But, Father, this is my errand! There is a sure hope for him! In the night I
have been miraculously visited. I have come to tell you what divine mercy has
instructed me. Father, in the small hours I fell into a doze beside Brother
Columbanus’ bed, and had a marvellously sweet dream.”
By this time he had everyone’s attention, even Brother Cadfael was wide
awake. “What, another of them?” whispered Brother John wickedly into his ear.
“The plague’s spreading!”
“Father, it seemed to me that the wall of the room opened, and a great light
shone in, and through the light and radiating the light there came in a most
beautiful young virgin, and stood beside our brother’s bed, and spoke to me. She
told me that her name was Winifred, and that in Wales there is a holy spring, that
rose to the light where she suffered martyrdom. And she said that if Brother
Columbanus bathed in the water of that well, he would surely be healed, and
restored at once to his senses. Then she uttered a blessing upon our house, and
vanished in a great light, and I awoke.”
Through the murmur of excitement that went round the chapter-house, Prior
Robert’s voice rose in reverent triumph: “Father Abbot, we are being guided!
Our quest for a saint has drawn to us this sign of favour, in token that we should
persevere.”
“Winifred!” said the abbot doubtfully. “I do not recall clearly the story of
this saint and martyr. There are so many of them in Wales. Certainly we ought to
send Brother Columbanus to her holy sring, it would be ingratitude to neglect so
clear an omen. But exactly where is it to be found?”
Prior Robert looked round for the few Welshmen among the brothers,
passed somewhat hurriedly over Brother Cadfael, who had never been one of his
favourites, perhaps by reason of a certain spark in his eye, as well as his
notoriously worldly past, and lit gladly upon Old Brother Rhys, who was
virtually senile but doctrinally safe, and had the capacious if capricious memory

of the very old. “Brother, can you tell us the history of this saint, and where her
well is to be found?”
The old man was slow to realise that he had become the centre of attention.
He was shrunken like a bird, and toothless, and used to a tolerant oblivion. He
began hesitantly, but warmed to the work as he found all eyes upon him.
“Saint Winifred, you say, Father? Everybody knows of Saint Winifred.
You’ll find her spring by the name they gave the place, Holywell, it’s no great
way in from Chester. But she’s not there. You won’t find her grave at Holywell.”
“Tell us about her,” coaxed Prior Robert, almost fawning in his eagerness.
“Tell us all her story.”
“Saint Winifred,” declaimed the old man, beginning to enjoy his hour of
glory, “was the only child of a knight named Tevyth, who lived in those parts
when the princes were yet heathens. But this knight and all his household were
converted by Saint Beuno, and made him a church there, and gave him house-
room. The girl was devoted even above her parents, and pledged herself to a
virgin life, hearing Mass every day. But one Sunday it happened that she was
sick, and stayed at home when all the rest of the household went to church. And
there came to the door the prince of those parts. Cradoc, son of the king, who
had fallen in love with her at a distance. For this girl was very beautiful. Very
beautiful!” gloated Brother Rhys, and licked his lips loudly. Prior Robert visibly
recoiled, but refrained from stopping the flow by reproof. “He pleaded that he
was hot and parched from hunting,” said Brother Rhys darkly, “and asked for a
drink of water, and the girl let him in and gave him to drink. Then,” he shrilled,
hunching himself in his voluminous habit and springing erect with a vigour
nobody present would have credited, “he pressed his suit upon her, and grappled
her in his arms. Thus!” The effort was almost too much for him, and moreover,
the prior was eyeing him in alarm; he subsided with dignity. “The faithful virgin
put him off with soft words, and escaping into another room, climbed from a
window and fled towards the church. But finding that she had eluded him, Prince
Cradoc took horse and rode after, and overtaking her just within sight of the
church, and dreading that she would reveal his infamy, struck off her head with
his sword.”
He paused for the murmur of horror, pity and indignation, and got it, with a
flurry of prayerfully-folded hands, and a tribute of round eyes.
“Then thus piteously she came by her death and beatitude?” intoned
Brother Jerome enthusiastically.
“Not a bit of it!” snapped Brother Rhys. He had never liked Brother
Jerome. “Saint Beuno and the congregation were coming out of the church, and
saw what had passed. The saint drew a terrible curse upon the murderer, who at

once sank to the ground, and began to melt like wax in a fire, until all his body
had sunk away into the grass. Then Saint Beuno fitted the head of the virgin onto
her neck, and the flesh grew together, and she stood up alive, and the holy
fountain sprang up on the spot where she arose.”
They waited, spellbound, and he let them wait. He had lost interest after the
death.
“And afterwards?” insinuated Prior Robert. “What did the saint do with her
restored life?”
“She went on a pilgrimage to Rome,” said Brother Rhys indifferently, “and
she attended at a great synod of saints, and was appointed to be prioress over a
community of virgin sisters at Gwytherin, by Llanrwst. And there she lived
many years, and did many miracles in her lifetime. If it should be called her
lifetime? She was once dead already. When she died a second time, that was
where it befell.” He felt nothing concerning this residue of life, he offered it with
a shrug. The girl had had her chance with Prince Cradoc, and let is slip,
obviously her natural bent was to be prioress of a nest of virgins, and there was
nothing more to be told about her.
“And she is buried there at Gwytherin?” persisted the prior. “And her
miracles continued after death?”
“So I have heard. But it’s a long time,” said the old man, “since I’ve heard
her name mentioned. And longer since I was in those parts.”
Prior Robert stood in the circle of sunlight that filtered between the pillars
of the chapter-house, drawn to his full imposing height, and turned a radiant face
and commanding eyes upon Abbot Heribert.
“Father, does it not seem to you that our reverent search for a patron of
great power and sanctity is being divinely guided? This gentle saint has visited
us in person, in Brother Jerome’s dream, and beckoned us to bring our afflicted
brother to her for healing. Shall we not hope, also, that she will again show us
the next step? If she does indeed receive our prayers and restore Brother
Columbanus to health of body and mind, may we not be encouraged to hope that
she will come in person and dwell among us? That we may humbly beg the
church’s sanction to take up her blessed relics and house them fittingly here in
Shrewsbury? To the great glory and lustre of our house!”
“And of Prior Robert!” whispered Brother John in Cadfael’s ear.
“It certainly seems that she has shown us singular favour,” admitted Abbot
Heribert.
“Then, Father, have I your leave to send Brother Columbanus with a safe
escort to Holywell? This very day?”
“Do so,” said the abbot, “with the prayers of us all, and may he return as

Saint Winifred’s own messenger, hale and grateful.”
The deranged man, still wandering in mind and communing with himself in
incoherent ravings, was led away out of the gatehouse on the first stage of his
journey immediately after the midday meal, mounted on a mule, with a high,
cradling saddle to give him some security from falling, in case the violent fit
took him again, and with Brother Jerome and a brawny lay-brother one on either
side, to support him at need. Columbanus looked about him with wide, pathetic,
childlike eyes, and seemed to know nobody, though he went submissively and
trustfully where he was led.
“I could have done with a nice little trip into Wales,” said Brother John
wistfully, looking after them as they rounded the corner and vanished towards
the bridge over the Severn. “But I probably shouldn’t have seen the right visions.
Jerome will do the job better.”
“Boy,” said Brother Cadfael tolerantly, “you become more of an unbeliever
every day.”
“Not a bit of it! I’m as willing to believe in the girl’s sanctity and miracles
as any man. We know the saints have power to help and bless, and I’ll believe
they have the goodwill, too. But when it’s Prior Robert’s faithful hound who has
the dream, you’re asking me to believe in his sanctity, not hers! And in any case,
isn’t her favour glory enough? I don’t see why they should want to dig up the
poor lady’s dust. It seems like charnel-house business to me, not church
business. And you think exactly the same,” he said firmly, and stared out his
elder, eye to eye.
“When I want to hear my echo,” said Brother Cadfael, “I will speak first.
Come on, now, and get the bottom strip of ground dug, there are kale plants
waiting to go in .”
The delegation to Holywell was gone five days, and came home towards
evening in a fine shower of rain and a grand glow of grace, chanting prayers as
the three entered the courtyard. In the midst rode Brother Columbanus, erect and
graceful and jubilant, if that word could be used for one so humble in his
gladness. His face was bright and clear, his eyes full of wonder and intelligence.
No man ever looked less mad, or less likely to be subject to the falling sickness.
He went straight to the church and gave thanks and praise to God and Saint
Winifred on his knees, and from the altar all three went dutifully to report to the
abbot, prior and sub-prior, in the abbot’s lodging.
“Father,” said Brother Columbanus, eager and joyous, “I have no skill to
tell what has befallen me, for I know less than these who have cared for me in
my delirium. All I know is that I was taken on this journey like a man in an ill
dream, and went where I was taken, not knowing how to fend for myself, or

what I ought to do. And suddenly I was like a man awakened out of that
nightmare to a bright morning and a world of spring, and I was standing naked in
the grass beside a well, and these good brothers were pouring water over me that
healed as it touched. I knew myself and them, and only marvelled where I might
be, and how I came there. Which they willingly told me. And then we went, all,
and many people of that place with us, to sing Mass in a little church that stands
close by the well. Now I know that I owe my recovery to the intervention of
Saint Winifred, and I praise and worship her from my heart, as I do God who
caused her to take pity on me. The rest these brothers will tell.”
The lay-brother was large, taciturn, weary—having done all the work
throughout—and by this time somewhat bored with the whole business. He
made the appropriate exclamations where needed, but left the narrative in the
able hands of Brother Jerome, who told all with zest. How they had brought their
patient to the village of Holywell, and asked the inhabitants for directions and
aid, and been shown where the saint had risen living after her martyrdom, in the
silver fountain that still sprang in the same spot, furnished now with a stone
basin to hold its sacred flow. There they had led the rambling Columbanus,
stripped him of habit, shirt and drawers, and poured the sacred water over him
and instantly he had stood erect and lifted his hands in prayer, and given thanks
for a mind restored. Afterwards he had asked them in wonder how he came
there, and what had happened to him, and had been greatly chastened and
exalted at his humbling and his deliverance, and most grateful to his patroness,
by whose guidance he had been made whole.
“And, Father, the people there told us that the saint is indeed buried at
Gwytherin, where she died after her ministry, and that the place where her body
is laid has done many miracles. But they say that her tomb, after so long, is
neglected and little thought of, and it may well be that she longs for a better
recognition, and to be installed in some place where pilgrims may come, where
she may be revered as is her due, and have room to enlarge her grace and
blessing to reach more people in need.”
“You are inspired, having been present at this miracle,” said Prior Robert,
tall and splendid with faith rewarded, “and you speak out what I have felt in
listening to you. Surely Saint Winifred is calling us to rescue as she came to the
rescue of Brother Columbanus. Many have need of her goodness as he had, and
know nothing of her. In our hands she would be exalted as she deserves, and
those who need her grace would know where to come and seek it. I pray that we
may mount that expedition of faith to which she summons us. Father Abbot, give
me your leave to petition the church, and bring this blessed lady home to rest
here among us, and be our proudest boast. For I believe it is her will and her

command.”
“In the name of God,” said Abbot Heribert devoutly, “I approve that
project, and pray the blessing of heaven upon it!”
“He had it all planned beforehand,” said Brother John over the bed of mint,
between envy and scorn. “That was all a show, all that wonder and amazement,
and asking who Saint Winifred was, and where to find her. He knew it all along.
He’d already picked her out from those he’s discovered neglected in Wales, and
decided she was the one most likely to be available, as well as the one to shed
most lustre on him. But it had to come out into the open by miraculous means.
There’ll be another prodigy whenever he needs his way smoothed for him, until
he gets the girl here safely installed in the church, to his glory. It’s a great
enterprise, he means to climb high on the strength of it. So he starts out with a
vision, and a prodigious healing, and divine grace leading his footsteps. It’s as
plain as the nose on your face.”
“And are you saying,” asked Brother Cadfael mildly, “that Brother
Columbanus is in the plot as well as Brother Jerome, and that falling fit of his
was a fake, too? I should have to be very sure of my reward in heaven before I
volunteered to break the paving with my forehead, even to provide Prior Robert
with a miracle.
Brother John considered seriously, frowning. “No, that I don’t say. We all
know our meek white lamb is liable to the horrors over a penance scamped, and
ecstasies over a vigil or a fast, and pouring ice-cold water over him at Holywell
would be the very treatment to jolt him back into his right wits. We could just as
well have tossed him in the fishpond here! But of course he’d believe what they
told him, and credit it all to the saint. Catch him missing such a chance! No, I
wouldn’t say he was a party to it—not knowingly. But he gave them the
opportunity for a splendid demonstration of grace. You notice it was Jerome who
was set to take care of him overnight! It takes only one man to be favoured with
a vision, but it has to be the right man.” He rolled a sprig of the young green
leaves sadly between his palms, and the fragrance distilled richly on the early
morning air. “And it will be the right men who’ll accompany Prior Robert into
Wales,” he said with sour certainty. “You’ll see!”
No doubt about it, this young man was hankering after a glimpse of the
world again, and a breath of air from outside the walls. Brother Cadfael
pondered, not only with sympathy for his young assistant, but also with some
pleasurable stirrings of his own. So momentous an event in the otherwise even
course of monastic life ought not to be missed. Besides the undoubted
possibilities of mischief!
“True!” he said thoughtfully. “Perhaps we ought to take some steps to

leaven the lump. Wales should not be left with the notion that Jerome is the best
Shrewsbury can muster, that’s very true.”
“You have about as much chance of being invited as I,” said Brother John
with his customary bluntness. “Jerome is sure of his place. Prior Robert must
have his right hand with him. And Columbanus, fool innocent, was the
instrument of grace, and could be made to serve the same turn again. Brother
Sub-Prior they have to take along, for form’s sake. Surely we could think up
some way of getting a foot in the door? They can’t move for a few days yet, the
carpenters and carvers are working hard on this splendid reliquary coffin they’re
going to take with them for the lady, but it will take them a while to finish it. Get
your wits to work, brother! There isn’t anything you couldn’t do, if you’ve a
mind! Prior or no prior!”
“Well, well, did I say you had no faith?” wondered
Brother Cadfael, charmed and disarmed. “I might worm my own way in,
there could be ways, but how am I to recommend a graceless rogue like you?
What are you good at, to be taken along on such an errand?”
“I’m a good hand with mules,” said Brother John hopefully, “and you don’t
think Prior Robert intends to go on foot, I suppose? Or to do the grooming and
feeding and watering himself? Or the mucking-out? They’ll need somebody to
do the hard work and wait on them. Why not me?”
It was, indeed, something nobody as yet seemed to have thought of. And
why take a lay-brother, if there was a cloister-brother, with a sweet voice in the
Mass, willing to do the sweating into the bargain? And the boy deserved his
outing, since he was willing to earn it the hard way. Besides, he might be useful
before the end. If not to Prior Robert, to Brother Cadfael.
“We’ll see,” he said, and with that drove his mutinous protege back to the
work in hand. But after dinner, in the somnolent half-hour of sleep for the elders
and play for the novices, he sought out Abbot Heribert in his study.
“Father Abbot, it is on my mind that we are undertaking this pilgrimage to
Gwytherin without full consideration. First we must send to the bishop of
Bangor, in whose see Gwytherin lies, for without his approval the matter cannot
proceed. Now it is not essential to have a speaker fluent in Welsh there, since the
bishop is obviously conversant with Latin. But not every parish priest in Wales
has that tongue, and it is vital to be able to speak freely with the priest at
Gwytherin, should the bishop sanction our quest. But most of all, the see of
Bangor is wholly within the sovereignty of the king of Gwynedd, and surely his
goodwill and permission are essential as those of the church. The princes of
Gwynedd speak only Welsh, though they have learned clerks. Father Prior,
certainly, has a smattering of Welsh, but…”

“That is very true,” said Abbot Heribert, easily dismayed. “It is but a
smattering. And the king’s agreement is all-important. Brother Cadfael, Welsh is
your first, best language, and has no mysteries for you. Could you…? The
garden, I am aware… But with your aid there would be no problem.”
“In the garden,” said Brother Cadfael, “everything is well forward, and can
manage without me ten days or more, and take no hurt. I should be glad indeed
to be the interpreter, and lend my skills also in Gwytherin.”
“Then so be it!” sighed the abbot in heartfelt relief. “Go with Prior Robert,
and be our voice to the Welsh people. I shall sanction your errand myself, and
you will have my authority.”
He was old and human and gentle, full of experience, short on ambition,
self-righteousness and resolution. There could have been two ways of
approaching him concerning Brother John. Cadfael took the more honest and
simple way.
“Father, there is a young brother concerning whose vocation I have doubts,
but concerning whose goodness I have none. He is close to me, and I would that
he might find his true way, for if he finds it he will not forsake it. But it may not
be with us. I beg that I may take him with me, as our hewer of wood and drawer
of water in this enterprise, to allow him time to consider.”
Abbot Heribert looked faintly dismayed and apprehensive, but not
unsympathetic. Perhaps he remembered long-ago days when his own vocation
had suffered periods of storm.
“I should be sorry,” he said, “to refuse a choice to any man who may be
better fitted to serve God elsewhere. Which of us can say he has never looked
over his shoulder? You have not,” he questioned delicately, approaching the
aspect that really daunted him, though with a cautiously dauntless face,
“broached this matter to Prior Robert?”
“No, Father,” said Brother Cadfael virtuously. “I thought it wrong to charge
him with so small a responsibility, when he already carries one so great.”
“Very proper!” agreed the abbot heartily. “It would be ill-done to distract
his mind from his great purpose at this stage. I should say no word to him of the
reason for adding this young man to the party. Prior Robert in his own unshaken
certainty is apt to take an austere view of any man who looks back, once having
set his hand to the plough.”
“Yet, Father, we were not all cut out to be ploughmen. Some could be more
useful labouring in other ways.”
“True!” said the abbot, and warily smiled, pondering the recurring but often
forgotten riddle of Brother Cadfael himself. “I have wondered, I confess… But
never mind! Very well, tell me this young brother’s name, and you shall have

him.”

Chapter Two
 
PRIOR 
ROBERT’S 
FINE, 
FROSTY 
FACE 
MOMENTARILY
REGISTERED DISPLEASURE AND SUSPICION when he heard how his
delegation was to be augmented. Brother Cadfael’s gnarled, guileless-eyed self-
sufficiency caused him discomfort without a word amiss or a glance out of place,
as though his dignity were somehow under siege. Of Brother John he knew no
particular evil, but the redness of his hair, the exuberance of his health and high
spirits, the very way he put live blood back into old martyrdoms with his
extravagant gusto in the reading, were all offensive in themselves, and jarred on
the prior’s aesthetic sensibilities. However, since Abbot Heribert had innocently
decreed that they should join the party, and since there was no denying that a
fluent Welsh speaker might become an urgent necessity at some stage, Prior
Robert accepted the fiat without demur, and made the best of it.
They set out as soon as the fine reliquary for the saint’s bones was ready,
polished oak ornamented with silver, to serve as a proof what honours awaited
Winifred in her new shrine. In the third week of May they came to Bangor, and
told their story to Bishop David, who was sympathetic, and readily gave his
consent to the proposed translation, subject only to the agreement of Prince
Owain, who was regent of Gwynedd owing to the illness of the old king, his
father. They ran the prince to earth at Aber, and found him equally obliging, for
he not only gave the desired approval, but sent his one English-speaking clerk
and chaplain to show them the best and quickest way to Gwytherin, and
commend them and their errand to the parish priest there. Thus episcopally and
royally blessed, Prior Robert led his party on the last stage of their journey, a
little too easily convinced that his progress was being divinely smoothed, and
would be so to its triumphant end.
They turned aside from the Conway valley at Llanrwst, climbing away from
the river into forested hill country. Beyond the watershed they crossed the Elwy
where it is young and small, and moved steadily south-eastwards through thick
woods, over another ridge of high land, to descend once again into the upland
valley of a little river, that provided some marshy water-meadows along its
banks, and a narrow band of tilled fields, sloping and sturdy but protected by the
forests, above these lush pastures. The wooded ridge on either hand ran in
oblique folds, richly green, hiding the scattered housesteads. The fields were
already planted, and here and there orchards flowered. Below them, where the

woods drew back to leave an amphitheatre of green, there was a small stone
church, whitewashed and shimmering, and a little wooden house beside it.
“You see the goal of your pilgrimage,” said the chaplain Urien. He was a
compact, neat, well-shaven personage, handsomely dressed and mounted, more
of an ambassador than a clerk.
“That is Gwytherin?” asked Prior Robert.
“It is the church and priest’s house of Gwytherin. The parish stretches for
several miles along the river valley, and a mile or more from the Cledwen on
either bank. We do not congregate in villages as you English do. Land good for
hunting is plentiful, but good for tillage meagre. Every man lives where best
suits him for working his fields and conserving his game.”
“It is a very fair place,” said the sub-prior, and meant it, for the fold on fold
of well-treed hills beyond the river made a pattern of spring beauty in a hundred
different greens, and the water-meadows were strung like a necklace of emeralds
along the fringes of a necklace of silver and lapis-lazuli.
“Good to look at, hard to work,” said Urien practically. “See, there’s an ox-
team on the far side trying to break a new strip, now all the rest are planted.
Watch the beasts strain at it, and you’ll know how the higher ground weighs.”
Across the river, some way below them and a great way off, the snaky
curve of the furrows already won patterned the slope between cultivated fields
and leaning trees, a dark brown writing upon the hillside, and on the higher
furrow, as yet uncompleted, the oxen leaned into their yokes and heaved, and the
ploughman behind them clung and dragged at the heavy share. Before the
leading pair a man walked backwards, arms gently waving and beckoning, his
goad only a wand, flourished for magic, not for its sting, his high, pure calls
carried aloft on the air, cajoling and praising. Towards him the beasts leaned
willingly, following his cries with all their might. The new-turned soil, greyish-
brown and sluggish, heaved moist and fresh to light after the share.
“A harsh country,” said Urien, as one assessing, not complaining, and set
his horse moving downhill towards the church. “Come, I’ll hand you over to
Father Huw, and see you well-received.”
They followed him by a green path that wound out of the hills, and soon
lost its view of the valley between scattered, flowering trees. A wooden house or
two showed among the woods, surrounded by small garden plots, and again
vanished.
“Did you see?” said Brother John in Cadfael’s ear, pacing beside the
sumpter mule. “Did you see how the beasts laboured towards that fellow not to
escape the goad, only to go where he willed, only to please him? And such
labour! That I should like to learn!”

“It’s labour for man as well as beast,” said Brother Cadfael.
“But for free goodwill! They wanted to go with him, to do what he wanted
them to do. Brother, could devoted disciples do more? Do you tell me he takes
no delight in what he does?”
“No man nor God who sees his faithful delight to serve him,” said Brother
Cadfael patiently and carefully, “but he knows delight. Hush, now, we’re barely
here, there’ll be time to look round us.”
They were down in the little arena of grass and vegetable plots, clear of the
trees. The stone church with its tiny turret and tinier bell visible within shone
blindingly white, bluish-white against all the lush green. And out of the cabbage-
patch, freshly planted, in the lee of the wooden cabin, rose a small, square man
in a brown sackcloth gown hoisted to the knees, thick brown legs sturdy under
him, and a thicket of curly brown hair and beard half-concealing a brown, broad,
wondering face round two large, dark-blue eyes. He came out hastily, scrubbing
his hands on his skirts. At close quarters his eyes were larger, bluer and more
astonished than ever, and as timid as the mild eyes of a doe.
“Good-day to you, Father Huw,” said Urien, reining in before him, “I’ve
brought you distinguished guests from England, upon important church business,
and with the blessing of prince and bishop.”
When they had ridden into the clearing the priest had certainly been the
only man in sight, but by the time Urien had ended his greeting a score of silent,
sudden figures had appeared from nowhere, and made a wary and curious half-
circle about their pastor. By the distracted look in Father Huw’s eyes he was
busy reckoning up in some alarm how many of these strangers his modest hut
could fittingly house, and where to bestow the rest of them, and how much food
there was in his larder to make a meal for so many, and where he could best
commandeer whatever extra was needed. But no question of not extending a
welcome. Guests were sacrosanct, and must not even be questioned on the
proposed length of their stay, however ruinous.
“My poor household is at the reverend fathers’ disposal,” he said, “and
whatever powers I have to serve them, also. You come fresh from Aber?”
“From Aber,” said Urien, “from Prince Owain, and I must rejoin him there
tonight. I am only the herald for these Benedictine brothers, who come on a holy
errand, and when I have explained their case to you, then I leave them in your
hands.” He presented them by name, Prior Robert first. “And have no fear when
I have left, for Brother Cadfael here is a man of Gwynedd himself, and speaks
Welsh as well as you do.”
Huw’s look of harassed apprehension was immediately eased, but in case he
should be in any doubt, Cadfael favoured him with a rapid brotherly greeting in

the promised language, which gratifyingly produced the identical look of slight
distrust and insecurity in Prior Robert’s normally assured grey eyes.
“You are welcome to this poor house you honour,” said Huw, and ran a
quick eye over the horses and mules and their loads, and without hesitation
called a couple of names over his shoulder. A shaggy-headed elder and a
sunburned boy of about ten came forward readily in answer. “Ianto, help the
good brother water the beasts, and put them in the little paddock to graze, until
we see how best to stable them. Edwin, run and tell Marared we have guests, and
help her bring water and wine.”
They ran to do his bidding, and several of the others who had gathered,
brown, bare-legged men, slender dark women and half-naked children, drew
nearer, conferred softly among themselves, and the women slipped away to their
own cooking-fires and bake-ovens to bring whatever they could to contribute to
Gwytherin’s hospitality.
“While it’s so fine and mild,” said Huw, standing aside to wave them into
the little enclosure of his garden, “it may please you best to sit in the orchard. I
have benches and table there. Through the summer I live out of doors. Time
enough to go within and light fires when the days draw in and the nights grow
cold.”
His holding was tiny and his living poor enough but he took good care of
his fruit-trees and was a diligent gardener, Brother Cadfael noted with approval.
And for one who seemed, unlike many of the parish priests of the Celtic
persuasion, to be celibate, and happily so, he had the bare little house and
grounds in very neat order, and could produce from his own store, or his
parishioners’ shared stock, clean wooden trenchers and good bread to put on
them, and plain but presentable drinking-horns for his raw red wine. He
performed all the ceremonies due from a host with humble dignity. The boy
Edwin returned with a lively old woman, Huw’s neighbour, bringing food and
drink. And all the while that the visitors sat there in the sun, various of the
people of Gwytherin, scattered though the parish might be, found occasion to
walk past the wattle fence of the orchard and examine the party carefully, though
without seeming to do so. It was not every day, or every year, indeed, that they
had so momentous a visitation. Every soul in the parish would know before
evening not only that monks from Shrewsbury were guests at Huw’s house, but
also how many they were, what they looked like, what fine horses and handsome
mules they had, and most probably what they had come for, into the bargain. But
the eyeing and the listening were done with perfect courtesy and discretion.
“And now, since Master Urien has to return to Aber,” said Huw, when they
had eaten and were sitting at ease, “it might be well if he would tell me in what

particular I can serve the brothers of Shrewsbury, so that he may be assured we
understand each other before he leaves us. And whatever is in my competence I
will surely do.”
Urien told the story as he had heard it, and Prior Robert elaborated at such
length that Brother John, growing bored and restless, let his eyes stray to take
stock of the occasional figures that passed along the fence, with alert ears and
shy but sharp eyes. His interest and curiosity were somewhat less discreet than
theirs. And there were some very handsome girls among them! The one passing
now, for instance, her step graceful and slow—she knew she was watched!—and
her hair a great, heavy braid over her shoulder, the colour of polished oak, a
light, silken brown, even with silvery dashes in it like the grain of oak…
“And the bishop has given his consent to your proposal?” asked Huw, after
a long minute of silence, and in a voice that suggested wonder and doubt.
“Both bishop and prince have sanctioned it.” Prior Robert was uneasy at the
very hint of a hitch at this stage. “The omens have surely not misled us? Saint
Winifred is here? She lived out her restored life here, and is buried in this
place?”
Huw owned that it was so, with so curious an intonation of caution and
reluctance that Cadfael decided he was trying to recall exactly where the lady
was to be found, and wondering in what state her grave would be discovered,
after all this time since last he had so much as thought of it.
“She is here, in this cemetery?” The little whitewashed church gleamed
provocatively in the sunshine.
“No, not here.” Some relief this time, he did not have to reveal her
whereabouts immediately. “This church is new since her time. Her grave is in the
old burial-ground of the wooden church on the hill, a mile or more from here. It
is long disused. Yes, certainly the omens favour your plans, and beyond question
the saint is here in Gwytherin. But…”
“But?” said Prior Robert with displeasure. “Both prince and bishop have
given us their blessing, and commended our cause to you. Moreover, we have
heard, and they have agreed, that the saint in her stay here among you has been
much neglected, and may well wish to be received where greater honour will be
paid to her.”
“In my church,” said Huw humbly, “I have never heard that the saints
desired honour for themselves, but rather to honour God rightly. So I do not
presume to know what Saint Winifred’s will may be in this matter. That you and
your house should desire to honour her rightly, that is another matter, and very
proper. But…  This blessed virgin lived out her miraculously restored life in this
place, and no other. Here she died for the second time, and here is buried, and

even if my people have neglected her, being human and faulty, yet they always
knew that she was here among them, and at a pinch they could rely on her, and
for a Welsh saint I think that counts for much. Prince and bishop—both of whom
I reverence as I ought—may not altogether understand how my flock will feel, if
their holiest girl is to be dug up out of her grave and taken away into England. It
may matter little to the crown and the crozier, a saint is a saint wherever her
relics rest. But I tell you plainly, the people of Gwytherin are not going to like it
at all!”
Brother Cadfael, stirred to an atavistic fervour of Welshness by this homely
eloquence, snatched the initiative from Urien at this point, and translated with
the large declamation of the bards.
In full spate, he turned his eyes away from the distracting faces, to light
upon one even more distracting. The girl with the light-oak sheen on her hair
was again passing the fence, and had been so charmed by what she heard, and
the vehemence of its delivery, that for a moment she forgot to keep moving, and
stood there at gaze, apple-blossom face radiant and rose-leaf lips laughing. And
with the same satisfaction with which she gazed at Cadfael, Brother John gazed
at her. Cadfael observed both, and was dazzled. But the next moment she caught
herself up in a hasty alarm, and blushed beautifully, and swept away out of sight.
Brother John was still gaping long after she had vanished.
“It is hardly important, surely?” said Prior Robert with ominous mildness.
“Your bishop and your prince have made their views plain. The parishioners
need not be consulted.”
That, too, Cadfael interpreted, Urien choosing to remain neutral and mute.
“Impossible!” said Huw firmly, knowing himself on secure ground. “In
such a grave matter affecting the whole parish, nothing can be done without
calling together the assembly of the free men, and putting the case to them fully
and publicly. Doubtless the will of prince and bishop will prevail, but even so,
these must be put to the people before they can say yes or no to them. I shall call
such an assembly tomorrow. Your case can only be vindicated absolutely by
public acceptance.”
“He says truly,” said Urien, holding the prior’s austere and half affronted
eyes. “You will do well to get the goodwill of Gwytherin, however many
blessings you already have. They respect their bishop, and are very content with
their king and his sons. I doubt if you need grudge the delay.”
Prior Robert accepted both the warning and the reassurance, and felt the
need of a period of quietude in which to review his strategy and prepare his
persuasions. When Urien rose to take his leave, his errand punctiliously
completed, the Prior also rose, half a head taller than the tallest there, and folded

his long white hands in submissive resignation.
“We have yet two hours or more to Vespers,” he said, eyeing the angle of
the sun. “I should like to withdraw into your church and spend some while in
meditation, and prayer for right guidance. Brother Cadfael, you had better
remain with Father Huw, and help him in any arrangements he needs to make,
and you, Brother John, bestow the horses as he directs, and see them cared for.
The rest will join me in intercession, that we may conduct this enterprise
rightly.”
He swept away, elongated and silvery and majestic, and had to stoop his
head to enter under the low round arch of the church door. Brother Richard,
Brother Jerome, Brother Columbanus vanished within on his heels. Not all the
time they were together there would be spent in prayer. They would be
considering what arguments would be most likely to carry the day with Father
Huw’s free assembly, or what oblique ecclesiastical threats daunt them into
submission.
Brother John looked after the lofty silver head until it stooped with accurate
dignity just low enough to pass under the stone, and let out something between a
sigh and an arrested gurgle of laughter, as though he had been praying for a
miscalculation. What with the journey, and the exercise, and the outdoor living,
he looked ruddier and healthier and more athletic than ever.
“I’ve been hoping all this while for a chance to get my leg over that dapple-
gray,” he said. “Richard rides him like a badly-balanced woolsack. I hope Father
Huw’s stabling is a mile or more away.”
Father Huw’s plans for them, it seemed, involved two of the nearer and
more prosperous members of his flock, but even so, in the scattered Welsh way,
their houses were dispersed in valley and forest.
“I shall give up my own house to the prior and sub-prior, of course,” he
said, “and sleep in the loft above my cow. For the beasts, my grazing here is too
small, and I have no stable, but Bened the smith has a good paddock above the
water-meadows, and stabling with a loft, if this young brother will not mind
being lodged the better part of a mite from his fellows. And for you and your
two companions, Brother Cadfael, there is open house half a mile from here
through the woods, with Cadwallon, who has one of the biggest holdings in
these parts.”
Brother Cadfael considered the prospect of being housed with Jerome and
Columbanus, and found it unattractive. “Since I am the only one among us who
has fluent Welsh,” he said diplomatically, “I should remain close to Prior
Robert’s side. With your goodwill, Huw, I’ll share your loft above the cow-byre,
and be very comfortable there.”

“If that’s your wish,” said Huw simply, “I shall be glad of your company.
And now I must set this young man on his way to the smithy.”
“And I,” said Cadfael, “if you don’t need me along with you—and yonder
boy will make himself understood in whatever language, or none!—will go a
piece of the way back with Urien. If I can pick up an acquaintance or so among
your flock, so much the better, for I like the look of them and their valley.”
Brother John came out from the tiny paddock leading the two tall horses,
the mules following on leading reins. Huw’s eyes glowed almost as bright as
John’s, caressing the smooth lines of neck and shoulder.
“How long it is,” he said wistfully, “since I was on a good horse!”
“Come on, then, Father,” urged Brother John, understanding the look if not
the words, “up with you! Here’s a hand, if you fancy the roan. Lead the way in
style!” And he cupped a palm for the priest’s lifted foot, and hoisted him, dazed
and enchanted, into the saddle. Up himself on the grey, he fell in alongside,
ready if the older man should need a steadying hand, but the brown knees
gripped happily. He had not forgotten how. “Bravely!” said John, hugely
laughing. “We shall get on famously together, and end up in a race!”
Urien, checking his girth, watched them ride away out or the gentle bowl of
the clearing “There go two happy men,” he said thoughtfully.
“More and more I wonder,” said Cadfael, “how that youngster ever came to
commit himself to the monastic life.”
“Or you, for instance?” said Urien, with his toe in the stirrup. “Come, if you
want to view the ground, we’ll take the valley way a piece, before I leave you for
the hills.”
They parted at the crest of the ridge, among the trees but where a fold of the
ground showed them the ox-team still doggedly labouring at a second strip,
continuing the line of the first, above the richer valley land. Two such strips in
one day was prodigious work.
“Your prior will be wise,” said Urien, taking his leave, “to take a lesson
from yonder young fellow. Leading and coaxing pays better than driving in these
parts. But I need not tell you—a man as Welsh as myself.”
Cadfael watched him ride away gently along the cleared track until he
vanished among the trees. Then he turned back towards Gwytherin, but went
steeply downhill towards the river, and at the edge of the forest stood in green
shadow under an oak tree, gazing across the sunlit meadows and the silver thread
of river to where the team heaved and strained along the last furrow. Here there
was no great distance between them, and he could see clearly the gloss of sweat
on the pelts of the oxen, and the heavy curl of the soil as it heeled back from the
share. The ploughman was dark, squat and powerful, with a salting of grey in his

shaggy locks, but the ox-caller was tall and slender, and the curling hair that
tossed on his neck and clung to his moist brow was as fair as flax. He managed
his backward walking without a glance behind, feeling his way light-footed and
gracefully, as if he had eyes in the back of his heels. His voice was hoarse and
tired with long use now, but still clear and merry, more effective than any goad,
as he cajoled his weary beasts along the final furrow, calling and luring and
praising, telling them they had done marvels, and should get their rest and their
meed for it, that in moments now they would be going home, and he was proud
of them and loved them, as if he had been talking to Christian souls. And the
beasts heaved and leaned, throwing their weight into the yokes and keeping their
eyes upon him, and plainly would do anything in their power to please him.
When the plough curved to the end and halted, and the steaming oxen stood with
lowered heads, the young man came and flung an arm over the neck of the near
leader, and scrubbed with brisk knuckles in the curly hair on the other’s brow,
and Cadfael said aloud: “Bravely! But, my friend, how did you stray into
Wales?”
Something small, round and hard dropped rustling through the leaves above
him, and hit him neatly in the middle of his weather-beaten tonsure. He clapped
a hand to his crown, and said something unbecoming his habit. But it was only
one of last year’s oak-balls, dried out by a winter’s weathering to the hardness of
a pebble. He looked up into the foliage above his head, already thick and turning
rich green from its early gold, and it seemed to him that the tremor of leaves
where there was no wind required more explanation than the accidental fall of
one small remnant of a dead year. It stilled very quickly, and even its stillness, by
contrast, seemed too careful and aware. Cadfael removed himself a few yards, as
if about to walk on, and doubled round again behind the next barrier of bushes to
see if the bait had been taken.
A small bare foot, slightly strained with moss and bark, reached down out
of the branches to a toe-hold on the trunk. Its fellow, stretched at the end of a
long, slim leg, swung clear, as the boy prepared to drop. Brother Cadfael,
fascinated, suddenly averted his eyes in haste, and turned his back, but he was
smiling, and he did not, after all, withdraw, but circled his screen of bushes and
reappeared innocently in view of the bird that had just flown down out of its
nest. No boy, as he had first supposed, but a girl, and a most personable girl, too,
now standing decorously in the grass with her skirts nobly disposed round her,
and even the small bare feet concealed.
They stood looking at each other with candid curiosity, neither at all
abashed. She might have been eighteen or nineteen years old, possibly younger,
for there was a certain erect assurance about her that gave her the dignity of

maturity even when newly dropped out of an oak tree. And for all her bare feet
and mane of unbraided dark hair, she was no villein girl. Everything about her
said clearly that she knew her worth. Her gown was of fine homespun wool,
dyed a soft blue, and had embroidery at neck and sleeves. No question but she
was a beauty. Her face was oval and firm of feature, the hair that fell in wild
waves about her shoulders was almost black, but black with a tint of dark and
brilliant red in it where the light caught, and the large, blacklashed eyes that
considered Brother Cadfael with such frank interest were of almost the same
colour, dark as damsons, bright as the sparkles of mica in the river pebbles.
“You are one of the monks from Shrewsbury,” she said with certainty. And
to his astonishment she said it in fluent and easy English.
“I am,” said Cadfael. “But how did you come to know all about us so soon?
I think you were not among those who made it their business to walk along
Huw’s garden fence while we were talking. There was one very young girl, I
remember, but not a black lass like you.”
She smiled. She had an enchanting smile, sudden and radiant. “Oh, that
would be Annest. But everybody in Gwytherin knows by now all about you, and
what you’ve come for. Father Huw is right, you know,” she warned seriously,
“we shan’t like it at all. Why do you want to take Saint Winifred away? When
she’s been here so long, and nobody ever paid any attention to her before? It
doesn’t seem neighbourly or honest to me.”
It was an excellent choice of words, he thought, and marvelled how a Welsh
girl came by it, for she was using English as if she had been born to it, or come
to it for love.
“I question the propriety of it myself, to be truthful,” he agreed ruefully.
“When Father Huw spoke up for his parish, I confess I found myself inclining to
his side of the argument.” That made her look at him more sharply and carefully
than before, frowning over some sudden doubt or suspicion in her own mind.
Whoever had informed her had certainly witnessed all that went on in Father
Huw’s garden. She hesitated a moment, pondering, and then launched at him
unexpectedly in Welsh: “You must be the one who speaks our language, the one
who translated what Father Huw said.” It seemed to trouble her more than was
reasonable. “You do know Welsh! You understand me now.”
“Why, I’m as Welsh as you, child,” he admitted mildly, “and only a
Benedictine in my middle years, and I haven’t forgotten my mother-tongue yet, I
hope. But I marvel how you’ve come to speak English as well as I do myself,
here in the heart of Rhos.”
“Oh, no,” she said defensively, “I’ve only learned a very little. I tried to use
it for you, because I thought you were English. How was I to know you’d be just

that one?” Now why should his being bilingual cause her uneasiness? he
wondered. And why was she casting so many rapid, furtive glances aside
towards the river, brightly glimpsed through the trees? Where, as he saw in a
glance just as swift as hers, the tall, fair youngster who was no Welshman, and
was certainly the finest ox-caller in Gwynedd, had broken away from his
placidly-drinking team, and was wading the river thigh-deep towards this
particular tall oak, in a flurry of sparkling spray. The girl had been ensconced in
this very tree, whence, no doubt, she had a very good view of the ploughing.
And came down as soon as it was finished! “I’m shy of my English,” she said,
pleading and vulnerable. “Don’t tell anyone!”
She was wishing him away from here, and demanding his discretion at the
same time. His presence, he gathered, was inconvenient.
“I’ve known the same trouble myself,” he said comfortably, “when first I
tried getting my tongue round English. I’ll never call your efforts into question.
And now I’d better be on my way back to our lodgings, or I shall be late for
Vespers.”
“God go with you, then, Father,” she said, radiant and relieved.
“And with you, my child.”
He withdrew by a carefully chosen route that evaded any risk of bumping
into the fair young man. And she watched him go for a long moment, before she
turned eagerly to meet the ox-caller as he came splashing through the shallows
and climbed the bank. Cadfael thought that she was perfectly aware how much
he had observed and understood, and was pleased by his reticence. Pleased and
reassured. A Welsh girl of status, with embroidery along the hems of her gown,
had good need to go softly if she was meeting an outlander, a man landless and
rootless here in a clan society, where to be without place in a kinship was to be
without the means of living. And yet a very pleasing, comely young man, good
at his work and feeling for his beasts. Cadfael looked back, when he was sure the
bushes covered him, and saw the two of them draw together, still and glad, not
touching, almost shy of each other. He did not look back again.
Now what I really need here, he thought as he walked back towards the
church of Gwytherin, is a good, congenial acquaintance, someone who knows
every man, woman and child in the parish, without having to carry the burden of
their souls. A sound drinking companion with good sense is what I need.

Chapter Three
 
HE FOUND NOT ONE OF WHAT HE WANTED, BUT THREE at one
stroke, after Compline that evening, when he walked back with Brother John in
the twilight to the smithy and croft at the edge of the valley fields. Prior Robert
and Brother Richard had already withdrawn for the night into Huw’s house,
Jerome and Columbanus were on their way through the woods to Cadwallon’s
holding, and who was to question whether Brother Cadfael had also gone to his
pallet in the priest’s loft, or was footloose among the gossips of Gwytherin? The
lodging arrangements were working out admirably. He had never felt less
inclined for sleep at this soft evening hour, nor was anyone going to rouse them
at midnight here for Matins. Brother John was delighted to introduce him into
the smith’s household, and Father Huw favoured the acquaintance for his own
reasons. It was well that others besides himself should speak for the people of
the parish, and Bened the smith was a highly respected man, like all of his craft,
and his words would carry weight. There were three men sitting on the bench
outside Bened’s door when they arrived, and the mead was going round as fast
as the talk. All heads went up alertly at the sound of their steps approaching, and
a momentary silence marked the solidarity of the local inhabitants. But Brother
John seemed already to have made himself welcome, and Cadfael cast them a
greeting in Welsh, like a fisherman casting a line, and was accepted with
something warmer than the strict courtesy the English would have found. Annest
with the light-brown, sunflecked hair had spread word of his Welshness far and
wide. Another bench was pulled up, and the drinking-horns continued their
circling in a wider ring. Over the river the light was fading gradually, the
dimness green with the colours of meadow and forest, and threaded through with
the string of silver water.
Bened was a thickset, muscular man of middle years, bearded and brown.
Of his two companions the younger was recognisable as the ploughman who had
followed the ox-team that day, and no wonder he was dry after such labour. And
the third was a grey-headed elder with a long, smoothly-trimmed beard and fine,
sinewy hands, in an ample homespun gown that had seen better days, perhaps on
another wearer. He bore himself as one entitled to respect, and got it.
“Padrig, here, is a good poet and a fine harpist,” said Bened, “and
Gwytherin is lucky to have him staying a while among us, in Rhisiart’s hall.
That’s away beyond Cadwallon’s place, in a forest clearing, but Rhisiart has land

over this way, too, both sides the river. He’s the biggest landowner in these parts.
There are not many here entitled to keep a harp, or maybe we’d be honoured
with more visits from travelling bards like Padrig. I have a little harp myself—I
have that privilege—but Rhisiart’s is a fine one, and kept in use, too. I’ve heard
his girl play on it sometimes.”
“Women cannot be bards,” said Padrig with tolerant scorn. “But she knows
how to keep it tuned, and well looked after, that I will say. And her father’s a
patron of the arts, and a generous, open-handed one. No bard goes away
disappointed from his hall, and none ever leaves without being pressed to stay. A
good household!”
“And this is Cai, Rhisiart’s ploughman. No doubt you saw the team cutting
new land, when you came over the ridge today.”
“I did and admired the work,” said Cadfael heartily. “I never saw better. A
good team you had there, and a good caller, too.”
“The best,” said Cai without hesitation. “I’ve worked with a good many in
my time, but never known one with the way Engelard has with the beasts.
They’d die for him. And as good a hand with all cattle, calving or sick or what
you will. Rhisiart would be a sorry man if ever he lost him. Ay, we did a good
day’s work today.”
“You’ll have heard from Father Huw,” said Cadfael, “that all the free men
are called to the church tomorrow after Mass, to hear what our prior is
proposing. No doubt we shall see Rhisiart there.”
“See and hear him,” said Cai, and grinned. “He speaks his mind. An open-
hearted, open-natured man, with a temper soon up and soon down, and never a
grudge in him, but try and move him when his mind’s made up, and you’re
leaning on Snowdon.”
“Well, a man can but hold fast to what he believes right, and even the
opponent he baulks should value him for that. And have his sons no interest in
the harp, that they leave it to their sister?”
“He has no sons,” said Bened. “His wife is dead, and he never would take
another, and there’s only this one girl to follow him.”
“And no male heir anywhere in his kinship? It’s rare for a daughter to
inherit.”
“Not a man on his side the family at all,” said Cai, “and a pity it is. The
only near kin is her mother’s brother, and he has no claim, and is old into the
bargain. The greatest match anywhere in this valley, is Sioned, and young men
after her like bees. But God willing, she’ll be a contented wife with a son on her
knee long before Rhisiart goes to his fathers.”
“A grandson by a good man, and what could any lord want more.” said

Padrig, and emptied the jug of mead and passed the horn along. “Understand me,
I’m not a Gwytherin man myself, and have no right to give a voice one way or
the other. But if I may say a word my friends won’t say for themselves—you
having your duty to your prior as Cai has to his lord, or I to my art and my
patrons—don’t look for an easy passage, and don’t take offence if your way is
blocked. Nothing personal to you! But where the free men of Wales see no fair
dealing, they won’t call it by fair names, and they won’t stand aside.”
“I should be sorry if they did,” said Cadfael. “For my part, the ending I
want is the fair ending, leaving no man with a just grievance. And what of the
other lords we can expect to see there? Of Cadwallon we’ve heard, two of our
brothers are enjoying his hospitality. And his lands are neighbour to Rhisiart’s?”
“It’s a fair piece beyond to Rhisiart’s hall, on through the forest. But they’re
neighbours, boundary to boundary, yes, and friends from youth. A peaceable
man, Cadwallon, he likes his comfort and his hunting. His way would be to say
yes to whatever bishop and prince commend, but then, his way normally is also
to say yes to Rhisiart. For that matter,” owned Bened, tilting the last drop from
the horn, “I know no more than you what either of them will have to say in this
matter. For all I know they’ll accept your omens and bless your errand. If the
free voice goes with your prior, then Saint Winifred goes home with you, and
that’s the end of it.”
It was the end of the mead, too, for that night.
“Bide the night here,” said Bened to Padrig, when the guests rose to walk
home, “and we’ll have a little music before you leave tomorrow. My small harp
needs to be played, I’ve kept it in fettle for you.”
“Why, so I will, since you’re so kind,” said Padrig, and weaved his way
gently into the house with his host. And Cai and Brother Cadfael, taking their
leave, set off companionably shoulder to shoulder, to make their way back to
Father Huw’s house, and thence in courtesy a measure of the way through the
woods towards Rhisiart’s hall before they parted.
“I would not say more nor plainer,” said Cai confidingly, “while Bened was
present, nor in front of Padrig, for that matter, though he’s a good fellow—so are
they both!—but a traveller, not a native. This Sioned, Rhisiart’s girl…  The truth
is, Bened would like to be a suitor for her himself, and a good, solid man he is,
and a girl might well do worse. But a widower, poor soul, and years older than
the lass, and a poor chance he has. But you haven’t seen the girl!”
Brother Cadfael was beginning to suspect that he had indeed seen the girl,
and seen more than any here had ever been allowed to see. But he said nothing.
“A girl like a squirrel! As swift, as sudden, as black and as red! If she had
nothing, they’d still be coming from miles around, and she will have lands any

man might covet even if she squinted! And there’s poor Bened, keeping his own
counsel and feeding on his own silence, and still hoping. After all, a smith is
respected in any company. And give him his due, it isn’t her heritage he covets.
It’s the girl herself. If you’d seen her, you’d know. In any case,” said Cai, sighing
gustily for his friend, “her father has a favourite for son-in-law already, and has
all along. Cadwallon’s lad has been in and out of Rhisiart’s hall, and made free
with Rhisiart’s servants and hawks and horses, ever since he could run, and
grown up with the girl. And he’s sole heir to the neighbouring holding, and what
could suit either father better? They’ve had it made up between them for years.
And the children seem ideally matched, they know each other through and
through, like brother and sister.”
“I doubt if I’d say that made for an ideal match,” said Brother Cadfael
honestly.
“So Sioned seems to think, too,” said Cai drily. “So far she’s resisted all
pressures to accept this lad Peredur. And mind you, he’s a very gay, lively well-
looking young fellow, spoiled as you please, being the only one, but show me a
girl round here who wouldn’t run if he lifted his finger—all but this girl! Oh, she
likes him well enough, but that’s all. She won’t hear of marriage yet, she’s still
playing the heartfree child.”
“And Rhisiart bears with her?” asked Cadfael delicately.
“You don’t know him, either. He dotes on her, and well he may, and she
reveres him, and well she may, and where does that get any of us? He won’t
force her choice. He never misses a chance to urge how suitable Peredur is, and
she never denies it. He hopes, if he bides his time, she’ll come round.”
“And will she?” asked Brother Cadfael, responding to something in the
ploughman’s voice. His own was milder than milk.
“No accounting,” said Cai slowly, “for what goes on in a girl’s head. She
may have other plans of her own. A bold, brave one she is, clever and patient at
getting her own way. But what that may be, do I know? Do you? Does any
man?”
“There may be one man who does,” said Brother Cadfael with guileful
disinterest.
If Cai had not risen to that bait, Cadfael would have let well alone then, for
it was no business of his to give away the girl’s secrets, when he had stumbled
upon them himself only by chance. But he was no way surprised when the
ploughman drew meaningfully close against his arm, and jabbed a significant
elbow into his ribs. A man who had worked closely with the young ox-caller as
he had must surely have noted a few obvious things by now. This afternoon’s
purposeful bee-line across the meadows and through the water to a certain well-

grown oak would be enough in itself for a sharp man. And as for keeping his
mouth shut about it, it was pretty plain that his sympathies were with his work-
mate.
“Brother Cadfael, you wouldn’t be a talking man, not out of turn, and
you’re not tied to one side or the other in any of our little disputes here. No
reason you shouldn’t know. Between you and me, she has got a man in her eye,
and one that wants her worse than Bened does, and has even less chance of ever
getting her. You remember we were talking of my fellow on the team, Engelard?
A good man with cattle, worth plenty to his lord, and Rhisiart knows it and
values him fairly on it. But the lad’s an alltud—an outlander!”
“Saxon?” asked Cadfael.
“The fair hair. Yes, you saw him today. The length and slenderness of him
too. Yes, he’s a Cheshire man from the borders of Maelor, on the run from the
bailiffs of Earl Ranulf of Chester. Oh, not for murder or banditry or any such!
But the lad was simply the most outrageous deer-poacher in the earldom. He’s a
master with the short bow, and always stalked them afoot and alone. And the
bailiff was after his blood. Nothing for him to do, when he was cornered on the
borders, but run for it into Gwynedd. And he daren’t go back, not yet, and you
know what it means for a foreigner to want to make a living in Wales.”
Cadfael knew indeed. In a country where every native-born man had and
knew his assured place in a clan kinship, and the basis of all relationships was
establishment on the land, whether as free lord or villein partner in a village
community, the man from outside, owning no land here, fitting into no place,
was deprived of the very basis of living. His only means of establishing himself
was by getting some overlord to make compact with him, give him house-room
and a stake in the land, and employ him for whatever skills he could offer. For
three generations this bargain between them was revocable at any time, and the
outlander might leave at the fair price of dividing his chattels equally with the
lord who had given him the means of acquiring them.
“I do know. So Rhisiart took this young man into his service and set him up
in a croft?”
“He did. Two years ago now, a little more. And neither of them has had any
call to regret it. Rhisiart’s a fair-minded master, and gives credit where it’s due.
But however much he respects and values him, can you see a Welsh lord ever
letting his only daughter go to an alltud?”
“Never!” agreed Cadfael positively. “No chance of it! It would be against
all his laws and customs and conscience. His own kinship would never forgive
it.”
“True as I’m breathing!” sighed Cai ruefully. “But you try telling that to a

proud, stubborn young fellow like Engelard, who has his own laws and rights
from another place, where his father’s lord of a good manor, and carries every bit
as much weight in his feudal fashion as Rhisiart does here.”
“Do you tell me he’s actually spoken for her to her father?” demanded
Cadfael, astonished and admiring.
“He has, and got the answer you might expect. No malice at all, but no hope
either. Yes, and stood his ground and argued his case just the same. And comes
back to the subject every chance that offers, to remind Rhisiart he hasn’t given
up, and never will. I tell you what, those two are two of a kind, both hot-
tempered, both obstinate, but both as open and honest as you’ll find anywhere,
and they’ve a great respect for each other that somehow keeps them from
bearing malice or letting this thing break them apart. But every time this comes
up, the sparks fly. Rhisiart clouted Engelard once, when he pushed too hard, and
the lad came within an ace of clouting back. What would the answer to that have
been? I never knew it happen with an alltud, but if a slave strikes a free man he
stands to lose the hand that did it. But he stopped himself in time, though I don’t
think it was fear that stopped him—he knew he was in the wrong. And what did
Rhisiart do, not half an hour later, but fling back and ask his pardon! Said he was
an insolent, unreasonable, unWelsh rascal, but he should not have struck him.
There’s a battle going on all the time between those two, and neither of them can
get any peace, but let any man say a word against Rhisiart in Engelard’s hearing,
and he’ll get it back down his throat with a fist behind it. And if one of the
servants ever called down Engelard, thinking to curry favour with Rhisiart, he’d
soon get told that the alltud’s an honest man and a good worker, worth ten of the
likes of his backbiters. So it goes! And I can see no good end to it.”
“And the girl?” said Cadfael. “What does she say to all this?”
“Very little, and very softly. Maybe at first she did argue and plead, but if so
it was privately with her father alone. Now she’s biding her time, and keeping
them from each other’s throat as best she can.”
And meeting her lover at the oak tree, thought Cadfael, or any one of a
dozen other private places, wherever his work takes him. So that’s how she
learned her English, all through those two years while the Saxon boy was busy
learning Welsh from her, and that’s why, though she was willing to pass the time
of day in his own language with a visiting monk, she was concerned about
having betrayed her accomplishment to a Welsh-speaking stranger, who might
innocently blurt it abroad locally. She’d hardly want to let slip how often she’s
been meeting Engelard in secret, if she’s biding her time, and keeping father and
lover from each other’s throat till she can get her own way with them. And
who’s to say which of the three will give way first, where all look immovable?

“It seems you’ve your own troubles here in Gwytherin, let alone what
we’ve brought with us.” he said, when he parted from Cai.
“God resolves all given time,” said Cai philosophically and trudged away
into darkness. And Cadfael returned along the path with the uncomfortable
feeling that God, nevertheless, required a little help from men, and what he
mostly got was hindrance.
All the free men of Gwytherin came to the meeting next day, and their
womenfolk and all the villein community came to the Mass beforehand. Father
Huw named the chief among them softly to Brother Cadfael as they made their
appearance. He had seldom had such a congregation.
“Here is Rhisiart, with his daughter and his steward, and the girl’s waiting-
woman.”
Rhisiart was a big, bluff, hearty-looking man of about fifty, high-coloured
and dark-haired, with a short, grizzled beard, and bold features that could be
merry or choleric, fierce or jovial, but were far too expressive ever to be
secretive or mean. His stride was long and impetuous, and his smile quick in
response when he was greeted. His dress hardly distinguished him from any of
the other free landholders who came thronging into the church, being plain as
any, but of good homespun cloth. To judge from his bright face, he came without
prejudice, willing to listen, and for all his thwarted family plans, he looked an
expansively happy man, proud and fond of his daughter.
As for the girl, she followed at his heels modestly, with poised head and
serene eyes. She had shoes on for this occasion, and her hair was brushed and
braided into a burnished dark coil on her neck, and covered with a linen coif, but
there was no mistaking her. This was the urchin of the oak tree, and the greatest
heiress and most desirable prize in marriage in all this countryside.
The steward was an older man, grey-headed and balding, with a soft,
goodhumoured face. “He is Rhisiart’s kinsman by marriage,” whispered Huw,
“his wife’s elder brother.”
“And the other girl is Sioned’s tirewoman?” No need to name her, he
already knew her name. Dimpled and smiling, Annest followed her friend with
demure little steps into the church, and the sun stroked all the bright, silvery
grain in the sheaf of her pale hair. “She is the smith’s niece,” said Father Huw
helpfully. “A good girl, she visits him often since he buried his wife, and bakes
for him.”
“Bened’s niece?” Brother John pricked his ears, and looked after the
shapely waist and glowing hair with fascinated eyes, no doubt hoping there
would be a baking day before they had to leave Gwytherin. The lodging
arrangements had certainly been inspired, though whether by an angel or an imp

remained to be seen.
“Lower your eyes, brother,” said Jerome chidingly. “It is not seemly to look
so straightly upon women.”
“And how did he know there were women passing,” whispered Brother
John rebelliously, “if his own eyes were so dutifully lowered?”
Brother Columbanus, at least, was standing as prescribed in the presence of
females, with pale hands prayerfully folded, and lofty eyelids lowered, his gaze
upon the grass.
“And here comes Cadwallon now,” said Father Huw. “These good brothers
already know him, of course. And his lady. And his son Peredur.”
So this young man, loping after his parents with the long, springy gait of a
yearling roebuck, was the chosen husband for Sioned, the lad she liked well
enough, and had known familiarly all her life, but was in no way inclined to
marry. It occurred to Cadfael that he had never asked how the groom felt about
the situation, but it needed only a glimpse of Peredur’s face when he caught sight
of Sioned to settle the matter. Here was a tangle. The girl might have worn out in
mere liking all her inclination to love, but the boy certainly had not. At sight of
her his face paled, and his eyes took fire.
The parents were ordinary enough, comfortable people grown plump from
placid living, and expecting things to go smoothly still as they always had.
Cadwallon had a round, fleshy, smiling face, and his wife was fat, fair and
querulous. The boy cast back to some more perilous ancestor. The spring of his
step was a joy to watch. He was not above middle height, but so well-
proportioned that he looked tall. His dark hair was cut short, and curled crisply
all over his head. His chin was shaven clean, and all the bones of his face were
as bold and elegant as his colouring was vivid, with russet brushings of sun on
high cheekbones, and a red, audacious, self-willed mouth. Such a young person
might well find it hard to bear that another, and an alien at that, should be
preferred to him. He proclaimed in his every movement and glance that
everything and everyone in his life had responded subserviently to his charm,
until now.
At the right moment, when the church was full, Prior Robert, tall and
imposing and carefully groomed, swept in through the tiny sacristy and took his
place, and all the Shrewsbury brothers fell into line and followed on his heels.
The Mass began.
In the deliberations of the free assembly of the parish, of course, the women
had no part. Neither had the villeins, though they had their indirect influence
through those of their friends who were free. So while the free men lingered
after the Mass, the rest dispersed, moving away with slow dignity, and not too

far, just far enough to be discreetly out of sight and earshot, but handy to detect
what was passing by instinct, and confirm it as soon as the meeting broke up.
The free men gathered in the open before the church. The sun was already
high, for it was little more than an hour to noon. Father Huw stood up before the
assembly, and gave them the gist of the matter, as it had been presented to him.
He was the father of this flock, and he owed his people truth, but he also owed
his church fealty. He told them what bishop and prince had answered to the
request from Shrewsbury, reverently presented, and with many proofs. Which
proofs he left to Robert to deliver.
The prior had never looked holier or more surely headed for sainthood
himself. He had always a sense of occasion, and beyond a doubt it had been his
idea to hold the meeting here in the open, where the sun could gild and
illuminate his otherworldly beauty. It was Cadfael’s detached opinion that he did
himself more than justice, by being less overbearing than might have been
expected. Usually he overdid things, this time he got it right, or as right as
something only equivocally right in itself can be got.
“They’re not happy!” whispered Brother John in Cadfael’s ear, himself
sounding far from sad about it. There were times when even Brother John could
be humanly smug. And indeed, those Welsh faces ranged round them were
singularly lacking in enthusiasm for all these English miracles performed by a
Welsh saint. Robert at his best was not exactly carrying his audience.
They swayed and murmured, and eyed one another, and again turned as one
man to eye him.
“If Owain ap Griffith wills it, and the bishop gives his blessing, too,” began
Cadwallon hesitantly, “as loyal sons of the church, and true men of Gwynedd,
we can hardly…”
“Both prince and bishop have blessed our errand,” said the prior loftily.
“But the girl is here, in Gwytherin,” said Rhisiart abruptly. He had the voice
that might have been expected from him, large, melodious and deep, a voice that
sang what it felt, and waited for thought afterwards, to find that the thought had
been there already in the feeling. “Ours, not Bishop David’s! Not Owain ap
Griffith’s! She lived out her life here, and never said a word about wanting to
leave us. Am I to believe easily that she wants to leave us now, after so long?
Why has she never told us? Why?”
“She has made it clear to us,” said the prior, “by many manifestations, as I
have told you.”
“But never a word to us,” cried Rhisiart, roused. “Do you call that courtesy?
Are we to believe that, of a virgin who chose to make her home here among us?”
They were with him, his assurance had fired their smouldering reluctance.

They cried out from a dozen directions at once that Saint Winifred belonged to
Gwytherin, and to no other place.
“Do you dare tell me,” said Prior Robert, high and clear, “that you have
visited her? That you have committed your prayers to her? That you have
invoked the aid of this blessed virgin, and given her the honour that is her due?
Do you know of any reason why she should desire to remain here among you?
Have you not neglected even her grave?”
“And if we have,” said Rhisiart with blithe conviction, “do you suppose the
girl wonders at it? You have not lived here among us. She did. You are English,
she was Welsh, she knew us, and was never so moved against us that she
withdrew or complained. We know she is there, no need to exclaim or make any
great outcry. If we have needs, she knows it, and never asks that we should come
with prayers and tears, knocking our knees on the ground before her. If she
grudged a few brambles and weeds, she would have found a means to tell us. Us,
not some distant Benedictine house in England!”
Throats were opening joyfully, shouting where they had muttered. The man
was a poet and a preacher, match for any Englishman. Brother Cadfael let loose
his bardic blood, and rejoiced silently. Not even because it was Prior Robert
recoiling into marble rage under Welsh siege. Only because it was a Welsh voice
that cried battle.
“And do you deny,” thundered Robert, stretching his ascetic length to its
loftiest, “the truth of those omens and miracles I have declared to you, the
beckoning that led us here?”
“No!” said Rhisiart roundly. “I never doubted you believed and had
experienced these portents. But portents can arise, miracles can be delivered,
either from angels or devils. If these are from heaven, why have we not been
instructed? The little saint is here, not in England. She owes us the courtesy of
kinsmen. Dare you say she is turned traitor? Is there not a church in Wales, a
Celtic church such as she served? What did she know of yours? I do not believe
she would speak to you and not to us. You have been deceived by devils!
Winifred never said word!”
A dozen voices took up the challenge, hallooing applause for their most
articulate spokesman, who had put his finger on the very pulse of their
resentment. Even the very system of bishoprics galled the devout adherents of
the old, saintly Celtic church, that had no worldly trappings, courted no thrones,
but rather withdrew from the world into the blessed solitude of thought and
prayer. The murmur became a subdued rumbling, a thunder, a roar. Prior Robert,
none too wisely, raised his commanding voice to shout them down.
“She said no word to you, for you had left her forgotten and unhonoured.

She has turned to us for recognition, when she could get none from you.”
“That is not true,” said Rhisiart, “though you in your ignorance may believe
it. The saint is a good Welshwoman, and knows her countrymen. We are not
quick in respect to rank or riches, we do not doff and bow and scrape when any
man flaunts himself before us. We are blunt and familiar even in praise. What we
value we value in the heart, and this Welsh girl knows it. She would never leave
her own unfurnished, even if we have neglected to trim her grave. It is the spirit
that leans to us, and is felt by us as guardian and kin. But these bones you come
hunting are also hers. Not ours, not yours! Until she tells us she wills to have
them moved, here they stay. We should be damned else!”
It was the bitterest blow of Prior Robert’s life to know that he had met his
match and overmatch in eloquence and argument, here in a half-barbaric Welsh
landholder, no great lord, but a mere squireling elevated among his inferiors to a
status he barely rated, at least in Norman eyes. It was the difference between
them that Robert thought in hierarchies, and Rhisiart thought in blood-ties, high
and low of one mind and in one kinship, and not a man among them aware of
inferiority, only of his due place in a united family.
The thunder was one voice now, demanding and assured, but it was one
man who had called it into being. Prior Robert, well aware that a single
adversary confronted him, subdued his angry tones, and opted for the wisdom of
the dove, and the subtlety of single combat. He raised his long, elegant arms,
from which the wide sleeves of his habit fell free, and smiled on the assembly,
turning the smile at its most compelling and fatherly upon Rhisiart.
“Come Brother Cadfael, say this for me to the lord Rhisiart, that it is all too
easy for us, who have the same devotion at heart, to disagree about the means. It
is better to speak quietly, man to man, and avoid the deformation of anger. Lord
Rhisiart, I beg you to come apart with me, and let us debate this matter in
quietude, and then you shall have liberty to speak out what you will. And having
had my say fairly with you, I will say no word further to challenge what you
have to impart to your people.”
“That is fair and generous,” said Rhisiart promptly to this offer, and stood
forward with ingenuous pleasure from the crowd, which parted to let him
through.
“We will not take even the shadow of dissension into the church,” said Prior
Robert. “Will you come with us into Father Huw’s house?” All those bright,
sullen, roused eyes followed them in through the low doorway, and clung there
to wait for them to come forth again. Not a man of the Welsh moved from his
place. They trusted the voice that had spoken for them hitherto to speak for them
still.

In the small, wood-scented room, dark after the brightness of the day
outside, Prior Robert faced his opponent with a calm and reasonable face.
“You have spoken well,” he said, “and I commend your faith, and the high
value you set on the saint, for so do we value her highly. And at her own wish,
for so we believe, we have come here, solely to serve her. Both church and state
are with us, and you know better than I the duty a nobleman of Wales owes to
both. But I would not willingly leave Gwytherin with a sense of grievance, for I
do know that by Saint Winifred’s departure Gwytherin’s loss is great. That we
own, and I would wish to make due reparation.”
“Reparation to Gwytherin?” repeated Rhisiart, when this was translated to
him. “I do not understand how…”
“And to you,” said Robert softly and matter-of-factly, “if you will withdraw
your opposition, for then I feel sure all your fellows will do the same, and
sensibly accept what bishop and prince decree.”
It occurred to Cadfael as he interpreted this, even before the prior began the
slow, significant motion of one long hand into the breast of his habit, that Robert
was about to make the most disastrous miscalculation of his life. But Rhisiart’s
face remained dubious and aloof, quite without understanding, as the prior drew
from his bosom a soft leather bag drawn up with a cord at the neck, and laid it on
the table, pushing it gently across until it rested against Rhisiart’s right hand. Its
progress over the rough boards gave out a small chinking sound. Rhisiart eyed it
suspiciously, and lifted uncomprehending eyes to stare at the prior. “I don’t
understand you. What is this?”
“It is yours,” said Robert, “if you will persuade the parish to agree to give
up the saint.”
Too late he felt the unbelieving coldness in the air, and sensed the terrible
error he had made. Hastily he did his best to recover some of the ground lost.
“To be used as you think best for Gwytherin—a great sum…” It was useless
Cadfael let it lie in silence.
“Money!” said Rhisiart in the most extraordinary of tones, at once curious,
derisory and revolted. He knew about money, of course, and even understood its
use, but as an aberration in human relations. In the rural parts of Wales, which
indeed were almost all of Wales, it was hardly used at all, and hardly needed.
Provision was made in the code for all necessary exchange of goods and
services, nobody was so poor as to be without the means of living, and beggars
were unknown. The kinship took care of its helpless members, and every house
was open as of right. The minted coins that had seeped in through the marches
were a pointless eccentricity. Only after a moment of scornful wonder did it
occur to Rhisiart that in this case they were also a mortal insult. He snatched

away his hand from the affronting touch, and the blood surged into his face
darkly red, suffusing even the whites of his eyes.
“Money? You dare offer to buy our saint? To buy me? I was in two minds
about you, and about what I ought to do, but now, by God, I know what to think!
You had your omens. Now I have mine.”
“You mistake me!” cried the prior, stumbling after his blunder and seeing it
outdistance him at every breath. “One cannot buy what is holy, I am only
offering a gift to Gwytherin, in gratitude and compensation for their sacrifice—“
“Mine, you said it was,” Rhisiart reminded him, glowing copper bright with
dignified rage. “Mine, if I persuaded…! Not a gift! A bribe! This foolish stuff
you hoard about you more dearly far than your reputations, don’t think you can
use it to buy my conscience. I know now that I was right to doubt you. You have
said your say, now I will say mine to those people without, as you promised me I
should, without hindrance.”
“No, wait!” The prior was in such agitation that he actually reached out a
hand and caught his opponent by the sleeve. “Do nothing in haste! You have
mistaken my meaning indeed, and if I was wrong even to offer an alms to
Gwytherin, I am sorry for it. But do not call it—“
Rhisiart withdrew himself angrily from the detaining clasp, and cut off the
protest curtly, wheeling on Cadfael. “Tell him he need not be afraid. I should be
ashamed to tell my people that a prior of Shrewsbury tried to corrupt me with a
bribe. I don’t deal in that kind of warfare. But where I stand—that they shall
know, and you, too.” And he strode out from them, and Father Huw put out a
warning hand to prevent any of them from attempting to impede or follow him.
“Not now! He is hot now. Tomorrow something may be done to approach
him, but not now. You must let him say what he will.”
“Then at least let’s put in an appearance,” said the prior, magnificently
picking up what pieces he could of the ruin he had created; and he swept out into
the sunlight and took his stand close to the door of the church, with all his
fellow-monks dutifully following on his heels, and stood with erect head and
calmly folded hands, in full view, while Rhisiart thundered his declaration to the
assembled people of Gwytherin.
“I have listened to what these men from Shrewsbury have had to say to me,
and I have made my judgment accordingly, and now I deliver it to you. I say that
so far from changing my views, I am confirmed a thousand times that I was right
to oppose the sacrilege they desire. I say that Saint Winifred’s place is here
among us, where she has always belonged, and that it would be mortal sin to let
her be taken away to a strange place, where not even the prayers would be in a
tongue she knows, where foreigners not worthy to draw near her would be her

only company. I pledge my opposition to the death, against any attempt to move
her bones, and I urge upon you the same duty. And now this conference is
ended.”
So he said, and so it was. There could be no possible way of prolonging it.
The prior was forced to stand with marble face and quiet hands while Rhisiart
strode away towards the forest path, and all the assembly, in awed and
purposeful silence, melted away mysteriously in all directions after his
departure, so that within minutes all that green, trodden arena was empty.

Chapter Four
 
YOU SHOULD HAVE TOLD ME WHAT YOU INTENDED,” said Father
Huw, timidly reproachful. “I could have told you it was folly, the worst possible.
What attraction do you think money has for a man like Rhisiart? Even if he was
for sale, and he is not, you would have had to find other means to purchase him.
I thought you had taken his measure, and were proposing to plead to him the
sorry plight of English pilgrims, who have no powerful saints of their own, and
are sadly in need of such a protectress. He would have listened to something that
entreated of his generosity.”
“I am come with the blessing of church and sovereign,” said the prior
fiercely, though the repetition was beginning to pall even on him. “I cannot be
repudiated at the will of a local squire. Has my order no rights here in Wales?”
“Very few,” said Cadfael bluntly. “My people have a natural reverence, but
it leans towards the hermitage, not the cloister.”
The heated conference went on until Vespers, and poisoned even Vespers
with its bitterness, for there Prior Robert preached a fearful sermon detailing all
the omens that Winifred desired above all things to remove to the sanctity of
Shrewsbury, and issuing her prophetic denunciation against all who stood in the
way of her translation. Terrible would be her wrath visited on those who dared
resist her will. Thus Prior Robert approached the necessary reconciliation with
Rhisiart. And though Cadfael in translating toned down the threat as much as he
dared, there were some among the congregation who understood enough English
to get the full drift of it. He knew by their closed, mute faces. Now they would
go away to spread the word to those who had not been present, until everyone in
Gwytherin knew that the prior had bidden them remember what befell Prince
Cradoc, whose very flesh watered away into the ground like rain, so that he
vanished utterly, as to the body expunged out of the world, as to the soul, the
fearful imagination dared not guess. So also it might happen to those who dared
offend against Winifred now.
Father Huw, harried and anxious, cast about him as honestly as he could for
a way of pleasing everybody. It took him most of the evening to get the prior to
listen, but from sheer exhaustion a calm had to set in at last.
“Rhisiart is not an impious man—“
“Not impious!” fluted Brother Jerome, appealing to heaven with uplifted
eyes. “Men have been excommunicated for less!”

“Then men have been excommunicated for no evil at all,” said Huw
sturdily, “and truly I think they sometimes have. No, I say he is a decent, devout
man, open-handed and fair, and had a right to resent it when he was
misunderstood and affronted. If he is ever to withdraw his opposition, it must be
you, Father Prior, who make the first approach to him, and upon a different
footing. Not in person first, I would not ask or advise it. But if I were to go to
him, perhaps with Brother Cadfael here, who is known to be a good Welshman
himself, and ask him to forget all that has been said and done, and come with an
open mind to begin the discussion over again, I think he would not refuse.
Moreover, the very act of seeking him out would disarm him, for he has a
generous heart. I don’t say he would necessarily change his mind—it would
depend on how he is handled this time—but I do say he would listen.”
“Far be it from me” said Prior Robert loftily “to pass over any means of
saving a soul from perdition. I wish the man no ill, if he tempers his offences. It
is not a humiliation to stoop to deliver a sinner.”
“O wondrous clemency!” intoned Brother Jerome. “Saintly generosity
towards the ill-doer!”
Brother John flashed a narrow, glittering glance, and shifted one foot
uneasily, as if restraining an impulse to kick. Father Huw, desperate to preserve
his stock of goodwill with prince, bishop, prior and people alike, cast him a
warning look, and resumed hurriedly: “I will go to Rhisiart tonight, and ask him
to dine here at my house tomorrow. Then if we can come to terms between us,
another assembly can be called, so that all may know there is peace.”
“Very well!” said the prior, after consideration. In that way he need never
actually admit any guilt on his part, or apologise for any act of his, nor need he
enquire too closely what Huw might have to say on his behalf. “Very well, do so,
and I hope you may succeed.”
“It would be a mark of your status, and the importance of this gesture,”
suggested Cadfael with an earnest face, “if your messengers went mounted. It’s
not yet dark, and the horses would be better for exercise.”
“True,” said the prior, mildly gratified. “It would be in keeping with our
dignity and lend weight to our errand. Very well, let Brother John bring the
horses.”
“Now that’s that I call a friend!” said Brother John heartily, when they were
all three in the saddle, and safely away into the early dusk under the trees, Father
Huw and John on the two tall horses, Brother Cadfael on the best of the mules.
“Ten more minutes, and I should have earned myself a penance that would have
lasted a month or more, and now here we are in the best company around, on a
decent errand, and enjoying the quiet of the evening.”

“Did I ever say word of your coming with us?” said Cadfael slyly. “I said
the horses would add lustre to the embassage, I never went so far as to say you
would add any.”
“I go with the horses. Did you ever hear of an ambassador riding without a
groom? I’ll keep well out of the way while you confer, and play the dutiful
servant. And by the by, Bened will be doing his drinking up there at the hall
tonight. They go the rounds, and it’s Cai’s turn.”
“And how did you learn so much,” wondered Cadfael, “without a word of
Welsh?”
“Oh, they knock their meaning into me somehow, and I into them. Besides,
I have several words of Welsh already, and if we’re held up here for a while I
shall soon learn a great many more, if I can get my tongue round them. I could
learn the smith’s art, too. I lent him a hand at the forge this morning.”
“You’re honoured. In Wales not everyone can be a smith.”
Huw indicated the fence that had begun to run alongside them on the right.
“Cadwallon’s holding. We have a mile of forest to go yet to Rhisiart’s hall.”
It was still no more than dusk when they emerged into a large clearing, with
ploughed and planted strips surrounding a long stockade fence. The smell of
wood-smoke drifted on the air, and glimmer of torches lit the open doorway of
the hall. Stables and barns and folds clung to the inner side of the fence, and men
and women moved briskly about the evening business of a considerable
household.
“Well, well!” said the voice of Cai the ploughman, from a bench under the
eaves of one of the byres. “So you’ve found your way by nose to where the
mead is tonight, Brother Cadfael.” And he moved up obligingly to make room,
shoulder to shoulder with Bened. “Padrig’s making music within, and from all I
hear it may well be war music, but he’ll be with us presently. Sit yourself down,
and welcome. Nobody looks on you as the enemy.”
There was a third with them already, a long man seated in deeper shadow,
his legs stretched well out before him at ease, and his hair showing as a primrose
pallor even in the dimness. The young outlander, Engelard, willingly gathered up
his long limbs and also moved to share the bench. He had a quick, open smile
vivid with white teeth.
“We’ve come expressly to halt the war,” said Brother Cadfael as they
dismounted, and a groom of the household came running to take their bridles.
“Father Huw has the peace in hand, I’m only an assessor to see fair play. And,
sadly, we’ll be expected back with an answer as soon as we’ve spoken with your
lord. But if you’ll take charge of Brother John while we deal, he’ll be grateful.
He can speak English with Engelard, a man should practise his own tongue when

he can.”
But Brother John, it appeared, had at that moment completely lost the use
of his tongue in any language, for he stood at gaze, and let the reins be taken
from his hands like a man in a dream. Nor was he looking at Engelard, but
towards the open doorway of the hall, from which a girl’s figure had issued, and
was crossing gaily towards the drinkers under the eaves, a large jug carried in
both hands. The lively brown eyes flickered over the visitors, took in Cadfael
and the priest with easy friendliness, and opened wide upon Brother John,
standing like a very lifelike statue, all thorny russet hair, weather-burned cheeks
and wild, admiring eyes. Cadfael looked where Annest’s eyes were looking, and
approved a very upstanding, ruggedly-built, ingenuous, comely young fellow,
maybe two or three years older than the girl. The Benedictine habit, kilted to the
knee for riding and forgotten now, looked as much like a working Welsh tunic as
made no matter, and the tonsure, however well a man (or a girl!) knew it was
there, was invisible behind the burning bush of curls.
“Thirsty people you are, then!” said Annest, still with one eye upon Brother
John, and set down her pitcher on the bench beside Cai, and with a flick of her
skirts and a wave of her light-brown mane, sat down beside it, and accepted the
horn Bened offered her. Brother John stood mute and enchanted.
“Come on, then, lad,” said Bened, and made a place for him between
himself and Cai, only one remove from where the girl sat delicately sipping. And
Brother John, like a man walking in his sleep, though perhaps with rather more
zestful purpose, strode forward towards the seat reserved for him.
“Well, well!” said Cadfael silently to himself, and left the insoluble to the
solver of all problems, and with Father Huw moved on into the hall.
“I will come,” said Rhisiart, shut into a small chamber apart with his
visitors. “Of course I will come. No man should refuse another his say. No man
can be sure he will not belie himself and do himself less than justice, and God
forbid I should refuse anyone his second chance. I’ve often spoken in haste
myself, and been sorry after, and said so, as your prior has said so now.” He had
not, of course, nor had Huw claimed, in so many words, that he had. Rather he
had expressed his own shame and regret, but if Rhisiart attributed these to Prior
Robert, Huw was desperate enough to let him continue in the delusion. “But I
tell you this, I expect little from this meeting. The gap between us is too wide. To
you I can say what I have not said to any who were not there, because I am
ashamed. The man offered me money. He says now he offered it to Gwytherin,
but how is that possible? Am I Gwytherin? I am a man like other men, I fill my
place as best I can, but remain one only. No, he offered the purse to me, to take
back my voice against him. To persuade my own people to go along with his

wishes. I accept his desire to talk to me again, to bring me to see this matter as
he sees it. But I cannot forget that he saw it as something he could buy with
money. If he wishes to change me, that must change, and be shown to be
changed. As for his threats, for threats they are, and I approve you for reporting
them faithfully, they move me not at all. My reverence for our little saint is the
equal of his or any man’s. Do you think she does not know it?”
“I am sure she does,” said Father Huw.
“And if all they want is to honour and adore her rightly, why can they not
do so here, where she lies? Even dress her grave, if that is what disturbs them,
that we’ve let it run wild?”
“A good question,” said Brother Cadfael. “I have asked it myself. The sleep
of saints should be more sacred and immune even than the sleep of ordinary
men.”
Rhisiart looked him over with those fine, challenging eyes, a shade or two
lighter than his daughter’s, and smiled. “Howbeit, I will come, and my thanks for
all your trouble. At the hour of noon, or a little after, I will come to your dinner,
and I will listen faithfully to whatever may be said to me.’
There was a good laughter echoing from end to end of the bench under the
eaves, and it was tempting to join the drinkers, at least for one quick cup, as Cai
demanded. Bened had got up to replenish his horn from the pitcher, and Brother
John, silent and flushed but glowingly happy, sat with no barrier between him
and the girl, their sleeves all but touching when she leaned curiously closer, her
hair dropping a stray lock against his shoulder.
“Well, how have you sped?” asked Cai, pouring mead for them. “Will he
come and talk terms with your prior?”
“He’ll come,” said Cadfael. “Whether he’ll talk terms I doubt. He was
greatly affronted. But he’ll come to dine, and that’s something.”
“The whole parish will know it before ever you get back to the parsonage,”
said Cai. “News runs faster than the wind in these parts, and after this morning
they’re all building on Rhisiart. I tell you, if he changed his tune and said amen,
so would they. Not for want of their own doubts and waverings, but because they
trust him. He took a stand, and they know he won’t leave it but for good reason.
Sweeten him, and you’ll get your way.”
“Not my way,” said Cadfael. “I never could see why a man can’t reverence
his favourite saint without wanting to fondle her bones, but there’s great rivalry
for such relics among the abbeys these days. A good mead, this, Cai.”
“Our Annest here brewed it,” said Bened, with tolerant pride in his niece,
and clapped a hand fondly on her shoulder. “And only one of her skills! She’ll be
a treasure for some man when she weds, but a sad loss to me.”

“I might bring you a good smith to work with you,” said the girl, dimpling.
“Where’s the loss then?”
It was deep dusk, and with all the longing they felt to linger, they had to be
away. Huw was fidgety, thinking of Prior Robert’s rising impatience, his tall
figure pacing the garden and looking out for the first glimpse of his messengers
returning. “We should be off. We shall be looked for. Come, brother, make your
farewells.”
Brother John rose reluctantly but dutifully. The groom was leading the
horses forward, an arm under each arching neck. With composed face but
glowing eyes Brother John said his general goodnight and blessing. In careful
but resounding Welsh!
The echo swept the riders away towards the gate on a wave of laughter and
goodwill, in which the girl’s light voice soared gaily, and Engelard’s hearty
English “God go with you!” balanced the tongues.
“And who taught you that between evening and dark?” asked Brother
Cadfael with interest, as they entered the deep green twilight under the trees.
“Bened or Cai?”
“Neither,” said Brother John, contentedly pondering a deep private
satisfaction.
Small use asking how she had managed it, she having no English and he no
Welsh, to determine what the phrase was she was drumming into him. There was
a kind of language at work here that made short shrift on interpreters.
“Well, you can fairly claim the day hasn’t been wasted,” owned Cadfael
generously, “if something’s been learned. And have you made any other
discoveries to add to that?”
“Yes,” said Brother John, placidly glowing. “The day after tomorrow is
baking-day at Bened’s.”
“You may rest and sleep, Father Prior,” said Huw, fronting the tall, pale
forehead gallantly with his low, brown one. “Rhisiart has said he will come, and
he will listen. He was gracious and reasonable. Tomorrow at noon or soon after
he will be here.”
Prior Robert certainly loosed a cautious, suppressed sigh of relief. But he
required more before they could all go away and sleep. Richard loomed at his
shoulder, large, benign and anxious.
“And is he sensible of the wrong-mindedness of his resistance? Will he
withdraw his opposition?”
In the dimness where the candle-light barely reached, Brothers Jerome and
Columbanus trembled and hoped, for while doubt remained they had not been
permitted to remove to their rest at Cadwallon’s house. Anxious eyes appealed,

reflecting the light.
Father Huw hedged, wanting his own sleep. “He offers friendly interest and
faithful consideration. I asked no more.”
Brother Cadfael said bluntly: “You will need to be persuasive, and sincere.
He is sincere. I am no way convinced that he can be lightly persuaded.” He was
tired of nursing wounded vanities, he spoke out what was in his mind. “Father
Prior, you made your mistake with him this morning. You will need a change of
heart, his or yours, to undo that damage.”
Prior Robert made his dispositions as soon as Mass was over next morning,
and with some care.
“Only Brother Sub-Prior and I, with Father Huw, and Brother Cadfael as
interpreter, will sit at table together. You, Brother John, will make yourself
useful to the cooks, and do whatever is needed, and you may also see to Father
Huw’s cattle and chickens. And you two, Brother Jerome, Brother Columbanus,
I have a special mission for you. Since we are about Saint Winifred’s business, I
would have you go and spend the hours while we deliberate in vigil and prayer,
imploring her aid to bring the obdurate to reason, and our errand to a successful
conclusion. Not in the church here, but in her own chapel in the old graveyard
where she is buried. Take your food and your measure of wine with you, and go
there now. The boy Edwin will show you the way. If we prevail upon Rhisiart, as
with her aid I trust we may, I will send to release you. But continue your
intercessions until I do send word.”
They scattered dutifully, John, cheerfully enough, to tend the fire for
Marared, and fetch and carry as she directed. The old woman, long widowed and
her own sons grown, preened herself at having a strapping young fellow to keep
her company, and Cadfael reflected that John might well be favoured with the
best bits before the meal ever came to table. As for Jerome and Columbanus, he
saw them set out with the boy, bread and meat wrapped in napkins in the breasts
of their habits, and Columbanus carrying the flask with their ration of wine, and
a small bottle of spring water for himself.
“It is very little to offer,” he said meekly, “but I will touch nothing but water
until our cause has prevailed.”
“More fool he,” said Brother John blithely, “for he may well be swearing
off wine for life!”
It was a fine spring morning, but capricious as May can be. Prior Robert
and his attendants sat in the orchard until they were driven indoors by a sharp
and sparkling shower that lasted almost half an hour. It was then approaching
noon, the time when Rhisiart should join them. He would have a wet walk by the
short path through the forest. Or perhaps he had waited for the sun’s return at

Cadwallon’s house, which was on his way. Making allowances for that, they
thought little of it when another half-hour passed, and he did not put in an
appearance. But when he was an hour late for the meeting, and still no sign of
him, Prior Robert’s face grew both grim and cautiously triumphant.
“He has heard the warning I issued against his sin, and he fears to come and
face me,” he said.
“He had heard the warning, indeed,” said Father Huw heavily, “but I saw no
signs of fear in him. He spoke very firmly and calmly. And he is a man of his
word. I don’t understand this, it is not like him.”
“We will eat, but frugally,” said the prior, “and give him every chance of
keeping his promise, if something has happened to delay him. So it may, to any
man. We will wait until it is time to prepare for Vespers.”
“I’ll walk as far as Cadwallon’s house,” offered Brother Richard, “for the
way is all one to that point, and see if I can meet with him, or get word if he’s on
his way.”
He was gone more than an hour and a half, and came back alone. “I went
beyond, some way along the ride, but saw no sign of him. On my way back I
asked at Cadwallon’s gate, but no one had seen him pass. I feared he might have
walked by the short path while I was taking the other road.”
“We’ll wait for him until Vespers, and no longer,” said the prior, and by
then his voice was growing grimly confident, for now he did not expect the guest
to come, and the enemy would have put himself in the wrong, to Prior Robert’s
great gain. Until Vespers, therefore, they waited, five hours after the appointed
time. The people of Gwytherin could hardly say Rhisiart had been written off too
hastily.
“So it ends,” said the prior, rising and shaking out his skirts like one
shaking off a doubt or an incubus. “He has turned tail, and his opposition will
carry no weight now with any man. Let us go!”
The sunlight was still bright but slanting over the green bowl where the
church stood, and a number of people were gathering for the service. And out of
the deeper green shadow where the forest path began, came, not Rhisiart, but his
daughter, sailing gallantly out into the sunlight in a green gown, with her wild
hair tamed and braided, and a linen coif over it, Sioned in her church-going
person, with Peredur on her heels, his hand possessively cupping her elbow,
though she paid little heed to that attention. She saw them issuing in a silent
procession from Huw’s gate, and her eyes went from person to person, lingering
on Cadfael who came last, and again looking back with a small frown, as though
one face was missing from the expected company.
“Where is my father?” she asked, her wide eyes surprised but not yet

troubled. “Is he not still here with you? Have I missed him? I rode as far as
Cadwallon’s house, and he was on foot, so if he has left more than an hour ago
he may well be home by now. I came to bear him company to church and go
back with him afterwards.”
Prior Robert looked down at her in some wonder, the first flickering
uneasiness twitching his nostrils. “What is she saying? Do you tell me that the
lord Rhisiart set out to come to our meeting?”
“Of course!” said Sioned, amazed. “He had said he would.”
“But he did not come,” said Robert. “We’ve waited for him since noon, and
we’ve seen no sign of him. Brother Sub-Prior went a part of the way to see if he
could meet with him, but in vain. He has not been here.”
She caught the meaning of that without Cadfael’s services. Her eyes flashed
from face to face, distrustful and ready for anger. “Are you telling me truth? Or
have you hidden him away under lock and key until you can get Winifred out of
her grave and away to Shrewsbury? He was all that stood in your way. And you
have threatened him!”
Peredur closed his fingers anxiously on her arm, and drew her against his
side. “Hush, you must not say such things. These brothers would not lie to you.”
“At what hour,” asked Cadfael, “did your father set out this morning?”
She looked at him, and was a little reassured. The ring of silent onlookers
drew nearer, listening attentively, ready to take her part if she needed an army.
“A good hour before noon. He was going first to the fields in the clearing,
so he would be coming here by the shortest way, cutting through a quarter of a
mile of forest to the usual path. He had plenty of time to be here before noon. As
far as the clearing Engelard would be with him, he was going beyond, to the
byres over the hill. There are two cows there ready to drop their calves.”
“We are telling you truly, child,” said Father Huw, his voice as grave and
anxious as her own, “we waited for him, and he never came.”
“What can have happened to him? Where can he be?”
“He will have crossed with us and gone home,” urged Peredur, hovering
unhappily at her shoulder. “We’ll ride back, we shall surely find him there before
us.”
“No! Why should he turn back, and never come to the dinner? And if he
did, why so late? He would have been home long before I dressed my hair and
set out to meet him, if he had changed his mind. And besides, he never would.”
“I think,” said Father Huw, “that my whole parish has some interest in this
matter, and we had better put off everything else, even the services of the church,
until we have found Rhisiart and assured ourselves that all’s well with him. Truly
this may be no more than a tangle of mistiming and misunderstanding, but let’s

resolve it first, and wonder about it afterwards. There are enough of us here.
Let’s send out in parties along all the roads he may have taken, and Sioned shall
show us where she thinks his short cut from the upland fields would bring him to
the path. He could not well meet with any dangerous beasts in these woods, but
he may have had a fall, an injury that has halted or slowed him. Father Prior, will
you join with us?”
“With all my heart,” said Prior Robert, “and so will we all.”
The less active among them were sent along the open ride, with orders to
scatter on either side and comb the surroundings as they went, while the more
athletic took the narrow footpath beyond Cadwallon’s stockade. The woods here
were not yet close-set, mere was thick, springy grass under the trees, and no
dense undergrowth. They spread out into a half-circle, moving along within a
few paces of one another, Sioned pressing purposefully forward up the path with
set lips and fixed eyes, Peredur with every evidence of desperate affection
following close and murmuring agitated urgings into her unheeding ears.
Whether he believed in his own reassurances or not, out of all question he was a
young man fathoms deep in love, and ready to do anything to serve and protect
Sioned, while she saw in him nothing but the boy from the next holding, and
tiresome at that.
They were perhaps half a mile beyond Cadwallon’s enclosure when Father
Huw suddenly plucked at Brother Cadfael’s sleeve.
“We have forgotten Brother Jerome and Brother Columbanus! The hill of
the chapel is off to the right here, no great way. Ask Prior Robert, should we not
send and call them to join us?”
“I had indeed forgotten,” admitted the prior. “Yes, by all means send
someone. Best one of your parishioners, they’ll all know the way.”
One of the young men swerved aside obediently between the trees, and ran.
The slow-moving scythe swept on into deeper forest.
“About here,” said Sioned, halting, “he would have come down from the
clearing. If we go obliquely to the right here, and spread out as before, we shall
be covering his likely way.”
The ground rose, the trees grew closer, the undergrowth thicker. They began
to thread the encroaching bushes, having to part company by a few yards, losing
sight momentarily of their neighbours. They had gone thus only a short way
when Bened the smith, crashing through bushes at Brother Cadfael’s left hand,
uttered a great shout of discovery and dismay, and everyone in the wavering line
halted and shook to the sound.
Cadfael turned towards the cry, thrusting through thorn-branches, and came
out in a narrow oval of grass surrounded every way with thick bushes, through

which a used track no wider than a man’s shoulders clove, the long way of the
oval. Just where he must have brushed through into the clear space, Rhisiart lay
on his back, his right hip hollowing the grass under him, shoulders flattened to
the ground and arms spread wide. His legs were drawn up under him with bent
knees, the left leg crossed over the right. His short, defiant beard pointed at the
sky. So, and at the very same slanting angle, did the feathered flight of the arrow
that jutted out from under the cage of his ribs.

Chapter Five
 
FROM BOTH SIDES THEY GATHERED, DRAWN TO THE SMITH’S
CALL, breaking through bushes like the running of a startled herd of deer, and
halting appalled round the oval where the body lay. Cadfael went on his knees,
and looked for any sign of breath within the drawnback lips, any pulse in the
stretched throat or rise and fall of the pierced breast, but there was none. And for
that first moment he was the only one who moved within the open space of
grass, and what he did was done in strange, too-intense silence, as though
everyone round him held his breath.
Then everything broke out at once in noise and motion. Sioned clawed
through the screening circle and saw her father’s body, and uttered a great shriek
that was more of fury even than of grief, and flung herself forward. Peredur
caught her by the wrist and pulled her round into his arms, one hand cupped
behind her head to press her face into his shoulder, but she shrieked again, and
struck out at him with all her strength, and breaking loose, hurled herself to her
knees facing Cadfael, and reached out to embrace her father’s body. Cadfael
leaned across to ward her off, his hand braced into the grass under Rhisiart’s
right armpit.
“No! Touch nothing! Not yet! Let him alone, he has things to tell us!”
By some intuitive quickness of mind that had not deserted her even at this
moment, she obeyed the tone first, and awakened to the words immediately after.
Her eyes questioned him, widening, and slowly she sat back in the grass, and
drew her hands together in her lap. Her lips shaped the words after him silently:
“—things to tell us!” She looked from his face into the face of the dead man. She
knew he was dead. She also knew that the dead speak, often in thunder. And she
came of proud Welsh stock to which the blood-feud is sacred, a duty
transcending even grief.
When those following gathered closer, and one reached to touch, it was she
who spread her arm protectively over the body, and said with authority: “No! Let
him be!”
Cadfael had drawn back his arm, and for a moment wondered what troubled
him about the palm he had lifted from the grass beside Rhisiart’s breast. Then he
knew. Where he knelt the grass was perceptibly damp from the morning’s sharp
shower, he could feel the cling of the habit when he shifted his knee. Yet under
the outflung right arm the grass was dry, his hand rose from it with no hint of

moisture, no scent of rain. He touched again, ran his fingers up and down
alongside Rhisiart’s right flank. He was down to the knee before he felt the
dampness and stirred the green fragrance. He felt outwards, the width of the
body, to find the same signs. Strange! Very strange! His mind recorded and
forbore to wonder then, because there were other things to be observed, and all
manner of dangers were falling in upon all manner of people.
The tall shape looming at his back, motionless and chill, could be none
other than Prior Robert, and Prior Robert in a curious state of exalted shock,
nearer to Brother Columbanus’ ecstatic fit than he had ever been before or would
ever be again. The high, strained voice asked, over the shuddering quietness of
Sioned’s tearless sobs: “He is dead?”
“Dead,” said Cadfael flatly, and looked into Sioned’s wide, dry eyes and
held them, promising something as yet undefined. Whatever it was, she
understood it and was appeased, for he was Welsh, too, he knew about the blood-
feud. And she was the only heir, the only close kin, of a murdered man. She had
a task far above sorrow.
The prior’s voice soared suddenly, awed and exalted. “Behold the saint’s
vengeance! Did I not say her wrath would be wreaked upon all those who stood
in the way of her desire? Tell them what I am saying! Tell them to look well at
the fulfilment of my prophecy, and let all other obdurate hearts take warning.
Saint Winifred has shown her power and her displeasure.”
There was hardly any need for translation, they had the sense of it already.
A dozen of those standing close shrank warily away, a dozen voices muttered
hurried submission. Not for worlds would they stand in the saint’s way.
“The impious man reaps what he sows,” declaimed Robert. “Rhisiart had
his warning, and did not heed it.”
The most timorous were on their knees by then, cowed and horrified. It was
not as if Saint Winifred had meant very much to them, until someone else
wanted her, and Rhisiart stated a prior claim on behalf of the parish. And
Rhisiart was dead by violence, struck down improbably in his own forests.
Sioned’s eyes held Cadfael’s, above her father’s pierced heart. She was a
gallant girl, she said never a word, though she had words building up in her ripe
for saying, spitting, rather, into Prior Robert’s pallid, aristocratic, alabaster face.
It was not she who suddenly spoke out. It was Peredur.
“I don’t believe it!” He had a fine, clear, vehement voice that rang under the
branches. “What, a gentle virgin saint, to take such vengeance on a good man?
Yes, a good man, however mistaken! If she had been so pitiless as to want to slay
—and I do not believe it of her!—what need would she have of arrows and
bows? Fire from heaven would have done her will just as well, and shown her

power better. You are looking at a murdered man, Father Prior. A man’s hand
fitted that arrow, a man’s hand drew the bow, and for a man’s reason. There must
have been others who had a grudge against Rhisiart, others whose plans he was
obstructing, besides Saint Winifred. Why blame this killing on her?”
This forthright Welsh sense Cadfael translated into English for Robert’s
benefit, who had caught the dissenting tone of it, but not the content. “And the
young man’s right. This arrow never was shot from heaven. Look at the angle of
it, up from under his ribs into the heart. Out of the earth, rather! A man with a
short bow, on his knee among the bushes? True, the ground slopes, he may even
have been lower than Rhisiart, but even so…”
“Avenging saints may make use of earthly instruments,” said Robert
overbearingly.
“The instrument would still be a murderer,” said Cadfael. “There is law in
Wales, too. We shall need to send word to the prince’s bailiff.”
Bened had stood all this time darkly gazing, at the body, at the very slight
ooze of blood round the wound, at the jutting shaft with its trimmed feathers.
Slowly he said: “I know this arrow. I know its owner, or at least the man whose
mark it bears. Where young men are living close together in a household, they
mark their own with a distinctive sign, so that there can be no argument. See the
tip of the feathering on one side, dyed blue.” It was as he said, and at the
mention of it several there drew breath hard, knowing the mark as well as he
knew it.
“It’s Engelard’s,” said Bened outright, and three or four hushed voices bore
him out.
Sioned raised her stricken face, shocked into a false, frozen calm that
suddenly melted and crumbled into dread and anger. Rhisiart was dead, there
was nothing she could do now for him but mourn and wait, but Engelard was
alive and vulnerable, and an outlander, with no kinship to speak for him. She
rose abruptly, slender and straight, turning her fierce eyes from face to face all
round the circle.
“Engelard is the most trustworthy of all my father’s men, and would cut off
his own drawing hand rather than loose against my father’s life. Who dares say
this is his work?”
“I don’t say so,” said Bened reasonably. “I do say this is marked as his
arrow. He is the best shot with the short bow in all this countryside.”
“And everybody in Gwytherin knows,” spoke up a voice from among the
Welshmen, not accusing, only pointing out facts, “that he has quarrelled often
and fiercely with Rhisiart, over a certain matter at issue between them.”
“Over me,” said Sioned harshly. “Say what you mean! I, of all people,

know the truth best. Better than you all! Yes, they have had high words many
times, on this one matter, and only this, and would have had more, but for all
that, these two have understood each other, and neither one of them would ever
have done the other harm. Do you think the prize fought over does not get to
know the risks to herself and both the combatants? Fight they did, but they
thought more highly of each other than either did of any of you, and with good
reason.”
“Yet who can say,” said Peredur in a low voice, “how far a man may step
aside even from his own nature, for love?”
She turned and looked at him with measuring scorn. “I thought you were
his friend!”
“So I am his friend,” said Peredur, paling but steadfast. “I said what I
believe of myself, no less than of him.”
“What is this matter of one Engelard?” demanded Prior Robert, left behind
in this exchange. “Tell me what they are saying.” And when Cadfael had done
so, as tersely as possible: “It would seem that at least this young man must be
asked to account for his movements this day,” decreed Robert, appropriating an
authority to which he had no direct right here. “It may be that others have been
with him, and can vouch for him. But if not…”
“He set out this morning with your father,” said Huw, distressfully eyeing
the girl’s fixed and defiant face. “You told us so. They went together as far as the
cleared fields. Then your father turned to make his way down to us, and
Engelard was to go a mile beyond, to the byres where the cows were in calf. We
must send out and ask if any man has seen your father since he parted from
Engelard. Is there any who can speak to that?”
There was a silence. The numbers gathered about them were growing
steadily. Some of the slower searchers from the open ride had made their way up
here without news of their own, to find the matter thus terribly resolved. Others,
hearing rumours of the missing man, had followed from the village. Father
Huw’s messenger came up behind with Brother Columbanus and Brother Jerome
from the chapel. But no one spoke up to say he had seen Rhisiart that day. Nor
did any volunteer word of having encountered Engelard.
“He must be questioned,” said Prior Robert, “and if his answers are not
satisfactory, he must be held and handed over to the bailiff. For it’s clear from
what has been said that this man certainly had a motive for wishing to remove
Rhisiart from his path.”
“Motive?” blazed Sioned, burning up abruptly as a dark and quiet fire
suddenly spurts flame. Instinctively she recoiled into Welsh, though she had
already revealed how well she could follow what was said around her in English,

and the chief reason for her reticence concerning her knowledge had been
cruelly removed. “Not so strong a motive as you had, Father Prior! Every soul in
this parish knows what store you set upon getting Saint Winifred away from us,
what glory it will be to your abbey, and above all, to you. And who stood in your
way but my father? Yours, not the saint’s! Show me a better reason for wanting
him dead! Did any ever wish to lift hand against him, all these years! Until you
came here with your quest for Winifred’s relics? Engelard’s disagreement with
my father was constant and understood, yours was new and urgent. Our need
could wait, we’re young. Yours could not wait. And who knew better than you at
what hour my father would be coming through the forest to Gwytherin? Or that
he would not change his mind?”
Father Huw spread a horrified hand to hush her long before this, but she
would not be hushed. “Child, child, you must not make such dreadful
accusations against the reverend prior, it is mortal sin.”
“I state facts, and let them speak,” snapped Sioned. “Where’s the offence in
that? Prior Robert may point out the facts that suit him, I showed you the others,
those that do not suit him. My father was the sole obstacle in his path, and my
father has been removed.”
“Child, I tell you every soul in this valley knew that your father was coming
to my house, and the hour of his coming, and many would know all the possible
ways, far better than any of these good brethren from Shrewsbury. The occasion
might well suit another grudge. And you must know that Prior Robert has been
with me, and with Brother Richard and Brother Cadfael here, ever since morning
Mass.” And Father Huw turned in agitated supplication to Robert, wringing his
hands. “Father Prior, I beg you, do not hold it against the girl that she speaks so
wildly. She is in grief—a father lost…  You cannot wonder if she turns on us
all.”
“I say no word of blame,” said the prior, though coldly. “I gather she is
casting doubts upon myself and my companions, but doubtless, you have
answered her. Tell the young woman, in my name, that both you and others here
can witness for my own person, for all this day I have been within your sight.”
Grateful for at least one certainty, Huw turned to repeat as much to Sioned
yet again, but she blazed back with biting promptness and force, forgetting all
restraints in the need to confront Robert face to face, without the tedious
intervention of interpreters. “So you may have been, Father Prior,” she flashed in
plain English. “In any case I don’t see you as likely to make a good bowman.
But a man who would try to buy my father’s compliance would be willing and
able to buy some more pliable person to do even this work for him. You still had
your purse! Rhisiart spurned it!”

“Take care!” thundered Robert, galled beyond the limits of his arduous
patience. “You put your soul in peril! I have borne with you thus far, making
allowances for your grief, but go no further along this road!”
They were staring upon each other like adversaries in the lists before the
baton falls, he very tall and rigid and chill as ice, she light and ferocious and
very handsome, her coif long ago lost among the bushes, and her sheaves of
black hair loose on her shoulders. And at that moment, before she could spit
further fire, or he threaten more imminent damnation, they all heard voices
approaching from higher up among the woods, a man’s voice and a girl’s in
quick, concerned exchanges, and coming rapidly nearer with a light threshing of
branches, as though they had caught the raised tones and threatening sounds of
many people gathered here improbably deep in the forest, and were hurrying to
discover what was happening.
The two antagonists heard them, and their concentration on each other was
shaken and disrupted. Sioned knew them, and a fleeting shadow of fear and
desperation passed over her face. She glanced round wildly, but there was no
help. A girl’s arm parted the bushes above the oval where they stood, and Annest
stepped through, and stood in astonishment, gazing round at the inexplicable
gathering before her.
It was the narrowness of the track—no more than the shadow of a deer-path
in the grass—and the abruptness with which she had halted that gave Sioned her
one chance. She took it valiantly. “Go back home, Annest,” she said loudly. “I
am coming with company. Go and prepare for guests, quickly, you’ll have little
time.” Her voice was high and urgent. Annest had not yet lowered her eyes to the
ground, and grass and shadows veiled Rhisiart’s body.
The effort was wasted. Another hand, large and gentle, was laid on Annest’s
shoulder while she hesitated, and moved her aside. “The company sounds
somewhat loud and angry,” said a man’s voice, high and clear, “so, with your
leave, Sioned, we’ll all go together.”
Engelard put the girl aside between his hands, as familiarly and serenely as
a brother might have done, and stepped past her into the clearing.
He had eyes for no one but Sioned, he walked towards her with the straight
gait of a proprietor, and as he came he took in her stiff erectness, and fixed face
of fire and ice and despair, and his own face mirrored everything he saw in her.
His brows drew together, his smile, taut and formidable to begin with, vanished
utterly, his eyes burned bluer than cornflowers. He passed by Prior Robert as
though he had not even been there, or not alive, a stock, a dead tree by the path.
He put out his hands, and Sioned laid her hands in them, and for an instant
closed her eyes. There was no frowning him away now, he was here in the midst,

quite without defences. The circle, not all inimical but all hampering, was
closing round him.
He had her by the hands when he saw Rhisiart’s body.
The shock went into him as abruptly as the arrow must have gone into
Rhisiart, stopping him instantly. Cadfael had him well in view, and saw his lips
part and whisper soundlessly: “Christ aid!” What followed was most eloquent.
The Saxon youth moved with loving slowness, shutting both Sioned’s hands into
one of his, and with his freed right hand stroked softly over her hair, down
temple and cheek and chin and throat, all with such mastered passion that she
was soothed, as he meant, while he had barely stopped shaking from the shock.
He folded an arm about her, holding her close against his side, and slowly
looked all round the circle of watching faces, and slowly down at the body of his
lord. His face was bleakly angry.
“Who did this?”
He looked round, seeking the one who by rights should be spokesman,
hesitating between Prior Robert, who arrogated to himself authority wherever he
came, and Father Huw, who was known and trusted here. He repeated his
demand in English, but neither of them answered him, and for a long moment
neither did anyone else. Then Sioned said, with clear, deliberate warning: “There
are some here are saying that you did.”
“I?” he cried, astonished and scornful rather than alarmed, and turned
sharply to search her face, which was intent and urgent.
Her lips shaped silently: “Run! They’re blaming you!”
It was all she could do, and he understood, for they had such a link between
them that meanings could be exchanged in silence, in a look. He measured with
a quick glance the number of his possible enemies, and the spaces between them,
but he did not move. “Who accuses me?” he said. “And on what ground? It
seems to me I might rather question all of you, whom I find standing here about
my lord’s dead body, while I have been all day out with the cows, beyond Bryn.
When I got home Annest was anxious because Sioned had not returned, and the
sheep boy told her there was no service at Vespers at the church. We came out to
look for you, and found you by the noise you were making among you. And I
ask again, and I will know before ever I give up: Who did this?”
“We are all asking that,” said Father Huw. “Son, there’s no man here has
accused you. But there are things that give us the right to question you, and a
man with nothing on his conscience won’t be ashamed or afraid to answer. Have
you yet looked carefully at the arrow that struck Rhisiart down? Then look at it
now!”
Frowning, Engelard drew a step nearer, and looked indeed, earnestly and

bitterly at the dead man, only afterwards at the arrow. He saw the flutter of deep
blue, and gasped.
“This is one of mine!” He looked up with wild suspicion at them all.
“Either that, or someone has copied my mark. But no, this is mine, I know the
trim, I fletched it new only a week or so ago.”
“He owns it his?” demanded Robert, following as best he could. “He admits
it?”
“Admit?” flashed Engelard in English. “What is there to admit? I say it!
How it was brought here, who loosed it, I know no more than you do, but I know
the shaft for mine. God’s teeth!” he cried furiously, “do you think if I had any
hand in this villainy I should leave my mark flaunting in the wound? Am I fool
as well as outlander? And do you think I would do anything to harm Rhisiart?
The man who stood my friend and gave me the means of living here when I’d
poached myself out of Cheshire?”
“He refused to consider you as a suitor for his daughter,” Bened said almost
reluctantly, “whatever good he did for you otherwise.”
“So he did, and according to his lights, rightly so. And I know it, knowing
as much as I’ve learned of Wales, and even if I did smart under it, I knew he had
reason and custom on his side. Never has he done anything I could complain of
as unfair to me. He stood much arrogance and impatience from me, come to that.
There isn’t a man in Gwynedd I like and respect more. I’d as soon have cut my
own throat as injured Rhisiart.”
“He knew and knows it,” said Sioned, “and so do I.”
“Yet the arrow is yours,” said Huw unhappily. “And as for reclaiming or
disguising it, it may well have been that speedy flight after such an act would be
more important.”
“If I had planned such an act,” said Engelard, “though God forbid I should
ever have to imagine a thing so vile, I could as easily have done what some devil
has done now to me, and used another man’s shaft.”
“But, son, it would be more in keeping with your nature,” the priest pursued
sadly, “to commit such a deed without planning, having with you only your own
bow and arrows. Another approach, another quarrel, a sudden wild rage! No one
supposes this was plotted beforehand.”
“I had no bow with me all this day. I was busy with the cattle, what should I
want with a bow?”
“It will be for the royal bailiff to enquire into all possible matters
concerning this case,” said Prior Robert, resolutely reclaiming the dominance
among them. “What should be asked at once of this young man is where he has
been all this day, what doing, and in whose company.”

“In no man’s company. The byres behind Bryn are in a lonely place, good
pasture but apart from the used roads. Two cows dropped their calves today, one
around noon, the second not before late afternoon, and that was a hard birth, and
gave me trouble. But the young things are there alive and on their legs now, to
testify to what I’ve been doing.”
“You left Rhisiart at his fields along the way?”
“I did, and went straight on to my own work. And have not seen him again
until now.”
“And did you speak with any man, there at the byres? Can anyone testify as
to where you were, at any time during the day?” No one was likely to try and
wrest the initiative from Robert now. Engelard looked round him quickly,
measuring chances. Annest came forward silently, and took her stand beside
Sioned. Brother John’s roused, anxious eyes followed her progress, and
approved the loyalty which had no other way of expressing itself.
“Engelard did not come home until half an hour ago,” she said stoutly.
“Child,” said Father Huw wretchedly, “where he was not does not in any
way confirm where he says he was. Two calves may be delivered far more
quickly than he claims, how can we know, who were not there? He had time to
slip back here and do this thing, and be back with his cattle and never noticed.
Unless we can find someone who testifies to having seen him elsewhere, at
whatever time this deed may have been done, then I fear we should hold
Engelard in safe-keeping until the prince’s bailiff can take over the charge for
us.”
The men of Gwytherin hovered, murmuring, some convinced, many angry,
for Rhisiart had been very well liked, some hesitant, but granting that the
outlander ought to be held until his innocence was established or his guilt
proved. They shifted and closed, and their murmur became one of consent.
“It is fair,” said Bened, and the growl of assent answered him.
“One lone Englishman with his back to the wall,” whispered Brother John
indignantly in Cadfael’s ear, “and what chance will he have, with nobody to bear
out what he says? And plain truth, for certain! Does he act or speak like a
murderer?”
Peredur had stood like a stock all this while, hardly taking his eyes from
Engelard’s face but to gaze earnestly and unhappily at Sioned. As Prior Robert
levelled an imperious arm at Engelard, and the whole assembly closed in slowly
in obedience, braced to lay hands on him, Peredur drew a little further back at
the edge of the trees, and Cadfael saw him catch Sioned’s eye, flash her a wild,
wide-eyed look, and jerk his head as though beckoning. Out of her exhaustion
and misery she roused a brief, answering blaze, and leaned to whisper rapidly in

Engelard’s ear.
“Do your duty, all of you,” commanded Robert, “to your laws and your
prince and your church, and lay hold of this man!”
There was one instant of stillness, and then they closed in all together, the
only gap in their ranks where Peredur still hung back. Engelard made a long leap
from Sioned’s side, as though he would break for the thickest screen of bushes,
and then, instead, caught up a dead, fallen bough that lay in the grass, and
whirled it about him in a flailing circle, laying two unwary elders flat, and
sending others reeling back out of range. Before they could reassemble, he had
changed direction, leaped over one of the fallen, and was clean through the midst
of them, arming off the only one who almost got a grip on him, and made
straight for the gap Peredur had left in their ranks. Father Huw’s voice, uplifted
in vexed agitation, called on Peredur to halt him, and Peredur sprang to intercept
his flight. How it happened was never quite clear, though Brother Cadfael had a
rough idea, but at the very moment when his outstretched hand almost brushed
Engelard’s sleeve, Peredur stepped upon a rotten branch in the turf, that snapped
under his foot and rolled, tossing him flat on his face, half-blinded among the
bushes. And winded, possibly, for certainly he made no move to pick himself up
until Engelard was past him and away.
Even then it was not quite over, for the nearest pursuers on either side,
seeing how the hunt had turned, had also begun to run like hares, on courses
converging with the fugitive’s at the very edge of the clearing. From the left
came a long-legged villein of Cadwallon’s, with a stride like a greyhound, and
from the right Brother John, his habit flying, his sandalled feet pounding the
earth mightily. It was perhaps the first time Brother John had ever enjoyed Prior
Robert’s whole-hearted approval. It was certainly the last.
There was no one left in the race but these three, and fleet though Engelard
was, it seemed that the long-legged fellow would collide with him before he
could finally vanish. All three were hurtling together for a shattering collision, or
so it seemed. The villein stretched out arms as formidably long as his legs. So,
on the other side, did Brother John. A great hand closed on a thin fold of
Engelard’s tunic from one side. Brother John bounded exuberantly in from the
other. The prior sighed relief, expecting the prisoner to be enfolded in a double
embrace. And Brother John, diving, caught Cadwallon’s villein round the knees
and brought him crashing to the ground, and Engelard, plucking his tunic out of
the enemy’s grasp, leaped into the bushes and vanished in a receding susurration
of branches, until silence and stillness closed over the path of his withdrawal.
Half the hunt, out of excitement rather than any real enmity, streamed away
into the forest after the quarry, but half-heartedly now. They had little chance of

capturing him. Probably they had no great desire to do anything of the kind,
though once put to it, hounds must follow a scent. The real drama remained
behind in the clearing. There, at least, justice had one clear culprit to enjoy.
Brother John unwound his arms from his victim’s knees, sat up in the grass,
fended off placidly a feeble blow the villein aimed at him, and said in robust but
incomprehensible English: “Ah, let well alone, lad! What did he ever do to you?
But faith, I’m sorry I had to fetch you down so heavily. If you think you’re hard-
done-to, take comfort! I’m likely to pay dearer than you.”
He looked round him complacently enough as he clambered to his feet and
dusted off the debris of leaves and twigs that clung to his habit. There stood
Prior Robert, not yet unfrozen from the shock of incredulous disillusionment, tall
and stiff and grey, a Norman lordling debating terrible penalties for treason. But
there, also, stood Sioned, tired, distraught, worn out with passion, but with a
small, reviving glow in her eyes, and there was Annest at her elbow, an arm
protectively round her waist, but her flower-face turned towards John. Not much
use Robert thundering and lightning, while she so smiled and blossomed,
beaming her gratitude and admiration.
Brother Richard and Brother Jerome loomed like messengers of doom, one
at either elbow. “Brother John, you are summoned. You are in gross offence.”
He went with them resignedly. For all the threatening thunderbolts he had
never felt freer in his life. And having now nothing to lose but his own self-
respect, he was sturdily determined not to sacrifice that.
“Unfaithful and unworthy brother,” hissed Prior Robert, towering in terrible
indignation, “what have you done? Do not deny what we have all witnessed. You
have not merely connived at the escape of a felon, you have frustrated the
attempt of a loyal servant to arrest him. You felled that good man deliberately, to
let Engelard go free. Traitor against church and law, you have put yourself
beyond the pale. If there is anything you can say in your defence, say it now.”
“I thought the lad was being harried beyond reason, on very suspect
suspicion,” said Brother John boldly. “I’ve talked with Engelard, I’ve got my
own view of him, a decent, open soul who’d never do violence to any man by
stealth, let alone Rhisiart, whom he liked and valued high. I don’t believe he has
any part in this death, and what’s more, I think he’ll not go far until he knows
who had, and God help the murderer then! So I gave him his chance, and good
luck to him!”
The two girls, their heads close together in women’s solidarity, interpreted
the tone for themselves, if they lacked the words, and glowed in silent applause.
Prior Robert was helpless, though he did not know it. Brother Cadfael knew it
very well.

“Shameless!” thundered Robert, bristling until even his suave purity
showed knife-edged with affront. “You are condemned out of your own mouth,
and a disgrace to our order. I have no jurisdiction here as regards Welsh law. The
prince’s bailiff must resolve this crime that cries for vengeance here. But where
my own subordinates are concerned, and where they have infringed the law of
this land where we are guests, there two disciplines threaten you, Brother John.
As to the sovereignty of Gwynedd, I cannot speak. As to my own discipline, I
can and do. You are set far beyond mere ecclesiastical penance. I consign you to
close imprisonment until I can confer with the secular authority here, and I
refuse to you, meanwhile, all the comforts and consolations of the church.” He
looked about him and took thought, brooding. Father Huw hovered miserably,
lost in this ocean of complaints and accusations. “Brother Cadfael, ask Father
Huw where there is a safe prison, where he can be held.”
This was more than Brother John had bargained for, and though he repented
of nothing, like a practical man he did begin to look round to weigh up the
chances of evading the consequences. He eyed the gaps in the ring as Engelard
had done, braced his sturdy feet well apart, and flexed his shoulders
experimentally, as though he had thoughts of elbowing Brother Richard smartly
in the belly, kicking the legs from under Jerome, and making a dash for freedom.
He stopped himself just in time when he heard Cadfael report sedately: “Father
Huw suggests there is only one place secure enough. If Sioned is willing to
allow her holding to be used, a prisoner could be safe enough there.”
At this point Brother John unaccountably lost interest in immediate escape.
“My house is at Prior Robert’s disposal,” said Sioned in Welsh, with
appropriate coldness, but very promptly. She had herself well in hand, she made
no more lapses into English. “There are storehouses and stables, if you wish to
use them. I promise I shall not go near the prisoner, or hold the key to his prison
myself. Father Prior may choose his guard from among my people as he sees fit.
My household shall provide him his living, but even that charge I shall give to
someone else. If I undertook it myself I fear my impartiality might be doubted,
after what has happened.”
A good girl, Cadfael thought, translating this for Robert’s benefit rather less
than for John’s. Clever enough to step resolutely round any actual lies even when
she was thus wrung by one disaster after another, and generous enough to think
for the wants and wishes of others. The someone else who would be charged
with seeing Brother John decently housed and fed was standing cheek to cheek
with her mistress as she spoke, fair head against dark head. A formidable pair!
But they might not have found this unexpected and promising path open to them
but for the innocence of celibate parish priests.

“That may be the best plan,” said Prior Robert, chilly but courteous, “and I
thank you for your dutiful offer, daughter. Keep him straitly, see he has what he
needs for life, but no more. He is in great peril of his soul, his body may
somewhat atone. If you permit, we will go before and bestow him securely, and
let your uncle know what has happened, so that he may send down to you and
bring you home. I will not intrude longer on a house of mourning.”
“I will show you the way,” said Annest, stepping demurely from Sioned’s
side.
“Hold him fast!” warned the prior, as they massed to follow her uphill
through the woods. Though he might have seen for himself, had he looked
closely, that the culprit’s resignation had mellowed into something very like
complacency, and he stepped out as briskly as his guards, a good deal more
intent on keeping Annest’s slender waist and lime shoulders in sight than on any
opportunity for escape.
Well, thought Cadfael, letting them go without him, and turning to meet
Sioned’s steady gaze, God sort all! As doubtless he is doing, now as ever!
The men of Gwytherin cut young branches and made a green litter to carry
Rhisiart’s body home. Under the corpse, when they lifted it, there was much
more blood than about the frontal wound, though the point of the arrow barely
broke through skin and clothing. Cadfael would have liked to examine tunic and
wound more closely, but forbore because Sioned was there beside him, stiffly
erect in her stony grief, and nothing, no word or act that was not hieratic and
ceremonial, was permissible then in her presence. Moreover, soon all the
servants of Rhisiart’s household came down in force to bring their lord home,
while the steward waited at the gate with bards and mourning women to
welcome him back for the last time, and this was no longer an enquiry into guilt,
but the first celebration of a great funeral rite, in which probing would have been
indecent. No hope of enquiring further tonight. Even Prior Robert had
acknowledged that he must remove himself and his fellows reverently from a
mourning community in which they had no rights.
When it was time to raise the litter and its burden, now stretched out
decently with his twisted legs drawn out straight and his hands laid quietly at his
sides, Sioned looked round for one more to whom she meant to confide a share
in this honourable load. She did not find him.
“Where is Peredur? What became of him?”
No one had seen him go, but he was gone. No one had had attention to
spare for him after Brother John had completed what Peredur had begun. He had
slipped away without a word, as though he had done something to be ashamed
of, something for which he might expect blame rather than thanks. Sioned was a

little hurt, even in her greater hurt, at his desertion.
“I thought he would have wanted to help me bring my father home. He was
a favourite with him, and fond of him. From a little boy he was in and out of our
house like his own.”
“He maybe doubted his welcome,” said Cadfael, “after saying a word that
displeased you concerning Engelard.”
“And doing a thing afterwards that more than wiped that out?” she said, but
for his ears only. No need to say outright before everyone what she knew very
well, that Peredur had contrived a way out for her lover. “No, I don’t understand
why he should slink away without a word, like this.” But she said no more then,
only begged him with a look to walk with her as she fell in behind the litter.
They went some distance in silence. Then she asked, without looking aside at
him: “Did my father yet tell you those things he had to tell?”
“Some,” said Cadfael. “Not all.”
“Is there anything I should do, or not do? I need to know. We must make
him seemly tonight.” By the morrow he would be stiff, and she knew it. “If you
need anything from me, tell me now.”
“Keep me the clothes he’s wearing, when you take them off him, and take
note for me where they’re damp from this morning’s rain, and where they’re dry.
If you notice anything strange, remember it. Tomorrow, as soon as I can, I’ll
come to you.”
“I must know the truth,” she said. “You know why.”
“Yes, I know. But tonight sing him and drink to him, and never doubt but
he’ll hear the singing.”
“Yes,” she said, and loosed a great, renewing sigh. “You are a good man.
I’m glad you’re here. You do not believe it was Engelard.”
“I’m as good as certain it was not. First and best, it isn’t in him. Lads like
Engelard hit out in passion, but with their fists, not with weapons. Second, if it
had been in his scope, he’d have made a better job of it. You saw the angle of the
arrow. Engelard, I judge, is the breadth of three fingers taller than your father.
How could he shoot an arrow under a man’s rib-cage who is shorter than he,
even from lower ground? Even if he kneeled or crouched in the undergrowth in
ambush, I doubt if it could be done. And why should it ever be tried? No, this is
folly. And to say that the best shot in all these parts could not put his shaft clean
through his man, at any distance there where he could see him? Not more than
fifty yards clear in any direction. Worse folly still, why should a good bowman
choose such a blind tangled place? They have not looked at the ground, or they
could not put forward such foolishness. But first and last and best, that young
man of yours is too open and honest to kill by stealth, even a man he hated. And

he did not hate Rhisiart. You need not tell me, I know it.”
Much of what he had said might well have been hurtful to her, but none of
it was. She went with him every step of that way, and flushed and wanned into
her proper, vulnerable girlhood at hearing her lover thus accepted.
“You’ve said no word in wonder,” she said, “that I have not been more
troubled over what has become of Engelard, and where he is gone to earth now.”
“No,” said Cadfael, and smiled. “You know where he is, and how to get in
touch with him whenever you need. I think you two have two or three places
better for secrecy than your oak tree, and in one of them Engelard is resting now,
or soon will be. You seem to think he’ll be safe enough. Tell me nothing, unless
you need a messenger, or help.”
“You can be my messenger, if you will, to another,” she said. They were
emerging from the forest at the edge of Rhisiart’s home fields, and Prior Robert
stood tall and grim and noncommittal aside from their path, his companions
discreetly disposed behind him, his hands, features, and the angle of his gently
bowed head all disposed to convey respect for death and compassion for the
bereaved without actually owning to forgiveness of the dead. His prisoner was
safely lodged, he was waiting only to collect the last stray from his flock, and
make an appropriately impressive exit. “Tell Peredur I missed him from among
those my father would have liked to carry him home. Tell him what he did was
generous, and I am grateful. I am sorry he should ever have doubted it.”
They were approaching the gate, and Uncle Meurice, the steward, came out
to meet them with his kindly, soft-lined face quaking and shapeless with shock
and distress.
“And come tomorrow,” said Sioned on an almost soundless breath, and
walked away from him alone, and entered the gateway after her father’s body.

Chapter Six
 
SIONED’S MESSAGE MIGHT NOT HAVE BEEN DELIVERED SO
SOON, for it would not have been any easy matter to turn aside at Cadwallon’s
house, without a word of request or excuse to Prior Robert; but in the dimness of
the woods, a little above the holding, Cadfael caught a glimpse of a figure
withdrawing from them, with evident intent, some fifty yards into cover, and
knew it for Peredur. He had not expected to be followed, for he went only far
enough to be secure from actual encounter on the path, and there sat down
moodily on a fallen trunk, his back against a young tree that leaned with him,
and kicked one foot in the litter of last year’s leaves. Cadfael asked no
permission, but went after him.
Peredur looked up at the sound of other feet rustling the beech-mast, and
rose as if he would have removed further to avoid speech, but then gave up the
thought, and stood mute and unwelcoming, but resigned.
“I have a word to you,” said Brother Cadfael mildly, “from Sioned. She
bade me to tell you that she missed you when she would gladly have asked you
to lend a shoulder for her father’s bier. She sends you word that what you did
was generous, and she is grateful.”
Peredur stirred his feet uneasily, and drew a little back into deeper shadow.
“There were plenty of her own people there,” he said, after a pause that
seemed awkward rather than sullen. “She had no need of me.”
“Oh, there were hands enough, and shoulders enough,” agreed Cadfael,
“nevertheless, she missed you. It seems to me that she looks upon you as one
having a forward place among her own people. You have been like a brother to
her from children, and she could do well with a brother now.”
The stiffness of Peredur’s young body was palpable even in the green dusk,
a constraint that crippled even his tongue. He got out, with a bitter spurt of
laughter: “It was not her brother that I wanted to be.”
“No, that I understand. Yet you behaved like one, towards her and towards
Engelard, when it came to the testing.”
What was meant to comfort and compliment appeared, instead, to hurt.
Peredur shrank still deeper into his morose stillness. “So she feels she has a debt
to me, and wants to pay it but not for my sake. She does not want me.”
“Well,” said Cadfael equably, “I have delivered her message, and if you’ll
go to her she’ll convince you, as I cannot. There was another would have wanted

you there, if he could have spoken.”
“Oh, hush!” said Peredur, and jerked his head aside with a motion of
sudden pain. “Don’t say more…”
“No, pardon me, I know this is a grief to you, as well as to her. She said so.
‘He was a favourite with him,’ she said, ‘and fond of him—‘”
The boy gave a sharp gasp, and turning with blundering haste, walked away
rapid walked away rapidly through the trees, deeper into the wood, and left
Brother Cadfael to return very thoughtfully to his companions, with the feel of
that unbearably tender spot still wincing under his probing finger.
“You and I,” said Bened, when Cadfael walked down to the smithy after
Compline, “must do our drinking alone tonight, my friend. Huw has not yet
come down from Rhisiart’s hall, and Padrig will be busy singing the dead man
till the small hours. Well that he was there at this time. A man’s all the better for
being sung to his grave by a fine poet and harpist, and it’s a great thing for his
children to remember. And Cai—Cai we shan’t be seeing down here much for a
while, not until the bailiff comes to take his prisoner off his hands.”
“You mean Brother John has Cai for his gaoler?” asked Cadfael,
enlightened.
“He volunteered for the job. I fancy that girl of mine ran and prompted him,
but he wouldn’t need much prodding. Between them, Brother John will be lying
snug enough for a day or two. You need not worry about him.”
“Nothing was further from my mind,” said Cadfael. “And it’s Cai who
keeps the key on him?”
“You may be sure. And what with Prince Owain being away in the south, as
I hear he is, I doubt if sheriff or bailiff will have much time to spare for a small
matter of insubordination in Gwytherin.” Bened sighed heavily over his horn,
filled this time with coarse red wine. “It grieves me now that ever I spoke up and
called attention to the blue on the feathers, at least in front of the lass. But
someone would have said it. And it’s truth that now, with only her Uncle
Meurice as guardian, she could have got her own way. She twists him round her
finger, he wouldn’t have stood in her road. But now I misdoubt me, no man
would be such a fool as to leave his private mark on a dead man for all to see.
Not unless he was disturbed and had to take to his heels. All it needed was the
corner clipping, how long does that take if you’ve a knife on you? No, it’s hard
to understand. And yet it could be so!”
By his deep gloom there was more on Bened’s mind than that. Somewhere
within, he was in abysmal doubt whether he had not spoken up in the hope of
having a better chance with Sioned himself if his most favoured rival was
removed. He shook his head sadly. “I was glad when he broke clear as he did,

but I’ll be satisfied if he makes his way back to Cheshire after this alarm. And
yet it’s hard to think of him as a murderer.”
“We might give our minds to that, if you’re willing,” said Cadfael, “for you
know the people of these parts better than I do. Let’s own it, the girl’s suspicion,
that she spoke out to Prior Robert’s face, will be what many a one here is
thinking, whether he says it or not. Here are we come into the place and starting
a great contention, chiefly with this one lord—no need to argue who’s in the
right—and there he stands as the one obstacle to what we’ve come for, and
suddenly he’s dead, murdered. What’s more natural than to point the finger at us,
all of us?”
“It’s blasphemy even to consider such a charge against such reverend
brothers,” said Bened, shocked.
“Kings and abbots are also men, and can fall to temptation. So how do we
all stand in regard to this day’s doings? All six of us were together or close
within sight of one another until after Mass. Then Prior Robert, Brother Richard
and I were with Father Huw, first in the orchard, and when it rained, half an hour
before noon, in the house. None of the four of us could have gone into the forest.
Brother John, too, was about the house and holding, Marared can vouch for him
as well as we. The only one who left, before we all came forth for Vespers and
set off to search for Rhisiart, was Brother Richard, who offered to go and see if
he could meet with him or get word of him, and was gone perhaps an hour and a
half, and came back empty-handed. From an hour after noon he was gone, and
into the forest, too, for what it’s worth, and makes no claim to have spoken with
anyone until he enquired at Cadwallon’s gate on his way back, which would be
nearing half past two. I must speak with the gate-keeper, and see if he bears that
out. Two of us are left, but not unaccounted for. Brother Jerome and Brother
Columbanus were sent off to keep vigil together at Saint Winifred’s chapel, to
pray for a peaceful agreement. We all saw them set off together, and they’d be in
the chapel and on their knees long before ever Rhisiart came down towards the
path. And there they stayed until Father Huw’s messenger went to fetch them to
join us. Each of them is warranty for the other.”
“I said so,” said Bened, reassured. “Holy men do not murder.”
“Man,” said Cadfael earnestly, “there are as holy persons outside orders as
ever there are in, and not to trifle with truth, as good men out of the Christian
church as most I’ve met within it. In the Holy Land I’ve known Saracens I’d
trust before the common run of the crusaders, men honourable, generous and
courteous, who would have scorned to haggle and jostle for place and trade as
some of our allies did. Meet every man as you find him, for we’re all made the
same under habit or robe or rags. Some better made than others, and some better

cared for, but on the same pattern all. But there it is. As far as I can see, only one
of us, Brother Richard, had any chance at all to be in the neighbourhood when
Rhisiart was killed, and of all of us he makes the least likely murderer. So we’re
forced to look if the ground is not wide open for others, and Saint Winifred only
an opportunity and an excuse. Had Rhisiart any enemies around Gwytherin?
Some who might never have moved against him if we had not blown up this
storm and put the temptation in their way?”
Bened considered gravely, nursing his wine. “I wouldn’t say there’s a man
anywhere who has not someone to wish him ill, but it’s a far cry from that to
murder. Time was when Father Huw himself came up against Rhisiart over a
patch of land both claimed, and tempers ran high, but they settled it the proper
way, by witness from the neighbours, and there’s been no malice after. And there
have been lawsuits—did you ever hear of a Welsh landholder without one or two
lawsuits in hand? One with Rhys ap Cynan over a disputed boundary, one over
some beasts that strayed. Nothing to make lasting bad blood. We thrive on suits
at law. One thing’s true, with the interest you’ve roused here, every soul for
miles around knew that Rhisiart was due at Father Huw’s parsonage at noon. No
limit at all, there, on who might have decided to waylay him on the road.”
That was as far as they could get. The field was wide, wide enough still to
include Engelard, however persuaded Cadfael might be that he was incapable of
such an act. Wide enough to enfold even neighbours like Cadwallon, villeins
from the village, servants of the household.
But not, surely, thought Brother Cadfael, making his way back to Huw’s
loft in the green and fragrant dark, not that strange young man who had been a
favourite of Rhisiart, and fond of him, and in and out of his house like a son
from childhood? The young man who had said of Engelard, and of himself, that
a man might step far aside even from his own nature, for love, and then,
presumably for love, had opened a way for Engelard to escape, as Cadfael had
seen for himself. And who was now avoiding Sioned’s gratitude and affection,
either because it was not love, and love was the only thing he wanted from her,
or for some darker reason. When he flung away in silence into the forest he had
had the look of one pursued by a demon. But surely not that demon? So far from
furthering his chances, Rhisiart’s death robbed him of his most staunch ally, who
had waited patiently and urged constantly, to bring his daughter to the desired
match in the end. No, whichever way a man looked at him, Peredur remained
mysterious and disturbing.
Father Huw did not come back from Rhisiart’s house that night. Brother
Cadfael lay alone in the loft, and mindful that Brother John was locked up
somewhere in Sioned’s barns, and there was no one to prepare food, got up in

good time and went to do it himself, and then set off to Bened’s paddock to see
the horses, who were also left without a groom. It suited him better to be out and
working in the fresh morning than cooped up with Prior Robert, but he was
obliged to return in time for chapter, which the prior had decreed should be held
daily as at home, however brief the business they had to transact here.
They met in the orchard, the five of them, Prior Robert presiding in as
solemn dignity as ever. Brother Richard read out the saints to be celebrated that
day and the following day. Brother Jerome composed his wiry person into his
usual shape of sycophantic reverence, and made all the appropriate responses.
But it seemed to Cadfael that Brother Columbanus looked unusually withdrawn
and troubled, his full blue eyes veiled. The contrast between his athletic build
and fine, autocratic head, and his meek and anxious devoutness of feature and
bearing, was always confusing to the observer, but that morning his extreme
preoccupation with some inward crisis of real or imagined sin made it painful to
look at him. Brother Cadfael sighed, expecting another falling fit like the one
that had launched them all on this quest. Who knew what this badly-balanced
half-saint, half-idiot would do next?
“Here we have but one business in hand,” said Prior Robert firmly, “and we
shall pursue it as in duty bound. I mean to press more resolutely than ever for
our right to take up the relics of the saint, and remove them to Shrewsbury. But
we must admit, at this moment, that we have not so far been successful in
carrying the people with us. I had great hopes yesterday that all would be
resolved. We made every reverent preparation to deserve success…”
At this point he was interrupted by an audible sob from Brother
Columbanus, that drew all eyes to that young man. Trembling and meek, he rose
from his place and stood with lowered eyes and folded hands before Robert.
“Father Prior, alas, mea culpa! I am to blame! I have been unfaithful, and I
desire to make confession. I came to chapter determined to cleanse my bosom
and ask penance, for my backsliding is the cause of our continued distresses.
May I speak?”
I knew there was something brewing, thought Brother Cadfael, resigned
and disgusted. But at least without rolling on the ground and biting the grass, this
time!
“Speak out,” said the prior, not unkindly. “You have never sought to make
light of your failings, I do not think you need fear our too harsh condemnation.
You have been commonly your own sternest judge.” So he had, but that, well
handled, can be one way of evading and forestalling the judgements of others.
Brother Columbanus sank to his knees in the orchard turf. And very comely
and aristocratic he looked, Cadfael admitted, again admiring with surprise the

compact grace and strength of his body, and the supple flow of his movements.
“Father, you sent me with Brother Jerome, yesterday, to keep vigil in the
chapel, and pray earnestly for a good outcome, in amity and peace. Father, we
came there in good time, before eleven, as I judge, and having eaten our meal,
we went in and took our places, for there are prayer-desks within, and the altar is
kept clean and well-tended. Oh, Father, my will to keep vigil was good, but the
flesh was weak. I had not been half an hour kneeling in prayer, when I fell asleep
on my arms on the desk, to my endless shame. It is no excuse that I have slept
badly and thought much since we came here. Prayer should fix and purify the
mind. I slept, and our cause was weakened. I must have slept all the afternoon,
for the next thing I remember is Brother Jerome shaking me by the shoulder and
telling me there was a messenger calling us to go with him.”
He caught his breath, and a frantic tear rolled down his cheek, circling the
bold, rounded Norman bone. “Oh, do not look askance at Brother Jerome, for he
surely never knew I had been sleeping, and there is no blame at all to him for not
observing and reporting my sin. I awoke as he touched me, and arose and went
with him. He thought me as earnest in prayer as he, and knew no wrong.”
Nobody, probably, had thought of looking askance at Brother Jerome until
then, but Cadfael was probably the quickest and most alert, and the only one
who caught the curious expression of apprehension, fading rapidly into
complacency, that passed over Brother Jerome’s normally controlled
countenance. Jerome had not been pursuing the same studies as Cadfael, or he
would have been far from complacent. For Brother Columbanus in his self-
absorbed innocence had just removed all certainty that Jerome had spent the
previous noon and afternoon motionless in Saint Winifred’s chapel, praying for a
happy solution. His only guarantor had been fast asleep throughout. He could
have sauntered out and gone anywhere he chose.
“Son,” said Prior Robert, in an indulgent voice he would certainly never
have used to Brother John, “your fault is human, and frailty is in our nature. And
you redeem your own error, in defending your brother. Why did you not tell us
of this yesterday?”
“Father, how could I? There was no opportunity, before we learned of
Rhisiart’s death. Thus burdened, how could I burden you further at that time? I
kept it for this chapter, the right place for erring brothers to receive their
penance, and make their abasement. As I do abase myself, as all unworthy the
vocation I chose. Speak out sentence on me, for I desire penance.”
The prior was opening his lips to give judgment, patiently enough, for such
devout submission and awareness of guilt disarmed him, when they were
distracted by the clap of the wooden bar of the garden gate, and there was Father

Huw himself advancing across the grass towards them, hair and beard even more
disordered than usual, and his eyes heavy and resolved and calm.
“Father Prior,” he said, halting before them, “I have just come from holding
council with Cadwallon, and Rhys, and Meurice, and all the men of substance in
my parish. It was the best opportunity, though I’m sad indeed about the cause.
They all came to the mourning for Rhisiart. Every man there knew how he had
been struck down, and how such a fate was prophesied…”
“God forbid,” said Prior Robert hastily, “that I should threaten any man’s
death. I said that Saint Winifred would be revenged in her own time on the man
who stood in the way and did her offence, I never said word of killing.”
“But when he was dead you did claim that this was the saint’s vengeance.
Every man there heard it, and most believed. I took this chance of conferring
with them again in the matter. They do not wish to do anything that is against the
will of heaven, nor to give offence to the Benedictine order and the abbey of
Shrewsbury. They do not think it right or wise, after what has happened, even to
put any man, woman or child of Gwytherin in peril. I am commissioned, Father
Prior, to tell you that they withdraw all opposition to your plans. The relics of
Saint Winifred are yours to take away with you.”
Prior Robert drew a great breath of triumph and joy, and whatever will he
might have had to deal even the lightest punishment left him in an instant. It was
everything he had hoped for. Brother Columbanus, still kneeling, cast up his
eyes radiantly towards heaven and clasped his hands in gratitude, and somehow
contrived to look as though he had brought about this desired consummation
himself, the deprivation caused by his unfaithfulness compensated in full by this
reward of his penitence. Brother Jerome, just as determined to impress prior and
priest with his devotion, threw up his hands and uttered a reverent Latin
invocation of praise to God and the saints.
“I am certain,” said Prior Robert magnanimously, “that the people of
Gwytherin never wished to offend, and that they have done wisely and rightly
now. I am glad, for them as for my abbey, that we may complete our work here
and take our leave in amity with you all. And for your part in bringing about this
good ending, Father Huw, we are all grateful. You have done well for your
parish and your people.”
“I am bound to tell you,” said Huw honestly, “that they are not at all happy
at losing the saint. But none of them will hinder what you wish. If you so will,
we will take you to the burial place today.”
“We will go in procession after the next Mass,” said the prior, unwonted
animation lighting up his severe countenance now that he had his own way, “and
not touch food until we have knelt at Saint Winifred’s altar and given thanks.”

His eyes lit upon Brother Columbanus, patiently kneeling and gazing upon him
with doglike eyes, still insistent upon having his sin recognised. Robert looked
faintly surprised for a moment, as if he had forgotten the young man’s existence.
“Rise, brother, and take heart, for you see that there is forgiveness in the air. You
shall not be deprived of your share in the delight of visiting the virgin saint and
paying honour to her.”
“And my penance?” insisted the incorrigible penitent.
There was a good deal of iron in Brother Columbanus’s meekness.
“For penance you shall undertake the menial duties that fell to Brother
John, and serve your fellows and their beasts until we return home. But your part
in the glory of this day you shall have, and help to bear the reliquary in which
the saint’s bones are to rest. We’ll carry it with us, and set it up before the altar.
Every move we make I would have the virgin approve plainly, in all men’s
sight.”
“And will you break the ground today?” asked Father Huw wearily. No
doubt he would be glad to have the whole episode over and forgotten, and be rid
of them all, so that Gwytherin could settle again to its age-old business, though
short of one good man.
“No,” said Prior Robert after due thought. “I wish to show forth at every
stage our willingness to be guided, and the truth of what we have claimed, that
our mission was inspired by Saint Winifred herself. I decree that there shall be
three nights of vigil and prayer before the chapel altar, before ever we break the
sod, to confirm to all that what we are doing is indeed right and blessed. We are
six here, if you will join us, Father Huw. Two by two we will be watching
nightlong in the chapel, and pray to be guided rightly.”
They took up the silver-inlaid coffin made in implicit faith in Shrewsbury,
and carried it in procession up through the woods, past Cadwallon’s house,
taking the right-hand path that led them obliquely away from the scene of
Rhisiart’s death, until they came to a small clearing on a hillside, ringed round
on three sides by tall, thick clumps of hawthorn, then in snowy bloom. The
chapel was of wood, dark with age, small and shadowy within, a tiny bell-turret
without a bell leaning over the doorway. Round it the old graveyard lay spread
like billowing green skirts, thick with herbs and brambles and tall grasses. By
the time they reached this place they had a silent and ever-growing company of
local inhabitants following them, curious, submissive, wary. There was no way
of telling whether they still felt resentment. Their eyes were steady, observant
and opaque, determined to miss nothing and give nothing away.
At the sagging wooden gate that still hung where the path entered, Prior
Robert halted, and made the sign of the cross with large, grave gestures. “Wait

here!” he said, when Huw would have led him forward. “Let us see if prayer can
guide my feet, for I have prayed. You shall not show me the saint’s grave. I will
show it to you, if she will be my aid.”
Obediently they stood and watched his tall figure advance with measured
steps, as if he felt his way, the skirts of his habit sweeping through the tangles of
grass and flowers. Without hesitation and without haste he made his way to a
little, overgrown mound aligned with the east end of the chapel, and sank to his
knees at its head.
“Saint Winifred lies here,” he said.
Cadfael thought about it every step of the way, as he went up through the
woods that afternoon to Rhisiart’s hall. A man could count on Prior Robert to be
impressive, but that little miracle had been a master-stroke. The breathless hush,
the rippling outbreak of comment and wonder and awe among the men of
Gwytherin were with him still. No question but the remotest villein hut and the
poorest free holding in the parish would be buzzing with the news by now. The
monks of Shrewsbury were vindicated. The saint had taken their prior by the
hand and led him to her grave. No, the man had never before been to that place,
nor had the grave been marked in any way, by a belated attempt to cut the
brambles from it, for instance. It was as it had always been, and yet he had
known it from all the rest.
No use at all pointing out, to a crowd swayed by emotion, that if Prior
Robert had not previously been to the chapel, Brothers Jerome and Columbanus,
his most faithful adherents, had, only the previous day, and with the boy Edwin
to guide them, and what more probable than that one of them should have asked
the child the whereabouts of the lady they had come all this way to find?
And now, with this triumph already establishing his claim,
Robert had given himself three whole days and nights of delay, in which
other, similar prodigies might well confirm his ascendancy. A very bold step, but
then, Robert was a bold and resourceful man, quite capable of gambling his
chances of providing further miracles against any risk of contrary chance
refuting him. He meant to leave Gwytherin with what he had come for, but to
leave it, if not fully reconciled, then permanently cowed. No scuttling away in
haste with his prize of bones, as though still in terror of being thwarted.
But he could not have killed Rhisiart, thought Cadfael with certainty. That I
know. Could he have gone so far as to procure…? He considered the possibility
honestly, and discarded it. Robert he endured, disliked, and in a fashion admired.
At Brother John’s age he would have detested him, but Cadfael was old,
experienced and grown tolerant.
He came to the gatehouse of Rhisiart’s holding, a wattle hut shored into a

corner of the palisade fence. The man knew him again from yesterday, and let
him in freely. Cai came across the enclosed court to meet him, grinning. All
grins here were somewhat soured and chastened now, but a spark of inward
mischief survived.
“Have you come to rescue your mate?” asked Cai. “I doubt he wouldn’t
thank you, he’s lying snug, and feeding like a fighting cock, and no threats of the
bailiff yet. She’s said never a word, you may be sure, and Father Huw would be
in no hurry. I reckon we’ve a couple of days yet, unless your prior makes it his
business, where it’s none. And if he does, we have boys out will give us plenty
of notice before any horseman reaches the gate. Brother John’s in good hands.”
It was Engelard’s fellow-worker speaking, the man who knew him as well
as any in this place. Clearly Brother John had established himself with his
gaoler, and Cai’s mission was rather to keep the threatening world from him,
than to keep him from sallying forth into the world. When the key was needed
for the right purpose, it would be provided.
“Take care for your own head,” said Cadfael, though without much anxiety.
They knew what they were doing. “Your prince may have a lawyer’s mind, and
want to keep in with the Benedictines along the border.”
“Ah, never fret! An escaped felon can be nobody’s fault. And everybody’s
quarry and nobody’s prize! Have you never hunted zealously in all the wrong
places for something you desired not to find?”
“Say no more,” said Cadfael, “or I shall have to stop my ears. And tell the
lad I never even asked after him, for I know there’s no need.”
“Would you be wishing to have a gossip with him?” offered Cai generously.
“He’s lodged over yonder in a nice little stable that’s clean and empty, and he
gets his meals princely, I tell you!”
“Tell me nothing, for I might be asked,” said Cadfael. “A blind eye and a
deaf ear can be useful sometimes. I’ll be glad to spend a while with you
presently, but now I’m bound to her. We have business together.”
Sioned was not in the hall, but in the small chamber curtained off at its end,
Rhisiart’s private room. And Rhisiart was private there with his daughter,
stretched out straight and still on draped furs, on a trestle table, with a white
linen sheet covering him. The girl sat beside him, waiting, very formally attired,
very grave, her hair austerely braided about her head. She looked older, and
taller, now that she was the lady-lord of this holding. But she rose to meet
Brother Cadfael with the bright, sad, eager smile of a child sure now of counsel
and guidance.
“I looked for you earlier. No matter, I’m glad you’re here. I have his clothes
for you. I did not fold them; if I had, the damp would have spread evenly

through, and now, though they may have dried off, I think you’ll still feel a
difference.” She brought them, chausses, tunic and shirt, and he took them from
her one by one and felt at the cloth testingly. “I see,” she said, “that you already
know where to feel.”
Rhisiart’s hose, though partly covered by the tunic he had worn, were still
damp at the back of the thighs and legs, but in front dry, though the damp had
spread round through the threads to narrow the dry part to a few inches. His
tunic was moist all down the back to the hem, the full width of his shoulders still
shaped in a dark patch like spread wings, but all the breast of it, round the dark-
rimmed slit the arrow had made, was quite dry. The shirt, though less definitely,
showed the same pattern. The fronts of the sleeves were dry, the backs damp.
Where the exit wound pierced his back, shirt and tunic were soaked in blood
now drying and encrusted.
“You remember,” said Cadfael, “just how he lay when we found him?”
“I shall remember it my life long,” said Sioned. “From the hips up flat on
his back, but his right hip turned into the grass, and his legs twisted, the left over
the right, like…” She hesitated, frowning, feeling for her own half-glimpsed
meaning, and found it. “Like a man who has been lying on his face, and heaves
himself over in his sleep on to his back, and sleeps again at once.”
“Or,” said Cadfael, “like a man who has been taken by the left shoulder, as
he lay on his face, and heaved over on to his back. After he was well asleep!”
She gazed at him steadily, with eyes hollow and dark like wounds. “Tell me
all your thoughts. I need to know. I must know.”
“First, then,” said Brother Cadfael, “I call attention to the place where this
thing happened. A close-set, thicketed place, with plenty of bushes for cover, but
not more than fifty paces clear view in any direction. Is that an archer’s ground?
I think not. Even if he wished the body to be left in woodlands where it might lie
undiscovered for hours, he could have found a hundred places more favourable
to him. An expert bowman does not need to get close to his quarry, he needs
room to draw on a target he can hold in view long enough for a steady aim.”
“Yes,” said Sioned. “Even if it could be believed of him that he would kill,
that rules out Engelard.”
“Not only Engelard, any good bowman, and if someone so incompetent as
to need so close a shot tried it, I doubt if he could succeed. I do not like this
arrow, it has no place here, and yet here it is. It has one clear purpose, to cast the
guilt on Engelard. But I cannot get it out of my head that it has some other
purpose, too.”
“To kill!” said Sioned, burning darkly.
“Even that I question, mad though it may seem. See the angle at which it

enters and leaves. And then see how the blood is all at the back, and not where
the shaft entered. And remember all we have said and noted about his clothes,
how they were wet behind, though he lay on his back. And how you yourself
said it was the attitude of a man who had heaved himself over from lying on his
face. And one more thing I found out yesterday, as I kneeled beside him. Under
him the thick grass was wet. But all down by his right side, shoulder to hip and
body-wide, it was bone-dry. There was a brisk shower yesterday morning, half
an hour of rain. When that rain began, your father was lying on his face, already
dead. How else could that patch of grass have remained dry, but sheltered by his
body?”
“And then,” said Sioned low but clearly, “as you say, he was taken by his
left shoulder and heaved over on to his back. When he was well asleep. Deep
asleep!”
“So it looks to me!”
“But the arrow entered his breast,” she said. “How, then, could he fall on
his face?”
“That we have to find out. Also why he bled behind, and not in front. But
lie on his face he did, and that from before the rain began until after it ceased, or
the grass beneath him could not have been dry. From half an hour before noon,
when the first drops fell, until some minutes past noon, when the sun came out
again. Sioned, may I, with all reverence look closely again now at his body?”
“I know no greater reverence anyone can pay to a murdered man,” she said
fiercely, “than to seek out by all possible means and avenge him on his murder.
Yes, handle him if your must. I’ll help you. No one else! At least,” she said with
a pale and bitter smile, “you and I are not afraid to touch him, in case he bleeds
in accusation against us.”
Cadfael was sharply arrested in the act of drawing down the sheet that
covered Rhisiart’s body, as though what she had said had put a new and
promising idea into his head. “True! There are not many who do not believe in
that trial. Would you say everyone here holds by it?”
“Don’t your people believe it? Don’t you?” She was astonished. Her eyes
rounded like a child’s.
“My cloister-brothers…  Yes, I dare say all or most believe in it. I? Child,
I’ve seen too many slaughtered men handled over and over after a battle by those
who finish them off, and never known one of them gush fresh blood, once the
life was out of him. But what I believe or don’t believe is not to the point. What
the murderer believes well may be. No, you have endured enough. Leave him
now to me.”
Nevertheless, she did not turn her eyes away, as Cadfael drew off the

covering sheet. She must have anticipated the need to examine the body further,
for as yet she had left him naked, unshrouded. Washed clean of blood, Rhisiart
lay composed and at rest, a thick, powerful trunk brown to the waist, whiter
below. The wound under his ribs, an erect slit, now showed ugly and torn, with
frayed, bluish lips, though they had done their best to smooth the lacerated flesh
together.
“I must turn him,” said Cadfael. “I need to see the other wound.”
She did not hesitate, but with the tenderness of a mother rather than a
daughter she slipped an arm under her father’s shoulders, and with her free hand
flattened under him from the other side, raised the stiffened corpse until he lay
on his right side, his face cradled in the hollow of her arm. Cadfael steadied the
stretched-out legs, and leaned to peer closely at the wound high on the left side
of the back.
“You would have trouble pulling out the shaft. You had to withdraw it
frontally.”
“Yes.” She shook for a moment, for that had been the worst of the ordeal.
“The tip barely broke the skin behind, we had no chance to cut it off. Shame to
mangle him so, but what could we do? And yet all that blood!”
The steel point had indeed done little more than puncture the skin, leaving a
small, blackened spot, dried blood with a bluish bruise round it. But there was a
further mark there, thin and clear and faint. From the black spot the brown line
of another upright slit extended, a little longer above the arrow-mark than below,
its length in all about as great as the width of Cadfael’s thumb-joint, and a faint
stain of bruising extending it slightly at either end, beyond where the skin was
broken. All that blood—though in fact it was not so very much, though it took
Rhisiart’s life away with it—had drained out of this thin slit, and not from the
wound in his breast, though that now glared, and this lay closed and secret.
“I have done,” said Cadfael gently, and helped her to lay her father at peace
again. When they had smoothed even the thick mane of his hair, they covered
him again reverently. Then Cadfael told her exactly what he had seen. She
watched him with great eyes, and thought for some moments in silence. Then
she said: “I did see this mark you speak of. I could not account for it. If you can,
tell me.”
“It was there his life-blood came out,” said Cadfael. “And not by the
puncture the arrow certainly made, but by a prior wound. A wound made, as I
judge, by a long dagger, and a very thin and sharp one, no common working
knife. Once it was withdrawn, the wound was nearly closed. Yet the blade passed
clean through him. For it was possible, afterwards, to trace and turn that same
thrust backwards upon itself, and very accurately, too. What we took for the exit

wound is no exit wound at all, but an entry wound. The arrow was driven in
from the front after he was dead, to hide the fact that he was stabbed in the back.
That was why the ambush took place in thick undergrowth, in a tangled place.
That was why he fell on his face, and why, afterwards, he was turned on his
back. And why the upward course of the arrow is so improbable. It never was
shot from any bow. To thrust in an arrow is hard work, it was made to get its
power from flight. I think the way was opened first with a dagger.”
“The same that struck him down from behind,” she said, white and
translucent as flame.
“It would seem so. Then the arrow was inserted after. Even so he could not
make it penetrate further. I mistrusted that shot from the first. Engelard could
have put a shaft through a couple of oak boards and clean away at that distance.
So could any archer worth his pay. But to thrust it in with your hands—no, it was
a strong, lusty arm that made even this crude job of it. And at least he got the
line right. A good eye, a sensitive hand.”
“A devil’s heart,” said Sioned, “and Engelard’s arrow! Someone who knew
where to find them, and knew Engelard would not be there to prevent.” But for
all her intolerable burdens, she was still thinking clearly. “I have a question yet.
Why did this murderer leave it so long between killing and disguising his kill?
My father was dead before ever the rain came. You have shown it clearly. But he
was not turned on his back to receive Engelard’s arrow until after the rain
stopped. More than half an hour. Why? Was his murderer startled away by
someone passing close? Did he wait in the bushes to be sure Rhisiart was dead
before he dared touch him? Or did he only think of this devilish trick later, and
have to go and fetch the shaft for his purpose? Why so long?”
“That,” said Cadfael honestly, “I do not know.”
“What do we know? That whoever it was wished to pin this thing upon
Engelard. Was that the whole cause? Was my father just a disposable thing, to
get rid of Engelard? Bait to trap another man? Or did someone want my father
disposed of, and only afterwards realise how easy, how convenient, to dispose of
Engelard, too?”
“I know no more than you,” said Cadfael, himself shaken. And he thought,
and wished he had not, of that young man fretting his feet tormentedly among
the leaves, and flinching from Sioned’s trust as from a death-wound. “Perhaps
whoever it was did the deed, and slipped away, and then paused to think, and
saw how easy it might be to point the act away from himself, and went back to
do it. All we are sure of is this, and, child, thank God for it. Engelard has been
set up as a sacrificial victim, and is clear of all taint. Keep that at heart, and
wait.”

“And whether we discover the real murderer or not, if ever it should be
needful you will speak out for Engelard?”
“That I will, with all my heart. But for now, say nothing of this to anyone,
for we are still here, the troublers of Gwytherin’s peace, and never think that I
have set us apart as immaculate. Until we know the guilty, we do not know the
innocent.”
“I take back nothing,” said Sioned firmly, “of what I said concerning your
prior.”
“Nevertheless, he could not have done it. He was not out of my sight.”
“No, that I accept. But he buys men, and he is utterly set upon getting his
saint, and now, as I understand, he had his will. It is a cause. And never forget,
Welshmen, as well as Englishmen may be for sale. I pray not many. But a few.”
“I don’t forget,” said Cadfael.
“Who is he? Who? He knows my father’s movements. He knows where to
lay hands on Engelard’s arrows. He wants God knows what from my father’s
death, but certainly he wants to pin murder on Engelard. Brother Cadfael, who
can this man be?”
“That, God willing,” he said, “you and I between us will find out. But as at
this moment, I cannot judge nor guess, I am utterly astray. What was done I see,
but why, or by whom, I know no more than you. But you have reminded me how
the dead are known to rebel against the touch of those who struck them down,
and as Rhisiart has told us much, so he may tell us all.”
He told her, then, of the three nights of prayer and vigil Prior Robert had
decreed, and how all the monks and Father Huw, by turns, would share the duty.
But he did not tell her how Columbanus, in his single-minded innocence and his
concern for his own conscience, had added one more to those who had had the
opportunity to lie in wait for her father in the forest. Nor did he admit to her, and
hardly to himself, that what they had discovered here lent a sinister meaning to
Columbanus’s revelation. Jerome out hunting his man with bow and arrow was a
most unlikely conception, but Jerome creeping up behind a man’s back in thick
cover, with a sharp dagger in hand…
Cadfael put the thought behind him, but it did not go far. There was a
certain credibility about it that he did not like at all.
“Tonight and for two nights following, two of us will be keeping watch in
the chapel from after Compline in the evening until Prime in the morning. All
six of us can be drawn into the same trial, and not one can feel himself singled
out. After that, we’ll see. Now this,” said Brother Cadfael, “is what you must
do…”

Chapter Seven
 
AFTER COMPLINE, IN THE SOFT EVENING LIGHT, WITH THE
SLANTING SUNSET filtering through young viridian leaves, they went up, all
six together, to the wooden chapel and the solitary graveyard, to bring their first
pair of pilgrims to the vigil. And there, advancing to meet them in the clearing
before the gate, came another procession, eight of Rhisiart’s household officers
and servants, winding down out of the woods with their lord’s bier upon their
shoulders, and their lord’s daughter, now herself their lord, walking erect and
dignified before them, dressed in a dark gown and draped with a grey veil, under
which her long hair lay loose in mourning. Her face was calm and fixed, her
eyes looked far. She could have daunted any man, even an abbot. Prior Robert
baulked at sight of her. Cadfael was proud of her.
So far from checking at sight of Robert, she gave a slight spring of hope
and purpose to her step, and came on without pause. Face to face with him at
three paces distance, she halted and stood so still and quiet that he might have
mistaken this for submission, if he had been fool enough. But he was not a fool,
and he gazed and measured silently, seeing a woman, a mere girl, who had come
to match him, though not yet recognising her as his match.
“Brother Cadfael,” she said, without taking her eyes from Robert’s face,
“stand by me now and make my words plain to the reverend prior, for I have a
prayer to him for my father’s sake.”
Rhisiart was there at her back, not coffined, only swathed and shrouded in
white linen, every line of the body and face standing clear under the tight
wrappings, in a cradle of leafy branches, carried on a wooden bier. All those
dark, secret Welsh eyes of the men who bore him glowed like little lamps about
a catafalque, betraying nothing, seeing everything. And the girl was so young,
and so solitary. Prior Robert, even in his assured situation, was uneasy. He may
have been moved.
“Make your prayer, daughter,” he said.
“I have heard that you intend to watch three nights in reverence to Saint
Winifred, before you take her hence with you. I ask that for the ease of my
father’s soul, if he has offended against her, which was never his intent, he may
be allowed to lie those three nights before her altar, in the care of those who keep
watch. I ask that they will spare one prayer for forgiveness and rest to his soul,
one only, in a long night of prayer. Is that too much to ask?”

“It is a fair asking,” said Robert, “from a loyal daughter.” And after all, he
came of a noble family, and knew how to value the ties of blood and birth, and
he was not all falsity.
“I hope for a sign of grace,” said Sioned, “all the more if you approve me.”
There was no way that such a request could do anything but add lustre and
glory to his reputation. His opponent’s heiress and only child came asking his
countenance and patronage. He was more than gratified, he was charmed. He
gave his consent graciously, aware of more pairs of Gwytherin eyes watching
him than belonged to Rhisiart’s bearers. Scattered though the households were,
apart from the villein community that fanned as one family, the woods were full
of eyes now wherever the strangers went. A pity they had not kept as close a
watch on Rhisiart when he was man alive!
They installed his green bier on the trestles before the altar, beside the
reliquary that awaited Saint Winifred’s bones. The altar was small and plain, the
bier almost dwarfed it, and the light that came in through the narrow east
window barely illuminated the scene even by morning sunlight. Prior Robert had
brought altar-cloths in the chest, and with these the trestles were draped. There
the party from Rhisiart’s hall left their lord lying in state, and quietly withdrew
on the way home.
“In the morning,” said Sioned, before she went with them, “I shall come to
say my thanks to those who have asked grace for my father during the night.
And so I shall do each morning, before we bury him.”
She made the reverence due to Prior Robert, and went away without
another word, without so much as a glance at Brother Cadfael, drawing the veil
close round her face.
So far, so good! Robert’s vanity and self-interest, if not his compunction,
had assured her of her chance, it remained to be seen what would come of it. The
order of their watches had been decreed by Robert himself, in consultation with
no one but Father Huw, who wished to be the first to spend the night opening his
heart to the saint’s influence, if she pleased to make her presence known. His
partner was Brother Jerome, of whose obsequious attendance the prior
occasionally grew weary, and Cadfael was thankful for the accidental choice that
suited him best. That first morning, at least, no one would know what to expect.
After that the rest would have due warning, but surely no way of evading the
issue.
In the morning, when they went to the chapel, it was to find a fair number
of the inhabitants of Gwytherin already gathered there, though unobtrusively,
lurking in the edges of the woods and under the fragrant shadow of the hawthorn
hedges. Only when the prior and his companions entered the chapel did the

villagers emerge silently from cover and gather close, and the first of them to
draw near was Sioned, with Annest at her elbow. Way was opened for the two
girls, and the people of Gwytherin closed in after them, filling the doorway of
the chapel and blocking off the early light, so that only the candles on the altar
cast a pale glow over the bier where the dead man lay.
Father Huw got up from his knees somewhat creakily, leaning on the solid
wood of the desk till he could get his old legs straightened and working again.
From the other desk beside him Jerome rose briskly and supply. Cadfael thought
suspiciously of devout watchkeepers who fell asleep as comfortably as possible
on their folded arms, but at the moment that was of no importance. He would
hardly have expected heaven to open and rain down roses of forgiveness at
Jerome’s request, in any case.
“A quiet watch,” said Huw, “and all most calm. I was not visited by any
great experience, but such hardly fall to humble parish priests. We have prayed,
child, and I trust we have been heard.”
“I am grateful,” said Sioned. “And before you go, will you do one more
kindness for me and mine? As you have all been sufferers in this trouble and
dissension, will you show your own will to mercy? You have prayed for him,
now I ask you to lay your hand, each of you, upon my father’s heart, in token of
reassurance and forgiveness.”
The people of Gwytherin, still as trees in the doorway, but live as trees, too,
and all eyes as a tree is all leaves, made never a sound, and missed never a move.
“Gladly!” said Father Huw, and stepped to the bier and laid his rough hand
gently on the stilled heart, and by the wagging of his beard his lips were again
moving in silent intercession. All eyes turned upon Brother Jerome, for Brother
Jerome was hesitating.
He did not look greatly disturbed, but he did look evasive. The face he
turned upon Sioned was benevolent and sweet, and having bestowed on her the
obligatory glance of compassion, he modestly lowered his eyes before her as
was prescribed, and turned to look trustfully at Prior Robert.
“Father Huw holds the cure of this parish, and is subject to one discipline,
but I to another. The lord Rhisiart surely carried out his religious duties
faithfully, and I feel with him. But he died by violence, unconfessed and
unshriven, and such a death leaves the health of his soul in doubt. I am not fit to
pronounce in this case. I have prayed, but blessing is not for me to dispense
without authority. If Prior Robert feels it is justified, and gives me leave, I will
gladly do as I am asked.”
Along this devious path Cadfael followed him with some amazement and
considerable doubt. If the prior had himself authorised the death, and sent his

creature out to accomplish it, Jerome could not have turned the threat back on
his superior more neatly. On the other hand, knowing Jerome, this could as well
be his way of flattering and courting, at this opportunity as at every other. And if
Robert graciously gave his leave, did he suppose that would protect him, as
having plainly handed on the guilt and the threat where they truly belonged, and
leave him free to touch his victim with impunity? It would have mattered less if
Cadfael had firmly believed that the murdered bleed when the murderer touches,
but what he believed was very different, simply that the belief was general
among most people, and could drive the guilty, when cornered, to terror and
confession. That very terror and stress might even produce some small effusion
of blood, though he doubted it. He was beginning to think that Jerome doubted
it, too.
The watching eyes had changed their quarry, and hung heavily upon the
prior. He frowned, and considered gravely for some moments, before he gave
judgment. “You may do what she wishes, with a good conscience. She is asking
only for forgiveness, which is every man’s to give, not for absolution.”
And Brother Jerome, gratefully acknowledging the instruction, stepped
readily to the bier, and laid his hand upon the swathed heart without a tremor. No
spurt of red showed through the shroud to accuse him. Complacently he
followed Prior Robert out of the chapel, the others falling in behind, and the
silent, staring people fell back from the doorway and let them pass.
And where, thought Cadfael following, does that leave us? Is he quite hardy
about the ordeal, not believing in it at all, or does he feel he has passed the guilt
to the guilty, whatever his own part in it, and is therefore out of danger? Or had
he no part in it at all, and was all this to no purpose? He is quite narrow enough
to refuse the girl a kindness, unless he could turn it to his own credit and
advantage.
Well, we shall see tomorrow, reasoned Cadfael, what Robert will do when
he’s asked for his own forgiveness, instead of being generous with another
man’s.
However, things did not turn out quite as he had expected. Prior Robert had
certainly elected to take that night’s watch himself, along with Brother Richard.
But as the two were on their way to the chapel, and passing by Cadwallon’s
holding, the prior was hailed by the gateman, and Cadwallon himself came
hastening out to intercept him, with a burly, handsomely-dressed Welshman in a
short riding tunic at his heels.
The first Cadfael knew of it was when the prior came striding back into
Huw’s garden with the stranger beside him, just at the hour when he should have
been sinking to his knees in the sombre chapel with its tiny lights, to keep

nightlong company with his dead man, in a confrontation which might yet
produce fruitful evidence. But here he was, just in time to prevent Cadfael from
slipping away to Bened’s smithy to exchange the news of the day, and share a
cup of wine. And plainly not seriously displeased at having his night’s vigil
disrupted, either.
“Brother Cadfael, we have a visitor, and I shall require your services. This
is Griffith ap Rhys, Prince Owain’s bailiff in Rhos. Cadwallon sent to him
concerning the death of the lord Rhisiart, and I must make my own statement to
him, and discuss what is to be done. He will be enquiring of all those who may
have witness to deliver, but now he requires that I shall render my account first. I
have had to send Brother Richard on to the chapel without me.”
Jerome and Columbanus had been about to set out for their own beds in
Cadwallon’s house, but they lingered dutifully at hearing this. “I will go in your
place, Father Prior,” offered Jerome devotedly, certain he would be refused.
“No, you have had one sleepless night.” (Had he? In that dim interior there
was no being sure, even if Father Huw had been a suspicious man. And Jerome
was not the kind to wear himself out needlessly.) “You must get your rest.”
“I would gladly take your place, Father Prior,” offered Columbanus just as
ardently.
“You have your turn tomorrow. Beware, brother, of taking too much to
yourself, of arrogance in the guise of humility. No, Brother Richard will keep the
vigil alone tonight. You may wait, both, until you have given your witness as to
what you did and saw the day before yesterday, and then leave us, and get your
proper sleep.”
That was a long tedious session, and greatly fretted Brother Cadfael, who
was obliged to fall back on his own conception of truth, not, indeed, by
translating falsely, but by adding his own view of those things that had happened
in the forest by Rhisiart’s body. He did not suppress anything Robert said, but he
severed plain fact from supposition, the thing observed from the conclusion
leaped to, on his own authority. Who was there with Welsh enough to challenge
him, except Griffith ap Rhys himself? And that experienced and sceptical officer
soon proved himself not only a quick and agile listener, but a very shrewd
dissector of feelings and motives, too. He was, after all, Welsh to the bone, and
Welsh bones were at the heart of this tangle. By the time he had dealt with
Columbanus and Jerome, those two faithful watchers of whom one had turned
out to be a treasonous sleeper-on-duty (though neither they nor Prior Robert saw
fit to mention that lapse!), Cadfael was beginning to feel he could rely on the
good sense of the prince’s bailiff, and need not have gone to so much trouble to
suppress most of what he himself knew and was about. Better so, though, he

decided finally, for what he most needed now was time, and a day or two saved
buy sending Griffith all round the parish after evidence might see the satisfactory
conclusion of his own enquiries. Official justice does not dig deep, but regards
what comes readily to the surface, and draws conclusions accordingly. A nagging
doubt now and then is the price it pays for speedy order and a quiet land. But
Cadfael was not prepared to let the nagging doubt occur in the person of either
Engelard or Brother John. No, better go his own way to the end, and have a
finished case to present to bailiff and prince.
So there was nothing at all for Sioned to do, when she came the next
morning, but to ask Brother Richard, that large, lazy, kindly man who willed
peace and harmony all round him, for his personal pity towards her father, and
his benediction in the laying on of hands. Which he gave willingly and
guilelessly, and departed still in ignorance of what he had done, and what he had
been absolved from doing.
“I missed you,” said Bened, briefly visited between Mass and dinner.
“Padrig came down for a while, we were talking over the old days, when
Rhisiart was younger. Padrig’s been coming here a good many years now. He
knows us all. He asked after you.”
“Tell him we’ll share a cup one of these days, here or there. And say I’m
about Rhisiart’s business, if that’s any comfort.”
“We’re getting used to you,” said Bened, stooping to his fire, where a
sinewy boy was bending into the bellows. “You should stay, there’d be a place
for you.”
“I’ve got my place,” said Cadfael. “Never fret about me. I chose the cowl
with both eyes open. I knew what I did.”
“There are some I can’t reconcile with you,” said Bened, with the iron in
hand for the shoe that waited.
“Ah, priors and brothers come and go, as mixed as the rest of men, but the
cloister remains. Now, there are some who did lose their way, I grant you,” said
Cadfael, “mostly young things who mistook a girl’s ‘no’ for the end of the world.
Some of them might make very useful craftsmen, if ever they broke free. Always
supposing they were free men, and could get entry to, say, the smith’s
mystery…”
“He has a good arm and wrist on him, that one,” said Bened reflectively,
“and knows how to jump and do as he’s bid when the man bidding knows his
business. That’s half the craft. If he hasn’t let Rhisiart’s killer loose on the world,
then there isn’t an outlander would be more welcome here. But that I don’t yet
know, though the poor girl up yonder may think she does. How if she’s wrong?
Do you know?”

“Not yet,” owned Cadfael. “But give us time, and we shall know.”
On this third day of Brother John’s nominal captivity he found himself
more closely confined. The word had gone round that the bailiff was in the
parish and asking questions everywhere concerning the circumstances of
Rhisiart’s death, and it was known that he had had a lengthy session with the
prior at Father Huw’s parsonage, and must certainly have been urged and
admonished as to his duty to take action also in the matter of Brother John’s
crime. Not that John had any complaints as to his lodging, his food or his
company; he had seldom been so completely content. But for two days, with
brief intervals when caution had seemed advisable, he had been out from dawn
to dusk about the holding, lending a hand with the cattle, replenishing the wood-
pile, fetching and carrying, planting out in the vegetable garden, and had had
neither time nor inclination to worry about his situation. Now that he was hustled
out of sight, and sat idle in the stable, the realities fretted even John, and the
want of Welsh, or of Brother Cadfael to supply the want, was a frustration no
longer so easy to bear. He did not know what Cadfael and Sioned were up to, he
did not know what was happening to Saint Winifred, or to Prior Robert and his
fellows, and above all he did not know where Engelard was, or how he was to be
extricated from the tangle of suspicion roused against him. Since his instinctive
gesture of solidarity, John took a proprietorial interest in Engelard, and wanted
him safe, vindicated, and happy with his Sioned.
But Sioned, true to her word, did not come near him, and there was no one
else in the holding who could talk to him freely. Simple things could be
conveyed, but there was no way of communicating to him everything he wanted
and needed to know. There was he, willing but useless, wondering and fretting
how his friends were faring, and quite unable to do anything to aid them.
Annest brought his dinner, and sat by him while he ate, and the same want
of words troubled her. It was all very well teaching him simple words and
phrases in Welsh by touching the thing she meant, but how to set about pouring
out to him, as she would have liked, all that was happening at the chapel, and
what the village was saying and thinking? The helplessness of talking at all
made their meetings almost silent, but sometimes they did speak aloud, he in
English, she in Welsh, saying things because they could not be contained, things
that would be understood by the other only in some future day, though the tone
might convey at least the sense of friendship, like a kind of restrained caress.
Thus they conducted two little monologues which yet were an exchange and a
comfort.
Sometimes, though they did not know it, they were even answering each
other’s questions.

“I wonder who she was,” said Annest, soft and hesitant, “that one who
drove you to take the cowl? Sioned and I, we can’t help wondering how a lad
like you ever came to do it.” Now if he had known Welsh, she could never have
said that to him.
“How did I ever come to think that Margery such a beauty!” marvelled
John. “And take it so hard when she turned me down? But I’d never really seen
beauty then—I’d never seen you!”
“She did us all a bad turn,” said Annest, sighing, “whoever she was, driving
you into that habit for life!”
“Dear God,” said John, “to think I might have married her! At least she did
me that much of a favour, with her ‘no.’ There’s only the matter of a cowl
between you and me, not a wife.” And that was the first moment when he had
entertained the dazzling idea that escape from his vows might be possible at all.
The thought caused him to turn his head and look with even closer and more
ardent attention at the fair face so close to his. She had smooth, rounded, apple-
blossom cheeks, and delicate, sun-glossed bones, and eyes like brook-water in
the sun over bright pebbles, glittering, polished, crystal-clear.
“Do you still fret after her?” wondered Annest in a whisper. “A conceited
ninny who hadn’t the wit to know a good man when she saw one?” For he was
indeed a very well-grown, handy, handsome, goodhumoured young fellow, with
his long, sturdy legs and his big, deft hands, and his bush of russet curls, and the
girl who thought herself too good for him must have been the world’s fool. “I
hate her!” said Annest, leaning unwarily towards him.
The lips that tantalised him with soft utterances he could not understand
were only a little way from his own. He resorted in desperation to a kind of sign-
language that needed no interpreter. He hadn’t kissed a girl since Margery, the
draper’s daughter, threw him over when her father became bailiff of Shrewsbury,
but it seemed he hadn’t forgotten how. And Annest melted into his arms, where
she fitted a great deal better than his too-hasty vows had ever fitted him.
“Oh, Annest!” gasped Brother John, who had never in his life felt less like a
brother, “I think I love you!”
Brother Cadfael and Brother Columbanus walked up through the woodland
together, to keep the third night of prayer. The evening was mild and still but
overcast, and under the trees the light grew dusky green. Until the last moment it
had remained a possibility that Prior Robert, having missed his chosen night of
duty, might elect to be present on this last occasion, but he had said no word, and
to tell the truth, Cadfael was beginning to wonder if that long session with the
bailiff had really been necessary at all, or whether the prior had welcomed it as
an alternative to keeping the night-watch and facing Sioned with her request in

the morning. Not necessarily a proof of any guilt on his part, beyond the guilt of
still wishing to refuse grace to Rhisiart, without actually having to do so face to
face with his daughter. For whatever virtues might be found in Prior Robert,
humility was not one, nor magnanimity. He was invariably sure of his own
rightness, and where it was challenged he was not a forgiving man.
“In this quest and this vigil, brother,” said Columbanus, his long young
steps keeping easy pace with Cadfael’s seaman’s roll, “we are greatly privileged.
The history of our abbey will record our names, and brothers in the generations
to come will envy us.”
“I have already heard,” said Cadfael drily, “that Prior Robert is proposing to
write a life of Saint Winifred, and complete it with the story of this translation to
Shrewsbury. You think he’ll record the names of all his companions?” Yours,
however, he thought, he well might mention, as the afflicted brother who first
fell sick and was sent to Holywell to be cured. And Jerome’s, who had the dream
that took you there. But mine, I feel sure, will remain a silence, and so much the
better!
“I have a fault to atone for,” recalled Columbanus devoutly, “having
betrayed my trust once in this same chapel, I, who most of all should have been
faithful.” They were at the decrepit gate, the tangle of the graveyard before them,
threaded by a narrow path just discernible through the long grass. “I feel a holy
air reaching out to me,” said the young man, quivering, his face uplifted and
pale. “I am drawn into a light. I believe we are approaching a wonder, a miracle
of grace. Such mercy to me, who fell asleep in betrayal of her service!” And he
led the way to the open door, his stride lengthening in eagerness, his hands
extended as if to clasp a mistress rather than make obeisance before a saint.
Cadfael followed morosely but resignedly, used to these uncomfortable ardours,
but not looking forward to being confined in so small a chapel with them
overnight. He had thinking as well as praying to do, and Columbanus was not
conducive to either activity.
Inside the chapel the air was heavy with the scent of old wood, and the
spices and incense of the draperies on which the reliquary lay, and the faint,
aromatic aura of years of dust and partial disuse. A small oil-lamp burned with a
dark yellow flame on the altar, and Cadfael went forward and lit the two altar
candles from it, and set them one on either side. Through the narrow east
window the fragrance of the falling may-blossom breathed freshness on a very
light breeze, causing the flames to flicker for a few minutes. Their faint, dancing
radiance glanced from every near surface, but did not reach the comers of the
roof, or fix the walls in place. They were in a narrow cavern of brown, wood-
scented darkness, with a dim focus of light before them, that shone on an empty

coffin and an uncoffined body, and just showed them the rough outlines of the
two prayer-desks drawn up side by side at a little distance from the catafalque.
Rhisiart lay nearer to them, the black and silver bulk of the reliquary like a low
wall shading him from the altar lights.
Brother Columbanus bowed humbly low to the altar, and took his place at
the desk on the right. Brother Cadfael settled solidly at the one on the left, and
with practised movements sought and found the best place for his knees.
Stillness came down on them gently. He composed himself for a long watch, and
said his prayer for Rhisiart, not the first he had said for him. Great darkness and
constant, feeble light, the slow flowing of time from far beyond his conception
to far beyond his power to follow, the solitude about him and the troubled and
peopled world within, all these settled into their perpetual pattern, a steady
rhythm as perfect as sleep. He thought no more of Columbanus, he forgot that
Columbanus existed. He prayed as he breathed, forming no words and making
no specific requests, only holding in his heart, like broken birds in cupped hands,
all those people who were in stress or in grief because of this little saint, for if he
suffered like this for their sake, how much more must she feel for them?
The candles would last the night, and by instinct he traced time by the rate
at which they dwindled, and knew when it was near to midnight.
He was thinking of Sioned, to whom he had nothing but himself to offer in
the morning, this pietistic innocent being essentially nothing, and Cadfael
himself by no means enough, when he heard the faintest and strangest of sounds
issuing from the prie-dieu on his right, where Columbanus leaned in total
absorption. Not now with face hidden on his linked hands, but uplifted and
strained upwards into what light could reach him, and faint though it was, it
conjured his sharp profile into primrose pallor. His eyes were wide open and
staring beyond the chapel wall, and his lips open and curved in ecstasy, and
singing, a mere thread of Latin chant in praise of virginity. It was barely audible,
yet clear as in a dream. And before Cadfael was fully aware of what he heard, he
saw the young man thrust himself upwards, holding by the desk, and stand
upright before the altar. The chant ceased. Suddenly he reared himself erect to
his tallest, drawing back his head as though he would see through the roof into a
spring night full of stars, and spreading out his arms on either side like a man
stretched on a cross. He gave a great, wordless cry, seemingly both of pain and
triumph, and fell forward full-length on the earthen floor, crashing to the ground
stiffly, arms still outspread, body stretched to the very toes, and lay still, his
forehead against the trailing fringe of the altar-cloth that spilled from beneath
Rhisiart’s body.
Cadfael got up in a hurry and went to him, torn between anxiety and alarm

on one hand, and disgusted resignation on the other. Exactly what was to be
expected of the idiot, he thought with exasperation, even as he was on his knees
feeling at the prone brow, and adjusting a fold of the altar drapery under it to
ease the position of nose and mouth, turning the young man’s head to one side so
that he could breathe freely. I should have recognised the signs! Never an
opportunity but he can produce a devotional fit or a mystic ecstasy to order. One
of these days he’ll be drawn into that light of his, and never come back. Yet I’ve
noticed he can fall flat on his face without hurting himself, and go into pious
convulsions over his visions or his sins without ever hurling himself against
anything sharp or hard, or even biting his tongue. The same sort of providence
that takes care of drunken men looks out for Columbanus in his throes. And he
reflected at the back of his mind, and tartly, that there ought somewhere to be a
moral in that, lumping all excesses together.
No convulsions this time, at any rate. He had simply seen whatever he had
seen, or thought he had seen, and fallen down before it in this destroying rapture.
Cadfael shook him by the shoulder gently, and then more sharply, but he was
rigid and unresponsive. His forehead was cool and smooth, his features, very
dimly seen, yet looked serene, composed, if anything, in a gentle and joyful
peace. But for the rigidity of body and limbs, and that unnatural attitude as
though he lay stretched on a cross, he might have been asleep. All Cadfael had
been able to do by way of easing him was to turn his head so that he lay on his
right cheek, pillowed on the draperies. When he tried to bend the right arm and
turn the young man more comfortably on his side, the joints resisted him, so he
let well enough alone.
And now, he thought, what am I supposed to do? Abandon my watch and
go down and fetch the prior with help for him? What could they do for him that I
cannot do here? If I can’t rouse him, then neither could they. He’ll come out of it
when the right time comes, and not before. He’s done himself no injury, his
breathing is steady and deep. His heart beats strongly and regularly, he has no
fever. Why interfere with a man’s peculiar pleasures, if they’re doing him no
harm? It isn’t cold here, and he can have one of these altar-cloths for blanket, a
fancy that ought to please him. No, we came to watch out the night together, and
so we will, I here on my knees as is due, and he wherever he may be at this
moment in his dreams.
He covered Columbanus, adjusted the cloths to cushion his head, and went
back to his own prie-dieu. But whatever this visitation had done for
Columbanus, it had shattered all possibility of thought or concentration for
Cadfael. The more he tried to focus his mind whether upon his duty of prayer
and meditation, or the urgent need to consider where Sioned stood now, and

what more could be done, the more was he drawn to look again at the prone
body, and listen again to make sure it still breathed as evenly as ever. What
should have been a profitable night hung heavy upon him, wasted as worship,
useless as thought, as long and dreary and tedious a night as he had ever passed.
The first dove-grey softening of the darkness came as a blessing, bringing
release at least within sight. The narrow space of sky seen through the altar
window changed from grey to pale, clear green, from green to saffron, from
saffron to gold, a cloudless morning, the first sunray piercing through the slit and
falling on the altar, the reliquary, the shrouded body, and then striking like a
golden sword across the chapel, leaving Columbanus in darkness. Still he lay
rigid, yet breathing deeply and softly, and no touch or word could reach him.
He was in the same condition when Prior Robert came with his fellows, and
Sioned with Annest in attendance, and all the people from the village and the
nearby holdings, silent and watchful as before, to see the end of this three-night
vigil.
Sioned was the first to enter, and the dimness within, after the brightness
without, made her blind for a moment, so that she halted in the doorway until her
eyes should grow accustomed to the change. Prior Robert was close behind her
when she saw the soles of Brother Columbanus’s sandals upturned before her,
just touched by the sunray from the window, while the rest of him lay still in
shadow. Her eyes widened in wonder and horror, and before Cadfael could rise
and turn to reassure her she had uttered a sharp cry: “What is it? Is he dead?”
The prior put her aside quickly, and strode past her, and was brought up
short with his foot on the hem of Columbanus’ habit.
“What happened here? Columbanus! Brother!” He stooped and laid his
hand upon a rigid shoulder. Columbanus slept and dreamed on, unmoved and
unmoving. “Brother Cadfael, what does this mean? What has befallen him?”
“He is not dead,” said Cadfael, putting first things first, “nor do I think he is
in any danger. He breathes like a man peacefully sleeping. His colour is good, he
is cool to the touch, and has no injury. Simply, at midnight he suddenly stood up
before the altar, and spread out his arms and fell forward thus in trance. He has
lain all night like this, but without distress or agitation.”
“You should have called us to his aid,” said the prior, shaken and dismayed.
“I had also a duty,” said Cadfael shortly, “to remain here and keep the vigil
I was sent to keep. And what could have been done for him more than I have
done, in giving him a pillow for his head and a cover against the chill of the
night? Nor, I think, would he have been grateful if we had carried him away
before the appointed time. Now he has kept his own watch faithfully, and if we
cannot rouse him we may bear him away to his bed, without doing violence to

his sense of duty.”
“There is something in that,” said Brother Richard earnestly, “for you know
that Brother Columbanus has several times been visited and favoured by visions,
and it might have been a great wrong to take him away from the very place
where such blessings befell him. An offence, perhaps, against the saint herself, if
she was pleased to reveal herself to him. And if that is so, then he will awake
when the time is right that he should, and it might do him great harm to try and
hasten the hour.”
“It is true,” said the prior, a little reassured, “that he seems at peace, and has
a good colour, and no sign of trouble or pain. This is most strange. Is it possible
that this young brother will be the occasion of another such prodigy as when his
affliction first drew us to Saint Winifred?”
“He was the instrument of grace once,” said Richard, “and may be so again.
We had better carry him down to his bed at Cadwallon’s house, and keep him
quiet and warm, and wait. Or had we not better take him to Father Huw’s
parsonage, so that he may be close to the church? It may be that his first need
will be to give thanks.”
With a heavy altar-cloth and their girdles they made a sling in which to
carry Columbanus, lifting him from the floor, stiff as a branch, even his extended
arms still rigid. They laid him on his back in their improvised litter, and he
suffered whatever they did to him, and made no sound or sign. A few of the
watching natives, moved and awed by the spectacle, came forward to lend a
hand in carrying him down through the forest to Huw’s house. Cadfael let them
go. He turned to look at Sioned, as she was looking at him, with dubious and
speculative eyes.
“Well, I, at least,” he said, “am in my right senses, and can and will do what
you have asked of me.” And he stepped to Rhisiart’s side, and laid his hand upon
the dead man’s heart, and signed his forehead with a cross.
She walked beside him as they followed the slow procession down towards
the village.
“What more can we do? If you know of anything, only tell me. We have not
been favoured so far. And today is to be his burial.”
“I know it,” said Cadfael, and brooded. “As for this affair in the night, I’m
torn two ways. I should think it possible it was all planned, to reinforce our
cause with another miracle, but for two things. To me Prior Robert’s amazement
and concern, however I look at them, seem to be true and not false. And
Columbanus has shown these strange properties before, and the way they
overtake him is violent and perilous, and it’s hard to believe he is feigning. A
tumbler at a fair, making his living by playing the devil with his own body, could

not outdo Columbanus when the fit comes on him. I am not able to judge. I think
there are some who live on a knife-edge in the soul, and at times are driven to
hurl themselves into the air, at the mercy of heaven or hell which way to fall.”
“All I know,” said Sioned, burning darkly red like a slow torch, “is that my
father whom I loved is murdered, and I want justice on the murderer, and I do
not want a blood price. There is no price I will accept for Rhisiart’s blood.”
“I know, I know!” said Cadfael. “I am as Welsh as you. But keep a door
open to pity, as who knows when you or I may need it! And have you spoken
with Engelard? And is all well with him?”
She quivered and flushed and softened beside him, like a frost-blighted
flower miraculously revived by a southern wind. But she did not answer. There
was no need.
“Ah, you’ll live!” said Brother Cadfael, satisfied. “As he’d want you to.
Even if he did set his face against, like a proper Welsh lord. You’d have got your
way in the end, you were right about that. And listen, I have thought of two
things you should yet do. We must try whatever we can. Don’t go home now. Let
Annest take you to Bened’s smithy to rest, and the both of you come to Mass.
Who knows what we may learn once our half-fledged saint regains his senses?
And then, also, when you bury your father, make certain Peredur comes with his
father. He might try to avoid else, if he’s eluded you this far, but if you ask him,
he cannot refuse. I am still in more minds than one, and none of them very clear,
concerning Master Peredur.”

Chapter Eight
 
IT WAS THE LITTLE BRAZEN BELL RINGING FOR MASS that
penetrated Brother Columbanus’ enchanted sleep at last. It could not be said that
it awoke him, rather it caused him to open his closed eyes, quiver through all his
frozen members, flex his stiff arms, and press his re-quickened hands together
over his breast. Otherwise his face did not change, nor did he seem to be aware
of those who were gathered anxiously about the bed on which he lay. They
might not have been there at all. All Brother Columbanus responded to was the
bell, the first call to worship. He stirred and sat up. He rose from the bed, and
stood firmly on his feet. He looked radiant, but still private and apart.
“He is preparing to take his usual place with us,” said the prior, moved and
awed. “Let us go, and make no attempt yet to rouse him. When he has given
thanks he’ll come back to us, and speak out what he has experienced.”
And he led the way to the church, and as he had supposed, Columbanus fell
into his usual place as the youngest in the attendant brotherhood now that John
was disgraced, and followed modestly, and modestly took part in the service, still
like a man in a dream.
The church was full as it would hold, and there were more people clustered
outside the doorway. The word had gone round already that something strange
and wonderful had happened at Saint Winifred’s chapel, and revelations might
very well follow at Mass.
Not until the end did any further change occur in the condition of Brother
Columbanus. But when the prior, slowly and expectantly, as one turning a key
and almost confident of entry, took the first step towards the doorway, suddenly
Columbanus gave a great start, and uttered a soft cry, staring wonderingly about
him at all these known faces. His own visage came to life, smiling. He put out a
hand as if to arrest the prior’s departure, and said in a high voice: “Oh, Father, I
have been so blessed, I have known such bliss! How did I come here, when I
know I was elsewhere, and translated out of night’s darkness into so glorious a
light? And surely this is again the world I left! A fair world enough, but I have
been in a fairer, far beyond any deserts of mine. Oh, if I could but tell you!”
Every eye was upon him, and every ear stretched to catch his least word.
Not a soul left the church, rather those without crowded in closer.
“Son,” said Prior Robert, with unwontedly respectful kindness, “you are
here among your brothers, engaged in the worship of God, and there is nothing

to fear and nothing to regret, for the visitation granted you was surely meant to
inspire and arm you to go fearless through an imperfect world, in the hope of a
perfect world hereafter. You were keeping night watch with Brother Cadfael at
Saint Winifred’s chapel—do you remember that? In the night something befell
you that drew your spirit for a time away from us, out of the body, but left that
body unharmed and at rest like a child asleep. We brought you back here still
absent from us in the spirit, but now you are here with us again, and all is well.
You have been greatly privileged.”
“Oh, greatly, far more than you know,” sang Columbanus, glowing like a
pale lantern. “I am the messenger of such goodness, I am the instrument of
reconciliation and peace. Oh, Father…  Father Huw… brothers… let me speak
out here before all, for what I am bidden to tell concerns all.”
Nothing, thought Cadfael, could have stopped him, so plainly did his
heavenly embassage override any objection mere prior or priest might muster.
And Robert was proving surprisingly compliant in accepting this transfer of
authority. Either he already knew that the voice from heaven was about to say
something entirely favourable to his plans and conducive to his glory, or else he
was truly impressed, and inclining heart and ear to listen as devoutly as any man
there present.
“Speak freely, brother,” he said, “let us share your joy.”
“Father, at the hour of midnight as I knelt before the altar I heard a sweet
voice crying my name, and I arose and went forward to obey the call. What
happened to my body then I do not know, you tell me it was lying as if asleep
when you came. But it seemed to me that as I stepped towards the altar there was
suddenly a soft, golden light all about it, and there rose up, floating in the midst
of the light, a most beautiful virgin, who moved in a miraculous shower of white
petals, and distilled most sweet odours from her robe and from her long hair.
And this gracious being spoke to me, and told me that her name was Winifred,
and that she was come to approve our enterprise, and also to forgive all those
who out of mistaken loyalty and reverence had opposed it hitherto. And then, oh,
marvellous goodness!—she laid her hand on Rhisiart’s breast, as his daughter
has begged us to do in token of our mere personal forgiveness, but she in divine
absolution, and with such perfection of grace, I cannot describe it.”
“Oh, son,” said Prior Robert in rapture, riding over the quivering murmurs
that crossed the church like ripples on a pool, “you tell a greater wonder than we
dared hope. Even the lost saved!”
“It is so! And, Father, there is more! When she laid her hand on him, she
bade me speak out to all men in this place, both native and stranger, and make
known her merciful will. And it is this ‘Where my bones shall be taken out of

the earth,’ she said, ‘there will be an open grave provided. What I relinquish, I
may bestow. In this grave,’ said Winifred, ‘let Rhisiart be buried, that his rest
may be assured, and my power made manifest.’ “
“What could I do,” said Sioned, “but thank him for his good offices, when
he brought divine reassurance for my father’s weal? And yet it outrages me, I
would rather have stood up and said that I am not and never have been in the
least doubt that my father is in blessedness this moment, for he was a good man
who never did a mean wrong to anyone. And certainly it’s kind of Saint Winifred
to offer him the lodging she’s leaving, and graciously forgive him, but—
forgiveness for what? Absolution for what? She might have praised him while
she was about it, and said outright that he was justified, not forgiven.”
“Yet a very ambassadorial message,” admitted Cadfael appreciatively,
“calculated to get us what we came for, assuage the people of Gwytherin, make
peace all round—“
“And to placate me, and cause me to give up the pursuit of my father’s
murderer,” said Sioned, “burying the deed along with the victim. Except that I
will not rest until I know.”
“—and shed reflected glory upon Prior Robert, I was going to say. And I
wish I knew which mind conceived the idea!”
They had met for a few hurried minutes at Bened’s smithy, where Cadfael
had gone to borrow mattock and spade for the holy work now to be undertaken.
Even a few of the men of Gwytherin had come forward and asked to have a
share in breaking the sacred earth, for though they were still reluctant to lose
their saint, if it was her will to leave them they had no wish to cross her.
Prodigious things were happening, and they intended to be in receipt of her
approval and blessing rather than run the risk of encountering her arrows.
“It seems to me most of the glory is falling, rather, on Brother Columbanus
of late,” said Sioned shrewdly. “And the prior took it meekly, and never made
any attempt to filch it back fro from him. That’s the one thing that makes me
believe he may be honest.”
She had said something that caused Cadfael to pause and look attentively at
her, scrubbing dubiously at his nose.
“You may well be right. And certainly this story is bound to go back to
Shrewsbury with us, and spread through all our sister houses, when we come
home with our triumph. Yes, Columbanus will certainly have made himself a
great name for holiness and divine favour in the order.”
“They say an ambitious man can make a grand career in the cloister,” she
said. “Maybe he’s busy laying the foundations, a great step up towards being
prior himself when Robert becomes abbot. Or even abbot, when Robert supposes

he’s about to become abbot! For it’s not his name they’ll be buzzing round the
shires as the visionary the saints use to make their wants known.”
“That,” agreed Cadfael, “may not even have dawned on Robert yet, but
when the awe of the occasion passes it will. And he’s the one who’s pledged to
write a life of the saint, and complete it with the account of this pilgrimage.
Columbanus may very well end up as an anonymous brother who happened to
be charged with a message to the prior from his patroness. Chroniclers can edit
names out as easily as visionaries can noise them abroad. But I grant you, this
lad comes of a thrusting Norman family that doesn’t put even its younger sons
into the Benedictine habit to spend their lives doing menial work like
gardening.”
“And we’re no further forward,” said Sioned bitterly.
“No. But we have not finished yet.”
“But as I see it, this is devised to be an ending, to close this whole episode
in general amity, as if everything was resolved. But everything is not resolved!
Somewhere in this land there is a man who stabbed my father in the back, and
we’re all being asked to draw a veil over that and lose sight of it in the great
treaty of peace. But I want that man found, and Engelard vindicated, and my
father avenged, and I won’t rest, or let anyone else rest, until I get what I want.
And now tell me what I am to do.”
“What I’ve already told you,” said Cadfael. “Have all your household party
and friends gathered at the chapel to watch the grave opened, and make sure that
Peredur attends.”
“I’ve already sent Annest to beg him to come,” said Sioned. “And then?
What have I to say or do to Peredur?”
“That silver cross you wear round your neck,” said Cadfael. “Are you
willing to part with it in exchange for one step ahead towards what you want to
know?”
“That and all the rest of the valuables I own. You know it.”
“Then this,” said Cadfael, “is what you will do…”
With prayers and psalms they carried their tools up to the tangled graveyard
by the chapel, trimmed back the brambles and wild flowers and long grass from
the little mound of Winifred’s grave, and reverently broke the sod. By turns they
laboured, all taking a share in the work for the merit to be acquired. And most of
Gwytherin gathered round the place in the course of the day, all work left at a
standstill in the fields and crofts, to watch the end of this contention. For Sioned
had spoken truly. She and all her household servants were there among the rest,
in mourning and massed to bring out Rhisiart’s body for burial when the time
came, but this funeral party had become, for the time being, no more than a side-

issue, an incident in the story of Saint Winifred, and a closed incident at that.
Cadwallon was there, Uncle Meurice was there, and Bened, and all the
other neighbours. And there at his father’s elbow, withdrawn and brooding,
stood young Peredur, by the look of him wishing himself a hundred leagues
away. His thick dark brows were drawn together as though his head ached, and
wherever his brown eyes wandered, it was never towards Sioned. He had crept
here reluctantly at her express asking, but he could not or would not face her.
The bold red mouth was chilled and pale from the tension with which it was
tightened against his teeth. He watched the dark pit deepen in the grass, and
breathed hard and deep, like a man containing pain. A far cry from the spoiled
boy with the long, light step and the audacious smile, who so plainly had taken it
for granted that the world was his for the wooing. Peredur’s demons were at him
within.
The ground was moist but light, not hard to work, but the grave was deep.
Gradually the diggers sank to the shoulders in the pit, and by mid-afternoon
Brother Cadfael, shortest of the party, had almost disappeared from view when
he took his final turn in the depths. No one dared to doubt openly if they were in
the right place, but some must have been wondering. Cadfael, for no good reason
that he could see, had no doubts at all. The girl was here. She had lived many
years as an abbess after her brief martyrdom and miraculous restoration, yet he
thought of her as that devout, green girl, in romantic love with celibacy and
holiness, who had fled from Prince Cradoc’s advances as from the devil himself.
By some perverse severance of the heart in two he could feel both for her and for
the desperate lover, so roughly molten out of the flesh and presumably
exterminated in the spirit. Did anyone every pray for him? He was in greater
need than Winifred. In the end, perhaps the only prayers he ever benefited by
were Winifred’s prayers. She was Welsh, and capable of detachment and
subtlety. She might well have put in a word for him, to reassemble his liquefied
person and congeal it again into the shape of a man. A chastened man, doubtless,
but still the same shape as before. Even a saint may take pleasure, in retrospect,
in having been once desired.
The spade grated on something in the dark, friable soil, something neither
loam nor stone. Cadfael checked his stroke instantly at its suggestion of age,
frailty and crumbling dryness. He let the blade lie, and stooped to scoop away
with his hands the cool, odorous, gentle earth that hid the obstruction from him.
Dark soil peeled away under his fingers from a slender, pale, delicate thing, the
gentle dove-grey of pre-dawn, but freckled with pitted points of black. He drew
out an armbone, scarcely more than child size, and stroked away the clinging
earth. Islands of the same soft colouring showed below, grouped loosely

together. He did not want to break any of them. He hoisted the spade and tossed
it out of the pit.
“She is here. We have found her. Softly, now, leave her to me.”
Faces peered in upon him. Prior Robert gleamed in silvery agitation,
thirsting to plunge in and dredge up the prize in person, but deterred by the
clinging darkness of the soil and the whiteness of his hands. Brother
Columbanus at the brink towered and glittered, his exalted visage turned, not
towards the depths where this fragile virgin substance lay at rest, but rather to the
heavens from which her diffused spiritual essence had addressed him. He
displayed, no doubt of it, an aura of distinct proprietorship that dwarfed both
prior and sub-prior, and shone with its full radiance upon all those who watched
from the distance. Brother Columbanus meant to be, was, and knew that he was,
memorable in this memorable hour.
Brother Cadfael kneeled. It may even have been a significant omen that at
this moment he alone was kneeling. He judged that he was at the feet of the
skeleton. She had been there some centuries, but the earth had dealt kindly, she
might well be whole, or virtually whole. He had not wanted her disturbed at all,
but now he wanted her disturbed as little as might be, and delved carefully with
scooping palms and probing, stroking finger-tips to uncover the whole slender
length of her without damage. She must have been a little above medium height,
but willowy as a seventeen-year-old girl. Tenderly he stroked the earth away
from round her. He found the skull, and leaned on stretched arms, fingering the
eye-sockets clear, marvelling at the narrow elegance of the cheekbones, and the
generosity of the dome. She had beauty and fineness in her death. He leaned
over her like a shield, and grieved.
“Let me down a linen sheet,” he said, “and some bands to raise it smoothly.
She shall not come out of here bone by bone, but whole woman as she went in.”
“They handed a cloth down to him, and he spread it beside the slight
skeleton, and with infinite care eased her free of the loose soil, and edged her by
inches into the shroud of linen, laying the disturbed armbone in its proper place.
With bands of cloth slung under her she was drawn up into the light of day, and
laid tenderly in the grass at the side of her grave.
“We must wash away the soil-marks from her bones,” said Prior Robert,
gazing in reverent awe upon the prize he had gone to such trouble to gain, “and
wrap them afresh.”
“They are dry and frail and brittle, ‘ warned Cadfael impatiently. “If she is
robbed of this Welsh earth she may very well crumble to Welsh earth herself in
your hands. And if you keep her here in the air and the sun too long, she may fall
to dust in any case. If you are wise, Father Prior, you’ll wrap her well as she lies,

and get her into the reliquary and seal her from the air as tight as you can, as
quickly as you can.”
That was good sense, and the prior acted on it, even if he did not much
relish being told what to do so brusquely. With hasty but exultant prayers they
brought the resplendent coffin out to the lady, to avoid moving her more than
they must, and with repeated swathings of linen bound her little bones carefully
together, and laid her in the coffin. The brothers who made it had realised the
need for perfect sealing to preserve the treasure, and taken great pains to make
the lid fit down close as a skin, and line the interior with lead. Before Saint
Winifred was carried back into the chapel for the thanksgiving Mass the lid was
closed upon her, the catches secured, and at the end of the service the prior’s
seals were added to make all fast. They had her imprisoned, to be carried away
into the alien land that desired her patronage. All the Welsh who could crowd
into the chapel or cling close enough to the doorway to catch glimpses of the
proceedings kept a silence uncannily perfect, their eyes following every move,
secret eyes that expressed no resentment, but by their very attention, fixed and
unwavering, implied an unreconciled opposition they were afraid to speak aloud.
“Now that this sacred duty is done,” said Father Huw, at once relieved and
saddened, “it is time to attend to the other duty which the saint herself has laid
upon us, and bury Rhisiart honourably, with full absolution, in the grave she has
bequeathed to him. And I call to mind, in the hearing of all, how great a blessing
is thus bestowed, and how notable an honour.” It was as near as he would go to
speaking out his own view of Rhisiart, and in this, at least, he had the sympathy
of every Welshman there present.
That burial service was brief, and after it six of Rhisiart’s oldest and most
trusted servants took up the bier of branches, a little wilted now but still green,
and carried it out to the graveside. The same slings which had lifted Saint
Winifred waited to lower Rhisiart into the same bed.
Sioned stood beside her uncle, and looked all round her at the circle of her
friends and neighbours, and unclasped the silver cross from her neck. She had so
placed herself that Cadwallon and Peredur were close at her right hand, and it
was simple and natural to turn towards them. Peredur had hung back throughout,
never looking at her but when he was sure she was looking away, and when she
swung round upon him suddenly he had no way of avoiding.
“One last gift I want to give to my father. And I would like you, Peredur, to
be the one to give it. You have been like a son to him. Will you lay this cross on
his breast, where the murderer’s arrow pierced him? I want it to be buried with
him. It is my farewell to him here, let it be yours, too.”
Peredur stood dumbstruck and aghast, staring from her still and challenging

face to the little thing she held out to him, in front of so many witnesses, all of
whom knew him, all of whom were known to him. She had spoken clearly, to be
heard by all. Every eye was on him, and all recorded, though without
understanding, the slow draining of blood from his face, and his horror-stricken
stare. He could not refuse what she asked. He could not do it without touching
the dead man, touching the very place where death had struck him.
His hand came out with aching reluctance, and took the cross from her. To
leave her thus extending it in vain was more than he could stand. He did not look
at it, but only desperately at her, and in her face the testing calm had blanched
into incredulous dismay, for now she believed she knew everything, and it was
worse than anything she had imagined. But as he could not escape from the trap
she had laid for him, neither could she release him. It was sprung, and now he
had to fight his way out of it as best he could. They were already wondering why
he made no move, and whispering together in concern at his hanging back.
He made a great effort, drawing himself together with a frantic briskness
that lasted only a moment. He took a few irresolute steps towards the bier and
the grave, and then baulked like a frightened horse, and halted again, and that
was worse, for now he stood alone in the middle of the circle of witnesses, and
could go neither forward nor back. Cadfael saw sweat break in great beads on
his forehead and lip.
“Come, son,” said Father Huw kindly, the last to suspect evil, “don’t keep
the dead waiting, and don’t grieve too much for them, for that would be sin. I
know, as Sioned has said, he was like another father to you, and you share her
loss. So do we all.”
Peredur stood quivering at Sioned’s name, and at the word “father,” and
tried to go forward, and could not move. His feet would not take him one step
nearer to the swathed form that lay by the open grave. The light of the sun on
him, the weight of all eyes, bore him down. He fell on his knees suddenly, the
cross still clutched in one hand, the other spread to hide his face.
“He cannot!” he cried hoarsely from behind the shielding palm. “He cannot
accuse me! I am not guilty of murder! What I did was done when Rhisiart was
already dead!”
A great, gasping sigh passed like a sudden wind round the clearing and over
the tangled grave, and subsided into a vast silence. It was a long minute before
Father Huw broke it, for this was his sheep, not Prior Robert’s, a child of his
flock, and hitherto a child of grace, now stricken into wild self-accusation of
some terrible sin not yet explained, but to do with violent death.
“Son Peredur,” said Father Huw firmly, “you have not been charged with
any ill-doing by any other but yourself. We are waiting only for you to do what

Sioned has asked of you, for her asking was a grace. Therefore do her bidding,
or speak out why you will not, and speak plainly.”
Peredur heard, and ceased to tremble. A little while he kneeled and gathered
his shattered composure about him doggedly, like a cloak. Then he uncovered
his face, which was pale, despairing but eased, no longer in combat with truth
but consenting to it. He was a young man of courage. He got to his feet and
faced them squarely.
“Father I come to confession by constraint, and not gladly, and I am as
ashamed of that as of what I have to confess. But it is not murder. I did not kill
Rhisiart. I found him dead.”
“At what hour?” asked Brother Cadfael, wholly without right, but nobody
questioned the interruption.
“I went out after the rain stopped. You remember it rained.” They
remembered. They had good reason. “It would be a little after noon. I was going
up to the pasture our side of Bryn, and I found him lying on his face in that place
where afterwards we all saw him. He was dead then, I swear it! And I was
grieved, but also I was tempted, for there was nothing in this world I could do
for Rhisiart, but I saw a way…” Peredur swallowed and sighed, bracing his
forehead against his fate, and went on. “I saw a means of ridding myself of a
rival. Of the favoured rival. Rhisiart had refused his daughter to Engelard, but
Sioned had not refused him, and well I knew there was no hope for me, however
her father urged her, while Engelard was there between us. Men might easily
believe that Engelard should kill Rhisiart, if—if there was some proof…”
“But you did not believe it,” said Cadfael, so softly that hardly anyone
noticed the interruption, it was accepted and answered without thought.
“No!” said Peredur almost scornfully. “I knew him, he never would!”
“Yet you were willing he should be taken and accused. It was all one to you
if it was death that removed him out of your way, so he was removed.”
“No!” said Peredur again, smouldering but aware that he was justly lashed.
“No, not that! I thought he would run, take himself away again into England, and
leave us alone, Sioned and me. I never wished him worse than that. I thought,
with him gone, in the end Sioned would do what her father had wished, and
marry me. I could wait! I would have waited years…”
He did not say, but there were two there, at least, who knew, and
remembered in his favour, that he had opened the way for Engelard to break out
of the ring that penned him in, and deliberately let him pass, just as Brother
John, with a better conscience, had frustrated the pursuit.
Brother Cadfael said sternly: “But you went so far as to steal one of this
unfortunate young man’s arrows, to make sure all eyes turned on him.”

“I did not steal it, though no less discredit to me that I used it as I did. I was
out with Engelard after game, not a week earlier, with Rhisiart’s permission.
When we retrieved our arrows, I took one of his by error among mine. I had it
with me then.”
Peredur’s shoulders had straightened, his head was up, his hands, the right
still holding Sioned’s cross, hung gently and resignedly at his sides. His face was
pale but calm. He had got the worst of it off his back, after what he had borne
alone these last days confession and penance were balm.
“Let me tell the whole of it, all the thing I did, that has made me a monster
in my own eyes ever since. I will not make it less than it was, and it was hideous.
Rhisiart was stabbed in the back, and the dagger withdrawn and gone. I turned
him over on his back, and I turned that wound back to front, and I tell you, my
hands burn now, but I did it. He was dead, he suffered nothing. I pierced my own
flesh, not his. I could tell the line of the wound, for the dagger had gone right
through him, though the breast wound was small. I took my own dagger, and
opened the way for Engelard’s arrow to follow, and I thrust it through and left it
standing in him for witness. And I have not had one quiet moment, night or day,”
said Peredur, not asking pity, rather grateful that now his silence was broken and
his infamy known, and nothing more to hide, “since I did this small, vile thing,
and now I am glad it’s out, whatever becomes of me. And at least grant me this, I
did not make my trap in such a way as to accuse Engelard of shooting a man in
the back! I knew him! I lived almost side by side with him since he came here a
fugitive, we were of an age, we could match each other. I have liked him, hunted
with him, fought with him, been jealous of him, even hated him because he was
loved where I was not. Love makes men do terrible things,” said Peredur, not
pleading, marvelling, “even to their friends.”
He had created, all unconsciously, a tremendous hush all about him, of awe
at his blasphemy, of startled pity for his desolation, of chastened wonder at their
own misconceivings. The truth fell like thunder, subduing them all. Rhisiart had
not been shot down with an arrow, but felled from behind at close quarters, out
of thick cover, a coward’s killing. Not saints, but men, deal in that kind of
treachery.
Father Huw broke the silence. In his own providence, where no alien
dignitaries dared intrude, he grew taller and more secure in his gentle,
neighbourly authority. And great violence had been done to what he knew to be
right, and great requital was due from the sinner, and great compassion due to
him.
“Son Peredur,” he said, “you stand in dire sin, and cannot be excused. Such
violation of the image of God, such misuse of a clean affection—for such I know

you had with Rhisiart—and such malice towards an innocent man—for such you
proclaimed Engelard—cannot go unpunished.”
“God forbid,” said Peredur humbly, “that I should escape any part of what
is due. I want it! I cannot live with myself if I have only this present self to live
with!”
“Child, if you mean that, then give yourself into my hands, to be delivered
up both to secular and religious justice. As to the law, I shall speak with the
prince’s bailiff. As to the penance due before God, that is for me as your
confessor, and I require that you shall wait my considered judgment.”
“So I will, Father,” said Peredur. “I want no unearned pardon. I take
penance willingly.”
“Then you need not despair of grace. Go home now, and remain
withindoors until I send for you.”
“I will be obedient to you in all things. But I have one prayer before I go.”
He turned slowly and faced Sioned. She was standing quite still where the awful
dread had fallen upon her, her hands clutched to her cheeks, her eyes fixed in
fascination and pain upon the boy who had grown up as her playfellow. But the
rigidity had ebbed out of her, for though he called himself a monster, he was not,
after all, the monster she had briefly thought him. “May I now do what you
asked of me? I am not afraid now. He was a fair man always. He won’t accuse
me of more than my due.”
He was both asking her pardon and saying his farewell to any hope he had
still cherished of winning her, for now that was irrevocably over. And the strange
thing was that now he could approach her, even after so great an offence, without
constraint, almost without jealousy. Nor did her face express any great heat or
bitterness against him. It was thoughtful and intent.
“Yes,” she said, “I still wish it.” If he had spoken the whole truth, and she
was persuaded that he had, it was well that he should take his appeal to Rhisiart,
in a form every man there would acknowledge. In otherworldly justice the body
would clear him of the evil he had not committed, now that confession was made
of what he had.
Peredur went forward steadily enough now, sank to his knees beside
Rhisiart’s body, and laid first his hand, and then Sioned’s cross, upon the heart
he had pierced, and no gush of blood sprang at his touch. And if there was one
thing certain, it was that here was a man who did believe. He hesitated a
moment, still kneeling, and then, feeling a need rather to give thanks for this
acceptance than to make any late and unfitting display of affection, stooped and
kissed the right hand that lay quiet over the left on Rhisiart’s breast, their clasped
shape showing through the close shroud. That done, he rose and went firmly

away by the downhill path towards his father’s house. The people parted to let
him through in a great silence, and Cadwallon, starting out of a trance of
unbelieving misery, lurched forward in haste and went trotting after his son.

Chapter Nine
 
THE EVENING WAS DRAWING IN by the time they had buried Rhisiart,
and it was too late for Prior Robert and his companions to take their prize and
leave at once for home, even if it had been a seemly thing to do, after all that had
happened. Some ceremony was due to the community the saint was leaving, and
the houses that had offered hospitality freely even to those who came to rob
them.
“We will stay this night over, and sing Vespers and Compline in the church
with you, and give due thanks,” said the prior. “And after Compline one of us
will again watch the night through with Saint Winifred, as is only proper. And
should the prince’s bailiff require that we stay longer, we will do as he asks. For
there is still the matter of Brother John, who stands in contempt of the law, to our
disgrace.”
“At present,” said Father Huw deprecatingly, “the bailiff is giving his
attention to the case of Rhisiart’s murder. For though we have suffered many
revelations in that matter, you see that we are no nearer knowing who is guilty.
What we have seen today is one man who certainly is innocent of the crime,
whatever his other sins may be.”
“I fear,” said Prior Robert with unwonted humility, “that without ill intent
we have caused you great grief and trouble here, and for that I am sorry. And
greatly sorry for the parents of that sinful young man, who are suffering, I think,
far worse than he, and without blame.”
“I am going to them now,” said Huw. “Will you go on ahead, Father Prior,
and sing Vespers for me? For I may be delayed some time. I must do what I can
for this troubled household.”
The people of Gwytherin had begun to drift away silently by many paths,
vanishing into the woods to spread the news of the day’s happening to the far
corners of the parish. In the long grass of the graveyard, trampled now by many
feet, the dark, raw shape of Rhisiart’s grave made a great scar, and two of his
men were filling in the earth over him. It was finished. Sioned turned towards
the gate, and all the rest of her people followed.
Cadfael fell in beside her as the subdued, straggling procession made its
way home towards the village.
“Well,” he said resignedly, “it was worth trying. And we can’t say it got us
nothing. At least we know now who committed the lesser crime, if we’re very

little nearer knowing who committed the greater. And we know why there were
two, for they made no sense, being one and the same. And at any rate, we have
shaken the devil off that boy’s back. Are you quite revolted at what he did? As
he is?”
“Strangely,” said Sioned, “I don’t believe I am. I was too sick with horror,
that short time while I thought him the murderer. After that, it was simple relief
that he was not. He has never gone short of anything he wanted, you see, until he
wanted me.”
“It was a real wanting,” said Brother Cadfael, remembering long-past
hungers of his own. “I doubt if he’ll ever quite get over it, though I’m pretty sure
he’ll make a sound marriage, and get handsome children like himself, and be
fairly content. He grew up today, she won’t be disappointed, whoever she may
be. But she’ll never be Sioned.”
Her tired, woeful, discouraged face had softened and warmed, and suddenly
she was smiling beside him, faintly but reassuringly. “You are a good man. You
have a way of reconciling people. But no need! Do you think I did not see how
he dragged himself painfully to this afternoon’s business, and has gone striding
away with his head up to embrace his punishment? I might really have loved him
a little, if there had been no Engelard. But only a little! He may do better than
that.”
“You are a fine girl,” said Brother Cadfael heartily. “If I had met you when
I was thirty years younger, I should have made Engelard sweat for his prize.
Peredur should be thankful even for such a sister. But we’re no nearer knowing
what we want and need to know.”
“And have we any more shafts left to loose?” she asked ruefully. “Any
more snares to set? At least we’ve freed the poor soul we caught in the last one.”
He was silent, glumly thinking.
“And tomorrow,” she said sadly, “Prior Robert will take his saint and all his
brothers, and you with them, and set out for home, and I shall be left with
nobody to turn to here. Father Huw is as near a saint himself, in his small,
confused way, as ever Winifred was, but no use to me. And Uncle Meurice is a
gentle creature who knows about running a manor, but nothing about anything
else, and wants no trouble and no exertion. And Engelard must go on hiding, as
well you know. Peredur’s plot against him is quite empty now, we all know it.
But does that prove he did not kill my father, after a raging quarrel?”
“In the back?” said Cadfael, unguardedly indignant.
She smiled. “All that proves is that you know him! Not everyone does.
Some will be saying at this moment, perhaps, after all… that Peredur may have
been right without even knowing it.”

He thought about it and was dismayed, for no question but she was right.
What, indeed, did it prove if another man had wished to burden him with the
guilt? Certainly not that the guilt was not his. Brother Cadfael confronted his
own voluntarily assumed responsibility, and braced himself to cope with it.
“There is also Brother John to be considered,” said Sioned. It may well be
that Annest, walking behind, had prodded her.
“I have not forgotten Brother John,” agreed Cadfael.
“But I think the bailiff well may have done. He would shut his eyes or look
the other way, if Brother John left for Shrewsbury with the rest of you. He has
troubles enough here, what does he want with alien trouble?”
“And if Brother John should seem to him to have left for Shrewsbury, he
would be satisfied? And ask no questions about one more outlander taken up by
a patron here?”
“I always knew you were quick,” said Sioned, brown and bright and
animated, almost herself again. “But would Prior Robert pursue him still, when
he hears he’s gone from custody? I don’t see him as a forgiving man.”
“No, nor he is, but how would he set about it? The Benedictine order has no
real hold in Wales. No, I think he’d let it ride, now he has what he came for. I’m
more concerned for Engelard. Give me this one more night, child, and do this for
me! Send your people home, and stay the night over with Annest at Bened’s
croft, and if God aids me with some new thought—for never forget God is far
more deeply offended even than you or I by this great wrong!—I’ll come to you
there.”
“We’ll do that,” said Sioned. “And you’ll surely come.”
They had slowed to let the cortege move well ahead of them, so that they
could talk freely. They were approaching the gatehouse of Cadwallon’s holding,
and Prior Robert and his companions were far in front and had passed by the
gate, bent upon singing Vespers in good time. Father Huw, issuing forth in haste
and agitation in search of help, seemed relieved rather than dismayed to find
only Cadfael within call. The presence of Sioned checked him to a decent walk
and a measured tone, but did nothing to subdue the effect of his erected hair and
frantic mien.
“Brother Cadfael, will you spare some minutes for this afflicted household?
You have some skills with medicines, you may be able to advise…”
“His mother!” whispered Sioned in immediate reassurance. “She weeps
herself into a frenzy at everything that crosses her. I knew this would set her off.
Poor Peredur, he has his penance already! Shall I come?”
“Better not,” he said softly, and moved to meet Father Huw. Sioned was,
after all, the innocent cause of Peredur’s fall from grace, she would probably be

the last person calculated to calm his mother’s anguish. And Sioned understood
him so, and went on, and left the matter to him, so calmly that it was clear she
expected no tragic results from the present uproar. She had known Cadwallon’s
wife all her life, no doubt she had learned to treat her ups and downs as
philosophically as Cadfael did Brother Columbanus’ ecstasies and excesses. He
never really hurt himself in his throes, either!
“Dame Branwen is in such a taking,” fluttered Father Huw distractedly,
steering Cadfael in haste towards the open door of the hall. “I fear for her wits.
I’ve seen her upset before, and hard enough to pacify, but now, her only child,
and such a shock…  Really, she may do herself an injury if we cannot quiet her.”
Dame Branwen was indeed audible before they even entered the small
room where husband and son were trying to soothe her, against a tide of
vociferous weeping and lamentation that all but deafened them. The lady, fat and
fair and outwardly fashioned only for comfortable, shallow placidity, half-sat,
half-lay on a couch, throwing her substantial person about in extravagant
distress, now covering her silly, fond face, now throwing her arms abroad in
sweeping gestures of desolation and despair, but never for one moment ceasing
to bellow her sorrow and shame. The tears that flowed freely down her round
cheeks and the shattering sobs that racked her hardly seemed to impede the flow
of words that poured out of her like heavy rain.
Cadwallon on one side and Peredur on the other stroked and patted and
comforted in vain. As often as the father tried to assert himself she turned on him
with wild reproaches, crying that he had no faith in his own son, or he could
never have believed such a terrible thing of him, that the boy was bewitched,
under some spell that forced false confession out of him, that he ought to have
stood up for him before everybody and prevented the tale from being accepted
so lightly, for somewhere there was witchcraft in it. As often as Peredur tried to
convince her he had told the truth, that he was willing to make amends, and she
must accept his word, she rounded on him with fresh outbursts of tears,
screaming that her own son had brought dreadful disgrace upon himself and her,
that she wondered he dare come near her, that she would never be able to lift up
her head again, that he was a monster…
As for poor Father Huw, when he tried to assert his spiritual authority and
order her to submit to the force of truth and accept her son’s act with humility, as
Peredur himself had done in making full confession and offering full submission,
she cried out that she had been a God-fearing and law-abiding woman all her
life, and done everything to bring up her child in the same way, and she could
not now accept his guilt as reflecting upon her.
“Mother,” said Peredur, haggard and sweating worse than when he faced

Rhisiart’s body, “nobody blames you, and nobody will. What I did I did, and it’s
I who must abide the consequence, not you. There isn’t a woman in Gwytherin
won’t feel for you.”
At that she let out a great wail of grief, and flung her arms about him, and
swore that he should not suffer any grim penalties, that he was her own boy, and
she would protect him. And when he extricated himself with fading patience, she
screamed that he meant to kill her, the unfeeling wretch, and went off into peals
of ear-piercing, sobbing laughter.
Brother Cadfael took Peredur firmly by the sleeve, and hauled him away to
the back of the room. “Show a little sense, lad, and take yourself out of her sight,
you’re fuel to her fire. If nobody marked her at all she’d have stopped long ago,
but now she’s got herself into this state she’s past doing that of her own accord.
Did our two brothers stop in here, do you know, or go on with the prior?”
Peredur was shaking and tired out, but responded hopefully to this matter-
of-fact treatment. “They’ve not been here, or I should have seen them. They
must have gone on to the church.”
Naturally, neither Columbanus nor Jerome would dream of absenting
himself from Vespers on such a momentous day.
“Never mind, you can show me where they lodge. Columbanus brought
some of my poppy syrup with him, in case of need, the phial should be there
with his scrip, he’d hardly have it on him. And as far as I know, he’s had no
occasion to use it, his cantrips here in Wales have been of a quieter kind. We can
find a use for it now.”
“What does it do?” asked Peredur, wide-eyed.
“It soothes the passions and kills pain—either of the body or the spirit.”
“I could use some of that myself,” said Peredur with a wry smile, and led
the way out to one of the small huts that lined the stockade. The guests from
Shrewsbury had been given the best lodging the house afforded, with two low
brychans, and a small chest, with a rush lamp for light. Their few necessaries
occupied almost no space, but each had a leather scrip to hold them, and both of
these dangled from a nail in the timber wall. Brother Cadfael opened first one,
and then the other, and in the second found what he was seeking.
He drew it out and held it up to the light, a small phial of greenish glass.
Even before he saw the line of liquid in it, its light weight had caused him to
check and wonder. Instead of being full to the stopper with the thick, sweet
syrup, the bottle was three-quarters empty.
Brother Cadfael stood stock-still for a moment with the phial in his hand,
staring at it in silence. Certainly Columbanus might at some time have felt the
need to forestall some threatening spiritual disturbance but Cadfael could recall

no occasion when he had said any word to that effect, or shown any sign of the
rosy, reassuring calm the poppies could bring. There was enough gone from the
bottle to restore serenity three times over, enough to put a man to sleep for hours.
And now that he came to think back, there had been at least one occasion when a
man had slept away hours of the day, instead of keeping the watch he was set to
keep. The day of Rhisiart’s death Columbanus had failed of his duty, and
confessed as much with heartfelt penitence. Columbanus, who had the syrup in
his possession, and knew its use…
“What must we do?” asked Peredur, uneasy in the silence. “If it tastes
unpleasant you’ll have trouble getting her to drink it.”
“It tastes sweet.” But there was not very much of it left, a little
reinforcement with something else soothing and pleasant might be necessary.
“Go and get a cup of strong wine, and we’ll see how that goes down.”
They had taken with them a measure of wine that day, he remembered, the
ration for the two of them, when they set off for the chapel. Columbanus had
drawn and carried it. And a bottle of water for himself, since he had made an act
of piety of renouncing wine until their mission was accomplished. Jerome had
done well, getting a double ration.
Brother Cadfael stirred himself out of his furious thoughts to deal with the
immediate need. Peredur hurried to do his bidding, but brought mead instead of
wine.
“She’s more likely to drink it down before she thinks to be obstinate, for
she likes it better. And it’s stronger.”
“Good!” said Cadfael. “It will hide the syrup better. And now, go
somewhere quiet, and harden your heart and stop your ears and stay out of her
sight, for it’s the best thing you can do for her, and God knows the best for
yourself, after such a day. And leave agonising too much over your sins, black as
they are, there isn’t a confessor in the land who hasn’t heard worse and never
turned a hair. It’s a kind of arrogance to be so certain you’re past redemption.”
The sweet, cloying drink swirled in the cup, the syrup unwinding into it in a
long spiral that slowly melted and vanished. Peredur with shadowy eyes watched
and was silent.
After a moment he said, very low: “It’s strange! I never could have done so
shabbily by anyone I hated.”
“Not strange at all,” said Cadfael bluntly, stirring his potion. “When harried,
we go as far as we dare, and with those we’re sure of we dare go very far,
knowing where forgiveness is certain.”
Peredur bit his lip until it was biddable. “Is it certain?”
“As tomorrow’s daylight, child! And now be off out of my way, and stop

asking fool questions. Father Huw will have no time for you today, there’s more
important business waiting.”
Peredur went like a docile child, startled and comforted, and wherever he
hid himself, he did it effectively, for Cadfael saw no more of him that evening.
He was a good lad at heart, and this wild lunge of his into envy and meanness
had brought him up short against an image of himself that he did not like at all.
Whatever prayers Huw set him by way of penance were likely to hit heaven with
the irresistible fervour of thunderbolts, and whatever hard labour he was given,
the result was likely to stand solid as oak and last for ever.
Cadfael took his draught, and went back to where Dame Branwen was still
heaving and quivering with uncontrollable sobs, by this time in genuine distress,
exhausted by her efforts but unable to end them. He took advantage of her sheer
weariness to present the cup to her as soon as he reached her side, and with
abrupt authority that acted on her before she could muster the fibre of
stubbornness.
“Drink this!” And automatically she drank it, half of it going down out of
pure surprise, the second half because the first had taught her how dry and sore
her throat was from all its exertions, and how smooth was the texture and how
sweet the taste of this brew. The very act of swallowing it broke the frightening
rhythm of the huge sighs that had convulsed her almost worse than the sobbing.
Father Huw had time to mop his brow with a fold of his sleeve before she was
able to resume her complaints. Even then, by comparison with what had gone
before, they sounded half-hearted.
“We women, we mothers, we sacrifice our lives to bringing up children, and
when they’re grown they reward us by bringing disgrace upon us. What did I
ever do to deserve this?”
“He’ll do you credit yet,” said Cadfael cheerfully. “Stand by him in his
penance, but never try to excuse his sin, and he’ll think the better of you for it.”
That went by her like the wind sighing at the time, though she may have
remembered it later. Her voice declined gradually from its injured self-
justification, dwindled into a half-dreamy monologue of grief, and took on at
length a tone of warm and drowsy complacency, before it lapsed into silence.
Cadwallon breathed deep and cautiously, and eyed his advisers.
“I shall call her women and get her to bed,” said Cadfael. “She’ll sleep the
night through, and it’ll do her nothing but good.” And you more good still, he
thought but did not say. “Let your son rest, too, and never say another word
about his trouble but by the way, like any other daily business, unless he speaks
up first. Father Huw will take care of him faithfully.”
“I will,” said Huw. “He’s worth our efforts.”

Dame Branwen went amiably where she was led, and the house was
wonderfully quiet. Cadfael and Huw went out together, pursued as far as the gate
by Cadwallon’s distracted gratitude. When they were well away from the
holding, at the end of the stockade, the quietness of the dusk came down on them
softly, a cloud descending delicately upon a cloud.
“In time for supper, if not for Vespers,” said Huw wearily. “What should we
have done without you, Brother Cadfael? I have no skill at all with women, they
confuse me utterly. I marvel how you have learned to deal with them so ably,
you, a cloistered brother.”
Cadfael thought of Bianca, and Arianna, and Mariam, and all the others,
some known so briefly, all so well.
“Both men and women partake of the same human nature, Huw. We both
bleed when we’re wounded. That’s a poor, silly woman, true, but we can show
plenty of poor, silly men. There are women as strong as any of us, and as able.”
He was thinking of Mariam—or was it of Sioned? “You go to supper, Huw, and
hold me excused, and if I can be with you before Compline, I will. I have some
business first at Bened’s smithy.”
The empty phial swung heavily in the pocket in his right sleeve, reminding
him. His mind was still busy with the implications. Before ever he reached
Bened’s croft he had it clear in his mind what must be done, but was no nearer
knowing how to set about it.
Cai was with Bened on the bench under the eaves, with a jug of rough wine
between them. They were not talking, only waiting for him to appear, and there
could be no reason for that, but that Sioned had told them positively that he
would.
“A fine tangle it turns out,” said Bened, shaking his grizzled head. “And
now you’ll be off and leave us holding it. No blame to you, you have to go
where your duty is. But what are we to do about Rhisiart when you’re gone?
There’s more than half this parish thinks your Benedictines have killed him, and
the lesser half thinks some enemy here has taken the chance to blame you, and
get clean away into cover. We were a peaceful community until you came,
nobody looked for murder among us.”
“God knows we never meant to bring it,” said Cadfael. “But there’s still
tonight before we go, and I haven’t shot my last bolt yet. I must speak with
Sioned. We’ve things to do, and not much time for doing them.”
“Drink one cup with us before you go in to her,” insisted Cai. “That takes
no time at all, and is a powerful aid to thought.”
They were seated all together, three simple, honest men, and the wine
notably lower in the jug, when someone turned in at the gate, light feet came

running in great haste along the path, and suddenly there was Annest confronting
them, skirts flying and settling about her like wings folding, her breath short and
laboured, and excitement and consternation in her face. And ready to be
indignant at the very sight of them sitting peacefully drinking wine.
“You’d better stir yourselves,” she said, panting and sparkling. “I’ve been
along to Father Huw’s house to see what’s going on there—Marared and Edwin
between them have been keeping an eye open for us. Do you know who’s there
taking supper with the Benedictines? Griffith ap Rhys, the bailiff! And do you
know where he’s bound, afterwards? Up to our house, to take Brother John to
prison!”
They were on their feet fast enough at this news, though Bened dared to
question it. “He can’t be there! The last I heard of him he was at the mill.”
“And that was this morning, and I tell you now he’s eating and drinking
with Prior Robert and the rest. I’ve seen him with my own eyes, so don’t tell me
he can’t be there. And here I find you sitting on your hams drinking, as though
we had all the time in the world!”
“But why in such a hurry tonight?” persisted Bened. “Did the prior send for
him, because he’s wanting to be away tomorrow?”
“The devil was in it! He came to Vespers just by way of compliment to
Father Huw, and who should he find celebrating instead but Prior Robert, and the
prior seized on it as just the chance he wanted, and has hung on to him and
persuaded him Brother John must be taken in charge tonight, for he can’t leave
without knowing he’s safely in the hands of the law. He says the bailiff should
deal with him for the secular offence of hindering the arrest of a criminal, and
when he’s served his penalty he’s to be sent back to Shrewsbury to answer for
his defiance of discipline, or else the prior will send an escort to fetch him. And
what could the bailiff do but fall in with it, when it was put to him like that? And
here you sit—!”
“All right, girl, all right,” said Cai placatingly. “I’m off this minute, and
Brother John will be out of there and away to a safe place before ever the bailiff
gets near us. I’ll take one of your ponies, Bened…”
“Saddle another for me,” said Annest with determination. “I’m coming with
you.”
Cai went off at a jogtrot to the paddock, and Annest, drawing breath more
easily now that the worst was told, drank off the wine he had left in his cup, and
heaved a huge, resolute sigh.
“We’d better be out of here fast, for that young brother who looks after the
horses now will be coming down after supper to get them. The prior means to be
there to see John safe bound. ‘There’s time yet before Compline,’ he said. He

was complaining of wanting you, too, to interpret for him, they were managing
lamely with only Latin between them. Dear God, what a day it’s been!”
And what a night, thought Cadfael, it’s still likely to be. “What else was
going on there?” he asked. “Did you hear anything that might give me a light?
For heaven knows I need one!”
“They were debating which one of them should watch the night through at
the chapel. And that same young fair one, the one who has visions, up and
prayed it might be him. He said he’d been unfaithful to his watch once, and
longed still to make amends. And the prior said he might. That much I
understood myself. All the prior’s thinking about seems to be making all the
trouble he can for John,” said Annest resentfully, “or I should think he might
have sent somebody else instead. That young brother—what is it you call him?”
“Columbanus,” said Brother Cadfael.
“That’s him, Columbanus! He begins to put on airs as if he owned Saint
Winifred. I don’t want her to go away at all, but at least it was the prior who first
thought of it, and now if there’s a halo for anybody it’s shifted to this other
fellow’s head.”
She did not know it, but she had indeed given Cadfael a light, and with
every word she said it burned more steadily. “So he’s to be the one who watches
the night through before the altar—and alone, is he?”
“So I heard.” Cai was coming with the ponies, at a gay trot out of the
meadow. Annest rose eagerly and kilted her gown, knotting her girdle tightly
about the broad pleat she drew up over her hips. “Brother Cadfael, you don’t
think it wrong of me to love John? Or of him to love me? I don’t care about the
rest of them, but I should be sorry if you thought we were doing something
wicked.”
Cai had not bothered with a saddle for himself, but had provided one for
her. Quite simply and naturally Brother Cadfael cupped his hands for her foot, to
give her a lift on to the pony’s broad back, and the fresh scent of her linen and
the smooth coolness of her ankle against his wrists as she mounted made one of
the best moments of that interminably long and chaotic day. “As long a I may
live, girl,” he said, “I doubt if I shall ever know two creatures with less
wickedness between them. He made a mistake, and there should be provision for
everybody to make one fresh start. I don’t think he’s making any mistake this
time.”
He watched her ride away, setting an uphill pace to which Cai adapted
himself goodhumouredly. They had a fair start, it would be ten minutes or more
yet before Columbanus came to fetch the horses, and even then he had to take
them back to the parsonage. It might be well to put in an appearance and go with

Robert dutifully to interpret his fulminations, too, in which case there was need
of haste, for he had now a great deal to say to Sioned, and this night’s moves
must be planned thoroughly. He withdrew into the croft as soon as Annest and
Cai were out of sight, and Sioned came out of the shadows eagerly to meet him.
“I expected Annest to be here before you. She went to find out what’s
happening at Father Huw’s. I thought best to stay out of sight. If people think
I’m away home, so much the better. You haven’t seen Annest?”
“I have, and heard all her news,” said Cadfael, and told her what was in the
wind, and where Annest was gone. “Never fear for John, they’ll be there well
ahead of any pursuit. We have other business, and no time to waste, for I shall be
expected to ride with the prior, and it’s as well. I should be there to see fair play.
If we manage our business as well as I fancy Cai and Annest will manage theirs,
before morning we may know what we want to know.”
“You’ve found out something,” she said with certainty. “You are changed.
You are sure!”
He told her briefly all that had happened at Cadwallon’s house, how he had
brooded upon it without enlightenment as to how it was to be used, and how
Annest in innocence had shown him. Then he told her what he required of her.
“I know you can speak English, you must use it tonight.
This may be a more dangerous trap than any we’ve laid before, but I shall
be close by. And you may call in Engelard, too, if he’ll promise to stay close in
cover. But, child, if you have any doubts or fears, if you’d rather let be, and have
me try some other way, say so now, and so be it.”
“No,” she said, “no doubts and no fears. I can do anything. I dare do
anything.”
“Then sit down with me, and learn your part well, for we haven’t long. And
while we plan, can I ask you to bring me some bread and a morsel of cheese?
For I’ve missed my supper.”
Prior Robert and Brother Richard rode into Rhisiart’s yard with the prince’s
bailiff between them, his two henchmen and Brother Cadfael close behind, at
about half past seven, in a mild twilight, with all the unhurried ceremony of the
law, rather as if Griffith ap Rhys held his commission from Saint Benedict, and
not from Owain Gwynedd. The bailiff was, in fact, more than a little vexed at
this unfortunate encounter, which had left him no alternative but to comply with
Robert’s demands. An offence against Welsh law was alleged, and had been
reported to him, and he was obliged to investigate it, where, considering the
circumstances, he would much have preferred to pack all the Benedictine
delegation back to Shrewsbury, and let them sort out their own grudges there,
without bothering a busy man who had plenty of more important things on his

mind. Unhappily Cadwallon’s villein, the long-legged fellow who had been
brought down by Brother John, had given vociferous evidence in support of the
accusation, or it would have been easier to ignore it.
There was no one on duty at the gate, which was strange, and as they rode
in, a number of people seemed to be running hither and thither in a distracted
way, as if something unforeseen had happened, and confused and conflicting
orders were being given from several authorities at once. No groom ran to attend
to them, either. Prior Robert was displeased. Griffith ap Rhys was mildly and
alertly interested. When someone did take notice of them, it was a very
handsome young person in a green gown, who came running with her skirts
gathered in her hands, and her light-brown hair slipping out of its glossy coil to
her shoulders.
“Oh, sirs, you must excuse us this neglect, we’ve been so disturbed! The
gate-keeper was called away to help, and all the grooms are hunting…  But I’m
ashamed to let our troubles cast a shadow over our hospitality. My lady’s resting,
and can’t be disturbed, but I’m at your service. Will it please you light down?
Shall I have lodgings made ready?”
“We don’t propose to stay,” said Griffith ap Rhys, already suspecting this
artless goodwill, and approving the way she radiated it. “We came to relieve you
of a certain young malefactor you’ve had in hold here. But it seems you’ve
suffered some further calamity, and we should be sorry to add to your troubles,
or disturb your lady, after the grievous day she’s endured.”
“Madam,” said Prior Robert, civilly but officiously, “you are addressing the
prince’s bailiff of Rhos, and I am the prior of Shrewsbury abbey. You have a
brother of that abbey in confinement here, the royal bailiff is come to relieve you
of his care.”
All of which Cadfael duly and solemnly translated for Annest’s benefit, his
face as guileless as hers.
“Oh, sir!” She opened her eyes wide and curtseyed deeply to Griffith and
cursorily to the prior, separating her own from the alien. “It’s true we had such a
brother here a prisoner…”
“Had?” said Robert sharply, for once detecting the change of tense.
“Had?” said Griffith thoughtfully.
“He’s gone, sir! You see what confusion he’s left behind. This evening,
when his keeper took him his supper, this brother struck him down with a board
torn loose from the manger in this prison, and dropped the bolt on him and
slipped away. It was some time before we knew. He must have climbed the wall,
you see it is not so high. We have men out now looking for him in the woods,
and searching everywhere here within. But I fear he’s clean gone!”

Cai made his entrance at the perfect time, issuing from one of the barns
with shaky steps, his head wreathed in a white cloth lightly dabbled with red.
“The poor man, the villain broke his head for him! It was some time before
he could drag himself to the door and hammer on it, and make himself heard.
There’s no knowing how far the fellow may have got by now. But the whole
household is out hunting for him.”
The bailiff, as in duty bound, questioned Cai, but gently and briefly,
questioned all the other servants, who ran to make themselves useful and
succeeded only in being magnificently confusing. And Prior Robert, burning
with vengeful zeal, would have pressed them more strenuously but for the
bailiff’s presence and obvious prior right, and the brevity of the time at his
disposal if he was to get back for Compline. In any case, it was quite clear that
Brother John was indeed over the wall and clean gone. Most willingly they
showed the place where he had been confined, and the manger from which he
had ripped the board, and the board itself, artistically spattered at one end with
spots of Cai’s gore, though it may, of course, have been pigment borrowed from
the butcher.
“It seems your young man has given us all the slip,” said Griffith, with
admirable serenity for a man of law who has lost a malefactor. “There’s nothing
more to be done here. They could hardly expect such violence from a
Benedictine brother, it’s no blame to them.”
With considerable pleasure Cadfael translated that neat little stab. It kindled
a spark in the speaking eyes of the young person in green, and Griffith did not
miss it. But to challenge it would have been folly. The clear brown eyes would
have opened wide enough and deep enough to drown a man in their innocence.
“We’d best leave them in peace to mend their broken mangers and broken
heads,” said Griffith, “and look elsewhere for our fugitive.”
“The wretch compounds his offences,” said Robert, furious. “But I cannot
allow his villainy to disrupt my mission. I must set out for home tomorrow, and
leave his capture to you.”
“You may trust me to deal properly with him,” said Griffith drily, “when he
is found.” If he laid the slightest of emphasis on the “when”, no one appeared to
remark it but Cadfael and Annest. By this time Annest was quite satisfied that
she liked this princely official, and could trust him to behave like a reasonable
man who is not looking for trouble, or trying to make it for others as harmless as
himself.
“And you will restore him to our house when he has purged his offences
under Welsh law?”
“When he has done so,” said Griffith, decidedly with some stress this time

on the “when”, “you shall certainly have him back.”
With that Prior Robert had to be content, though his Norman spirit burned
at being deprived of its rightful victim. And on the ride back he was by no means
placated by Griffith’s tales of the large numbers of fugitive outlaws who had
found no difficulty in living wild in these forests, and even made friends among
the country people, and been accepted into families, and even into respectability
at last. It galled his orderly mind to think of insubordination mellowing with
time and being tolerated and condoned. He was in no very Christian mood when
he swept into Father Huw’s church, only just in time for Compline.
They were all there but Brother John, the remaining five brethren from
Shrewsbury and a good number of the people of Gwytherin, to witness the last
flowering of Brother Columbanus’ devotional gift of ecstasy, now dedicated
entirely to Saint Winifred, his personal patroness who had healed him of
madness, favoured him with her true presence in a dream, and made known her
will through him in the matter of Rhisiart’s burial. For at the end of Compline,
rising to go to his self-chosen vigil, Columbanus turned to the altar, raised his
arms in a sweeping gesture, and prayed aloud in a high, clear voice that the
virgin martyr would deign to visit him once more in his holy solitude, in the
silence of the night, and reveal to him again the inexpressible bliss from which
he had returned so reluctantly to this imperfect world. And more, that this time,
if she found him worthy of translation out of the body, she would take him up
living into that world of light. Humbly he submitted his will to endure here
below, and do his duty in the estate assigned him, but rapturously he sent his
desire soaring to the timber roof, to be uplifted out of the flesh, transported
through death without dying, if he was counted ready for the assumption.
Everyone present heard, and trembled at such virtue. Everyone but Brother
Cadfael, who was past trembling at the arrogance of man, and whose mind, in
any case, was busy and anxious with other, though related, matters.

Chapter Ten
 
BROTHER 
COLUMBANUS 
ENTERED 
THE 
SMALL, 
DARK,
WOODSCENTED CHAPEL, heavy with the odours of centuries, and closed the
door gently behind him, without latching it. There were no candles lighted,
tonight, only the small oil-lamp upon the altar, that burned with a tall,
unwavering flame from its floating wick. That slender, single turret of light cast
still shadows all around, and being almost on a level with the bier of Saint
Winifred, braced on trestles before it, made of it a black coffin shape, only
touched here and there with sparkles of reflected silver.
Beyond the capsule of soft golden light all was darkness, perfumed with
age and dust. There was a second entrance, from the minute sacristy that was no
more than a porch beside the altar, but no draught from that or any source caused
the lamp-flame to waver even for an instant. There might have been no storms of
air or spirit, no winds, no breath of living creature, to disturb the stillness.
Brother Columbanus made his obeisance to the altar, briefly and almost
curtly. There was no one to see, he had come alone, and neither seen nor heard
any sign of another living soul in the graveyard or the woods around. He moved
the second prayer-desk aside, and set the chosen one squarely in the centre of the
chapel, facing the bier. His behavior was markedly more practical and moderate
than when there were people by to see him, but did not otherwise greatly differ.
He had come to watch out the night on his knees, and he was prepared to do so,
but there was no need to labour his effects until morning, when his fellows
would come to take Saint Winifred in reverent procession on the first stage of
her journey. Columbanus padded the prie-dieu for his knees with the bunched
skirts of his habit, and made himself as comfortable as possible with his gowned
arms broadly folded as a pillow for his head. The umber darkness was scented
and heavy with the warmth of wood, and the night outside was not cold. Once he
had shut out the tiny, erect tower of light and the few bright surfaces from which
it was reflected, the drowsiness he was inviting came stealing over him in long,
lulling waves until it washed over his head, and he slept.
It seemed, after the fashion of sleep, no time at all before he was startled
awake, but in fact it was more than three hours, and midnight was approaching,
when his slumbers began to be strangely troubled with a persistent dream that
someone, a woman, was calling him by name low and clearly, and over and over
and over again: “Columbanus…  Columbanus…” with inexhaustible and

relentless patience. And he was visited, even in sleep, by a sensation that this
woman had all the time in the world, and was willing to go on calling for ever,
while for him there was no time left at all, but he must awake and be rid of her.
He started up suddenly, stiff to the ends of fingers and toes, ears stretched
and eyes staring wildly, but there was the enclosing capsule of mild darkness all
about him as before, and the reliquary dark, too, darker than before, or so it
seemed, as if the flame of the lamp, though steady, had subsided, and was now
more than half hidden behind the coffin. He had forgotten to check the oil. Yet
he knew it had been fully supplied when last he left it, after Rhisiart’s burial, and
that was only a matter of hours ago.
It seemed that all of his senses, hearing had been the last to return to him,
for now he was aware, with a cold crawling of fear along his skin, that the voice
of his dream was still with him, and had been with him all along, emerging from
dream into reality without a break. Very soft, very low, very deliberate, not a
whisper, but the clear thread of a voice, at once distant and near, insisting
unmistakably: “Columbanus… Columbanus… Columbanus, what have you
done?”
Out of the reliquary the voice came, out of the light that was dwindling
even as he stared in terror and unbelief.
“Columbanus, Columbanus, my false servant, who blasphemes against my
will and murders my champions, what will you say in your defence to Winifred?
Do you think you can deceive me as you deceive your prior and your brothers?”
Without haste, without heat, the voice issued forth from the darkening apse
of the altar, so small, so terrible, echoing eerily out of its sacred cave.
“You who claim to be my worshipper, you have played me false like the
vile Cradoc, do you think you will escape his end? I never wished to leave my
resting-place here in Gwytherin. Who told you otherwise but your own devil of
ambition? I laid my hand upon a good man, and sent him out to be my
champion, and this day he has been buried here, a martyr for my sake. The sin is
recorded in heaven, there is no hiding-place for you. Why,” demanded the voice,
cold, peremptory and menacing in its stillness, “have you killed my servant
Rhisiart?”
He tried to rise from his knees, and it was as if they were nailed to the wood
of the prie-dieu. He tried to find a voice, and only a dry croaking came out of his
stiff throat. She could not be there, there was no one there! But the saints go
where they please, and reveal themselves to whom they please, and sometimes
terribly. His cold fingers clutched at the desk, and felt nothing. His tongue, like
an unplaned splinter of wood, tore the roof of his mouth when he fought to make
it speak.

“There is no hope for you but in confession, Columbanus, murderer! Speak!
Confess!”
“No!” croaked Columbanus, forcing out words in frantic haste. “I never
touched Rhisiart! I was here in your chapel, holy virgin, all that afternoon, how
could I have harmed him? I sinned against you, I was faithless, I slept…  I own
it! Don’t lay a greater guilt on me…”
“It was not you who slept,” breathed the voice, a tone higher, a shade more
fiercely, “liar that you are! Who carried the wine? Who poisoned the wine,
causing even the innocent to sin? Brother Jerome slept, not you! You went out
into the forest and waited for Rhisiart, and struck him down.”
“No… no, I swear it!” Shaking and sweating, he clawed at the desk before
him, and could get no leverage with his palsied hands to prise himself to his feet
and fly from her. How can you fly from beings who are everywhere and see
everything? For nothing mortal could possibly know what this being knew. “No,
it’s all wrong, I am misjudged! I was asleep here when Father Huw’s messenger
came for us. Jerome shook me awake…  The messenger is witness…”
“The messenger never passed the doorway. Brother Jerome was already
stirring out of his poisoned sleep, and went to meet him. As for you, you feigned
and lied, as you feign and lie now. Who was it brought the poppy syrup? Who
was it knew its use? You were pretending sleep, you lied even in confessing to
sleep, and Jerome, as weak as you are wicked, was glad enough to think you
could not accuse him, not even seeing that you were indeed accusing him of
worse, of your act, of your slaying! He did not know you lied, and could not
charge you with it. But I know, and I do charge you! And my vengeance loosed
upon Cradoc may also be loosed upon you, if you lie to me but once more!”
“No!” he shrieked, and covered his face as though she dazzled him with
lightnings, though only a thin, small, terrible sound threatened him. “No, spare! I
am not lying! Blessed virgin, I have been your true servant… I have tried to do
your will… I know nothing of this! I never harmed Rhisiart! I never gave
poisoned wine to Jerome!”
“Fool!” said the voice in a sudden loud cry. “Do you think you can deceive
me? Then what is this?”
There was a sudden silvery flash in the air before him, and something fell
and smashed with a shivering of glass on the floor just in front of the desk,
spattering his knees with sharp fragments and infinitesimal, sticky drops, and at
the same instant the flame of the lamp died utterly, and black darkness fell.
Shivering and sick with fear, Columbanus groped forward along the earth
floor, and slivers of glass crushed and stabbed under his palms, drawing blood.
He lifted one hand to his face, whimpering, and smelled the sweet, cloying scent

of the poppy syrup, and knew that he was kneeling among the fragments of the
phial he had left safe in his scrip at Cadwallon’s house.
It was no more than a minute before the total darkness eased, and there
beyond the bier and the altar the small oblong shape of the window formed in
comparative light, a deep, clear sky, moonless but starlit. Shapes within the
chapel again loomed very dimly, giving space to his sickening terror. There was
a figure standing motionless between him and the bier.
It took a little while for his eyes to accustom themselves to the dimness, and
assemble out of it this shadowy, erect pallor, a woman lost in obscurity from the
waist down, but head and shoulders feebly illuminated by the starlight from the
altar window. He had not seen her come, he had heard nothing. She had appeared
while he was dragging his torn palm over the shards of glass, and moaning as if
at the derisory pain. A slender, still form swathed from head to foot closely in
white, Winifred in her grave clothes, long since dust, a thin veil covering her
face and head, and her arm outstretched and pointing at him.
He shrank back before her, scuffling abjectly backwards along the floor,
making feeble gestures with his hands to fend off the very sight of her. Frantic
tears burst out of his eyes, and frantic words from his lips.
“It was for you! It was for you and for my abbey! I did it for the glory of
our house! I believed I had warranty—from you and from heaven! He stood in
the way of God’s will! He would not let you go. I meant only rightly when I did
what I did!”
“Speak plainly,” said the voice, sharp with command, “and say out what
you did.”
“I gave the syrup to Jerome—in his wine—and when he was asleep I stole
out to the forest path, and waited for Rhisiart. I followed him. I struck him
down…  Oh, sweet Saint Winifred, don’t let me be damned for striking down the
enemy who stood in the way of blessedness…”
“Struck in the back!” said the pale figure, and a sudden cold gust of air
swept over her and shuddered in her draperies, and surging across the chapel,
blew upon Columbanus and chilled him to the bone. As if she had touched him!
And she was surely a pace nearer, though he had not seen her move. “Struck in
the back, as mean cowards and traitors do! Own it! Say it all!”
“In the back!” babbled Columbanus, scrambling back from her like a
broken animal, until his shoulders came up against the wall, and he could retreat
no farther. “I own it. I confess it all! Oh, merciful saint, you know all, and I
cannot hide from you! Have pity on me! Don’t destroy me! It was all for you, I
did it for you!”
“You did it for yourself,” charged the voice, colder than ice and burning

like ice. “You who would be master of whatever order you enter, you with your
ambitions and stratagems, you setting out wilfully to draw to yourself all the
glory of possessing me, to work your way into the centre of all achievements, to
show as the favourite of heaven, the paragon of piety, to elbow Brother Richard
out of his succession to your prior, and if you could, the prior out of his
succession to your abbot. You with your thirst to become the youngest head
under a mitre in this or any land! I know you, and I know your kind. There is no
way too ruthless for you, providing it leads to power.”
“No, no!” he panted, bracing himself back against the wall, for certainly she
was advancing upon him, and now in bitter, quiet fury, jetting menace from her
outstretched finger-tips. “It was all for you, only for you! I believed I was doing
your will!”
“My will to evil?” the voice rose into a piercing cry, sharp as a dagger. “My
will to murder?”
She had taken one step too many. Columbanus broke in frenzied fear,
clawed himself upright by the wall, and struck out with both hands, beating at
her blindly to fend her off from touching, and uttering thin, babbling cries as he
flailed about him. His left hand caught in her draperies and dragged the veil from
her face and head. Dark hair fell round her shoulders. His fingers made contact
with the curve of a smooth, cool cheek, cool, but not cold, smooth with the
graceful curves of firm young flesh, where in his sick horror he had expected to
plunge his hand into the bony hollows of a skull.
He uttered a scream that began in frantic terror and ended in soaring
triumph. The hand that had shrunk from contact turned suddenly to grasp hold,
knotting strong fingers in the dark tangle of hair. He was very quick,
Columbanus. It took him no more than the intake of a breath to know he had a
flesh-and-blood woman at the end of his arm, and scarcely longer to know who
she must be, and what she had done to him, with this intolerable trap in which
she had caught him. And barely another breath to consider that she was here
alone, and to all appearances had set her trap alone, and if she survived he was
lost, and if she did not survive, if she vanished—there was plenty left of the
night!—he was safe, and still in command of all this expedition, and inheritor of
all its glory.
It was his misfortune that Sioned was almost as quick in the uptake as he. In
a darkness in which vision hardly helped or hindered, she heard the great,
indrawn breath that released him from the fear of hell and heaven together, and
felt the wave of animal anger that came out from him like a foul scent, almost as
sickening as the odour of his fear. She sprang back from it by instinct, and
repeated the lunge of intent, dragging herself out of his grasp at the price of a

few strands of hair. But his clawing hand, cheated, loosed the fragments and
caught again at the linen sheet that draped her, and that would not tear so easily.
She swung round to her left, to put as much distance as she could between her
body and his right hand, but she saw him lunge into the breast of his habit, and
saw the brief, sullen flash of the steel as he whipped it out and followed her
swing, hacking into dimness. The same dagger, she thought, swooping beneath
its first blind stab, that killed my father.
Somewhere a door had opened fully on the night, for the wind blew through
the chapel suddenly, and sandalled feet thudded in with the night air, a thickset,
powerful body driving the draught before it. A loud voice thundered warning.
Brother Cadfael erupted into the chapel from the sacristy like a bolt from a
crossbow, and drove at full speed into the struggle.
Columbanus was in the act of striking a second time, and with his left hand
firmly clutching the linen sheet wound about Sioned’s body. But she was
whirling round away from him to unloose those same folds that held her, and the
blow that was meant for her heart only grazed painfully down her left forearm.
Then his grip released her, and she fell back against the wall, and Columbanus
was gone, hurtling out at the door in full flight, and Brother Cadfael was
embracing her with strong, sustaining arms, and upbraiding her with a furious,
bracing voice, while he held her in a bear’s hug, and felt at her as tenderly and
fervently as a mother.
“For God’s sake, fool daughter, why did you get within his reach? I told
you, keep the bier between you and him…!”
“Get after him,” shouted Sioned wrathfully, “do you want him clean away?
I’m sound enough, go get him! He killed my father!”
They headed for the door together, but Cadfael was out of it first. The girl
was strong, vigorous and vengeful, a Welshwoman to the heart, barely grazed, he
knew the kind. The wind of action blew her, she felt no pain and was aware of
no effusion of blood, blood she wanted, and with justification. She was close on
his heels as he rolled like a thunderbolt down the narrow path through the
graveyard towards the gate. The night was huge, velvet, sewn with stars, their
veiled and delicate light barely casting shadows. All that quiet space received
and smothered the sound of their passage, and smoothed the stillness of the night
over it.
Out of the bushes beyond the graveyard wall a man’s figure started, tall,
slender and swift, leaping to block the gateway. Columbanus saw him, and
baulked for a moment, but Cadfael was running hard behind him, and the next
instant the fugitive made up his mind and rushed on, straight at the shadow that
moved to intercept him. Hard on Cadfael’s heels, Sioned suddenly shrieked:

“Take care, Engelard! He has a dagger!”
Engelard heard her, and swerved to the right at the very moment of
collision, so that the stroke meant for his heart only ripped a fluttering ribbon of
cloth from his sleeve. Columbanus would have bored his way past at speed, and
run for the cover of the woods, but Engelard’s long left arm swept round hard
into the back of his neck, sending him off-balance for a moment, though he kept
his feet, and Engelard’s right fist got a tight grip on the flying cowl, and twisted.
Half-strangled, Columbanus whirled again and struck out with the knife, and this
time Engelard was ready for the flash, and took the thrusting wrist neatly in his
left hand. They swayed and wrestled together, feet braced in the grass, and they
were very fairly matched if both had been armed. That unbalance was soon
amended. Engelard twisted at the wrist he held, ignoring the clawing of
Columbanus’ free hand at his throat, and the numbed fingers opened at last and
let the dagger fall. Both lunged for it, but Engelard scooped it up and flung it
contemptuously aside into the bushes, and grappled his opponent with his bare
hands. The fight was all but over. Columbanus hung panting and gasping, both
arms pinned, looking wildly round for a means of escape and finding none.
“Is this the man?” demanded Engelard.
Sioned said: “Yes. He has owned to it.”
Engelard looked beyond his prisoner then for the first time, and saw her
standing in the soft starlight that was becoming to their accustomed eyes almost
as clear as day. He saw her dishevelled and bruised and gazing with great,
shocked eyes, her left arm gashed and bleeding freely, though the cut was
shallow. He saw smears of her blood dabbling the white sheet in which she was
swathed. By starlight there is little or no colour to be seen but everything that
Engelard saw at that moment was blood-red. This was the man who had
murdered in coward’s fashion Engelard’s well-liked lord and good friend—
whatever their differences!—and now he had tried to kill the daughter as he had
killed the father.
“You dared, you dared touch her!” blazed Engelard in towering rage. “You
worthless cloister rat!” And he took Columbanus by the throat and hoisted him
bodily from the ground, shook him like the rat he had called him, cracked him in
the air like a poisonous snake, and when he had done with him, flung him down
at his feet in the grass.
“Get up!” he growled, standing over the wreckage. “Get up now, and I’ll
give you time to rest and breathe, and then you can fight a man to the death,
without a dagger in your hand, instead of writhing through the undergrowth and
stabbing him in the back, or carving up a defenceless girl. Take your time, I can
wait to kill you till you’ve got your breath.”

Sioned flew to him, breast to breast, and held him fast in her arms, pressing
him back. “No! Don’t touch him again! I don’t want the law to have any hold on
you, even the slenderest.”
“He tried to kill you—you’re hurt…”
“No! It’s nothing… only a cut. It bleeds, but it’s nothing!”
His rage subsided slowly, shaking him. He folded his arms round her and
held her to him, and with a disdainful but restrained jab of a toe urged his
prostrate enemy again: “Get up! I won’t touch you. The law can have you, and
welcome!”
Columbanus did not move, not by so much as the flicker of an eyelid or the
twitching of a finger. All three of them stood peering down at him in sudden
silence, aware how utterly still he was, and how rare such stillness is among
living things.
“He’s foxing,” said Engelard scornfully, “for fear of worse, and by way of
getting himself pitied. I’ve heard he’s a master at that.”
Those who feign sleep and hear themselves talked of, usually betray
themselves by some exaggeration of innocence. Columbanus lay in a stillness
that was perfectly detached and indifferent.
Brother Cadfael knelt down beside him, shook him by the shoulder gently,
and sat back with a sharp sigh at the broken movement of the head. He put a
hand inside the breast of the habit, and stooped to the parted lips and wide
nostrils. Then he took the head between his hands, and gently turned and tilted it.
It rolled back, as he released it, into a position so improbable that they knew the
worst even before Cadfael said, quite practically: “You’d have waited a long
time for him to get his breath back, my friend. You don’t know your own
strength! His neck is broken. He’s dead.”
Sobered and shocked, they stood dumbly staring down at what they had
hardly yet recognised for disaster. They saw a regrettable accident which neither
of them had ever intended, but which was, after all, a kind of justice. But
Cadfael saw a scandal that could yet wreck their young lives, and others, too, for
without Columbanus alive, and forced by two respected witnesses to repeat his
confession, how strong was all their proof against him? Cadfael sat back on his
heels, and thought. It was startling to realise, now that the unmoved silence of
the night came down on them again, how all this violence and passion had
passed with very little noise, and no other witnesses. He listened, and no stirring
of foot or wing troubled the quiet. They were far enough away from any
dwelling, not a soul had been disturbed. That, at least, was time gained.
“He can’t be dead,” said Engelard doubtfully. “I barely handled him at all.
Nobody dies as easily as that!”

“This one did. And now what’s to be done? I hadn’t bargained for this.” He
said it not complainingly, but as one pointing out that further urgent planning
would now be necessary, and they had better keep their minds flexible.
“Why, what can be done?” To Engelard it was simple, though troublesome.
“We shall have to call up Father Huw and your prior, and tell them exactly
what’s happened. What else can we do? I’m sorry to have killed the fellow, I
never meant to, but I can’t say I feel any guilt about it.”
Nor did he expect any blame. The truth was always the best way. Cadfael
felt a reluctant affection for such innocence. The world was going to damage it
sooner or later, but one undeserved accusation had so far failed even to bruise it,
he still trusted men to be reasonable. Cadfael doubted if Sioned was so sure. Her
silence was anxious and foreboding. And her grazed arm was still oozing blood.
First things first, and they might as well be sensibly occupied while he thought.
“Here, make yourself useful! Help me get this carrion back into the chapel,
out of sight. And, Sioned, find his dagger, we can’t leave that lying about to bear
witness. Then let’s get that arm of yours washed and bound up. There’s a stream
at the back of the hawthorn hedge, and of linen we’ve plenty.”
They had absolute faith in him, and did his bidding without question,
though Engelard, once he had assured himself that Sioned was not gravely hurt,
and had himself carefully and deftly bandaged her scratch, returned to his
dogged opinion that their best course was to tell the whole story, which could
hardly cast infamy upon anyone but Columbanus. Cadfael busied himself with
flint and tinder until he had candles lighted, and the lamp refilled, from which he
himself had drained a judicious quantity of oil before Sioned took her place
under the draperies of the saint’s catafalque.
“You think,” he said at length, “that because you’ve done nothing wrong,
and we’ve all of us banded together to expose a wrong, that the whole world will
be of the same opinion, and honestly come out and say so. Child, I know better!
The only proof we have of Columbanus’ guilt is his confession, which both of us
here heard. Or rather, the only proof we had, for we no longer have even that.
Alive, we two could have forced the truth out of him a second time. Dead, he’s
never going to give us that satisfaction. And without that, our position is
vulnerable enough. Make no mistake, if we accuse him, if this fearful scandal
breaks, to smirch the abbey of Shrewsbury, and all the force of the Benedictine
order, backed here by the bishop and the prince, take my word for it, all the
forces of authority will band together to avert the disaster, and nobody, much
less a friendless outlander, will be allowed to stand in the way. They simply can’t
afford to have the acquisition of Saint Winifred called in question and brought to
disrepute. Rather than that, they’ll call this an outlaw killing by a desperate man,

a fugitive already, wanted for another crime, and trying to escape both together.
A pity,” he said, “I ever suggested that Sioned should call you in to wait in
reserve, in case we had trouble. But none of this is your fault, and I won’t have
you branded with it. I made the plot, and I must unravel it. But give up all idea
of going straight to Father Huw, or the bailiff, or anyone else, with the true story.
Far better use the rest of this night to rearrange matters to better advantage.
Justice can be arrived at by more routes than one.”
“They wouldn’t dare doubt Sioned’s word,” said Engelard stoutly.
“Fool boy, they’d say that Sioned, for love’s sake, might go as far aside
from her proper nature as Peredur did. And as for me, my influence is small
enough, and I am not interested in protecting only myself, but as many of those
in this coil as I can reach. Even my prior, who is arrogant and rigid, and to tell
the truth, sometimes rather stupid, but not a murderer and not a liar. And my
order, which has not deserved Columbanus. Hush, now, and let me think! And
while I do, you can be clearing away the remains of the syrup bottle. This chapel
must be as neat and quiet tomorrow as before we ever brought our troubles into
it.”
Obediently they went about removing the traces of the night’s alarms, and
let him alone until he should have found them a way through the tangle.
“And I wonder, now,” he said at length, “what made you improve on all the
speeches I made for you, and put such fiery words into Saint Winifred’s mouth?
What put it into your head to say that you’d never wanted to leave Gwytherin,
and did not want it now? That Rhisiart was not merely a decent, honest man, but
your chosen champion?”
She turned and looked at him in astonishment and wonder. “Did I say that?”
“You did, and very well you delivered it, too. And very proper and apt it
sounded, but I think we never rehearsed it so. Where did you get the words?”
“I don’t know,” said Sioned, puzzled. “I don’t remember what I did say.
The words seemed to come freely of themselves, I only let them flow.”
“It may be,” said Engelard, “that the saint was taking her chance when it
offered. All these strangers having visions and ecstasies, and interpreting them to
suit themselves, yet nobody ever really asked Saint Winifred what she wanted.
They all claimed they knew better than she did.”
“Out of the mouths of innocents!” said Cadfael to himself, and pondered
the road that was gradually opening before his mind’s eye. Of all the people who
ought to be left happy with the outcome, Saint Winifred should surely come first.
Aim, he thought, at making everybody happy, and if that’s within reach, why stir
up any kind of unpleasantness? Take Columbanus, for instance! Only a few
hours ago at Compline he prayed aloud before us all that if the virgin deemed

him worthy, he might be taken up out of this world this very night, translated
instantly out of the body. Well, that was one who got his wish! Maybe he’d have
withdrawn his request if he’d known it was going to be taken up so literally, for
its purpose was rather to reflect incomparable holiness upon him while he was
still alive to enjoy it. But saints have a right to suppose that their devotees mean
what they say, and bestow gifts accordingly. And if the saint has really spoken
through Sioned, he thought—and who am I to question it?—if she really wants
to stay here in her own village, which is a reasonable enough wish, well, the plot
where she used to sleep has been newly turned today, no one will notice
anything if it’s turned again tonight.
“I believe,” said Sioned, watching him with the first faint smile, wan but
trusting, “you’re beginning to see your way.”
“I believe,” said Cadfael, “I’m beginning to see our way, which is more to
the point. Sioned, I have something for you to do, and you need not hurry, we
have work to do here while you’re away. Take that sheet of yours, and go and
spread it under the may trees in the hedge, where they’re beginning to shed, but
not yet brown, Shake the bushes and. bring us a whole cloud of petals. The last
time she visited him, it was with wondrous sweet odours and a shower of white
flowers. Bring the one, and we shall have the other.”
Confidently, understanding nothing as yet, she took the linen sheet from
which she had unwound herself as from a shroud, and went to do his bidding.
“Give me the dagger,” said Cadfael briskly when she was gone. He wiped
the blade on the veil Columbanus had torn from Sioned’s head, and moved the
candles so that they shone upon the great red seals that closed Winifred’s
reliquary. “Thank God he didn’t bleed,” he said. “His habit and clothes are
unmarked. Strip him!”
And he fingered the first seal, nodded satisfaction at its fatness and the
thinness and sharpness of the dagger, and thrust the tip of the blade into the
flame of the lamp.
Long before daylight they were ready. They walked down all three together
from the chapel towards the village, and separated at the edge of the wood,
where the shortest path turned off uphill towards Rhisiart’s holding.
Sioned carried with her the blood-stained sheet and veil, and the fragments
of glass they had buried in the forest. A good thing the servants who had filled in
Rhisiart’s grave had left their spades on the scene, meaning to tidy the mound
next day. That had saved a journey to borrow without leave, and a good hour of
time.
“There’ll be no scandal,” said Cadfael, when they halted at the place where
the paths divided. “No scandal, and no accusations. I think you may take him

home with you, but keep him out of sight until we’re gone. There’ll be peace
when we’re gone. And you needn’t fear that the prince or his bailiff will ever
proceed further against Engelard, any more than against John. I’ll speak a word
in Peredur’s ear, Peredur will speak it into the bailiff’s ear, the bailiff will speak
it into Owain Gwynedd’s ear—Father Huw we’ll leave out of it, no need to
burden his conscience, the good, simple man. And if the monks of Shrewsbury
are happy, and the people of Gwytherin are happy—for they’ll hear the whisper
fast enough—why should anyone want to upset such a satisfactory state of
affairs, by speaking the word aloud? A wise prince—and Owain Gwynedd seems
to me very wise—will let well alone.”
“All Gwytherin,” said Sioned, and shivered a little at the thought, “will be
there in the morning to watch you take the reliquary away.”
“So much the better, we want all the witnesses we can have, all the
emotion, all the wonder. I am a great sinner,” said Cadfael philosophically, “but I
feel no weight. Does the end justify the means, I wonder?”
“One thing I know,” she said. “My father can rest now, and that he owes to
you. And I owe you that and more. When I first came down to you out of the tree
—you remember?—I thought you would be like other monks, and not want to
look at me.”
“Child, I should have to be out of my wits, not to want to look at you. I’ve
looked so attentively, I shall remember you all my life. But your love, my
children, and how you manage it—with that I can’t help you.”
“No need,” said Engelard. “I am an outlander, with a proper agreement.
That agreement can be dissolved by consent, and I can be a free man by dividing
all my goods equally with my lord, and now Sioned is my lord.”
“And then there can no man prevent,” said Sioned, “if I choose to endow
him with half my goods, as is only fair. Uncle Meurice won’t stand in our way.
And it won’t even be hard for him to justify. To marry an heiress to an outlander
servant is one thing, to marry her to a free man and heir to a manor, even if it’s in
England and can’t be claimed for a while, is quite another.”
“Especially,” said Cadfael, “when you already know he’s the best hand with
cattle in the four cantrefs.”
It seemed that those two, at any rate, were satisfied. And Rhisiart in his
honoured grave would not grudge them their happiness. He had not been a
grudging man.
Engelard, no talker, said his thanks plainly and briefly when they parted.
Sioned turned back impulsively, flung her arms round Cadfael’s neck, and kissed
him. It was their farewell, for he had thought it best to advise them not to show
themselves at the chapel again. It was a wry touch that she smelled so heady and

sweet with flowering may, and left so saintly a fragrance in his arms when she
was gone.
On his way down to the parsonage Cadfael made a detour to the mill-pond,
and dropped Columbanus’s dagger into the deepest of the dark water. What a
good thing, he thought, making for the bed he would occupy for no more than an
hour or so before Prime, that the brothers who made the reliquary were such
meticulous craftsmen, and insisted on lining it with lead!

Chapter Eleven
 
PRIOR ROBERT AROSE AND WENT TO THE FIRST SERVICE OF
THE DAY in so great content with his success that he had almost forgotten about
the escape of Brother John, and even when he remembered that one
unsatisfactory particular, he merely put it away in the back of his mind, as
something that must and would be dealt with faithfully in good time, but need
not cloud the splendour of this occasion. And it was indeed a clear, radiant
morning, very bright and still, when they came from the church and turned
towards the old graveyard and the chapel, and all the congregation fell in at their
heels and followed, and along the way others appeared silently from every path,
and joined the procession, until it was like some memorable pilgrimage. They
came to Cadwallon’s gatehouse, and Cadwallon came out to join them, and
Peredur, who had hung back in strict obedience to his orders to remain at home
until his penance was appointed, was kindly bidden forth by Father Huw, and
even smiled upon, though as saint to sinner, by Prior Robert. Dame Branwen, if
not still asleep, was no doubt recuperating after her vapours. Her menfolk were
not likely to be very pressing in their invitations to her to go with them, and
perhaps she was still punishing them by withdrawing herself. Either way, they
were relieved of her presence.
The order of procession having only a loose form, brothers and villagers
could mingle, and greet, and change partners as they willed. It was a communal
celebration. And that was strange, considering the contention that had threatened
it for some days. Gwytherin was playing it very cautiously now, intent on seeing
everything and giving nothing away.
Peredur made his way to Cadfael’s side, and remained there thankfully,
though silently. Cadfael asked after his mother, and the young man coloured and
frowned, and then smiled guiltily like a child, and said that she was very well, a
little dreamy still, but placid and amiable.
“You can do Gwytherin and me a good service, if you will,” said Brother
Cadfael, and confided to his ear the work he had in mind to pass on to Griffith ap
Rhys.
“So that’s the way it is!” said Peredur, forgetting altogether about his own
unforgivable sins. His eyes opened wide. He whistled softly. “And that’s the way
you want it left?”
“That’s the way it is, and that’s the way I want it left. Who loses? And

everyone gains. We, you, Rhisiart, Saint Winifred—Saint Winifred most of all.
And Sioned and Engelard, of course,” said Cadfael firmly, probing the penitent
to the heart.
“Yes… I’m glad for them!” said Peredur, a shade too vehemently. His head
was bent, and his eyelids lowered. He was not yet as glad as all that, but he was
trying. The will was there. “Given a year or two longer, nobody’s going to
remember about the deer Engelard took. In the end he’ll be able to go back and
forth to Cheshire if he pleases, and he’ll have lands when his father dies. And
once he’s no longer reckoned outlaw and felon he’ll have no more troubles. I’ll
get your word to Griffith ap Rhys this very day. He’s over the river at his cousin
David’s but Father Huw will give me indulgence if it’s to go voluntarily to the
law.” He smiled wryly. “Very apt that I should be your man! I can unload my
own sins at the same time, while I’m confiding to him what everyone must know
but no one must say aloud.”
“Good!” said Brother Cadfael, contented. “The bailiff will do the rest. A
word to the prince, and that’s the whole business settled.”
They had come to the place where the most direct path from Rhisiart’s
holding joined with their road. And there came half the household from above,
Padrig the bard nursing his little portable harp, perhaps bound for some other
house after this leavetaking. Cai the ploughman still with an impressive bandage
round his quite intact head, an artistic lurch to his gait, and a shameless gleam in
his one exposed eye. No Sioned, no Engelard, no Annest, no John. Brother
Cadfael, though he himself had given the orders, felt a sudden grievous
deprivation.
Now they were approaching the little clearing, the woodlands fell back
from them on either side, the narrow field of wild grass opened, and then the
stone-built wall, green from head to foot, of the old graveyard. Small, shrunken,
black, a huddled shape too tall for its base, the chapel of Saint Winifred loomed,
and at its eastern end the raw, dark oblong of Rhisiart’s grave scarred the lush
spring green of the grass.
Prior Robert halted at the gate, and turned to face the following multitude
with a benign and almost affectionate countenance, and through Cadfael
addressed them thus:
“Father Huw, and good people of Gwytherin, we came here with every
good intent, led, as we believed and still believe, by divine guidance, desiring to
honour Saint Winifred as she had instructed us, not at all to deprive you of a
treasure, rather to allow its beams to shine upon many more people as well as
you. That our mission should have brought grief to any is great grief to us. That
we are now of one mind, and you are willing to let us take the saint’s relics away

with us to a wider glory, is relief and joy. Now you are assured that we meant no
evil, but only good, and that what we are doing is done reverently.”
A murmur began at one end of the crescent of watchers, and rolled gently
round to the other extreme, a murmur of acquiescence, almost of complacency.
“And you do not grudge us the possession of this precious thing we are
taking with us? You do believe that we are doing justly, that we take only what
had been committed to us?”
He could not have chosen his words better, thought Brother Cadfael,
astonished and gratified, if he had known everything—or if I had written this
address for him. Now if there comes an equally well-worded answer, I’ll believe
in a miracle of my own.
The crowd heaved, and gave forth the sturdy form of Bened, as solid and
respectable and fit to be spokesman for his parish as any man in Gwytherin,
barring, perhaps, Father Huw, who here stood in the equivocal position of having
a foot in both camps, and therefore wisely kept silence.
“Father Prior,” said Bened gruffly, “there’s not a man among us now
grudges you the relics within there on the altar. We do believe they are yours to
take, and you take them with our consent home to Shrewsbury, where by all the
omens they rightly belong.”
It was altogether too good. It might bring a blush of pleasure, even mingled
with a trace of shame, to Prior Robert’s cheek, but it caused Cadfael to run a
long, considering glance round all those serene, secretive, smiling faces, all
those wide, honest, opaque eyes. Nobody fidgeted, nobody muttered, nobody,
even at the back, sniggered. Cai gazed with simple admiration from his one
visible eye. Padrig beamed benevolent bardic satisfaction upon this total
reconciliation.
They knew already! Whether through some discreet whisper started on its
rounds by Sioned, or by some earth-rooted intuition of their own, the people of
Gwytherin knew, in essence if not in detail, everything there was to be known.
And not a word aloud, not a word out of place, until the strangers were gone.
“Come, then,” said Prior Robert, deeply gratified, “let us release Brother
Columbanus from his vigil, and take Saint Winifred on the first stage of her
journey home.” And he turned, very tall, very regal, very silvery-fine, and paced
majestically to the door of the chapel, with most of Gwytherin crowding into the
graveyard after him. With a long, white, aristocratic hand he thrust the door wide
and stood in the doorway.
“Brother Columbanus, we are here. Your watch is over.”
He took just two paces into the interior, his eyes finding it dim after the
brilliance outside, in spite of the clear light pouring in through the small east

window. Then the dark-brown, wood-scented walls came clear to him, and every
detail of the scene within emerged from dimness into comparative light, and then
into a light so acute and blinding that he halted where he stood, awed and
marvelling.
There was a heavy, haunting sweetness that filled all the air within, and the
opening of the door had let in a small morning wind that stirred it in great waves
of fragrance. Both candles burned steadily upon the altar, the small oil-lamp
between them. The prie-dieu stood centrally before the bier, but there was no one
kneeling there. Over altar and reliquary a snowdrift of white petals lay, as though
a miraculous wind had carried them in its arms across two fields from the
hawthorn hedge, without spilling one flower on the way, and breathed them in
here through the altar window. The snowy sweetness carried as far as the prie-
dieu, and sprinkled both it and the crumpled, empty garments that lay discarded
there.
“Columbanus! What is this? He is not here!”
Brother Richard came to the prior’s left shoulder, Brother Jerome to the
right, Bened and Cadwallon and Cai and others crowded in after them and
flowed round on either side to line the dark walls and stare at the marvel, nostrils
widening to the drowning sweetness. No one ventured to advance beyond where
the prior stood, until he himself went slowly forward, and leaned to look more
closely at all that was left of Brother Columbanus.
The black Benedictine habit lay where he had been kneeling, skirts spread
behind, body fallen together in folds, sleeves spread like wings on either side,
bent at the elbow as though the arms that had left them had still ended in hands
pressed together in prayer. Within the cowl an edge of white showed.
“Look!” whispered Brother Richard in awe. “His shirt is still within the
habit, and look!—his sandals!” They were under the hem of the habit, neatly
together, soles upturned, as the feet had left them. And on the book-rest of the
prie-dieu, laid where his prayerful hands had rested, was a single knot of
flowering may.
“Father Prior, all his clothes are here, shirt and drawers and all, one within
another as he would wear them. As though—as though he had been lifted out of
them and left them lying, as a snake discards its old skin and emerges bright in a
new…”
“This is most marvellous,” said Prior Robert. “How shall we understand it,
and not sin?”
“Father, may we take up these garments? If there is trace or mark on
them…”
There was none, Brother Cadfael was certain of that. Columbanus had not

bled, his habit was not torn, nor even soiled. He had fallen only in thick spring
grass, bursting irresistibly through the dead grass of last autumn.
“Father, it is as I said, as though he has been lifted out of these garments
quite softly, and let them fall, not needing them any more. Oh, Father, we are in
the presence of a great wonder! I am afraid!” said Brother Richard, meaning the
wonderful, blissful fear of what is holy. He had seldom spoken with such
eloquence, or been so moved.
“I do recall now,” said the prior, shaken and chastened (and that was no
harm!), “the prayer he made last night at Compline. How he cried out to be taken
up living out of this world, for pure ecstasy, if the virgin saint found him fit for
such favour and bliss. Is it possible that he was in such a state of grace as to be
found worthy?”
“Father, shall we search? Here, and without? Into the woods?”
“To what end?” said the prior simply. “Would he be running naked in the
night? A sane man? And even if he ran mad, and shed the clothes he wore,
would they be thus discarded, fold within fold as he kneeled, here in such pure
order? It is not possible to put off garments thus. No, he is gone far beyond these
forests, far out of this world. He has been marvellously favoured, and his most
demanding prayers heard. Let us say a Mass here for Brother Columbanus,
before we take up the blessed lady who has made him her herald, and go to make
known this miracle of faith.”
There was no knowing, Prior Robert being the man he was, at what stage
his awareness of the use to be made of this marvel thrust his genuine faith and
wonder and emotion into the back of his mind, and set him manipulating events
to get the utmost glory out of them. There was no inconsistency in such
behaviour. He was quite certain that Brother Columbanus had been taken up
living out of this world, just as he had wished. But that being so, it was not only
his opportunity, but his duty, to make the utmost use of the exemplary favour to
glorify the abbey of Saint Peter and Saint Paul of Shrewsbury, and not only his
duty, but his pleasure, to make use of the same to shed a halo round the head of
Prior Robert, who had originated this quest. And so he did. He said Mass with
absolute conviction, in the cloud of white flowers, the huddle of discarded
garments at his feet. Almost certainly he would also inform Griffith ap Rhys,
through Father Huw, of all that had befallen, and ask him to keep an alert eye
open in case any relevant information surfaced after the brothers from
Shrewsbury were gone. Brother Prior was the product of his faith and his birth,
his training for sanctity and for arbitrary rule, and could snake off neither.
The people of Gwytherin, silent and observant, crowded in to fill the space
available, made no sound, expressed no opinion. Their presence and silence

passed for endorsement. What they really thought they kept to themselves.
“Now,” said Prior Robert, moved almost to tears, “let us take up this
blessed burden, and praise God for the weight we carry.”
And he moved forward to offer his own delicate hands and frail shoulder,
first of the devout.
That was Brother Cadfael’s worst moment, for it was the one thing he had
overlooked, But Bened, unwontedly quick at the right moment, called aloud:
“Shall Gwytherin be backward, now peace is made?” and rolled forward with
less stateliness and greater speed, and had a solid shoulder under the head end of
the reliquary before the prior was able to reach it, and half a dozen of the smith’s
own powerful but stocky build took up the challenge with enthusiasm. Apart
from Cadfael, the only monk of Shrewsbury who got a comer hoisted into his
neck was Jerome, being of much the same height, and his was the sole voice that
cried out in astonishment at the weight, and sagged under it until Bened shifted
nearer and hefted most of the load from him.
“Your pardon, Father Prior! But who would have thought those slender little
bones could weigh so heavily?”
Cadfael spoke up in hasty interpretation: “We are surrounded here by
miracles, both small and great. Truly did Father Prior say that we thank God for
the weight we carry. Is not this evidence of singular grace, that heaven has
caused the weight of her worthiness to be so signally demonstrated?”
In his present state, at once humbled and exalted, Prior Robert apparently
did not find the logic of this nearly as peculiar as did Brother Cadfael himself.
He would have accepted and embraced anything that added to his own triumph.
So it was on sturdy Gwytherin shoulders that the reliquary and its contents were
hoisted out of the chapel and borne in procession down to the parsonage, with
such brisk enthusiasm that it almost seemed the parish could hardly wait to get
rid of them. It was Gwytherin men who fetched the horses and mules, and rigged
a little cart, spread with cloths, on which the precious casket could be drawn
home. Once installed on this vehicle, which, after all, cost little in materials or
labour, given the smith’s benevolent interest, the casket need not be unloaded
until it reached Shrewsbury. Nobody wanted anything untoward to happen to it
on the way, such as Brother Jerome crumpling under his end, and starting the
joints by dropping it.
“But you we’ll miss,” said Cai regretfully, busy with the harness. “Padrig
has a song in praise of Rhisiart you’d have liked to hear, and one more
companionable drinking night would have been pleasant. But the lad sends you
his thanks and his godspeed. He’s only in hiding until the pack of you have gone.
And Sioned told me to tell you from him, look out for your pear trees, for the

winter moth’s playing the devil with some of ours here.”
“He’s a good helper in a garden,” Cadfael confirmed judicially. “A shade
heavy-handed, but he shifts the rough digging faster than any novice I ever had
under me. I shall miss him, too. God knows what I shall get in his place.”
“A light hand’s no good with iron,” said Bened, standing back to admire the
banded wheels he had contributed to the cart. “Deft, yes! Not light. I tell you
what, Cadfael! I’ll see you in Shrewsbury yet. For years I’ve had a fancy to
make a great pilgrimage across England some day and get to Walsingham. I
reckon Shrewsbury would be just about on my way.”
At the last, when all was ready and Prior Robert mounted, Cai said in
Cadfael’s ear: “When you’re up the hill, where you saw us ploughing that day,
cast a look the other way. There’s a place where the woods fall away, and an
open hillock just before they close again. We’ll be there, a fair gathering of us.
And that’s for you.
Brother Cadfael, without shame, for he had been up and busy all night and
was very tired, annexed the gentler and cleverer of the two mules, a steady pad
that would follow where the horses led, and step delicately on any ground. It had
a high, supporting saddle, and he had not lost the trick of riding through his
knees, even when asleep. The larger and heavier beast was harnessed to draw the
cart, but the carriage was narrow yet stable, rode well even on a forest floor, and
Jerome, no great weight, could still ride, either on the mule’s back or the shafts
and yoke. In any case, why trouble too much about the comfort of Jerome, who
had concocted that vision of Saint Winifred in the first place, almost certainly
knowing that the prior’s searches in Wales had cast up this particular virgin as
one most desirable, and most available? Jerome would have been courting
Columbanus just as assiduously, if he had survived to oust Robert.
The cortege set forth ceremoniously, half of Gwytherin there to watch it go,
and sigh immense relief when it was gone. Father Huw blessed the departing
guests. Peredur, almost certainly, was away across the river, planting the good
seed in the bailiff’s mind. He deserved that his errand should be counted to his
own credit. Genuine shiners are plentiful, but genuine penitents are rare. Peredur
had done a detestable thing, but remained a very likeable young man. Cadfael
had no serious fears for his future, once he was over Sioned. There were other
girls, after all. Not many her match, but some not so very far behind.
Brother Cadfael settled himself well down in the saddle, and shook his
bridle to let the mule know it might conduct him where it would. Very gently he
dozed. It could not yet be called sleep. He was aware of the shifting light and
shadow under the trees, and the fresh cool air, and movement under him, and a
sense of something completed. Or almost completed, for this was only the first

stage of the way home.
He roused when they came to the high ridge above the river valley. There
was no team ploughing, even the breaking of new ground, was done. He turned
his head towards the wooded uplands on his right, and waited for the opening
vista between the trees. It was brief and narrow, a sweep of grass soaring to a
gentle crest beyond which the trees loomed close and dark. There were a number
of people clustered there on the rounded hillock, most of Sioned’s household, far
enough removed to be nameless to anyone who knew them less well than he. A
cloud of dark hair beside a cap of flaxen, Cai’s flaunting bandage shoved back
like a hat unseated in a hot noon, a light brown head clasped close against a red
thorn-hedge that looked very like Brother John’s abandoned tonsure. Padrig, too,
not yet off on his wanderings. They were all waving and smiling, and Cadfael
returned the salute with enthusiasm. Then the ambulant procession crossed the
narrow opening, and the woods took away all.
Brother Cadfael, well content, subsided into his saddle comfortable, and fell
asleep.
Overnight they halted at Penmachmo, in the shelter of the church, where
there was hospitality for travellers. Brother Cadfael, without apology to any,
withdrew himself as soon as he had seen to his mule, and continued his overdue
sleep in the loft above the stables. He was roused after midnight by Brother
Jerome in delirious excitement.
“Brother, a great wonder!” bleated Jerome, ecstatic. “There came a traveller
here in great pain from a malignant illness, and made such outcry that all of us in
the hostel were robbed of sleep. And Prior Robert took a few of the petals we
saved from the chapel, and floated them in holy water, and gave them to this
poor soul to drink, and afterwards we carried him out into the yard and let him
kiss the foot of the reliquary. And instantly he was eased of his pain, and before
we laid him in his bed again he was asleep. He feels nothing, he slumbers like a
child! Oh, brother, we are the means of astonishing grace!”
“Ought it to astonish you so much?” demanded Brother Cadfael
censoriously, malicious half out of vexation at being awakened, and half in self-
defence, for he was considerably more taken aback than he would admit. “If you
had any faith in what we have brought from Gwytherin, you should not be
amazed that it accomplishes wonders along the way.”
But by the same token he thought honestly, after Jerome had left him to
seek out a more appreciative audience, I should! I do believe I begin to grasp the
nature of miracles! For would it be a miracle, if there was any reason for it?
Miracles have nothing to do with reason. Miracles contradict reason, they strike
clean across mere human deserts, and deliver and save where they will. If they

made sense, they would not be miracles, And he was comforted and entertained,
and fell asleep again readily, feeling that all was well with a world he had always
know to be peculiar and perverse.
Minor prodigies, most of them trivial, some derisory, trailed after them all
the way to Shrewsbury, though how many of the crutches discarded had been
necessary, and how many, even of those that were, had to be resumed shortly
afterwards, how many of the speech impediments had been in the will rather
than in the tongue, how many feeble tendons in the mind rather than in the legs,
it was difficult to judge, not even counting all the sensation-seekers who were
bound to bandage an eye or come over suddenly paralytic in order to be in with
the latest cult. It all made for a great reputation that not only kept pace with
them, but rushed ahead, and was already bringing in awestruck patronage in gifts
and legacies to the abbey of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, in the hope of having
dubious sins prayed away by a grateful saint.
When they reached the outskirts of Shrewsbury, crowds of people came out
to meet them, and accompany the procession as far as the boundary church of
Saint Giles, where the reliquary was to await the great day of the saint’s
translation to the abbey church. This could hardly take place without the blessing
of the bishop, and due notice to all churches and religious houses, to add to the
glory accruing. It was no surprise to Brother Cadfael that when the day came it
should come with grey skies and squally rain, to leave room for another little
miracle. For though it rained heavily on all the surrounding fields and
countryside, not a drop fell on the procession, as they carried Saint Winifred’s
casket at last to its final resting-place on the altar of the abbey church, where the
miracle-seekers immediately betook themselves in great numbers, and mostly
came away satisfied.
In full chapter Prior Robert gave his account of his mission to Abbot
Heribert. “Father, to my grief I must own it, we have come back only four, who
went out from Shrewsbury six brethren together. And we return without both the
glory and the blemish of our house, but bringing with us the treasure we set out
to gain.”
On almost all of which counts he was in error, but since no one was ever
likely to tell him so, there was no harm done. Brother Cadfael dozed gently
behind his pillar through the awed encomiums on Brother Columbanus, out of
whom they would certainly have wished to make a new saint, but for the sad fact
that they supposed all his relics but his discarded clothes to be for ever
withdrawn from reach. Letting the devout voices slip out of his consciousness,
Cadfael congratulated himself on having made as many people as possible
happy, and drifted into a dream of a hot knife-blade slicing deftly through the

thick wax of a seal without ever disturbing the device. It was a long time since
he had exercised some of his more questionable skills, he was glad to be
confirmed in believing that he had forgotten none of them, and that every one
had a meritorious use in the end.

Chapter Twelve
 
IT WAS MORE THAN TWO YEARS LATER, and the middle of a bright
June afternoon, when Brother Cadfael, crossing the great court from the
fishponds, saw among the travellers arriving at the gate a certain thickset,
foursquare, powerful figure that he knew. Bened, the smith of Gwytherin, a little
rounder in the belly and a little greyer in the hair, had found the time ripe for
realising an old ambition, and was on his way in a pilgrim’s gown to the shrine
of Our Lady of Walsingham.
“If I’d put it off much longer,” he confided, when they were private
together with a bottle of wine in a comer of the herb-garden, “I should have
grown too old to relish the journey. And what was there to keep me now, with a
good lad ready and able to take over the smithy while I’m gone? He took to it
like a duck to water. Oh, yes, they’ve been man and wife eighteen months now,
and as happy as larks. Annest always knew her own mind, and this time I will
say she’s made no mistake.”
“And have they a child yet?” asked Brother Cadfael, imagining a bold,
sturdy boy-baby with a bush of red hair, nibbed away by his pillow in an infant
tonsure.
“Not yet, but there’s one on the way. By the time I get back he’ll be with
us.”
“And Annest is well?”
“Blossoming like a rose.”
“And Sioned and Engelard? They had no troubles after we were gone?”
“None, bless you! Griffith ap Rhys let it be known that all was well, and
should be let well alone. They’re married, and snug, and I’m to bring you their
warmest greetings, and to tell you they have a fine son—three months old, I
reckon he’d be now—dark and Welsh like his mother. And they’ve named him
Cadfael.”
“Well, well!” said Brother Cadfael, absurdly gratified. “The best way to get
the sweet out of children and escape the bitter is to have them by proxy. But I
hope they’ll never find anything but sweet in their youngster. There’ll be a
Bened yet, in one household or the other.”
Bened the pilgrim shook his head, but without any deep regret, and reached
for the bottle. “There was a time when I’d hoped…  But it would never have
done. I was an old fool ever to think of it, and it’s better this way. And Cai’s

well, and sends you remembrances, and says drink down one cup for him.”
They drank many more than one before it was time for Vespers. “And
you’ll see me again at chapter tomorrow,” said Bened, as they walked back to
the great court, “for I’m charged with greetings from Father Huw to Prior Robert
and Abbot Heribert, and I’ll need you to be my interpreter.”
“Father Huw must be the one person in Gwytherin, I suppose, who doesn’t
know the truth by this time,” said Cadfael, with some compunction. “But it
wouldn’t have been fair to lay such a load on his conscience. Better to let him
keep his innocence.”
“His innocence is safe enough,” said Bened, “for he’s never said word to
bring it in question, but for all that I wouldn’t be too sure that he doesn’t know.
There’s a lot of merit in silence.”
The next morning at chapter he delivered his messages of goodwill and
commendation to the monastery in general, and the members of Prior Robert’s
mission in particular, from the parish of Saint Winifred’s ministry to the altar of
her glorification. Abbot Heribert questioned him amiably about the chapel and
the graveyard which he himself had never seen, and to which, as he said, the
abbey owed its most distinguished patroness and most precious relics.
“And we trust,” he said gently, “that in our great gain you have not suffered
equally great deprivation, for that was never our intent.”
“No, Father Abbot,” Bened reassured him heartily, “you need have no
regrets upon that score. For I must tell you that at the place of Saint Winifred’s
grave wonderful things are happening. More people come there for help than
ever before. There have been marvellous cures.”
Prior Robert stiffened in his place, and his austere face turned bluish-white
and pinched with incredulous resentment.
“Even now, when the saint is here on our altar, and all the devout come to
pray to her here? Ah, but small things—the residue of grace…”
“No, Father Prior, great things! Women in mortal labour with cross-births
have been brought there and laid on the grave from which she was taken, where
we buried Rhisiart, and their children have been soothed into the world whole
and perfect, with no harm to the mothers. A man blind for years came and bathes
his eyes in a distillation of her may-blossoms, and threw away his stick and went
home seeing. A young man whose leg-bone had been broken and knitted awry
came in pain, and set his teeth and danced before her, and as he danced the pain
left him, and his bones straightened. I cannot tell you half the wonders we have
seen in Gwytherin these last two years.”
Prior Robert’s livid countenance was taking on a shade of green, and under
his careful eyelids his eyes sparkled emerald jealousy. How dare that obscure

village, bereft of its saint, outdo the small prodigies of rain that held off from
falling, and superficial wounds that healed with commendable but hardly
miraculous speed, and even the slightly suspicious numbers of lame who brought
their crutches and left them before the altar, and walked away unsupported?
“There was a child of three who went into a fit,” pursued Bened with gusto,
“stiff as a board in his mother’s arms, and stopped breathing, and she ran with
him all the way from the far fields, fording the river, and carried him to
Winifred’s grave, and laid him down in the grass there dead. And when he
touched the chill of the earth, he breathed and cried out, and she picked him up
living, and took him home joyfully, and he is live and well to this day.”
“What, even the dead raised?” croaked Prior Robert, almost speechless with
envy.
“Father Prior,” said Brother Cadfael soothingly, “surely this is but another
proof, the strongest possible, of the surpassing merit and potency of Saint
Winifred. Even the soil that once held her bones works wonders, and every
wonder must redound to the credit and glory of that place which houses the very
body that blessed the earth still blesses others.”
And Abbot Heribert, oblivious of the chagrin that was consuming his prior,
benignly agreed that it was so, and that universal grace, whether it manifested
itself in Wales, or England, or the Holy Land, or wheresoever, was to be hailed
with universal gratitude.
“Was that innocence or mischief?” demanded Cadfael, when he saw Bened
off from the gatehouse afterwards.
“Work it out for yourself! The great thing is, Cadfael, it was truth! These
things happened, and are happening yet.”
Brother Cadfael stood looking after him as he took the road towards
Lilleshall, until the stocky figure with its long, easy strides dwindled to child-
size, and vanished at the curve of the wall. Then he turned back towards his
garden, where a new young novice, barely sixteen and homesick, was waiting
earnestly for his orders, having finished planting out lettuces to follow in
succession. A silent lad as yet. Maybe once he had taken Brother Cadfael’s
measure his tongue would begin to wag, and then there’d be no stopping it. He
knew nothing, but was quick to learn, and though he was still near enough to
childhood to attract any available moist soil to his own person, things grew for
him. On the whole, Cadfael was well content.
I don’t see, he thought, reviewing the whole business again from this
peaceful distance, how I could have done much better. The little Welsh saint’s
back where she always wanted to be, bless her, and showing her pleasure by
taking good care of her own, it seems. And we’ve got what belonged to us in the

first place, all we have a right to, and probably all we deserve, too, and by and
large it seems to be thought satisfactory. Evidently the body of a calculating
murderer does almost as well as the real thing, given faith enough. Almost, but
never quite! Knowing what they all know by now, those good people up there in
Gwytherin may well look forward to great things. And if a little of their thanks
and gratitude rubs off on Rhisiart, well, why not? He earned it, and it’s a sign
she’s made him welcome. She may even be glad of his company. He’s no threat
to her virginity now, and if he is trespassing, that’s no fault of his. His bed-fellow
won’t grudge him a leaf or two from her garland!

About the Author
 
ELLIS PETERS is the nom-de-crime of English novelist Edith Pargeter,
author of scores of books under her own name. She is the recipient of the Silver
Dagger Award, conferred by the Crime Writers Association in Britain, as well as
the coveted Edgar, awarded by the Mystery Writers of America. Miss Pargeter is
also well known as a translator of poetry and prose from the Czech and has been
awarded the Gold Medal and Ribbon of the Czechoslovak Society for Foreign
Relations for her services to Czech literature. She passed away in 1995, at the
age of 82, at home in her beloved Shropshire.
 

Table of Contents
Chapter One
Chapter Two
Chapter Three
Chapter Four
Chapter Five
Chapter Six
Chapter Seven
Chapter Eight
Chapter Nine
Chapter Ten
Chapter Eleven
Chapter Twelve

