
A Natural History
of Human Th inking


A Natural History
of Human Th inking
Michael Tomasello
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, En gland
2014

Copyright © 2014 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging- in- Publication Data
Tomasello, Michael.
A natural history of human thinking / Michael Tomasello.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978- 0- 674- 72477- 8 (hardcover : alk. paper)
1. Cognition— Social aspects. 2. Evolutionary psychology. 
3. Psychology, Comparative. I. Title.
BF311.T6473 2014
153—dc23       2013020185

For Rita, Anya, Leo, and Chiara


Preface   ix
1.
Th e Shared Intentionality Hypothesis   1
2.
Individual Intentionality   7
Evolution of Cognition   7
Th inking like an Ape   15
Cognition for Competition   26
3.
Joint Intentionality    32
A New Form of Collaboration   33
A New Form of Cooperative Communication   49
Second- Personal Th inking    68
Perspectivity: Th e View from  Here and Th ere   76
Contents

viii 
Con t en ts
4.
Collective Intentionality   80
Th e Emergence of Culture   81
Th e Emergence of Conventional Communication   93
Agent- Neutral Th inking    113
Objectivity: Th e View from Nowhere   120
5.
Human Th inking as Cooperation   124
Th eories of Human Cognitive Evolution   125
Sociality and Th inking    133
Th e Role of Ontogeny   144
6.
Conclusion   149
Notes   155
References   159
Index   173

Th is book is a sequel— or, better, a prequel— to Th e Cultural Origins of Human 
Cognition (Harvard University Press, 1999). But it also has a slightly diff erent 
focus. In the 1999 book the question was what makes human cognition unique, 
and the answer was culture. Individual human beings develop uniquely pow-
erful cognitive skills because they grow to maturity in the midst of all kinds 
of cultural artifacts and practices, including a conventional language, and of 
course they have the cultural learning skills necessary to master them. Indi-
viduals internalize the artifacts and practices they encounter, and these then 
serve to mediate all of their cognitive interactions with the world.
In the current book, the question is similar: what makes human thinking 
unique? And the answer is similar as well: human thinking is fundamentally 
cooperative. But this slightly diff erent question and slightly diff erent answer 
lead to a very diff erent book. Th e 1999 book was clean and simple because the 
data we had comparing apes and humans  were so sparse. We could thus say 
things like “Only humans understand others as intentional agents, and this 
enables human culture.” But we now know that the picture is more complex 
than this. Great apes appear to know much more about others as intentional 
agents than previously believed, and still they do not have human- like culture 
Preface

x 
Pr eface
or cognition. Based on much research reported  here, the critical diff erence 
now seems to be that humans not only understand others as intentional agents 
but also put their heads together with others in acts of shared intentionality, 
including everything from concrete acts of collaborative problem solving to 
complex cultural institutions. Th e focus now is thus less on culture as a pro-
cess of transmission and more on culture as a pro cess of social coordination— 
and indeed, we argue  here that modern human cultures  were made possible 
by an earlier evolutionary step in which individuals made a living by coordi-
nating with others in relatively simple acts of collaborative foraging.
Th e specifi c focus on thinking means that this book does not simply doc-
ument that humans participate in shared intentionality in a way that their 
nearest primate relatives do not, which has been done elsewhere. Rather, in 
addition, it examines the underlying thinking pro cesses involved. To describe 
the nature of these thinking processes— in par tic u lar, to distinguish human 
thinking from that of other apes— we must characterize its component pro-
cesses of cognitive repre sen ta tion, inference, and self- monitoring. Th e shared 
intentionality hypothesis claims that all three of these components  were trans-
formed in two key steps during human evolution. In both cases, the transfor-
mation was part of a larger change of social interaction and or ga ni za tion in 
which humans  were forced to adopt more cooperative lifeways. In order to 
survive and thrive, humans  were forced, twice, to fi nd new ways to coordinate 
their behavior with others in collaborative (and then cultural) activities and 
to coordinate their intentional states with others in cooperative (and then 
conventional) communication. And this transformed, twice, the way that 
humans think.
Th e writing of this book, as most others, was made possible by the support 
of many institutions and people. I would like to thank the University of Pitts-
burgh Center for Philosophy of Science (John Norton, director and seminar 
leader extraordinaire) for hosting me for one peaceful semester of concen-
trated writing in the spring of 2012. I especially benefi ted during this stay 
from Bob Brandom’s generosity with his time and thoughts on many topics 
central to the current enterprise. I thank Celia Brownell at the Pitt Depart-
ment of Psychology and Andy Norman at Carnegie Mellon for many useful 
discussions during this semester as well. Th e ensuing summer I benefi ted 
greatly from presenting the themes of the book to the SIAS Summer Institute 
titled Th e Second Person: Comparative Perspectives, or ga nized in Berlin by Jim 
Conant and Sebastian Rödl. Th e book is better for all of these encounters.

Pr eface 
xi
With regard to the manuscript itself, I would like to thank Larry Barsa-
lou, Mattia Galloti, Henrike Moll, and Marco Schmidt for reading various 
chapters and providing very useful feedback. Of special importance, Richard 
Moore and Hannes Rakoczy each read the entire manuscript at a fairly early 
stage and provided a number of trenchant comments and suggestions, re-
garding both content and pre sen ta tion. Th anks also to Elizabeth Knoll and 
three anonymous reviewers at Harvard University Press for a number of help-
ful comments and criticisms on the penultimate draft.
Last and most important, I thank my wife, Rita Svetlova, for providing con-
stant and detailed critical commentary and suggestions throughout. Many 
ideas  were made clearer through discussion with her, and confusing passages 
 were made clear, or at least clearer, by her literate eye.


A Natural History
of Human Th inking


1
Th e Shared Intentionality Hypothesis
Only cooperation constitutes a pro cess that can produce reason.
—jean piaget, So cio log i cal Studies
Thinking would seem to be a completely solitary activity. And so it is for other 
animal species. But for humans, thinking is like a jazz musician improvising 
a novel riff  in the privacy of his own room. It is a solitary activity all right, 
but on an instrument made by others for that general purpose, after years of 
playing with and learning from other practitioners, in a musical genre with a 
rich history of legendary riff s, for an imagined audience of jazz afi cionados. 
Human thinking is individual improvisation enmeshed in a sociocultural 
matrix.
How did this novel form of socially infused thinking come to be, and how 
does it work? One set of classic theorists has emphasized the role of culture 
and its artifacts in making possible certain types of individual thinking. For 
example, Hegel (1807) argued that the social practices, institutions, and ideolo-
gies of a par tic u lar culture at a par tic u lar historical epoch constitute a necessary 
conceptual framework for individual human reason (see also Collingwood, 
1946). Peirce (1931– 1935) claimed more specifi cally that virtually all of humans’ 
most sophisticated types of thinking, including most especially mathematics 
and formal logic, are possible only because individuals have available to them 
culturally created symbolic artifacts such as Arabic numerals and logical nota-
tion. Vygotsky (1978) emphasized that human children grow up in the midst 
of the tools and symbols of their culture, including especially the linguistic 
symbols that preor ga nize their worlds for them, and during ontogeny they 
internalize the use of these artifacts, leading to the kind of internal dialogue 
that is one prototype of human thinking (see also Bakhtin, 1981).
Th e other set of classic theorists has focused on the fundamental pro cesses 
of social coordination that make human culture and language possible in the 

2 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
fi rst place. Mead (1934) pointed out that when humans interact with one an-
other, especially in communication, they are able to imagine themselves in the 
role of the other and to take the other’s perspective on themselves. Piaget 
(1928) argued further that these role- taking and perspective- taking abilities— 
along with a cooperative attitude— not only make culture and language pos-
sible but also make possible reasoning in which individuals subordinate their 
own point of view to the normative standards of the group. And Wittgen-
stein (1955) explicated several diff erent ways in which the appropriate use of a 
linguistic convention or cultural rule depends on a preexisting set of shared 
social practices and judgments (“forms of life”), which constitute the prag-
matic infrastructure from which all uses of language and rules gain their 
interpersonal signifi cance. Th ese social infrastructure theorists, as we may 
call them, all share the belief that language and culture are only the “icing on 
the cake” of humans’ ultrasocial ways of relating to the world cognitively.
Insightful as they  were, all of these classic theorists  were operating with-
out several new pieces of the puzzle, both empirical and theoretical, that have 
emerged only in recent years. Empirically, one new fi nding is the surprisingly 
sophisticated cognitive abilities of nonhuman primates, which have been 
discovered mostly in the last few de cades (for reviews, see Tomasello and Call, 
1997; Call and Tomasello, 2008). Th us, great apes, as the closest living rela-
tives of humans, already understand in human- like ways many aspects of 
their physical and social worlds, including the causal and intentional rela-
tions that structure those worlds. Th is means that many important aspects of 
human thinking derive not from humans’ unique forms of sociality, culture, 
and language but, rather, from something like the individual problem- solving 
abilities of great apes in general.
Another new set of fi ndings concern prelinguistic (or just linguistic) human 
infants, who have yet to partake fully of the culture and language around 
them. Th ese still fl edgling human beings nevertheless operate with some cog-
nitive pro cesses that great apes do not, enabling them to engage with others 
socially in some ways that great apes cannot, for example, via joint attention 
and cooperative communication (Tomasello et al., 2005). Th e fact that these 
precultural and prelinguistic creatures are already cognitively unique provides 
empirical support for the social infrastructure theorists’ claim that important 
aspects of human thinking emanate not from culture and language per se but, 
rather, from some deeper and more primitive forms of uniquely human social 
engagement.

T h e Sh a r ed In t en t iona l it y H y pot h e sis 
3
Th eoretically, recent advances in the philosophy of action have provided 
powerful new ways of thinking about these deeper and more primitive forms 
of uniquely human social engagement. A small group of phi los o phers of 
action (e.g., Bratman, 1992; Searle, 1995; Gilbert, 1989; Tuomela, 2007) have 
investigated how humans put their heads together with others in acts of 
so- called shared intentionality, or “we” intentionality. When individuals par-
ticipate with others in collaborative activities, together they form joint goals 
and joint attention, which then create individual roles and individual perspec-
tives that must be coordinated within them (Moll and Tomasello, 2007). More-
over, there is a deep continuity between such concrete manifestations of joint 
action and attention and more abstract cultural practices and products such 
as cultural institutions, which are structured— indeed, created— by agreed- 
upon social conventions and norms (Tomasello, 2009). In general, humans 
are able to coordinate with others, in a way that other primates seemingly are 
not, to form a “we” that acts as a kind of plural agent to create everything 
from a collaborative hunting party to a cultural institution.
Further in this theoretical direction, as a specifi c form of human collabora-
tive activity and shared intentionality, human cooperative communication 
involves a set of special intentional and inferential processes— fi rst identifi ed 
by Grice (1957, 1975) and since elaborated and amended by Sperber and Wilson 
(1996), Clark (1996), Levinson (2000), and Tomasello (2008). Human com-
municators conceptualize situations and entities via external communicative 
vehicles for other persons; these other persons then attempt to determine why 
the communicator thinks that these situations and entities will be relevant 
for them. Th is dialogic pro cess involves not only skills and motivations for 
shared intentionality but also a number of complex and recursive inferences 
about others’ intentions toward my intentional states. Th is unique form of 
communication— characteristic not just of mature language use but also of 
the prelinguistic gestural communication of human infants— presupposes 
both a shared conceptual framework between communicative partners (a.k.a. 
common conceptual ground) and an appreciation of those partners’ individual 
intentions and perspectives within it.
Th ese new empirical and theoretical advances enable us to construct a much 
more detailed account than was previously possible of the social dimensions 
of human cognition in general. Our focus in this book is on the social di-
mensions of human thinking in par tic u lar. Although humans and other ani-
mals solve many problems and make many decisions based on evolved intuitive 

4 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
heuristics (so- called system 1 pro cesses), humans and at least some other ani-
mals also solve some problems and make some decisions by thinking (system 
2 pro cesses; e.g., Kahneman, 2011). A specifi c focus on thinking is useful be-
cause it restricts our topic to a single cognitive pro cess, but one that involves 
several key components, especially (1) the ability to cognitively represent expe-
riences to oneself “off - line”; (2) the ability to simulate or make inferences trans-
forming these repre sen ta tions causally, intentionally, and/or logically; and 
(3) the ability to self- monitor and evaluate how these simulated experiences 
might lead to specifi c behavioral outcomes— and so to make a thoughtful 
behavioral decision.
It seems obvious that, compared with other animal species, humans think 
in special ways. But this diff erence is hard to characterize using traditional 
theories of human thinking since they presuppose key aspects of the pro cess 
that are actually evolutionary achievements. Th ese are precisely the social 
aspects of human thinking that are our primary focus  here. Th us, although 
many animal species can cognitively represent situations and entities at least 
somewhat abstractly, only humans can conceptualize one and the same situ-
ation or entity under diff ering, even confl icting, social perspectives (leading 
ultimately to a sense of “objectivity”). Further, although many animals also 
make simple causal and intentional inferences about external events, only 
humans make socially recursive and self- refl ective inferences about others’ or 
their own intentional states. And, fi nally, although many animals monitor 
and evaluate their own actions with respect to instrumental success, only 
humans self- monitor and evaluate their own thinking with respect to the 
normative perspectives and standards (“reasons”) of others or the group. Th ese 
fundamentally social diff erences lead to an identifi ably diff erent type of think-
ing, what we may call, for the sake of brevity, objective- refl ective- normative 
thinking.
In this book we attempt to reconstruct the evolutionary origins of this 
uniquely human objective- refl ective- normative thinking. Th e shared intentio na -
lity hypothesis is that what created this unique type of thinking— its pro cesses 
of repre sen ta tion, inference, and self- monitoring—were adaptations for dealing 
with problems of social coordination, specifi cally, problems presented by indi-
viduals’ attempts to collaborate and communicate with others (to co-operate 
with others). Although humans’ great ape ancestors  were social beings, they 
lived mostly individualistic and competitive lives, and so their thinking was 
geared toward achieving individual goals. But early humans  were at some 

T h e Sh a r ed In t en t iona l it y H y pot h e sis 
5
point forced by ecological circumstances into more cooperative lifeways, and 
so their thinking became more directed toward fi guring out ways to coordinate 
with others to achieve joint goals or even collective group goals. And this 
changed everything.
Th ere  were two key evolutionary steps. Th e fi rst step, refl ecting the focus 
of social infrastructure theorists such as Mead and Wittgenstein, involved the 
creation of a novel type of small- scale collaboration in human foraging. Par-
ticipants in this collaborative foraging created socially shared joint goals and 
joint attention (common ground), which created the possibility of individual 
roles and perspectives within that ad hoc shared world or “form of life.” To 
coordinate these newly created roles and perspectives, individuals evolved 
a new type of cooperative communication based on the natural gestures of 
pointing and pantomiming: one partner directed the attention or imagina-
tion of the other perspectivally and/or symbolically about something “rele-
vant” to their joint activity, and then that partner made cooperative (recur-
sive) inferences about what was intended. To self- monitor this pro cess the 
communicator had to simulate ahead of time the recipient’s likely inferences. 
Because the collaboration and communication at this point  were between ad 
hoc pairs of individuals in the moment— based on purely second- personal 
social engagement between “I” and “you”— we may refer to all of this as joint 
intentionality. When put to use in thinking, joint intentionality comprises 
perspectival and symbolic repre sen ta tions, socially recursive inferences, and 
second- personal self- monitoring.
Th e second step, refl ecting the focus of culture theorists such as Vygotsky 
and Bakhtin, came as human populations began growing in size and com-
peting with one another. Th is competition meant that group life as a  whole 
became one big collaborative activity, creating a much larger and more per-
manent shared world, that is to say, a culture. Th e resulting group- mindedness 
among all members of the cultural group (including in- group strangers) was 
based on a new ability to construct common cultural ground via collectively 
known cultural conventions, norms, and institutions. As part of this pro cess, 
cooperative communication became conventionalized linguistic communi-
cation. In the context of cooperative argumentation in group decision mak-
ing, linguistic conventions could be used to justify and make explicit one’s 
reasons for an assertion within the framework of the group’s norms of ratio-
nality. Th is meant that individuals now could reason “objectively” from the 
group’s agent- neutral point of view (“from nowhere”). Because the collaboration 

6 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
and communication at this point  were conventional, institutional, and nor-
mative, we may refer to all of this as collective intentionality. When put to use 
in thinking, collective intentionality comprises not just symbolic and perspec-
tival repre sen ta tions but conventional and “objective” repre sen ta tions; not 
just recursive inferences but self- refl ective and reasoned inferences; and not just 
second- personal self- monitoring but normative self- governance based on the 
culture’s norms of rationality.
Importantly, this evolutionary scenario does not mean that humans today 
are hardwired to think in these new ways. A modern child raised on a desert 
island would not automatically construct fully human pro cesses of thinking 
on its own. Quite the contrary. Children are born with adaptations for collabo-
rating and communicating and learning from others in par tic u lar ways— 
evolution selects for adaptive actions. But it is only in actually exercising these 
skills in social interaction with others during ontogeny that children create 
new repre sen ta tional formats and new inferential reasoning possibilities as 
they internalize, in Vygotskian fashion, their coordinative interactions with 
others into thinking for the self. Th e result is a kind of cooperative cognition 
and thinking, not so much creating new skills as cooperativizing and collec-
tivizing those of great apes in general.
And so let us tell a story, a natural history, of how human thinking came 
to be, beginning with our great ape ancestors, proceeding through some early 
humans who collaborated and communicated in species- unique ways, and end-
ing with modern humans and their fundamentally cultural and linguistic ways 
of being.

2
Individual Intentionality
Understanding consists in imagining the fact.
—ludwig wittgenstein, The Big Typescript
Cognitive pro cesses are a product of natural selection, but they are not its tar-
get. Indeed, natural selection cannot even “see” cognition; it can only “see” the 
eff ects of cognition in or ga niz ing and regulating overt actions (Piaget, 1971). In 
evolution, being smart counts for nothing if it does not lead to acting smart.
Th e two classic theories of animal behavior, behaviorism and ethology, both 
focused on overt actions, but they somehow forgot the cognition. Classical 
ethology had little or no interest in animal cognition, and classical behavior-
ism was downright hostile to the idea. Although contemporary instantiations of 
ethology and behaviorism take some account of cognitive pro cesses, they pro-
vide no systematic theoretical accounts. Nor are any other modern approaches 
to the evolution of cognition suffi  cient for current purposes.
And so to begin this account of the evolutionary emergence of uniquely 
human thinking, we must fi rst formulate, in broad outline, a theory of the 
evolution of cognition more generally. We may then begin our natural history 
proper by using this theoretical framework to characterize pro cesses of cogni-
tion and thinking in modern- day great apes, as representative of humans’ 
evolutionary starting point before they separated from other primates some 
six million years ago.
Evolution of Cognition
All organisms possess some refl exive reactions that are or ga nized linearly as 
stimulus- response linkages. Behaviorists think that all behavior is or ga nized 
in this way, though in complex organisms the linkages may be learned and 
become associated with others in various ways. Th e alternative is to recognize 
that complex organisms also possess some adaptive specializations that are 

8 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
or ga nized circularly, as feedback control systems, with built- in goal states and 
action possibilities. Starting from this foundation, cognition evolves not from 
a complexifying of stimulus- response linkages but, rather, from the individ-
ual organism gaining (1) powers of fl exible decision-making and behavioral 
control in its various adaptive specializations, and (2) capacities for cognitively 
representing and making inferences from the casual and intentional relations 
structuring relevant events.
Adaptive specializations are or ga nized as self- regulating systems, as are 
many physiological pro cesses such as the homeostatic regulation of blood 
sugar and body temperature in mammals. Th ese specializations go beyond 
refl exes in their capacity to produce adaptive behavior in a much wider range 
of circumstances, and indeed, they may be quite complex, for example, spi-
ders spinning webs. Th ere is no way that a spider can spin a web using only 
stimulus-response linkages. Th e process is too dynamic and dependent on 
local context. Instead, the spider must have goal states that it is motivated to 
bring about, and the ability to perceive and act so as to bring them about in a 
self-regulated manner. But adaptive specializations are still not cognitive (or 
only weakly cognitive) because they are unknowing and infl exible by defi nition: 
perceived situations and behavioral possibilities for goal attainment are mostly 
connected in an infl exible manner. Th e individual organism does not have the 
kind of causal or intentional understanding of the situation that would enable it 
to deal fl exibly with “novel” situations. Natural selection has designed these 
adaptive specializations to work invariantly in “the same” situations as those 
encountered in the past, and so cleverness from the individual is not needed.
Cognition and thinking enter the picture when organisms live in less pre-
dictable worlds and natural selection crafts cognitive and decision making 
pro cesses that empower the individual to recognize novel situations and to 
deal fl exibly, on its own, with unpredictable exigencies. What enables eff ec-
tive handling of a novel situation is some understanding of the causal and/or 
intentional relations involved, which then suggests an appropriate and poten-
tially novel behavioral response. For example, a chimpanzee might recognize 
that the only tool available to her in a given situation demands, based on the 
physical causality involved, manipulations she has never before performed 
toward this goal. A cognitively competent organism, then, operates as a con-
trol system with reference values or goals, capacities for attending to situations 
causally or intentionally “relevant” to these reference values or goals, and 
capacities for choosing actions that lead to the fulfi llment of these reference 
values or goals (given the causal and/or intentional structure of the situation). 

Indi v idua l In ten t iona l it y 
9
Th is description in control system terms is basically identical to the classic 
belief- desire model of rational action in philosophy: a goal or desire coupled 
with an epistemic connection to the world (e.g., a belief based on an under-
standing of the causal or intentional structure of the situation) creates an 
intention to act in a par tic u lar way.1
We will refer to this fl exible, individually self- regulated, cognitive way of 
doing things as individual intentionality. Within this self- regulation model 
of individual intentionality, we may then say that thinking occurs when an 
organism attempts, on some par tic u lar occasion, to solve a problem, and so to 
meet its goal not by behaving overtly but, rather, by imagining what would 
happen if it tried diff erent actions in a situation— or if diff erent external forces 
entered the situation— before actually acting. Th is imagining is nothing more 
or less than the “off - line” simulation of potential perceptual experiences. To 
be able to think before acting in this way, then, the organism must possess the 
three prerequisites outlined above: (1) the ability to cognitively represent experi-
ences to oneself “off -line,” (2) the ability to simulate or make inferences trans-
forming these repre sen ta tions causally, intentionally, and/or logically, and (3) 
the ability to self- monitor and evaluate how these simulated experiences might 
lead to specifi c behavioral outcomes— and so to make a thoughtful behavioral 
decision. Th e success or failure of a par tic u lar behavioral decision exposes the 
underlying pro cesses of repre sen ta tion, simulation, and self- monitoring—indi-
rectly, as it  were— to the unrelenting sieve of natural selection.
Cognitive Repre sen ta tion
Cognitive repre sen ta tion in a self- regulating, intentional system may be char-
acterized both in terms of its content and in terms of its format. In terms of 
content, the claim  here is that both the organism’s internal goals and its ex-
ternally directed attention (NB: not just perception but attention) have as 
content not punctate stimuli or sense data, but rather  whole situations. Goals, 
values, and other reference values (pro- attitudes) are cognitive repre sen ta-
tions of situations that the organism is motivated to bring about or maintain. 
Although we sometimes speak of an object or location as someone’s goal, this 
is really only a shorthand way of speaking; the goal is the situation of having 
the object or reaching the location. Th e phi los o pher Davidson (2001) writes, 
“Wants and desires are directed to propositional contents. What one wants 
is . . .  that one has the apple in hand. . . .  Similarly . . .  someone who intends 
to go to the opera intends to make it the case that he is at the opera” (p. 126). 

10 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
In this same manner, modern decision theory often speaks of the desire or 
preference that a par tic u lar state of aff airs be realized.
If goals and values are represented as desired situations, then what the or-
ganism must attend to in its perceived environment is situations relevant to 
those goals and values. Desired situations and attended- to environmental situ-
ations are thus perforce in the same perceptually based, fact- like repre sen ta-
tional format, which enables their cognitive comparison. Of course, complex 
organisms also perceive less complex things, such as objects, properties, and 
events— and can attend to them for specifi c purposes— but in the current 
analysis they always do so as components of situations relevant to behavioral 
decision making.
To illustrate the point, let us suppose that the image in Figure 2.1 is what 
a chimpanzee sees as she approaches a tree while foraging.
Figure 2.1  What a chimpanzee sees

Indi v idua l In ten t iona l it y 
11
Th e chimpanzee perceives the scene in the same basic way that we would; 
our visual systems are similar enough that we see the same basic objects and 
their spatial relationships. But what situations does the chimpanzee attend 
to? Although she could potentially focus her attention on any of the poten-
tially infi nite situations that this image presents, at the current moment she 
must make a foraging decision, and so she attends to the situations or “facts” 
relevant to this behavioral decision, to wit (as described in En glish):
• that many bananas are in the tree
• that the bananas are ripe
• that no competitor chimpanzees are already in the tree
• that the bananas are reachable by climbing
• that no predators are nearby
• that escaping quickly from this tree will be diffi  cult
•  etc.,  etc.
For a foraging chimpanzee with the goal of obtaining food, given all of its 
perceptual and behavioral capacities and its knowledge of the local ecol ogy, 
all of these are relevant situations for deciding what to do— all present in a 
single visual image and, of course, nonverbally. (NB: Even the absence of 
something expected, such as food not in its usual location, may be a relevant 
situation.)
Relevance is one of those occasion- sensitive judgments that cannot be 
given a general defi nition. But in broad strokes, organisms attend to situations 
as either (1) opportunities or (2) obstacles to the pursuit and maintenance of 
their goals and values (or as information relevant to predicting possible future 
opportunities or obstacles). Diff erent species have diff erent ways of life, of 
course, which means that they perceive or attend to diff erent situations (and 
components of situations). Th us, for a leopard, the situation of bananas in a 
tree would not represent an opportunity to eat, but the presence of a chim-
panzee would. For the chimpanzee, in contrast, the leopard’s presence now 
presents an obstacle to its value of avoiding predators, and so it should look 
for a situation providing opportunities for escape, such as a tree to climb with-
out low- hanging limbs— given its knowledge that leopards cannot climb such 
trees and its familiarity with its own tree- climbing prowess. If we now throw 
into the mix a worm resting on the banana’s surface, the relevant situations 
for the three diff erent species— the obstacles and opportunities for their re-
spective goals— would overlap even less, if at all. Relevant situations are thus 

12 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
determined jointly by the organism’s goals and values, its perceptual abili-
ties and knowledge, and its behavioral capacities, that is to say, by its overall 
functioning as a self- regulating system. Identifying situations relevant for 
a behavioral decision thus involves an organism’s  whole way of life (von 
Uexküll, 1921).2
In terms of repre sen ta tional format, the key is that to make creative infer-
ences that go beyond par tic u lar experiences, the organism must represent its 
experiences as types, that is to say, in some generalized, schematized, or abstract 
form. One plausible hypothesis is a kind of exemplar model in which the indi-
vidual in some sense “saves” the par tic u lar situations and components to 
which it has attended (many models of knowledge repre sen ta tion have atten-
tion as the gateway). Th ere is then generalization or abstraction across these in 
a pro cess that we might call schematization. (Langacker’s [1987] meta phor is of 
a stack of transparencies, each depicting a single situation or entity, and sche-
matization is the pro cess of looking down through them for overlap.) We 
might think of the result of this pro cess of schematization as cognitive models 
of various types of situations and entities, for example, categories of objects, 
schemas of events, and models of situations. Recognizing a situation or entity 
as a token of a known type— as an exemplar of a cognitive category, schema, 
or model— enables novel inferences about the token appropriate to the type.
Categories, schemas, and models as cognitive types are nothing more or less 
than imagistic or iconic schematizations of the organism’s (or, in some cases, its 
species’) previous experience (Barsalou, 1999, 2008). As such, they do not suff er 
from the indeterminacy of interpretation that some theorists attribute to iconic 
repre sen ta tions considered as mental pictures, that is, the indeterminacy of 
whether this image is of a banana, a fruit, an object, and so forth (Crane, 2003). 
Th ey do not because they are composed of individual experiences in which the 
organism was attending to a relevant (already “interpreted”) situation. Th us, 
the organism “interprets,” or understands, par tic u lar situations and entities in 
the context of its goals as it assimilates them to known (cognitively represented) 
types: “Th is is another one of those.”
Simulation and Inference
Th inking in an organism with individual intentionality involves simulations 
or inferences that connect cognitive repre sen ta tions of situations and their 
components in various ways. First are those instrumental inferences that occur 

Indi v idua l In ten t iona l it y 
13
in behavioral decision making of the “what would happen if . . .” variety. For 
example, in a concrete problem- solving situation— such as a rock preventing 
the movement of a stick beneath it— some organisms might go through the 
kind of inferential simulation that Piaget (1952) called “mental trial and error”: 
the organism imagines a potential action and its consequences. Th us, a chim-
panzee might simulate imaginatively what would happen if she forcefully 
tugged at the stick, without actually doing it. If she judged that this would be 
futile given the size and weight of the rock, she might decide to push the rock 
aside before pulling the stick.
Also possible are inferences about causal and intentional relations created by 
outside forces and how these might aff ect the attainment of goals and values. 
For example, a chimpanzee might see a monkey feeding in the banana tree 
and infer that there are no leopards nearby (because if there  were, the mon-
key would be fl eeing). Or, upon fi nding a fi g on the ground, a bonobo might 
infer that it will have a sweet taste and that there is a seed inside— based on a 
categorization of the encountered fi g as “another one of those” and the natural 
inference that this one will have the same properties as others in the category. 
Or an orangutan might recognize a conspecifi c climbing a tree as an intentional 
event of a par tic u lar type, and then infer something about goals and attention 
as intentional causes and so predict the climber’s impending actions. Schema-
tizing over such experiences (again aided, perhaps, by the experience of the 
species), individuals may potentially build cognitive models of general patterns 
of causality and intentionality.
Th e best way to conceptualize such pro cesses is in terms of off - line, image- 
based simulations, including novel combinations of represented events and 
entities that the individual herself has never before directly experienced as 
such, for example, an ape imagining what the monkey would do if a leopard 
entered the scene (see Barsalou, 1999, 2008, for relevant data on humans; Bar-
salou, 2005, extends the analysis to nonhuman primates). Importantly, the 
combinatorial pro cesses themselves will include causal and intentional rela-
tions that connect diff erent real and imagined situations, and also “logical” 
operations such as the conditional, “negation,” exclusion, and the like. Th ese 
logical operations are not themselves imagistic cognitive repre sen ta tions 
but, rather, cognitive procedures (enactive, in Bruner’s terms, or operative, in 
Piaget’s terms) that the organism accesses only through actual use. Concrete 
examples of how this works will be given when we look more closely at great 
ape thinking in the section that follows.

14 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
Behavioral Self- Monitoring
To think eff ectively, an organism with individual intentionality must be able 
to observe the outcome of its actions in a given situation and evaluate whether 
they match the desired goal state or outcome. Engaging in some such pro-
cesses of behavioral self- monitoring and evaluation is what enables learning 
from experience over time.
A cognitive version of such self- monitoring enables the agent, as noted above, 
to inferentially simulate a potential action- outcome sequence ahead of time 
and observe it— as if it  were an actual action- outcome sequence— and then 
evaluate the imagined outcome. Th is pro cess creates more thoughtful decision 
making through the precorrection of errors. (Dennett [1995] calls it Pop-
perian learning because failure means that my hypothesis “dies,” not me.) For 
example, consider a squirrel on one tree branch gearing up to jump to another. 
One can see the muscles preparing, but in some cases the squirrel decides the 
leap is too far and so, after feigning some jumps, climbs down the trunk and 
then back up the other branch. Th e most straightforward description of this 
event is that the squirrel is observing and evaluating a simulation of what it 
would experience if it leaped; for example, it would experience missing the 
branch and falling— a decidedly negative outcome. Th e squirrel must then 
use that simulation to make a decision about whether to actually leap. Okrent 
(2007) holds that imagining the possible outcomes of diff erent behavioral 
choices ahead of time, and then evaluating and deciding for the one with the 
best imagined outcome, is the essence of instrumental rationality.
Th is kind of self- monitoring, requiring what some call executive function-
ing, is cognitive because the individual, in some sense, observes not just its ac-
tions and their results in the environment but also its own internal simulations. 
It is also possible for the organism to assess things like the information it has 
available for making a decision in order to predict the likelihood that it will 
make a successful choice (before it actually chooses). Humans even use the 
imagined evaluations of other persons— or the imagined comprehension of 
others in the case of communication— to evaluate potential behavioral deci-
sions. What ever its specifi c form, internal self- monitoring of some kind is 
critical to anything we would want to call thinking, as it constitutes, in some 
sense, the individual knowing what it is doing.

Indi v idua l In ten t iona l it y 
15
Th inking like an Ape
We begin our natural history of the evolutionary emergence of uniquely 
human thinking with a focus on the last common ancestor of humans and 
other extant primates. Our best living models for this creature are humans’ 
closest primate relatives, the nonhuman great apes (hereafter, great apes), com-
prising chimpanzees, bonobos, gorillas, and orangutans— especially chim-
panzees and bonobos, who diverged from humans most recently, around 6 
million years ago. When cognitive abilities are similar among the four species 
of great ape but diff erent in humans, we presume that the apes have con-
served their skills from the last common ancestor (or before) whereas humans 
have evolved something new.
Our characterizations of the cognitive skills of this last common ancestor 
will derive from empirical research with great apes, cast in the theoretical frame-
work of individual intentionality just elaborated: behavioral self- regulation 
involving cognitive models and instrumental inferences, along with some form 
of behavioral self- monitoring. Because humans share with other apes such a 
recent evolutionary history— along with the same basic bodies, sense organs, 
emotions, and brain organization— in the absence of evidence our default 
assumption will be evolutionary continuity (de Waal, 1999). Th at is to say, 
when great apes behave identically with humans, especially in carefully con-
trolled experiments, we will assume continuity in the underlying cognitive 
pro cesses involved. Th e onus of explanation is thus on those who posit evolu-
tionary discontinuities, a challenge we embrace in later chapters.
Great Apes Th ink about the Physical World
Pro cesses of great ape cognition and thinking may be usefully divided into those 
concerning the physical world, structured by an understanding of physical 
causality, and those concerning the social world, structured by an under-
standing of agentive causality, or intentionality. Primate cognition of the 
physical world evolved mainly in the context of foraging for food (see Toma-
sello and Call, 1997, for this theoretical claim and supporting evidence); this 
is thus its “proper function” (in Millikan’s [1987] sense). In order to procure 
their daily sustenance, primates (as mammals in general) evolved the proximate 
goals, repre sen ta tions, and inferences for (1) fi nding food (requiring skills of 
spatial navigation and object tracking), (2) recognizing and categorizing food 

16 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
(requiring skills of feature recognition and categorization), (3) quantifying 
food (requiring skills of quantifi cation), and (4) procuring or extracting food 
(requiring skills of causal understanding). In these most basic skills of physical 
cognition, all nonhuman primates would seem to be generally similar (Toma-
sello and Call, 1997; Schmitt et al., 2012).
What great apes are especially skillful at, compared with other primates, is 
tool use— which one might characterize as not just understanding causes but 
actually manipulating them. Other primates are mostly not skilled tool users 
at all, and when they are it is typically in only one fairly narrow context (e.g., 
Fragaszy et al., 2004). In contrast, all four species of great ape are highly skilled 
at using a variety of tools quite fl exibly, including using two tools in succession 
in a task, using one tool to rake in another (which is then needed to procure 
food), and so forth (Herrmann et al., 2008). Classically, tool use is thought to 
require the individual to assess the causal eff ect of its tool manipulations on the 
goal object or event (Piaget, 1952), and so the fl exibility and alacrity with which 
great apes succeed in using novel tools suggest that they have one or more 
general cognitive models of causality guiding their use of these novel tools.
Great apes’ skills with manipulating causal relations via tools may be 
combined in interesting ways with pro cesses of cognitive repre sen ta tion and 
inference. For example, Marín Manrique et al. (2010) presented chimpanzees 
with a food extraction problem that they had never before seen. Its solution 
required a tool with par tic u lar properties (e.g., it had to be rigid and of a 
certain length). Th e trick was that the potential tools they could use  were in 
a diff erent room, out of sight of the problem. To solve this task, individuals 
had to fi rst comprehend the causal structure of the novel problem, and then 
keep that structure cognitively represented while approaching and choosing a 
tool in the other room. Many individuals did this, often from the fi rst trial 
onward, suggesting that they assimilated the novel problem to a known cog-
nitive model having a certain causal structure, which they then kept with 
them as they entered the adjoining room. Th ey then simulated the use of at 
least some of the available tools and the likely outcome in each case through 
the medium of this cognitive model— before actually choosing a tool overtly. 
In the study of Mulcahy and Call (2006), bonobos even saved a tool for 
future use, presumably imagining the future situation in which they would 
need it.
Th e simulations or inferences involved  here have logical structure. Th is is 
not the structure of formal logic but, rather, a structure based on causal infer-
ences. Th e idea is that causal inferences have a basic if- then logic and so lead 

Indi v idua l In ten t iona l it y 
17
to “necessary” conclusions: if A happens, then B happens (because A caused B). 
Bermudez (2003) calls inferences of this type protoconditional because the 
necessity is not a formal one but a causal one. In the experiment of Marín 
Manrique et al. (2010), as an ape simulates using the diff erent tools, she infers 
“if a tool with property A is used, then B must happen.” One thus gets a kind 
of proto-modus ponens by then actually using the tool with property A in the 
expectation that B will indeed happen as a causal result (if A happens, then B 
happens; A happens; therefore B will happen). Th is is basically a forward- 
facing inference, from premise or cause to conclusion or eff ect.
In another set of recent experiments, we can see backward- facing infer-
ences, that is, from eff ect to cause. Call (2004) showed chimpanzees a piece of 
food, which was then hidden in one of two cups (they did not know which). 
Th en, depending on condition, the experimenter shook one of the cups. Th e 
relevant background knowledge for success in this experiment is as follows: 
(1) the food is in one of the two cups (learned in pretraining), and (2) shaking 
the cup with food will result in noise, whereas shaking the cup without food 
will result in silence (causal knowledge brought to the experiment). Th e two 
conditions are shown in Figure 2.2, using iconic repre sen ta tions to depict some-
thing of the way the apes understand the situation.
(Th e iconic diagrams modeling great ape cognitive repre sen ta tions in 
 Figure 2.2 are not uninterpreted pictures but symbols in a theoretical meta-
language that mean what we agree that they mean. So they are meant to de-
pict the ape’s interpreted experience when she has seen the cup as a cup and 
the noise as coming from the cup, and so on. Importantly, these diagrams are 
created within the confi nes of a restrictive theory of the possibilities of great 
ape cognition. Following Tomasello’s (1992) depictions for one- year- old hu-
man children, we make the diagrams out of concrete spatial- temporal- causal 
elements that may be posited to be a part of the apes’ cognitive abilities based 
on empirical research. Th en, the logical structure— based on the protocondi-
tional and protonegation— is posited to be necessary to explain apes’ actions 
in specifi c experimental situations. Th e logical operations are depicted in 
En glish words, since the ape does not have perception- based repre sen ta tions 
of them, but only procedural competence with them.)
In condition 1, an experimenter shook the cup with food. In this case the 
chimpanzee observed a noise being made and had to infer backward in 
the causal chain to what might have caused it, specifi cally, the food hitting the 
inside of the cup. Th is is a kind of abduction (not logically valid, but an “in-
ference to best explanation”). Th at is, (1) the shaking cup is making noise; 

Figure 2.2  Ape inferences in fi nding hidden food (Call, 2004)

Indi v idua l In ten t iona l it y 
19
(2)  if the food  were inside the shaking cup, then it would make noise; 
(3) therefore, the food is inside the cup. In condition 2, the experimenter 
shook the empty cup. In this case the chimpanzee observed only silence and 
had to infer backward in the causal chain to why that might be, specifi cally, 
that there was no food in the cup. Th is is a kind of proto-modus tollens: (1) the 
shaking cup is silent; (2) if the food  were inside the shaking cup, then it 
would make noise; (3) therefore, the food must not be in the cup (the shaken 
cup must be empty). Th e chimpanzees made this inference, but they also made 
an additional one. Th ey combined their understanding of the causality of 
noise making in this context with their preexisting knowledge that the food 
was in one of the two cups to locate the food in the other, nonshaken cup (if 
the food is not in this one, then it must be in that one; see bottom row in 
Figure 2.2). Th is inferential paradigm thus involves the kind of exclusion in-
ference characteristic of a disjunctive syllogism.
Negation is a very complex cognitive operation, and one could easily 
object to the use of negation in these proposed accounts of great ape logical 
inferences. But Bermudez (2003) makes a novel theoretical proposal about some 
possible evolutionary precursors to formal negation that make these accounts 
much more plausible. Th e proposal is to think of a kind of protonegation 
as simply comprising exclusionary opposites on a scale (contraries), such as 
presence- absence, noise- silence, safety- danger, success- failure, and available- 
not available. If we assume that great apes understand polar opposites such as 
these as indeed mutually exclusive— for example, if something is absent, it 
cannot be present, or if it makes noise it cannot be silent— then this could be 
a much simpler basis for the negation operation. All of the current descrip-
tions assume protonegation of this type.
When taken together, the conditional (if- then) and negation operations 
structure all of the most basic paradigms of human logical reasoning. Th e 
claim is thus that great apes can solve complex and novel physical problems 
by assimilating key aspects of the problem situation to already known cognitive 
models with causal structure and then use those models to simulate or make 
inferences about what has happened previously or what might happen next— 
employing both a kind of protoconditional and a kind of protonegation in 
both forward- facing and backward- facing paradigms. Our general conclusion 
is thus that since the great apes in these studies are using cognitive models con-
taining general principles of causality, and they are also simulating or making 
inferences in various kinds of protological paradigms, with various kinds of 

20 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
self- monitoring along the way, what the great apes are doing in these studies 
is thinking.
Great Apes Th ink about the Social World
Primate cognition of the social world evolved mainly in the context of compe-
tition within the social group for food, mates, and other valued resources (see 
Tomasello and Call, 1997); competitive social interactions are thus its “proper 
function.” In order to outcompete groupmates, individual primates evolved 
the proximate goals, repre sen ta tions, and inferences for (1) recognizing indi-
viduals in their social group and forming dominance and affi  liative relation-
ships with them and (2) recognizing third parties’ social relationships with 
one another, such as parent or dominant or friend, and taking these into 
account. Th ese abilities enable individuals to better predict the behavior of 
others in a complex “social fi eld” (Kummer, 1972). Despite important species 
diff erences of social structure and interaction, in these most basic of skills of 
social cognition all primates would appear to be generally similar (e.g., see 
Tomasello and Call, 1997; see also the chapters in Mitani et al., 2012).
Beyond recognizing social relationships based on observed social interac-
tions, great apes also understand that other individuals have goal- situations 
that they are pursuing and perceived- situations in the environment that they 
are attending to— so that together the individual’s goals and perceptions (and 
her assessment of any relevant obstacles and opportunities for goal achieve-
ment in the environment) determine her behavior. Th is means that nonhu-
man great apes not only are intentional agents themselves but also understand 
others as intentional agents (i.e., as possessing individual intentionality; Call 
and Tomasello, 2008).
Consider the following experiment. Hare et al. (2000) had a dominant 
and subordinate chimpanzee compete for food in a novel situation in which 
one piece of food was out in the open and one piece of food was on the sub-
ordinate’s side of a barrier where only she could see it. In this situation the 
subordinate knew that the dominant could see the piece out in the open and 
so he would go for it as soon as he could, whereas he could not see the other 
piece (i.e., he saw the barrier only) and so would not go for that piece (i.e., he 
would stay on his side). When her door was opened (slightly before the domi-
nant’s), the subordinate chose to pursue the food on her side of the barrier; 
she knew what the dominant could and could not see. In an important varia-

Indi v idua l In ten t iona l it y 
21
tion, subordinate chimpanzees avoided going for food that a dominant could 
not see now but had seen hidden in one of the locations some moments be-
fore; they knew that he knew where the hidden food was located (Hare et al., 
2001; Kaminski et al., 2008). In still another variation, in a back- and- forth 
foraging game, chimpanzees knew that if their competitor chose fi rst, he would 
choose a board that was lying slanted on the table (as if something  were under-
neath) rather than a fl at board (under which there could be nothing); they 
knew what kind of inference he would make in the situation (Schmelz et al., 
2011). Chimpanzees thus know that others see things, know things, and 
make inferences about things.
But beyond exploiting their understanding of what others do and do not 
experience and how this aff ects their behavior, great apes sometimes even at-
tempt to manipulate what others experience. In a series of experiments, Hare 
et al. (2006) and Melis et al. (2006a) had chimpanzees compete with a human 
(sitting in a booth- like apparatus) for two pieces of food. In some conditions, 
the human could see the ape equally well if it approached either piece of food; 
in these cases, the apes had no preference for either piece. But in the key con-
dition, a barrier was in place so that the apes could approach one piece of food 
without being seen— which is exactly what they did. Th ey even did this when 
they themselves could not see the human in either case. (Th ey had to choose 
to reach for food from behind a barrier in both cases, but through a clear tun-
nel in one case and an opaque one in the other.) Perhaps most impressive, the 
same individuals also preferentially chose to pursue food that they could ap-
proach silently— so that the distracted human competitor did not know they 
 were doing so— as opposed to food that required them to make noise en 
route. Th is generalization to a completely diff erent perceptual modality speaks 
to the power and fl exibility of the cognitive models and inferences involved.
Importantly analogous to the domain of physical cognition, the chimpan-
zees in these studies not only made productive inferences based on a general 
understanding of intentionality but also connected their inferences into para-
digms to both predict and even manipulate what others would do (see Figure 
2.3). Th e background knowledge required in all of these food competition 
experiments is that a competitor will go for a piece of food if and only if (1) he 
has the goal of having it and (2) he perceives its location (e.g., at location A). 
Th e protoconditional inferences in the Hare et al. (2000) experiment follow 
straightforwardly from this: if the dominant wants the banana and sees it at 
location A, then she will go to location A. Also analogous to the domain of 

22 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
physical cognition, in these food competition experiments chimpanzees make 
use of protonegation. Th us, conceptualizing protonegation in terms of polar 
opposites, in the Hare et al. experiments chimpanzees know that if the com-
petitor sees only the barrier, then she will stay in place (i.e., if she does not see 
the food she will not go for it; see Figure 2.3, condition C). In the Melis et al. 
(2006a) concealment experiments, chimpanzees also understand that if the 
human sees only the barrier, or hears only silence, she will remain sitting 
peacefully (i.e., if she does not see or hear my approach, she will not reach for 
the food), and so they approach such that the other sees only barrier or hears 
only silence.3
And so, just as in the domain of physical cognition, in the domain of 
social cognition what great apes are especially good at is manipulation. Th is 
special facility for social manipulation also comes out clearly in their gestural 
communication. (Th eir vocal communication is mostly hardwired, and simi-
lar to that of monkeys, so not of great interest for the question of thinking.) All 
four species of great apes communicate with others gesturally in ways that 
nonape primates mostly do not. Th ey ritualize from their social interactions 
with others certain intention- movements—such as raising the arm to begin 
play- hitting as an instigation to play— that they then use fl exibly to manipulate 
the behavior of others. Perhaps even more important, they also use a number 
of attention- getting gestures— for example, slapping the ground to get others 
to look at them— in order to manipulate the attention of others. And they 
even adopt with humans something like a ritualized reaching or pointing 
gesture, one that is not in their natural repertoire with conspecifi cs, demon-
strating especially clearly the fl exibility of great apes’ skills for manipulating 
the behavior and attention of others (see Call and Tomasello, 2007, for a re-
view). Great apes’ gestural communication thus shows again their special 
skills at manipulating causes.
A fi nal experiment demonstrates something like backward- facing infer-
ences in the social domain. Buttelmann et al. (2007) tested six human- raised 
chimpanzees in the so- called rational imitation paradigm of Gergely et al. 
(2002). Individuals saw a human perform an unusual action on an apparatus 
to produce an interesting result. Th e idea was that in one condition the physi-
cal constraints of the situation forced the human to use an unusual action; 
for example, he had to turn on a light with his head because his hands  were 
occupied holding a blanket, or he had to activate a music box with his foot 
because his hands  were occupied with a stack of books. When given their 
turn with the apparatus and no constraints in eff ect, the chimpanzees dis-

Figure 2.3  Ape inferences in competing for food (Hare et al., 2000)

24 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
counted the unusual action and used their hands as they normally would. 
However, when they saw the human use the unusual action when there was 
no physical constraint dictating this— he just turned on the light with his 
head for no discernable reason— they quite often copied the unusual behavior 
themselves. Th e most natural interpretation of this diff erentiated pattern of 
response would be that the apes employed a kind of proto-modus tollens, from 
eff ect to cause with protonegation, similar to that in the Call (2004) shaking 
cups study: (1) he is not using his hands; (2) if he had a free choice, he would 
be using his hands; (3) therefore he must not have a free choice (in one case 
for obvious reasons; in the other not).
Th ese studies demonstrate that great apes can solve complex social problems, 
just as they solve complex physical problems, by assimilating key aspects of the 
problem situation to a cognitive model— which in this case embodies a gen-
eral understanding of intentionality— and then using that model to simulate or 
make inferences about what has happened or what might happen next. Great 
apes employ both a kind of protoconditional and a kind of protonegation—
in both forward- facing and backward- facing modes— in the context of 
protological paradigms of social inferring. Our conclusion is thus that in the 
social domain, as well as the physical domain, what the great apes in these 
studies are doing is thinking.
Cognitive Self- Monitoring
Great apes in these studies are clearly not just automatically fl ipping through 
behavioral alternatives and reacting to a goal match; they monitor, and so in 
some sense know, what they are doing in order to make more eff ective deci-
sions. On the level of action (recall the hesitant squirrel), recent studies of 
great apes have shown that they can (1) delay taking a smaller reward so as to 
get a larger reward later, (2) inhibit a previously successful response in favor 
of a new one demanded by a changed situation, (3) make themselves do some-
thing unpleasant for a desired reward at the end, (4) persist through failures, and 
(5) concentrate through distractions. Specifi cally, in a comprehensive com-
parative study, chimpanzees’ ability to do these things was roughly comparable 
to that of three- year- old human children (Herrmann et al., submitted). Th ese 
are all skills referred to variously as impulse control, attentional control, emo-
tion regulation, and executive function— though we prefer to use the terms 
behavioral self- monitoring, for more action- based self- regulation, and cognitive 

Indi v idua l In ten t iona l it y 
25
self- monitoring (and in some cases, self- refl ection), for more cognitive versions 
of the pro cess.
Evidence that apes go beyond just behavioral self- monitoring and engage 
in cognitive self- monitoring comes from several experimental paradigms 
used with nonhuman primates (sometimes referred to as studies of metacog-
nition). In the best- known paradigm, employed mostly with rhesus monkeys, 
individuals must make a discrimination (or remember something) to get a 
highly desirable reward. But if they fail to make the discrimination or re-
member correctly, they get nothing and must take a time- out before the next 
trial. Th e trick is that on each trial individuals have the possibility of opting 
out of the problem and going for a lesser reward with 100% certainty, which 
also means no time- out before the next trial. Many individuals thus develop 
a strategy of opting out of only those discrimination or memory tasks that 
they are especially likely to fail (Hampton, 2001). Th ey seem to know that they 
do not know or that they do not remember.
In another paradigm involving chimpanzees, individuals either do or do 
not see the pro cess of food being hidden in one of several tubes. When they 
see the hiding pro cess, they choose a tube directly. When they do not see the 
hiding pro cess, they go to some trouble to look into the tubes and discover 
where the food is located before choosing. Again, the apes seem to know when 
they do not know, or at least when they are uncertain, and seek to do some-
thing about it. Interesting for interpretation, variables that aff ect this pro cess 
in apes are the same as those that aff ect it in humans: they are more likely to 
seek extra information if the reward is highly valuable or if it has been longer 
since they acquired the information (Call, 2010). Th us, as they are assessing 
situations and deciding what to do, if apes self- monitor and fi nd that they 
have insuffi  cient information to make an eff ective decision, this prompts them 
to gather information as prerequisite to their choice.
Th e interpretation of these experiments is not totally straightforward, but 
the apes clearly are doing some kind of self- monitoring and evaluation, just as 
they do in all of their intelligent decision making. What is new  here is that they 
seem to be monitoring not just imagined actions and their imagined results, or 
imagined causes and their imagined outcomes, but also their own knowledge 
or memory— which they then use to make inferences about their likelihood of 
behavioral success. Great apes and other primates thus have some kind of ac-
cess, at least in instrumental contexts, to their own psychological states. And 
even if this is not the fully human version of self- refl ection (as we will argue 

26 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
later that it is not— because it lacks a social/perspectival dimension), this ability 
adds further to the conclusion that great apes are skillful with all three of the 
key components— abstract cognitive repre sen ta tions (models), protological in-
ferential paradigms, and psychological self- monitoring and evaluation— that 
constitute what can only be called thinking.
Cognition for Competition
Many theorists continue to maintain a kind of Cartesian picture of the dif-
ference between humans and other animals: humans have rational thinking, 
whereas other animals, including great apes, are simply stimulus- response 
machines with no ratiocination what ever. Th is view is held not only by behav-
iorist psychologists but also by many otherwise very thoughtful phi los o phers 
and cognitive scientists. But it is a factually incorrect view, in our opinion, 
and one that is grounded in an erroneous theory of the evolution of cognition 
(Darwin, 1859, 1871). Cognitive evolution does not proceed from simple asso-
ciations to complex cognition, but rather from infl exible adaptive specializa-
tions of varying complexities to fl exible, individually self- regulated intentional 
actions underlain by cognitive repre sen ta tions, inferences, and self- monitoring. 
Th e empirical research reviewed  here (there is much more) clearly demon-
strates, in our view, that great apes operate in this fl exible, intelligent, self- 
regulated way—and they do so without language, culture, or any other forms 
of human-like sociality.
Th is is not to say, of course, that the interpretations of the studies cited 
here are the only possible ones. Th us, some theorists would contest the con-
clusion that great apes understand causal and intentional relations (e.g., Povi-
nelli, 2000; Penn et al., 2008), proposing instead that they operate with some 
kind of noncognitive “behavioral rules.” Others would propose that instead 
of causal, intentional, and logical inferences, great apes— just like rats and 
pigeons— operate only with associations (e.g., Heyes, 2005). And skepticism 
about cognitive self- monitoring in apes and other animals abounds (e.g., 
Carruthers and Ritchie, 2012). But behavioral rules (whose nature and origins 
have never been specifi ed) cannot account for the fl exibility with which great 
apes solve novel physical and social problems (Tomasello and Call, 2006), 
and association learning takes many dozens of trials to be eff ective, and this 
does not accord with the speed and fl exibility with which great apes solve 
novel physical and social problems in experiments (Call, 2006). Although the 

Indi v idua l In ten t iona l it y 
27
empirical data are less clear- cut in the case of cognitive self- monitoring, Call’s 
(2010) fi nding that the same factors aff ect the pro cess in humans and great 
apes is highly suggestive that— in concrete situations, at least— the apes are 
genuinely self- monitoring the decision- making pro cess.
In any case, our natural history of human thinking begins with this pos-
sibly somewhat generous account of great ape thinking. To summarize, think-
ing comprises three key components, and great apes operate in cognitively 
sophisticated ways with each of them.
Schematic Cognitive Representations
First is the ability to work with some kind of abstract cognitive repre sen ta-
tions, to which the individual assimilates par tic u lar experiences. According 
to the best available evidence, great ape abstract cognitive representations— 
categories, schemas, and models— have three main features.
Imagistic.  Great ape cognitive repre sen ta tions are iconic or imagistic in 
format, based on pro cesses of perceptual and motor experience (for the pro-
posal that human infant cognitive repre sen ta tions are also iconic in format, see 
Carey, 2009; Mandler, 2012). It is diffi  cult to imagine what  else they could be.
Schematic.  Great apes’ imagistic repre sen ta tions are generalized or ab-
stract: schematizations of the organism’s perceptual experience of exemplar 
situations or entities (i.e., they have type- token structure). Importantly, iconic 
or imagistic schematizations are not uninterpreted “pictures” but, rather, 
amalgams of already understood (made relevant to existing cognitive models) 
exemplars. Th us, when Wittgenstein is searching for what could underlie our 
most basic pro cesses of understanding, he speculates “imagining the fact”: 
representing to ourselves the more general and already meaningful cognitive 
model to which the current situation is best assimilated as exemplar. Such cog -
nitive models are already meaningful because a schematized and generalized 
understanding of causality and/or intentionality is part and parcel of many of 
apes’ cognitive models of situations.
Situational content.  Great ape cognitive repre sen ta tions have as 
their most basic content situations, specifi cally, situations that are relevant to 
the individual’s goals and values (e.g., that food is present or that a predator 

28 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
is absent). Obviously, repre sen ta tional content structured as  whole situations 
prefi gures, in some important sense, human propositional content (though it 
is not there yet). Apes can also, for specifi c purposes, schematize their experi-
ence with components of situations such as objects and events (e.g., a category 
of “fi gs”).
Causal and Intentional Inferences
Th e second key component is the ability to make inferences from cognitive 
repre sen ta tions. Great apes use their cognitive categories, schemas, and models 
productively to imagine or infer nonactual situations. Th ese inferences have 
two main characteristics.
Causally and intentionally logical.  Great ape inferences are 
based on their general understanding of causality and intentionality; they 
are causal and intentional inferences. But importantly, they still have logical 
structure— they form paradigms— based on facility with a kind of protocon-
ditional (inferences between cause and eff ect in both the physical world and 
social world) and a kind of protonegation (based on mutually exclusive polar 
opposite or contraries, such as presence- absence). Apes thus possess proto- 
versions of everything from modus tollens to disjunctive syllogism.
Productive.  Great apes’ cognitive repre sen ta tions and inferences are pro-
ductive or generative in that they can support off - line simulations in which 
the subject infers or imagines nonactual situations (Barsalou, 1999, 2008). 
Nevertheless, some theorists might still doubt whether great ape thinking 
meets Evans’s (1982) generality constraint. In this linguistically inspired ac-
count, each potential subject of a thought (or sentence) may be combined with 
multiple predicates, and each potential predicate may have multiple subjects. 
To do this nonlinguistically, an individual must be able not only to relate rep-
resented situations to one another but also to extract their components and 
use them in productive combinations to imagine novel situations.
With respect to a par tic u lar agent doing multiple things, great apes know, 
for example, that this leopard does lots of things like climb trees, eat chimpan-
zees, drink water, and so on. Indirect evidence for this is the fact that great 
apes pass object permanence tasks in which they must understand that the 
same object is going diff erent places and doing diff erent things (Call, 2001), 

Indi v idua l In ten t iona l it y 
29
and also that they can predict what par tic u lar individuals will do in situations 
based on their past experience with them (Hare et al., 2001). Further evidence 
is the fact that in experiments great apes individuate objects, so that if they 
see a par tic u lar object go behind a screen, they expect to fi nd that par tic u lar 
object there, and if they see it leave and another replace it, they do not expect 
to fi nd it there anymore— and if two identical objects go behind the screen 
they expect to fi nd two objects. Th ey are not “feature placing,” but rather, they 
are tracking the self- same object or objects engaging in diff erent actions across 
time (Mendes et al., 2008).
With respect to diff erent individuals doing “the same thing,” great apes 
know such individual things as leopards climb trees, snakes climb trees, 
monkeys climb trees— each in their own way.  Here things are a bit more 
diffi  cult evidentially because there are few if any nonverbal methods for inves-
tigating event schemas like climbing. But one hypothesis is that a nonverbal 
way of establishing an event schema is imitation. Th at is, an individual who 
imitates another knows at the very least that a demonstrator is doing X and 
then they themselves can do X—“the same thing”— as well (and perhaps 
other actors also). Although imitation is not their frontline strategy for social 
learning, great apes (at least those raised by humans) are nevertheless capable 
of reproducing the actions of others with some facility in some contexts (e.g., 
Tomasello et al., 1993; Custance et al., 1995; Buttelmann et al., 2007). Some 
apes also know when another individual is imitating them, again suggesting 
at least a rudimentary understanding of self- other equivalence (Haun and 
Call, 2008). But imitation involves just self and other. Since apes understand 
the goals of all agents, an alternative hypothesis might be that apes schematize 
acts of climbing based not on movements but on an understanding that the 
actor has the goal of getting up the tree— and that goal (not actions per se) 
provides the basis for an event schema across all individuals, with or without 
the self.
Great ape cognition thus goes at least some way toward meeting the gen-
erality constraint, although productivity may be limited. Th e claim would be 
that great ape productive thinking enables an individual to imagine, for ex-
ample, that if I chase this novel animal it might climb a tree, even if I have 
never before seen this animal climb a tree. On the other hand, it may be that 
an ape could not imagine something contrary to fact (i.e., contrary to its causal 
understanding), such as a leopard fl ying, as humans are able to do with the 
aid of external communicative vehicles. Apes’ sense of self- other equivalence 

30 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
may also be limited by the fact that imitation takes place sequentially, whereas 
much better for establishing self- other equivalence are situations in which 
the equivalence manifest in a single social interaction simultaneously (e.g., 
role reversal in the collaborative activities of humans).
Behavioral Self-Monitoring
Th e third key component of great ape thinking is the ability to self- monitor the 
decision- making pro cess. Many animal species self- monitor, and even antici-
pate, the outcomes of their behavioral decisions in the world. But great apes 
do more than this simple behavioral self- monitoring.
Cognitive self- monitoring.  Great apes (and some other primate 
species) also know when they have insuffi  cient information to make an in-
formed behavioral decision. As noted, monitoring outcomes is a basic pre-
requisite of a self- regulating system, and monitoring simulated outcomes is 
a characteristic of a cognitive system capable of thinking before it chooses. 
But monitoring the elements of the decision- making pro cess itself— one’s 
memory or powers of discrimination or the environmental information 
available— is a still further enrichment. Self- monitoring of this type implies 
some kind of “executive” oversight of the decision- making pro cess itself.
And so we may imagine a common ancestor to humans and other great apes. 
Its daily life was like that of extant nonhuman apes: most waking hours spent 
in small bands foraging individually for fruit and other vegetation, with 
various kinds of social interactions, mostly competitive, interspersed. Our 
hypothesis is that this creature— and also probably australopithecines for the 
ensuing 4 million years of the human lineage— was individually intentional 
and instrumentally rational. It cognitively represented its physical and social 
experience categorically and schematically, and it made all kinds of produc-
tive and hypothetical inferences and chains of inferences about its experience 
as well— all with a modicum of cognitive self- monitoring. And so, the crucial 
point is that well before the emergence of uniquely human sociality, much 
less culture, language, and institutions, the foundations for human thinking 
 were securely in place in humans’ last common ancestor with other apes.

Indi v idua l In ten t iona l it y 
31
Individual intentionality is what is needed for creatures whose social inter-
actions are mainly competitive, that is, creatures that act on their own or, at 
most, join in with others to choose sides when there is a good fi ght going 
on. In virtually all theoretical accounts, great apes’ skills of social cognition 
evolved mainly for competing with others in the social group: being better or 
quicker than groupmates at anticipating what potential competitors might do, 
based on a kind of Machiavellian intelligence (Whiten and Byrne, 1988). And 
indeed a number of recent studies have found that great apes utilize their most 
sophisticated skills of social cognition in contexts involving competition or 
exploitation of others as opposed to contexts involving cooperation or com-
munication with others (e.g., Hare and Tomasello, 2004; see Hare, 2001). 
Great apes are all about cognition for competition.
Human beings, in contrast, are all about (or mostly about) cooperation. 
Human social life is much more cooperatively or ga nized than that of other 
primates, and so, in the current hypothesis, it was these more complex forms 
of cooperative sociality that acted as the selective pressures that transformed 
great ape individual intentionality and thinking into human shared inten-
tionality and thinking. Our task now is thus to provide a plausible evolution-
ary narrative that can take us from humans’ great ape ancestors all the way to 
modern humans. Th e shared intentionality hypothesis is that this story comprises 
a two- step evolutionary sequence: joint intentionality followed by collective 
intentionality. At both of these transitions the overall pro cess was, at a very 
general level, the same: a change of ecol ogy led to some new forms of collabo-
ration, which required for their coordination some new forms of cooperative 
communication, and then together these created the possibility that, dur-
ing ontogeny, individuals could construct through their social interactions 
with others some new forms of cognitive repre sen ta tion, inference, and self- 
monitoring for use in their thinking.

3
Joint Intentionality
Conceptual contents are essentially expressively perspectival.
—robert brandom, Making It Explicit
In their magisterial survey of life on planet earth, Maynard- Smith and Szath-
mary (1995) identifi ed eight major transitions in the evolution of complexity 
of living things, for example, the emergence of chromosomes, the emergence 
of multicellular organisms, and the emergence of sexual reproduction. Astound-
ingly, in each case the transition was characterized by the same two fundamen-
tal pro cesses. First, in each case there emerged some new form of cooperation 
with interdependence: “Entities that  were capable of in de pen dent replication 
before the transition can replicate only as part of a larger  whole after it” 
(p. 6). Second, in each case this new form of cooperation was made possible by 
a concomitant new form of communication: “change in the method of infor-
mation transmission” (p. 6).
Th e most recent major transition, in this account, was the emergence of hu-
man cooperative societies (cultures) structured by linguistic communication. 
Our ultimate goal is to give an account of this emergence, with a specifi c focus 
on the new forms of thinking that it engendered. But we cannot go directly 
from competitive great ape societies to cooperative human cultures in one giant 
leap. Th e problem is that there are thousands of human cultures, and each of 
them has conventionalized, normativized, and institutionalized a par tic u lar set 
of cultural and communicative practices. But anything may be conventional-
ized, normativized, or institutionalized; these pro cesses are totally blind to 
content. And so to get to cooperatively or ga nized human cultures, there must 
have been in existence in all human populations already— as raw material for 
these group- level pro cesses of cultural creation— many and varied kinds of co-
operative social interactions of a type not possessed by other great apes. Assum-
ing again that great apes are representative of humans’ last common ancestor 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
33
with other primates, then, it would seem that we need an intermediate step 
in our natural history. We need some early humans who  were not yet living in 
cultures and using conventional languages, but who  were nevertheless much 
more cooperatively inclined than the last common ancestor.
And so we will posit in this chapter, as an initial step, some early humans 
who created new forms of social coordination, perhaps in the context of col-
laborative foraging. Early humans’ new form of collaborative activity was 
unique among primates because it was structured by joint goals and joint 
attention into a kind of second- personal joint intentionality of the moment, a 
“we” intentionality with a par tic u lar other, within which each participant 
had an individual role and an individual perspective. Early humans’ new 
form of cooperative communication— the natural gestures of pointing and 
pantomiming— enabled them to coordinate their roles and perspectives on 
external situations with a collaborative partner toward various kinds of joint 
objectives. Th e result was that these early humans “cooperativized” great ape 
individual intentionality into human joint intentionality involving new forms 
of cognitive repre sen ta tion (perspectival, symbolic), inference (socially recur-
sive), and self- monitoring (regulating one’s actions from the perspective of a 
cooperative partner), which, when put to use in solving concrete problems of 
social coordination, constituted a radically new form of thinking.
So let us look, fi rst, at the new form of collaboration that emerged with 
early humans, then at the new form of cooperative communication that early 
humans used to coordinate their collaborative activities, and then at the result-
ing new form of thinking that all of this collaborating and communicating 
required as substrate.
A New Form of Collaboration
Cooperation by itself does not create complex cognitive skills— witness the 
complex cooperation of the cognitively simple eusocial insects and the coop-
erative child care and food sharing of the not- so- cognitively- complex New 
World monkeys, marmosets and tamarins. Th e case of humans is unique, from 
a cognitive point of view, because the common ancestor to humans and other 
great apes had already evolved highly sophisticated skills of social cognition 
and social manipulation for purposes of competition (as well as highly so-
phisticated skills of physical cognition for purposes of manipulating causality 
in the context of tool use)— as documented in chapter 2.

34 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
Th en, out of the elements of these sophisticated pro cesses of individual 
intentionality built for competition— understanding how the par tic u lar goals 
and perceptions of others generate par tic u lar actions— humans evolved, in 
addition, even more sophisticated pro cesses of joint intentionality, involving 
joint goals and joint attention, built for social coordination. And social coor-
dination creates unique challenges for cognition and thinking. Whereas the 
social dilemmas of game theory (e.g., prisoner’s dilemma) occur when inter-
actants’ goals and preferences mostly confl ict, coordination dilemmas occur 
when individuals’ goals and preferences mostly align. Th e challenge in these 
cases is not to resolve some confl ict, but rather to fi nd a way, perhaps by think-
ing, to coordinate with a social partner to a common goal.
Th e Cooperative Turn
Chimpanzees and other great apes live in highly competitive societies in 
which individuals vie with others for valued resources all day every day, and, 
as argued above, this is what shapes their cognition most profoundly. But 
chimpanzees and other apes also engage regularly in a number of important 
activities that are cooperative in a very general sense. For example, chimpan-
zees travel together and forage in small groups, “allies” support one another 
in fi ghts within the group, and males engage in group defense against out-
siders and predators (Muller and Mitani, 2005). Th ese group behaviors for 
traveling, fi ghting, and defending the group are also common in many other 
mammalian species.
To illustrate the diff erence with human cooperation, let us focus on for-
aging, clearly one of the fundamental activities of all primates. Th e typical 
scene for chimpanzees, for instance, is that a small traveling party comes 
upon a fruit tree. Each individual then scrambles up on its own, fi nds a good 
place to procure some fruit on its own, grabs one or several pieces on its own, 
and then separates from the others by a few meters to eat. In one recent 
experiment, when given a choice of acquiring food cooperatively or alone, 
chimpanzees preferred to acquire it alone (Bullinger et al., 2011a). In another 
recent experiment, when given a choice of eating together with a groupmate 
or eating alone, both chimpanzees and bonobos preferred to eat alone (Bull-
inger et al., 2013). If there is ever a confl ict over a piece of food, the dominant 
individual (depending, ultimately, on fi ghting ability) gets it. In general, the 
acquisition of food via individual scrambling and contests of dominance 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
35
characterizes virtually all of the foraging activities of the four great ape 
species.
Th e main exception to this general great ape pattern is chimpanzees’ group 
hunting of monkeys— systematically observed only in chimpanzees, and only 
in some groups (Boesch and Boesch, 1989; Watts and Mitani 2002). What 
happens prototypically is that a small party of male chimpanzees spies a red 
colobus monkey somewhat separated from its group, which they then proceed 
to surround and capture. Normally, one individual begins the chase, and 
others scramble to the monkey’s possible escape routes, including the ground. 
One individual actually captures the monkey, and he ends up getting the 
most and best meat. But because he cannot dominate the carcass on his own, 
all participants (and many bystanders) usually get at least some meat, depend-
ing on their dominance and the vigor with which they beg and harass the 
captor (Gilby, 2006).
Th e social and cognitive pro cesses involved in chimpanzee group hunting 
could potentially be complex, but they could also be fairly simple. Th e “rich” 
reading is a human- like reading, namely, that chimpanzees have the joint goal 
of capturing the monkey together and that they coordinate their individual 
roles in doing so (Boesch, 2005). But more likely, in our opinion, is a “leaner” 
interpretation (Tomasello et al., 2005). In this interpretation, each individual 
is attempting to capture the monkey on its own (since captors get the most 
meat), and they take into account the behavior, and perhaps intentions, of 
the other chimpanzees as these aff ect their chances of capture. Adding some 
complexity, individuals prefer that one of the other hunters capture the mon-
key (in which case they will get a small amount of meat through begging and 
harassing) to the possibility of the monkey escaping totally (in which case 
they get no meat). In this view, chimpanzees in a group hunt are engaged in 
a kind of co- action in which each individual is pursuing his own individ-
ual goal of capturing the monkey (what Tuomela, 2007 calls “group behavior 
in I-mode”). In general, it is not clear that chimpanzees’ group hunting of 
monkeys is so diff erent cognitively from the group hunting of other social 
mammals, such as lions and wolves.
In stark contrast, human foraging is collaborative in much more fundamen-
tal ways. In modern forager societies, individuals produce the vast majority 
of their daily sustenance collaboratively with others, either immediately 
through collaborative eff orts or via procurers who bring the food back to some 
central location for sharing (Hill and Hurtado, 1996; Hill, 2002; Alvard, 

36 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
2012).1 Human foragers also collaborate in many other domains of activity in 
ways that great apes do not. Tomasello (2011) systematically compares the 
social structures of great ape and human forager societies and concludes that 
in every domain, whereas apes behave mostly individualistically, humans 
behave mostly cooperatively. For example, humans but not apes engage in 
cooperative childcare in which all adults do all kinds of things to support 
developing children (so- called cooperative breeding; Hrdy, 2009). Humans 
but not apes engage in cooperative communication in which they provide 
one another with information that they judge to be useful for the recipient. 
Humans but not apes actively teach one another things helpfully, again for 
the benefi t of the recipient. Humans but not apes make group decisions about 
group- relevant matters. And humans but not apes create and maintain all 
kinds of formal social structures such as social norms and institutions and 
even conventional languages (using agreed- upon means of expression). In all, 
cooperation is simply a defi ning feature of human societies in a way that it is 
not for the societies of the other great apes.2
Exactly when and how this cooperative turn took place in human evolu-
tion are not critical for current purposes. But for what ever it is worth, Tomasello 
et al. (2012) hypothesize that it began happening in an initial, preparatory 
step soon after the emergence of the genus Homo, around 2 million years ago. 
During this period there was a great expansion of terrestrial monkeys, like 
baboons, that might have outcompeted humans for their normal fruits and 
other vegetation. Humans then needed a new foraging niche. A beginning 
might have been scavenging meat, which would probably have required a 
kind of co ali tion of individuals to frighten off  the animals that made the ini-
tial kill. But at some point there began more active collaborative hunting of 
large game and gathering of plant foods, typically in a mutualistic stag hunt– 
type situation in which both individuals could expect to benefi t from the 
collaboration— if they could somehow manage to coordinate their eff orts. Th is 
is the collaborative creature we are imagining  here, and for the most clarity 
we may focus on its culmination in hominins of about 400,000 years ago: 
the common ancestor to Neanderthals and modern humans, the ever myste-
rious Homo heidelbergensis. Paleoanthropological evidence suggests that this 
was the fi rst hominin to engage systematically in the collaborative hunting of 
large game, using weapons that almost certainly would not enable a single 
individual to be successful on its own, and sometimes bringing prey back to 
a home base (Stiner et al., 2009). Th is is also a time when brain size and 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
37
population size  were both expanding rapidly (Gowlett et al., 2012). We may 
hypothesize that these collaborative foragers lived as more or less loose bands 
comprising a kind of pool of potential collaborators.
But more important than when is how. In the hypothesis of Tomasello et 
al. (2012), obligate collaborative foraging became an evolutionarily stable strat-
egy for early humans because of two interrelated pro cesses: interdependence 
and social selection. Th e fi rst and most basic point is that humans began a 
lifestyle in which individuals could not procure their daily sustenance alone 
but instead  were interdependent with others in their foraging activities— 
which meant that individuals needed to develop the skills and motivations to 
forage collaboratively or  else starve. Th ere was thus direct and immediate se-
lective pressure for skills and motivations for joint collaborative activity ( joint 
intentionality). Th e second point is that as a natural outcome of this interde-
pendence, individuals began to make evaluative judgments about others as 
potential collaborative partners: they began to be socially selective, since choos-
ing a poor partner meant less food. Cheaters and laggards  were thus selected 
against, and bullies lost their power to bully. Importantly, this now meant that 
early human individuals had to worry, in a way that other great apes do not, 
both about evaluating others and about how others  were evaluating them as 
potential collaborative partners (i.e., a concern for self- image).
Th e situation these early humans faced is perhaps best modeled by the stag 
hunt scenario from game theory (Skyrms, 2004). Two individuals have easy 
access to low- payoff  “hares” (e.g., low- calorie vegetation), and then there ap-
pears on the horizon a high- payoff  but diffi  cult- to- obtain “stag” (e.g., large 
game) that can be acquired only if individuals abandon their hares and col-
laborate. Th eir motivations thus align, because it is in both their interests to 
work together. Th e dilemma is thus purely cognitive: since collaboration is 
mandatory and I am risking my hare, I want to go for the stag only if you do, 
too. But you only want to go for the stag if I do, too. How do we coordinate 
this potential standoff  ? Th ere are some cognitively simple ways out of the 
dilemma (see Bullinger et al., 2011b, for the leader- follower strategy that chim-
panzees use), but they always involve one individual incurring disproportion-
ate risk, and so they are unstable in certain circumstances. For example, if there 
 were very few hares, so that each was highly valued, and hunting stags was 
only rarely successful, then the cost/benefi t analysis would require that each 
individual attempt to make certain that their potential partner was also going 
for the stag before they relinquished their hare.

38 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
In the original analyses of Schelling (1960) and Lewis (1969), coordinating 
in this way required some kind of mutual knowledge or recursive mind reading: 
for me to go, I have to expect you to expect me to expect you. . . .  For both 
Schelling and Lewis, this pro cess, while remarkable, did not cause alarm. Later 
commentators problematized the analysis, pointing out that an infi nite back- 
and- forth of us thinking about one another’s thinking could not actually be 
happening, or no decision could ever be made. Clark (1996) proposed, as a more 
realistic account, that humans simply recognize the “common ground” they 
have with others (e.g., we both know that we both want to go for the stag) and 
that this is suffi  cient for making joint decisions toward joint goals. Tomasello 
(2008) suggested that something like common ground is how people actually 
operate, but when perturbations occur they often explain them by reasoning 
that “he thinks that I think he thinks . . .” (typically only a few iterations deep), 
suggesting an underlying recursive structure. Our position is thus that human 
individuals are attuned to the common ground they share with others, and 
this does not always involve recursive mind reading, but still, if necessary, they 
may decompose their common ground a few recursive layers deep to ask such 
things as what he thinks I think about his thinking.
In any case, we may imagine that individuals who  were attuned to their 
common ground with others, and who could engage in some level of recur-
sive mind reading, had a huge advantage in strategically deciding when to 
stay with their hare and when to join with others to go for the more profi table 
stag. And those who could develop more sophisticated forms of cooperative 
communication would have had an even larger advantage. And so, the fi rst 
step in our natural history of uniquely human thinking is the cognitive 
mechanisms of joint intentionality that evolved to coordinate humans’ ear-
liest species- unique forms of small- scale collaboration and, later, cooperative 
communication.
Joint Goals and Individual Roles
We may characterize the formation of a joint goal (or joint intention) in more 
detail as follows (see Bratman, 1992). For you and me to form a joint goal (or 
joint intention) to pursue a stag together, (1) I must have the goal to capture 
the stag together with you; (2) you must have the goal to capture the stag to-
gether with me; and, critically, (3) we must have mutual knowledge, or com-
mon ground, that we both know each other’s goal.

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
39
It is important  here that each of our goals is not just to capture the stag 
but, rather, to capture it together with the other. Each of us wanting sepa-
rately to capture the stag (even if this was mutual knowledge; see Searle, 1995) 
would constitute two individuals hunting in parallel, not jointly. It is also 
important that we have mutual knowledge of one another’s goal, that is, that 
our respective goals are part of our common conceptual ground. Each of us 
may want to capture the stag together with the other, but if neither of us 
knows that this is the case, we very likely will not succeed in coordinating 
(for all of the reasons outlined by Lewis and Schelling, among others). Th us, 
joint intentionality is operative both in the action content of each of our goals 
or intentions— that we act together— and in our mutual knowledge, or com-
mon ground, that we both know that we both intend this.
Young children begin engaging with others in ways that suggest some form 
of joint goal from around fourteen to eigh teen months of age, when they are 
still mostly prelinguistic. Th us, Warneken et al. (2006, 2007) had infants of 
this age engage in a joint activity with an adult, such as obtaining a toy by 
each operating one side of an apparatus. Th en, the adult simply stopped play-
ing her role for no reason. Th e children  were not happy about this and did 
various things to attempt to reengage their partner. (Th ey did not do this if 
her stopping was for a good reason; e.g., she had to attend to something  else 
[Warneken et al., 2012].) Interesting, when this same situation was arranged 
for human- raised chimpanzees, they simply ignored the recalcitrant partner 
and tried to fi nd ways to achieve the goal on their own. Although infants’ 
reengagement attempts do not suggest necessarily that they have a fully adult- 
like joint goal in common ground with their partner, at the very least they 
refl ect an expectation that, barring obstacles, my partner in this joint activity 
is committed enough to reengage after a stoppage— an expectation that, ap-
parently, chimpanzees in similar activities do not have.
By the time they are three years of age, children provide much more con-
vincing evidence for joint goals because they themselves display commitment 
to the joint activity in the face of distractions and temptations. For example, 
Hamann et al. (2012) had pairs of three- year- old children work together to 
bring rewards to the top of a step- like structure. Th e problem was that for 
one child the reward, surprisingly, became available midway through. Never-
theless, when this happened, the lucky child delayed consumption of her own 
reward and persevered until the other got hers (i.e., more than they helped 
the partner in a similar situation in which they  were acting individually, 

40 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
without collaboration). Such commitment to the partner suggests that the chil-
dren constructed a joint goal at the beginning that “we” get the prizes together, 
and they made what ever adjustments  were necessary to realize that joint goal. 
Again, great apes do not behave in this same way. In a similar experiment with 
chimpanzees, Greenberg et al. (2010) found no signs of a human- like com-
mitment to follow through on the joint action until both partners received 
their reward. (And Hamann et al. [2011] found that at the end of the collab-
orative activity, three- year- old children, but not chimpanzees,  were committed 
to dividing the spoils equally among participants as well.)
Importantly, when children of this same age have it in their common ground 
with a collaborative partner that each is counting on the other to come through 
(we are interdependent), they both feel obligated to the other (see Gilbert, 
1989, 1990). Th us, Gräfenhain et al. (2009) had preschoolers explicitly agree 
to play a game with one adult, and then another adult attempted to lure them 
away to a more exciting game. Although two- year- old children mostly just 
bolted to the new game straightaway, from three years of age children paused 
before departing and “took leave,” either verbally or by handing the adult the 
tool they had been using together. Th e children seemed to recognize that joint 
goals involve joint commitments, the breaking of which requires some kind 
of ac know ledg ment or even apology. No study of this type has ever been 
done with chimpanzees, but there are no published reports of one chimpanzee 
taking leave from, making excuses to, or apologizing to another for breaking 
a joint commitment.
In addition to joint goals, collaborative activities also demand a division of 
labor and so individual roles. Bratman (1992) specifi es that in joint coopera-
tive activities individuals must “mesh” their subplans together toward the 
joint goal, and even help one another in their individual roles as necessary. In 
the Hamann et al. (2012) study cited above, young children stopped to help 
their partner as needed. Th is demonstrates that the partners are attending to 
one another and their respective subgoals, and perhaps even attending to the 
partner attending to them, and so forth. Indeed, other studies have found 
that young children, but not chimpanzees, learn important new things about 
the partner’s role as they are collaborating. For example, Carpenter et al. (2005) 
found that after young children played one role in a collaboration, they could 
quickly switch to the other, whereas chimpanzees could not do this (Toma-
sello and Carpenter, 2005). Most important, Fletcher et al. (2012) found that 
three- year- olds who had fi rst participated in a collaboration playing role 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
41
A then knew much better how to play role B than if they had not previously 
collaborated, whereas this was not true of chimpanzees.
Young children are thus beginning to understand that the roles in a collab-
orative activity are in most cases interchangeable among individuals, which 
suggests a “bird’s eye view” of the collaboration in which the various roles, 
including one’s own, are all conceptualized in the same repre sen ta tional for-
mat (see Hobson, 2004). Th is species- unique understanding may support an 
especially deep appreciation of self- other equivalence, as individuals imagine 
diff erent subjects/agents engaging in similar or complementary activities 
 simultaneously in the same collaborative activity. As suggested in our discus-
sion of great ape thinking, the understanding of self- other equivalence is a 
key component enabling various kinds of combinatorial fl exibility in think-
ing. (It also sets the stage for a full- blooded appreciation of agent neutrality 
encompassing not just self and other but all possible agents, which is a key 
feature of cultural norms and institutions, and “objectivity” more generally, 
as we shall see in chapter 4.)
Preschool children are not good models for the early humans we are pic-
turing  here because they are modern humans and they are bathed in culture 
and language from the beginning. But from soon after their fi rst birthdays, 
and continuing up to their third birthdays, they come to engage with others 
in collaborative activities that have a species- unique structure and that do 
not, in any obvious way, depend on cultural conventions or language. Th ese 
young children coordinate a joint goal, commit themselves to that joint goal 
until all get their reward, expect others to be similarly committed to the joint 
goal, divide the common spoils of a collaboration equally, take leave when 
breaking a commitment, understand their own and the partner’s role in the 
joint activity, and even help the partner in her role when necessary. When 
tested in highly similar circumstances, humans’ nearest primate relatives, great 
apes, do not show any of these capacities for collaborative activities underlain 
by joint intentionality. Importantly, young children also seem to have a species- 
unique motivation for collaboration, as shown in recent studies in which 
children and chimpanzees had to choose between pulling in a certain amount 
of food collaboratively with a conspecifi c or pulling in that same amount of 
food (or more or less) in a solo activity. Children very much preferred the col-
laborative option, whereas chimpanzees went wherever there was most food 
regardless of opportunities for collaboration (Rekers et al., 2011; Bullinger 
et al., 2011a).

42 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
box 1.  Relational Th inking
Penn et al. (2008) have proposed that what makes human cognition 
diff erent from that of other primates is thinking in terms of relations, 
especially higher- order relations. To support their claim, they review 
evidence from many diff erent domains of cognition: judgments of relational 
similarity, judgments of same- diff erence, analogy, transitive inference, 
hierarchical relations, and so forth.
Th eir evaluation of the literature is decidedly one- sided, as they dismiss 
fi ndings suggesting that nonhuman primates have some skills of this type. 
For example, nonhuman primates clearly understand some relations 
(consistently choosing the larger of two objects, for example, despite 
absolute size), and some individuals make same- diff erence judgments again 
based on relational not absolute characteristics (Th ompson et al., 1997). 
Some chimpanzees also do something like analogical inference in using a 
scale model (Kuhlmeier et al., 1999), and many primates make transitive 
inferences (see Tomasello and Call, 1997, for a review).
But at the same time, it is true that humans are particularly skilled at 
relational thinking (Gentner, 2003). One hypothesis that might explain the 
data is that there are actually two kinds of relational thinking. One 
concerns the concrete physical world of space and quantities, in which we 
may compare various characteristics or magnitudes such as bigger- smaller, 
brighter- darker, fewer- greater, higher- lower, and even same- diff erent. 
Nonhuman primates have some skills with these kinds of physical relations 
and relational magnitudes. What they may not comprehend at all— though 
there are few direct tests— is a second type of relation. Specifi cally, they 
may not comprehend functional categories of things defi ned by their role in 
some larger activity. Humans are exceptional in creating categories such as 
pet, husband, pedestrian, referee, customer, guest, tenant, and so forth, 
what Markman and Stillwell (2001) call “role- based categories.” Th ey are 
relational not in the sense of comparing two physical entities but, rather, in 
assessing the relation between an entity and some larger event or pro cess in 
which it plays a role.
Th e obvious hypothesis  here is that this second type of relational thinking 
comes from humans’ unique understanding of collaborative activities with 
joint goals and individual roles (perhaps later generalized to all kinds of 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
43
Th e main point for now is that early humans seem to have created a new 
cognitive model. Collaborating toward a joint goal created a new kind of so-
cial engagement, a joint intentionality in which “we” are hunting antelopes 
together (or what ever), with each partner playing her own interdependent 
role. Th is dual- level structure of simultaneous sharedness and individuality—
a joint goal but with individual roles— is a uniquely human form of second- 
personal joint engagement requiring species- unique cognitive skills and 
motivational propensities. It also has a number of perhaps surprising ramifi -
cations for many diff erent aspects of human cognition that go beyond our 
primary focus  here (see box 1 for one example).
Joint Attention and Individual Perspectives
Organisms attend to situations that are relevant to their goals. And so, when 
two humans act together jointly, they naturally attend together jointly to situ-
ations that are relevant to their joint goals. Said another way, as humans 
coordinate their actions, they also, to do this eff ectively, coordinate their 
social activities even if they are not collaborative per se). As humans 
constructed these kinds of activities, they  were creating more or less abstract 
“slots” or roles that anyone could play. Th ese abstract slots formed role- 
based categories, such as things that one uses to kill game (viz., weapons; 
Barsalou, 1983), as well as more abstract narrative categories such as 
protagonist, victim, avenger, and so on. A further speculation might be that 
these abstract slots at some point enabled humans to even put relational 
material in the slots; for example, a married couple can play a role in a 
cultural activity. Th is would be the basis for the kinds of higher- order 
relational thinking that Penn et al. (2008) emphasize as especially important 
in diff erentiating human thinking.
In any case, the proposal  here is that, at the very least, constructing the 
kinds of dual- level cognitive models needed to support collaborative 
activities enhanced, if not enabled, human engagement in much broader 
and more fl exible relational thinking involving roles in larger social realities, 
and possibly in higher- order relational thinking as well.

44 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
attention. Underlying this coordination is, once again, some notion of com-
mon ground, in which each individual— at least potentially— can attend to 
his partner’s attention, his partner’s attention to his attention, and so forth 
(Tomasello, 1995). Joint actions, joint goals, and joint attention are thus of a 
piece, and so they must have coevolved together.
Th e current proposal is that the phyloge ne tic origins of the ability to par-
ticipate with others in joint attention— the fi rst and most concrete way in 
which young children create common conceptual ground and so shared reali-
ties with others— lie in collaborative activities. Th is is what Tomasello (2008) 
calls the “top- down” version of joint attention because it is directed by joint 
goals. (Th e alternative is bottom- up joint attention, such as when a loud noise 
attracts both of our attention, and we both know it must have attracted the 
other’s attention as well.) Ontoge ne tically, young children begin to structure 
their joint actions with others via joint visual attention at around nine to 
twelve months of age, often called joint attentional activities. Th ese are such 
activities as giving and taking objects, rolling a ball back and forth, building 
a block tower together, putting away toys together, and “reading” books to-
gether. Despite specifi c attempts to identify and solicit such joint attentional 
activities with human- raised chimpanzees, Tomasello and Carpenter (2005) 
 were unable to fi nd any (nor are there any other reliable reports of joint atten-
tion in nonhuman primates).
Just as each partner in a joint collaborative activity has her own individual 
role, each partner in joint attentional engagement has her own individual 
perspective— and knows that the other has her own individual perspective as 
well. Th e crucial point, which will be foundational for all that follows, is that 
the notion of perspective assumes a single target of joint attention on which we 
have diff ering perspectives (Moll and Tomasello, 2007, in press). If you are 
looking out one window of the  house and I am looking out another in the 
opposite direction, we do not have diff erent perspectives— we are just seeing 
completely diff erent things. We can thus operate with the notion of individu-
ally distinct perspectives only if (1) we are both considering “the same” thing, 
and (2) we both know the other is attending to it diff erently. If I see some-
thing in one way, and then round the corner to see it in another, this does not 
give me two perspectives on the same thing, because I do not have multiple 
perspectives available to me simultaneously for comparison. But when two 
people are attending to the same thing simultaneously— and it is in their 
common ground that they are both doing so— then “space is created” (to use 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
45
Davidson’s [2001] meta phor) for an understanding of diff erent perspectives to 
arise.3
Young children begin showing an appreciation that others have perspectives 
that diff er from their own from soon after their fi rst birthdays, in conjunction 
with their earliest joint attentional activities. For example, in one experiment 
an adult and child played together jointly with three diff erent objects for a 
short time each (Tomasello and Haberl, 2003). Th en, while the adult was out of 
the room, the child and a research assistant played with a fourth object. After 
that the adult returned, looked at an array containing all four objects, and 
exclaimed excitedly “Wow! Cool! Look at that!” Under the assumption that 
people only get excited about new things, not old things, children as young as 
twelve months of age identifi ed which of the objects was the new one causing 
the adult’s excitement— even though they  were all equally old for her. Th e new 
one is the one we have not attended to together before.
Th is is what some researchers have called level 1 perspective taking, because 
it concerns only whether the other person does or does not see something, not 
how she sees it. In level 2 perspective taking, children understand that some-
one sees the same thing diff erently than they do. For example, Moll et al. (2013) 
found that three- year- old children understood which object an adult intended 
to indicate by calling it “blue,” even though the object did not appear blue to 
the child— only to the adult due to her looking through a color fi lter. Children 
could thus take the perspective of the other person when it diff ered from 
their own. However, these same children could not answer correctly when 
asked if they and the adult saw the object diff erently at the same time. Indeed, 
children struggle with several versions of such simultaneously confl icting 
perspectives on a jointly attended- to situation until they are four or fi ve years 
of age (Moll and Tomasello, in press). Th us, children before four or fi ve years 
have diffi  culty with dual naming tasks (“it” is simultaneously a horse and a 
pony), appearance- reality tasks (“it” is simultaneously a rock and a sponge; 
Moll and Tomasello, 2012), and false belief tasks (“it” is in the cabinet or in 
the box). Resolving the confl ict between perspectives that confront one an-
other on a jointly attended- to entity— especially when both purport to depict 
“reality”— takes some additional skills for dealing with an objective reality 
and how diff erent perspectives relate to it, which again will await the next 
step in our evolutionary story (and see note 6).
And so we have come to a tipping point. Based on their capacity to coor-
dinate actions and attention with others toward joint goals, early humans 

46 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
came to understand that diff erent individuals can have diff erent perspectives 
on one and the same situation or entity. In contrast, great apes (including the 
last common ancestor with humans) do not coordinate their actions and at-
tention with others in this same way, and so they do not understand the no-
tion of simultaneously diff erent perspectives on the same situation or entity 
at all. We thus encounter once again the dual- level structure of simultaneous 
jointness and individuality. Just as collaborative activities have the dual- level 
structure of joint goal and individual roles, joint attentional activities have 
the dual- level structure of joint attention and individual perspectives. Joint 
attention thus begin the pro cess by which human beings construct an inter-
subjective world with others— shared but with diff ering perspectives— which 
will also be fundamental to human cooperative communication. We may thus 
posit that joint attention in joint collaborative activity, as manifest even in 
very young children, was the most basic form of socially shared cognition in 
human evolution— characteristic already of early humans— and that this pri-
mal version of socially shared cognition spawned an equally primal version of 
perspectivally constructed cognitive repre sen ta tions.
Social Self- Monitoring
Early humans living as obligate collaborative foragers would have become 
more deeply social in still another way. Although skills of joint intentionality 
are necessary for human- like collaborative foraging, they are not suffi  cient. 
One also has to fi nd a good partner. Th is may not always be overly diffi  cult, 
as even chimpanzees, after some experience, learn which partners are good 
(i.e., lead to success) and which are not (Melis et al., 2006b). But in addition, 
in situations in which there is meaningful partner choice, one must be— or at 
least appear to be— a good collaborative partner oneself. To be an attractive 
partner for others, and so not be excluded from collaborative opportunities, 
one must not only have good collaborative skills, but also do one’s share of 
the work, help one’s partner when necessary, share the spoils at the end of the 
collaboration, and so forth.
And so early humans had to develop a concern for how other individuals 
in their group  were evaluating them as potential collaborative partners, and 
then regulate their actions so as to aff ect these external social judgments in 
positive ways— what we may call social self- monitoring. Other great apes do 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
47
not appear to engage in such social self- monitoring. Th us, when Engelmann 
et al. (2012) gave apes the opportunity to either share or steal food from a 
groupmate, their behavior was totally unaff ected by the presence or absence 
of other group members observing the pro cess. In contrast, in the same situ-
ations, young human children shared more with others and stole less from 
others when another child was watching.
Motivationally, a concern for social evaluation derives from the interde-
pendence of collaborative partners: my survival depends on how you judge 
me. Cognitively, a concern for social evaluation involves still another form of 
recursive thinking: I am concerned about how you are thinking about my 
intentional states. Social self- monitoring is thus the fi rst step in humans’ ten-
dency to regulate their behavior not just by its instrumental success, as apes 
do in their goal- directed activities, but also by the anticipated social evalua-
tions of important others. Because these concerns are about the evaluations 
of specifi c other individuals, we may think of them as second- personal phe-
nomena. Th ey thus represent an initial sense of social normativity— a con-
cern for what others think I should and should not be doing and thinking— 
and so a fi rst step toward the kind of normative self- governance, so as to fi t in 
with group expectations, that will characterize modern humans in the next 
step of our story (see chapter 4).
Summary: Second- Personal Social Engagement
Great apes have a multitude of social- cognitive skills for understanding the 
intentional actions of others, but they do not engage with them in any form 
of joint intentionality. Th us, great apes understand that others have goals, 
and they sometimes even help others attain their goals (Warneken and To-
masello, 2009), but they do not collaborate with others by means of a joint 
goal. Similarly, great apes understand that others see things and so can follow 
the gaze direction of others to see what they see (Call and Tomasello, 2005), 
but they do not engage with others in joint attention. And great apes make 
individual decisions that they self- monitor, but they do not make joint deci-
sions with others or monitor themselves via the social evaluations of others. 
What emerges for the fi rst time with early humans, in the current account, is 
a “we” intentionality in which two individuals engage with the intentional 
states of one another both jointly and recursively.

48 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
Th is new form of joint engagement is second- personal: an engagement of 
“I” and “you.” Second- personal engagement has two minimal characteristics: 
(1) the individual is directly participating in, not observing from outside, the 
social interaction; and (2) the interaction is with a specifi c other individual 
with whom there is a dyadic relationship, not with something more general 
like a group (if there are multiple persons present, there are many dyadic rela-
tionships but no sense of group). Th ere is less consensus about other possible 
features of second- personal engagement, but Darwall (2006) proposes, in addi-
tion, that (3) the essence of this kind of engagement is “mutual recognition” 
in which each partner gives the other, and expects from the other, a certain 
amount of respect as an equal individual— a fundamentally cooperative atti-
tude among partners.
And so, the evolutionary proposal is that early humans— perhaps Homo 
heidelbergensis some 400,000 years ago— evolved skills and motivations for 
joint intentionality that transformed great apes’ parallel group activities (e.g., 
you and I are each chasing the monkey in parallel) into truly joint collabora-
tive activities (e.g., we are chasing the monkey together, each with our own 
role). And they also transformed great apes’ parallel looking behavior (e.g., 
you and I are each looking at the banana) into true joint attention (e.g., we 
are looking at the banana together, each with our own perspective). But early 
humans  were not doing this in the manner of contemporary human beings, 
that is, as manifest in relatively permanent cultural conventions and institu-
tions. Rather, their earliest collaborative activities  were ad hoc collaborations 
for par tic u lar goals on a par tic u lar occasion with a par tic u lar person, with their 
joint attention similarly structured in this second- personal way. Th ere would 
thus be second- personal joint engagement with the partner, but when the 
collaboration was over the “we” intentionality would be over as well.
Th e cognitive model schematized from repeated experiences of this kind 
was thus a dual- level structure of simultaneous sharing and individuality while 
in direct social interaction with other par tic u lar partners, underlain and sup-
ported by some kind of common ground and recursive mind reading (see 
Figure 3.1). Th e cognitive model of this second- personal, dual- level social 
engagement laid the foundation for almost everything that was uniquely 
 human. It provided the joint intentionality infrastructure for uniquely human 
forms of cooperative communication involving intentions and inferences about 
perspectives— as we shall see in the section that follows— and, ultimately, it 
provided the foundation for the cultural conventions, norms, and institutions 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
49
that brought the human species into the modern human world— as we shall 
see in the next chapter.
A New Form of Cooperative Communication
Early humans coordinated their actions and attention based on common 
ground. But coordinating in more complex ways— for example, in planning 
our specifi c roles in a collaboration under various contingencies, or in planning 
a series of joint actions— required a new type of cooperative communication. 
Th e gestures and vocalizations of ancient great apes could not have done this 
coordinating work. Th ey could not have, fi rst, because they  were geared 
totally toward self- serving ends, and this simply does not mesh with mutual-
istic collaboration toward a joint goal. Th ey could not have, second, because 
they  were used exclusively in attempts to regulate the behavior of others 
directly, and this does not mesh with the need to coordinate actions and 
attention referentially on external situations and entities, as in collaborative 
foraging for food.
Tomasello (2008) argued and presented evidence that the fi rst forms of 
uniquely human cooperative communication  were the natural gestures of 
pointing and pantomiming used to inform others helpfully of situations rel-
evant to them. Pointing and pantomiming are human universals that even 
Figure 3.1  Th e dual- level structure of joint collaborative activity

50 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
people who share no conventional language can use to communicate eff ectively 
in contexts with at least some common ground. But to do this requires an 
extremely rich and deep set of interpersonal intentions and inferences in the 
context of this common ground. If I point for you in the direction of a tree, 
or pantomime for you a tree, without any common ground, you have nothing 
to guide your inferences about what I am intending to communicate to you 
or why. Pointing and pantomiming thus created for early humans new prob-
lems of social coordination— not just in coordinating actions with others but 
also in coordinating intentional states— and solving these new coordination 
problems required new ways of thinking.
A New Motive for Communicating
In joint collaborative activities in which the partners are interdependent, it is 
in the interest of each partner to help the other play her role. Th is is the basis 
for a new motive in human communication, not available to other apes (but 
see Crockford et al., 2011, for one possible exception), namely, the motive to 
help the other by informing her of situations relevant to her. Th e emergence 
of this motive was aided by the fact that in the context of a joint collaborative 
activity, directive communication and informative communication are not 
clearly distinct— because the partners’ individual motives are so closely inter-
twined. Th us, if we are gathering honey together and you are struggling with 
your role, I can point to a stick, which I intend as a directive to you to use it, 
or, alternatively, I can point to the stick intending only to inform you of its 
presence— because I know that if you see it you will most likely want to use 
it. When we are working together toward a joint goal, both of these work 
because our interests are so closely aligned.
Th e evolutionary proposal is thus that early humans’ fi rst acts of coopera-
tive communication  were pointing gestures in joint collaborative activities, 
and these  were underlain by a communicative motive not yet diff erentiated 
between requestive and informative. But at some point early humans began 
to understand their interdependence with others not just while the collaboration 
was ongoing but also more generally: if my best partner is hungry to night, I 
should help her so that she will be in good shape for tomorrow’s foraging. 
And outside of collaborative activities, the diff erence between me requesting 
help from you, for my benefi t, and me informing you of things helpfully, for 
your benefi t, becomes crystal clear. And so there arose for early humans two 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
51
distinct motives for their deictic communication, requestive and informative, 
which everyone both comprehended and produced.
When great apes work together in experiments, there is an almost total 
absence of intentional communication of any kind (e.g., Melis et al., 2009; 
Hirata, 2007; Povinelli and  O’Neill, 2000). When apes communicate with 
one another in other contexts, it is always directive (Call and Tomasello, 2007; 
Bullinger et al., 2011c). In stark contrast, from as soon as they can collaborate 
meaningfully with others, at around fourteen to eigh teen months of age, 
young children use the pointing gesture to coordinate their joint activity 
(e.g., Brownell and Carriger, 1990; Warneken et al., 2006, 2007)— with, again, 
a telling ambiguity about whether their motive is requestive or informative. 
But also, outside of collaborative activities, even twelve- month- old infants 
sometimes point simply to inform others of such things as the location of a 
sought- for object. For example, Liszkowski et al. (2006, 2008) placed twelve- 
month- olds in various situations in which they observed an adult misplace an 
object or lose track of it in some way, and then start searching. In these situ-
ations infants pointed to the sought- for object (more often than to distractor 
objects that  were misplaced in the same way but  were not needed by the adult), 
and in doing this they showed no signs of wanting the object for themselves 
(no whining, reaching,  etc.). Th e infants simply wanted to help the adult by 
informing her of the location of the sought- for object.
Th e emergence of the informative communicative motive, alongside the 
general great ape directive motive, had three important consequences for the 
evolution of uniquely human thinking. First, the informative motive led com-
municators to make a commitment to informing others of things honestly 
and accurately, that is, truthfully. Initially during collaborative activities, but 
then more generally (as humans’ interdependence extended outside of collab-
orative activities), if individuals wanted to be seen as cooperative, they would 
commit themselves to always communicating with others honestly. Of course, 
you may still lie: you point to where you want me to search for my spear even 
though it is not really there, for some selfi sh motive. But lying only works if 
there is fi rst a mutual assumption of cooperation and trust: you only lie because 
you know that I will trust your information as truthful and act accordingly. 
And so, while there is still some way to go to get to truth as an “objective” 
feature of linguistic utterances (see chapter 4), if we want to explain the origins 
of humans’ commitment to characterize the world accurately in de pen dent 
of any selfi sh purpose, then being committed to informing others of things 

52 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
honestly, for their not our benefi t, is the starting point. Th e notion of truth 
thus entered the human psyche not with the advent of individual intentionality 
and its focus on accuracy in information acquisition but, rather, with the 
advent of joint intentionality and its focus on communicating cooperatively 
with others.4
Th e second important consequence of this new cooperative way of com-
municating was that it created a new kind of inference, namely, a relevance 
inference. Th e recipient of a cooperative communicative act asks herself: given 
that we know together that he is trying to help me, why does he think that I 
will fi nd the situation he is pointing out to me relevant to my concerns. Con-
sider great apes. If a human points and looks at some food on the ground, apes 
will follow the pointing/looking to the food and so take it— no inferences 
required. But if food is hidden in one of two buckets (and the ape knows it is 
in only one of them) and a human then points to a bucket, apes are clueless 
(see Tomasello, 2006, for a review). Apes follow the human’s pointing and 
looking to the bucket, but then they do not make the seemingly straightfor-
ward inference that the human is directing their attention there because he 
thinks it is somehow relevant to their current search for the food. Th ey do not 
make this relevance inference because it does not occur to them that the hu-
man is trying to inform them helpfully— since ape communication is always 
directive— and this means that they are totally uninterested in why the hu-
man is pointing to one of the boring buckets. Importantly, it is not that apes 
cannot make inferences from human behavior at all. When a human fi rst sets 
up with them a competitive situation and then reaches desperately toward one 
of the buckets, great apes know immediately that the food must be in that one 
(Hare and Tomasello, 2004). Th ey make the competitive inference, “He wants 
in that bucket; therefore the food must be in there,” but they do not make the 
cooperative inference, “He wants me to know that the food is in that bucket.”
Th is pattern of behavior contrasts markedly with that of human infants. 
In the same situation, prelinguistic infants of only twelve months of age trust 
that the adult is pointing out to them something relevant to their current 
search— they comprehend the informative motive— and so they know imme-
diately that the pointed- to bucket is the one containing the reward (Behne 
et al., 2005, 2012). Th e mutual assumption of cooperativeness in such situations 
is so natural for humans that they have developed a special set of signals— 
ostensive signals such as eye contact and addressing the other vocally— by 
means of which the communicator highlights for the recipient that he has 
some relevant information for her. Th us, as evolutionary example, suppose 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
53
that while we are collaboratively foraging I point to berries on a bush for you, 
with eye contact and an excited vocalization. You look and see the bush but, 
at fi rst, no berries. So you ask yourself: why does he think that this bush is rel-
evant for me— and this makes you look harder for something that is indeed 
relevant— and thus you discover the berries. As communicator, I know that 
you, as recipient, are going to be engaging in this pro cess if and only if you see 
me as directing your attention cooperatively, and so I want to make sure that 
you know that I am doing this. Th erefore, I not only want you to know that 
there are berries  here but also want you to know that I want you to know 
this— so that you will follow through the inferential pro cess to its conclusion 
(Grice, 1957; Moore, in press). By addressing you ostensively, and based on 
our mutual expectation of cooperation, I am in eff ect saying, “You are going 
to want to know this”— and you do want to know it because you trust that 
I have your interests in mind.
Th e third and fi nal consequence of this newly cooperative way of com-
municating was that there now emerged, at least in nascent form, a distinc-
tion between communicative force— as overtly expressed in requestive and 
informative intonations— and situational or propositional content as indicated 
by the pointing gesture. (NB: Th is means that by this time early humans 
would have had to control their vocal expressions of emotions voluntarily in 
a way that apes do not.) Early humans could now point toward berries in a 
bush, with one of two diff erent motives, expressed intonationally: either an 
insistent requestive intonation, in the hopes that the recipient would fetch 
some berries for her, or a neutral intonation to just inform the recipient of the 
berries’ location so that she might get some for herself. We thus now have a 
clear distinction between something like communicative force and commu-
nicative content: the communicative content is the presence of the berries, 
and the communicative force is either requestive or informative. All of this is 
implicit, of course, and so we still have some way to go to reach the convention-
alized and so explicit distinction between communicative force and content 
that is so important in conventional linguistic communication (see chapter 4). 
But the breakthrough  here is the relative in de pen dence of referential (situa-
tional, propositional) content from the communicator’s motives or intentions 
for referring attention to it.
And so, early humans’ joint collaborative activities created a new motiva-
tional infrastructure for their communication, a cooperative motivation to 
inform one another of things helpfully and honestly. Th is then motivated 
recipients to do signifi cant inferential work to fi nd out why the communicator 

54 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
thought that looking in a certain direction would be relevant for their con-
cerns, which then motivated communicators to advertise when they had some-
thing relevant for a recipient. And the fact that there  were now two diff erent 
communicative motives possible— requestive and informative— meant that 
the situational (propositional) content of the communicative act was starting 
to be conceptualized as in de pen dent of the par tic u lar intentional states of the 
communicator.
New Ways of Th inking for Communicating
Th e motive to be helpful and cooperative in communication meant that, from 
the cognitive point of view, communicators had to be able to determine which 
situations  were relevant to a recipient on a par tic u lar occasion. Conversely, 
recipients had to be able to identify the intended situation and its relevance for 
them, in essence by determining which situation in the direction of his point-
ing gesture the communicator thinks is relevant or interesting for them on this 
occasion— and why. Th e basic problem is that what the communicator wishes 
to point out to the recipient— his communicative intention5— is a  whole fact- 
like situation, for example, that there are bananas in the tree, or that there are 
no predators in the tree. But the act of pointing— the protruding fi nger— is 
the same in all cases. Th e puzzle is how does one point out for a recipient dif-
ferent situations in the same perceptual scene?
Th e key to this puzzle is that the participants in a communicative interac-
tion mutually assume the relevance of the communicative act for the recipient 
(Sperber and Wilson, 1996), and this relevance is always in relation to some-
thing that is in our common ground (Tomasello, 2008). In de pen dent of com-
munication, a situation is relevant to you for your own individual reasons. But 
for me to direct your attention to that situation successfully in communica-
tion, you must know that I know it is relevant for you; indeed, we must know 
together in our common ground that it is relevant for you. Th e simplest situa-
tion is thus when we are in a collaborative activity with the immediate com-
mon ground created by our joint goal. For example, if we have been searching 
unsuccessfully for bananas all day, you will naturally assume that my pointing 
gesture toward the banana tree is intended to indicate for you the fact that 
there are bananas in that tree. On the other hand, if we spied the bananas to-
gether some minutes ago but there was a predator in the tree and so we waited, 
and now the predator seems to have left, you will naturally assume that I am 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
55
indicating for you the fact that there is now no predator in the tree. Common 
ground and a mutual assumption of relevance— not possible for apes because 
they simply do not engage in this kind of cooperative communication— 
enable a meeting of minds in the direction of the protruding fi nger.
Following the analysis in chapter 2, relevant situations are those that present 
individuals with opportunities and/or obstacles for reaching their goals and 
maintaining their values. Th us, if during our search for fruit I point toward a 
distant banana tree, it would never occur to you that I might be pointing out 
the presence of the leaves, even if leaves is all that you see at the moment, since 
the presence of leaves is in no way relevant to what we are doing. Instead, you 
will continue looking until you see, for example, some bananas behind the 
leaves, whose presence is highly relevant to what we are doing. Another dimen-
sion of this pro cess is that only “new” situations are communicatively relevant, 
since currently shared situations need not be pointed out. And so, in the 
example from above, after the predator left the banana tree I pointed to 
the banana tree with the intention to indicate the situation of the predator’s 
absence, which you readily discerned. How could I intend and you infer preda-
tor absence when the presence of the bananas is also highly relevant? Because 
the presence of the bananas was already in our current common ground, and 
so me pointing out this situation to you would be superfl uous. If I am going to 
be helpful, I must point out situations that are new for you, or  else why bother. 
And so, in human cooperative communication, both communicators and 
recipients mutually assume in their common ground that communicators 
point out for recipients’ situations that are both relevant and new.
Perhaps surprising, even young infants are skillful at keeping track of the 
common ground they have with specifi c other individuals and using that to 
determine relevance in both the comprehension and production of pointing 
gestures. For example, Liebal et al. (2009) had a one- year- old infant and an 
adult clean up together by picking up toys and putting them in a basket. At 
one point the adult stopped and pointed to a target toy, which the infant then 
cleaned up into the basket. However, when the infant and adult  were clean-
ing up in exactly this same way, and a second adult who had not shared this 
context entered the room and pointed toward the target toy in exactly the 
same way, infants did not put the toy away into the basket; they mostly just 
handed it to him, presumably because the second adult had not shared the 
cleaning up game with them as common ground. Infants’ interpretations 
thus did not depend on their own current egocentric activities and interests, 

56 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
which  were the same in both cases, but rather on their shared experience with 
each of the pointing adults. (In another study, Liebal et al. [2010] found that 
infants of this same age also produced points diff erently depending on their 
common ground with the recipient.)
Infants in this same age range also use a mutual assumption of newness to 
determine what a pointing adult thinks is relevant for them. Th us, Moll et al. 
(2006) had eighteen- month- old infants play with an adult and a toy drum. 
If a new adult now entered the room and indicated the drum excitedly, the 
child assumed he was talking about the cool drum. But if the adult with 
whom the child had just been sharing enjoyment of the drum pointed to the 
drum excitedly in exactly the same manner, the child did not assume that she 
was excited about the drum: how could she be, since it is old news for us? 
Rather, children assumed that the adult’s excitement must be due to some-
thing new about the drum that they had not previously noticed, and so they 
attended to some new aspect, for example, on the adult’s side of the drum. In 
their production of pointing, infants also use this distinction between shared 
and new information. For example, when a fourteen- month- old infant wanted 
his mother to put his high chair up to the dining room table: on one occasion 
he pointed to the chair (because he and his mother had already shared atten-
tion to the empty space at the table), whereas on another occasion he pointed 
to the empty space at the table (because he and his mother had already shared 
attention to the chair) (Tomasello et al., 2007a). In both cases the infant wants 
the exact same thing— his chair placed at the table— but to communicate 
eff ectively he assumes that the object he and his mother are focused on is al-
ready part of their common ground, and so he points out the aspect of the 
situation that she may not have noticed, the new part.6
Engaging in cooperative (ostensive- inferential) communication of this type 
requires some new types of thinking. In eff ect, all three components of the 
thinking process— representation, inference, and self- monitoring—must 
become socialized.
With respect to repre sen ta tion, the key novelty is that both participants in 
the communicative interaction must represent one another’s perspective 
on the situation and its elements. Th us, the communicator attempts to focus 
the recipient’s attention on one of the many possible situations—fact- like 
representations— immanent in the current perceptual scene (e.g., there are 
bananas in the tree versus there is no predator in the tree). Th e communica-
tive act thus perspectivizes the scene for the recipient. It also perspectivizes 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
57
the elements. For example, if we are building a fi re, me pointing out to you the 
presence of a log construes that log as fi rewood. But if we are tidying up the 
cave, me pointing out to you the presence of that very same log construes it as 
trash. In the object choice task, the communicator is not pointing to the bucket 
qua physical object or qua vessel for carry ing water, but rather qua location: 
I am informing you that the reward is located in there. Cooperative pointing 
thus creates diff erent conceptualizations or construals of things. Th ese presage 
the ability of linguistic creatures to place one and the same entity under alter-
native diff erent “descriptions” or “aspectual shapes,” which is one of the hall-
marks of human conceptual thinking; but it does this without the use of any 
conventional or symbolic vehicles with articulate semantic content.
With respect to inference, the key point is that the inferences used in co-
operative communication are socially recursive. Th us, implicit in all of the 
foregoing is a kind of backing- and- forthing of individuals making inferences 
about the partner’s intentions toward my intentional states. In the object choice 
task, for example, the recipient infers that the communicator intends that she 
know that the food is in that bucket— a socially recursive inference that great 
apes apparently do not make. Th is inference requires in all cases an abductive 
leap, something like: his pointing in the direction of that otherwise boring 
bucket would make sense (i.e., would be consistent with common ground, 
relevance, and newness) if it is the case that he intends that I know where the 
reward is. Th e communicator, for his part, is attempting to help the recipient 
to make that abductive leap appropriately. To do this, at least in many situa-
tions, the communicator must engage in some kind of simulation, or think-
ing, in which he imagines how pointing in a par tic u lar direction will lead the 
recipient to make a par tic u lar abductive inference: if I point in this direction, 
what inferences will he make about my intentions toward his intentional states? 
And then, when making his abductive inference, the recipient can potentially 
take into account the communicator’s taking into account of what kind of 
inference she is likely to make about his communicative intentions. And so 
forth.
Finally, with respect to self- monitoring, the key is that being able to oper-
ate in this way communicatively requires individuals to self- monitor in 
a new way. As opposed to apes’ cognitive self- monitoring, this new way was 
social. Specifi cally, as an individual was communicating with another, he 
was simultaneously imagining himself in the role of the recipient attempting 
to comprehend him (Mead, 1934). And so was born a new kind of self- monitoring 

58 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
in which communicators simulated the perspective of the recipient as a kind 
of check on whether the communicative act was well formulated and so was 
likely to be understood. Th is is not totally unlike the concern for self- image 
characteristic of early humans (noted earlier in the discussion of collabora-
tion) in which individuals simulate how they are being judged by others for 
their cooperativeness— it is just that in this case what is being evaluated is 
comprehensibility. Importantly, both of these kinds of self- monitoring are 
“normative” in a second- personal way: the agent is evaluating his or her own 
behavior from the perspective of how other social agents will evaluate it. Of 
this pro cess, Levinson (1995, p. 411) says, “Th ere is an extraordinary shift in 
our thinking when we start to act intending that our actions should be coordi-
nated with— then we have to design our actions so that they are self- evidently 
perspicuous.”7 Th is social self- monitoring for intelligibility in cooperative 
communication lays the foundation for modern human norms of social ratio-
nality, where social rationality means making communicative sense to one’s 
partner.
Th ese new pro cesses of thinking involved in cooperative communication 
are well illustrated by two studies with young children. First, from the point 
of view of the communicator, is a study by Liszkowski et al. (2009) with twelve- 
month- old infants. In this study, an adult played a game with an infant in 
which the infant repeatedly needed a par tic u lar kind of object, always found 
in the same location on a plate. At some point, the infant needed one of those 
objects, but none was around. To get one, many infants alighted upon the 
strategy of pointing for the adult to the empty plate, that is, to the location 
where they both knew in common ground that those kind of objects usually 
are found. To perform this communicative act, the infant had to simulate the 
adult’s pro cess of comprehension: what abductive inference (about my inten-
tions toward her intentional states) will she make if I point to the plate? Th at 
this is not just a simple association is suggested by the fact that chimpanzees, 
who are perfectly capable of associative learning, in this same setup made no 
attempts to direct the human’s attention to the empty plate (even though 
they did make pointing attempts in other contexts in this same study). Th e 
children simulated the adult making inferences about their intentions toward 
her intentional states.
To illustrate the pro cess even more dramatically, and from the point of view 
of comprehension, we may consider the phenomenon of “markedness.” On 
some occasions, a communicator may mark (e.g., with intonational stress) 
something in her communicative act as out of the ordinary, so that the recipient 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
59
will not make the normal inference but rather a diff erent one. For example, 
Liebal et al. (2011) had an adult and a two- year- old child again tidying up 
toys into a large basket. In the normal course of events, when the adult pointed 
to a medium- sized box on the fl oor, the child took this to suggest that she 
should tidy up this box into the basket as well. But in some cases the adult 
pointed to the box with fl ashing eyes and a kind of insistent pointing directed 
at the child, obviously not the normal way of doing it. Th e adult clearly intended 
something diff erent from the norm. In this case, many children looked at the 
adult puzzled but then proceeded to open the box and look at what was in-
side (and tidy it up). Th e most straightforward interpretation of this behavior 
is that the child understood that the adult was anticipating how she would 
construe a normal point, which he did not want, and so he was marking his 
pointing gesture so that she would be motivated to search for a diff erent in-
terpretation. Th is is the child thinking about the adult thinking about her 
thinking about his thinking.
And so, the kind of thinking that goes on in human cooperative commu-
nication is evolutionarily new in that it is perspectival and socially recur-
sive. Individuals must think (simulate, imagine, make inferences) about their 
communicative partner thinking (simulating, imagining, making inferences) 
about their thinking— at the very least. Great apes show no signs of making 
such inferences, and their failure to comprehend even the simplest acts of 
cooperative pointing, for example, in the object choice task (while making non-
recursive inferences in the same task setting), provides positive evidence that 
they do not. Human thinking in cooperative communication also involves a 
new kind of social self- monitoring, in which the communicator imagines 
what perspective the recipient is taking, or will take, on his intentions toward 
her intentions— and so imagines how she will comprehend it. In all, what we 
have at this point in our evolutionary story of human communication is indi-
viduals attempting to coordinate their intentional states, and so their actions, 
by pointing out new and relevant situations to one another. Th is relies on their 
having a certain amount and type of common ground, and it requires, further, 
that the interactants make a series of interlocking and socially recursive infer-
ences about one another’s perspectives and intentional states.
Symbolizing in Pantomime
Beyond the pointing gesture, the second form of “natural” communication that 
humans employ is spontaneously generated, nonconventional iconic gestures, 

60 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
or pantomime. Th ese gestures are used to direct the imagination of others to 
nonpresent entities, actions, or situations. Iconic gestures go beyond simply 
directing attention to situations deictically, as in pointing, by actually sym-
bolizing an entity, action, or situation in an external icon. Iconic gestures are 
“natural” because they employ normally eff ective intentional actions, just in 
a special way. Th e recipient can, on the basis of observing them, imagine the 
real actions or objects the communicator is pantomiming, and then, in the 
context of their common ground, make the appropriate inference to his com-
municative intention. Examples of informative uses of iconic gestures would 
be things like warning of a nearby snake by moving one’s hand in a slithering 
motion, telling of a deer at the waterhole by miming antlers on one’s own 
head (or the sound of his vocalization), or identifying the whereabouts of a 
friend by pantomiming him swimming. With the appropriate common ground, 
such gestures communicate very eff ectively about all kinds of nonpresent 
situations.
No nonhuman primates use iconic gestures or vocalizations. Great apes 
could easily gesture with their hands the way that humans do to mime eating 
or drinking, but they do not.8 Indeed, great apes do not even understand 
iconic signs. In a modifi ed object choice experiment, a human held up a rep-
lica of the object under which food was hidden. Two- year- old children knew 
that this meant to search in the similar- appearing object, while chimpanzees 
and orangutans did not (Tomasello et al., 1997; Herrmann et al., 2006). In 
ongoing research we have been trying to elicit iconic gesturing from apes in 
situations in which it would benefi t them to do so (e.g., showing a human 
how to extract food for them from an apparatus that only they know how to 
operate), but so far with no success. Presumably, great apes do not understand 
iconic gestures because they do not understand communication marked 
ostensively as “for you” (cooperatively). If an ape views someone hammering 
a nut, they know perfectly well what he is doing, but if they view him making 
a hammering motion in the absence of any stone or any nuts, they are simply 
perplexed. To comprehend iconic gestures, one must be able to see inten-
tional actions performed outside of their normal instrumental contexts as 
communication— because they are marked as such by the communicator via 
various kinds of ostensive signals (e.g., eye contact). Extending an analogy 
from Leslie (1987) on pretense, the bizarre action must be “quarantined” from 
straightforward interpretation as an instrumental action by marking it as 
“for communication only.”

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
61
Another prerequisite for an individual to produce an iconic gesture is that 
he is able to produce with his body an action that “resembles” a real action (or 
object). Presumably the ability to do this derives from the ability to imitate, at 
which humans are especially skillful compared with other apes (Tennie et al., 
2009). Somehow early humans came to understand that “imitating” an action 
not for real but with an ostensive communicative intention (simulating it in 
action) could lead a recipient to imagine all kinds of referential situations not 
in the current perceptual scene. One potentially important social context in 
this connection is teaching, which has the evolutionary advantage that the 
primal scene is one of an adult instructing its off spring. Csibra and Gergely 
(2009) explicate what they call “natural pedagogy” and note its close connec-
tion to cooperative communication. Th e most basic form of natural pedagogy 
is demonstrating: showing someone how to do something by either doing it 
directly or pantomiming it in some way. And like communication, the action 
is being done not for its own sake but for the benefi t of the observer/learner. 
Communicating with iconic gestures thus requires both an understanding of 
ostensive communication and some ability to imitate actions.
Importantly, iconic gestures may depict the referential object or action 
quite faithfully, but then it can still be, as in pointing, a large inferential leap 
to the underlying communicative intention. Th us, to bridge the gap, just as in 
the case of pointing, common ground and mutual assumptions of cooperation 
and relevance are needed. If I mime for you a snake’s motion as we approach 
a cave, if you do not know that snakes are often found in caves, you might 
wonder why I am waving my hand in that way. In the contemporary world, 
we recently observed a young child going through airport security. Th e guard 
scanning her with his wand moved his hand in a circular motion to tell her to 
turn around so he can scan her backside. Staring at him, she slowly began 
moving her hand in a circular motion back at him— she did not understand 
that his hand was meant to represent her body. Apparently, they did not have 
in their common ground airport security procedures.
Whereas there is only one basic pointing gesture,9 there are myriad possi-
ble iconic gestures— a “discrete infi nity,” perhaps. With iconic gestures there 
is, or at least can be, a more or less one- to- one correspondence of gestures and 
the intended referent (though typically only one aspect of an intended refer-
ential situation is mimed). Th is means that iconic gestures, even though not 
conventional, have a kind of semantic content. With pointing, I can in prin-
ciple indicate for you the shape, size, or material of a piece of paper, within 

62 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
the appropriate common ground, but the unique perspective in each case is 
not in any way contained “in” the protruding fi nger itself (see Wittgenstein’s 
[1955] incisive, if cryptic, discussion of this issue). But with iconic gestures, 
I would indicate for you the shape, size, or material of a piece of paper— or 
whether I want you to write on the paper or throw it away— by depicting each 
of these diff erent aspects or actions with diff erent icons. Th e momentous new 
feature of iconic gestures is thus that the diff erent perspectives of things and 
situations only implicit in pointing are now expressed overtly in external sym-
bolic vehicles with semantic content.
Relatedly, the vast majority of communicative conventions in a natural 
language are category terms. Th at is, common nouns and most verbs are con-
ventionalized for reference to categories of entities such as dog and bite, which 
means that to make reference to a specifi c dog or instance of biting, we must 
do some kind of pragmatic grounding (such as with the or my dog, or the dog 
who lives next door in the case of nouns; or tense and aspect markers, as in is 
biting or bit, in the case of verbs). Iconic gestures are already category terms, 
because they implore the recipient to imagine something “like this.” (It is pos-
sible that one could iconically gesture an individual as well— for example, by 
mimicking her idiosyncratic mannerisms— and so the distinction between 
common and proper nouns is at least in principle possible in this modality.) 
Th e categorical dimension is bound up with perspective in the sense that call-
ing someone either Bill or Mr. Smith is not perspectival because these are not 
category terms, but calling him a father or a man or a policeman is perspectival 
because it puts him “under a description,” that is, it “perspectivizes” him diff er-
ently on diff erent occasions for diff erent communicative purposes.
Iconic gestures are thus an important step on the road to linguistic conven-
tions in that they are symbolic, with semantic content, and are at least poten-
tially categorical. An interesting fact that reinforces this point is that although 
young children produce some iconic gestures from early in development, 
they actually go down in frequency over the second year of life as children 
begin learning language, whereas pointing increases in frequency during the 
same period. One hypothesis is that pointing increases because it does not 
compete with language but complements it by performing a diff erent func-
tion. As symbolic vehicles with semantic content, iconic gestures compete with 
linguistic conventions, and they lose the competition— for many obvious 
reasons— which usurps the need to create spontaneous gestures on the spot, 
except in a few exceptional circumstances. If one imagines an evolutionary 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
63
box 2.  Pantomime as Imagining in Space
Communicating with iconic gestures and pantomime might plausibly have 
had two large and important cognitive consequences. Th e fi rst stems from 
its intimate involvement with— and therefore stimulation of— imagination 
and pretense. Iconic gestures enable reference to things ever farther removed 
in space and time than does pointing, and at the moment of communica-
tion these must be imagined. When I gesture to inform you that there is an 
antelope out of sight over the hill, or to warn you that there are snakes in 
this cave we are about to enter, or to relate what happened to us on our 
just- fi nished hunting trip, I have to act out  whole scenarios in which some 
of the key players are not even present and the actions are either long past or 
only predicted.
Th e proposal, then, is that iconic gesturing both depends on preexisting 
skills of imagination and also takes these skills to new places. Whereas a 
chimpanzee might imagine what awaits her at the waterhole, we are now 
talking about depicting for another person in some kind of playacting such 
imagined scenes— tailored for the recipient’s knowledge and interests, given 
our common ground, so that she will be capable and motivated to compre-
hend. It is not unreasonable to suppose, then, that humans evolved ever 
more powerful forms of imagination to be able to act out scenes for 
others— in a kind of joint imagining. Indeed, we see this behavior in very 
young children on a daily basis as they pretend with a parent or peer that 
this stick is a  horse or that they are Superman. Th e evolutionary origins of 
pretend play— which would seem to be a bit mysterious because its function 
is not so obvious— are thus, in the current account, to be found in panto-
miming as a serious communicative activity. In modern humans, panto-
miming for communication has been supplanted by conventional language. 
As children learn a conventional language, their tendency to communicate 
to others by creating pretend scenarios in gesture has no place to go, so to 
speak. Th ey thus play with this ability and create pretend scenarios together 
with others, as a pretense activity with no other motivation. A number of 
scholars have argued as well that engaging in pretense is one source for the 
distinction between appearance and reality (e.g., Perner, 1991), as I act out 
X fi ctively in order to represent the real X, as well as for counterfactual 
thinking in general (Harris, 1991).
(continued )

64 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
And so the fi rst surprising eff ect of iconic gestures is that their emergence in 
human evolution led to skills of acting out pretend scenarios with and for 
others, which may be the basis for humans’ creation of all of the “imagi-
nary” situations and institutions within which they reside. In addition, to 
anticipate our story a bit, it is also reasonable to suppose that the creation of 
what Searle (1995) calls cultural “status functions” such as being a president 
or a husband— and pieces of paper standing for (indeed, constituting) 
money— has its phyloge ne tic and ontoge ne tic roots in pretend play in which 
children together anoint a stick as a  horse, which gives the stick special 
powers, in a manner very similar to anointing a person as a president 
(Rakoczy and Tomasello, 2007). If thinking is at base a form of imagining, 
then one can hardly overestimate the importance of imagining things for 
other people, as embodied in iconic gestures, for the evolution and develop-
ment of uniquely human thinking (Donald, 1991).
Th e second cognitive eff ect of iconic gestures and pantomiming is even 
more speculative. Almost everyone who studies human cognition recognizes 
the crucially important role of spatial conceptualizations. Th ere are 
undoubtedly multiple reasons for this, some of them having simply to do 
with the importance of space in primate cognition in general. It is well 
known, for example, that episodic memory has intimate connections to 
spatial cognition.
But more recently, some theorists have dug more deeply into this connec-
tion. Beginning with the pioneering work of Lakoff  and Johnson (1979), it is 
well known that humans quite often talk about abstract situations or 
entities meta phor ical ly or analogically in terms of concrete spatial relation-
ships. As just a few examples, we talk about putting things into and taking 
them out of our lectures, we fall into love, we are on our way to success, or 
we are going nowhere in our career, or I am out of my mind, or she is 
coming to her senses, and on and on. We are not talking about just surface 
meta phors  here, but very basic ways of conceptualizing complicated and 
abstract situations. Th us, in his follow- up work, Johnson (1987) identifi ed a 
number of so- called image schemas that seem to permeate our thinking, 
such as containment (in and out of a lecture), part- whole (the foundation of 
our relationship), link (we are connected), obstacle (my lack of education gets 
in the way of my social life), and path (we are on our way to marriage).
box 2 (continued )

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
65
Even in the grammars of languages, a number of scholars have noted the 
inordinate prominence of space, with some even creating such things as 
“space grammars.” Some of the early work on syntactic case relationships 
also emphasized that many case markers emerged fi rst historically from 
words for spatial relationships (adpositions of various kinds). Talmy (2003) 
has posited a human imaging system that structures grammar via a very 
strong spatial component. Th us, one of his central schemas is the force 
dynamic schema in which actors cause eff ects in other entities (e.g., 
investors’ anxieties crashed the stock market), and another is various kinds 
of fi ctive motion along paths. He has also noted that many complex 
relationships are expressed spatially, with topological relationships predomi-
nating. Even more strongly, conventional signed languages use space to 
depict all kinds of grammatical relationships, from anaphoric reference to 
case role (e.g., Liddel, 2003)— which is important if humans’ earliest 
linguistic conventions  were, as hypothesized  here, in the gestural modality.
In terms of ontogeny, Mandler (2012) has argued and presented evidence 
that children’s earliest language is made possible by a set of mainly spatial 
image schemas such as animate motion, caused motion, the path of motion, 
obstacles to motion, containment, and so forth. Th ese form the conceptual 
foundation for children’s early talk about agents doing things (Slobin’s [1985] 
manipulative activity scene) and objects going places (Slobin’s [1985] 
fi gure- ground scene, in which objects move along paths). Th ese are the 
things children fi rst talk about, and fundamental spatial relationships in 
motion along paths play a prominent role at all stages.
Th e speculation is thus that in addition to numerous other reasons for space 
being important in human cognition, a critically important reason is that at 
an early stage in their evolution humans conceptualized many things for 
others in their gestural communication in a fi ctive space with fi ctive actors 
and actions. Basically, the only way to depict many things in spontaneous, 
nonconventionalized gestures is by acting out in space the referent objects 
and events. And so if we believe that human thinking is intimately tied to 
communication— how we have come to conceptualize things for others— 
then the fact that we did this for some time in our history by pantomiming 
in space may go a long way toward explaining the inordinately important 
role of space in human cognition.

66 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
analog, the story would be one of conventional forms of communication 
mainly taking over from iconic gestures, whereas pointing would persist. In 
both evolution and ontogeny, then, the ability to act out nonactual situations 
could then potentially emerge again in other functions, for example, pretense 
and other forms of fi ction (see box 2).
Iconic gestures thus represent a kind of middle stage in human communi-
cation and thinking that bridges from pointing for others informatively and 
perspectivally in the context of common conceptual ground to conventional 
linguistic communication. Th is bridging step involves external forms of sym-
bolic repre sen ta tion that have semantic content categorized. Nevertheless, iconic 
gestures almost always have a potentially problematic ambiguity of perspective. 
If I mime the throwing of a spear, who is supposed to be throwing it— me, 
you, or someone  else? Of course, this typically is determined through our 
common ground context; it is normally clear if I am requesting you to do it, 
expressing my desire to do it, or reporting on our friend’s activity. But in some 
situations— for example, depicting the morning’s hunting events— it might 
not be clear who is throwing the spear. Th e only way to resolve this ambiguity 
is with further communicative acts, either deictic or iconic. And this leads us 
to the most complex way in which early humans communicated with natural 
gestures before conventional languages: combining their gestures in multiunit 
expressions.
Combining Gestures
Great apes do not create new communicative functions by combining their 
gestures, their vocalizations, or their gestures and vocalizations together (Liebal 
et al., 2004; Tomasello, 2008). But humans do, including young children 
from the earliest stages of their communicative development, and including 
even children exposed to no conventional language, vocal or signed, at all 
(Goldin- Meadow, 2003).
While there is no principled reason why someone could not string together 
various pointing gestures— and individuals may do this on occasion— this is 
not commonly observed. Beginning language learners combine their earliest 
linguistic conventions with pointing or other conventions, and beginning sign 
language learners produce iconic or conventional signs in combination with 
pointing (as do, again, children exposed to no conventional language at all; 
Goldin- Meadow, 2003). As originating context in evolution, one can easily 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
67
imagine situations in which an individual pantomimed something— such as 
eating— and then immediately afterward, in a second thought, pointed to 
some par tic u lar piece of food— for instance, the fruit over there (this pro cess 
is thus analogous to the “successive single word utterances” in early child lan-
guage, or the “broken” utterances in pidgin languages). But then, through a 
pro cess of “mental combination” (Piaget, 1952), these successive thoughts or 
intentions came to be integrated into a single thought or intention and so ex-
pressed as a single utterance within a single intonation contour. With some 
minimal skills of categorization, individuals could form a schema comprising, 
for example, an iconic gesture for eating followed by indexical indication of 
anything edible either by oneself or by others. Productivity in thinking would 
be thus scaff olded and enhanced by this overt communicative schema.
It is important to emphasize that just as in child language, in early human 
communication there would have been functional continuity between diff er-
ent expressions of the same referential intention, no matter their internal com-
plexity. For example, one could communicate that there are snakes in the cave 
either with a snake motion as we approach the cave or by combining a snake 
motion with a pointing gesture to the cave (e.g., if we are not approaching it)— 
both with the same communicative intention or function. Combining symbolic 
and deictic vehicles is not the creation of new communicative intentions, pri-
marily, but rather the parsing of existing ones into their component parts. 
Th is means that in combinations a single gesture is typically indicating only 
one aspect of a situation. Th us, whereas the snake motion while approaching 
the cave is intended to communicate that there are snakes in the cave, in com-
bination with pointing to the cave (or iconically depicting the cave) this snake 
motion now only indicates the snakes themselves, as the rest of the situation is 
indicated through other communicative devices. Th is focus on function and 
the parsing of situations into components with diff erent subfunctions are re-
sponsible for the hierarchical or ga ni za tion of human communication.
With gesture combinations we now also have the possibility of beginning 
down the path to the subject- predicate or ga ni za tion characteristic of full 
propositions.10 Two ingredients are involved, both of which are already present, 
in nascent form, in pointing inside collaborative activities. Th e fi rst ingredi-
ent is the specifi c cognitive distinction between events and participants. Even 
apes learning human- like forms of communication distinguish events and 
participants in their sign combinations (see Tomasello, 2008, for evidence). 
Th e second ingredient is the distinction between shared (or given) and new 

68 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
information. As noted above, even in pointing there is an implicit distinction 
between the shared common ground, which typically is not indicated spe-
cifi cally by the pointing gesture, and the new and noteworthy situation, 
which is indicated deictically. But this is all implicit. With gesture combina-
tions, what often happens is that one or more signs are used to make contact 
with the common ground— typically to use it as a perspective or “topic”— and 
then to indicate with another sign the new and interesting information. In 
many situations, one can imagine that one points to a perceptually present 
referent— to make sure that it is shared— and then iconically signs about some 
aspect of it that one thinks is new and noteworthy for the recipient.
Th e overall picture is thus that early humans used their pointing and 
iconic gestures, both singly and in combination, to communicate much more 
richly and powerfully than did their primate cousins. Th is new form of com-
munication took place initially inside of collaborative activities, which sup-
plied the interactants with both the necessary common conceptual ground 
and the necessary opportunities for interchanging roles and perspectives with 
their partner. Early humans’ cooperative communication with natural gestures 
thus required both levels in our dual- level conception of joint collaborative 
activities: joint goals and attention, as the shared aspect, and individual roles 
and perspectives, as the individual aspect. And none of this required language. 
Communicators conceptualizing or perspectivizing things in diff erent ways 
for diff erent communicative partners (depending on judgments of common 
ground, relevance, and newness), and then recipients comprehending the 
intended perspectives through socially recursive inferences, is not the result 
of becoming a language user, but rather its prerequisite.
Second- Personal Th inking
We are trying to get to the full fl owering of modern human objective- refl ective- 
normative thinking in the context of culture and language. We are halfway 
there. With the reconstructed early humans we are picturing  here, we have 
creatures who are not just strategizing how to obtain food or mates in bigger, 
better, and faster ways than others, as are great apes, but rather who are attempt-
ing to coordinate their actions and intentional states with others via evolution-
arily new forms of collaborative activity and cooperative communication. Th ey 
are not just or ga niz ing their actions via individual intentionality; they are also 
or ga niz ing them via joint intentionality. And this changed the way they imag-
ined the world so as to manipulate it in acts of thinking.

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
69
Perspectival, Symbolic Repre sen ta tions
Great apes schematize cognitive models for the various types of situations 
that are recurrent and important in their lives. And so when early humans 
began engaging in obligate collaborative foraging, they schematized a cogni-
tive model of the dual- level collaborative structure comprising a joint goal 
with individual roles and joint attention with individual perspectives. With 
cooperative communication, early human individuals began overtly indicat-
ing or symbolizing for a partner situations that  were relevant to her, given her 
individual role and perspective in the joint activity. To do this, they created 
evolutionarily new forms of natural gestures— pointing and pantomiming— 
whose use resulted in cognitive repre sen ta tions that had three new and trans-
formative characteristics.
Perspectival.  Conceptualizing things from diff erent perspectives comes 
so naturally to humans that we consider it as almost inevitable; it is just the 
way cognition works. Typically in cognitive science, concepts are character-
ized in En glish words, such as car, vehicle, and anniversary present, that can be 
applied as needed, even to the same entity sitting in the driveway. But this way 
of doing things is not inevitable; indeed, it is not even possible for creatures 
that cannot “triangulate” with another individual simultaneously on the same 
entity. Great apes may sometimes apply diff erent schematic repre sen ta tions to 
one and the same entity: on one occasion a par tic u lar tree is an escape route, 
whereas on another occasion it is a sleeping place. But each of these diff erent 
conceptualizations is tied to the individual’s current goal state; she may know 
many things about the tree, but she does not entertain them as alternative pos-
sible construals simultaneously, and so they are not interrelated perspectives in 
the way we have defi ned them  here (and this is true even if the ape is solving a 
problem by imagining nonactual entities or situations, because even  here she 
is doing this aimed only at her current problem situation).
In contrast, when early humans began to communicate cooperatively with 
others, they  were constantly taking the other’s perspective on a situation or 
entity to which they themselves  were already attending (they  were triangulat-
ing with the other). Indeed, each time they communicated, they had to make 
their communicative act relevant and new for the recipient in the context of 
her goals and values, their common ground, and her existing knowledge and 
expectations. As they  were thus thinking how their communicative act 
might fi t into the life of the recipient, communicators had to consider several 

70 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
alternative perspectives simultaneously, and only then choose a communica-
tive act to instantiate one of them. For example, in order to warn of danger, 
they might pantomime for a recipient as they approached a cave either a snake, 
or a snake bite on the leg, or just a general danger sign (which the recipient 
would know, in the context of their common ground about caves, meant 
snakes).
Th e key point from the perspective of cognitive repre sen ta tion is that com-
municators  were not tied to their own goals and perspectives, but rather they 
 were considering alternative perspectives for another person, whose conative 
and epistemic states they could only imagine. For her part, the recipient, in 
order to make the abductive leap necessary to grasp the communicator’s com-
municative intentions, had to then simulate his perspective on her perspective 
(at least). Th is transacting in perspectives meant that early human individuals 
did not just experience the world directly for themselves, in the manner of all 
apes but, in addition, at least in some aspects, experienced the exact same 
world viewed simultaneously from diff erent social perspectives. Th is triangu-
lating pro cess inserted for the fi rst time a small but powerful wedge between 
what we might now call the subjective and the objective.
Symbolic.  Iconic gestures, or pantomime, also seem mundane to humans, 
who have the ability to imitate one another’s actions, and to even imitate or 
simulate their own past actions outside of their normal instrumental context. 
But they are anything but mundane, as they represent the fi rst acts by any pri-
mate (arguably any animal species) that attempt to re- present for a recipient, in 
overt action, some event or entity, so that she will imagine it. Iconic gestures also 
require that the recipient comprehend communicative intentions (in our story, 
already in the comprehension of pointing) so that she can “quarantine” these 
gestures as not actual instrumental acts but rather acts of communication.
Producing communicative acts that resemble their intended referents (e.g., 
miming a monkey climbing) creates a symbolic relationship in which the act 
is meant to evoke in imagination the intended referent (e.g., a monkey or an 
act of climbing or a monkey climbing), which is hoped to lead the recipient to 
infer the communicator’s communicative intention (e.g., that they go hunting 
for monkeys now). Like pointing, iconic gestures perspectivize a situation, but 
unlike pointing, they do this articulately in the symbolic vehicle itself. For 
example, with iconic gestures one would have diff erent icons for “monkey” and 
“food” even if, on diff erent occasions, they  were used for the exact same animal, 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
71
whereas in pointing, the act (protruding fi nger) would be the same in both 
cases, with the common ground of the collaborative activity (whether we are 
admiring the local fauna or seeking sustenance) carry ing the semantic weight. 
Another important feature of iconic gestures is that they are mostly categori-
cal in nature, that is, used to conceptualize or perspectivize things, events, or 
situations “like this.” In choosing what to act out for others in pantomime, 
then, communicators construe the situation from a par tic u lar perspective cat-
egorically, as opposed to other possible categorical perspectives.
Quasi- Propositional.  Combining gestures into a single communicative 
act parses the referent situation into something like event- participant struc-
ture, which limits the semantic scope of each gesture. Th us, pantomiming a 
monkey in combination with pointing to a spear now suggests even more 
articulately the desired hunting trip, but the gesture for monkey is now con-
fi ned to symbolizing the monkey only, not the hunting trip as a  whole. In 
combination with the already established tendency to background knowledge 
in common ground (topic) and to explicitly communicate about new infor-
mation (focus), this parsing creates a nascent subject- predicate or ga ni za tion 
in the communicative act— resulting in something on the way to full propo-
sitions. (Interestingly, great apes raised by humans with a human- like com-
munication system typically make the event- participant distinction, but not 
the topic- focus distinction [because they do not have any notion of a shared 
focus of attention or topic], and so they do not have subject- predicate or ga ni-
za tion in their multiunit communicative acts [see Tomasello, 2008].) Th e 
addition of a new cooperative communicative motive made for two distinctly 
marked motives (requestive and informative), which created a fi rst nascent 
distinction between communicative force and content.
With the advent of early human collaboration and cooperative communi-
cation, then, the cognitive repre sen ta tion of experience in type- token format, as 
in great apes, was “cooperativized.” Individuals interacting in joint attention 
and common conceptual ground could conceptualize the same event, entity, 
or situation simultaneously from multiple perspectives. Th e symbolization of 
these perspectives in categorical iconic gestures and in gesture combinations 
with topic- focus or ga ni za tion, with some indication of a force- content dis-
tinction, made them at least incipiently propositional as well. Th is pro cess 
might be seen to eff ectively decontextualize (cooperativize or make less ego-
centric) the individual’s experience of the world, as he decides under which 

72 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
symbolic description to represent a situation for a communicative partner. 
With this perspectival crack in the experiential egg, we are on our way to think-
ing that is in some sense “objective.”
Socially Recursive Inferences
Socially recursive inferences, once again, seem so natural for humans as to be 
barely noticeable: I wonder what she thinks I’m thinking. Great apes make 
inferences about experience— they simulate the causes and outcomes of physi-
cal and social situations— but they do not make inferences about what the 
other is thinking about their thinking. Such inferences begin with early 
 humans attempting to coordinate their actions and attention with others in 
collaborative activities with joint goals and attention, but they come into full 
fl ower with early humans attempting to coordinate their intentional states 
and perspectives with others in cooperative communication.
In the context of a joint collaborative activity, early human communica-
tors began thinking about (i.e., simulating) how best to formulate their com-
municative act for a recipient, with the goal of both honesty (engendered by 
a concern with being cooperative in general) and communicative effi  cacy. Th e 
concern with honesty— especially given that recipients  were now becoming 
“epistemically vigilant” (Sperber et al., 2010)— puts us on the road to a com-
mitment to the truth of our communicative acts. Th e concern with commu-
nicative effi  cacy required that both communicator and recipient anticipate 
the perspective of their partner, which required socially recursive inferences 
that embedded the intentional states of one partner within those of the other. 
In addition, the production of overt combinations of gestures for others, once 
they  were schematized, created unpre ce dented new possibilities for produc-
tive inferences about nonactual or even counterfactual states of aff airs. Early 
human inferences thus display two new and transformative properties.
Socially Recursive.  We may reasonably ask why early human com-
municators began making socially recursive inferences in the fi rst place. Th e 
short answer is that they assumed together in common ground that the com-
municator had cooperative motives, and so they  were collaborating toward the 
joint goal of recipient comprehension. In this context, they  were each trying 
to help the other— as in all joint collaborative activities— and this meant 
simulating what the other was thinking about their thinking. And since 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
73
pointing and pantomiming on their own are quite weak communicative vehi-
cles, inferential leaps of at least some distance are always required to recon-
struct the communicator’s communicative intention— so that at least some 
help is almost always needed.
And so developed a form of communication in which a communicator 
intended that a recipient know something, for her benefi t. Th e recipient un-
derstood this and so, for example, understood that he intends for me to know 
that the banana is in that bucket. Th e communicator, for his part, knew that 
the recipient would make such an inference if he helped her to do so by alert-
ing her to the fact that he had such an intention (the Gricean communicative 
intention that the recipient notice that the communicator wants her to know 
something). Th is may not be one multiply embedded communicative inten-
tion, as in the Gricean analysis, but rather, as argued by Moore (in press) two 
singly embedded intentions: I intend that you notice that this communicative 
act is for you, plus I intend that you know that the banana is in that bucket. 
Nevertheless, the single embedding in this second intention is already more 
than great apes can do, and so it represents a new form of recursive inference 
(the production version occurring when the communicator simulated the re-
cipient’s intentional states in order to formulate communicative acts that 
would be readily comprehensible for her— not throwing the ball at her, but 
rather to her).
Combinatorial.  Communicating with others using overt gestures, and 
especially being able to combine gestures to communicate with others in more 
complex ways, enabled new pro cesses of productive thinking. In their natural 
communication with one another, great apes do not combine gestures with 
one another (nor vocalizations) to communicate something new. Th eir think-
ing is thus confi ned to imagining novel situations using their past individual 
experiences reconfi gured in new ways. But once early humans began imagin-
ing situations from the perspective of the other in order to communicate with 
combinations of gestures, and then schematized these combinations, they had 
the possibility to go beyond their own experience to think about something 
that others might experience, or even something impossible. For example, I 
might produce an iconic gesture for traveling followed by pointing to a loca-
tion, which I generalize to any location. I might then imagine or communi-
cate, via this schema, our child traveling to the sun— something I consider 
causally impossible. When humans began schematizing communicative 

74 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
constructions with abstract slots in this way, they created for themselves 
 almost unlimited combinatorial freedom. Schema formation in communi-
cative acts and the parsing of communicative intentions into discrete overt 
components represent a signifi cant step in the direction of the kind of “in-
ferential promiscuity” characteristic of modern human thinking in a con-
ventional language.
Beyond the new possibilities for creating novel, even counterfactual thoughts 
via external communicative vehicles, a number of theorists have emphasized 
the necessary role of such external vehicles for individuals to refl ect on their 
own thinking (e.g., Bermudez, 2003). When individuals formulate an overt 
communicative act and then perceive and comprehend it as they produce it, 
they are, in eff ect, refl ecting on their own thinking (a pro cess that may become 
internalized so that we may think about things that we could potentially com-
municate overtly). Because the gesture combinations at this point have only 
limited semantic content (e.g., no logical vocabulary and no propositional atti-
tude vocabulary), early humans could refl ect only in a highly limited way on 
their own thinking.
With the advent of early human collaboration and cooperative communi-
cation, then, the causal inferences of great apes  were, like their cognitive repre-
sen ta tions, “cooperativized.” Th is meant that the communicator’s inferences 
 were about what was the situation from the perspective of the recipient, and 
the recipient’s inferences  were about the communicator’s simulations of her 
simulating his perspective. Overt combinations of symbols, especially if sche-
matized, led to the possibility of thinking various new and even counterfac-
tual thoughts, as well as to the fi rst, rather modest, refl ections on one’s own 
thinking. With all of these new inferential possibilities, then, we are now well 
on our way to thinking pro cesses that are truly refl ectively reasoned.
Second- Personal Self- Monitoring
Great apes self- monitor their goal- directed behavior, including its psychologi-
cal underpinnings with respect to such things as memory and decision making. 
But great apes are not normative creatures. Th ey experience “instrumental 
pressure,” for example, when they have a goal to eat food and they know that 
food is available at location X; this implies that they “must” go to location X. 
But this is just the way control systems with individual intentionality work: a 
mismatch between goal and perceived reality motivates action. In contrast, 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
75
early humans began to self- monitor from the perspective of others and, indeed, 
self- regulated their behavioral decisions with others’ evaluations in mind. Now 
we may talk of something that is socially regulated, that is, socially norma-
tive, albeit only in second- personal (as opposed to agent- neutral) form. Th ere 
 were two manifestations.
Cooperative Self- Monitoring.  First, because the collaborative ac-
tivities of early humans  were interdependent and operated with partner choice, 
each individual, even the most dominant, had to respect the power of other 
individuals, even the most subordinate, to exclude them from collaborative 
opportunities. Early humans thus developed not only an ability to make evalu-
ative judgments about others’ cooperative proclivities but also an ability to 
simulate, and so to anticipate, the evaluative judgments that others  were mak-
ing about them. Young human children are concerned with the social evalua-
tions of others from the preschool years on as they attempt to actively manage 
the impression they are making on them (Haun and Tomasello, 2011), but 
chimpanzees seem to be not so concerned (Engelmann et al., 2012).
Early humans’ concerns for how their collaborative partners viewed them— 
and their active attempts to manage this impression— provided a new motive 
for actions, namely, to coordinate with the evaluative expectations of potential 
partners. Individuals thus began to cede power over themselves to the second- 
personal evaluations of others because these evaluations determined their fu-
ture collaborative opportunities. From the point of view of normativity, this 
meant that in making their behavioral decisions, humans not only experienced 
individual instrumental pressure but also experienced second- personal social 
pressure from their partners in social engagements. Th is constitutes, in the cur-
rent account, one origin of what will later become social norms of morality.
Communicative Self- Monitoring.  Second, because early human 
communicators wanted to facilitate the recipient’s comprehension, they had 
to actively self- monitor their potential communicative acts in anticipation of 
how they might be comprehended and/or interpreted by the recipient. Th ey 
thus engaged in a self- monitoring of the communicative pro cess, from the 
perspective of the recipient, especially for intelligibility.
Mead (1934) pointed out the key role of overtness  here. As they communi-
cated with others in overt acts— either deictic or symbolic— early humans 
saw or heard themselves performing those acts, in which case they then 

76 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
comprehended them (as perspectivized for another) as the recipient. Commu-
nicators thus adjusted their communicative act so as to maximize the com-
prehension of the recipient, as part of their commitment to the collaborative 
act of cooperative communication. Making such adjustments required self- 
monitoring and evaluating communicative acts for comprehensibility from 
the perspective of specifi c communicative partners, each with her own indi-
vidual knowledge and motives and common ground with the communicator. 
Th is constitutes, in the current account, one origin of what will later become 
social norms of rationality.
Th e early humans we are picturing  here would thus have been able to en-
gage in two kinds of cooperative and communicative self- monitoring that 
great apes cannot— because great apes do not engage in the kind of joint col-
laborative activities and cooperative communication that engenders such so-
cial self- monitoring. Early humans simulated the evaluative judgments that 
others made of them with regard to their cooperative proclivities— precursors 
to norms of morality— and also with regard to the intelligibility of their com-
municative acts— precursors to norms of rationality. Importantly, the evalua-
tions we are talking about  here come from par tic u lar individuals, and so we 
are still a way from the kind of agent- neutral, “objective” norms by which 
modern humans evaluate others and themselves. But we have begun the pro-
cess of socially normativizing individual thinking.
Perspectivity: Th e View from  Here and Th ere
It is now widely accepted that what most clearly distinguishes nonhuman 
primates from other mammalian species cognitively is their complex skills of 
social cognition. Dunbar (1998), for example, documented that primate brain 
size correlates most strongly not with primates’ physical ecol ogy but, rather, 
with their social group size (as a proxy for social complexity). But primates’ 
special skills of social cognition are aimed mainly at competition (i.e., their 
intelligence is Machiavellian), in which they keep track of all of the various 
dominance relationships in the group, as well as all of the various affi  liative 
relationships in the group as these might aff ect the competition for food and 
mates.
Th e question thus arises whether the uniquely human skills of cognition 
and thinking that we have identifi ed  here might instead have arisen for com-
petition. On the level of evolutionary function (ultimate causation), this is 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
77
true almost by defi nition, since evolutionary success is defi ned as having 
more off spring than others. But on the level of proximate mechanism, we do 
not think it likely that perspectival cognitive repre sen ta tions, socially recur-
sive inferences, and social self- monitoring could have arisen directly out of 
competitive contexts. It is true that, in theory, one could get a kind of arms 
race in mind reading to deal with competitive situations. In competition, 
individuals could come to realize that both me and my competitor are focused 
on the same resource at the same time ( joint attention?) and then to try to out-
compete her for that resource by thinking about what she is thinking about 
my thinking. But what we for sure cannot get strictly from competition are 
the unique forms of cooperative communication in which humans engage. 
Unlike other primates, humans use their communicative acts to actually en-
courage others to discern their thinking. Th us, human communicators take 
the perspective of others in order to determine their goals and interests so 
that they can then inform them of something helpful to them. Th ose others 
want this helpful information, and so they do their best to help the commu-
nicator discern their goals and interests, and also to discern their knowledge 
and expectations so that he may formulate his communicative act in a com-
prehensible manner. Humans, but not other primates, thus collaborate in 
their communication to make it easier for the other to take their perspective 
and even to manipulate it if they so desire.
An especially enlightening example of a similar cooperative pro cess con-
cerns a unique physical characteristic of humans. Of the more than two 
hundred species of primates, only humans have highly visible eye direction 
(because of especially visible white sclera; Kobayashi and Koshima, 2001). 
And only humans use this information. Th us, when tested in various condi-
tions contrasting head and eye direction, twelve- month- old human infants 
tended to follow the eye direction over the head direction of others, whereas 
great apes tended to follow the head direction of others only (Tomasello et al., 
2007b). For humans to have evolved conspicuous cues of gaze direction, there 
must have been some advantage to the individual to “advertise” her eye direc-
tion for others. Th is suggests predominantly cooperative situations in which 
the individual may rely on others using this information collaboratively or 
helpfully, not competitively or exploitively. Th e point is that human commu-
nicative acts serve to advertise the internal states of individuals in this same 
way, and so it also suggests cooperation of this same type (e.g., cooperative re-
quests such as “I’d like some fruit” are “advertisements” of my internal state of 

78 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
desire, and informative utterances such as “Th ere is some fruit over there” are 
public off ers of helpful information). Communication of this type could 
never be adaptively stable in contexts that  were not fundamentally coopera-
tive, and so fully human- like skills of joint intentionality could never evolve 
solely in the context of competition.
Th ere can be no doubt that the last common ancestor to humans and other 
primates engaged in individual thinking in pursuit of individual goals, mostly 
in order to compete with groupmates for valued resources. Along the way, they 
attended to situations relevant to those goals. Early human individuals— in 
response to a changing feeding ecology— then began to join together with 
other individuals dyadically in pursuit of joint goals, and they jointly attended 
to situations relevant to that joint goal. Each participant in the collaboration 
had her own individual role and her own individual perspective on the situa-
tion as part of the interactive unit. Th is dual- level structure— simultaneous 
jointness and individuality— is the defi ning structure of what we are calling 
joint intentionality, and it is foundational for all subsequent manifestations of 
human shared intentionality.
Th e problem was how to coordinate these collaborative activities as they 
became ever more complex, both to negotiate a joint goal and to coordinate 
the two diff erent roles. Th e solution was cooperative communication. Early 
humans directed the attention of their collaborative partner to relevant situa-
tions by pointing, which required taking her perspective and simulating her 
thinking (i.e., in terms of the abductive leap she might be expected to make 
given diff erent possible communicative acts). To comprehend, the recipient 
had to take the perspective of the communicator taking her perspective— 
which constituted to a new form of socially recursive inferring. Early humans’ 
concern that their partner comprehend them led to social self- monitoring via 
the anticipated evaluations of the partner with respect to the comprehensibil-
ity of the communicative act.
Th e basic cognitive challenge in all of this was to coordinate one’s own per-
spective with the perspective of one’s collaborative partner. And so, as early 
humans engaged in the truck and barter of making a living collaboratively, 
they began to truck and barter in perspectives with their interactive partners 
communicatively— and in their own perspectives refl ectively to some degree— 
and this gave human cognitive repre sen ta tion and inference a new kind of fl ex-
ibility and power. Now, instead of just their own view on the world, early hu-
mans could also view the world at the same time from the perspective of the 

Join t In ten t iona l it y 
79
other, which might also include her perspective on my perspective. Early hu-
mans had not just a great ape view from  here, but rather a view simultaneously 
from  here and there.
We do not know precisely who these early humans  were, but we may spec-
ulate Homo heidelbergensis some 400,000 years ago, living as loosely struc-
tured bands or pools of recurrently collaborating partners. Of course Homo 
heidelbergensis did not engage in modern human forms of fully objective- 
refl ective- normative thinking. Th eir thinking was not “objective” but rather 
was still tied to the two second- personal perspectives of “I” and “you.” Th eir 
thinking was only weakly refl ective because they could express very few of 
their intentional states or cognitive operations externally in communicative 
vehicles (and so they could act as both producers and comprehenders of only 
some limited semantic content). And their thinking was socially normative 
only in the sense that they  were concerned with how their partner evaluated 
their cooperative behavior and comprehended their communicative acts, not 
with the group’s normative standards. Th ere is thus no question that we are 
still some way from modern human collective intentionality and its objective- 
refl ective- normative thinking. But, we would argue, the “in- between” step of 
early human joint intentionality and its perspectival- recursive- socially moni-
tored thinking was necessary for getting there. It was necessary because the 
transition to modern humans was all about creating cultural conventions, and 
if these  were to be in a cooperative direction— as they almost invariably  were—
then some very strong cooperative tendencies had to be already present in the 
individuals doing the conventionalizing.
Together, then, early human collaborative activities and cooperative com-
munication represent a kind of second- personal “cooperativization” of great 
ape lifeways and thinking. But these evolutionarily new forms of second- 
person social interaction involved joint engagement with specifi c other per-
sons on specifi c occasions only, and they did not retain their special character-
istics very far outside of the collaborative activities themselves. And so, despite 
the great leap forward represented by this new joint intentional way of living, 
communicating, and thinking, the next leap forward will have to take this 
“cooperativized” cognition and thinking and “collectivize” it by conventional-
izing and institutionalizing— and so normativizing and objectifying— almost 
everything.

4
Collective Intentionality
Th ere is no thinking apart from common standards 
of correctness and relevance, which relate what I do think 
to what anyone ought to think. Th e contrast between 
“I” and “anyone” is essential to rational thought.
—wilfrid sellars, Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man
A modern human society may be characterized in two dimensions. Th e fi rst 
is its synchronic social or ga ni za tion: the coordinated social interactions that 
make it a society in the fi rst place. Early human individuals, as we have seen, 
coordinated in acts of collaborative foraging with specifi c others from a 
loosely structured pool of collaborators. But now with modern humans we 
need to scale up to much larger social groups with much more complex social 
or ga ni za tion, that is to say, to fully cultural or ga ni za tion. Modern humans 
became cultural beings by identifying with their specifi c cultural group and 
creating with groupmates various kinds of cultural conventions, norms, and 
institutions built not on personal but on cultural common ground. Th ey thus 
became thoroughly group- minded individuals.
Th e second dimension of a modern human society is its diachronic trans-
mission of skills and knowledge across generations. Social transmission of one 
sort or another was almost certainly important in the lives of early humans (as 
it is in some apes’ lives), as diffi  cult- to- invent, tool- based, subsistence activities 
became ever more complex and important for survival. But now with modern 
humans we need to scale up to full- fl edged cultural transmission supporting 
cumulative cultural evolution. Th is required that modern humans not just 
acquire instrumental actions by observing others, as did early humans, but 
actively conform to the behavior and norms of the group, and even enforce 
conformity on others through teaching and social norm enforcement.

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
81
Th e combination of these changes in the two dimensions of human social-
ity created some totally new cultural realities. Th e transformative pro cess was 
conventionalization, which has both a coordinative component, as individuals 
implicitly “agree” to do something in a consistent way (everyone wants to do 
it this way as long as everyone  else does, too), and a transmitive component, 
as this way of doing things sets a pre ce dent to be copied by others who want 
to coordinate as well. Th e result is what we may call cultural practices, in 
which individuals, in eff ect, coordinate with the entire cultural group via 
collectively known cultural conventions, norms, and institutions. In commu-
nication this means, of course, linguistic conventions, which serve their coor-
dinative function because, and only because, they exist as “agreements” in 
the group’s cultural common ground.
In terms of thinking, early humans imagined the world in order to ma-
nipulate it in thought via perspectival cognitive repre sen ta tions, socially recur-
sive inferences, and social self- monitoring—which prepared them to coordinate 
with other specifi c individuals. But group- minded and linguistically compe-
tent modern humans had to be prepared to coordinate with anyone from the 
group, with some kind of generic other. Th is meant that modern human in-
dividuals came to imagine the world in order to manipulate it in thought via 
“objective” repre sen ta tions (anyone’s perspective), refl ective inferences con-
nected by reasons (compelling to anyone), and normative self- governance so as 
to coordinate with the group’s (anyone’s) normative expectations. And these 
group- minded ways of operating and thinking  were not present just in specifi c 
ad hoc collaborative interactions of the moment; rather, because of the way 
that modern humans became competent members of a cultural group during 
ontogeny, they created a permanent imprint in the human mind- set.
So once more let us look, fi rst, at the new forms of collaboration evident in 
human cultural or ga ni za tion, then at the new forms of conventional linguis-
tic communication for coordinating cultural life, and then at the resulting 
new forms of agent- neutral, normatively governed thinking that cultural life 
demanded.
Th e Emergence of Culture
A number of animal species, from  whales to capuchin monkeys, engage in one 
or another form of social transmission, requiring some form of social learning. 

82 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
Th e most cultural of nonhuman animals are undoubtedly the great apes, espe-
cially chimpanzees and orangutans. Observations in the wild have documented 
for these two species a relatively large number of population- specifi c behaviors 
that persist in the group over time and that very likely involve social learning 
(Whiten et al., 1999; van Schaik et al., 2003). Experimental studies have also 
demonstrated some skills of social learning in these two species, for example, 
in learning to use novel tools, that very likely are at work in generating their 
cultural patterns in the wild (see Whiten, 2010, for a review).
But great ape culture is not human culture. Tomasello (2011) characterizes 
great ape culture as mainly “exploitive,” as individuals socially learn from others 
who may not even know they are being watched. Modern human culture, in 
contrast, is fundamentally cooperative, as adults actively teach children, altru-
istically, and children actively conform to adults, as a way of fi tting in coopera-
tively with the cultural group. Th e hypothesis is that this cooperative form of 
culture was made possible by the intermediate step of early humans’ highly 
cooperative lifeways and how this transformed great ape social learning into 
truly cultural learning. Teaching borrows its basic structure from cooperative 
communication in which we inform others of things helpfully, and conformity 
is imitation fortifi ed by the desire to coordinate with the normative expectations 
of the group. Modern humans did not start from scratch but started from early 
human cooperation. Human culture is early human cooperation writ large.
Group Identifi cation
Th e small- scale, ad hoc collaborative foraging characteristic of early humans 
was a stable adaptive strategy— for a while. In the hypothesis of Tomasello 
et al. (2012), it was destabilized by two, essentially demographic, factors.
Th e fi rst factor was competition with other humans. Th is meant that a 
loose pool of collaborators had to turn into a proper social group in order to 
protect their way of life from invaders. A loose social grouping of early humans 
was under pressure to transform into a coherent collaborative group with 
joint goals aimed at group survival (each group member needing the others as 
collaborative partners for both foraging and fi ghting) and division- of- labor 
roles toward this end. As with early humans’ smaller- scale collaborations, 
this meant that group members  were motivated to help one another, as they 
 were all now clearly interdependent with one another at all times: “we” must 
together compete with and protect ourselves from “them.” Individuals thus 

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
83
began to understand themselves as members of a par tic u lar social group with 
a par tic u lar group identity— a culture— based on a we- intentionality encom-
passing the entire group.
Th e second factor was increasing population size. As human populations 
grew, they tended to split into smaller groupings, leading to so- called tribal 
or ga ni za tion in which a number of diff erent social groupings  were still a single 
supergroup or “culture.” Th is meant that recognizing others from our own 
cultural group became far from trivial— and of course we needed to ensure 
that they could recognize us as well. Such recognition in both directions was 
important because only members of our cultural group can be counted on to 
share our skills and values and so be good and trustworthy collaborative part-
ners. Contemporary humans have many diverse ways of marking group iden-
tity, but one can imagine that the original ways  were mainly behavioral: people 
who talk like us, prepare food like us, and net fi sh in the conventional way— 
that is, those who share our cultural practices— are very likely members of our 
cultural group.
And so early humans’ skills of imitation became modern humans’ active 
conformity, both to coordinate activities more eff ectively with in- group strang-
ers and to display group identity so that others will choose me as a knowledge-
able and trustworthy partner. Teaching others to do things, perhaps especially 
one’s children, became a good way to assist their functioning in the group 
and to ensure even more conformity in the pro cess. Teaching and conformity 
then led to cumulative cultural evolution characterized by the “ratchet eff ect” 
(Tomasello et al., 1993; Tennie et al., 2009; Dean et al., 2012) in which modi-
fi cations of a cultural practice stayed in the population rather faithfully until 
some individual invented some new and improved technique, which was then 
taught and conformed to until some still newer innovation ratcheted things 
up again. Tomasello (2011) argues that great ape societies do not display the 
ratchet eff ect or cumulative cultural evolution because their social learning is 
fundamentally exploitative and not cooperatively structured in the human 
way via teaching and conformity, which constitute the ratchet that prevents 
individuals from slipping backward.
Th e new sense of group identity characteristic of modern humans was 
thus extended not just in space to in- group strangers but also in time to 
ancestors and descendants in the group: this is the way “we” have always done 
things; it is part of who “we” are. As cultural practices  were handed down 
across generations cooperatively— adults altruistically teaching and youngsters 

84 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
trusting and even conforming— the resulting cumulative eff ect was that the 
“we” became an enduring culture to which we (past, present, and future) are 
all committed ( just as early humans  were committed to their ongoing, small- 
scale collaborations). Human populations thus became more than a loosely 
structured pool of collaborators; they become self- identifi ed cultures with 
their own “histories.” Once again, precisely when this all happened is not 
crucial to our story, but the fi rst clear signs of distinct human cultures appear 
with Homo sapiens sapiens, that is, modern humans, beginning at the earliest 
some 200,000 years ago.
Th at humans do indeed think of their group as a “we” of interdependent 
individuals— that humans identify with their group— is a well- established 
psychological fact. Most fundamentally, humans have a marked in- group/out- 
group psychology that is, in all likelihood, unique to the species. Much re-
search shows that humans favor their in- group in all kinds of ways, and they 
care about their reputation more in their in- group than in any out- groups as 
well (Engelmann et al., in press). Moreover, they think of others from other 
groups not just as strangers, as do apes and as did early humans, but as mem-
bers of specifi c out- groups with alien, often despised ways. Perhaps the most 
striking phenomenon of group identity is collective guilt, shame, and pride. 
Individuals feel guilty, ashamed, and/or proud when an individual of their 
group does something noteworthy in basically the same way that they would 
if they themselves had done the deed (Bennett and Sani, 2008). In the con-
temporary world, one sees such group identity and collective guilt, shame, and 
pride quite clearly in struggles over ethnic identity, linguistic identity, collec-
tive responsibility, and so forth— and even in such frivolous phenomena as fan 
support of sports teams. As far as we know, great apes do not have, and early 
humans did not have, this sense of group identity at all.
Th e proposal is thus that with increasing population sizes and competition 
among humans, the members of human groups began to think of themselves 
and their groupmates (known and unknown, present and past) as participants 
in one big, interdependent, collaborative activity aimed at surviving and thriv-
ing in competition with other human groups. Group members  were identifi ed 
most readily by specifi c cultural practices, and so teaching and conformity to 
the group’s lifeways became a critical part of the pro cess. Th ese new forms of 
group- mindedness led to what we may call the collectivization of human social 
life, as embodied in group- wide cultural conventions, norms, and institutions— 
which transformed, one more time, the way that humans think.

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
85
Conventional Cultural Practices
Group identifi cation means that human groups each have their own set of 
conventional cultural practices. Conventional cultural practices are things 
that “we” do, that we all know in cultural common ground that we do, and 
that we all expect one another in cultural common ground to do in appropri-
ate circumstances. Th us, in an open barter food market in which a conven-
tionalized set of mea sure ments for coordination is in place, if I show up with 
my honey in unconventional containers, no other traders will know what to 
do with me and my undetermined quantities of honey. With conventional 
cultural practices, deviations are not punished per se; they are simply left on 
the outside looking in. And there are some conventions that one cannot opt 
out of: one can wear this clothing, or that clothing, or nothing at all, but 
what ever one wears, it is a cultural choice that will either conform to or vio-
late the expectations of others in the group.
Unlike the second- personal common ground that early human individu-
als created with one another as they engaged in collaborative activities, the 
common ground at this point is what Clark (1996) calls cultural common 
ground: things that we all in the group know that we all know even if we did 
not experience them together as individuals. Indeed, Chwe (2003) argues 
that the main function of the public events of a culture is to make sure that 
such things as the chief ’s coronation or his daughter’s marriage ceremony 
become public knowledge: a part of the cultural common ground that every-
one can count on everyone  else knowing, which no one can plausibly deny 
knowing, and knowledge of which serves as a shibboleth of group member-
ship. Interestingly, children as young as two years of age are already tuned 
into cultural common ground. Th us, Liebal et al. (2013) had two- and three- 
year- old children meet a novel adult (clearly from their group). Th is in- group 
stranger then asked them sincerely, “Who is that?” while they looked together 
at a Santa Claus toy and a toy the child had just made before the adult entered. 
Children answered by naming the newly created toy, as even children this 
young know that no one in the culture, not even someone they have never 
before met, needs to ask who is Santa Claus. (In a second condition they named 
Santa Claus if the stranger asked for the name of a toy she seemed to recog-
nize.) Children in this same age range also expect that in- group strangers will 
know the conventional name of an object but not a novel, arbitrary fact about 
that same object (Diesendruck et al., 2010).

86 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
Some conventional cultural practices are the product of explicit agreement. 
But this is not how things got started; a social contract theory of the origins 
of social conventions would presuppose many of the things it needed to ex-
plain, such as advanced communication skills in which to make the agree-
ment. Lewis (1969) thus proposed another way to get started. We begin with 
a coordination problem, say, what time to show up to go group fi shing every 
day at our new camp. Let us say that by chance we depart on the fi rst day at 
midday ( just because that is when enough people for the task have congre-
gated). Assuming no advanced communication skills, what do we do the next 
day? Following Schelling (1960), Lewis (1969) proposes that we search for 
anything to single out one time from all the others on this second day, and a 
natural way of doing that for humans seems to be “precedent”— we do what 
we did before (what worked for us before) and show up at midday again. And 
so we habituate, and new participants just imitate and conform to us. Anyone 
who does not conform simply does not participate.
But with the possibility of communication, we may also teach the conven-
tion to others and encourage them to conform and so to participate in the 
cultural practice. Importantly for our understanding of collective intention-
ality, when adults teach children how to perform cultural practices, the children 
take it not as communication about the current episodic event but, rather, as 
something general about the world, applying to things and/or events like 
these in general (i.e., “Fishing takes place at midday”). Th us, an adult might 
communicate to a child, without teaching, that there is a fi sh right there in 
the water. But when he goes into teaching mode the message is something 
more like, “Th ese kind of fi sh are found in places like this,” to facilitate the 
child’s fi shing skills in general (Csibra and Gergely, 2009). Th e implication of 
this pedagogical mode of cooperative communication is that there is a kind 
of objective reality that works on general principles (these kinds of fi sh in 
general, and these kinds of places in general), and the current situation is 
merely one instance of this objective reality. Teaching is implicitly backed by 
the collective and objective perspective on things developed by our cultural 
group.
Modern human children are thus learning from adults that there are 
certain ways that things should work. Th is “should” implicitly undergirding 
adult teaching prompts children, in ways that we do not fully understand, to 
objectify and reify the generic facts they are being taught into an objective 
reality— a generic perspective that is the ultimate adjudicator among diff ering 

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
87
perspectives on the world. Th is pro cess has many implications for human think-
ing, but a prominent one is the understanding of false beliefs (which great 
apes clearly do not do; see Tomasello and Moll, in press, for a review). Th us, 
we previously invoked something like Davidson’s notion of social triangula-
tion to explain how it is that early humans came to understand that others 
have perspectives that diff er from their own. But to get to an understanding 
of beliefs, including false beliefs, we must have some notion of a generalized 
perspective on an objective reality that is in de pen dent of any par tic u lar per-
spective. Something like this is needed to make the judgment not just that 
a belief is diff erent from mine, but that it is wrong— since objective reality is 
the fi nal arbiter. It is likely that young children begin to think in terms 
of multiple diff erent perspectives on things from as soon as they participate 
in joint attention with its two perspectives during late infancy (Onishi and 
Baillargeon, 2005; Buttelmann et al., 2009), and we may hypothesize that this 
was the case for early humans as well. But it is not for several more years that 
children come to a full- blown understanding of beliefs, including false beliefs, 
because they (and so presumably all humans before modern humans) do not 
yet understand “objective reality.”1
Social Norms and Normative Self- Monitoring
In the small- scale collaborative interactions of early humans, individuals ac-
tively chose some collaborative partners and shunned others, and in some 
cases even rewarded and punished partners. But this was all done in second- 
personal mode, that is, as one individual evaluating another individual. What 
happened with modern group- minded humans was that these evaluations 
became conventionalized and so applied in agent- neutral, transpersonal mode, 
that is, applied by all to all (even by and to those not directly involved in an 
interaction) and with respect to objective, transpersonal standards. Although 
great apes retaliate for harm done to them, they do not punish other individu-
als for acts toward third parties (Riedl et al., 2012). In contrast, three- year- old 
children enforce social norms on others even when they are not personally 
involved or aff ected in any way, often using normative language about what 
one should or should not do in general (Rakoczy et al., 2008; see Schmidt and 
Tomasello, 2012, for a review).
Social norms are thus mutual expectations in the cultural common ground 
of the group that people behave in certain ways, where the mutual expectations 

88 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
are not just statistical but, rather, socially normative, as in you are expected to 
do your part (or  else!). Th e force of the expectations derives from the fact that 
individuals who do not conform to our group’s way of doing things often create 
disruptions, which should not be tolerated, and indeed, if individuals behave 
too diff erently it signals that they are not one of us (or do not want to be one of 
us) and so cannot be trusted. Group- minded individuals thus view nonconfor-
mity in general as potentially harmful to group life in general. Th e result is that 
humans conform to social norms for instrumental reasons (to coordinate suc-
cessfully), for prudential reasons (to avoid the group’s opprobrium), and in order 
to benefi t of the group’s functioning since nonconformity potentially disrupts 
this functioning (a group- minded reason).
Like conventions in general, social norms operate not in second- personal 
mode but rather in agent- neutral, transpersonal, generic mode. First, and most 
basic, social norms are generic in that they imply an objective standard against 
which an individual’s behavior is evaluated and judged. In early humans’ so-
cial evaluations, individuals only knew who did things in eff ec tive ly or nonco-
operatively, but now the roles have specifi c agent- neutral standards (that can 
be taught as such). Th ese objective standards come from the mutual under-
standing of how the diff erent functions in par tic u lar conventionalized cultural 
practices are eff ected if everyone is to reap the anticipated benefi t. Th us, if it is 
cultural common ground in the group that when collecting honey the person 
smoking out the bees must do so in this par tic u lar way, and that if she does 
not do it in this way we will all go home empty- handed, then her behavior 
may be evaluated relative to this objective standard for job per for mance.
Social norms are also generic in terms of their source. Social norms emanate 
not from an individual’s personal preferences and evaluations but, rather, from 
the group’s agreed- upon evaluations for these kinds of things. Th us, when an 
individual enforces a social norm, she is doing so, in eff ect, as an emissary of 
the group as a  whole— knowing that the group will back her up. Group- 
minded individuals thus enforce social norms because their collective com-
mitment to a social norm means that they commit not only to following 
it themselves but also to seeing that others do, too— for the benefi t both of 
ourselves and of other group members with whom we are interdependent 
(Gilbert, 1983). Th e typical formulation of individuals enforcing social norms 
would be something like, “One cannot do it like that; one must do it like 
this,” which is of course very similar to the generic mode used in teaching. 
(Indeed, norm enforcement and teaching may be two versions of the same 

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
89
phenomenon: enculturating individuals to our group’s ways of doing and 
thinking about things.) Th e presupposition of norm enforcement is that this 
is the group’s collective perspective and evaluation, or possibly even something 
generalized beyond that to some deity or some external normative facts of the 
universe: it is just the case in our world that this is the right way and that is 
the wrong way to do it.
And fi nally, social norms are also generic in their target: group disapproval 
is aimed in an agent- neutral way at in principle anyone, that is, anyone who 
identifi es with our group’s lifeways and so mutually knows and accepts in 
cultural common ground our social norms. (Th e common ground assump-
tion exempts from the force of our social norms individuals from another 
social group, young children, and mentally incompetent persons [Schmidt 
et al., 2012].) Th is agent neutrality in application is nowhere more evident than 
in the fact that people apply social norms to themselves in acts of guilt and 
shame. Th us, if I take some honey that is needed by others, I will feel guilty 
under the force of the norm against stealing (perhaps undergirded by sympathy 
for the victim). More telling, if some illicit avocation of mine is made public, 
I will feel ashamed under the eyes of the group norm, even though I may not 
feel that it is wrong at all. Guilt and shame thus demonstrate with special 
clarity that the judgment being made is not my personal feeling about things 
(I wanted the honey and that avocation), but rather, it is the group’s— which is 
especially clear in the case of shame, in which I may not even agree with the 
group. Nevertheless, I, as an emissary of the group, am sanctioning myself. 
Guilt and shame may thus have some second- personal bases in me feeling 
bad that I harmed another individual or that I did not conform to the expec-
tations of valued others, but the full versions require in addition that I know 
I violated a collective norm. It is not just that my victim feels bad, or that I 
off ended others’ sense of decency but, more important, that the group— which 
includes me— disapproves.
Because I know that things work in this way, I self- monitor and self- regulate 
my actions via group norms so as to coordinate with the expectations of the 
group. In this normative self- monitoring, as we may call it, what one is often 
trying to protect is a public reputation, one’s status as a cooperative member 
of the group (Boehm, 2012). Th at is to say, with modern human collaboration 
taking place on the level of the entire cultural collectivity, my behavior in 
various contexts might be known to some degree in the cultural common 
ground of the group as a  whole (e.g., because of the pervasiveness of gossip, 

90 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
done best in a conventional language; see below). Th is means that early humans’ 
concern with being judged is transformed by modern humans into a concern 
for one’s public reputation and social status. And, critically, reputational status 
is more than just a sum of many social evaluations; it is nothing less than a 
Searlian status function (see next section) in which my public persona is a reifi ed 
cultural product created by the collectivity, who can take it away in a second, 
as any scandalized modern politician can attest.
Institutional Reality
In the limit, some conventional cultural practices turn into full- blown institu-
tions. Obviously, the dividing line is fuzzy, but a basic prerequisite is that the 
cultural practice is not a solo activity but is in some sense collaborative, with 
well- defi ned, complementary roles. But the key feature distinguishing cul-
tural institutions is that they comprise social norms that do not just regulate 
existing activities but, rather, create new cultural entities (the norms are not 
regulative but constitutive). For example, a human group might tend to make 
decisions about such things as where to travel next, how to set up defenses 
against potential predators, and so forth, by simply arguing among themselves. 
But if there are diffi  culties in making decisions, or infi ghting among several 
co ali tions, then the group could institutionalize the pro cess into some kind 
of governing council. Creating this council would give otherwise normal indi-
viduals abnormal status and powers. Th e council might then designate a 
chief, whom they would empower to do still other abnormal things, like ban-
ish people from the group. Th e council and chief are thus cultural creations, 
and their entitlements and obligations are bestowed upon them by the mem-
bers of the group, who can, in theory, take them away and so turn the council 
members and chief back into everyday people again. Th e roles in institutions 
are explicitly agent neutral because, in theory if not in practice, anyone may 
play any role.
Searle (1995) has been most explicit about how this pro cess works. First, 
obviously, is some kind of mutual agreement or joint ac cep tance among group 
members to designate, for example, an individual as chief. Second, there must 
be some kind of symbolizing capacity so as to enact Searle’s well- known 
formula “X counts as Y in context C” (X counts as chief in the context of 
group decision making). Related to this, there should be some actual physical 
symbol— something like a leader’s headdress or scepter or presidential seal— to 

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
91
help in marking the new status in a public way. Th e fact that institutions are 
public means that everyone knows that everyone knows about them and can-
not plead ignorance in the face of overt symbolic marking. Th is is one reason 
why new institutions and offi  cials are anointed with their new obligations and 
entitlements not just implicitly but explicitly and publicly. One could not do 
something bad to a chief wearing his offi  cial headdress, right after his offi  cial 
inauguration, and then plead ignorance of his status. Similarly with formally 
written rules and laws: their public nature essentially means that one cannot 
break them and expect to be excused by pleading ignorance.
Rakoczy and Tomasello (2007) argue that a simple model for understand-
ing cultural institutions is rule games. Of course one may move a piece of 
wood shaped like a  horse all around a checkered board in any way one likes. 
But if one wants to play chess, then one acknowledges that this  horse- shaped 
piece is a “knight,” and one moves a knight only in certain ways, and the other 
pieces in other ways, toward the goal of winning the game, where winning is 
defi ned by certain agreed- upon confi gurations of pieces. Th e pieces are given 
their statuses by the norms or rules, whose existence comes from, and only 
from, the explicit agreement of the players. Th us, we would argue that the 
ontoge ne tic cradle of such cultural status functions is young children’s joint 
pretense when they, for example, designate together a stick to be a snake. In 
doing this they are engaging in the fundamental act that creates new statuses 
since, we would claim, this designation is a social, public agreement with one’s 
play partner (see Wyman et al., 2009). Importantly, although the ability to 
pretend derives evolutionarily, as we have argued, from the way that early hu-
mans created pretend realities by pantomiming situations for others commu-
nicatively, the normative dimension comes only with the group- mindedness 
and collectivity characteristic of modern human cultures.
Th e most important point for current purposes is that there are in the 
modern human world social or institutional facts. Th ese are objective facts 
about the world: Barack Obama is president of the United States, the piece of 
paper in my pocket is a €20 note, and one wins at chess by checkmating one’s 
opponent. At the same time that they are objective, however, these facts are 
observer relative; that is, they are created by individuals in social groups, and 
so they may be just as easily dissolved (Searle, 1995). Barack Obama is president 
but only as long as we say so, euros are legal tender but only as long as we act 
so, and, in theory, the rules of chess may be changed at any time. What is ab-
solutely extraordinary about social facts, then, is that they are both objectively 

92 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
real and socially created, speaking once again to the power of the objectifi -
cation/reifi cation pro cess. Indeed, if one gives fi ve- year- old children some 
objects with almost no instruction, they very quickly create their own rules 
for how to play with them, and they then apply these rules both to them-
selves and to new players as objective facts: “One must do this fi rst,” “It works 
like this,” and so forth (Goeckeritz et al., unpublished manuscript). As in 
adult teaching and norm enforcement, the “must”  here implies the guiding 
hand of an objective reality, in de pen dent of the perspective or wishes of any 
par tic u lar individual.
Summary: Group- Mindedness and Objectivity
Th e social interactions of early humans  were wholly second- personal. Th e 
social interactions of modern humans added on top of this a group- minded 
layer, starting with identifi cation with one’s group. Individuals in a par tic u lar 
cultural group know that everyone knows certain things, knows that every-
one  else knows them, and so on, in the cultural common ground of the group. 
Th ere are collectively accepted perspectives on things (e.g., how we classify 
the animals of the forest, how we constitute our governing council) and col-
lectively known standards for how par tic u lar roles in par tic u lar cultural 
practices should be performed— indeed, must be performed— if one is to be 
a member of the group. Th e group has its perspective and evaluations and 
I accept them; indeed, I myself help to constitute the group’s perspective and 
evaluations, even if the target is myself.
Crucially, the generality involved in this new group- mindedness is not just 
schematicity. We are not talking  here about an individual perspective some-
how generalized or made large, or some kind of simple adding up of many 
perspectives. Rather, what we are talking about is a generalization from the 
existence of many perspectives into something like “any possible perspective,” 
which means, essentially, “objective.” Th is “any possible” or “objective” perspec-
tive combines with a normative stance to encourage the inference that such 
things as social norms and institutional arrangements are objective parts of 
an external reality. Th e generic nature of the communicative intention in 
both norm enforcement and pedagogy derives from the inherently generic 
group- mindedness and social normativity governing the way that “we” expect 
“us” to do things, which is then objectifi ed into this is the way things are, or 
ought to be, in the world at large.

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
93
Early humans’ dual- level cognitive model of jointness and individuality is 
thus scaled up by modern humans into a group- minded cognitive model of 
objectivity and individuality. Human group- mindedness thus refl ects a pro-
found shift in ways of both knowing and doing. Everything is genericized to 
fi t anyone in the group in an agent- neutral manner, and this results in a kind 
of collective perspective on things, experienced as a sense of the “objectivity” 
of things, even those we have created. Th us is human joint intentionality 
“collectivized.”
Th e Emergence of Conventional Communication
In addition to conventionalizing their social lives in general into collective 
cultural practices, norms, and institutions, modern humans also convention-
alized their natural gestures into collective linguistic conventions. Early 
humans’ spontaneous, natural gestures of the moment  were important for 
coordinating their many collaborative activities, but conventionalized ges-
tures and vocalizations— collectively known by all of those who have grown 
up in our cultural group, past and present, but not by others— enabled much 
more decontextualized and fl exible forms of communication and social coor-
dination with all members of the cultural group, even those with whom one 
had never before interacted.
Given a naive view of the nature of linguistic communication, one might 
assume that the use of language obviates the need for thinking in the commu-
nicative coordination of intentional states: I encode my “meaning” in language, 
and you decode it— the way telegraph operators used to work with Morse code. 
But, in fact, this is not the way linguistic communication works (Sperber and 
Wilson, 1996). For example, a large proportion of words in everyday spoken 
discourse are pronouns (he, she, it), indexicals (here, now), or proper names 
( John, Mary), whose referents cannot be determined from a codebook but 
rather must be determined by accessing some kind of nonlinguistically consti-
tuted common conceptual ground. Moreover, our everyday discourse is liber-
ally peppered with seemingly incoherent sequences, for example, Me: “Want to 
go to a movie to night?” You: “I have a test in the morning.” For me to interpret 
your answer as a “No,” we must share in common ground an understanding 
that tests require studying beforehand, one cannot study and watch a movie at 
the same time, and so forth. Th is common ground then makes possible my 
abductive leap that you will not be coming with me to the movie.

94 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
And so the most basic thinking pro cesses in linguistic communication are 
the same as in the account of pointing and pantomiming in chapter 3. In in-
formative linguistic communication, I intend that you know something, and 
so I refer your attention or imagination to some situation (my referential act) 
in the hope that you will fi gure out what I intend you to know (my communi-
cative intention). Th en you, relying on our common ground (both personal 
and cultural), hypothesize abductively what my communicative intention 
might be, given that I want you to attend to this referential situation. Th us, I 
might come into your offi  ce and say, “Th e city of Leipzig is running a tennis 
camp for two months this summer.” You comprehend my referential act per-
fectly well, but you have no idea why I am informing you of this situation. But 
then the abductive light bulb comes on: oh, if he intended to make a sugges-
tion about what my children might do this summer (since we  were talking 
about that last week), then referring my attention to this fact would make 
perfect sense. Anticipating this pro cess, and in order to be an eff ective com-
municator, I attempt to simulate your potential abductive inference ahead of 
time and so formulate my referential act to guide it in the intended direction— 
just as in pointing and pantomiming. For example, I might anticipate that if 
I refer to “tennis camp” without referring to “this summer,” she will think I 
mean a tennis camp for herself and not for her kids’ summer activities— a 
pro cess that is essentially me thinking about her thinking about my commu-
nicative act (which is itself an intention toward her intentional states).
Needless to say, communicative conventions add much more articulate 
semantic content to the communicative act than do pointing and pantomim-
ing, perhaps making things easier, but they do not thereby obviate all of the 
simulating, inferring, and thinking that must be done for two language users 
to communicate about complex situations successfully. In addition, despite 
this commonality of pro cess with the use of spontaneous gestures at some 
basic level, linguistic communication also provides some powerful new re-
sources for human thinking. We may focus on four of these, each elaborated 
in its own section below: (1) communicative conventions as inherited concep-
tualizations, (2) linguistic constructions as complex repre sen ta tional formats, 
(3) discourse and refl ective thinking, and (4) shared decision making and the 
giving of reasons.

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
95
Communicative Conventions as Inherited Conceptualizations
Early humans’ use of spontaneous iconic gestures as symbols to direct one 
another’s attention and imagination to relevant situations now became, with 
modern humans, conventionalized in the group. Th is meant not only that 
interpreting a gesture depended on some personal common ground between 
communicative partners in the moment, as before, but also that it now de-
pended on some cultural common ground about how we in this group expect 
others in this group to use and interpret this gesture (and expect others to 
expect us to,  etc.). Th us, for instance, we all know in cultural common ground 
that when one wants to direct the attention or imagination of a partner to a 
snake- danger situation, one produces a wavy hand gesture in the direction 
of the potential danger. Such conventions are coordination devices in the 
sense that individuals want to use them only if everyone  else uses them as well 
(Lewis, 1969; Clark, 1996). Communicative conventions thus come to be 
governed by constitutive norms in the sense that if I do not use them in the 
conventional way, I am just not in the game. As Wittgenstein (1955) argued so 
trenchantly, the criteria for conventional use are determined not by the indi-
vidual but by the community of users. I can rebel, but to what eff ect?
Th is cultural dimension to communicative conventions— everyone in the 
group is expected in cultural common ground to know them and to conform 
to them— means that we can now consider human communicative acts to 
be fully explicit. Early humans made overt the way they  were perspectivizing 
situations for others, for example, by pointing out relevant situations with a 
gesture, but the recipient could easily misunderstand, or even feign misun-
derstanding, and that would be the end of it. But now, if a modern human 
uses a communicative convention such as a snake- danger gesture, the partner 
cannot claim not to know it or, under normal circumstances, not to compre-
hend it. Since we all know the convention in cultural common ground, it is 
explicit, and so one must respond. Th e modern human was thus now not only 
under a second- personal pressure from the communicative partner to compre-
hend but also, in a sense, under normative pressure from the entire community: 
if you are one of us, then you know how to operate with this convention. 
Anyone not comprehending this communicative convention is just not one 
of us— which makes it culturally normative.
Iconic communicative conventions can quickly become noniconic. Th is 
happens reliably in the birth of sign languages, as isolated deaf individuals, 

96 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
who have been communicating their  whole lives with hearing parents using 
spontaneous iconic gestures, come together and conventionalize some of these 
“home signs.” Th is often leads to a kind of stylization or shortening of signs 
(see Senghas et al., 2004). Th us, the wavy hand for snake danger might be-
come abbreviated to the point of almost no waving. Typically this is because 
the recipient can predict what is coming in the communicative situation; for 
example, if she is about to turn over a rock, as soon as someone sticks out his 
hand she can anticipate the snake- danger gesture. Children and other new-
comers would then just imitate or conform to the abbreviated hand- out (with 
no waving) gesture to direct attention to snake- danger situations.2 Powerful 
skills of imitation and conformity thus undermine iconicity in communica-
tion, as iconicity is not necessary in a group with cultural common ground 
about what gesture to use for communicating about certain situations conven-
tionally. Communicative conventions can thus become “arbitrary.”
Th e implications of this conventional- arbitrary way of doing things for the 
individual and her pro cesses of thinking  were, needless to say, momentous. 
For one thing, children  were now born into a group of people using a set of 
communicative conventions that their ancestors had previously found useful 
in coordinating their referential acts, and everyone was expected to acquire 
and use exactly these conventions. Individuals thus did not have to invent 
their own ways of conceptualizing things; they just had to learn those of oth-
ers, which embodied, as it  were, the entire collective intelligence of the entire 
cultural group over much historical time. Individuals thus “inherited” myr-
iad ways of conceptualizing and perspectivizing the world for others, which 
created the possibility of viewing one and the same situation or entity simul-
taneously under diff erent construals as, for example, berry, fruit, food, or 
trading resource. Th e mode of construal was not due to reality, or even to the 
communicator’s goals, but rather to the communicator’s thinking about how 
best to construe a situation or entity so that a recipient would most eff ectively 
discern his communicative intention.
In addition to this fundamentally new form of conventional/normative 
and perspectival cognitive repre sen ta tion, communicating conventionally with 
arbitrary devices also creates, or at least facilitates, two other new pro cesses of 
cognitive repre sen ta tion. Th e fi rst is that the arbitrariness leads to a higher level 
of abstractness. Th us, when gestures are purely iconic, the level of abstraction 
is typically low and local. For example, with spontaneous iconic signs, open-
ing a door is pantomimed in one way whereas opening a jar is pantomimed 

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
97
in another. Th is pattern is typical of the individually created home signs of 
deaf children, which are under pressure to remain iconic since there is no 
community of users with whom to conventionalize them. However, in a 
community, as the iconicity fades for new learners, and arbitrary conventions 
arise, there comes a more stylized depiction of open that is highly abstract and 
resembles no par tic u lar manner of opening. Th is abstractness is characteristic 
of many signs in conventional sign languages, and of course vocal languages 
as well. Conventionalization, after a drift to the arbitrary, breeds abstractness. 
One can imagine that acquiring large numbers of arbitrary communicative 
conventions could lead to some kind of general insight that most of the com-
municative signs we use have only arbitrary connections to their intended 
referents, and so, voilà, we can make up new ones as needed.
Th e second new pro cess of cognitive repre sen ta tion created, or at least facili-
tated, by arbitrary communicative conventions also involves abstractness, but 
of a diff erent type. Many of the most abstract conceptualizations in contem-
porary languages are single items for highly complex situations involving mul-
tiple agents doing things over time; for example, to defi ne a term like justice, 
one would most naturally proceed with a kind of narrative: justice is when 
someone . . .  and then someone. . . .  It is diffi  cult to imagine how to indicate 
for others complex situations and events such as justice in pantomime, except 
by acting out a kind of full narrative, and this is true even for more concrete 
narrative events like a celebration or a funeral, for which one would also have to 
pantomime  whole sequences. But with arbitrary signs one may simply desig-
nate these complex situations with a single sign. Th is means that, in essence, 
arbitrary signs open up the novel possibility of symbolizing aspects of the rela-
tional, thematic, or narrative or ga ni za tion of human cognition— in addition to 
its straightforward categorical or schematized structure as symbolized by tree 
or eat— which expands the range and complexity of human thinking im-
mensely. As argued in box 1 (chapter 3), the source of human conceptual access 
to this relational- thematic- narrative organization— which may now be desig-
nated with simple signs— is complex collaborative activities with joint goals and 
various constitutive roles. Markman and Stillwell (2001) refer to “role- based 
concepts” for the role slots (e.g., tracker in a hunt) and “schema- based concepts” 
for the overall activity (e.g., the hunting trip itself ), and it is unlikely that any 
other organisms conceptualize this thematic dimension of experience.
Arbitrary communicative conventions— after there is a “critical mass”— 
also create two new pro cesses of inference. First, because humans communicate 

98 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
for diff erent purposes and at diff erent levels of abstraction on diff erent occa-
sions, the individual in a community of conventional communicators inher-
its a large inventory of communicative conventions that relate to one another 
in complex ways. For example, one can imagine that in some contexts indi-
viduals would conventionalize a gesture or vocalization for indicating a gazelle, 
whereas on other occasions they would conventionalize a gesture or vocalization 
for indicating an animal in general (or maybe a potential animal prey of 
what ever species). Children in this culture would learn, in diff erent contexts, 
both of these expressions. Th is now opens the possibility for not just causal 
inferences but formal inferences. If I indicate for you that a gazelle is over the 
hill, you may infer, based on your knowledge of things, that there is a poten-
tial animal prey over the hill, but you cannot make a similar inference in the 
opposite direction from animal to gazelle. Although in theory one could have 
spontaneous pantomimes at diff erent levels of generality, it is only with col-
lectively known conventionalized signs that communicators can be certain 
that recipients have the conventional means necessary to make such formal 
inferences— and so count on these inferences in formulating their communi-
cative acts.
Second, arbitrary communicative conventions come to form a kind of 
“system” such that, precisely because of their arbitrariness, the referential range 
of one is constrained by the referential range of others in the same “semantic 
fi eld” (Saussure, 1916). It is thus in our cultural common ground that I am 
making a choice between certain conventional expressions that we both 
know together I have available to me. For example, if I report to a friend that 
I saw his brother foraging with “a woman,” the inference is that this was not 
his wife, even though his wife is a woman, too, because if it had been his wife 
I would have said “wife” and not “woman.” Or, if I say that our child ate 
“some of the meat,” the inference is that he did not eat all of it because— at 
least in the context where we are both quite hungry— if he had eaten all of it 
I would have said so. Th ese kinds of pragmatic implicatures permeate dis-
course among contemporary language users based on the common cultural 
ground that we both have a certain inventory of conventional linguistic ex-
pressions from which we choose for communicative purposes. (Some of these 
inferences are recurrent and thus become what are often called, conten-
tiously, conventional implicatures [Grice, 1975; Levinson, 2000].) Inferences 
of this type are not generated in the same way by spontaneous pantomimes 
or any other kinds of unconventionalized signs because in these cases it is not 

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
99
in the cultural common ground of the group that everyone knows all of the 
alternatives and so will be making inferences about a communicator’s choice 
among them.
And so, with the advent of communicative conventions, we now have some 
new forms of conceptualization. Modern humans “inherit” a set of commu-
nicative conventions in their cultural common ground with others in the group, 
and the use of these conventions is normatively governed, in the sense that 
deviance from them puts one outside the cultural practice. Th e arbitrariness 
of communicative conventions means that they may be used to conceptual-
ize situations and entities of almost unlimited abstractness, including role- 
relational, thematic, and narrative schemas. And with communicative con-
ventions, we now have collectively known inferential connections among 
conceptualizations, both formal and pragmatic, which  were not possible in 
the same way with natural gestures.
Linguistic Constructions as Complex Repre sen ta tional Formats
If we imagine early modern humans with a small inventory of single- unit 
(holophrastic) communicative conventions, along with general cognitive abili-
ties for creating novel mental combinations (possessed by all apes), we can 
easily imagine them creating multiunit linguistic combinations. And so, for 
example, perhaps there was a communicative convention for requesting eating 
by moving the hand to the open mouth. And perhaps there was an unrelated 
communicative convention for requesting going foraging for berries (miming 
a picking motion). It would not take a genius, in a situation in which someone 
off ered something unpalatable to eat, to gesture eating followed by berries. 
Th en, given an existing ability for schematization (possessed by apes and early 
humans, but now applied to conventions), one could imagine this individual 
generalizing the conventional eating gesture to other conventional food ges-
tures, much like human toddlers do as they fi rst say things like “more juice,” 
followed soon by “more milk,” “more berries,” and so forth in a “more X” pat-
tern (so- called item- based schemas; Tomasello, 2003a).
Linguistic constructions begin with such simple item- based schemas but 
then are elaborated and made more abstract through discourse interactions. Th e 
key aspect of the pro cess for current purposes is the communicative pressure— 
the demand for suffi  cient information— coming from the recipient. Th is forces 
the communicator to make things explicit that he might otherwise have left 

100 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
implicit. Communicators stutter out a string of diff erent utterances, pidgin 
style, and recipients have to fi ll in the gaps inferentially. But communicative 
breakdowns occur, and recipients demand more information about how to 
relate the bits to one another, and so communicators must be more explicit 
about their communicative intentions. Th is process— in combination with 
skills for integrating and automatizing sequences— turns things like “I spear 
antelope . . .  he dead” into “I speared the antelope dead.” When other, similar 
schemas are created (e.g., “I drank the gourd empty”), the result is a conven-
tionalized linguistic construction, in this example the resultative construction 
(Langacker, 2000; Tomasello, 1998, 2003b, 2008). In the words of Givón (1995), 
today’s syntax is yesterday’s discourse.3
And so are born fully abstract linguistic constructions, which become 
gestalt- like symbolic conventions in their own right, with their own abstract 
communicative signifi cance indicating diff erent types of situations. For 
example, young English- speaking children learn early abstract constructions 
for (1) straightforward causal situations (e.g., the transitive construction: X 
VERBed Y); (2) causal situations viewed from the perspective of the aff ected 
object (e.g., the passive construction: Y got VERBed by X); (3) situations of 
object movement (the intransitive locative construction: X VERBed to/into/
onto Y); (4) situations of transfer of possession (e.g., the ditransitive construc-
tion: X VERBed Y a Z); (5) situations in which an agent acts with no aff ected 
object (e.g., the unergative intransitive construction: X smiled/cried/swam); 
(6) situations in which objects change states with no specifi cation of the 
agent or cause (e.g., the unaccusative intransitive construction: X broke/
died); and so forth (Goldberg, 1995). Importantly, the communicative func-
tion of these abstract patterns is in de pen dent of the par tic u lar words used in 
them, as these schematic depictions illustrate.
In using a construction, communicators invite recipients to view or imag-
ine situations from a par tic u lar perspective. Th us, in a conventional language 
there are various ways of designating subject, as perspectival topic, no matter 
who is performing or receiving the action. Th us, one and the same action 
may be referred to as “John broke the window,” “Th e window got broken by 
John,” “John’s throwing of the rock broke the window,” “Th e window was 
broken by John’s throwing of the rock,” “Th e rock broke the window,” “Th e 
window was broken by the rock,” and so on, depending of how the speaker 
wishes to conceptualize the situation for the listener on a par tic u lar occasion 
of use. Other constructions perspectivize the situation based on the commu-

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
101
nicator’s judgment of the recipient’s knowledge and expectations. For example, 
the En glish cleft construction, as in “It was John who broke the window,” is 
used to indicate that John did the breaking when the recipient currently 
believes that someone  else did; that is, it is used as a correction to a mistaken 
belief (e.g., You: “Bill broke the window.” Me: “No, it was John who broke 
the window”). MacWhinney (1977) argues that these diff erent construals 
derive from what communicators choose as their “starting point” or “perspec-
tive” for entering the event cognitively— which is conventionalized into the 
grammatical topic or subject.
From a cognitive point of view, abstract constructions give humans a new 
kind of abstract, syntagmatically or ga nized conventional format for cogni-
tive repre sen ta tion. Th ese abstract constructions enable linguistic items to 
be used, and then reused, in a wide variety of diff erent constructions, playing 
diff erent roles on diff erent occasions. Importantly, this fl exibility in how items 
are used creates the need to explicitly mark the roles being played by diff erent 
items. If I gesture or vocalize man, tiger, eat, it is important to know who is 
the agent and who is the patient of the eating activity. Modern- day languages 
have a variety of means for doing this, such as case marking and contrastive 
word order. Markers used to indicate participant roles may be seen as kind of 
second- order symbols, because they are about the role the participant is playing 
in the larger construction (Tomasello, 1992).4 Importantly for current pur-
poses, Croft (2001) argues that the linguistic items in an utterance gain 
their communicative functions not via their syntactic relations to other items 
but, rather, from the collaborative syntactic role they play in the utterance/
construction as a  whole. A linguistic construction may thus be seen, in a way, 
as a symbolic collaboration.
Abstract constructions are thus the main source of conventional linguistic 
productivity, and thus conceptual productivity in thinking. Individuals sche-
matize and analogize to create abstract constructions, and they then can read-
ily put new items into the slots of these constructions based on a more or less 
good fi t with the communicative role of that slot. Indeed, using an item in a 
construction’s slot coerces a construal that may be atypical for that item; for 
example, we quite often say such things as “he treed the cat,” “he ate his 
pride,” “he coughed his age,” and so forth, which force atypical construals on 
some of the items. Such meta phorical or analogical thinking is testament to 
the fact that the construction itself has its own communicative function— 
from the top down, as it  were— into which, up to some limit, items must be 

102 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
forced (Goldberg, 2006). In all, this system of conventionalized abstract 
constructions— and items that can be used and reused as needed in diff erent 
constructions— enables the kind of creative conceptual combination by which 
humans may think, or at least try to think, of everything from fl ying toasters 
to colorless green ideas sleeping furiously.
All of this is about how the communicator specifi es the referential situa-
tion that he and the recipient are communicating about during their ongoing 
second- personal communicative interaction. In addition, modern human com-
municators often use language as well to specify things about their commu-
nicative motive and their modal or epistemic relation to this referential material 
in their ongoing second- personal communicative interaction. Critically, this 
is something almost wholly new in the communicative pro cess. Early humans 
made reference to things in the world in various ways, but their own relation 
to that referential material was left implicit— perhaps expressed unintention-
ally (procedurally) in a facial expression or vocalization, but not an intentional 
part of the communicative act under the communicator’s voluntary control 
in decision making.
But now modern human communicators explicitly indicate their commu-
nicative motive in communicative conventions. Th us, most languages have 
diff erent constructions for speech acts such as requestives and informatives 
(assertives). Phi los o phers of mind and language believe it to be very important 
that the “same” fact- like propositional content may be used in diff erent con-
structions with diff erent communicative motives, as in “She is going to the 
lake,” “Is she going to the lake?,” “Go to the lake!,” “Oh, that she could go to 
the lake,” and so forth. Th e idea is that this in de pen dence of the propositional 
content from any par tic u lar “illocutionary force” makes the propositional 
content into a kind of quasi- independent, fact- like entity, free of par tic u lar 
instantiations in par tic u lar linguistic utterances (e.g., Searle, 2001). As speech 
act function came to be expressed conventionally, in either linguistic items or 
constructions as a  whole (as above), both the communicative motive and the 
propositional content  were now conventionalized into the same repre sen ta-
tional format of words and constructions. In this totally new communicative 
move, the communicator’s motive in the communicative interaction is now 
itself referred to and so conventionally conceptualized. Th is fact, among others, 
is what prompted Wittgenstein’s (1955, #11) observation that a major diffi  culty 
in understanding how language works is that very diff erent functions are all 
expressed in the same basic way in words and constructions: “Of course, 

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
103
what confuses us is the uniform appearance of words when we hear them 
spoken. . . .  For their application is not presented to us so clearly.”
In addition, communicators indicate through various linguistic devices 
their modal or epistemic “attitude” toward some propositional content in an 
utterance. Th us, a communicator might opine, modally, that “She must go to 
the lake” or that “She can go to the lake,” or, epistemically, that “I believe she 
is going to the lake” or that “I doubt she is going to the lake.” Again, the evo-
lutionary raw material for the conventionalization of modal and epistemic 
attitudes is presumably facial expressions and prosody as expressed simultane-
ously with some utterance, for example, uncertainty, surprise, or indignation. 
But then these became conventionalized.5 Communicators thus now encase 
propositional content also in a kind of “modal- epistemic envelope” (Givón, 
1995)— again, with all items in the same conventionalized repre sen ta tional 
format of words and constructions— that further encourages us to conceptual-
ize them as quasi- independent mental entities. In this case, the in de pen dence 
is not only from speaker motive but also from how speakers feel or think about 
them. Th is distinction between content and attitude is also foundational to the 
idea of some kind of timeless, objective, propositionally structured facts that 
are in de pen dent of how anyone thinks or feels about them and, therefore, also 
to the general idea of an in de pen dent, “objective” reality.
If we now combine all of the distinctions we have made— that is, those 
that the communicator actively controls (and for which he must choose from 
among alternatives)— we have the basic structure of a conventional linguistic 
utterance: the force- content distinction, within that the attitude- content dis-
tinction, and within that the topic- focus (subject- predicate) distinction, as 
shown in Figure 4.1.
Overall, then, we may say that linguistic constructions are conventional-
ized and automatized segments of discourse that or ga nize human experience 
into abstract patterns of various sorts, as individuals conceptualize things for 
Figure 4.1  Th e basic structure of a conventional linguistic utterance

104 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
others in communication. Constructions contain abstract roles— such as agent, 
recipient, location— marked via second- order symbols such as case markers, 
adpositions, or contrastive word order. Th e possibility of placing an almost 
unlimited inventory of linguistic items into these role slots is a major source 
of creative conceptual combination (see Clark’s [1996] famous “Th e newspaper 
boy porched the newspaper”). Topic- focus (subject- predicate) or ga ni za tion 
within specifi c constructions serves to conceptualize situations from the per-
spective of one or the other of the roles. Communicative devices for indicating 
speaker motives, along with the modal- epistemic envelope, serve to partition 
out fact- like propositional content as indicating some kind of timeless, objec-
tive facts about an objective world, in de pen dent of how anyone thinks or feels 
about them. Th ese are all aspects of human linguistic communication unique 
to the species (see box 3).
Discourse and Refl ective Th inking
Once we have linguistic communication, we have discourse. And what hap-
pens in discourse quite often is that the recipient responds to an utterance by 
signaling noncomprehension, requesting clarifi cation, and so forth. Th e com-
municator then does his best to provide the needed information explicitly in 
further discourse. Th e key point for human thinking is that explicating con-
ceptual content in conventional linguistic format (content that was only 
implicit in some original communicative act) makes this content ripe for self- 
refl ection. Th at is to say, invoking again the analysis of Mead (1934; and to 
some degree that of Karmiloff - Smith, 1992), the collaborative nature of human 
communication means that the communicator can perceive and comprehend 
his own communicative act as if he  were the recipient, which enables him to 
think about his own thinking, from an external perspective, as it  were (see 
also Bermudez, 2003). Although the pointing and pantomiming of early 
humans enabled them to engage in some degree of refl ection on their own 
overtly expressed thoughts, with modern humans and conventional linguistic 
communication, some new types of thoughts could now be expressed. More-
over, now the self- monitoring pro cess came not just from the perspective of the 
recipient, but from the normative perspective of all users of the conventions. 
Th ree especially important examples are as follows.
First, one important piece of information often needing explication is the 
communicator’s intentional states (or propositional attitudes). For example, 

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
105
box 3.  Th e “Language” of Kanzi et al.
Over the past few de cades, a handful of great apes have been raised by humans 
and taught some form of human- like communication. Th ey end up doing very 
interesting things, but it is not clear in which ways they are human- like and in 
which ways they are not. With par tic u lar regard to linguistic constructions, 
there is no doubt that apes can combine their signs, sometimes creatively, but 
they do not seem to have anything resembling human constructions (even 
though they are perfectly capable of schematizing conceptual content in 
general). Why is this? To help answer this question,  here are some examples of 
the kinds of utterances they produce, with either manual gestures or human- 
provided visual symbols (not resembling their referents):
BITE BALL— wanting to do this
GUM HURRY— wanting to have some
CHEESE EAT— wanting to
You(point) CHASE me(point)— requesting it from other
Th e fi rst thing to note is that these are all requests, refl ecting the fact that 
systematic studies have found that over 95% of the communicative acts 
produced by these individuals are some form of imperative (and the other 
5% are questionable; Greenfi eld and Savage- Rumbaugh, 1990, 1991; Rivas, 
2005). Th is is because no matter how they are trained by humans, great apes 
will not acquire a motive to simply inform others of things or share 
information with them (Tomasello, 2008). And in strictly imperative 
communication, there is little functional need for all the complexities of 
human linguistic communication (prototypically, no subject, no tense,  etc.).
Nevertheless, many of the communicative acts produced by these individu-
als are clearly complex, structured by a kind of event- participant structure, 
refl ecting a partitioning of situations into the participants involved in the 
relations or actions indicated. But despite this complexity, some key things 
relative to human linguistic communication are missing. Basically what is 
missing is all of those aspects of human grammar that conceptually 
structure constructions for others and their knowledge, expectations, and 
perspective. Over and above events and participants (and perhaps locations), 
the linguistic apes have learned items that indicate their own desire (e.g., 
although not apparent on the human gloss, their use of the item “hurry” 
indicates that they want it now). But what is missing is all of those aspects 
(continued )

106 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
of syntax that are geared at making the utterance comprehensible to the 
recipient— a key part of the cooperative motive. For example:
• Th ey do not “ground” their acts of reference for the listener to help 
them identify the referent. Th at is to say, they do not have noun 
phrases with things like articles and adjectives that help to specify 
which ball or cheese is wanted, for example. Nor do they have any 
kind of markers of tense that would indicate which event, as 
indicated by when it occurred, they intend to indicate.
• Th ey do not use second- order symbols such as case markers or word 
order to mark semantic roles and so to indicate who is doing what to 
whom in the utterance. Communicators do not need this information; 
it is provided to make sure that the listener understands the role of each 
participant in the larger situation or event being communicated about.
• Th ey do not have constructions or other devices for indicating for 
listeners what is old versus new versus contrasting information. For 
example, if you adamantly expressed that Bill broke the window, I 
probably would correct you by using a cleft construction and say 
“No, it was FRED that broke the window.” Apes do not have such 
constructions.
• Th ey do not choose constructions based on perspective. For 
example, I might describe the same event either as “I broke the vase” 
or “Th e vase broke,” based on your knowledge and expectations and 
my communicative intentions, whereas linguistic apes have not 
learned constructional alternatives of this type.
• Th ey do not specifi cally indicate in their utterances their communica-
tive motive (why should they, since it is always requestive) or anything 
of their epistemic or modal attitudes toward the referential situation.
Th e key theoretical point is that, beyond just supplying ordering preferences for 
utterances, human linguistic constructions are created with adaptations for the 
recipients’ knowledge, expectations, and perspective in mind. And even very 
simple constructions like noun phrases require adaptations to the recipient’s 
knowledge, expectations, and perspective. Humans also conventionalize 
expressions of motives and epistemic and modal attitudes in their constructions. 
Call all of this the pragmatic dimension of grammar, and call it uniquely human.
box 3 (continued )

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
107
let us suppose that on my way back from a hunting trip I see gazelles drinking 
at watering hole no. 2, leading me to infer that their preferred watering hole 
no. 1 is currently dry (given the recent dry weather). Back at the home base, 
you inform me that you are headed to watering hole no. 1 to fetch water. I 
want to inform you that it very likely does not have water, but I do not want 
to just state as fact “It does not have water” since I am not certain. Presum-
ably the fi rst marker of speaker uncertainty used in such situations was some 
involuntary facial expression (see above). But then humans conventionalized 
ways of indicating doubt, for example, by saying something like, “Maybe it 
does not have water” or “I think it does not have water.” Interestingly, young 
English- and German- speaking children fi rst use words for thinking not to 
indicate a specifi c mental act of thinking but rather to express their uncer-
tainty in the same way as maybe (thus, “I think it does not have water” means 
maybe it does not; Diessel and Tomasello, 2001). Only later do they make 
explicit reference to third- person mental happenings. And so one hypothesis 
is that it was the demands of discourse that led humans to begin talking explic-
itly about mental states, and they did not do this across- the- board initially, but 
only for their own epistemic attitudes toward propositional contents. Later, 
they came to refer to the mental states of anyone and everyone, including both 
others and the self, with the exact same set of communicative conventions. 
Once humans could make explicit reference to intentional states, they could 
think refl ectively about them in some new ways.
A second set of cognitive pro cesses often in need of explication is the 
communicator’s logical inferring pro cesses. Th ese include most prominently 
those indicated by and and or, various kinds of negation (e.g., not), and impli-
cation (if . . .  then . . .  ). For example, in response to pressure from the recipient 
in argumentative discourse, the speaker requires terms such as these to make 
explicit his reasoning pro cesses. And so, analogous to communicative pres-
sure in normal discourse, “logical pressure” in argumentative discourse forces 
disputants to make explicit in language the logical operations that until that 
time  were only procedural and not repre sen ta tional at all. One can imagine a 
fi rst gestural/iconic step in which, for example, or is expressed in some kind 
of pantomiming in which one off ers someone either this object (held out 
with one hand) or that object (held out with the other). An “if . . .  then . . .” 
implication could be acted out in pantomiming such everyday social interac-
tions as threats and warnings (if X . . .  then Y). But, as always, symbolizing 
these logical operators in linguistic conventions would make them much 

108 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
more abstract and powerful and, once again, much more readily available 
for self- monitoring and self- refl ection.
Th ird, speakers are often forced to make explicit some of the background 
assumptions and/or common ground to help the recipient to comprehend. For 
example, assume we are foraging together for honey, a cultural practice with 
which we are both very familiar from our cultural common ground. Th e 
knowledge we share about this practice— what kind of hive we are looking 
for, the height in the tree we should scan, the tools we will need, the container 
we will need for transport, and so forth— directs many of our activities. Th us, 
if you go off  and start picking and weaving together leaves, I wait for you 
patiently as we both know that a vessel will be needed for transport. But this 
shared knowledge is all implicit in our (cultural) common ground. An early 
human might make this knowledge overt by pointing out to his partner the 
presence of some appropriate leaves. But now imagine that I, as modern human, 
express my intention that you notice the leaves’ presence by means of some 
shared communicative conventions: “Look, there are some good leaves over 
there.” Th is draws your attention to the leaves in a much more explicit way, 
but there is still room for misunderstanding (good for what?). So perhaps you 
look over at the leaves but draw a blank. Depending on my assessment of what 
you are not comprehending, I might say, “Its banyan leaves,” or “We are going 
to need a vessel,” or “We need banyan leaves to make the vessel,” or what ever. 
I am making explicit for you the reason I am directing your attention to the 
leaves’ presence (which I erroneously thought you could infer from our com-
mon ground), and, in the pro cess, make explicit the bases for my own think-
ing for communicating. Once more, this makes it possible for me to refl ect on 
my thoughts and their connections in a way that I could not when they  were 
only an implicit part of our common ground.
And so with modern humans such things as intentional states, logical 
operations, and background assumptions could be expressed explicitly in a 
relatively abstract and normatively governed set of collectively known lin-
guistic conventions. Because of the conventional and normative nature of 
language, new pro cesses of refl ection now took place not just as when apes 
monitor their own uncertainty in making a decision, and not as when early 
humans monitor recipient comprehension, but rather as an “objectively” and 
normatively thinking communicator evaluating his own linguistic conceptu-
alization as if it  were coming from some other “objectively” and normatively 

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
109
thinking person. Th e outcome is that modern humans engage not just in in-
dividual self- monitoring or second- personal social evaluation but, rather, in 
fully normative self- refl ection.
Shared Decision Making and the Giving of Reasons
We must single out, fi nally, a very special discourse context in human com-
munication with world- changing implications for the pro cess of human 
thinking: shared decision making. Prototypically, we may imagine as an ex-
ample collaborative partners— or even a council of elders— attempting to 
choose a course of action, given that they know together in common ground 
that multiple courses of action are possible. Given their equal power in their 
interdependent situation, they cannot just tell the other or others what to 
do; rather, they must suggest a possible course of action and back it up with 
reasons.
Let us start with early humans. Because early human collaborators typi-
cally had much in common ground, they could point and pantomime in 
ways suggesting reasons implicitly. Th us, we may imagine two early humans 
following an antelope. Th ey lose sight of the beast, and so pause in a clearing 
to make a joint decision about which way to go. One individual might in this 
context point to some tracks on the ground. Th ey are relevant to the hunters 
because it is in their common ground that these are antelope tracks, possibly 
of the animal they  were following. Also relevant is the direction of the tracks, 
which again is signifi cant for the two of them because they know in common 
ground what this means for the antelope’s likely travel direction. Th e point is 
that in directing his partner’s attention to the tracks, the communicator’s 
goal is that his partner travel with him in a certain direction. But he is not 
pointing in that direction; he is only pointing to the ground. Th e communi-
cator’s act is thus providing a kind of implicit reason for the recipient, which 
we may gloss as: see the tracks; given our common ground about what they 
mean for our prey’s likely travel direction, they give us a reason for going in 
this direction. Th e recipient might counter by pointing in a diff erent direc-
tion, where they spy the antelope’s off spring next to some bushes, which is a 
better reason for traveling in this other direction. None of these reasons is 
explicit, of course, and so it does not constitute what we might call fully rea-
soned thinking. But it is a start.

110 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
With modern humans and their skills of conventional linguistic commu-
nication, we get to full- blooded reasoning, where “reasoning” means not just 
to think about something but to explicate in conventional form— for others 
or oneself— the reasons why one is thinking what one is thinking. Th is con-
fl icts with the traditional view that human reasoning is a private aff air. Most 
articulate on this point are Mercier and Sperber (2011) who recast the reason-
ing pro cess in terms of communication and discourse, specifi cally argumen-
tative discourse in which individuals make explicit to others their reasons for 
believing something to be the case. Th e basic idea is this: When a communi-
cator informs a recipient of something, she wants to be believed, and often is 
(based on mutual assumptions of cooperation). But sometimes there is not 
enough trust on the recipient’s part (for what ever reason), and so the com-
municator gives reasons for her informative statement. In reason- giving dis-
course of this kind, individuals are attempting to convince others. Many 
lines of evidence suggest that the main function of reasoning is to convince 
others, for example, people’s tendency to look for supporting rather than 
disconfi rming evidence (the confi rmation bias). In this view, convincing oth-
ers is good for individual fi tness, and so humans evolved reasoning abilities 
not for getting at the truth but for convincing others of their views.
Th e proposal that human reasoning, including individual human reason-
ing, has a social- communicative origin is almost certainly correct. But Mercier 
and Sperber’s account tends to background the cooperative pro cesses involved, 
and so  here is an alternative account that foregrounds these pro cesses: Th e 
key social context is joint or collective decision making, as it occurred regu-
larly in collaborative activities. Th us, on a hunting trip, perhaps you think we 
should hunt for antelopes in this direction, and I think we would be better 
off  going in that direction. To make your case, you make your reasoning 
more explicit in our conventional language by, for instance, noting that there 
is a watering hole to the south. I counter, also in language, by making explicit 
my reasoning that at this time of day it is likely that lions will be at the water-
ing hole and so no antelopes will be— and besides,  here are some antelope 
tracks going to the north. You say these tracks look old, but I think that is 
because they  were in the direct sunlight this morning and actually they are 
from around dawn or so. And on and on. Th e key point is that arguing in 
this way assumes a cooperative context. As Darwall (2006, p. 14) puts it: “It 
is only in certain contexts, say, when you and I are trying to work out what to 

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
111
believe together, that either of us has any standing to demand that one another 
reason logically.”
Such cooperative argumentation, as we may call it, may be modeled in game 
theory as a battle of the sexes: our highest goals are collaborative— we will 
hunt together under all circumstances because otherwise there is zero hope of 
success— but within that cooperative framework we each argue our case. 
Critically, in this context, neither of us wants to convince the other if we are 
in fact wrong about the location of antelopes; each would rather lose the 
argument and eat to night than win the argument and go hungry. And so a 
key dimension of our cooperativeness is that we both have agreed ahead of 
time, implicitly, that we will go in the direction for which there are the “best” 
reasons. Th at is what being reasonable is all about.
An appeal to “best” reasons invokes what Sellars (1963) calls “common 
standards of correctness and relevance, which relate what I do think to what 
anyone ought to think.” Our cooperative argumentation in the context of 
joint or collective decision making is thus premised on a shared metric that we 
both use in determining which reasons are indeed “best.” Th ere have thus 
arisen social norms that govern cooperative argumentation in group decision 
making specifying, for example, that reasons based on direct observation trump 
reasons based on indirect evidence or hearsay. An even deeper, conceptual 
point is that to be in an argument in the fi rst place means to accept as infra-
structure certain “rules of the game,” namely, the group’s social norms for 
arguing cooperatively. Th is is the diff erence between a street fi ght and a boxing 
match. Th e early Greeks made explicit some of the most important of these 
norms of argumentation in Western culture, for example, the law of noncon-
tradiction (a disputant cannot hold the same statement to be both true and 
false at the same time), and the law of identity (a disputant cannot change the 
identity of A during the course of the argument). Even before the Greeks, we 
can imagine that individuals who, for example, held the same statement to 
be both true and false at the same time  were either ignored by others or  else 
exhorted to argue rationally. Th e cooperative infrastructure was thus deci-
sive in determining what it means to reason at all. Th e natural world itself 
may be totally “is”— the antelopes are where they are. However, the cultur-
ally embedded discourse pro cesses by which we determine what that “is” in 
fact is— in the space of reasons, to use Sellars’s evocative phrase— are fraught 
with ought.

112 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
Cooperative argumentation would thus have been the birthplace of “asser-
tive” speech acts. Assertions go beyond the informative speech acts from 
which they derive in that the asserter commits himself to the truth of a state-
ment (i.e., I commit not just to honesty but to the objective truth of the state-
ment) and, crucially, to backing it up with reasons and justifi cations as neces-
sary. Reasons and justifi cations are intended to make explicit to others the 
bases on which I believe something, which, because they share these bases, 
might give them reason to believe it as well (e.g., we all know and accept 
ahead of time that if there are lions at the watering hole, then there will be no 
antelopes). One may also reject an argument because it violates the norms of 
argumentation (e.g., you just contradicted yourself ) or implies something 
that we both know is not true. Overall, this ability to connect thoughts to 
other thoughts (both those of others and one’s own) by various inferential 
relations (prototypically by providing reasons and justifi cations) is key to hu-
man reason in general, and it leads to a kind of interconnection among all of 
an individual’s potential thoughts in a kind of holistic “web of beliefs.”
Th e capstone of all of this— recognized by all modern thinkers who take a 
sociocultural view of human thinking— is the internalization of these vari-
ous interpersonal pro cesses of making things explicit into individual rational 
thinking or reasoning. Making things explicit to facilitate the comprehension 
of a recipient leads the communicator to simulate, before actually producing 
an utterance, how his planned communicative act might be comprehended— 
perhaps in a kind of inner dialogue. Making things explicit to persuade 
someone in an argument leads the disputant to simulate ahead of time how a 
potential opponent might counter his argument, and so to make ready, in 
thought, an interconnected set of reasons and justifi cations— again, perhaps, 
in a kind of inner dialogue. As Brandom (1994, pp. 590– 591) describes the 
pro cess: “Th e conceptual contents employed in monological reasoning . . .  are 
parasitic on and intelligible only in terms of the sort of content conferred by 
dialogical reasoning, in which the issue of what follows from what essentially 
involves assessments from the diff erent social perspectives of scorekeeping 
interlocutors with diff erent background commitments.”
Th e norms of human reasoning are thus at least implicitly agreed upon in 
the community, and individuals provide reasons and justifi cations as ways of 
convincing “any rational person.” Human reasoning, even when it is done inter-
nally with the self, is therefore shot through and through with a kind of collec-

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
113
tive normativity in which the individual regulates her actions and thinking 
based on the group’s normative conventions and standards— what some have 
called “normative self- governance” (e.g., Korsgaard, 2009).
Agent- Neutral Th inking
Th e second- personal thinking of early humans was aimed at solving coordina-
tion problems presented by direct collaborative and communicative interactions 
with specifi c others. Modern humans faced diff erent kinds of coordination 
problems, namely, those involving unknown others, with whom one had little 
or no personal common ground. Th e solution on the behavioral level was the 
creation of group- wide, agent- neutral conventions, norms, and institutions, 
to which everyone expected everyone, in cultural common ground, to con-
form. To coordinate with others communicatively in such a world, human 
communication had to be conventional as well, based again not on personal 
but rather on cultural common ground. And to be a good communicative 
partner in conventional communication— especially, to be a cooperative par-
ticipant in shared decision making— modern humans needed to express their 
reasons for thinking in certain ways explicitly in language and then simulate 
the cultural group’s normative judgments of the intelligibility and rationality 
of those linguistic acts and reasons. Modern humans participate not only in 
joint intentionality with other individuals but also in collective intentionality 
with the entire cultural group.
Representing “Objectively”
Early humans cognitively represented to themselves various situations and 
entities simultaneously from more than one perspective, and they then indi-
cated or symbolized par tic u lar perspectives on those situations and entities 
for others in their deictic and iconic communicative acts. Modern humans 
then began collaborating and communicating with sometimes unfamiliar 
others structured by agent- neutral conventions, norms, and institutions, so that 
the cognitive models they  were building and the perspectives they  were simu-
lating concerned not just par tic u lar others but, rather, some kind of generic 
other or, perhaps, the group at large. Th e linguistic conventions individuals 
 were born into embodied the way that the group as a  whole, from many years 

114 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
past, perspectivized and schematized experience, so that this way seemed inevi-
table. Th is new way of operating socially led to cognitive repre sen ta tions with 
three important new features.
Conventional.  For the fi rst time in the history of life, modern human 
individuals “inherited” a culturally constructed repre sen ta tional system in the 
form of a conventional language, comprising a structured inventory of con-
ceptualizations that forebears in the culture had previously found useful in 
communicating with others. Th e uses of linguistic conventions  were shared 
within the cultural common ground of the group, and this meant, given 
human group- mindedness and conformity, that they became normatively 
grounded in “community standards” governing their proper use. Th is made 
it seem, especially to language- acquiring children, that the way that one’s 
linguistic conventions carved up the world was somehow natural.
In addition, the arbitrariness of linguistic conventions created, or at least 
facilitated, the ability to operate with highly abstract conceptualizations such 
as justice or blackmail that schematize not a taxonomic class but, rather, a the-
matically or narratively defi ned entity. Th e arbitrariness of linguistic symbols 
also led to more abstract conceptualizations of relatively concrete terms, such 
as open or break, across diff erent par tic u lar situations. Most important, because 
of their conventional nature, linguistic conventions and their interrelations 
made possible conceptualizations with explicitly contrasting aspectual shapes—
gazelle, animal, dinner— known to everyone in the cultural common ground 
of the group. Th ese contrasting aspectual shapes created a gap for the indi-
vidual between the world as she conceptualized it for her own instrumental 
actions and the world as conceptualized in various contrastive ways in her 
conventional language, a gap that humans have been pondering from the 
early Greeks to Benjamin Lee Whorf.
Propositional.  Modern humans began to use linguistic conventions 
together in combination in patterned ways that led to the creation of abstract 
linguistic constructions as kinds of linguistic gestalts. Many linguistic con-
structions conceptualize  whole propositions, and they do this with internal 
constituents that are marked with second- order symbols as playing specifi ed 
roles in the construction. Proposition- level linguistic constructions are per-
spectival (e.g., active vs. passive), and one of the elements (subject) provides a 
perspectival entry point into the conceptualized situation. Th e abstractness 

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
115
of linguistic constructions makes possible especially productive conceptual 
combinations, so that we may represent to ourselves all kinds of imaginary 
entities and situations, from a happy sun to a man in the moon. Linguistic 
constructions thus create the possibility of various kinds of meta phorical 
repre sen ta tions in which structural analogies provide a new framework for 
thinking, from one idea “undermining” another to activities “eating up” my 
free time. Making explicit in linguistic constructions various kinds of com-
municative motives and attitudes contributed to an objectifi ed view of expe-
rience, as it suggested a fact- like propositional content in de pen dent of the 
desires or attitudes of any par tic u lar individual.
With their linguistic constructions, modern humans also began to make 
assertions— to whose objective truth they  were committed— that could be 
either about par tic u lar episodic events or  else, importantly, about generic 
events or facts of a type. Th ey did this especially in norm enforcement (“One 
does not do that in public”) and teaching (“It works this way”). Th is generic-
ness presumably originated from the normative “group voice” that lay behind 
the assertive expression and gave it an objectivity that transcended the 
individual.
“Objective.”  Early humans lived in a world of diff erent individual per-
spectives. Modern humans live in this world too, but in addition, in the 
context of group- minded cultures, there arose a kind of public world compris-
ing collectively created entities such as conventions, norms, and institutions 
from marriage to money to governments. Th ese entities existed before the 
individual arrived on the scene, and they existed in de pen dent of the thoughts 
and wishes of any single individual, giving them the same kind of “always 
already there” status as the physical world. In addition, these collective enti-
ties had preestablished roles into which, in theory, any agent could seamlessly 
fi t; and, indeed, in some cases these roles created new realities, such as presi-
dents and money, whose very real deontic powers  were readily observable. 
Operating in this public world required that individuals be able to take a 
kind of agent- neutral perspective on things, a kind privileged, “transcenden-
tal” perspective that constituted the world “objectively” and that then justi-
fi ed personal judgments of true and false, right and wrong.
As modern human individuals  were building their cognitive models of the 
world, the use of simple causal and intentional relations was not enough. To 
explain such things as chiefs and marriage, not to mention language and 

116 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
culture, they needed some understanding of things created by collective agree-
ment and maintained by collective normative judgment. Said another way, they 
needed some new conceptualizations of collective realities that transcended 
the thoughts and attitudes of single individuals, even multiple individuals. 
Constructing such models would lead naturally to judgments such as real, 
true, and right that come not from the individual herself but rather from her 
appropriation of the transpersonal, “objective” perspective engendered by her 
cultural world. Linguistic representations— especially assertions with a distinc-
tion between the second- personal attitudes of the communicator and some 
timeless, generic propositional content (e.g., “I think its raining”)— only 
added additional force to these objectifying and reifying tendencies. Modern 
humans thus “collectivized” early humans’ ways of life, and so “objectifi ed” 
their cognitive models of the world.
Reasoning Refl ectively
Th e inferences of the common ancestor to humans and great apes  were simple 
causal and intentional inferences. Th e inferences of early humans  were recur-
sively structured, enabling them to produce and interpret cooperative com-
municative acts comprising nothing but a protruding fi nger. But now, the 
linguistic communication of modern humans opened up  whole new vistas of 
inference and reasoning. We now have such things as formal and pragmatic 
inferences, and external communicative vehicles can be refl ected upon by the 
communicator from an objective and normative perspective. And the giving 
of reasons and justifi cations to others— and to the self in internal reasoning— 
now serves to connect up an individual’s various conceptualizations into a 
single inferential web.
Linguistic Inferences.  Th e hierarchical relationship between the ref-
erents of diff erent linguistic conventions is part of the conventionalization 
pro cess. Th us, everyone knows collectively that everyone uses gazelle only for 
a par tic u lar type of animal, and animal for all kinds of animals, of which 
gazelle is one type, and so we now have the possibility of formal inferences: if 
we know that a gazelle is over the hill, then we know that an animal is over 
the hill (but not the reverse). Much of the early development of formal logic 
was built on inferences of this type, and in contemporary conceptual role 
semantics, inferences of this type play an important role as well. Also crucial 

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
117
is the fact that we all know collectively that we all know the linguistic options 
available to a communicator, which leads to the kind of pragmatic inferences 
that Grice (1975) made famous: if I refer to someone as an “acquaintance,” 
that almost certainly means that we are not friends— because if we  were friends 
I would have used the word friend. Th ese implicatures and corresponding 
inferences are possible because, and only because, the options available are 
part of the group’s cultural common ground, so that we can wonder together 
why I made the choice that I did. Conventional linguistic communication 
thus makes possible powerful new kinds of inferences.
In addition, linguistic communication, and the arbitrary nature of lin-
guistic conventions, enabled modern humans to express explicitly in lan-
guage some conceptualizations that could not be expressed easily, if at all, 
in the natural gestures of early humans, for example, intentional states and 
logical operations. Based on the hypothesis that one can refl ect on one’s 
thinking only as it is expressed in external behavior directed at another— 
because only then can one play the other’s role and attempt to comprehend 
it from her perspective— linguistic communication now made available to 
modern humans many new conceptualizations about which they could think 
refl ectively. Importantly, as modern humans thought about their own think-
ing refl ectively, at least in some situations, they did not do so merely from 
their own perspective, or even that of the other, but from a more “objective” 
perspective.
Reflective Inferences.  A special discourse situation is cooperative 
argumentation, in which we attempt to come to a group decision about either 
action or beliefs. We do this not only by making assertions, committed to the 
truth, but also by backing up those assertions with reasons and justifi cations, 
which means making connections to things that are collectively agreed to be 
true and reliable. Th e outcome of this pro cess is that the various conceptual-
izations and propositionally structured thoughts of modern humans as ex-
pressed in language become ever more inferentially interconnected in a vast 
“web of beliefs,” such that each element in the web gains signifi cance from its 
inferential relations with others. Th is interconnectedness is a key component 
in being a fully rational creature who “knows his way about” an entire con-
ceptual system in which propositionally structured thoughts provide reasons 
and justifi cations for one another (i.e., they can be used as premises and con-
clusions for one another in argumentation; Brandom, 2009).

118 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
In addition, as modern humans began engaging in such cooperative argu-
mentation, implicitly accepted norms emerged. Th ese norms operated such 
that individuals who contradicted themselves from one assertion to the next, 
or changed the meaning of their terms in the middle of an argument, or held 
a single assertion to be both true and false,  were basically ignored or excluded 
from the group decision- making pro cess. Th e pro cess of cooperative argu-
mentation, then, was the special language game within which human norms 
of rationality came to govern all those who wanted a voice in collective deci-
sions (such as po liti cal, judicial, and epistemic decisions).
All of this may be internalized. Internalization means simply that one 
directs a communicative act, as communicator, to oneself, as recipient, includ-
ing holding the “other” to “objective” normative criteria of intelligibility, coop-
erative participation, and so on. Th e resulting internal dialogue is one especially 
salient type of human thinking (Vygotsky, 1978). When the communicative 
context is cooperative argumentation, what now get internalized are  whole 
lines of argumentation and justifi cations for arguments. Now, an individual 
can give to himself a normatively justifi ed reason for why he is thinking what 
he is thinking, and so his conceptualizations become defi ned, in large part, by 
their normatively sanctioned inferential relations with other conceptualiza-
tions. Th e resulting web of beliefs, and humans’ ability to navigate this web 
facilely, is foundational for the ability to engage in individual reasoning.
At this point, then, the inferring of modern humans is not just imagining 
causal and intentional sequences, as in apes, or even just perspectivizing and 
recursivizing them, as in early humans; rather the inferring of modern humans 
now includes new kind of inferences made possible by a conventional language, 
and new forms of refl ecting on their own thinking, including in a kind of inner 
dialogue. When these pro cesses operate in the special context of cooperative 
argumentation, the result is something we might call reasoning. Modern 
 humans thus are on occasion able to engage in a kind of reasoned, or refl ective, 
inferring in the context of the normative standards of the cultural group.
Normative Self- Monitoring
Early humans engaged in what we have called cooperative self- monitoring—
regulating their collaborative activities by the evaluative reactions of specifi c 
partners; and communicative self- monitoring—regulating their communica-

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
119
tive acts by the anticipated interpretations of specifi c partners. Scaling up 
these pro cesses to the cultural way of life characteristic of modern humans 
means that individuals now regulate their behavioral decision making instead 
via the collectively known and collectively accepted norms of the cultural 
group. Modern humans thus came to feel not only a second- personal pressure 
in their decision making but also, on top of this, as it  were, a group- level nor-
mative pressure to conform to the group. Th us, I do not renege on my commit-
ments, fi rst of all, because I do not want to disappoint my partner, and second 
of all, because “we” in this group do not treat others like that. Th is more gen-
eralized normativity thus ends up back at group identity: if I want to be a 
member of this group, I must behave as they do, that is, follow the norms to 
which we all together (including me) have committed ourselves.
Modern human thinking and reasoning become normatively structured 
and governed in multiple ways. When one communicates with others via com-
municative conventions, one needs to do it in the way that they do it to par-
ticipate successfully. In addition, in the context of group decision making and 
cooperative argumentation, one must agree to certain norms of argumenta-
tion. Others in the group decision making have a stake in me participating in 
useful ways, and so everyone has a stake in everyone  else making true asser-
tions, following the norms of inference and argumentation, justifying by con-
necting to propositions and arguments already collectively accepted, and so 
forth. Internalized, this communicative pro cess becomes individual reason.
Normative Self- Governance.  Normative self- governance results from 
an internalization of the pro cesses of collective normativity, as the individual 
self- monitors and, indeed, self- regulates her actions by taking into account 
the social norms of the group, both cooperative and communicative. Modern 
humans communicate with themselves and so refl ect on and evaluate their 
own thinking with group- held normative standards. Th is refl ection means 
that humans know what they are thinking and can provide to themselves 
normatively sanctioned justifi cations and reasons for thinking in this way— 
thus connecting up their many and diverse thoughts in an intricate inferential 
web that is governed, to some extent, by “community standards.” Th e think-
ing subject also uses this refl ection in exercising executive control over her own 
thinking and reasoning. Korsgaard (2009), in par tic u lar, has emphasized 
that humans not only have goals and make decisions and reason in par tic u lar 

120 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
ways but also attempt to assess ahead of time whether those are good goals to 
pursue or good decisions to make or good reasons to have— a clearly extra 
layer of refl ection and evaluation. And the normative judgment  here is not 
simply mine alone, nor that of a specifi c other partner, but rather a judgment 
about whether that would be a good goal or decision or line of reasoning for 
any rational person, that is, for anyone from our group who does things the 
way that we do them.
Modern humans thus operate with the social norms of the group as inter-
nalized guides to both action and thinking. Th is means that in their collab-
orative interactions modern humans conform to the collectively accepted 
ways of doing things, based on norms of cooperation, and in their communi-
cative interactions they conform to the collectively accepted ways of using 
language and also linguistically formulated arguments, based on the group’s 
norms of reason.
Objectivity: Th e View from Nowhere
Unlike other great apes, who all live in the general vicinity of the equator, 
modern humans have migrated all over the globe. Th ey have done this not as 
individuals but as cultural groups; in none of their local habitats could a 
modern human individual survive for very long on his own. Instead, in each 
specifi c environment, modern human cultural groups have developed col-
lectively a set of specialized and cognitively complex cultural practices to ac-
commodate the local conditions, from seal hunting and igloo building to 
tuber gathering and bow- and- arrow making— not to mention science and 
mathematics. What we have attempted to do  here is to specify the skills of 
cognition and thinking that enable modern human individuals to coordinate 
with those around them, both collaboratively and communicatively, in their 
eff orts to adapt together to the novel exigencies they encounter in their spe-
cifi c corner of the world.
An image for the advent of modern humans is this: Earlier humans are 
living quite nicely by collaborating and communicating with others in vari-
ous ways for a variety of cooperative purposes. Th en, in the face of some seri-
ous demographic challenges, a great wave of group- mindedness and confor-
mity washes over everyone. Humans who  were spontaneously coordinating 
with partners to hunt or gather their daily meals then began to develop for 

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
121
foraging a number of conventionalized cultural practices. Humans who  were 
spontaneously communicating with their partners in coordinating their 
complex collaborative activities using ad hoc gestures then began developing 
skills of conventional linguistic communication. And humans who  were spon-
taneously exhorting or admonishing one another second- personally in various 
cooperative directions then began to develop collectively known and applied 
social norms of morality and rationality. Early humans lived together and 
interacted with others jointly; modern humans lived together and interacted 
with others collectively.
One eff ect of this great wave of group- mindedness and conformity was 
cultural group selection accompanied by cumulative cultural evolution. Cul-
tural group selection takes place when individuals conform within their 
group— and diff erentiate themselves from other groups— to the extent that the 
group itself becomes a unit of natural selection (Richerson and Boyd, 2006). 
In this way, successful cultural adjustments to local conditions stay around, 
and unsuccessful attempts die out. Cumulative cultural evolution takes place 
when the inventions in a cultural group are passed on with such fi delity that 
they remain stable in the group until a new and improved invention comes 
along (the so- called ratchet eff ect; Tomasello et al., 1993). Modern humans 
had a stronger ratchet than early humans and apes because they had— in addi-
tion to powerful skills of imitation— proclivities both to teach things to others 
and also to conform to others when they themselves  were being taught. And 
so it is with this wave of group- mindedness and conformity that we get the 
possibility of cultural groups creating and constantly improving their own cog-
nitive artifacts— from procedures for  whale hunting to procedures for solving 
diff erential equations— that help them both to adapt to local conditions and 
to mark themselves as distinct from other cultural groups.
Th e subterranean eff ect of this wave of group- mindedness and conformity, 
as it  were, was new and culturally collective forms of cognitive repre sen ta tion, 
inference, and self- monitoring for use in thinking. Modern humans began 
representing the world “objectively,” refl ecting a kind of generic, agent- neutral 
perspective possible by any rational person. Further, humans’ new skills of 
conventional linguistic communication enabled them to talk about many 
things that they previously could not (e.g., mental states and logical opera-
tions), and this enabled refl ective inferences— thinking about one’s own 
thinking— with much greater depth and breadth. In the context of cooperative 

122 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
argumentation, modern humans made explicit the reasons for their assertions, 
thus connecting them in an inferential web to their other knowledge, and 
then this social practice of reason- giving was internalized into fully refl ective 
reason. And the self- monitoring of modern humans for the fi rst time refl ected 
not just their expectations about the second- personal evaluations of specifi c 
others but, rather, their expectations about the normative evaluations of “us” 
as a cultural group. Given all of these new ways of behaving and thinking, the 
crack in the human experiential egg now became a veritable chasm: the indi-
vidual no longer contrasted her own perspective with that of a specifi c other— 
the view from  here and there; rather, she contrasted her own perspective with 
some kind of generic perspective of anyone and everyone about things that 
 were objectively real, true, and right from any perspective whatsoever— a 
perspectiveless view from nowhere.
And so, if from a moral point of view, cooperation always entails some 
kind of eff acing of one’s own interests in deference to those of others or the 
group, then, from a cognitive point of view, cooperative thinking always 
entails some kind of eff acing of one’s own perspective in deference to the more 
“objective” perspective of others or the group (Piaget, 1928). Th us, in coop-
erative communication I must always honor the perspective of my recipient, 
and in cooperative argumentation I must be committed to accept the reasons 
and arguments of others if they are better than my own— by the yardstick of 
our agreed upon normative criteria of rationality, which include our agreed 
upon objective reality— and so to abandon mine for theirs. In the words of 
Nagel (1986. p. 4): “Objectivity is a method of understanding . . .  To acquire 
a more objective understanding of some aspect of life or the world, we step 
back from our initial view of it and form a new conception which has that 
view and its relation to the world as its object. . . .  Th e pro cess can be repeated, 
using a still more objective conception.” In this formulation, “objectivity” is 
the result of being able to think of things from ever wider perspectives and 
also recursively, as one embeds one’s perspective within another, more en-
compassing perspective. In the current view, more encompassing means sim-
ply from the perspective of an ever wider, more transpersonally constituted 
generic individual or social group— the view from anyone.
Th e monumental second step on the way to modern humans thus took the 
already cooperativized and perspectival thinking of early humans and collec-
tivized and objectifi ed it. Whereas early humans internalized and referenced 
the perspective of what Mead (1934) calls the “signifi cant other”, modern 

Col l ec t i v e In t en t iona l i t y 
123
humans internalized and referenced the perspective of the group as a  whole, 
or any group member, Mead’s “generalized other.” Human thinking at this 
point is no longer a solely individual pro cess, or even a second- personal social 
pro cess; rather, it is an internalized dialogue between “what I do think” and 
“what anyone ought to think” (Sellars, 1963). Human thinking has now be-
come collective, objective, refl ective, and normative; that is to say, it has now 
become full- blown human reasoning.

5
Human Th inking as Cooperation
Th e internalization of socially rooted and historically developed 
activities is the distinguishing feature of human psychology.
—lev vygotsky, Mind in Society
Human cognition and thinking are much more complex than the cognition 
and thinking of other primates. Human social interaction and or ga ni za tion are 
much more complex than the social interaction and or ga ni za tion of other pri-
mates as well. It is highly unlikely, we would argue, that this is a coincidence.
Complex human cognition is of course responsible for complex human 
societies in the sense that human societies would fall apart if human- like cog-
nition  were not available to support them. But this cognition- to- society 
causal link is not a plausible direction for an account of evolutionary origins. 
For that direction of eff ect, there would need to be some other behavioral 
domain in which powerful cognitive skills  were selected, and then those 
skills  were somehow extended to solving social problems. But it is not clear 
what other behavioral domain that might be, given that we are trying to ex-
plain the many particularities of cognitive skills supporting humans’ unique 
forms of collaboration and communication, including in the end such things 
as cultural conventions, norms, and institutions. It seems highly unlikely 
that cognitive skills adapted for, say, individual tool use or the tracking of 
prey could be exapted in this way for such complex cooperative enterprises.
And so, in the current view, the most plausible evolutionary scenario is 
that new ecological pressures (e.g., the disappearance of individually obtain-
able foods and then increased population sizes and competition from other 
groups) acted directly on human social interaction and or ga ni za tion, leading 
to the evolution of more cooperative human lifeways (e.g., collaboration for 
foraging and then cultural or ga ni za tion for group coordination and defense). 
Coordinating these newly collaborative and cultural lifeways communica-

Hu m a n T hin k ing a s Cooper at ion 
125
tively required new skills and motivations for co-operating with others, fi rst 
via joint intentionality, and then via collective intentionality. Th inking for 
co-operating. Th is, in broadest possible outline, is the shared intentionality 
hypothesis.
But our evolutionary story has taken many more detailed twists and turns 
as we have attempted to account, in detail, for the many diff erent aspects of 
uniquely human thinking as they relate, in detail, to the many diff erent aspects 
of uniquely human collaboration and communication. Because there are no 
other contemporary evolutionary stories with exactly this focus, we have thus 
far made scant reference to other theories. But there are a number of other 
contemporary accounts of the evolution of uniquely human cognition and/or 
uniquely human sociality in general, and a broad survey of these will help to 
better situate the shared intentionality hypothesis within the current theo-
retical landscape.
Th eories of Human Cognitive Evolution
When asked what makes human cognition and thinking unique, a kind of 
default answer for many cognitive scientists would be something like “gen-
eral intelligence.” Since humans have evolved very large brains (roughly three 
times larger than those of other great apes), and since larger brains have more 
computing power, the idea is that humans are able to engage in all kinds of 
cognitive pro cessing, including thinking, in bigger, better, and faster ways. 
But even if this description is in some sense true, the question remains of how 
it came about evolutionarily. It is implausible in the extreme to just say that 
being smart is more adaptive than being dumb and so humans became smarter. 
Th is is a just- so story of the most egregious kind. Being able to fl y and walk 
would be better than being able to walk only, so why did humans not come 
to fl y as well? Th e point is that a plausible evolutionary account must be built 
on an adaptive scenario involving a specifi c set of circumstances in which a 
specifi c set of cognitive skills provided a specifi c set of advantages to the indi-
viduals who possessed them.
In the case of general intelligence, if this is a useful construct at all, recent 
data suggest that the more specifi c story would almost certainly be some vari-
ant of our social account. Th us, Herrmann et al. (2007, 2010) administered a 
comprehensive battery of cognitive tests— assessing skills for dealing both 
with the physical world and with the social world— to large numbers of two 

126 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
of human’s closest primate relatives, chimpanzees and orangutans, and to 
2.5- year- old human children. If the diff erence between human and ape cogni-
tion  were based on general intelligence, then the children in this study should 
have diff ered from the apes uniformly across all the diff erent tasks. But this 
was not the case. Th e fi nding was that the children and apes had very similar 
cognitive skills for dealing with the physical world, but the children— old 
enough to use some language but still years away from reading, counting, or 
going to school— already had more sophisticated cognitive skills than either 
ape species for dealing with the social world. Th e hypothesis was thus that 
human adults are cleverer than other apes at almost everything not because 
they possess an adaptation for greater general intelligence but, rather, because 
they grew up as children using their special skills of social cognition to coop-
erate, communicate, and socially learn all kinds of new things from others in 
their culture, including the use of all of their various artifacts and symbols 
(Herrmann and Tomasello, 2012).
A similar but diff erent argument applies to theories that propose nar-
rower, but still domain general, cognitive pro cesses to distinguish humans 
from other primates. Th e most systematic such attempt is that of Penn et al. 
(2008). Th ey claim that what distinguishes human from nonhuman primate 
cognition is humans’ ability to understand and reason with various kinds of 
higher- order relations. In addition to several empirical disputes about the 
data they cite for great apes, the overall problem is that this theory would also 
predict across- the- board diff erences in how well humans and other great apes 
deal with various kinds of problems in diff erent domains of activity. But, 
again, the Herrmann et al. (2007, 2010) results are not consistent with this 
account. Furthermore, Penn et al. have no evolutionary story specifying the 
adaptive context(s) that could account for humans’ special skills with rela-
tional conceptualizations. Th e discussion in box 1 (chapter 3) proposed an 
alternative account, namely, that humans’ especially sophisticated relational 
thinking derives from comprehension of the individual roles involved in vari-
ous types of joint and collective intentionality. Th us, this special form of re-
lational thinking is just one outcome of the pro cess of adapting cognitively to 
new forms of social engagement. And something similar may be said about 
Corbalis’s (2011) proposal that the key to human cognitive uniqueness is re-
cursion, especially as manifested in language, “mental time travel,” and theory 
of mind. Recursion also plays a key role in the current account, but again, we 
would claim that it is not the  whole story. Rather, it is an outcome of the pro-

Hu m a n T hin k ing a s Cooper at ion 
127
cess by which humans came to collaborate and communicate with others in 
special ways; specifi cally in this case, it is the special way that individuals 
had to make inferences to participate in cooperative (ostensive- inferential) 
communication.
A second set of hypotheses to explain human cognitive uniqueness invoke 
language and/or culture. In the case of language, some theorists have pointed 
to the unique kinds of computational pro cesses that language enables, namely, 
various kinds of combinatorial/syntactic productivity, including recursion 
(see Bickerton, 2009, for a recent version of this view). More philosophically 
minded theorists have focused on the role of language in reasoning, that is, 
on the way that humans make assertions aimed at truth, and then attempt to 
justify them to others with articulated reasons (as in science and mathematics 
and, perhaps, courts of law and po liti cal disputes), and this is only possible in 
the medium of a language of some kind (see, e.g., Brandom, 1994). Of course, 
no one can dispute the crucial role of language in human thinking— and 
language is a key part of our proposed second step in human cognitive 
evolution— but, in the current view, it plays its role only fairly late in the pro-
cess. Indeed, we have argued previously that human language was made pos-
sible by a number of earlier adaptations for joint intentionality (e.g., joint 
goals, common conceptual ground, recursive inferences), and that its even-
tual emergence was part of a larger pro cess in which many human activities 
 were conventionalized and normativized (Tomasello, 2008). In our view, 
saying that only humans have language is like saying that only humans build 
skyscrapers, when the fact is that only humans, among primates, build any 
kind of stable shelters at all. Language is the capstone of uniquely human 
cognition and thinking, not its foundation.
Somewhat relatedly, many social and cognitive anthropologists have insisted 
that what is most remarkable about human cognition, compared with that of 
other primates, is its variability across diff erent human populations, which 
attests to its grounding in pro cesses of culture (e.g., Shore, 1995; Chase, 2006). 
More radically, various postmodern theorists have claimed that basically all 
of human experience takes place within the discursive practices of a human 
culture, and so uniquely human thinking is only imaginable within this cul-
tural framework (e.g., Geertz, 1973). Again, these claims for the key role of 
culture are all, in some general sense, true. But again, if our question is evo-
lutionary origins, they are not suffi  cient. Human thinking became unique 
even before the fl ourishing of human cultural variability, specifi cally, in the 

128 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
evolution of species- wide skills of collaboration, cooperative communication, 
and joint intentionality more generally (and it can be seen today in the species- 
unique skills of prelinguistic human children). Th ese skills then enabled the 
evolution and development of culture at a subsequent time. Th is analysis also 
applies to the account of Richerson and Boyd (2006), who have argued for 
the crucial role of cultural group selection in most things uniquely human. 
Again, the second (cultural) step of our story invoked this pro cess as well, but 
again, there are numerous prerequisite and concomitant uniquely human 
capacities that make cultures, and consequently cultural group selection, pos-
sible in the fi rst place (e.g., conformity, conventionalization, and normativ-
ization). Since a culture comprises conventionalized ways of doing things, for 
modern human cultures to be the way that they are, some things must have 
already been complex and fundamentally cooperative “naturally,” before they 
 were conventionalized.
And so we agree with almost everyone that language and culture  were 
necessary for the evolutionary emergence of modern human cognition and 
thinking. We have just argued that they  were made possible by other uniquely 
human social and cognitive processes— namely, those associated with joint 
and collective intentionality more generally— that emerged earlier or con-
comitantly in human evolution. A full account must therefore acknowledge 
the role of these earlier and/or concomitant pro cesses, and indeed, our own 
view is that an understanding of how language and culture work as modes of 
social engagement and interaction at all requires a full explication of the 
underlying pro cesses of joint and collective intentionality involved (Toma-
sello, 1999, 2008).
Th e third and fi nal set of hypotheses comes from evolutionary psychol-
ogy. Tooby and Cosmides (1989) have proposed a Swiss army knife meta phor 
in which the human mind comprises a varied collection of special- purpose 
modules evolved to solve specifi c and unrelated problems, the most numer-
ous and crucial of which arose with early humans and their small- group 
social interactions. Th is focus on specifi c adaptive challenges and the evolved 
cognitive capacities for solving them is a necessary and important propaedeu-
tic in the mostly evolution- free fi eld of cognitive psychology. But, in practice, 
evolutionary psychologists have focused mainly on noncognitive (or only 
weakly cognitive) problems such as mate selection and incest avoidance. In 
terms of cognition, Tooby and Cosmides (2013) have been content simply to 
point out various ways in which human cognition shows the imprint of its 

Hu m a n T hin k ing a s Cooper at ion 
129
evolutionary history in various domains. For example, in the domain of rea-
soning, humans solve some logical problems better if they are presented in 
social contexts similar to those from the environment of evolutionary adapted-
ness; in the domain of spatial cognition women have better spatial memories 
than men because they are adapted for plant gathering; and in the domain of 
visual attention humans pay special attention to the comings and goings of 
animals. So far, however, these theorists have given no comprehensive account 
of human cognitive modules in general, or of their unique aspects relative to 
other primates in par tic u lar.
Th ere are several theories from this general perspective—that is, focusing 
on modularity and adaptedness— that make more systematic attempts to 
account for human cognitive uniqueness. First, Sperber (1996, 2000) argues 
that humans, like all animal species, possess a host of highly specifi c cogni-
tive modules, such as snake detection and face recognition, as well as some 
more general modules, such as intuitive physics and intuitive psychology. Th ese 
support what he calls intuitive beliefs (fast, resistant to evidence). What makes 
human cognition especially powerful is a kind of supermodule that enables 
individuals to entertain metarepre sen ta tions, that is to say, repre sen ta tions 
that not only cognitively represent the world but also represent others’ or their 
own repre sen ta tions of the world. Individuals do this “propositionally” (com-
positionally and recursively), leading to what Sperber calls refl ective beliefs 
(which may be formed either by having good reasons or by adopting the beliefs 
of others whom one trusts). If other animals engage in meta- representation at 
all, it is only in very rudimentary fashion, without compositionality and recur-
sivity. Th is metarepre sen ta tional ability (Sperber actually thinks there may 
be three diff erent metarepre sen ta tional modules) enables everything from 
cooperative (ostensive- inferential) communication, to teaching and cultural 
transmission, to reasoning by arguing with others. Th e capacity for metarepre-
sen ta tion coevolved with and interacts with a separate language module, which 
is also, obviously, uniquely human.
Carruthers (2006) gives an account of nonhuman primate cognition that 
involves repre sen ta tions and inferences, but he also stresses the limitations 
imposed by the “compartmentalization” of nonhuman primate cognitive 
modules. Human cognition is much more creative and fl exible because, in the 
course of human evolution, additional modules  were added, the most impor-
tant of which are a mind- reading system (going beyond what apes do), a 
language- learning system, and a normative reasoning system. Th ese modules 

130 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
can be applied simultaneously in the same situation, which creates some nov-
elties, and in addition, humans evolved a disposition to imagine and rehearse 
action plans creatively in working memory, a capacity that enables all of the 
other modules to interact with one another more fl exibly.
Mithen (1996) makes a systematic attempt to provide a modular theory of 
human cognitive evolution closely tied to the artifactual record. He makes a 
distinction between early humans and modern humans, noting that early 
humans  were relatively limited cognitively, using the same tools everywhere 
over many millennia, with no symbolic behavior, and so forth. He explains 
this limitation by positing that early humans, like most animals, possessed 
several diff erent cognitive modules that  were not integrated with one another. 
Specifi cally, they had a technical intelligence with tools, a natural history in-
telligence with animals, and a social intelligence with conspecifi cs, none of 
which interacted any other module. With modern humans, we get symbolic 
capacities and language, which enabled the modules to work together, creat-
ing the kind of “cognitive fl uidity” associated with modern human thinking.
What all of these more specifi c evolutionary psychology accounts have in 
common is the proposal that nonhuman primates, and perhaps even early 
humans, are dominated by highly compartmentalized modules, and this 
means that their cognitive pro cesses are relatively narrow and infl exible. In 
contrast, human cognition is broader and more fl exible because humans have 
modules, including some novel modules, that somehow work together or 
communicate with one another (via metarepre sen ta tion, symbols and lan-
guage, or some horizontal pro cesses such as creative imagination in working 
memory). Th e means that nonhuman animals (and perhaps early humans) 
operate only with system 1 intuitive inferences, whereas modern humans op-
erate in addition with system 2 refl ective inferences based on actual thinking. 
But this view— a kind of strict view of modularity for all animals except 
modern humans— is not compatible with the data on great ape thinking at 
all. Th ere is no evidence that great apes operate only with highly compart-
mentalized modules, and indeed, chapter 2 presented evidence that they do 
not; they often use system 2 pro cesses to think before they act in both the 
physical and social domains, in both cases using abstract repre sen ta tions, 
simple inferences, and protological paradigms (structured by physical causal-
ity or social intentionality). In our view, then, these attempts to both be true 
to modularity theory and simultaneously make room for human fl exible 
thinking simply do not accord well with available empirical evidence.

Hu m a n T hin k ing a s Cooper at ion 
131
It is also disconcerting to see how diff erent are the specifi c modules that 
the diff erent theorists posit— indeed, they often operate at very diff erent lev-
els of analysis (compare snake detection and face recognition with technical 
intelligence and normative reasoning). Perhaps a more systematic and com-
prehensive list could be compiled, but the real problem is that modularity 
theorists do not often ask the question of origins beyond seeking a single 
evolutionary function for a module (what it is “good for”). It is well known 
that in evolution new functions are often subserved by existing structures, 
perhaps put together in some new ways. Th us, for example, the proposed mod-
ule for normative reasoning would almost certainly have been constructed 
out of earlier skills and motivations for such things as making individual 
inferences, conforming to others and the group, evaluating others and being 
sensitive to their evaluations, cooperative communication, and other skills. 
Looking at the architecture of contemporary human cognition for a single 
evolutionary function (via “reverse engineering”) misses out on the dynamics 
of evolution, the way that new functions are created by cobbling together 
already existing structures as evolution proceeds. Th is dynamic means that 
there are deep relations among many cognitive functions via “common de-
scent.” A complex adaptive behavior such as collaborative foraging, for example, 
may comprise many component pro cess such as fast running, accurate throw-
ing, and skillful tracking— not to mention skills of joint intentionality— that 
may each have other adaptive functions, either on their own or in other com-
plex behaviors. Once we get past narrowly defi ned problems with immediate 
and urgent fi tness benefi ts (e.g., mate selection and predator detection), this 
hierarchical structure is crucial for understanding how diff erent cognitive 
skills interrelate with others.
Our preference would thus be not to use the word module, which suggests 
a static architectural or engineering perspective. Rather, we would prefer the 
word adaptation, which suggests dynamic evolutionary pro cesses. Adapta-
tions may be quite narrowly targeted, and we ourselves have invoked the etho-
logical notion of adaptive specialization (e.g., spiders building webs), which is 
very close in spirit to the notion of a module. But other adaptations may apply 
more broadly, either initially or through extensions over time. For example, 
great apes do not seem to be specifi cally adapted for tool use, as neither goril-
las nor bonobos (and only some orangutan populations) use tools in the wild. 
But all great apes use tools, and quite adeptly, in appropriate circumstances 
in captivity. Th e adaptation thus seems to be more for causal understanding 

132 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
in the manipulation of objects, which can then be applied in the use of tools 
if the need arises for an individual (in contrast to some bird species, which 
seem to be specifi cally adapted for tool use).
Even more generally along these lines, the question arises whether there 
exist any truly domain- general horizontal abilities. (Th e meta phor is that 
specifi c content, like space or quantity, is vertical, whereas general pro cesses 
like repre sen ta tion, memory, and inference are horizontal.) Some modularity 
theorists believe that seemingly horizontal abilities do not represent single 
domain- general pro cesses; rather, each module has its own computational 
procedures that have nothing to do with those in other modules. Our view is 
that this again misses the importance of hierarchical or ga ni za tion in complex 
adaptations. Pro cesses such as cognitive repre sen ta tion, inference, and self- 
monitoring may have evolved initially— in some ancient vertebrate ancestor—
in the context of some fairly narrow behavioral specializations. But as new 
species have evolved, in the face of new and complex problems, these pro-
cesses have been co- opted for use as subcomponents, as it  were, in many dif-
ferent adaptations, some quite broad. Th is co- option pro cess is especially 
important in highly fl exible organisms such as great apes and humans, and 
indeed, wide- ranging occurrence of this pro cess is a key component of cogni-
tive fl exibility.
Finally, we must also note that human skills and motivations for shared 
intentionality do not, in our view, represent typical cognitive adaptations 
occurring within individuals. Early humans had their own individual cognitive 
skills, but then they began attempting to coordinate with others toward joint 
goals with joint attention. Solving these coordination problems did not end 
the matter, however; rather, it opened up a  whole new way of operating for 
early humans, especially the possibility of communicating referentially about 
basically everything in their experience with modifi ed pro cesses of repre sen-
ta tion and inference. Th e emergence of shared intentionality thus eff ected a 
restructuring, a transformation, a socialization, of all the pro cesses involved 
in individual intentionality and thinking—an unusual, if not unpre ce dented, 
evolutionary event. Th is does not mean that humans do not also operate with 
many system 1 pro cesses impervious to this transformation; they do, quite 
often making “gut decisions” about event probabilities, moral dilemmas, dan-
gerous situations, and so forth (see, e.g., Gigerenzer and Selton, 2001; Haidt, 
2012). But still, humans may consider and even communicate about all of these 
things in their system 2 thinking, even if this does not aff ect their eventual 

Hu m a n T hin k ing a s Cooper at ion 
133
behavioral decision. Skills and motivations for shared intentionality thus 
transform the way that humans think about almost everything— because they 
can communicate about almost everything.
In any case, as noted at the outset, none of these various hypotheses— in 
any one of the three sets just reviewed— is a direct competitor to the shared 
intentionality hypothesis, as none of them focuses specifi cally on human 
thinking and its component pro cesses. Each has captured its own segment of 
the truth about uniquely human cognition and thinking, we would argue, but 
the current account is both more comprehensive in covering all of the many 
diff erent aspects of human thinking and more true to the way that evolution-
ary pro cesses operate in cobbling together complex behavioral functions 
out of preexisting component pro cesses. In addition, as we shall now see, the 
shared intentionality hypothesis also fi ts quite well with contemporary theories 
of the evolution of human sociality.
Sociality and Th inking
Th ere are a number of diff erent theories of the evolution of human sociality, 
but they all agree on one thing: the general direction is one of ever more coop-
eration (at least until the rise of agriculture, cities, and stratifi ed societies, 
some 10,000 years ago). As distinct from other great apes, early humans began 
mating via pair bonding, with the result that nuclear families became newly 
cooperating social units (Chapais, 2008). Relatedly, humans— again as opposed 
to other great apes— began various forms of cooperative childcare in which 
adults other than mothers cared for youngsters (Hrdy, 2009). Th is new form 
of childcare may have been a precursor to, but also may have occurred in con-
junction with, collaborative foraging, as grandmothers and other females 
remained at home with the children while the healthiest females foraged and 
brought back the food to share— which turned the network of families in-
volved into new cooperating units (Hawkes, 2003). And with the rise of mod-
ern humans, entire cultural groups— potentially encompassing  whole clans or 
tribes with individuals who might not even know one another— became coop-
erating units as they competed with other human groups for valuable resources 
in cultural group selection (Richerson and Boyd, 2006).
How this trend toward cooperation might have interacted with humans’ 
ever increasing cognitive competencies has been little explored, or even spec-
ulated about. Th ere are two main exceptions. First, in support of the social 

134 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
brain hypothesis, Dunbar (1998) has documented across primate species a 
strong positive correlation between brain size (presumably refl ecting cogni-
tive complexity) and population size (presumably refl ecting social complex-
ity). Modern humans are the extreme case: human brain size and population 
size are both several times larger than those of their nearest great ape rela-
tives. Gowlett et al. (2012) attempted to trace this relationship across human 
evolution and found an especially big jump in both brain size (as estimated 
by cranial volume) and estimated group size at around 400,000 years ago 
with Homo heidelbergensis— which is, of course, precisely at the time of our 
hypothesized fi rst step in the evolution of human thinking via joint intention-
ality. However, group size is only a very gross indicator of social complexity 
(Dunbar focuses on the greater numbers of social relationships and reputations 
to be kept track of ), and brain size is only a very gross indicator of cognitive 
capacities, so the social brain hypothesis gives us only a very general indication 
of the actual pro cesses involved on either side of the correlation.
A more specifi c attempt to link human sociality and cognition is provided 
by Sterelny (2012), who has focused on human cooperation and its many 
facets, including cooperative childcare, cooperative foraging, and coopera-
tive communication and teaching. Th e human cooperative lifestyle depends 
on individuals acquiring huge amounts of information during ontogeny— 
everything from how to track an antelope, to how to make a spear, to how 
the kinship relations of the group are constructed— and so the cooperative 
transmission of information from expert adults to novice children is crucial 
for individual survival. Humans have thus constructed learning environ-
ments within which their own off spring develop, which ensures that these 
off spring gain the information they need to perform critical subsistence ac-
tivities such as toolmaking and collaborative foraging. Tomasello (1999) also 
off ers a version of this theory, focusing especially on the ways in which hu-
man cognitive ontogeny is made possible by children acquiring the material 
and symbolic artifacts (including language) created by their forebears. In a 
generally similar vein, Levinson (2006) focuses on the uniquely human “in-
teractive engine” of cooperative social engagement and how its evolution has 
created uniquely human forms of multimodal communication. Hrdy (2009) 
stresses that some of the adaptations involved  here could have been for infant 
behavior itself, for example, special skills of cooperation and communication 
that enabled infants to navigate the newly complex world of multiple caregiv-
ers from an early age.

Hu m a n T hin k ing a s Cooper at ion 
135
From the current perspective, these two accounts of the interrelation of 
human sociality and cognition are both useful and generally correct. But we 
have focused  here specifi cally on the underlying pro cesses of thinking in-
volved. We have done this at a level of detail showing relatively precisely how 
specifi c problems in the coordination of action (collaboration) and the coor-
dination of intentional states (cooperative communication) might have pre-
sented themselves to humans at two diff erent evolutionary periods, and how 
humans might have solved them via new forms of thinking (employing new 
forms of cognitive repre sen ta tion, inference, and self- monitoring). Early hu-
mans needed not just to keep track of social relationships and transmit useful 
information to their young, but in addition and most immediately they also 
needed to meet the many and varied challenges of subsistence via social 
coordination— which they did by developing the many and varied skills and 
motivations of shared intentionality, including the ability to conceptualize 
situations for others recursively in cooperative and conventional communi-
cation. Th e indissociability of social coordination and human thinking is 
captured quite nicely by Sellars (1962/2007, p. 385), who writes: “Conceptual 
thinking is not by accident that which is communicated to others, any more 
than the decision to move a chess piece is by accident that which fi nds an 
expression in a move on a board between two people.”
And so, by way of a general summary of our account, let us focus on the 
specifi c issue of the relation between sociality and thinking as it arises at each 
step of the proposed natural history. Th e main conclusions may be expressed 
in four very general propositions.
1. Competition with groupmates led to sophisticated 
forms of nonhuman primate social cognition and think-
ing without human-like forms of sociality or communi-
cation.  Basic mammalian sociality is simply the motivation to live in 
a social group. Within- group competition engenders social relations of domi-
nance and, along with other factors, affi  liation. Great apes, and perhaps 
other primates, engage in more- than- average social competition and so 
have developed skills for understanding the goals and perceptions of  others 
as a way of fl exibly predicting their behavior. Th ey also are especially skillful 
at manipulating physical causes in tool use and the intentional states of 
others in gestural communication. Great apes collaborate— that is, actually 
work together— very little, and when they do, it is best characterized as 

136 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
what Tuomela (2007) calls “group behavior in I-mode,” as in chimpanzees’ 
group hunting in which each individual is attempting to capture the mon-
key for  itself. Great ape communication is almost exclusively about at-
tempting to direct the recipient’s attention and behavior in some desired 
ways, not to inform them of things useful to them. Th ere are no human- 
like joint goals; there is no cooperative communication for coordinating 
actions.
Great ape cognition and thinking are adapted to this social, but not very 
cooperative, way of life. Great apes attend to situations relevant to their goals 
and values and, in certain problem situations, simulate or imagine the eff ects 
of various causes on the problem ahead of time before acting, as a way of 
making an eff ective behavioral decision. Th ey do this with cognitive repre-
sen ta tions that are imagistic and schematic, understanding that “this is another 
one of those.” Th ey also understand in many cases how situations (and their 
components) relate to one another causally or intentionally, which enables 
them to simulate nonactual situations and make all kinds of causal and in-
tentional inferences about them, including logical inferences or ga nized into 
paradigms. For example, they infer not only “if X is present, then Y will be 
absent,” but also “if there is only silence coming from  here, then X must be 
there,” and even “if X wants Y and perceives it in location Z, then she will 
go to location Z.” Th ese causal and intentional inferences also generate a 
kind of instrumental rationality in decision making, as the individual infers 
“if situation X obtains, then the best action to choose is Y.” Great apes also 
self- monitor their own decision making not only by monitoring how out-
comes match goals but also by monitoring the information available to them, 
and their confi dence in it, before making a decision.
And so, the upshot is that great ape sociality has led to some remarkable 
skills of social cognition, to complement sophisticated skills of physical con-
dition, what we have called skills of individual intentionality. But this form 
of sociality has not led to any transformations in the way that individuals 
conceptualize the world or think about problems in general. Individual in-
tentionality has enabled great apes, and perhaps other nonhuman primates, 
to actually think about problems in specifi c situations, and to do this without 
any of humans’ unique forms of sociality or communication. Individual in-
tentionality and instrumental rationality may thus be considered general 
primate issue for “thought in a hostile world” (Sterelny, 2003.)

Hu m a n T hin k ing a s Cooper at ion 
137
2. Early human collaborative activities and coopera-
tive  communication— employing new forms of social 
coordination— led to new forms of human thinking 
without either culture or language.  For more than 5 million 
of the 6 million years that humans have been on their own evolutionary 
pathway, their thinking was mainly ape- like (though their skills at making 
tools may have enhanced their causal understanding). But then there was a 
change in ecological conditions that forced some early humans to begin col-
laborating in new ways to obtain food. Th is made individuals interdependent 
with one another in an especially urgent way. In mutualistic activities such as 
these, communication could become fully cooperative since it was in the in-
terest of each individual to coordinate with others toward their mutualistic 
goal and to inform them of things useful to them in their role. And so  were 
born early humans who could survive and thrive only by collaborating and 
communicating cooperatively with social partners.
Collaborative foraging created a number of diffi  cult problems of social 
coordination. Th e basic solution was to form with others joint goals to do 
things together, to which both participants  were jointly committed. Th is cre-
ated the dual- level structure: joint goals with individual roles, along with 
joint attention with individual perspectives. In the cooperative communica-
tion used to coordinate individuals’ perspectives (and so actions) within these 
activities— initially via pointing and pantomiming— the communicator was 
committed to cooperation in the form of an honest informative act, and 
communicator and recipient collaborated to ensure successful communica-
tion. Th e recipient followed the pointing gesture, or imagined the referent of 
the pantomime, and then made an abductive inference from that to what, 
given their common ground, the communicator intended to communicate. 
Th e communicator, for his part, knew that this was what the recipient would 
be doing and so attempted to conceptualize the situation for her in his choice 
of referents— anticipating her perspective of his perspective on her perspec-
tive recursively— in a way that facilitated her abductive leap. Moreover, in 
the special context of joint decision making, early human communicators 
sometimes pointed out relevant situations to their partner that (implicitly) 
provided reasons for them to jointly decide on a certain course of action based 
on their common ground understanding of the causal and/or intentional 
implications of the indicated situation.

138 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
To do all of this eff ectively required thinking of a type not possible for great 
apes and their individual intentionality: the communicator had to make 
judgments not only about his common conceptual ground with recipient but 
also about which aspects of the current situation the recipient would fi nd 
both relevant and new— and so what kind of abductive inference she would 
make given diff erent possible referential acts. Doing this led to what we have 
called second- personal thinking, comprising (1) cognitive repre sen ta tions that 
are perspectival and symbolic, (2) inferences that are recursively structured to 
include intentional states within intentional states, and (3) self- monitoring that 
incorporates the imagined social evaluation and/or comprehension of the col-
laborative and/or communicative partner. Th ese changes all served to basically 
“cooperativize” great ape individual intentionality into a kind of second- personal 
joint intentionality and thinking.
And so, early humans’ joint intentionality and second- personal thinking 
represented a radical break, a new type of relation between sociality and think-
ing. Th e cooperative and recursive sociality of early humans created an adaptive 
context requiring individuals, if they  were to survive and thrive, to coordinate 
their actions and intentional states with others, which required them to “co-
operativize” their cognitive repre sen ta tions, inferences, and self- monitoring,  
and so the pro cesses of thinking that these enabled. Importantly for theories 
of the relation of sociality and thinking, this new type of second- personal 
thinking took place without conventionalization, culture, or language or any-
thing  else going beyond direct, second- personal, social engagements.
3. Modern human pro cesses of conventionalized culture 
and language led to all of the unique complexities of 
modern human thinking and reasoning.  Modern humans 
faced some new social challenges due to increases in group sizes accompanied 
by competition among groups. For survival, modern human groups had to 
begin operating as relatively cohesive collaborative units, with various division- 
of- labor roles (see Wilson, 2012). Th is created the problem of how individuals 
could coordinate with in- group strangers, with whom they had no personal 
common ground. Th e solution was the conventionalization of cultural prac-
tices: everyone conformed to what everyone  else was doing, and expected 
others to conform as well (and expected them to expect them to,  etc.), which 
created a kind of cultural common ground that could be assumed of all 
members of the group (but not other groups). Modern humans’ ways of com-

Hu m a n T hin k ing a s Cooper at ion 
139
municating  were conventionalized in this same way as well, which meant 
that individuals operated in a cultural common ground comprising a kind of 
group perspective and with conventionalized linguistic items and construc-
tions that could be used eff ectively with anyone in the group.
Th is group- minded structuring of modern humans’ activities and interac-
tions, along with their conventional means of communication, meant that 
modern humans came to construct a kind of transpersonal, “objective” per-
spective on the world. Conventional communication became fully proposi-
tional, not only because of its conventional, normative, “objective” format 
and topic- focus structuring, but also because the speaker’s communicative 
motives and epistemic/modal attitudes could be in de pen dently controlled in 
conventional signs, which meant that the propositional content was con-
ceptualized in de pen dent of the motives and attitudes of par tic u lar individu-
als. Linguistic constructions enabled unpre ce dented creativity of conceptual 
combination, and moreover, they enabled full propositions representing a kind 
of generic, timeless, “objective” state of aff airs, as in pedagogy (“It works like 
this”) and the enforcement of social norms (“One must not do that”). Group- 
minded individuals thus constructed an “objective” world.
Conventional linguistic communication provided developing children with 
a preexisting repre sen ta tional system of alternative means of conceptualiza-
tion, and everyone knew together in cultural common ground the available 
alternatives. Th is opened up a  whole new world of both formal and pragmatic 
inferences. Pro cesses of discourse aimed at eff ective communication encour-
aged communicators to make explicit many aspects of their own psychological 
pro cesses left implicit in previous forms of communication (e.g., intentional 
states, logical operations), which enabled new ways of refl ecting on thinking. 
In addition, cooperative argumentation for making joint decisions required 
that individuals make explicit their reasons and justifi cations to others in order 
to convince them of their truth; therefore, to be eff ective, they had to meet the 
group’s normative expectations for rational discourse. Internalizing this reason- 
giving pro cess meant that individuals now knew why, for what group- accepted 
reason, they  were thinking what they  were thinking. Th is pro cess provided 
conceptual links between the individual’s myriad thoughts and propositional 
repre sen ta tions, leading to a kind of holistic conceptual web. Each individual 
was also now practicing a kind of normative self- governance in which she, as 
emissary of the group to which she was a committed member, regulated her own 
actions and thoughts in terms of the group’s normative standards.

Figure 5.1  Summary of the shared intentionality hypothesis

Hu m a n T hin k ing a s Cooper at ion 
141
And so, modern humans’ creation of the various form of collective 
intentionality— comprising cultural conventions, norms, and institutions, 
including language— led to a kind of agent- neutral, “objective” thinking 
comprising conventional and objective repre sen ta tions; pro cesses of inferring 
that  were reasoned, refl ective, and aimed at truth; and normative self- 
governance in which individuals monitored and adjusted their thinking to fi t 
with that of the group. Culture and language, as agent- neutral conventional 
phenomena, thus provide another setting within which a new form of human 
sociality can lead to a new form of human thinking, specifi cally, objective- 
refl ective- normative thinking.
From an evolutionary point of view, then, our overall argument is an exten-
sion of that of Maynard Smith and Szathmáry (1995): humans have created 
genuine evolutionary novelties via new forms of cooperation, supported and 
extended by new forms of communication. Further, this has led to new forms 
of cognitive repre sen ta tion, inference, and self- monitoring together consti-
tuting new forms of thinking. And humans have done this twice, the second 
step building on the fi rst. Figure 5.1 summarizes the three component pro-
cesses of human thinking at each of the three steps (i.e., including apes as 
step 0) of the shared intentionality hypothesis.
4. Cumulative cultural evolution led to a plethora of 
culturally specific cognitive skills and types of think-
ing.  All of these pro cesses of joint and collective intentionality are universal 
in the human species. Most likely, the fi rst step of joint intentionality evolved 
in Africa before the split between Neanderthals and modern humans and so 
characterized both species. Th e second step of collective intentionality likely 
evolved in a population of modern humans in Africa before they migrated 
out into other parts of the world after 100,000 years ago. But once they started 
migrating out and settling in highly variable local ecologies, diff erences in 
cultural practices became pronounced. Diff erent human cultures created 
very diff erent sets of par tic u lar cognitive skills, for example, for navigating 
across large distances, for building important tools and artifacts, and even for 
communicating linguistically. Th is meant that diff erent cultures created, on 
top of their species- wide cognitive skills of individual, joint, and collective 
intentionality, many culturally specifi c cognitive skills and ways of thinking 
for their own local purposes.

142 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
Importantly, these culturally specifi c skills build on one another over his-
torical time within a culture in a kind of ratchet eff ect, leading to cumulative 
cultural evolution. Because of humans’ especially powerful skills of cultural 
learning, along with adult teaching and children’s tendency to conform, the 
artifacts and practices of a culture acquire a “history.” Individuals mediate their 
interactions with the world through the culture’s artifacts and symbols from 
early in ontogeny (Vygotsky, 1978; Tomasello, 1999), thus absorbing something 
of the wisdom of the entire cultural group and its history. Cumulative cul-
tural evolution is what enabled humans to conquer all kinds of otherwise 
uninhabitable places all over the globe.
As one dramatic example in the contemporary world, we may point to 
what are arguably the most abstract and complex forms of human thinking, 
that is, those involved in Western science and mathematics. Th e point  here is 
that these forms of thinking are simply not possible without special forms of 
socially constructed conventions, namely, those in written form, that devel-
oped over historical time in Western culture. Th is point is stressed especially 
by Peirce (1931– 1958) and is summarized in the classic text of modern logic by 
Lewis and Langford (1932, p. 4): “Had it not been for the adoption of the new 
and more versatile ideographic symbols, many branches of mathematics could 
never have been developed because no human mind could grasp the essence of 
their operations in terms of the phonograms of ordinary language.” Many 
scholars of literacy would also argue that written language makes certain forms 
of reasoning, if not possible, at least more accessible (Olson, 1994). Writing also 
greatly facilitates metalinguistic thinking and the possibility to analyze, criti-
cize, and evaluate our own linguistic communication, as well as that of others. 
Pictures and other graphic symbols used as communicative devices are collec-
tive repre sen ta tions that contribute to the pro cess in important ways as well.
Th ose modern cultures that have created active communities of scientists, 
mathematicians, linguists, and other scholars are pretty much unthinkable 
without written language, written mathematical numerals and operations, 
and other forms of visually based and semipermanent symbols. Cultures 
that have not created and do not currently possess any of these kinds of graphic 
symbols cannot currently participate in these activities. Th is demonstrates 
quite clearly that many of the most complex and sophisticated human cog-
nitive pro cesses are indeed culturally and historically constructed. It also 
opens the possibility that some other human cognitive achievements are a 
kind of co- evolutionary mixture. Our own view would be that many of the 

Hu m a n T hin k ing a s Cooper at ion 
143
complexities of human language are of this nature: built on universal cogni-
tive pro cesses but with culturally constructed concrete manifestations 
( Tomasello, 2008).
It is theoretically possible that this entire account applies not to human think-
ing in general but only to a kind of modularized thinking for collaboration 
and communication specifi cally (see Sperber, 1994, for something in this 
general direction). But this does not seem to be the case. Human perspectival 
and objective repre sen ta tions, recursive and refl ective inferences, and norma-
tive self- monitoring—the constituents of uniquely human thinking— do not 
just go away when humans are not collaborating or communicating. On the 
contrary, they structure nearly everything that humans do, with the possible 
exception of sensory- motor activities. Th us, humans use recursive inferences 
in the grammatical structures of their languages, in mind- reading in non-
communicative contexts, in mathematics, and in music, to name just the 
most obvious examples. Humans use perspectival and objective repre sen ta-
tions for thinking about everything, even in their solitary reveries, and they 
are engaged in normative self- monitoring whenever they are concerned about 
their reputation— which is pretty much all of the time. We might also recall 
 here skills of relational thinking, which are products of dual- level collabora-
tion but used more broadly, and skills of imagination and pretense, which are 
products of imagining in pantomime but are now used in all kinds of artistic 
creation. Collaboration and communication may play the crucial instigating 
roles in our story, but their eff ects on cognitive repre sen ta tion, inference, and 
self- monitoring extend much more broadly to basically all of humans’ con-
ceptually mediated activities.
Along these same lines, we should also be clear that the new forms of 
social cognition that this account proposes are not just modularized theory 
of mind skills. Rather, such things as perspectival repre sen ta tions, recursive 
inferences, and social self- monitoring evolved so that individuals could now 
understand the world in new ways by putting their heads together with others 
in acts of shared intentionality. Doing this requires more than just some spe-
cifi c cognitive skill aimed at some specifi c content domain, because coordi-
nating actions and intentional states with others toward outside referents 
requires new ways of operating across the board. Skills and motivations for 
shared intentionality thus changed not just the way that humans think about 

144 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
others but also the way they conceptualize and think about the entire world, 
and their own place in it, in collaboration with others.
Th e Role of Ontogeny
Although we have used ontoge ne tic data in various ways in this account, our 
focus  here has not been on human ontogeny per se. It is thus important to make 
two key points about the role of ontogeny in the origins of uniquely human 
thinking.
First, although ontogeny does not have to recapitulate phylogeny, in the 
current case the relation between joint intentionality and collective intention-
ality is partly logical— one must have some skills for coordinating with other 
individuals before coordinating with the group— and so the ontoge ne tic or-
dering is basically the same as our hypothesized phyloge ne tic ordering (Toma-
sello and Hamann, 2012). In fact, however, things are more complicated than 
this because, as noted, young children are modern human beings, and they 
are exposed to many cultural artifacts, including a conventional language, 
practically from birth. But we would claim that, until around their third 
birthday, young children’s social interactions with others are basically second- 
personal, not group based, and they do not fully understand how such things 
as language, artifacts, and social norms work as conventional creations.
And so, in the current view, the sequence is roughly this: Young children 
begin collaborating and communicating cooperatively with others with a 
second- personal orientation— through direct participation with specifi c other 
individuals— at around their fi rst birthday. Th is includes engaging with others 
in joint attention, taking others’ perspective in simple ways, and using the 
pointing gesture with others creatively (Carpenter et al., 1998; see Moll and 
Tomasello, in press, for a review). Importantly, this developmental timing is 
characteristic of children from a wide variety of cultural settings— including 
small- scale, nonliterate societies (Callaghan et al., 2011)— but it is not char-
acteristic of chimpanzee ontogeny, even those raised by humans (Tomasello 
and Carpenter, 2005; Wobber et al., in press). Th is set of facts suggests a highly 
canalized and species- specifi c developmental pathway for the fi rst emergence 
of skills of joint intentionality.
Skills of collective intentionality begin to emerge at around the third birth-
day. Th is is when young children fi rst begin to understand social norms and 
other conventional phenomena as products of some kind of collective agree-

Hu m a n T hin k ing a s Cooper at ion 
145
ment. Th us, at around three years of age, young children do not just follow 
social norms but begin actively to enforce them on others (and to feel guilty 
when they break norms themselves). Th ey do this in ways that demonstrate their 
understanding that par tic u lar norms apply only in par tic u lar contexts and 
only to individuals in the group who have conventionalized them. Th ey also 
understand that some pieces of language, for example, common nouns, are 
conventional for everyone in the group, whereas proper names are conventional 
only for those who know the person (see Schmidt and Tomasello, 2012, for a 
review). Skills of collective intentionality have not been studied in any depth 
outside of Western, middle- class culture, and so the cross- cultural generality 
of this developmental timing is not known.
Th e second point about the role of ontogeny is this: neither joint nor collec-
tive intentionality would exist without it. Th is is true of many human traits, 
as the human species has evolved an extended ontogeny for all kinds of things 
that other species possess in mature, or almost mature, form at birth. Th us, 
whereas many small primates have brains that develop very rapidly in the fi rst 
months of life, maturing in less than a year, and chimpanzees have brains that 
develop to maturity in only about fi ve years, the human brain takes more 
than ten years to reach its fully mature adult volume (Coqueugniot et al., 2004). 
Because this extended ontogeny is highly risky both for youngsters and 
mothers, there must be off setting advantages, presumably in terms of such 
things as especially fl exible behavioral or ga ni za tion, cognition, and decision 
making— as well as time to master the local group’s cultural artifacts, symbols, 
and practices (Bruner, 1972).
Human skills of joint and collective intentionality thus come into existence 
during an extended ontogeny in which the child and her developing brain are 
in constant interaction with the environment, especially the social environ-
ment. Our hypothesis is that they would not come into existence without this 
interaction. To make the point as concretely as possible, let us invoke a thought 
experiment we have used before, and then add a novel twist. Imagine a child 
born on a desert island, miraculously kept alive and healthy until adulthood, 
but all alone. Th e hypothesis is that this child, as an adult, would not have 
skills of either joint or collective intentionality. Th is social isolate could not, 
as an adult, enter a human group and start collaborating by forming joint goals 
with individual roles, or communicating cooperatively in the context of joint 
attention with individual perspectives. Th is individual would thus not develop 
during its isolated lifetime second- personal thinking with perspectival and 

146 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
symbolic repre sen ta tions, recursive inferences, and social self- monitoring. How 
could he develop an appreciation for perspectives that diff er from his own 
without in fact experiencing diff erent perspectives? How could he develop 
socially recursive inferences without any social partners with whom to com-
municate? How could he worry about others evaluating him if no such others 
existed? No, skills of shared intentionality are not simply innate, or matura-
tional; they are biological adaptations that come into existence as they are 
used during ontogeny to collaborate and communicate with others.
Th is thought experiment might be called Robinson Crusoe, as the child 
is alone on the desert island. But now imagine a Lord of the Flies scenario. 
In this case it would be multiple infants born and growing to maturity on a 
desert island, with no one to interact with but each other. Perhaps surpris-
ingly, the hypothesis in this case is that these children would indeed have the 
kind of social interactions necessary for developing joint intentionality— but 
not collective intentionality. Th at is to say, these orphaned peers should de-
velop, through their social interactions with one another, skills of second- 
personal, recursive sociality. Th ey would fi nd ways to collaborate with one 
another with joint goals and attention, communicate with one another tak-
ing diff erent perspectives (by pointing and pantomiming), and monitor their 
behavior through the eyes of their interdependent partner. To develop in 
this way, sophisticated adults and all of their cultural paraphernalia are not 
necessary.
But we do not think that peer interaction alone would be suffi  cient for our 
orphaned peers to develop skills of collective intentionality in their lifetimes. 
Th ey might develop on their own some conventions and norms of some kind, 
as skills of joint intentionality plus imitation might be suffi  cient, and they 
might create something like a culture over many generations. But they would 
not develop during their own lifetimes a full- fl edged culture or conventional 
language, as these take multiple generations over historical time to develop. 
And the same could be said of cultural institutions with standing status 
functions, like chiefs and money. In general, fully fl edged skills of collective 
intentionality and agent- neutral thinking require, on our hypothesis, ontog-
eny in the midst of a preexisting cultural collective with preexisting conven-
tions, norms, and institutions, including a conventional language. How could 
one become group minded, represent things objectively, and regulate one’s 
behavior and reasoning by the cooperative and communicative norms of the 

Hu m a n T hin k ing a s Cooper at ion 
147
social group if there was in fact no social group that antedated one’s social 
and cognitive development? No, skills of collective intentionality are not sim-
ply innate or maturational either; they are biological adaptations that come 
into existence only through an extended ontogeny in a collectively created 
and transmitted cultural environment— which takes multiple generations 
to emerge. In this case, then, adults and all of their cultural paraphernalia 
are indeed necessary for the ontoge ne tic development of skills of collective 
intentionality.
It is not incoherent to believe that all of the cognitive and thinking skills 
we have described could be built- in—to the degree that our wild child or 
orphaned peers could, if discovered as adults, immediately display perfectly 
mature forms of uniquely human thinking at both levels. It is just, in our 
view, highly unlikely. Humans biologically inherit their basic capacities for 
constructing uniquely human cognitive repre sen ta tions, forms of inference, 
and self- monitoring, from out of their collaborative and communicative inter-
actions with other social beings. Absent a social environment, these capacities 
would wither away from disuse, like the capacity for vision in a person born 
and raised completely in darkness.
One could, in principle, collect data on the role of ontogeny in the emergence 
of uniquely human thinking— but only if one had no moral scruples. One 
would have to be prepared to randomly assigned newborn children to diff er-
ent rearing environments. Natural experiments, such as the feral child Victor 
of Aveyron and other “wolf ” children, are not defi nitive on the question for 
many reasons, not the least of which is that some of these children could have 
been abandoned by their parents precisely because they  were not normally 
functioning (Candland, 1995)— and none of them was tested for the relevant 
cognitive skills either. Some interesting indirect evidence for the important 
role of a human- like social environment is provided by so- called enculturated 
apes. When apes are raised by humans in the midst of all kinds of human- like 
social interaction and artifacts, they do not develop more human- like skills of 
physical cognition (e.g., space, object permanence, tool use), but they do develop 
more human- like skills of imitation and communication (Call and Tomasello, 
1996; Tomasello and Call, 2004). Th e signifi cance of these fi ndings for human 
ontogeny are, however, not straightforward.
In any case, while everyone will continue to be fascinated by the question of 
wild children and how much and what kinds of social experience are necessary 

148 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
for humans to develop their unique forms of cognition and thinking, the 
question is very likely to remain a deep mystery for the foreseeable future. In 
the meantime, our hypothesis is that, like many human adaptations, adapta-
tions for shared intentionality are built to grow and fl ourish only in the midst 
of rich social and cultural nourishment of par tic u lar kinds.

6
Conclusion
In both the evolution of thought in the history of mankind, 
and the evolution of thought in an individual, there is a stage at 
which there is no thought followed by a subsequent stage at which 
there is thought. . . .  What we lack is a satisfactory vocabulary 
for describing the intermediate steps.
—donald davidson, Subjective, Intersubjective, Objective
At least since Aristotle, human beings have wondered how they diff er from 
other animal species. But for almost all of that time the appropriate informa-
tion for making this comparison was not available— most important, because 
for the fi rst several thousand years of Western civilization there  were no non-
human primates in Eu rope. Aristotle and Descartes could readily posit things 
like “only humans have reason” or “only humans have free will” because they 
 were comparing humans to birds, rats, various domesticated animals, and 
the occasional fox or wolf.
In the nineteenth century nonhuman primates, including great apes, came 
to Eu rope via newly created zoological gardens. Darwin himself was dumb-
struck by his encounter in 1838 with an orangutan named Jenny at the London 
Zoo (whom Queen Victoria termed “disagreeably human”). After publication 
of the Origin of Species some twenty- one years later, and the Descent of Man 
some twelve years after that, the diff erences between humans and other 
animals—as now represented by our closest living relatives— became much 
more diffi  cult to pinpoint. Many phi los o phers reacted by simply defi ning away 
the problem: thinking is a pro cess that takes place in, and only in, the medium 
of language, and so other animal species cannot think by defi nition (the most 
prominent modern proponents being Davidson [2001] and Brandom [1994]). 
Recent research on great ape cognition and thinking, such as that reviewed 
 here, should already be undermining this “radical discontinuity” view. Great 

150 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
apes cognitively represent the world in abstract format, they make complex 
causal and intentional inferences with logical structure, and they seem to 
know, at least in some sense, what they are doing while they are doing it. 
Although this may not be fully human thinking, for sure it has some key 
components.
But the problem is deeper than fi nding a line of demarcation. Th e point is 
that the great ape species alive today are arbitrarily far from humans; it is just a 
matter of who survived and who did not. So what if we discovered, in some 
remote jungle, surviving members of the species Homo heidelbergensis or Homo 
neanderthalensis? How would we decide whether they possess fully human 
thinking— yes or no— given that, in all probability, they would be somewhere 
in between contemporary humans and great apes? Even more radical, what if 
we discovered some earlier side branches from the human evolutionary tree 
who had their own ways of doing and thinking about things, overlapping only 
partially with modern human thinking? Perhaps these creatures never devel-
oped pointing and so did not evolve skills of recursive inferring. Or perhaps 
they never imitated at a level suffi  cient for pantomime and so did not symbolize 
their experience for others gesturally. Or perhaps they collaborated but did not 
care about others’ evaluations and so did not become socially normative. Or 
perhaps they never had situations in which they had to make group decisions 
and so never came to off er one another reasons and justifi cations for their asser-
tions. Our question is what would these creatures’ version of thinking look 
like if it skipped a key ingredient (along with all of its cascading eff ects) of the 
modern human version? We might end up with something sharing many fea-
tures with modern human thinking but having its own unique features as well. 
Th e point is that, considered evolutionarily, human thinking is not a monolith 
but a motley— and it could have turned out other than it did.
What we have done in the current natural history is to imagine one pos-
sible “missing link” in the evolution of human thinking from great apes to 
modern humans based on selected aspects of the way of life of contemporary 
hunter- gatherers and selected aspects of the thinking of young children (ac-
companied by a few, admittedly indeterminant, paleoanthropological facts). 
But, importantly, our claim is not just that such an intermediate step can be 
imagined and that it probably occurred, but that it was necessary. It was nec-
essary because one cannot even imagine going directly from ape- like com-
petitive interactions and imperative communication to modern human cul-
ture and language with no evolutionary intermediary. Human culture and 

Conclusion 
151
language are simply conventionalizations of existing social interactions, and 
to provide the appropriate raw material, these interactions had to have been 
already highly cooperative. Put in terms of our two historical strands, we 
cannot get to pro cesses of culture and language (as invoked by Vygotsky and 
other culture theorists) without some kind of already existing and already 
cooperative social infrastructure (as described by Mead, Wittgenstein, and 
other social infrastructure theorists). We thus need our middle step— we would 
be very happy with multiple middle steps, if ours could be broken down 
further— to prepare the way for culture and language and all of their uniquely 
powerful structuring of human thinking. Th is intermediate step does not 
solve Davidson’s (1982) problem of a common theoretical vocabulary that 
spans from “no thought” to “thought,” but it does narrow the distance to be 
traversed by any one step signifi cantly.
In any case, no matter the precise number of steps, our account presupposes 
that to understand uniquely human thinking we must situate it in its evolu-
tionary context. Wittgenstein (1955, no. 132) says about language that “the 
confusions which occupy us arise when language is like an engine idling, not 
when it is doing its work.” It seems to us that many of the perplexities of 
human thinking pointed out by phi los o phers arise precisely when we attempt 
to understand it in the abstract, outside of its functioning in solving adaptive 
problems. It is natural to do this in the contemporary world because so much 
contemporary thinking is, in some sense, idling. But uniquely human think-
ing was almost certainly selected evolutionarily for its role in or ga niz ing and 
regulating adaptive actions, and so to understand it fully we must identify the 
relevant problems. If creatures from outer space came across a complex hu-
man artifact such as a traffi  c light, idling, they could dissect it and analyze its 
structure forever and not understand why it behaves in the way that it does. 
Th e wires and lights by themselves could never reveal (not even with the help 
of an fMRI) why the red light on one side activates only when the green light 
on the other side activates. To understand these actions, we must fi rst under-
stand traffi  c and how the traffi  c light was designed to solve the specifi c prob-
lems created by traffi  c. In the case of biological structures— and this is a 
central lesson of evolutionary psychology, of course— there is the additional 
possibility that they evolved to serve one set of functions at an earlier time, 
and now they serve a diff erent set. In any case, the current proposal is that to 
understand the way that contemporary humans think, we must understand 
how human thinking evolved to meet the specifi c evolutionary challenges 

152 
A Nat u r a l His tory of Hu m a n T hink ing
that early and modern humans faced as they moved toward ever more coop-
erative ways of making a living.
It is certain that some parts of our evolutionary story are incomplete. Th e 
main problem is that collaboration, communication, and thinking do not 
fossilize, and so we will always be in a position of speculation about such 
behavioral phenomena, as well as the specifi c events that  were critical to their 
evolution. Most crucial, we do not know how much contemporary great apes 
have changed from their common ancestor with humans because there are 
basically no relevant fossils from this era. Furthermore, our intermediary step 
of early humans very likely had much more of a gradual evolution than de-
scribed  here; indeed, it is not even clear that Homo heidelbergensis was a sepa-
rate species at all. And we have given only cursory attention to humans after 
agriculture and all of the complexities arising from the intermixing of cultural 
groups, from literacy and numeracy, and from institutions such as science 
and government. And so our attempt is less of an explicitly historical exercise 
than an attempt to carve nature at some of its most important joints, specifi -
cally, at some of its most important evolutionary joints.
A list of open questions at this point would be quite long. But two par-
ticularly big ones are these: First is the nature of the jointness or collectivity 
or “we- ness” that characterizes all forms of shared intentionality. Many theo-
rists subscribe to something like an irreducibility thesis (e.g., Gallotti, 2012) 
in which such things as joint attention and shared conventions are irreducibly 
social phenomena, and attempting to capture them in terms of the individu-
als involved, and what is going on in their individual heads, is doomed to 
failure. Our view is that shared intentionality is indeed an irreducibly social 
phenomena in the moment— joint attention only exists when two or more 
individuals are interacting, for example— but at the same time we may ask 
the evolutionary or developmental question of what does the individual bring 
to the interaction that enables her to engage in joint attention in a way that 
other apes and younger children cannot. And so for us this means that some-
thing like recursive mind- reading or inferring— still not adequately charac-
terized, and in most instances fully implicit— has to be a part of the story of 
shared intentionality. From the individual’s point of view, shared intentional-
ity is simply experienced as a sharing, but its underlying structure, refl ecting 
its evolution, is that each participant in an interaction can potentially take 
the perspective of others taking her perspective taking their perspective, and 
so forth for at least a few levels. But this, as they say, is a point on which rea-
sonable people may disagree.

Conclusion 
153
A second open question is how and why modern humans reify and objectify 
what are essentially socially created entities. Money is not just a piece of paper 
but legal tender, and Barack Obama is not just a person living in a large white 
 house but commander in chief— because we act and talk as if they are these 
things. We also reify such things as morality, arguing not about the moral 
norms of diff erent social groups, including those shared by all human groups, 
but rather about what is the “right” and “wrong” way to do things, where right 
and wrong are considered objective features of the world. And nowhere is 
this tendency stronger than in language, where everyone has a tendency— 
correctable but only with much eff ort— to reify the conceptualizations codifi ed 
in our own natural language. About all of these things, we are like the young 
child who says that even if long ago everyone agreed to call the striped feline in 
front of us a “gazzer,” it would not be right to do so because, well, “It’s a tiger.” 
Our own view is that such objectifying tendencies could come only from the 
kind of agent- neutral, group- minded perspective that imagines things from the 
view of any one of us, the view of any rational person, the view from nowhere, 
in the context of a world of social and institutional realities that antedate our 
own existence and that speak with an authority larger than us. Th is is the au-
thoritative voice that lies behind the use of genericized linguistic expressions in 
norm enforcement (“Th at is wrong”) and pedagogy (“It works like this”), and 
it determines, in large part, what we consider real. But, again, this is a point on 
which reasonable people may disagree.
Despite these gaping questions, and others, we cannot conceive any com-
prehensive theory of the origins of uniquely human thinking that is not fun-
damentally social in character. To be as clear as possible: we are not claiming 
that all aspects of human thinking are socially constituted, only the species- 
unique aspects. It is an empirical fact that the social interaction and or ga ni-
za tion of great apes and humans are hugely diff erent, with humans being 
much more cooperative in every way. We fi nd it diffi  cult in the extreme to 
believe that this is unrelated to the huge diff erences in cognition and think-
ing that also separate great apes from humans, especially when we focus on 
the details. What nonsocial theory can explain such things as cultural insti-
tutions, perspectival and conventional conceptualizations in natural languages, 
recursive and rational reasoning, objective perspectives, social norms and 
normative self- governance, and on and on? Th ese are all coordinative phe-
nomena through and through, and it is almost inconceivable that they arose 
evolutionarily from some nonsocial source. Something like the shared inten-
tionality hypothesis just must be true.


2. Individual Intentionality
1. Importantly, complex organisms embody hierarchies of control systems, so that 
most of their actions are attempts to regulate multiple goals simultaneously at mul-
tiple levels (e.g., the same act is simultaneously attempting to place left foot in front 
of right, pursue a prey, feed the family,  etc.).
2. Th is account is related to the notion of Gibsonian aff ordances, but it is much 
broader in including not only direct opportunities for the self ’s concrete actions but 
also situations that are relevant to the organism in many more indirect ways. In addi-
tion, we should also acknowledge that all organisms are hardwired to attend to some 
things as naturally salient (e.g., for humans, loud noises) because of potential relevance 
to biological “goals” and “values” (so- called “bottom- up” pro cesses of attention).
3. In none of these studies did chimpanzees understand and predict that, when a 
dominant was not just ignorant but had a false belief, she would reliably go to the 
place where she (falsely) thought the food was located. Th ey treated ignorance and 
false belief as the same (see also Kaminski et al., 2008; Krachun et al., 2009, 2010; 
chapter 3 discusses this distinction further).
3. Joint Intentionality
1. Contemporary human foragers are not good models for the early humans we 
are imagining  here, as they have gone through both steps of our evolutionary story 
Notes

156 
Not e s to Page s 36 – 60
and so live in cultures with social norms, institutions, and languages. Moreover, 
contemporary foragers have tools and weapons that make individual foraging (then 
sharing at the end) feasible, whereas the early humans we are imagining  here had 
more primitive weapons and so needed to work together.
2. Of course, contemporary human societies are also full of selfi shness and non-
cooperation, not to mention cruelty and war. Much of this is generated by confl icts 
between people from diff erent groups (however this is defi ned) and concerns compe-
tition for private property and the accumulation of wealth that began only in the last 
10,000 years or so, after the advent of agriculture, that is, after humans had spent 
many millennia as small- group collaborative foragers.
3. Davidson is actually concerned with a special kind of perspective, namely, be-
lief: a cognitive repre sen ta tion of the world that the subject knows might be in error. 
His claim is that a necessary condition for the notion of error is a social situation in 
which I and another person simultaneously focus on the same object or event simul-
taneously yet diff erently, what we have called perspective. But the notion of error 
introduces an additional consideration because it privileges one of the perspectives as 
accurate (and the other as in error), and this requires some notion of an “objective” 
perspective. Th is notion of objectivity— and so the notion of belief— will not be 
available to humans until the next step in our story when agent- neutral perspectives 
are possible (see chapter 4).
4. Th e possibility of lying meant that recipients had to practice “epistemic vigi-
lance” (Sperber et al., 2010). And so the notion of true propositions also arose from 
the comprehension side of the interaction, as comprehenders attempted to distin-
guish truthful from deceptive communicative acts.
5. For purposes of simplicity, the terminology  here— referential acts underlain by 
communicative intentions— is slightly diff erent from that of Tomasello (2008). 
What is  here called the communicative intention comprises what was there called 
the social intention in the context of the Gricean communicative intention.
6. Some researchers think that this characterization of children’s early communi-
cation via pointing is too cognitively rich (see, e.g., Gomez, 2007; Southgate et al., 
2007) and that infants are actually doing something simpler.
7. Said another way, it is one thing to throw an object at another person (which, 
coincidently, many apes do), but it is quite another to throw something to someone 
in anticipation of her task of catching (Darwall, 2006)— which is what the commu-
nicator does, meta phor ical ly, in human cooperative communication.
8. Some researchers have claimed that some great ape intention- movements are 
actually functioning iconically, for example, when one gorilla ritualistically pushes 
another in a direction in a sexual or play context (Tanner and Byrne, 1996). But these 
are most likely garden- variety ritualized behaviors that appear to humans to be 
iconic because they derive from attempts to actually move the body of the other in 
the desired direction— they are not functioning iconically for the apes themselves.

Not e s to Page s 61–101 
157
 9. Some contemporary cultures have more than one (e.g., pointing with the in-
dex fi nger and pinky extended simultaneously for a certain subclass of situations), 
but the presumption is that those are derived from the original primordial index 
fi nger pointing, with which all children begin.
10. We have until this point discussed only “propositional contents” in the sense 
of fact- like situations that are expressed in cooperative communication. By the term 
proposition we mean a communicative act expressed as a fully articulated act of con-
ventional linguistic communication.
4. Collective Intentionality
 1. Children also fi nd it diffi  cult for some time to comprehend situations in 
which objective reality is unaff ected by the fact that we humans may describe it from 
diff erent, even confl icting, perspectives, for example, situations in which there is an 
undisturbed objective reality despite the fact that this entity is simultaneously a dog 
an animal and a pet (see Moll and Tomasello, in press).
 2. Th is is not unlike the way that some motivated linguistic forms, such as meta-
phors, become opaque (“dead”) across historical time as new learners are ignorant of 
the original motivation.
 3. A number of unusual situations in the contemporary world have illustrated the 
pro cess, at least in broad outline. Most spectacular is the case of Nicaraguan Sign 
Language. A number of young deaf individuals each had their own kind of pidgin 
signing, or home sign, with very little grammatical structuring, that they used with 
their hearing families. But soon after they  were brought together into a community— 
within three “generations”— their various idiosyncratic home signs turned into a sys-
tem of conventionalized signs used in numerous constructions with all kinds of gram-
matical or ga ni za tion (Senghas et al., 2004). A very similar pro cess was observed in the 
birth of Al- Sayyid Bedouin Sign Language (Sandler et al., 2005), and indeed, some-
what similar pro cesses have been at least indirectly observed in many cases in which 
spoken pidgin languages have turned into creoles and full languages (Lefebvre, 2006). 
What seems to happen is that pidgin communication (or home sign) works well 
among family members, coworkers, and others with very strong common ground, 
typically in highly restricted and recurrent situations such as mealtime or a work task. 
But especially as a wider community of communicators and communicative situa-
tions must be accommodated, this pro cess breaks down, and new grammatical means 
must be found to help recipients to reconstruct the events and participants (and their 
roles) in the intended referential situation. Communicator and recipient then work 
together further until there is comprehension, and successful grammatical solutions 
are repeated and imitated and so conventionalized in the community.
 4. Participants and events in situations may be linguistically indicated at many 
diff erent levels of specifi city, depending on the common ground between communicator 

158 
Not e to Page 103
and recipient (Gundel et al., 1993). Pronouns are used to indicate entities already well 
established in common ground, whereas nouns with relative clauses are used for new 
entities that the recipient may identify using our common ground (e.g., “the man we 
saw yesterday”). In addition, many languages have determiners such as the and a, 
which specifi cally indicate whether something is or is not in our common ground in 
the current communicative interaction. Events are typically grounded in the current 
communicative interaction by specifying when they occurred or will occur relative 
to, ultimately, now (i.e., via tense). Th is way of specifying referents thus leads to the 
kind of hierarchical tree structures diagramed in traditional linguistic analyses, as 
the diff erent linguistic items of a noun phrase or a verbal complex, each with its own 
function, are used together, collaboratively as it  were, toward the overall goal of indi-
cating a par tic u lar participant or event in the referential situation.
5. Sandler et al. (2005) provide a very interesting description of how successive 
generations of the newly created Al- Sayyid Bedouin Sign Language conventional-
ized speaker motive and attitude, mostly by conventionalizing slightly exaggerated 
facial expressions. Th us, across generations signers came to use conventionalized fa-
cial expressions to signal such things as “the illocutionary force of an utterance, such 
as assertions vs. questions” (p. 31)— as in mature sign languages. In addition, com-
municators in later but not earlier generations came to symbolize conventionally 
their various modal and epistemic attitudes, such things as necessity, possibility, uncer-
tainty, or surprise.

Alvard, M. 2012. Human sociality. In J. Mitani, ed., Th e evolution of primate 
societies. (pp. 585– 604). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bakhtin, M. M. 1981. Th e dialogic imagination (trans. C. Emerson and M. 
Holquist). In M. Holquist, ed., Four essays. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Barsalou, L. W. 1983. Ad hoc categories. Memory and Cognition, 11, 211– 227.
———. 1999. Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 
577– 609.
———. 2005. Continuity of the conceptual system across species. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 9, 309– 311.
———. 2008. Grounded cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 617– 645.
Behne, T., M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2005. One- year- olds comprehend the 
communicative intentions behind gestures in a hiding game. Developmental 
Science, 8, 492– 499.
Behne, T., U. Liszkowski, M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2012. Twelve- month- 
olds’ comprehension and production of pointing. British Journal of Developmen-
tal Psychology, 30(3), 359– 375.
Bennett, M., and F. Sani. 2008. Children’s subjective identifi cation with social 
groups: A self- stereotyping approach. Developmental Science, 11, 69– 78.
Bermudez, J. 2003. Th inking without words. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bickerton, D. 2009. Adam’s tongue. New York: Hill and Wang.
References

160 
R efer ence s
Boehm, C. 2012. Moral origins. New York: Basic Books.
Boesch, C. 2005. Joint cooperative hunting among wild chimpanzees: Taking 
natural observations seriously. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28, 692– 693.
Boesch, C., and H. Boesch 1989. Hunting behavior of wild chimpanzees in the Taï 
National Park. American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 78, 547– 573.
Brandom, R. 1994. Making it explicit: Reasoning, representing, and discursive 
commitment. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 2009. Reason in philosophy: Animating ideas. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Bratman, M. 1992. Shared cooperative activity. Philosophical Review, 101(2), 
327– 341.
Brownell, C. A., and M. S. Carriger. 1990. Changes in cooperation and self- other 
diff erentiation during the second year. Child Development, 61, 1164– 1174.
Bruner, J. 1972. Th e nature and uses of immaturity. American Psychologist, 27, 
687– 708.
Bullinger, A., A. Melis, and M. Tomasello. 2011a. Chimpanzees prefer individ-
ual over cooperative strategies toward goals. Animal Behaviour, 82. 
1135– 1141.
———. 2013. Bonobos, Pan paniscus, chimpanzees, Pan troglodytes, and marmosets, 
Callithrix jacchus, prefer to feed alone. Animal Behavior, 85, 51– 60.
Bullinger, A., E. Wyman, A. Melis, and M. Tomasello. 2011b. Chimpanzees 
coordinate in a stag hunt game. International Journal of Primatology, 32, 
1296– 1310.
Bullinger, A., F. Zimmerman, J. Kaminski and M. Tomasello. 2011c. Diff erent 
social motives in the gestural communication of chimpanzees and human 
children. Developmental Science, 14, 58– 68.
Buttelmann, D., M. Carpenter, J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2007. Enculturated apes 
imitate rationally. Developmental Science, 10, F31– 38.
Buttelmann, D., M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2009. Eighteen- month- old 
infants show false belief understanding in an active helping paradigm. 
 Cognition, 112(2), 337– 342.
Call, J. 2001. Object permanence in orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus), chimpanzees 
(Pan troglodytes), and children (Homo sapiens). Journal of Comparative Psychology, 
115, 159– 171.
———. 2004. Inferences about the location of food in the great apes. Journal of 
Comparative Psychology, 118(2), 232– 241.
———. 2006. Descartes’ two errors: Reasoning and refl ection from a comparative 
perspective. In S. Hurley and M. Nudds, eds., Rational animals. (pp. 219– 34). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———. 2010. Do apes know that they can be wrong? Animal Cognition, 13, 
689– 700.

R efer ence s 
161
Call, J., and M. Tomasello. 1996. Th e eff ect of humans on the cognitive develop-
ment of apes. In A. E. Russon, K. A. Bard, and S. T. Parker, eds., Reaching into 
thought (pp. 371– 403). New York: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2005. What chimpanzees know about seeing, revisited: An explanation of 
the third kind. In N. Eilan, C. Hoerl, T. McCormack, and J. Roessler, eds., 
Joint attention: Communication and other minds (pp. 45– 64). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
———. 2007. Th e gestural communication of apes and monkeys. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum.
———. 2008. Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind: 30 years later. Trends in 
Cognitive Science, 12, 87– 92.
Callaghan, T., H. Moll, H. Rakozcy, T. Behne, U. Liszkowski, and M. Tomasello. 
2011. Early social cognition in three cultural contexts. Monographs of the Society 
for Research in Child Development 76(2). Boston: Wiley- Blackwell.
Candland, D. K. 1995. Feral children and clever animals: Refl ections on human 
nature. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carey, S. 2009. Th e origin of concepts. New York: Oxford University Press.
Carpenter, M., K. Nagel, and M. Tomasello 1998. Social cognition, joint attention, and 
communicative competence from 9 to 15 months of age. Monographs of the Society for 
Research in Child Development 63(4). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Carpenter, M., M. Tomasello, and T. Striano. 2005. Role reversal imitation in 12 
and 18 month olds and children with autism. Infancy, 8, 253– 278.
Carruthers, P. 2006. Th e architecture of the mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carruthers, P., and M. Ritchie. 2012. Th e emergence of metacognition: Aff ect and 
uncertainty in animals. In M. Beran et al., eds., Foundations of metacognition. 
(pp. 211– 37). New York: Oxford University Press.
Chapais, B. 2008. Primeval kinship: How pair- bonding gave birth to human society. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Chase, P. 2006. Th e emergence of culture. New York: Springer.
Chwe, M. S.- Y. 2003. Rational ritual: Culture, coordination and common knowledge. 
Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University Press.
Clark, H. 1996. Uses of language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Collingwood, R. 1946. Th e idea of history. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Coqueugniot, H., J.- J. Hublin, F. Veillon, F. Houet, and T. Jacob. 2004. Early 
brain growth in Homo erectus and implications for cognitive ability. Nature, 
231, 299– 302.
Corbalis, M. 2011. Th e recursive mind. Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University Press.
Crane, T. 2003. Th e mechanical mind: A philosophical introduction to minds, 
machines and mental repre sen ta tion. 2nd ed. New York: Routledge.
Crockford, C., R. M. Wittig, R. Mundry, and K. Zuberbuehler. 2011. Wild chimpan-
zees inform ignorant group members of danger. Current Biology, 22, 142– 146.

162 
R efer ence s
Croft, W. 2001. Radical construction grammar. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Csibra, G., and G. Gergely. 2009. Natural pedagogy. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
13, 148– 153.
Custance, D. M., A. Whiten, and K. A. Bard. 1995. Can young chimpanzees 
imitate arbitrary actions? Hayes and Hayes (1952) revisited. Behaviour, 132, 
839– 858.
Darwall, S. 2006. Th e second- person standpoint: Respect, morality, and accountability. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Darwin, C. 1859. Th e origin of species. London: John Murray.
———. 1871. Th e descent of man. London: John Murray.
Davidson, D. 1982. Rational Animals. Dialectica, 36, 317– 327.
———. 2001. Subjective, intersubjective, objective. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Dean, L. G., R. L. Kendal, S. J. Schapiro, B. Th ierry, and K. N. Laland. 2012. 
Identifi cation of the social and cognitive pro cesses underlying human 
 cumulative culture. Science, 335, 1114– 1118.
Dennett, D. 1995. Darwin’s dangerous ideas. New York: Simon and Schuster.
de Waal, F. B. M. 1999. Anthropomorphism and anthropodenial: Consistency in 
our thinking about humans and other animals. Philosophical Topics, 27, 255– 280.
Diesendruck, G., N. Carmel, and L. Markson. 2010. Children’s sensitivity to the 
conventionality of sources. Child Development, 81, 652– 668.
Diessel, H., and M. Tomasello. 2001. Th e acquisition of fi nite complement clauses 
in En glish: A usage based approach to the development of grammatical 
constructions. Cognitive Linguistics, 12, 97– 141.
Donald, M. 1991. Origins of the modern mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Dunbar, R. 1998. Th e social brain hypothesis. Evolutionary Anthropology, 6, 178– 190.
Engelmann, J., E. Herrmann, and M. Tomasello. 2012. Five- year olds, but not 
chimpanzees, attempt to manage their reputations. PLoS ONE, 7(10), e48433.
Engelmann, J., H. Over, E. Herrmann, and M. Tomasello. In press. Young 
children care more about their reputations with ingroup than with outgroup 
members. Developmental Science.
Evans, G. 1982. Th e varieties of reference. In J. McDowell, ed., Th e varieties of 
reference. (pp. 73– 100). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fletcher, G., F. Warneken, and M. Tomasello. 2012. Diff erences in cognitive 
pro cesses underlying the collaborative activities of children and chimpanzees. 
Cognitive Development, 27, 136– 153.
Fragaszy, D., P. Izar, and E. Visalberghi. 2004. Wild capuchin monkeys use anvils 
and stone pounding tools. American Journal of Primatology, 64, 359– 366.
Gallotti, M. 2012. A naturalistic argument for the irreducibility of collective 
intentionality. Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 42(1), 3– 30.
Geertz, C. 1973. Th e interpretation of cultures. New York: Basic Books.

R efer ence s 
163
Gentner, D. 2003. Why  we’re so smart. In D. Gentner and S. Goldin- Meadow, 
eds., Language in mind: Advances in the study of language and thought 
(pp. 195– 235). Cambridge, MA: Th e MIT Press.
Gergely, G., H. Bekkering, and I. Király. 2002. Rational imitation in preverbal 
infants, Nature, 415, 755.
Gigerenzer, G., and R. Selton. 2001. Bounded rationality: Th e adaptive toolbox. 
Cambridge, MA: Th e MIT Press.
Gilbert, M. 1983. Notes on the concept of social convention. New Literary History, 
14, 225– 251.
———. 1989. On social facts. London: Routledge.
———. 1990. Walking together: A paradigmatic social phenomenon. Midwest 
Studies in Philosophy, 15, 1– 14.
Gilby, I. C. 2006. Meat sharing among the Gombe chimpanzees: Harassment and 
reciprocal exchange. Animal Behaviour, 71(4), 953– 963.
Givón, T. 1995. Functionalism and grammar. Amsterdam: J. Benjamins.
Goeckeritz, S., M. Schmidt, and M. Tomasello. Unpublished manuscript. How 
children make up and enforce their own rules.
Goldberg, A. 1995. Constructions: A construction grammar approach to argument 
structure. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 2006. Constructions at work. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goldin- Meadow, S. 2003. Th e resilience of language: What gesture creation in deaf 
children can tell us about how all children learn language. New York: Psychology 
Press.
Gomez, J. C. 2007. Pointing behaviors in apes and human infants: A balanced 
perspective. Child Development, 78, 729– 734.
Gowlett, J., C. Gamble, and R. Dunbar. 2012. Human evolution and the archaeol-
ogy of the social brain. Current Anthropology, 53, 693– 722.
Gräfenhain, M., T. Behne, M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2009. Young children’s 
understanding of joint commitments. Developmental Psychology, 45, 1430– 1443.
Greenberg, J. R., K. Hamann, F. Warneken, and M. Tomasello. 2010. Chimpanzee 
helping in collaborative and non- collaborative contexts. Animal Behaviour, 80, 
873– 880.
Greenfi eld, P. M., and E. S. Savage- Rumbaugh. 1990. Grammatical combination in 
Pan paniscus: Pro cesses of learning and invention in the evolution and 
 development of language. In S. T. Parker and K. R. Gibson, eds., “Language” 
and intelligence in monkeys and apes (pp. 540– 578). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
———. 1991. Imitation, grammatical development, and the invention of 
 protogrammar by an ape. In N. A. Krasnegor, D. M. Rumbaugh, R. L. Schiefel-
busch, and M. Studdert- Kennedy, eds., Biological and behavioral determinants of 
language development (pp. 235– 258). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

164 
R efer ence s
Grice, H. P. 1957. Meaning. Philosophical Review, 66, 377– 388.
———. 1975. Logic and conversation. In P. Cole and J. Morgan, eds., Syntax and 
semantics, Vol. 3 (pp. 41– 58). New York: Academic Press.
Gundel, J., N. Hedberg, and R. Zacharski. 1993. Cognitive status and the form of 
referring expressions in discourse. Language, 69, 274– 307.
Haidt, J. 2012. Th e righ teous mind. New York: Pantheon.
Hamann, K., F. Warneken, J. Greenberg, and M. Tomasello. 2011. Collaboration 
encourages equal sharing in children but not chimpanzees. Nature, 476, 
328– 331.
Hamann, K., F. Warneken, and M. Tomasello. 2012. Children’s developing 
commitments to joint goals. Child Development, 83(1), 137– 145.
Hampton, R. R. 2001. Rhesus monkeys know when they remember. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 98(9), 5359– 5362.
Hare, B. 2001. Can competitive paradigms increase the validity of experiments on 
primate social cognition. Animal Cognition, 4, 269– 280.
Hare, B., and M. Tomasello. 2004. Chimpanzees are more skillful in competitive 
than in cooperative cognitive tasks. Animal Behaviour, 68, 571– 581.
Hare, B., J. Call, B. Agnetta, and M. Tomasello. 2000. Chimpanzees know what 
conspecifi cs do and do not see. Animal Behaviour, 59, 771– 785.
Hare, B., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2001. Do chimpanzees know what conspecif-
ics know? Animal Behaviour, 61(1), 139– 151.
———. 2006. Chimpanzees deceive a human by hiding. Cognition, 101, 495– 514.
Harris, P. 1991. Th e work of the imagination. In A. Whiten, ed., Natural theories of 
mind (pp. 283– 304). Oxford: Blackwell.
Haun, D. B. M., and J. Call. 2008. Imitation recognition in great apes. Current 
Biology, 18(7), 288– 290.
Haun, D. B. M., and M. Tomasello. 2011. Conformity to peer pressure in preschool 
children. Child Development, 82, 1759– 1767.
Hawkes, K. 2003. Grandmothers and the evolution of human longevity. American 
Journal of Human Biology, 15, 380– 400.
Hegel, G. W. F. 1807. Phänomenologie des Geistes. Bamberg: J. A. Goebhardt.
Herrmann, E., and M. Tomasello. 2012. Human cultural cognition. In J. Mitani, 
ed., Th e evolution of primate societies. (pp. 701– 14). Chicago: University Chicago 
Press.
Herrmann, E., A. Melis, and M. Tomasello. 2006. Apes’ use of iconic cues in the 
object choice task. Animal Cognition, 9, 118– 130.
Herrmann, E., A. Misch, and M. Tomasello. Submitted. Uniquely human 
self- control begins at school age.
Herrmann, E., J. Call, M. Lloreda, B. Hare, and M. Tomasello. 2007. Humans 
have evolved specialized skills of social cognition: Th e cultural intelligence 
hypothesis. Science, 317, 1360– 1366.

R efer ence s 
165
Herrmann, E., M. V. Hernandez- Lloreda, J. Call, B. Hare, and M. Tomasello. 
2010. Th e structure of individual diff erences in the cognitive abilities of children 
and chimpanzees. Psychological Science, 21, 102– 110.
Herrmann, E., V. Wobber, and J. Call. 2008. Great apes’ (Pan troglodytes, Pan 
paniscus, Gorilla gorilla, Pongo pygmaeus) understanding of tool functional 
properties after limited experience. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 122, 
220– 230.
Heyes, C. M. 2005. Imitation by association. In S. Hurley and N. Chater, eds. 
Perspectives on imitation: From mirror neurons to memes. (pp. 51– 76). Cambridge, 
MA: Th e MIT Press.
Hill, K. 2002. Altruistic cooperation during foraging by the Ache, and the evolved 
human predisposition to cooperate. Human Nature, 13(1), 105– 128.
Hill, K., and A. M. Hurtado. 1996. Ache life history: Th e ecol ogy and demography of a 
foraging people. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Hirata, S. 2007. Competitive and cooperative aspects of social intelligence in 
chimpanzees. Japa nese Journal of Animal Psychology, 57, 29– 40.
Hobson, P. 2004. Th e cradle of thought: Exploring the origins of thinking. London: 
Pan Books.
Hrdy, S. 2009. Mothers and others: Th e evolutionary origins of mutual understanding. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Johnson, M. 1987. Th e body in the mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kahneman, D. 2011. Th inking, fast and slow. New York: Farrar, Strauss, and Giroux.
Kaminski, J., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2008. Chimpanzees know what others 
know, but not what they believe. Cognition, 109, 224– 234.
Karmiloff - Smith, A. 1992. Beyond modularity: A developmental perspective on 
cognitive science. Cambridge, MA: Th e MIT Press.
Kobayashi, H., and S. Kohshima. 2001. Unique morphology of the human eye and 
its adaptive meaning: Comparative studies on external morphology of the 
primate eye. Journal of Human Evolution, 40, 419– 435.
Korsgaard, C. M. 2009. Self- constitution: Agency, identity, and integrity. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Krachun, C., M. Carpenter, J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2009. A competitive nonverbal 
false belief task for children and apes. Developmental Science, 12, 521– 535.
———. 2010. A new change- of- contents false belief test: Children and chimpan-
zees compared. International Journal of Comparative Psychology, 23, 145– 165.
Kuhlmeier, V. A., S. T. Boysen, and K. L. Mukobi. 1999. Scale model comprehension 
by chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). Journal of Comparative Psychology, 113, 396– 402.
Kummer, H. 1972. Primate societies: Group techniques of ecological adaptation. 
Chicago: Aldine- Atherton.
Lakoff , G., and M. Johnson. 1979. Meta phors we live by. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.

166 
R efer ence s
Langacker, R. 1987. Foundations of cognitive grammar, Vol. 1. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press.
———. 2000. A dynamic usage- based model. In M. Barlow and S. Kemmerer, 
eds., Usage- based models of language (pp. 1– 64). Stanford, CA: SLI Publications.
Lefebvre, C. 2006. Creole genesis and the acquisition of grammar. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Leslie, A. 1987. Pretense and repre sen ta tion: Th e origins of “theory of mind.” 
Psychological Review, 94, 412– 426.
Levinson, S. C. 1995. Interactional biases in human thinking. In E. Goody, ed., 
Social intelligence and interaction (pp. 221– 260). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
———. 2000. Presumptive meanings: Th e theory of generalized conversational 
implicature. Cambridge, MA: Th e MIT Press.
———. 2006. On the human interactional engine. In N. Enfi eld and S. Levinson, 
eds., Roots of human sociality (pp. 39– 69). New York: Berg.
Lewis, C. I., and C. H. Langford. 1932. Symbolic logic. London: Century.
Lewis, D. 1969. Convention. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Liddell, S. 2003. Grammar, gesture, and meaning in American Sign Language. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Liebal, K., T. Behne, M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2009. Infants use shared 
experience to interpret pointing gestures. Developmental Science, 12, 264– 271.
Liebal, K., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2004. Th e use of gesture sequences by 
chimpanzees. American Journal of Primatology, 64, 377– 396.
Liebal, K., M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2010. Infants’ use of shared experience 
in declarative pointing. Infancy, 15(5), 545– 556.
———. 2011. Young children’s understanding of markedness in nonverbal 
communication. Journal of Child Language, 38, 888– 903.
———. 2013. Young children’s understanding of cultural common ground. British 
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 31(1), 88– 96.
Liszkowski, U., M. Carpenter, T. Striano, and M. Tomasello. 2006. 12- and 
18- month- olds point to provide information for others. Journal of Cognition and 
Development, 7, 173– 187.
Liszkowski, U., M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2008. Twelve- month- olds 
communicate helpfully and appropriately for knowledgeable and ignorant 
partners. Cognition, 108, 732– 739.
Liszkowski, U., M. Schäfer, M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2009. Prelinguistic 
infants, but not chimpanzees, communicate about absent entities. Psychological 
Science, 20, 654– 660.
MacWhinney, B. 1977. Starting points. Language, 53, 152– 168.
Mandler, J. M. 2012. On the spatial foundations of the conceptual system and its 
enrichment. Cognitive Science, 36, 421– 451.

R efer ence s 
167
Marín Manrique, H., A. N. Gross, and J. Call. 2010. Great apes select tools on the 
basis of their rigidity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior 
Pro cesses, 36(4), 409– 422.
Markman, A., and H. Stillwell. 2001. Role- governed categories. Journal of Experi-
mental and Th eoretical Artifi cial Intelligence, 13, 329– 358.
Maynard Smith, J., and M. Szathmáry. 1995. Major transitions in evolution. Oxford: 
W. H. Freeman Spektrum.
Mead, G. H. 1934. Mind, self, and society (ed. C. W. Morris). Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Melis, A., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2006a. Chimpanzees conceal visual and 
auditory information from others. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 120, 154– 162.
Melis, A., B. Hare, and M. Tomasello. 2006b. Chimpanzees recruit the best 
collaborators. Science, 31, 1297– 1300.
———. 2009. Chimpanzees coordinate in a negotiation game. Evolution and 
Human Behavior, 30, 381– 392.
Mendes, N., H. Rakoczy, and J. Call. 2008. Ape metaphysics: Object individuation 
without language. Cognition, 106(2), 730– 749.
Mercier, H., and D. Sperber. 2011. Why do humans reason? Arguments for an 
argumentative theory. Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 34(2), 57– 74.
Millikan, R. G. 1987. Language, thought, and other biological categories. New 
foundations for realism. Cambridge, MA: Th e MIT Press.
Mitani, J., J. Call, P. Kappeler, R. Palombit, and J. Silk, eds. 2012. Th e evolution of 
primate societies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mithen, S. 1996. Th e prehistory of the mind. New York: Phoenix Books.
Moll, H., and M. Tomasello 2007. Cooperation and human cognition: Th e 
Vygotskian intelligence hypothesis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
of London, Series B: Biological Sciences, 362, 639– 648.
———. 2012. Th ree- year- olds understand appearance and reality— just not about 
the same object at the same time. Developmental Psychology, 48, 1124– 1132.
———. In press. Social cognition in the second year of life. In A. Leslie and 
T. German, eds., Handbook of Th eory of Mind. New York: Taylor and Francis.
Moll, H., C. Koring, M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2006. Infants determine 
others’ focus of attention by pragmatics and exclusion. Journal of Cognition and 
Development, 7, 411– 430.
Moll, H., A. Meltzoff , K. Mersch, and M. Tomasello. 2013. Taking versus confront-
ing visual perspectives in preschool children. Developmental Psychology, 49(4), 
646– 654.
Moore, R. In press. Cognizing communicative intent. Mind and Language.
Mulcahy, N. J., and J. Call. 2006. Apes save tools for future use. Science, 312, 1038– 1040.
Muller, M. N., and J. C. Mitani. 2005. Confl ict and cooperation in wild chimpan-
zees. Advances in the Study of Behavior, 35, 275– 331.

168 
R efer ence s
Nagel, T. 1986. Th e view from nowhere. New York: Oxford University Press.
Okrent, M. 2007. Rational animals: Th e teleological roots of intentionality. Athens: 
Ohio University Press.
Olson, D. 1994. Th e world on paper. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Onishi, K. H., and R. Baillargeon. 2005. Do 15- month- old infants understand false 
beliefs? Science, 308, 255– 258.
Peirce, C. S. 1931– 1958. Collected writings (ed. C. Hartshorne, P. Weiss, and A. W. 
Burks). 8 vols. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Penn, D. C., K. J. Holyoak, and D. J. Povinelli. 2008. Darwin’s mistake: 
 Explaining the discontinuity between human and nonhuman minds. Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, 31, 109– 178.
Perner, J. 1991. Understanding the repre sen ta tional mind. Cambridge, MA: Th e MIT 
Press.
Piaget, J. 1928. Ge ne tic logic and sociology. Reprinted in J. Piaget, So cio log i cal 
studies (ed. L. Smith). New York: Routledge, 1995.
———. 1952. Th e origins of intelligence in children. New York: W.W. Norton.
———. 1971. Biology and knowledge. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Povinelli, D. 2000. Folk physics for apes: Th e chimpanzee’s theory of how the world 
works. New York: Oxford University Press.
Povinelli, D. J., and D.  O’Neill. 2000. Do chimpanzees use their gestures to 
instruct each other? In S. Baron- Cohen, H. Tager- Flusberg, and D. Cohen, eds., 
Understanding other minds: Perspectives from developmental cognitive neuroscience, 
2nd ed. (pp. 111– 33). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rakoczy, H., and M. Tomasello. 2007. Th e ontogeny of social ontology: Steps to 
shared intentionality and status functions. In S. Tsohatzidis, ed., Intentional acts 
and institutional facts (pp. 113– 137). Dordrecht: Springer.
Rakoczy, H., F. Warneken, and M. Tomasello. 2008. Th e sources of normativity: 
Young children’s awareness of the normative structure of games. Developmental 
Psychology, 44, 875– 881.
Rekers, Y., D. Haun, and M. Tomasello. 2011. Children, but not chimpanzees, 
prefer to forage collaboratively. Current Biology, 21, 1756– 1758.
Richerson, P., and R. Boyd. 2006. Not by genes alone: How culture transformed 
human evolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Riedl, K., K. Jensen, J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2012. No third- party punishment 
in chimpanzees. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 109, 14824– 14829.
Rivas, E. 2005. Recent use of signs by chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) in interactions 
with humans. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 119(4), 404– 417.
Sandler, W., I. Meir, C. Padden, and M. Aronoff . 2005. Th e emergence of gram-
mar: Systematic structure in a new language. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102(7), 2661– 2665.

R efer ence s 
169
Saussure, F. de. 1916. Cours de linguistique générale (ed. Charles Bailey and Albert 
Séchehaye).
Schelling, T. C. 1960. Th e strategy of confl ict. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Schmelz, M., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2011. Chimpanzees know that others 
make inferences. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 108, 17284– 17289.
Schmidt, M., and M. Tomasello 2012. Young children enforce social norms. 
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 21, 232– 236.
Schmidt, M., H. Rakoczy, and M. Tomasello. 2012. Young children enforce social 
norms selectively depending on the violator’s group affi  liation. Cognition, 124, 
325– 333.
Schmitt, V., B. Pankau, and J. Fischer. 2012. Old World monkeys compare to apes 
in the Primate Cognition Test Battery. PLoS One, 7(4), e32024.
Searle, J. 1995. Th e construction of social reality. New York: Free Press.
———. 2001. Rationality in action. Cambridge, MA: Th e MIT Press.
Sellars, W. 1963. Empiricism and the philosophy of mind. London: Routledge.
Senghas, A., S. Kita, and A. Özyürek. 2004. Children creating core properties of 
language: Evidence from an emerging sign language in Nicaragua. Science, 305, 
1779– 1782.
Shore, B. 1995. Culture in mind: cognition, culture, and the problem of meaning. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Skyrms, B. 2004. Th e stag hunt and the evolution of sociality. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Slobin, D. 1985. Crosslinguistic evidence for the language- making capacity. In D. I. 
Slobin, ed., Th e crosslinguistic study of language acquisition, Vol. 2: Th eoretical 
issues (pp. 1157– 1260). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Smith, J. M., and Eörs Szathmáry (1995). Th e Major Transitions in Evolution. 
Oxford, En gland: Oxford University Press.
Southgate, V., C. van Maanen, and G. Csibra. 2007. Infant pointing: Communi-
cation to cooperate or communication to learn? Child Development, 78(3), 
735– 774.
Sperber, D. 1994. Th e modularity of thought and the epidemiology of repre sen ta-
tions. In L. A. Hirschfeld and S. A. Gelman, eds., Mapping the mind 
(pp. 39– 67). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1996, Explaining culture: A naturalistic approach. Oxford: Blackwell.
———. 2000. Metarepre sen ta tions in an evolutionary perspective. In Dan Sperber, 
ed., Metarepre sen ta tions: A multidisciplinary perspective. (pp. 219– 34). Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Sperber, D., and D. Wilson. 1996. Relevance: Communication and cognition. 2nd ed. 
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

170 
R efer ence s
Sperber, D., F. Clément, C. Heintz, O. Mascaro, H. Mercier, G. Origgi, and 
D. Wilson. 2010. Epistemic vigilance. Mind and Language, 25(4), 359– 393.
Sterelny, K. 2003. Th ought in a hostile world: Th e evolution of human cognition. 
London: Blackwell.
———. 2012. Th e evolved apprentice. Cambridge, MA: Th e MIT Press.
Stiner, M. C., R. Barkai, and A. Gopher. 2009. Cooperative hunting and meat 
sharing 400– 200 kya at Qesem Cave, Israel. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 106(32), 13207– 13212.
Talmy, L. 2003. Th e repre sen ta tion of spatial structure in spoken and signed 
language. In K. Emmorey, ed., Perspectives on classifi er constructions in sign 
language (pp. 169– 196). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Tanner, J. E., and R. W. Byrne. 1996. Repre sen ta tion of action through iconic 
gesture in a captive lowland gorilla. Current Anthropology, 37, 162– 173.
Tennie, C., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2009. Ratcheting up the ratchet: On the 
evolution of cumulative culture. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London, Series B: Biological Sciences, 364, 2405– 2415.
Th ompson, R. K. R., D. L. Oden, and S. T. Boysen. 1997. Language- naive chim-
panzees (Pan troglodytes) judge relations between relations in a conceptual 
matching- to- sample task. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior 
Pro cesses, 23, 31– 43.
Tomasello, M. 1992. First verbs: A case study of early grammatical development. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1995. Joint attention as social cognition. In C. Moore and P. J. Dunham, 
eds., Joint attention: Its origins and role in development. (pp. 23– 47). Hillsdale, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
———. 1998. Th e new psychology of language: Cognitive and functional approaches to 
language structure, Vol. 1. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
———. 1999. Th e cultural origins of human cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
———. 2003a. Constructing a language: A usage- based theory of language acquisition. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———, ed. 2003b. Th e new psychology of language: Cognitive and functional 
approaches to language structure, Vol. 2. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
———. 2006. Why don’t apes point? In N. J. Enfi eld and S. C. Levinson, eds., 
Roots of human sociality (pp. 506– 524). Oxford: Berg.
———. 2008. Origins of human communication. Cambridge, MA: Th e MIT Press.
———. 2009. Why we cooperate. Cambridge, MA: Th e MIT Press.
———. 2011. Human culture in evolutionary perspective. In M. Gelfand, C.- y. 
Chiu, and Y.- y. Hong, eds., Advances in culture and psychology, Vol. 1 (pp. 5– 51). 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Tomasello, M., and J. Call. 1997. Primate cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

R efer ence s 
171
———. 2004. Th e role of humans in the cognitive development of apes revisited. 
Animal Cognition, 7, 213– 215.
———. 2006. Do chimpanzees know what others see— or only what they are 
looking at? In S. Hurley and M. Nudds, eds., Rational animals? (pp. 371– 84). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tomasello, M., and M. Carpenter. 2005. Th e emergence of social cognition in three 
young chimpanzees. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Develop-
ment 70(1). Boston: Blackwell.
Tomasello, M. and K. Haberl. 2003. Understanding attention: 12- and 18- month- olds 
know what’s new for other persons. Developmental Psychology, 39, 906– 912.
Tomasello, M., and K. Hamann. 2012. Collaboration in young children. Quarterly 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 65, 1– 12.
Tomasello, M., and H. Moll. 2013. why don’t apes understand false beliefs? 
In M. Banaji and S. Gelman, eds., Th e development of social cognition. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Tomasello, M., S. Savage- Rumbaug, and A. Kruger. 1993. Imitative learning of 
actions on objects by children, chimpanzees and enculturated chimpanzees. 
Child Development, 64, 1688– 1705.
Tomasello, M., J. Call, and A. Gluckman. 1997. Th e comprehension of novel 
communicative signs by apes and human children. Child Development, 68, 
1067– 1081.
Tomasello, M., M. Carpenter, J. Call, T. Behne, and H. Moll. 2005. Understanding 
and sharing intentions: Th e origins of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, 28, 675– 691.
Tomasello, M., M. Carpenter, and U. Lizskowski. 2007a. A new look at infant 
pointing. Child Development, 78, 705– 722.
Tomasello, M., B. Hare, H. Lehmann, and J. Call. 2007b. Reliance on head versus 
eyes in the gaze following of great apes and human infants: Th e cooperative eye 
hypothesis. Journal of Human Evolution, 52, 314– 320.
Tomasello, M., A. Melis, C. Tennie, and E. Herrmann. 2012. Two key steps in the 
evolution of human cooperation: Th e interdependence hypothesis. Current 
Anthropology, 56, 1– 20.
Tooby, J., and L. Cosmides. 1989. Evolutionary psychology and the generation of 
culture, part I. Ethology and Sociobiology, 10, 29– 49.
———. 2013. Evolutionary psychology. Annual Review of Psychology, 64, 201– 229.
Tuomela, R. 2007. Th e philosophy of sociality: Th e shared point of view. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
van Schaik, C. P., M. Ancrenaz, G. Borgen, B. Galdikas, C. D. Knott, I. Singleton,  
A. Suzuki, S. S. Utami, and M. Merrill. 2003. Orangutan cultures and the 
evolution of material culture. Science, 299, 102– 105.
Von Uexküll, J. 1921. Umwelt und innenwelt der tiere. Berlin: Springer.

172 
R efer ence s
Vygotsky, L. 1978. Mind in society: Th e development of higher psychological pro cesses 
(ed. M. Cole). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Warneken, F., and M. Tomasello. 2009. Varieties of altruism in children and 
chimpanzees. Trends in Cognitive Science, 13, 397– 402.
Warneken, F., F. Chen, and M. Tomasello. 2006. Cooperative activities in young 
children and chimpanzees. Child Development, 77, 640– 663.
Warneken, F., B. Hare, A. Melis, D. Hanus, and M. Tomasello. 2007. Spontaneous 
altruism by chimpanzees and young children. PLoS Biology, 5(7), 414– 420.
Warneken, F., M. Gräfenhain, and M. Tomasello. 2012. Collaborative partner or 
social tool? New evidence for young children’s understanding of shared 
intentions in collaborative activities. Developmental Science, 15(1), 54– 61.
Watts, D., and J. C. Mitani. 2002. Hunting behavior of chimpanzees at Ngogo, 
Kibale National Park, Uganda. International Journal of Primatology, 23, 1– 28.
Whiten, A. 2010. A coming of age for cultural panthropology. In E. Lonsdorf, 
S. Ross, and T. Matsuzawa, eds., Th e mind of the chimpanzee (pp. 87– 100). 
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Whiten, A., and R. W. Byrne. 1988. Machiavellian intelligence: Social expertise and 
the evolution of intellect in monkeys, apes and humans. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Whiten, A., J. Goodall, W. C. McGrew, T. Nishida, V. Reynolds, Y. Sugiyama, 
C. E. G. Tutin, R. Wrangham, and C. Boesch. 1999. Cultures in chimpanzees. 
Nature, 399, 682– 685.
Wilson, E. O. 2012. Th e social conquest of earth. New York: Liveright.
Wittgenstein, L. 1955. Philosophical investigations. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Wobber, V., B. Hare, E. Herrmann, R. Wrangham, and M. Tomasello. In press. Th e 
evolution of cognitive development in Homo and Pan. Developmental Psychobiology.
Wyman, E., H. Rakoczy, and M. Tomasello. 2009. Normativity and context in 
young children’s pretend play. Cognitive Development, 24(2), 146– 155.

Index
Abstract linguistic constructions, 97– 98, 
101– 102, 114– 115
Adaptation and adaptedness, 128– 129, 
131– 132, 148
Adaptive specializations, as self- regulating 
systems, 8
Agent- neutral thinking: objective repre sen-
ta tion and, 113– 116; ontogeny and, 146
Al- Sayyid Bedouin Sign Language, 157n3, 
158n5
Arbitrary communicative conventions, 96– 99
Argumentation, cooperative, 110– 112, 
117– 118, 119, 121– 122
Assertions, 112, 115, 117– 118
Backward- facing inferences: and primate 
cognition of physical world, 16– 20; and 
primate cognition of social world, 22– 24
Behavioral self- monitoring: evolution of 
cognition and, 14; of great apes, 24– 25, 26
Behaviorism, 7
Beliefs, false, 87, 156n3
Brain: population size and, 134; develop-
ment of human, 145
Brandom, Robert, 32, 112
Carruthers, P., 129– 130
Category terms, 62
Causal inferences: and primate cognition of 
physical world, 16– 20; and primate cogni-
tion of social world, 24; of great apes, 74
Children: collaboration and individual 
thinking in, 2, 6; and joint goals in 
collaboration, 39– 40; and individual roles 
in collaboration, 40– 41; joint attention 
and individual perspectives among, 44, 
45; cooperative communication and, 51, 
58– 59; relevance inference and, 52– 53, 
55– 56; pantomime and pointing in, 
62– 66; pretend play in, 63– 64; spacial 
conceptualization and, 65; combined 
gestures and, 66; culture and, 82, 86– 87; 

174 
Inde x
Children (continued)
 cultural common ground and, 85; social 
norms and, 87; cognitive skills of, 126; 
family cooperation and, 133; in human 
cooperative lifestyle, 134; conventional 
communication and, 139; social interac-
tions of, 144– 145
Clark, H., 38
Cognition: evolution of, 7– 14, 26, 125– 133, 
151– 152; for competition, 26– 31, 76– 78; as 
cooperation, 124– 125; sociality and, 
133– 144; role of ontogeny in origins of 
human, 144– 148; intermediate step in, 
150– 151. See also Human thinking
Cognitive repre sen ta tion(s): and individual 
intentionality, 9– 12; of great apes, 27– 28
Cognitive self- monitoring, of great apes, 
24– 26, 26, 30– 31
Collaboration: shared intentionality and, 3, 
4– 6; emergence of, among early humans, 
33– 38; joint goals and individual roles in, 
38– 43; joint attention and individual 
perspectives in, 43– 46; social self- 
monitoring in, 46– 47; second- personal 
social engagement and, 47– 49; collective 
intentionality and, 80– 81; group 
identifi cation and, 82– 83; shared decision 
making and reason giving and, 109– 113; 
sociality and, 133– 138, 136– 138, 150– 151; 
eff ects of, 143. See also Cooperation
Collective entities, 115– 116
Collective intentionality: evolution of, 5– 6, 
139– 141; overview of, 80– 81; emergence of 
culture and, 81– 93; emergence of 
conventional communication and, 93– 94; 
and communicative conventions as 
inherited conceptualizations, 95– 99; and 
linguistic constructions as complex 
repre sen ta tional formats, 99– 104; 
discourse and refl ective thinking and, 
104– 109; shared decision making and 
reason giving and, 109– 113; agent- neutral 
thinking and, 113– 120; objectivity and, 
120– 123; cumulative cultural evolution 
and, 141; in children, 144– 145; ontogeny 
and, 144– 147
Common ground: joint intentionality and, 
38, 44; cooperative communication and, 
50; relevance and, 54– 55, 56; in panto-
mime, 61; combined gestures and, 67– 68; 
cultural, 85; social norms and, 89; in 
language, 93, 157– 158n4; in conventional 
communication, 95; arbitrary communi-
cative conventions and, 98– 99; discourse 
and, 108; agent- neutral thinking and, 113. 
See also Joint attention
Communication: shared intentionality and, 
3; of great apes, 22; in evolution of 
complexity of living things, 32– 33; 
perspectivity and, 77– 78; conventional 
cultural practices and, 86– 87; eff ects of, 
143. See also Conventional communica-
tion; Cooperative communication
Communicative self- monitoring, 75– 76
Competition: collaboration in, 5– 6; 
cognition for, 26– 31, 76– 78; group 
identifi cation and, 82– 83; sociality and, 
135– 136
Complexity of living things, evolution of 
transitions in, 32– 33
Conformity: to social norms, 88; to 
communicative conventions, 95. See also 
Self- monitoring
Conventional communication: emergence 
of, 93– 94; as inherited conceptualization, 
95– 99; and linguistic constructions as 
complex repre sen ta tional formats, 
99– 104; discourse and refl ective thinking 
in, 104– 109; shared decision making and 
reason giving in, 109– 113; agent- neutral 
thinking and, 113, 114; reasoning and, 
138– 141; development of, 146; sign 
language and, 157n3
Conventional cultural practices, 85– 87
Cooperation: Piaget on, 1; human sociality 
and, 31, 133– 138, 150– 151; in evolution of 

Inde x 
175
complexity of living things, 32– 33; 
objectivity and, 122; human thinking as, 
124– 125; among great apes, 135– 136. 
See also Collaboration
Cooperative argumentation, 110– 112, 
117– 118, 119, 121– 122
Cooperative communication: evolution of, 5; 
among humans, 36; joint intentionality 
and, 49– 50, 78– 79; motivation for, 50– 54; 
relevance in, 54– 59; pantomime in, 59– 66; 
and combined gestures, 66– 68; cognitive 
repre sen ta tions and, 69– 72; sociality and, 
136– 138
Cooperative self- monitoring, 75, 118– 119
Cosmides, L., 128– 129
Cultural evolution, cumulative, 83, 121, 
141– 143
Cultural group selection, 121, 128, 133
Culture: individual thinking and, 1– 2; 
competition and, 5; emergence of, 81– 82; 
group identifi cation and, 82– 84; 
conventional practices in, 85– 87; social 
norms and normative self- monitoring 
and, 87– 90; institutional reality and, 
90– 92; group- mindedness and objectivity 
in, 92– 93; and conventional communica-
tion, 95; human cognitive uniqueness 
and, 127– 128; reasoning and convention-
alized, 138– 141; development of, 146; 
cooperation and, 150– 151
Darwall, S., 110– 111
Darwin, Charles, 149
Davidson, Donald, 9, 149, 156n3
Decision making, shared, 109– 113
Diachronic transmission of skills, 80
Discourse, refl ective thinking and, 104– 109
Dunbar, R., 134
Enculturated apes, 147
Ethology, evolution of cognition and, 7
Event schema, imitation and establishment 
of, 29– 30
Evolution: of human thinking, 7– 14, 26, 
125– 133, 151– 152; of complexity of living 
things, 32– 33
Eye direction, 77
False beliefs, 87, 156n3
Families, 133
Foraging: collaboration in, 5, 34– 38, 137; and 
primate cognition of physical world, 15; 
contemporary, 155– 156n1
General intelligence, 125– 126
Gestures, iconic. See Iconic gestures; 
Pantomime
Goals: cognitive repre sen ta tion and, 9– 12; 
great apes’ understanding of individual, 
20; and individual roles in collaboration, 
38– 43
Great apes: cognition of physical world 
of, 15– 20; cognition of social world of, 
20– 24; cognitive self- monitoring of, 
24– 26; and cognition for competition, 
26– 31; cooperation among, 34– 36; joint 
attention and individual perspectives 
among, 46; social self- monitoring among, 
46– 47; joint intentionality among, 47; 
cooperative communication and, 49, 
51; relevance inference and, 52, 59; 
pantomime and, 60, 66, 73, 156n8; 
perspectival repre sen ta tions and, 69; 
socially recursive inference in, 72; 
second- personal self monitoring among, 
74; culture and, 82; linguistic construc-
tions of, 105– 106; cognitive skills of, 126, 
149– 150; adaptation in, 131– 132; social 
competition in, 135– 136; enculturated, 147
Group hunting: among chimpanzees, 35; 
among early humans, 36– 37
Group identifi cation, and emergence of 
culture, 82– 84
Group selection, cultural, 121, 128, 133
Guilt, collective, 84
Guilt, social norms and, 89

176 
Inde x
Hegel, G. W. F., 1
Home signs, 95– 96, 97, 157n3
Homo heidelbergensis, 36, 48, 79
Honesty. See Truth
Horizontal abilities, 132
Human thinking: evolution of, 7– 14, 26, 
125– 133, 151– 152; as cooperation, 124– 125; 
sociality and, 133– 144; role of ontogeny 
in origins of, 144– 148; intermediate step 
in, 150– 151. See also Cognition
Hunting, group: among chimpanzees, 35; 
among early humans, 36– 37
Iconic gestures: combining, 66– 68, 73– 74; 
cognitive repre sen ta tions of, 69– 72; 
conventionalization of, 93, 95– 97. See also 
Pantomime
Imagination, pantomime and, 63– 64, 70
Imitation: and establishment of even 
schema, 29; in cooperative communica-
tion, 61; group identifi cation and, 83
Individual intentionality: evolution of 
cognition and, 7– 14; great apes and, 
15– 26, 136; and cognition for competition, 
26– 31
Individual roles and perspectives: joint 
intentionality and, 33, 78; joint goals and, 
35, 40– 43; relational thinking and, 42– 43; 
in collaboration, 43– 46; cooperative 
communication and, 68, 137
Inference(s): evolution of cognition and, 12– 13; 
and behavioral self- monitoring, 14; and 
primate cognition of physical world, 16– 20; 
and primate cognition of social world, 
20– 21, 24, 136; causally and intentionally 
logical, 28; productive, 28– 30; recursive, 
38, 72– 74, 143, 152; relevance, 52– 59; 
arbitrary communicative conventions 
and, 97– 99; discourse and, 107– 108; 
linguistic, 116– 117; refl ective, 117– 118
Informative communicative motive, 
emergence of, 50– 54
Institutional reality, 90– 92
Intelligence, general, 125– 126
Intentional states, discourse and, 104– 107
Intuitive beliefs, 129
Irreducibility thesis, 152
Joint attention: in collaboration, 2– 3, 33– 34, 
43– 46; in evolution of human thinking, 5; 
second- personal social engagement and, 48; 
among early humans, 132; shared intentio-
nality and, 152. See also Common ground
Joint commitment, 39– 40
Joint goals: in evolution of human thinking, 
5; in collaboration, 33– 34; individual roles 
and, 38– 43; relational thinking and, 42– 43; 
individual perspectives and, 43– 44; 
cooperative communication and, 50
Joint intentionality: evolution of, 5; and 
evolution of complexity in living things, 
32– 33; and emergence of collaboration 
among early humans, 33– 38; joint goals 
and individual roles in, 38– 43; joint 
attention and individual perspectives in, 
43– 46; social self- monitoring in, 46– 47; 
second- personal social engagement and, 
47– 49; cooperative communication and, 
49– 50; and motivation for cooperative 
communication, 50– 54; relevance in 
cooperative communication and, 54– 59; 
pantomime and, 59– 66; and combined 
gestures, 66– 68; second- personal 
thinking and, 68– 76; perspectivity and, 
76– 79; cumulative cultural evolution and, 
141; ontogeny and, 145– 147
Langford, C. H., 142
Language: individual thinking and, 1– 2; 
pantomime and, 62, 63; spacial conceptu-
alization and, 64– 65; combined gestures 
and, 66– 67; sign language, 95– 96, 97, 
157n3, 158n5; conventional, 114; human 
cognitive uniqueness and, 127– 128; 
reasoning and conventionalized, 138– 141; 
written, 142; cooperation and, 150– 151; 

Inde x 
177
specifi city in, 157– 158n4. See also 
Communication
Leslie, A., 60
Levinson, S. C., 58
Lewis, C. I., 142
Linguistic constructions: as complex 
repre sen ta tional formats, 99– 104; of great 
apes, 105– 106; objective repre sen ta tion 
and, 113– 116; objectivity and, 139
Linguistic inference, 116– 117
Logical inference, 107– 108, 136
Manipulation, social, 22
Markedness, 58– 59
Mathematics, 142
Maynard Smith, J., 32
Mead, G. H., 2
Mercier, H., 110
Meta- representation, 129
Mithen, S., 130
Modular theory of human cognitive 
evolution, 128– 131
Morality, 75, 153
Mutual recognition, in second- personal 
social engagement, 48
Nagel, T., 122
Natural pedagogy, 61
Negation, 19. See also Protonegation
Nicaraguan Sign Language, 157n3
Nonconformity, to social norms, 88
Normative self- governance, 119– 120
Normative self- monitoring: social norms and, 
87– 90, 145; discourse and, 104– 108; agent- 
neutral thinking and, 118– 120; convention-
alized culture and language and, 139; 
collaboration and communication and, 143
Objective repre sen ta tion, 113– 116
Objectivity: collective intentionality and, 
5– 6, 120– 123; culture and, 92– 93; 
conventionalized culture and language 
and, 139– 141; belief and, 156n3
Ontogeny, in origins of human thinking, 
144– 148
Pantomime: social coordination and, 49– 50; 
in cooperative communication, 59– 66; as 
imagining in space, 63– 65; shared 
decision making and, 109; sociality and, 
137; in great apes, 156n8. See also Iconic 
gestures
Peirce, C. S., 1
Penn, D. C., 126
Perspectival repre sen ta tions, 69– 70, 143
Perspective: in collaboration, 43– 46; 
relevance inference and, 56– 57; category 
terms and, 62; joint intentionality and, 
76– 79; linguistic constructions and, 
100– 101; belief as, 156n3
Piaget, Jean, 1, 2
Pointing: social coordination and, 49– 50; 
emergence of, among early humans, 50; 
among infants, 51; relevance inference and, 
52– 57; pantomime and, 61– 62, 66– 68, 
70– 71; in children, 62– 66; shared deci-
sion making and, 109; sociality and, 137
Population size: group identifi cation and, 83; 
brain size and, 134
Pretend play, 63– 64, 92– 93
Pride, collective, 84
Propositional attitudes, 104– 107
Propositional linguistic conventions, 
114– 115
Protonegation, 21– 22, 24
Quasi- propositional repre sen ta tions, 71– 72
Ratchet eff ect, 83, 121, 141
Reality, institutional, 90– 92
Reasoning: shared decision making and, 
109– 113, 121– 122; refl ective, 116– 118; in 
human cognition, 126; language and, 127; 
conventionalized culture and language 
and, 138– 141
Recognition, group identifi cation and, 83

178 
Inde x
Recursion, in human cognition, 126– 127
Recursive inferences, 38, 143, 152
Refl ective reasoning, 116– 118
Refl ective thinking, 104– 109
Reifi cation of socially created entities, 
91– 92, 153
Relational thinking, 42– 43
Relevance inference, 52– 59
Repre sen ta tion: and individual intentional-
ity, 9– 12; of great apes, 27– 28; relevance 
inference and, 56– 57; perspectival, 69– 70, 
143; characteristics of cognitive, 69– 72; 
linguistic constructions and, 99– 104; ob-
jective, 113– 116; meta- representation, 129
Role- based categories, in relational 
thinking, 42– 43
Rule games, 92– 93
Schematization, 12, 27, 73– 74, 99
Science and mathematics, Western, 142
Second- personal self-monitoring, 74– 76
Second- personal social engagement, 47– 49
Second- personal thinking, 68– 76, 138
Self- governance, normative, 119– 120
Self- monitoring: behavioral, 14, 24– 25, 26; 
cognitive, 24– 26, 26, 30– 31; second- 
personal, 74– 76; cooperative, 75, 118– 119; 
communicative, 75– 76. See also Normative 
self- monitoring; Social self- monitoring
Sellars, Wilfrid, 80, 111, 135
Shame: collective, 84; social norms and, 89
Shared decision making, 109– 113
Shared intentionality hypothesis: summary 
of, 1– 6, 140; two- step evolutionary 
sequence in, 31; cooperation and, 124– 125; 
and theories on human thinking, 132– 133; 
collectivity and, 152
Sign language, 95– 96, 97, 157n3, 158n5
Simulation, 12– 13
Social brain hypothesis, 133– 134
Social coordination: and emergence of colla bo-
ration among early humans, 34, 36– 38; 
cooperative communication and, 49– 50
Sociality: primate cognition and, 20– 24; 
dimensions of, 80; complex human cogni-
tion and, 124; thinking and, 133– 144
Socially recursive inferences, 72– 74
Social norms, normative self- monitoring 
and, 87– 90, 145
Social selection, and collaborative foraging, 
37– 38
Social self- monitoring: in collaboration, 
46– 47; in cooperative communication, 
57– 58, 59, 78; in great apes, 136; evolution 
of, 143
Social transmission, 80, 81– 82
Spacial conceptualization, 64– 65
Sperber, D., 110, 129
Status functions, 64, 91, 146
Sterelny, K., 134
Symbols and symbolic repre sen ta tions, 
70– 71, 90– 91
Szathmary, M., 32
Talmy, L., 65
Teaching: imitation and, 61; culture and, 82; 
group identifi cation and, 83– 84; 
conventional cultural practices and, 
86– 87; social norm enforcement and, 
88– 89; ratchet eff ect and, 121; in human 
cooperative lifestyle, 134
Tooby, J., 128– 129
Tool use, 16, 82, 131– 132
Truth: in cooperative communication, 
51– 52; socially recursive inferences and, 72
Types, experiences as, 12
Vygotsky, Lev, 1, 124
Western science and mathematics, 142
Wittgenstein, Ludwig: on framework 
for individual thought, 2; on under-
standing, 7; and schematic cognitive 
repre sen ta tions, 27; on language, 
102– 103, 151
Written language, 142

