
A Student's Introduction to English Grammar 
This groundbreaking undergraduate textbook on modem Standard 
English grammar is the first to be based on the revolutionary advances of 
the authors' previous work, The Cambridge Grammar of the English 
Language (2002), winner of the 2004 Leonard Bloomfield Book Award of 
the Linguistic Society of America. The analyses defended there are out­
lined here more briefly, in an engagingly accessible and informal style. 
Errors of the older tradition of English grammar are noted and corrected, 
and the excesses of prescriptive usage manuals are firmly rebutted in spe­
cially highlighted notes that explain what older authorities have called 
'incorrect' and show why those authorities are mistaken. 
This book is intended for students in colleges or universities who have 
little or no previous background in grammar, and presupposes no linguis­
tics. It contains exercises and a wealth of other features, and will provide 
a basis for introductions to grammar and courses on the structure of 
English not only in linguistics departments but also in English language 
and literature departments and schools of education. Students will achieve 
an accurate understanding of grammar that will both enhance their lan­
guage skills and provide a solid grounding for further linguistic study. 

A Student's Introduction to 
English Grammar 
RODNEY HUDDLESTON 
Ullil'ersity of Queensland 
GEOFFREY K. PULLUM 
Ulliversity ()f Caliji)mia, Santa Cru& 
"CAMBRIDGE 
:> 
UNIVERSITY PRESS 

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, Sao Paulo 
Cambridge University Press 
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge, CB2 8RU, UK 
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York 
www.cambridge.org 
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780S21612883 
© Rodney Huddleston and Geoffrey K. Pullum 2005 
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception 
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements, 
no reproduction of any part may take place without 
the written permission of Cambridge University Press. 
First published 2005 
Reprinted with corrections 2006 
Third printing 2007 
Printed in the United Kingdom at the University Press, Cambridge 
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library 
ISBN-13 978-0-521-84837-4 hardback 
ISBN-13 978-0-521-61288-3 paperback 
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy 
of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, 
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, 
accurate or appropriate. 

Contents 
Notational conventions 
page vi 
Preface 
vii 
Introduction 
2 A rapid overview 
1 1  
3 
Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
29 
4 Clause structure, complements, and adjuncts 
63 
5 
Nouns and noun phrases 
82 
6 Adjectives and adverbs 
1 12 
7 Prepositions and preposition phrases 
127 
8 
Negation and related phenomena 
149 
9 Clause type: asking, exclaiming, and directing 
159 
10 Subordination and content clauses 
174 
1 1  Relative clauses 
1 83 
12 Grade and comparison 
195 
13 Non-finite clauses and clauses without verbs 
204 
14 Coordination and more 
225 
15 Information packaging in the clause 
238 
16 Morphology: words and lexemes 
264 
Further reading 
291 
Glossary 
295 
Index 
309 
v 

Notational conventions 
Abbreviations of grammatical terms 
Adj 
Adjective 
0; 
Indirect Object 
AdjP 
Adjective Phrase 
P 
Predicator 
AdvP 
Adverb Phrase 
PC 
Predicative Complement 
C, Comp 
Complement 
PP 
Preposition Phrase 
DP 
Determinative Phrase 
Pred Comp 
Predicative Complement 
N 
Noun 
Prep 
Preposition 
Nom 
Nominal 
S, Subj 
Subject 
NP 
Noun Phrase 
V 
Verb 
0 
Object 
VP 
Verb Phrase 
Od 
Direct Object 
Presentation of examples 
Italics are always used for citing examples (and for no other purpose). 
Bold italics are used for lexemes (as explained on p. 15). 
"Double quotation marks" enclose meanings. 
Underlining (single or double) and square brackets serve to highlight part of an 
example. 
The symbol '.' marks a morphological division within a word or a component 
part of a word, as in 'work·er·s' or 'the suffix ·s' . 
The following symbols indicate the status of examples (in the interpretation 
under consideration): 
*ungrammatical 
.) of questionable acceptability 
! non-standard 
%grammatical in some dialects only 
Additional conventions 
*Know you the answer? 
? The floor began to be swept by Max. 
I I done it myself. 
% Have you enough money? 
Boldface is used for technical terms when first introduced and sometimes for later 
occurrences too. 
S M A L L  C A P  I T A L  S are used for emphasis and contrast. 
vi 

Preface 
This book is an introductory textbook on modern Standard English grammar, 
intended mainly for undergraduates, in English departments and schools of educa­
tion as well as linguistics departments. (See www.cambridge.org/0521612888 for a 
link to the associated web site, where additional information can be found.) Though 
it takes note of developments in linguistics over the past few decades, and assumes a 
thorough knowledge of English, it does not presuppose any previous study of gram­
mar or other aspects of linguistics. 
We believe that every educated person in the English-speaking world should 
know something about the details of the grammar of English. There are a number of 
reasons. 
There are hardly any professions in which an ability to write and speak crisply 
and effectively without grammatical mistakes is not a requirement on some 
occasions. 
Although a knowledge of grammar will not on its own create writing skills, there 
is good reason to think that understanding the structure of sentences helps to 
increase sensitivity to some of the important factors that distinguish good writing 
from bad. 
Anyone who aims to improve their writing on the basis of another person's tech­
nical criticism needs to grasp enough of the technical terms of grammatical 
description to make sure the criticism can be understood and implemented. 
It is widely agreed that the foremost prerequisite for computer programming 
is the ability to express thoughts clearly and grammatically in one's native 
language. 
In many professions (the law being a particularly clear example) it is a vital part 
of the content of the work to be able to say with confidence what meanings a par­
ticular sentence or paragraph will or won't support under standard conceptions of 
English grammar. 
Discussions in a number of academic fields often depend on linguistic analysis of 
English: not only linguistics, but also philosophy, literature, and cognitive science. 
Industrial research and development areas like information retrieval, search 
engines, document summary, text databases, lexicography, speech analysis and 
synthesis, dialogue design, and word processing technology increasingly regard 
a good knowledge of basic linguistics, especially English grammar, as a prerequi­
site. 
vii 

viii 
Preface 
Knowing the grammar of your native language is an enormous help for anyone 
embarking on the study of another language, even if it has rather different gram­
matical principles; the contrasts as well as the parallels aid understanding. 
This book isn't the last word on the facts of Standard English, or about grammar 
more generally, but we believe it will make a very good foundation. It is based on 
a much bigger one, The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language (CGEL), 
written between 1990 and 2002 in collaboration with an international team of other 
linguists. That book often contains much fuller discussion of the analysis we give 
here, together with careful argumentation concerning the alternative analyses that 
have sometimes been advocated, and why they are less successful. 
The process of writing this book, and The Cambridge Grammar before it, was 
continually surprising, intriguing, and intellectually exciting for us. Some think the 
study of English grammar is as dry as dust, probably because they think it is virtu­
ally completed, in the sense that nothing important in the field remains to be dis­
covered. But it doesn't seem that way to us. When working in our offices and meet­
ing for lunchtime discussions we usually found that we would have at least one 
entirely new discovery to talk about over sandwiches. At the level of small but fas­
cinating details, there are thousands of new discoveries to be made about modern 
English. And even at the level of the broad framework of grammatical principles, we 
have frequently found that pronouncements unchallenged for 200 years are in fact 
flagrantly false. 
We are pleased that we were again able to work with Kate Brett of Cambridge 
University Press, the same senior acquisitions editor who saw CGEL through to 
completion, and with Leigh Mueller, our invaluable copy-editor. 
We have con­
stantly drawn on the expertise that was provided to CGEL by the other contributors: 
Peter Collins, David Lee, Peter Peterson, and Lesley Stirling in Australia; Ted 
Briscoe, David Denison, Frank Palmer, and John Payne in England; Betty Birner, 
Geoff Nunberg, and Gregory Ward in the United States; Laurie Bauer in New 
Zealand; and Anita Mittwoch in Israel. There are many topics covered in CGEL that 
we couldn't have tackled without their help, and this shorter presentation of some of 
those topics is indebted to them at various points. 
The School of English, Media Studies and Art History at the University of 
Queensland generously continued to provide an academic and electronic home for 
Rodney Huddleston while he worked full-time on this project. Professor Junko ItD, 
Chair of the Department of Linguistics at the University of California, Santa Cruz, 
helped a lot by arranging Geoff Pullum's teaching schedule in ways that facilitated 
his participation in completing this book. And most importantly, we would like to 
thank our families, who have been extraordinarily tolerant and supportive despite 
the neglect of domestic concerns that is inevitable when finishing a book. Vivienne 
Huddleston and Barbara Scholz, in particular, have seen less of us than (we hope) 
they would have liked, and taken on more work than was their proper share in all 
sorts of ways, and we are grateful. 

Introduction 
I Standard English 
2 Descriptive and prescriptive approaches to grammar 4 
3 Grammatical terms and definitions 
5 
1 
Standard English 
English is probably the most widely used language in the world, with 
around 400 million native speakers and a similar number of bilingual speakers in 
several dozen partially English-speaking countries, and hundreds of millions more 
users in other countries where English is widely known and used in business, gov­
ernment, or media. It is used for government communications in India; a daily 
newspaper in Cairo; and the speeches in the parliament of Papua New Guinea. You 
may hear it when a hotel receptionist greets an Iranian guest in Helsinki; when a 
German professor talks to a Japanese graduate student in Amsterdam; or when a 
Korean scientist lectures to Hungarian and Nigerian colleagues at a conference in 
Bangkok. 
A language so widely distributed naturally has many varieties. These are known 
as dialects. I That word doesn't apply just to rural or uneducated forms of speech; 
the way we use it here, everyone speaks a dialect. And naturally, this book doesn't 
try to describe all the different dialects of English there are. It concentrates on one 
central dialect that is particularly important: the one that we call Standard English. 
We can't give a brief definition of Standard English; in a sense, the point of this 
whole book is precisely to provide that definition. But we can make a few remarks 
about its special status. 
The many varieties of English spoken around the world differ mainly in pronunci­
ation (or ' accent'), and to a lesser extent in vocabulary, and those aspects of language 
(which are mentioned but not covered in detail in this book) do tend to give indications 
of the speaker's geographical and social links. But things are very different with 
grammar, which deals with the form of sentences and smaller units: clauses, phrases 
and words. The grammar of Standard English is much more stable and uniform than 
I We use boldface for technical terms when they are first introduced. Sometimes later occurrences are 
also boldfaced to remind you that the expression is a technical term or to highlight it in a context 
where the discussion contributes to an understanding of the cģtegQry or function concerned. 

2 
Chapter I Introduction 
its pronunciation or word stock: there is remarkably little dispute about what is gram­
matical (in compliance with the rules of grammar) and what isn't. 
Of course, the small number of controversial points that there are - trouble spots 
like who versus whom - get all the public discussion in language columns and let­
ters to the editor, so it may seem as if there is much turmoil; but the passions evinced 
over such problematic points should not obscure the fact that for the vast majority 
of questions about what's allowed in Standard English, the answers are clear? 
Moreover, in its written form, Standard English is regarded worldwide as an 
uncontroversial choice for something like an editorial on a serious subject in any 
English-language newspaper, whether in Britain, the USA, Australia, Africa, or 
India. It is true that a very few minor points of difference can be found between the 
American English (AmE) and British English (BrE) forms of Standard English; for 
example, BrE speakers will often use She may have done where an AmE speaker 
would say She may have; but for the most part using Standard English doesn't even 
identify which side of the Atlantic the user comes from, let alone indicate member­
ship in some regional, ethnic, or social group. 
Alongside Standard English there are many robust local, regional, and social 
dialects of English that are clearly and uncontroversially non-standard. They are in 
many cases familiar to Standard English speakers from plays and films and songs 
and daily conversations in a diverse community. In [1] we contrast two non-standard 
expressions with Standard English equivalents, using an exclamation mark () to 
indicate that a sentence belongs to a non-standard dialect, not the standard one. 
[1] 
STANDARD 
NON -STANDARD 
a. [did it myself. 
b. ![ done it myself. 
ii a. [haven 't told anybody anything. 
b. ![ ain 't told nobody nothing. 
We should note at this point that elsewhere we use a per cent sign to mark a Stan­
dard English form used by some speakers but not all (thus we write "left mayn 't hap­
pen because some Standard English speakers use mayn 't and some don't). And 
when our focus is entirely on Standard English, as it is throughout most of the book, 
we use an asterisk to mark sequences that are not grammatical (e.g., *Ran the away 
dog), ignoring the issue of whether that sequence of words might occur in some 
non-standard dialects. In [1], though, we're specifically talking about the sentences 
of a non-standard dialect. 
Done in [ib] is a widespread non-standard 'past tense' form of the verb do, cor­
responding to Standard English did - in the standard dialect done is what is 
called a 'past participle', used after have (I have done it) or be (It was done 
yesterday).3 
2 For example, try writing down the four words the, dog, ran, away in all twenty-four possible orders. 
You will find that just three orders turn out to be grammatical, and there can be no serious disagree­
ment among speakers as to which they are. 
3 Throughout this book we use bold italics to represent items from the dictionary independently of the 
various forms they have when used in sentences: did is one of the forms of the item listed in diction­
aries as do (the others are does, done, and doing); and was is one of the forms of the item listed as be. 

§ 1 Standard English 
3 
In [ii] there are two differences between the standard and non-standard versions. 
First, ain 't is a well-known non-standard form (here meaning "haven't"); and 
second, [iib] exhibits multiple marking of negation: the clause is marked three 
times as negative (in ain 't, nobody, and nothing), whereas in [iia] it is marked just 
once (in haven 't). 
Features of this sort would not be used in something like a TV news bulletin or a 
newspaper editorial because they are generally agreed to be non-standard. That 
doesn't mean dialects exhibiting such features are deficient, or illogical, or intrinsi­
cally inferior to the standard dialect. Indeed, as we point out in our discussion of 
negation in Ch. 8, many standard languages (they include French, Italian, Polish, 
and Russian) show multiple marking of negation similar to that in [ l ii]. It's a special 
grammatical fact about Standard English that it happens to lack multiple negation 
marking of this kind. 
Formal and informal style 
The distinction between standard and non-standard dialects of English is quite dif­
ferent from the distinction between formal and informal style, which we illustrate 
in [2]: 
[2] 
FORMAL 
a. He was the one with whom she worked. 
II a. She must be taller than I. 
INFORMAL 
b. He was the one she worked with. 
b. She must be taller than me. 
In these pairs, BOTH versions belong to the standard dialect, so there is no call for 
the exclamation mark notation. Standard English allows for plenty of variation in 
style depending on the context in which the language is being used. The [a] ver­
sions would generally be used only in quite formal contexts. In casual conversa­
tion they would very probably be regarded as pedantic or pompous. In most con­
texts, therefore, it is the [b] version, the informal one, that would be preferred. 
The informal Standard English sentences in [b] occur side by side with the formal 
variants; they aren't non-standard, and they aren't inferior to the formal counter­
parts in [a]. 
Informal style is by no means restricted to speech. Informal style is now quite 
common in newspapers and magazines. They generally use a mixture of styles: a 
little more informal for some topics, a little more formal for others. And informal 
style is also becoming more common in printed books on academic subjects. We've 
chosen to write this book in a fairly informal style. If we hadn't, we wouldn't be 
using we 've or hadn't, we'd be using we have and had not. 
Perhaps the key difference between style and dialect is that switching between 
styles within your native dialect is a normal ability that everyone has, while switch­
ing between dialects is a special ability that only some people have. Every speaker 
of a language with style levels knows how to use their native language more for­
mally (and maybe sound more pompous) or talk informally (and sound more 
friendly and casual). But to snap into a different dialect is not something that 

4 
Chapter I Introduction 
everyone can do. If you weren't raised speaking two dialects, you have to be some­
thing of an actor to do it, or else something of a linguist. Either way you have to 
actually become acquainted with the rules of the other dialect. Some people are 
much better than others at this. It isn't something that is expected of everyone. 
Many (probably most) Standard English speakers will be entirely unable to do a 
convincing London working-class, or African American vernacular, or Scottish 
highlands dialect. Yet all of them know how to recognise the difference in style 
between the [a] sentences and the [b] sentences in [2], and they know when to use 
which. 
2 
Descriptive and prescriptive approaches 
to grammar 
There is an important distinction to be drawn between two kinds of 
books on English grammar: a book may have either a descriptive or a prescriptive 
goal. 
Descriptive books try to describe the grammatical system that underlies the way 
people actually speak and write the language. That's what our book aims to do: we 
want to describe what Standard English is like. 
Prescriptive books aim to tell people how they should speak and write - to give 
advice on how to use the language. They typically take the form of usage manuals, 
though school textbook treatments of grammar also tend to be prescriptive. 
In principle you could imagine descriptive and prescriptive approaches not being 
in conflict at all: the descriptive grammar books would explain what the language is 
like, and the prescriptive ones would tell you how to avoid mistakes when using it. 
Not making mistakes would mean using the language in a way that agreed with the 
descriptive account. The two kinds of book could agree on the facts. And indeed 
there are some very good usage books based on thorough descriptive research into 
how Standard English is spoken and written. But there is also a long tradition of pre­
scriptive works that are deeply flawed: they simply don't represent things correctly 
or coherently, and some of their advice is bad advice. 
Perhaps the most important failing of the bad usage books is that they fre­
quently do not make the distinction we just made between STANDARD VS NON­
STANDARD DIALECTS on the one hand and FORMAL VS INFORMAL STYLE on the 
other. They apply the term 'incorrect' not only to non-standard usage like 
the [b] forms in [ 1 ]  but also to informal constructions like the [b] forms in [2]. 
But it isn't sensible to call a construction grammatically incorrect when people 
whose status as fully competent speakers of the standard language is unassail­
able use it nearly all the time. Yet that's what (in effect) many prescriptive man­
uals do. 
Often they acknowledge that what we are calling informal constructions are 
widely used, but they choose to describe them as incorrect all the same. Here's a 
fairly typical passage, dealing with another construction where the issue is the 

§3 Grammatical terms and definitions 
5 
choice between I and me (and corresponding forms of other pronouns): 
[3] 
Such common expressions as it's me and was it them? are incorrect, because 
the verb to be cannot take the accusative: the correct expressions are it's I and 
was it they? But general usage has led to their acceptance, and even to gentle 
ridicule of the correct version.4 
By 'take the accusative' the author means occur followed by accusative pronoun 
forms like me, them, us, etc., as opposed to the nominative forms I, they, we, etc. 
(see Ch. 5, §8.2). The book we quote in [3] is saying that there is a rule of English 
grammar requiring a nominative form where a pronoun is 'complement' of the verb 
be (see Ch. 4, §4. 1 ). But there isn't any such rule. A rule saying that would fail to 
allow for a construction we all use most of the time: just about everyone says It's 
me. There will be no ridicule of It is I in this book; but we will point out the simple 
fact that it represents an unusually formal style of speech. 
What we're saying is that when there is a conflict between a proposed rule of 
grammar and the stable usage of millions of experienced speakers who say what 
they mean and mean what they say, it's got to be the proposed rule that's wrong, not 
the usage. Certainly, people do make mistakes - more in speech than in writing, and 
more when they're tired, stressed, or drunk. But if I'm outside on your doorstep and 
I call out It's me, that isn't an accidental slip on my part. It's the normal Standard 
English way to confirm my identity to someone who knows me but can't see me. 
Calling it a mistake would be quite unwarranted. 
Grammar rules must ultimately be based on facts about how people speak and 
write. If they don't have that basis, they have no basis at all. The rules are supposed 
to reflect the language the way it is, and the people who know it and use it are the 
final authority on that. And where the people who speak the language distinguish 
between formal and informal ways of saying the same thing, the rules must describe 
that variation too. 
This book is descriptive in its approach, and insofar as space permits we cover 
informal as well as formal style. But we also include a number of boxes headed 
'Prescriptive grammar note' , containing warnings about parts of the language where 
prescriptive manuals often get things wrong, using the label 'incorrect' (or 'not 
strictly correct') for usage that is perfectly grammatical, though perhaps informal in 
style. 
3 
Grammatical terms and definitions 
Describing complex systems of any kind (car engines, legal codes, sym­
phonies, languages) calls for theoretical concepts and technical terms ('gasket', 
'tort', 'crescendo', 'adverb'). We introduce a fair amount of grammatical terminol­
ogy in this book. To start with, we will often need to employ the standard terms for 
4 From B. A. Phythian, A Concise Dictionary of Correct English (London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1979). 

6 
Chapter I Introduction 
three different areas within the study of language. Two of them have to do with the 
grammatical form of sentences: 
syntax is the study of the principles governing how words can be assembled into 
sentences (I found an unopened bottle of wine is admissible but *1 found a bottle 
unopened of wine is not); and 
morphology deals with the internal form of words (unopened has the parts un', 
open, and ·ed, and those parts cannot be combined in any other order).5 
But in addition to their form, expressions in natural languages also have meaning, 
and that is the province of the third area of study: semantics. This deals with the 
principles by which sentences are associated with their literal meanings. So the fact 
that unopened is the opposite of opened, and the fact that we correctly use the 
phrase an unopened bottle of wine only for a bottle that contains wine and has not 
been opened, are semantic facts about that expression. 
We will need a lot of more specific terms too. You may already know terms like 
noun, verb, pronoun, subject, object, tense, and so on; but we do not ASSUME any 
understanding of these terms, and will devote just as much attention to explaining 
them as to other terms that you are less likely to have encountered before. One rea­
son for this is that the definitions of grammatical terms given in dictionaries and 
textbooks are often highly unsatisfactory. This is worth illustrating in detail, so let's 
look at the definitions for two specific examples: the term past tense and the term 
imperative. 
Past tense 
The term 'past tense' refers to a grammatical category associated with verbs: likes is 
a present tense form and liked is a past tense form. The usual definition found in 
grammar books and dictionaries says simply that the past tense expresses or indi­
cates a time that is in the past. But things are nothing like as straightforward 
as that. The relation between the GRAMMATICAL category of past tense and the 
SEMANTIC property of making reference to past time is much more subtle. Let's look 
at the following examples (the verbs we need to compare are underlined): 
[4] 
DEFINITION WORKS 
DEFINITION FAILS 
a. The course started last week. 
b. I thought the course started next week. 
ii a. If he said that, he was wrong. 
b. If he said that, she wouldn 't believe him. 
III a. I ottended the Smiths. 
b. I regret offending the Smiths. 
The usual definition works for the [a] examples, but it completely fails for the 
[b] ones. 
In [i] the past tense started in the [a] case does locate the starting in past time, but 
in [b] the same past tense form indicates a (possible) starting time in the future. 
So not every past tense involves a past time reference. 
5 The decimal point of un· and ·ed is used to mark an element smaller than a full word. 

§3 Grammatical tenns and definitions 
7 
In [ii] we again have a contrast between past time in [a] and future time in Cb]. 
In [a] it's a matter of whether or not he said something in the past. In Cb] it's a 
matter of his possibly saying it in the future: we're supposing or imagining that 
he says it at some future time; again, past tense, but no past time. 
In [iii] we see a different kind of contrast between the [a] and Cb] examples. The 
event of my offending the Smiths is located in past time in both cases, but 
whereas in [a] offended is a past tense form, in Cb] offending is not. This shows 
that not every past time reference involves a past tense. 
So if we used the usual definition to decide whether or not the underlined verbs were 
past tense forms we would get the wrong answers for the [b] examples: we would 
conclude that started in rib] and said in [iib] are NOT past tense fonns and that 
offending in [iiib] IS a past tense fonn. Those are not correct conclusions. 
It is important to note that we aren't dredging up strange or anomalous examples 
here. The examples in the Cb] column are perfectly ordinary. You don't have to 
search for hours to find counterexamples to the traditional definition: they come up 
all the time. They are so common that you might well wonder how it is that the def­
inition of a past tense as one expressing past time has been passed down from one 
generation to the next for over a hundred years and repeated in countless books. 
Part of the explanation for this strange state of affairs is that 'past tense', like 
most of the grammatical tenns we'll use in this book, is not unique to the grammar 
of English but is applicable to a good number of languages. It follows that there are 
two aspects to the definition or explanation of such tenns: 
At one level we need to identify what is common to the fonns that qualify as past 
tense in different languages. We call this the general level. 
At a second level we need to show, for any particular language, how we decide 
whether a given fonn belongs to the past tense category. This is the language­
particular level (and for our purposes here, the particular language we are con­
cerned with is English). 
What we've shown in [4] is that the traditional definition fails badly at the language­
particular level: we'll be constantly getting wrong results if we try to use it as a way 
of identifying past tense forms in English. But it is on the right lines as far as the 
general level is concerned. 
What we need to do is to introduce a qualification to allow for the fact that there 
is no one-to-one correlation between grammatical form and meaning. At the general 
level we will define a past tense as one whose PRIMARY or CHARACTERISTIC use is to 
indicate past time. The examples in the right-hand column of [4] belong to quite 
nonnal and everyday constructions, but it is nevertheless possible to say that the 
ones in the left-hand column represent the primary or characteristic use of this fonn. 
That's why it is legitimate to call it a past tense. 
But by putting in a qualification like 'primary' or 'characteristic' we're acknowl­
edging that we can't detennine whether some arbitrary verb in English is a past tense 

8 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
form simply by asking whether it indicates past time. At the language-particular level 
we need to investigate the range of constructions, such as [4ib/iib], where the forms 
used are the same as those indicating past time in the [a] construction - and the 
conditions under which a different form, such as offending in [iiib], can be associated 
with past time. 
Imperative 
The typical definition of 'imperative' is that it is a form or construction used to issue 
a command. To begin with, notice that 'command' is in fact far too narrow a term for 
the meaning usually associated with imperatives: we use lots of imperatives in talk­
ing to friends and family and co-workers, but not (mostly) as commands. The 
broader term directive is more suitable; it covers commands (Get out!), offers (Have 
a pear), requests (Please pass rie the salt), invitations (Come to dinner), advice (Get 
your doctor to look at it), instructions (To see the picture click here), and so on. 
Even with this change from 'command' to 'directive' ,  though, the definition runs 
into the same kind of problems as the usual definitions of past tense. It works for 
some examples and fails for others: 
[5] 
DEFINITION WORKS 
DEFINITION FAILS 
a. Go to bed. 
b. Sleep well. 
II a. Please pass me the salt. 
b. Could you pass me the salt? 
In [i] both examples are imperatives, but while [a] is a directive, [b] is not. When I 
say [ib] I'm not directing you to sleep well, I'm just wishing you a peaceful night. 
In [ii] we have the opposite kind of failure. Both examples are directives, but 
while [a] is imperative, [b] is not. In terms of grammatical structure, [b] is an 
interrogative (as seen in questions like Are you hungry?, or Have you seen Sue ?, 
or Could you fmd any tea ?). But it is not being used to ask a question: if I say 
[iib], I'm not asking for an answer, I'm asking for the salt. So directives can be 
issued in other ways than by use of an imperative. 
Again the textbook definition is along the right lines for a general definition but, 
as before, we need to add an essential qualification. An imperative can be defined at 
the general level as a construction whose PRIMARY or CHARACTERISTIC use is to 
issue directives. 
At the language-particular level, to tie down the imperatives in English, we need 
to say how the grammatical structure of imperatives differs from that of related 
constructions. Compare, for example: 
[6] 
DECLARATIVE 
IMPERATIVE 
i a. You are very tactful. 
b. Be very tactful. 
ii a. They help me prepare lunch. 
b. Help me prepare lunch. 
The examples on the left are declaratives. The characteristic use of a declarative is 
to make statements. The two most important grammatical differences between 
imperatives and declaratives are illustrated in [i]: 

Exercises 
9 
The imperative [ib] has a different form of the verb, be as opposed to are in [ia]. 
(With other verbs the forms are not overtly distinct, as evident in [ii], but the fact 
that there is an overt difference in [i] is a clear distinguishing feature.) 
While you is overtly present in [ia], it is merely implicit or 'understood' in [ib]. You 
is called the subject. It's a major difference between the constructions that subjects 
are normally obligatory in declaratives but are usually omitted in imperatives. 
There's a good deal more to be said about the structure of imperatives (see Ch. 9), 
but here we just want to make the point that the definition found in textbooks and 
dictionaries is of very limited value in helping to understand what an imperative is 
in English. A definition or explanation for English must specify the grammatical 
properties that enable us to determine whether or not some expression is imperative. 
And the same applies to all the other grammatical terms we will be making use of 
in this book. 
In dismissing the two meaning-based definitions we just discussed, we don't 
mean to imply that meaning will be ignored in what follows. We'll be very much 
concerned with the relation between grammatical form and meaning. But we can 
only describe that relation if the categories of grammatical form are clearly defined 
in the first place, and defined separately from the kinds of meaning that they may or 
may not sometimes express. 
Exercises 
1 .  Footnote I pointed out that only three 
orderings of the words the, dog, ran, away 
are grammatical. Which are the three 
grammatical orders of those words? 
Discuss any possible grounds for doubt or 
disagreement that you see. 
2. Consider features of the following sen­
tences that mark them as belonging to 
non-standard dialects of English. Rewrite 
them in Standard English, keeping the 
meaning as close as possible to the original. 
i It ain 't what you do, it's the way how 
you do it. 
ii She don't pay the rent regular. 
iii Anyone wants this stuff can have it. 
iv This criteria is totally useless. 
v Me and her brother were late. 
3. Consider what features of the following 
sentences mark them as belonging to formal 
style in Standard English. Rewrite them in 
informal or neutral style, keeping the 
meaning as close as possible to the original. 
i To whom am I speaking? 
ii It would be a pity if he were to give up now. 
iii We hid the documents, lest they be 
confiscated. 
iv That which but twenty years ago was a 
mystery now seems entirely straightfor­
ward. 
v One should always try to do one's best. 
4. For each of the following statements, say 
whether it is a morphological, syntactic, or 
semantic fact about English. 
i Wherever I saw a host of yellow 
daffodils is true, I saw some yellow 
flowers is also true. 
ii The string of words *He it saw can be 
made grammatical by placing the word 
it after the word saw. 
iii Nobody could truly say they believe 
that he saw it if they didn't also believe 
that it was seen by him. 
iv The verb hospitalise is formed from 
hospital by adding ·ise. 

10 
Chapter I Introduction 
v A witness who truthfully asserted I 
saw a host of yellow daffodils would 
have to answer No if asked Was 
everything blue? 
VI Fall doesn't take the ·ed suffix: fell 
occurs, not *falled. 
vii You can't insert every in the sentence A 
man 's got to do what a man 's got to do 
and get a grammatical result. 
viii When someone says I was going to 
walk but I decided not to, the sense is 
the same as if they had said I was going 
to walk but I decided not to walk. 
ix Of can be the last word of a Standard 
English sentence. 
x A completed grammatical sentence of 
Standard English that begins 'I believe 
that we . . .  ' must continue in a way 
that includes at least one verb. 
5. Explain briefly in your own words, in the 
way you would explain it to someone who 
had not seen this book, what the difference 
is between a descriptive grammar book and 
a prescriptive one. Choose one or two 
grammars (of any language) from those 
accessible to you, and use them as exam­
ples, saying whether you think they are 
descriptive or prescriptive. 
6. A significant number of newspapers in 
English are published in mainly non-English­
speaking countries, and many of them have 
web editions - examples include The TImes 
of India (India; timesofindia. 
indiatimes.com); Cairo TImes (Egypt; 
www.cairotimes.com); Straits TImes 
(Singapore; straitstimes.asia l.com.sg); New 
Straits TImes (Malaysia; www.nst.com.my); 
Jamaica Gleaner (www. jamaica­
gleaner.com); etc. Collect some articles from 
several of these, sticking to subjects that 
minimise give-away local references, and see 
if native speakers of English can identify the 
country of origin purely from the grammar 
or other aspects of the language. 

 rapid overview 
I Two kinds of sentence 
12 
2 Clause, word and phrase 
12 
3 Subject and predicate 
13 
4 Two theoretical distinctions 
14 
5 Word and lexeme categories: the parts of speech 
16 
6 The structure of phrases 
22 
7 Canonical and non-canonical clauses 
24 
8 Word structure 
27 
The primary topic of this book is the way words combine to form sentences in Stan­
dard English. Sentences are made up from words in regular ways, and it is possible 
to describe the regularities involved by giving general statements or rules that hold 
for all the sentences in the language. To explain the rules for English we will need a 
number of technical terms. The purpose of this chapter is to introduce most of those 
(or at least the most important ones). We do it by taking a high-speed reconnais­
sance flight over the whole terrain covered in the book. 
What we mean by calling a word a technical term is simply that you can't guess 
how to use it on the basis of the way you may have used it so far; it needs an expla­
nation, because its use in the description of a language has a special definition. We 
may give that explanation just before we first use the term, or immediately fol­
lowing it, or you may need to set the term aside for a few paragraphs until we can 
get to a full explanation of it. This happens fairly often, because the vocabulary of 
grammar can't all be explained at once, and the meanings of grammatical terms 
are very tightly connected to each other; sometimes neither member of a pair of 
terms can be properly understood unless you also understand the other, which 
makes it impossible to define every term before it first appears, no matter what 
order is chosen. 
The account we give in this chapter is filled out and made more exact in the chap­
ters that follow. This chapter provides a short overview of the gramar that will enable 
you to see where the detailed discussions of particular categories and constructions fit 
into the overall organisation. We'll rely heavily on qualifications like 'usually', 'nor­
mally', 'in the most basic cases', and so on, because we're giving an outline, and there 
are details, refinements, and exceptions to be explained later in the relevant chapter. 
Here and there in this chapter we take the opportunity to draw attention to 
some of the contrasts between our analysis and that of a long tradition of English 
II 

1 2  
Chapter 2 A rapid overview 
grammatical description going back to the late sixteenth century. By the eighteenth 
century this traditional line of work on grammar was quite well developed and 
began to harden into a body of dogma that then changed very little in the nine­
teenth and twentieth centuries. Yet many aspects of this widely accepted system are 
clearly mistaken. We do not want to simply present once again what so many ear­
lier books have uncritically repeated. There are many revisions to the description 
of English that we think greatly enhance the coherence and accuracy of the 
description, many of them stemming from research in linguistics since the middle 
of the twentieth century, and we will offer brief comparative comments on some of 
them. 
1 
Two kinds of sentence 
The syntactically most straightforward sentences have the form of a sin­
gle clause or else of a sequence of two or more coordinated clauses, joined by a 
coordinator (e.g., and, or, but). We illustrate in [ 1 ] :  
[ I ]  
CLAUSAL SENTENCES (having the form of a clause) I 
a. Kim is an actor. 
b. Pat is a teacher. 
c. Sam is an architect. 
ii 
COMPOUND SENTENCES (having the form of a coordination of clauses) 
a. Kim is an actor; but Pat is a teacher. 
b. Kim is an actor; Pat is a teacher; and Sam is an architect. 
The distinction between the two kinds of sentence is drawn in terms of clauses 
(one versus more than one), which means we're taking the idea of a clause to be 
descriptively more basic than the idea of a sentence. Example sentences cited in the 
rest of this chapter and in the following eleven chapters will almost invariably have 
the form of a clause; we return to sentences having the form of a coordination of 
clauses when we discuss coordination more generally, in Ch. 14. 
2 
Clause, word and phrase 
The most basic kind of clause consists of a subject followed by a pred­
icate. In the simplest case, the subject (Subj) is a noun and the predicate (Pred) is a 
verb: 
[2] 
Subj 
Things 
Pred 
Subj 
Pred 
Subj 
change. 
I LI _K
_
im_-,-_I
_
efi
_
t'--l1 I People 
Pred 
complained. I 
I In traditional grammar the examples in [i] are called 'simple sentences', but we don't use this term; it 
covers only a subset of what we call clausal sentences. 

§3 Subject and predicate 
13 
More often, the subject and/or the predicate consist of more than one word while 
still having a noun and verb as their most important component: 
[3] 
Subj 
Pred 
Subj Pred 
Subj 
Pred 
I All things I change. I I Kim I left early. I 
Some people I complained about it. I 
Expressions such as all things and some people are called noun phrases -
phrases with a noun as their head. The head of a phrase is, roughly, the most impor­
tant element in the phrase, the one that defines what sort of phrase it is. The other 
elements are dependents. 
Similarly, left early and complained about it are verb phrases, phrases with a 
verb as head. Again, early and about it are dependents of the verb. 
Traditional grammars and dictionaries define a phrase as containing more than 
one word. But it's actually more convenient to drop this requirement, and generalise 
the category 'noun phrase' so that it covers things, Kim and people in [2], as well as 
all things and some people in [3]. There are lots of places besides the subject posi­
tion where all these expressions can occur: compare We need clients and We need 
some clients or This is good for clients and This is good for some clients, and so on. 
It would be tedious to have to talk about 'nouns or noun phrases' in all such cases. 
So we prefer to say that a noun phrase (henceforth NP) normally consists of a noun 
with or without various dependents. (In other words, the head is accompanied by 
ZERO OR MORE dependents.) 
It's much the same with other categories of phrase, e.g., verb phrases. Com­
plained in [2], just like complained about it in [3], can be regarded as a verb phrase 
(VP). And the same general point will hold for the rest of the categories we intro­
duce below: although they CAN contain more, they sometimes contain just a head 
and nothing else. 
3 
Subject and predicate 
Basic clauses can be analysed as a construction consisting of subject 
plus predicate, as in [2] and [3]. The predicate typically describes a property of the 
person or thing referred to by the subject, or describes a situation in which this per­
son or thing plays some role. In elementary clauses describing an action, the subject 
normally indicates the actor, the person or thing performing the action, while the 
predicate describes the action, as in Kim left and People complained in [2]. But this 
is rather vague: meaning doesn't give much guidance in distinguishing the subject 
from the predicate. 
Syntactically, however, the subject is quite sharply distinguished from other ele­
ments by (among others) the following properties: 
It usually has the form of an NP. 
Its default position is before the verb. 

14 
Chapter 2 A rapid overview 
In interrogative clauses it typically occupies a distinctive position just after the 
verb. 
The last two of these points are illustrated by contrasts of the following kind: 
[4] 
BASIC 
a. The clock has stopped. 
Jl a. Kim is downstairs. 
1Il a. Some customers complained. 
INTERROGATIVE 
b. Has the clock stopped? 
b. Is Kim downstairs? 
b. Did some customers complain? 
Here the [a] version represents the basic form while the [b] version is interrogative 
(a type of clause characteristically used to ask questions). The constructions differ 
with respect to the position of the subject: it precedes the verb in [a], but follows it 
in [b]. In [iii] the interrogative differs also in that it contains the verb do, which is 
absent from [a]. This do is often added to form interrogatives, but the general point 
is nonetheless clear: the subject precedes the verb in the basic version and follows it 
in the interrogative. One useful test for finding the subject of a clause, therefore, is 
to turn the clause into an interrogative and see which expression ends up after the 
(first or only) verb. 
4 
Two theoretical distinctions 
Before we continue with our survey we pause to introduce two theoreti­
cal distinctions frequently needed in the rest of the book. One (§4. 1) is the distinc­
tion between functions and categories, which is implicit in the elementary descrip­
tion of the clause that has already been given. The second (§4.2) is a clarification of 
two senses of the term 'word' . 
4. 1 
Functions and categories 
In our example Some people complained about it we have said that some 
people is subject and that it is an NP. These are two quite different kinds of concept. 
Subject is a function, while NP is a category. Function is a relational concept: when 
we say that some people is subject we are describing the relation between it and com­
plained, or between it and the whole clause. It is THE SUBJECT OF THE CLAUSE, 
not simply a subject. A category, by contrast, is a class of expressions which are 
grammatically alike. An NP is (setting aside a narrow range of exceptions) simply a 
phrase with a noun as head (it's not the NP of anything, it's just an NP). The class of 
NPs thus includes an indefinitely large set of expressions like the following (where 
underlining marks the head noun): some people, all things, Kim, people (as used in 
People complained), the people next door, the way home, and so on. 
The reason we need to distinguish so carefully between functions and categories 
is that the correspondence between them is often subtle and complex. Even though 
there are clear tendencies (like that the subject of a clause is very often an NP), a 

§4.2 Words and lexemes 
15 
single function may be filled by expressions belonging to different categories, and 
expressions belonging to a single category may occur in different functions. We can 
see this in the following examples: 
[5] 
ONE FUNCTION, DIFFERENT 
CATEGORIES 
a. His guilt was obvious. 
ii a. That he was guilty was obvious. 
ONE CATEGORY, DIFFERENT 
FUNCTIONS 
b. Some customers complained. 
b. Kim insulted some customers. 
In the left-hand column the underlined expressions both function as subject: they 
stand in the same relation to the predicate was obvious. But while his guilt is an 
NP (having the noun guilt as head), that he was guilty isn't - it's a clause, with 
its own subject (he) and its own predicate (was guilty). 
In the right-hand column some customers is in both cases an NP, but it has dif­
ferent functions. It is subject in [ib], but in [iib] it has the function of 'object', 
which we explain in §6 below. 
4.2 
Words and lexemes 
The term 'word' is commonly used in two slightly different senses. 
The difference can be seen if we ask how many DIFFERENT words there are in a 
sentence such as: 
[6] 
They had two cats and a dIlg; one cat kept attacking the dIlg. 
Focus on the four we've underlined. The second and fourth are obviously instances of 
the same word, but what about the first and third? Are these instances of the same word, 
or of different words? The answer depends on which sense of 'word' is intended. 
In one sense they are clearly different: the first contains an s at the end. 
But there is a second sense in which they're merely different FORMS OF THE 
SAME WORD. 
In this book we restrict word to the first sense and introduce a new term, lexeme, 
for the second sense. The 'lex' component of 'Iexeme' is taken from 'lexicon' , 
which has more or less the same meaning as 'dictionary' - and 'lexicography' has 
to do with writing dictionaries. Cat and cats are different words, but forms of the 
same Iexeme. The idea is that they are the same as far as the dictionary is concerned: 
the difference is purely grammatical. They are covered under a single dictionary 
entry, and in most dictionaries there is no explicit mention of cats. 
The difference between the various forms of a lexeme is a matter of inflection. 
Cat and cats, then, are different inflectional forms of the same Iexeme - the singu­
lar and plural forms respectively. In order to distinguish the lexeme as a whole 
from its various forms we represent it in boldface: cat and cats are inflectional forms 
of the lexeme cat. Similarly, take, takes, took, taking, taken are inflectional forms of 
the verb lexeme take. And big, bigger, biggest are inflectional forms of the adjective 
lexeme big. 

1 6  
Chapter 2 A rapid overview 
Not all lexemes show inflectional variation of this kind. For those that don't, the 
distinction between word and lexeme is unimportant, and we will represent them in 
ordinary italics, as with the, and, very and so on. 
5 
Word and lexeme categories: the parts of speech 
The traditional term 'parts of speech' applies to what we call categories 
of words and lexemes. Leaving aside the minor category of interjections (covering 
words like oh, hello, wow, ouch, etc., about which there really isn't anything inter­
esting for a grammar to say), we recognise eight such categories: 
[7] 
NOUN 
The dQg barked. 
ii VERB 
The dog barked. 
iii ADJECTIVE 
He 's very old. 
iv DETERMINATIVE 
The dog barked. 
v ADVERB 
She spoke clearly. 
vi PREPOSITION 
It's in the car. 
vii COORDINATOR 
I got up and left. 
viii SUBORDINATOR 
It's odd that they 
were late. 
That is Sue. 
It iJ. impossible. 
It looks Q1Jl1Y.. 
I need some nails. 
He 's ffa old. 
I gave it to Sam. 
Ed or la took it. 
I wonder whether 
it's still available. 
We saw ԣ. 
I have a headache. 
I've got a new car. 
All things change. 
I almost died. 
Here 's a list Q,[ them. 
It's cheap but strong. 
They don 't know if 
you 're serious. 
This scheme has much in common with the traditional one, but there are also some 
important differences that we will point out in the brief survey below. 
The two largest and most important categories are the noun and the verb, the two 
that we have already introduced. The most basic kind of clause contains at least one 
noun and one verb and, as as we have seen in [2] above, may contain just a noun and 
verb. 
The first six categories in list [7] can function as the head of corresponding 
phrases (noun phrase, verb phrase, adjective phrase, etc.). The other two can't. The 
very small coordinator and subordinator classes do not function as head but serve 
as markers of coordination and subordination (we'll explain those terms below). 
An NP with a coordinator added to it (such as or la) is still a kind of NP; and when 
you add a subordinator to a clause (as with that they were late), you get a kind of 
clause. There are no such things as 'coordinator phrases' or 'subordinator phrases' . 
5 . 1  
Nouns 
In any language, the nouns make up by far the largest category in terms 
of number of dictionary entries, and in texts we find more nouns than words of any 
other category (about 37 per cent of the words in almost any text). 
(a) Meaning 
Noun is the category containing words denoting all kinds of physical objects, such as 
persons, animals and inanimate objects: cat, tiger, man, woman, flower, diamond, 

§S.2 Verbs 
17 
car, computer, etc. There are also innumerable abstract nouns such as absence, man­
liness,fact, idea, sensitivity, computation, etc. 
(b) Inflection 
The majority of nouns, though certainly not all, have an inflectional form contrast 
between singular and plural forms: cat - cats, tiger - tigers, man - men, woman -
women, etc. 
(c) Function 
Nouns generally function as head of NPs, and NPs in turn have a range of functions, 
including that of subject, as in [2] and [3]. 
(d) Differences from traditional grammar 
Our noun category covers common nouns (illustrated in (a) above), proper nouns 
(Kim, Sue, Washington, Europe, etc.) and pronouns (I, you, he, she, who, etc.). In 
traditional grammar the pronoun is treated as a distinct part of speech rather than a 
subclass of noun. This, however, ignores the very considerable syntactic similarity 
between pronouns and common or proper nouns. Most importantly, pronouns are 
like common and proper nouns in their function: they occur as heads of NPs. They 
therefore occur in essentially the same range of positions in sentences as common 
and proper nouns - and this is why traditional grammars are constantly having to 
make reference to 'nouns or pronouns' .  
5.2 
Verbs 
(a) Meaning 
We use the term situation for whatever is expressed in a clause, and the verb is the 
chief determinant of what kind of situation it is: an action (I opened the door), some 
other event (The building collapse{[), a state (They know the rules), and so on. 
(b) Inflection 
The most distinctive grammatical property of verbs is their inflection. In particular, 
they have an inflectional contrast of tense between past and present. A past tense 
that is marked by inflection is called a preterite. 
In the present tense there are two forms, depending on properties of the subject 
(primarily whether it is singular or plural): 
[8] 
PRETERITE 
PRESENT 
She worked in Paris. 
She works in Paris. 
They work in Paris. 
He knew the answer. 
He knows the answer. 
They know the answer. 
The singular subject she and he occur here with the present tense forms works and 
knows while plural they occurs with work and know. Verbs have other inflectional 

1 8  
Chapter 2 A rapid overview 
fonns too, such as the one marked by the ending ·ing seen in They are working in 
Paris. 
(c) Function 
Verbs characteristically occur as head ofVPs that themselves function as predicate 
in a clause. As head of the VP, the verb largely detennines what other elements are 
permitted in the VP. Thus English allows She !&f1. the airport but not * She arrived 
the airport; it allows He seemed mature but not *He knew mature; and so on.2 
(d) Subclasses 
There is a very important distinction between a small class of auxiliary verbs and the 
rest, called lexical verbs. The auxiliary verbs have a number of special properties. 
One is that they can sometimes precede the subject. This occurs in interrogatives: 
[9] 
AUXILIARY VERB 
LEXICAL VERB 
a. Can you speak French ? 
b. * Speak you French ? 
Although [b] is ungrammatical, there is a way of forming an interrogative corre­
sponding to the clause You speak French: the auxiliary verb do is added, so the inter­
rogative clause has an extra word: Do you speak French? 
Auxiliaries are usually followed (perhaps not immediately) by another verb, as 
can and do in the foregoing examples are followed by speak. Notice also It will rain; 
They are working in Paris; She has gone home. The words will, are, and has are all 
auxiliary verbs. 
5.3 
Adjectives 
(a) Meaning 
Adjectives characteristically express properties of people or of concrete or abstract 
things. Thus when they combine with the verb be the clause generally describes a 
state: The soup is hot, Max was jealous, etc. 
(b) Function 
Most adjectives can occur in either of two major functions, attributive and pred­
icative: 
[ 1  0] 
ATTRIBUTIVE 
a. some hot soup 
II a. a jealous husband 
PREDICATIVE 
b. The soup is hot. 
b. He became jealous. 
In the attributive use the adjective functions as modifier to a following noun in NP 
structure. In the predicative use it generally occurs after the verb be or one of a small 
subclass of similar verbs such as become,feel, seem, etc . .  
2 Throughout this book we use an asterisk (*) to mark the beginning of a string of words that is NOT 
a sentence of Standard English. That's the only thing asterisks will be used for. 

(c) Gradability and inflection 
§S.S Adverbs 
1 9  
The most central adjectives are gradable - that is, they denote properties that can 
be possessed in varying degrees, properties like those expressed by big, good, hot, 
jealous, old, etc. The degree can be indicated by a modifier, as in fairly big, sur­
prisingly good, very hot, extremely jealous, three years old - and can be questioned 
by how: How big is it?, etc. 
One special case of marking degree is by comparison, and with short adjectives 
this can be expressed by inflection of the adjective: 
[ 1 1 ] 
PLAIN 
COMPARATIVE 
SUPERLATIVE 
Kim is old. 
Kim is older than Pat. 
Kim is the oldest of them all. 
This inflectional system is called grade: old is the plain form, older the compara­
tive form, and oldest the superlative form. 
Gradability, however, is less distinctive for adjectives than the functional property 
(b) above, as it is not only adjectives that can be gradable. 
5.4 
Determinatives 
(a) Definiteness 
There is a class of words called determinatives. The two most common members are 
the words the and a. These function as determiner in NP structure. They mark the NP 
as definite (in the case of the) and indefinite (in the case of a). I use a definite NP 
when I assume you will be able to identify the referent. I say Where 's the dog?, for 
example, only if I'm assuming you know which dog I'm referring to. There's no such 
assumption made with an indefinite NP, as in I could hear a dog barking. 
(b) Determinative vs determiner 
Notice that determinative is the name of a category (a class of words), while deter­
miner is the name of a function. There are other determinatives besides the and a: 
examples include this, that, some, any, many, few, one, two, three, etc. They can 
likewise function as determiner, but that isn't their only function. In It wasn 't that 
bad, for example, the determinative that is modifier of the adjective bad. 
(c) Differences from traditional grammar 
Traditional grammars generally don't use the term 'determinative' .  The words in 
that class are treated as a subclass of the adjectives. But in fact words such as the and 
a are very different in grammar and meaning from adjectives like those illustrated 
in §S.3 above, so we put them in a distinct primary category. 
5.5 
Adverbs 
(a) Relation to adjectives 
The most obvious adverbs are those derived from adjectives by adding ·ly: 

20 
Chapter 2 A rapid overview 
[ 1 2] 
ADJECTIVE 
ii ADVERB 
careful 
carefully 
certain 
certainly 
fortunate 
obvious 
rapid 
usual 
fortunately 
obviously 
rapidly usually 
Words like those in [ii] constitute the majority of the adverb class, though there are 
also a fair number of adverbs that do not have this form, some of them quite com­
mon: they include almost, always, not, often, quite, rather, soon, too, and very. 
(b) Function 
It is mainly function that distinguishes adverbs from adjectives. The two main func­
tions of adjectives exemplified in [10] are attributive and predicative, but adverbs do 
not occur in similar structures: compare *a jealously husband and *He became 
jealously. Instead adverbs mostly function as modifiers of verbs (or VPs), adjec­
tives, or other adverbs. In the following examples the modifying adverb is marked 
by single underlining and the element it modifies by double underlining: 
[ 1 3] 
MODIFYING A VERB OR VP 
11 MODIFYING AN ADJECTIVE 
1Il MODIFYING AN ADVERB 
5.6 
Prepositions 
(a) Meaning 
She spoke clearlv. 
a remarkably good idea 
She spoke quite clearly. 
I often see them. 
It's ļ expensive. 
It'll end quite soon. 
The most central members of the preposition category have primary meanings 
expressing various relations of space or time: 
[ 14] 
across the road 
in the box 
(b) Function 
after lunch 
Qj[ the platform 
at the corner 
on the roof 
before Easter 
under the bridge 
Prepositions occur as head of preposition phrases (PPs), and these in turn function 
as dependents of a range of elements, especially verbs (or VPs), nouns and adjec­
tives. In the following examples we use single underlining for the preposition, brack­
ets for the PP, and double underlining for the element on which the PP is dependent: 
[ 15] 
DEPENDENT ON A VERB OR VP 
ii DEPENDENT ON A NOUN 
iii DEPENDENT ON AN ADJECTIVE 
I sat [lz.v the door]. 
the man [il the moon] 
keen [on golf] 
(c) Differences from traditional grammar 
I saw her [after lunch]. 
the @ [before that] 
superior [to the others] 
In traditional grammar the class of prepositions only contains words that combine 
with nouns (actually, in our terms, NPs). The examples of prepositions in [14] and 
[ 1 5] above all comply with that, and we'll continue to limit our choice of preposi­
tion examples the same way in the early chapters. But in Ch. 7, §2, we drop this 
restriction and extend the membership of the preposition category. We'll show that 
there are very good reasons for doing this. 

5.7 
Coordinators 
§5.8 Subordinators 
2 1  
The central members of the coordinator category are and, or, and but -
in traditional grammar they are called 'coordinating conjunctions' . Their function is 
to mark the coordination of two or more expressions, where coordination is a rela­
tion between elements of equal syntactic status. This syntactic equality is typically 
reflected in the ability of any one element to stand in place of the whole coordina­
tion, as in: 
[16] 
We need a long table and at least eight chairs. 
ii a. We need a long table. 
b. We need at least eight chairs. 
In [i] we have a coordination of a long table and at least eight chairs, each of which 
can occur in place of the whole, as evident from the two examples in [ii]. Precisely 
because the elements are of equal status, neither is head: coordination is not a 
head + dependent construction. 
5.8 
Subordinators 
(a) Function 
The most central members of the subordinator category are that, whether, and one 
use of if- the one that is generally interchangeable with whether (as in I don 't know 
whether/if it 's possible). These words serve to mark a clause as subordinate. 
Compare, for example: 
[ 1 7] 
MAIN CLAUSE 
SUBORDINATE CLAUSE 
a. He did his best. 
b. I realise [that he did his best]. 
He did his best in [a] is a main clause, one which, in this example, forms a sentence 
by itself. Addition of the subordinator that changes it into a subordinate clause. 
Subordinate clauses characteristically function as a dependent element within the 
structure of a larger clause. In [b] that he did his best is a dependent of the verb 
realise, and hence is part of the larger clause I realise that he did his best. That is 
often optional: in I realise he did his best the clause he did his best is still subordi­
nate, but it is not overtly marked as such in its own structure. 
(b) Differences from traditional grammar 
One minor difference is that we follow most work in modern linguistics in taking 
subordinators and coordinators as distinct primary categories, rather than sub­
classes of a larger class of 'conjunctions' .  More importantly, we will argue 
in Ch. 7, §2. 1 ,  for a redrawing of the boundaries between subordinators and 
prepositions - but again we will in the meantime confine our examples to those 
where our analysis matches the traditional one in respect of the division between 
the two categories. 

22 
Chapter 2 A rapid overview 
5.9 
The concept of prototype 
The brief survey we've just given shows something important. Cate­
gories like noun, verb and adjective have not just one property distinguishing them 
from each other and from other categories: they have a cluster of distinctive proper­
ties. But while there are lots of words that have the full set of properties associated 
with their category, there are others which do not. Take equipment, for example. It's 
undoubtedly a noun, but it doesn't have a plural form the way nouns generally do. 
We use the term prototypical for the central or core members of a category that 
do have the full set of distinctive properties. 
Cat and dog are examples of prototypical nouns, but equipment is a non­
prototypical noun. 
Go, know, and tell (and thousands of others) are prototypical verbs, but must is 
non-prototypical, because (for example) it has no preterite form (*1 musted work 
late yesterday is ungrammatical), and it can't occur after to (compare 1 don 't 
want to gQ with *1 don 't want to must work late). 
Big, old, and happy are prototypical adjectives, while asleep is non-prototypical 
because it can't be used attributively (*an asleep child). 
We introduce the concept of prototype here because the parts of speech provide 
such clear examples of it, but it applies throughout the grammar. It applies to sub­
jects, for instance. The NP his guilt, as in the clause His guilt was obvious, is a pro­
totypical subject, whereas in That he was guilty was obvious the subordinate clause 
that he was guilty is a non-prototypical subject. It differs from his guilt in that it 
can't invert with an auxiliary verb to form an interrogative (that is, we don't find 
*Was that he was guilty obvious ?). 
6 
The structure of phrases 
A phrase normally consists of a head, alone or accompanied by one or 
more dependents. The category of the phrase depends on that of the head: a phrase 
with a noun as head is a noun phrase, and so on. 
We distinguish several different kinds of dependent, the most important of which 
are introduced in the following subsections. 
6. 1 
Complement and modifier 
The most general distinction is between complements and modifiers, 
as illustrated for VPs and NPs in [ 1 8], where complements are marked by double 
underlining, modifiers by single underlining: 
[ 1 8] 
I VP 
ii NP 
He [kept her letters for years]. 
She regularly gives us [very useful advice on financial matters], 

§6.3 Determiner 
23 
Complements are related more closely to the head than modifiers. In the clearest 
cases, complements are obligatory: we cannot, for example, omit her letters from 
[i]. In [ii] the complement is optional, but its close relation to the head is seen in the 
fact that the particular preposition on which introduces it is selected by advice: 
advice takes on, fear takes of, interest takes in, and so on. A more general account 
of the distinction between complements and modifiers will be introduced when we 
come to look at clause structure in Ch. 4. 
6.2 
Object and predicative complement 
The next distinction applies primarily within the VP. Two important 
subtypes of complement are the object and the predicative complement, illus­
trated in [19]: 
[ 1 9] 
OBJECT 
PREDlCA TIVE COMPLEMENT 
a. / met a friend ofvours. 
b. She was a friend o[y.ours. 
11 a. Sam appointed a real idiot. 
b. / felt a real idiot. 
iii a. [very friendly can't be an object] 
b. They seemed very friendlv. 
Objects are found with a great number of verbs, while predicative complements 
occur with a quite limited number of verbs, with be by far the most frequent. The 
constructions differ in both meaning and syntax. 
A prototypical object refers to a person or other entity involved in the situation. 
In [ia] there was a meeting between two people, referred to by the subject 
and object, while in [iia] we have a situation involving Sam and a person 
described as a real idiot. A predicative complement, by contrast, typically 
expresses a property ascribed to the person or other entity referred to by the 
subject. In [ib] a friend of yours gives a property of the person referred to as 
she, while in [iib] a real idiot doesn't refer to a separate person but describes 
how I felt. 
The most important syntactic difference is that a predicative complement can 
have the form of an adjective (or AdjP), as in [iiib], whereas an object cannot. 
Thus we cannot have, say, */ met very friendly or *Sam appointed very 
friendly. 
6.3 
Determiner 
This type of dependent is found only in the structure of NPs, where it 
serves to mark the NP as definite or indefinite. Certain kinds of singular noun usu­
ally require the presence of a determiner. In The dog barked or / need Q. key, for 
example, the determiners the and a are obligatory. 
The determiner function is usually filled by determinatives (see §5.4 above), but 
it can also have the form of a genitive NP, as in Fido 's bone or the dog 's owner, 
where 's is the marker of the genitive. 

24 
Chapter 2 A rapid overview 
7 
Canonical and non-canonical clauses 
There is a vast range of different clause structures, but we can greatly sim­
plify the description if we confine our attention initially to canonical clauses, those 
which are syntactically the most basic or elementary. The others, non-canonical 
clauses, can then be described derivatively, in terms of how they differ from the 
canonical ones. 
Canonical clauses consist of a subject followed by a predicate, as illustrated in [2] 
and [3]. The subject is usually (but not invariably) an NP, while the predicate is 
always - in canonical clauses - a VP. 
Non-canonical clauses contrast with canonical ones on one or more of the dimen­
sions reviewed in § § 7. 1-7.5. below. 
7. 1 
Polarity 
Polarity is the name of the system contrasting positive and negative 
clauses. 
[20] 
POSITIVE 
NEGATIVE (non-canonical) 
a. He is very careful. 
b. He isn 't very careful. 
Canonical clauses are positive, while negative clauses are non-canonical. The gram­
mar will have a special section describing how negation is expressed. In [b] the 
negation is marked on the verb; it can also be marked by not (He is not very careful) 
or by some other negative word (Nobodv liked it). 
7.2 
Clause type 
Canonical clauses are declarative. Clauses belonging to any other 
clause type are non-canonical. We illustrate here two of these other clause types, 
interrogative and imperative. 
(a) Interrogative 
[21 ]  
DECLARATIVE 
a. She can mend it. 
INTERROGATIVE (non-canonical) 
b. Can she mend it? 
Declaratives are characteristically used to make statements, while interrogatives are 
associated with questions. Syntactically, the subject she of interrogative [b] follows 
the verb instead of occupying the default position before the verb (see §3 above). 
(b) Imperative 
[22] 
DECLARATIVE 
a. You are patient. 
IMPERATIVE (non-canonical) 
b. Be patient. 
Imperatives are characteristically used to issue what we call directives, a term 
covering requests, commands, instructions, etc. 

§7.4 Coordination 
25 
Syntactically, the most important difference between imperatives and declara­
tives is that they usually contain no subject, though there is a covert subject 
understood: [b] is interpreted as "You be patient". 
There is also a difference in the inflectional form of the verb: are in [a] is a pres­
ent tense form, but be in [b] is not. 
7.3 
Subordination 
The distinction between subordinate and main clauses has already 
been introduced in connection with our discussion of subordinators as a word cate­
gory. All canonical clauses are main clauses. Subordinate clauses characteristically 
function as a dependent within a larger clause, and very often they differ in their 
internal structure from main clauses, as in the following examples: 
[23] 
MAIN 
SUBORDINATE (non-canonical) 
a. She 's ill. 
b. I know that she 's ill. 
ii a. We invited the Smiths. 
b. Inviting the Smiths was a mistake. 
iii a. Some guy wrote the editorial. 
b. He 's [the guy who wrote the editorial]. 
In [ib] the subordinate clause is complement ofthe verb know. It is marked by the 
subordinator that, though in this context this is optional: in I know she 's ill the 
subordinate clause does not differ in form from a main clause. 
In [iib] the subordinate clause is subject of the larger clause. Its structure differs 
more radically from that of a main clause: the subject is missing and the verb has 
a different inflectional form. 
The subordinate clause in [iiib] is called a relative clause. The most straightfor­
ward type of relative clause functions as modifier within the structure of an NP 
and begins with a distinctive word such as who, which, when, where, etc., that 
'relates' to the head of the NP - who in our example relates to guy. 
7.4 
Coordination 
One clause may be coordinated with another, the relation usually being 
marked by means of a coordinator such as and or or. Again, canonical clauses are 
non-coordinate, with coordinate clauses described in terms of the structural effects 
of coordination. Compare: 
[24] 
NON-COORDINATE 
That's Bill. 
I'm blind. 
COORDINATE (non-canonical) 
That's Bill or I'm blind. 
Here the coordination is marked by or in the second clause. In this example there is 
no marking in the first clause: coordinate clauses do not necessarily differ from non­
coordinate ones, just as subordinate clauses do not necessarily differ from main 
ones. 

26 
Chapter 2 A rapid overview 
7.5 
Information packaging 
The grammar makes it possible, in many cases, to say essentially the 
same thing by means of syntactically different constructions. It allows us to present ­
or package - the information in a variety of ways. Canonical clauses always present 
the information in the syntactically most elementary way. In Ch. 1 5  we review a fair 
number of constructions which differ from canonical clauses on this dimension; here 
we illustrate with just three: passive, preposing, and extraposition. 
(a) Passive clauses 
[25] 
ACTIVE 
PASSIVE (non-canonical) 
a. The dog bit me. 
b. I was bitten by the dog. 
These have the same meaning; they describe the same situation and if used in the 
same context it would be impossible for one to be true while the other was false. 
The terms active and passive reflect the fact that in clauses describing an action 
the subject of the active version (in [a] the dog) denotes the active participant, the 
performer of the action, while the subject of the passive version (in [b] l) denotes the 
passive participant, the undergoer of the action. Syntactically the passive version 
is clearly more complex than the active by virtue of containing extra elements: 
the auxiliary verb was and the preposition by. It is for this reason that we take the 
passive as a non-canonical construction. 
(b) Preposing 
[26] 
BASIC ORDER 
a. I gave the others to Kim. 
PREPOSING (non-canonical) 
b. The others I gave to Kim. 
Here the two versions differ simply in the order of elements - more precisely, in the 
position of the object the others. 
In [a] the object occupies its default position after the verb. 
In [b] it is preposed, placed at the beginning of the clause, before the subject. 
Canonical clauses have their elements in the basic order, with departures from this 
order being handled in our account of various types of non-canonical clause, such 
as the preposed complement construction in [b]. 
(c) Extraposition 
[27] 
BASIC (no extraposition) 
a. That I overslept was unfortunate. 
EXTRAPOSITION (non-canonical) 
b. 11 was unfortunate that I overslept. 
In [a] the subject is a subordinate clause - occupying the usual subject position. 
In [b] the subject position is occupied by the pronoun it and the subordinate 
clause appears at the end: it is called an extra posed subject. 
In pairs like this, the version with extraposition is much more frequent than the basic 
one, but we still regard version [a] as syntactically more basic. The extraposition 

§8 Word structure 
27 
construction is virtually restricted to cases where the basic subject is a subordinate 
clause. It's the [a] version that matches the canonical structure of clauses with NPs as 
subject, e.g., The delay was unfortunate. And [b] is (slightly) more complex in struc­
ture: it contains the extra word it. 
7.6 
Combinations of non-canonical features 
Non-canonical clause categories can combine, so that a clause may dif­
fer from a canonical one in a number of different ways at once: 
[28] 
CANONICAL 
NON-CANONICAL 
a. Sue can swim. 
b. He says that Sue can 't swim. 
ii a. Kim took the car. 
b. J wonder whether the car was taken bv Kim. 
The underlined clause in [ib] is both subordinate and negative. The one in [iib] is 
interrogative and passive as well as subordinate. (In subordinate clauses, an inter­
rogative clause of this type is marked by the subordinator whether, not by putting 
the subject after the verb.) 
8 
Word structure 
We have space for very little material on word structure here, but we 
need to point out that words are made up of elements of two kinds: bases and 
affixes. For the most part, bases can stand alone as whole words whereas affixes 
can't. Here are some examples, with the units separated by a decimal point, bases 
double-underlined, and affixes single-underlined: 
[29] 
en·danger slow·lJ. un·lliJ1. work·il1g blackbird·s. un·gentle·man·lJ. 
The bases danger, slow, and just, for example, can form whole words. But the 
affixes can't: there are no words *en, *ly, *un. Every word contains at least one or 
more bases; and a word may or may not contain affixes in addition. 
Affixes are subdivided into prefixes, which precede the base to which they attach, 
and suffixes, which follow. When citing them individually, we indicate their status 
by putting · after prefixes (en·, un·) and before suffixes (·ly, ·ing). 
Exercises 
I .  Divide the main clauses of the following 
examples into subject and predicate. 
Underline the subject and double-underline 
the predicate. (For example: This is the 
house that Jack built.) 
i I think it's a disgrace. 
ii The guy in that house over there works 
for the city. 
iii Most of the mistakes he made were very 
minor. 
iv The thing that puzzles me is why no one 
called the police. 

28 
Chapter 2 A rapid overview 
v One of her daughters is training to be a 
pilot. 
2. The underlined expressions in the following 
examples are all NPs. State the function of 
each one (either subject or direct object or 
predicative complement). 
i I've just seen your father. 
ii The old lady lived alone. 
iii Sue wrote that editorial. 
iv She 's the editor ofthe local paper. 
v It sounds a promising idea to me. 
3. Assign each word in the following examples 
to one of the part-of-speech categories: noun 
(N), verb (V), adjective (Adj), determina­
tive (D), adverb (Adv), preposition (Prep), 
subordinator (Sub), coordinator (Co). 
i She lives in Moscow. 
ii The dog was barking. 
iii Sue and Ed walked to the park. 
iv I met some friends of the new boss. 
v We know that these things are extremely 
expensive. 
4. Construct a plausible-sounding, grammati­
cal sentence that uses at least one word 
from each of the eight categories listed in 
the previous exercise (and in [7] in the text 
of this chapter). 
5. Is it possible to make up an eight-word 
sentence that contains exactly ONE word of 
each category? If it is, do it; if not, explain 
why. 
6. Classify the underlined clauses below as 
canonical or non-canonical. For the non­
canonical ones, say which non-canonical 
clause category or categories they belong 
to. 
i Most Q,fus enjoyed it very much. 
ii Have you seen Tom recently? 
iii He tends to exag"rate. 
iv Who said she was ill? 
v I've never seen anything like it. 
vi They invited me, but I couldn 't go. 
vii This house was built by my 
grandfather. 
viii It's a pity you live so far away. 
ix I'm sure she likes you. 
x Tell me what you want. 

.: 
Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
I Verb inflection 
29 
2 Finite and non-finite clauses 
36 
3 Auxiliary verbs 
37 
4 Perfective and imperfective interpretations 
42 
5 Primary tense 
44 
6 The perfect 
48 
7 Progressive aspect 
5 1  
8 Mood 
53 
1 
Verb inflection 
Verbs are variable lexemes. That is, they have a number of different 
inflectional forms that are required or permitted in various grammatical contexts. 
For example, the lexemefty has a formflown that is required in a context like [ l a], 
where it follows the verb have, and a form flew that is · permitted in a context like 
[ l b], where it is the only verb in a canonical clause: 
[ 1 ]  
a. Kim has flown home. 
b. Kim flew home. 
Notice that we said that flown is REQUIRED in contexts like [ l a], but that flew is 
PERMITTED in contexts like [b]. This is because in [b] we could have flies instead of 
flew. And there is of course a difference in meaning between Kim flew home and 
Kimflies home: the former locates the situation in past time, while the latter locates 
it in present or future time. 
We see from this that there are two kinds of inflection: in some cases an inflec­
tional contrast serves to convey a meaning distinction, while in others (like the flown 
of [ l a]) the occurrence of a particular inflectional form is simply determined by a 
grammatical rule. 
1 . 1  
The verb paradigm 
The set of inflectional forms of a variable lexeme (together with their 
grammatical labels) is called its paradigm. In some languages the verb paradigms 
are extremely complex, but in English they are fairly simple. The great majority of 
verbs in English have paradigms consisting of six inflectional forms. As illustration, 
29 

30 
Chapter 3 Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
we give in [2] the paradigm for the verb walk, with sample sentences exemplifying 
how the forms are used: 
[2] 
PARADIGM 
EXAMPLE SENTENCE 
preterite 
walked 
She walked home. 
PRIMARY FORMS 
3rd singular present 
walks 
She walks home. 
plain present 
walk 
They walk home. 
plain form 
walk 
She should walk home. 
SECONDARY FORMS 
gerund-participle 
walking 
She is walking home. 
past participle 
walked 
She has walked home. 
Inflectional form vs shape 
We explain below the various grammatical terms used to classify and label the 
inflectional forms. But first we must note that walked and walk each appear twice in 
the paradigm. To cater for this we need to draw a distinction between an inflectional 
form and its shape. 
By shape we mean spelling or pronunciation: spelling if we're talking about writ­
ten English, pronunciation if we're talking about spoken English. 
The preterite and the past participle are different inflectional forms but they have 
the same shape walked. Similarly for the plain present and the plain form, which 
share the shape walk. 
In the case of the preterite and the past participle there is a very obvious reason 
for recognising distinct inflectional forms even though the shape is the same: many 
common verbs have DIFFERENT shapes for these inflectional forms. One is jly, as 
shown in [1]: its preterite form has the shape jiew, while its past participle has the 
shape jiown. 
The reason for distinguishing the plain present from the plain form is less obvi­
ous. We take up the issue in § 1 .2 below. 
Primary vs secondary forms 
With one isolated exception that we take up in §8.4, primary forms show inflec­
tional distinctions of tense (preterite vs present) and can occur as the sole verb in a 
canonical clause. Secondary forms have no tense inflection and cannot occur as the 
head of a canonical clause. 
Preterite 
The term preterite is used for an infiectionally marked past tense. That is, the 
past tense is marked by a specific inflectional form of the verb rather than by 
means of a separate auxiliary verb. By a past tense we mean one whose most cen­
tral use is to indicate past time. The preterite of take is took, and when I say I took 
them to school I am referring to some time in the past. The relation between tense 
and time in English, however, is by no means straightforward, as we saw in Ch. 1 ,  
§3, and it is important to be aware that preterite tense does not always signal past 

§ 1 . 1  The verb paradigm 
3 1  
time. For example, in the more complex construction It would be better if I took 
them to school next week we have the same preterite form took, but here the time 
is future. We'll look into this a bit more in §5.2 below. Right now we simply want 
to point out that although making a reference to past time is the central use of the 
preterite (which is why we call it a past tense), a preterite doesn't ALWAYS signal 
past time. 
Present tense 
The central use of present tense forms is to indicate present time. For example, The 
door opens inwards describes a state of affairs that obtains now, at the moment of 
speaking. This explains why the present tense forms are so called, but here too it 
must be emphasised that they are not invariably used for referring to present time. 
In The exhibition opens next week, for example, we again have the same verb-form, 
but here the exhibition is claimed to open at some time in the future. 
3rd singular present vs plain present 
Almost all verbs have two present tense forms, such as walks and walk in [2]. The 
choice between them depends on the subject of the clause: the verb agrees with the 
subject. The 3rd person singular form occurs with a 3rd person singular subject (e.g. 
She walks home), and the plain present tense form occurs with any other kind of 
subject (e.g. They walk home). 
The agreement involves the categories of person and number, which apply in 
the first instance to NPs and hence are discussed more fully in Ch. 5, §§2, 8.2. 
Number, contrasting singular and plural, needs no further commentary at this point. 
Person contrasts 1st person (I and we), 2nd person (you) and 3rd person (all other 
NPs). Thus the 3rd person singular present form occurs with 3rd person singular 
subjects and the plain form with any other subject - whether plural (My parents 
walk home), 1st person (l walk home) or 2nd person (You walk home). 
We call this walk the 'plain' present tense (in preference to the cumbersome 'non-
3rd person singular') because it is identical with the lexical base of the lexeme. The 
lexical base is the starting-point for the rules of morphology which describe how the 
various inflectional forms are derived. The 3rd person singular present tense walks 
is formed from the lexical base by adding 's, the gerund-participle is formed by 
adding 'ing, while the plain present tense involves no such operation on the lexical 
base. 
The plain form 
The plain form is likewise identical with the lexical base of the verb. But it is not a 
present tense form, so we call it simply 'plain form' in contrast to 'plain present' .  
The distinction between these two inflectional forms is discussed in § 1 .2 below. 
The plain form is used in three syntactically distinct clause constructions: 
imperative, SUbjunctive, and infinitival. Infinitival clauses have two subtypes, the 
to-infinitival and the bare infinitival. These constructions are illustrated in [3] with 
the plain form of keep: 

32 
Chapter 3 Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
[3] 
IMPERATIVE 
ii SUBJUNCTIVE 
iii INFINITIVAL { a. TO-INFINITIVAL 
b. BARE INFINITIVAL 
Keep us informed tonight. 
It's essential [that he keep us informed]. 
It's essential [(for him) to keep us informed]. 
He should [keep us informed]. 
Imperatives are normally main clauses, and are typically used as directives - the 
term we have given for various ways of getting people to do things, such as 
requests, orders, instructions and so on. They usually have the subject you under­
stood rather than overtly expressed. 
Subjunctives occur as main clauses only in a few more or less fixed expressions, 
as in God bless you, Long live the Emperor, etc. Their most common use is as 
subordinate clauses of the kind shown in [ii]. Structurally these differ only in the 
verb inflection from subordinate clauses with a primary verb-form - and many 
speakers would here use a present tense in preference to the slightly more formal 
subjunctive: It's essential that he keeps us informed. 
To-infinitivals, as the name indicates, are marked by to. The subject is optional, 
and usually omitted. If present it is preceded by for, and if a pronoun such as I, 
he, she, etc., it appears in a different inflectional form from that used for sub­
jects in canonical clauses and also in subjunctives: compare him in [iiia] with he 
in [ii]. 
Bare infinitivals lack the to marker and almost always have no subject. They 
mostly occur after various auxiliary verbs such as should, can, may, will, etc. 
The gerund-participle 
Traditionally (for example, in the grammar of Latin), a gerund is a verb-form that 
is functionally similar to a noun, whereas a participle is one that is functionally 
similar to an adjective. English verb-forms like walking are used in both ways, and 
no verb has different forms corresponding to the two uses, so we have only a sin­
gle inflectional form with the shape walking in our paradigm, and we call it the 
gerund-participle. These examples show what we mean about its two main kinds 
of function: 
[4] 
a. She argued against [buying any more of them]. 
b. She argued against [any further purchases]. 
II a. People [earning $50,000 a year] don 't qualify 
for the rebate. 
b. [Moderately aUluent] people don 't qualify for 
the rebate. 
[gerund-participle] 
[noun] 
[gerund-participle] 
[adjective] 
In the [i] examples the bracketed parts function as complement to the preposition 
against. In [ia] the bracketed part is a clause, with the verb buying as its head; in [ib] 
the bracketed part is an NP with the noun purchases as head. The similarity between 
the verb-form buying and the noun purchases is simply this: they head expressions 
with the same function. 

§ 1 .2 Verb-fonns and shape sharing 
33 
In the [ii] examples the bracketed parts are alike in that they both modify the head 
noun people. In [iia] the brackets surround a clause with the verb earning as head; in 
[iib] we have an adjective phrase with the adjective affluent as head. Again, earning and 
affluent are thus functionally similar in that each heads an expression modifying a noun. 
The past participle 
There is a second inflectional fonn of the verb that contains the tenn 'participle' as 
part of its name: the past participle. It occurs in two major constructions, perfect 
and passive, illustrated here with the past participle of the verb fly: 
[5] 
a. She has flown from Dallas. 
b. She may have flown to Brussels. 
} 
11 a. The Brussels-Dallas route is flown by only two airlines. 
} 
b. A route [flown by only two airlines] is bound to be expensive. 
[perfect] 
[passive] 
The perfect is usually marked by the auxiliary have with a following past partici­
ple, as in [i]. The passive is a non-canonical clause construction (introduced in Ch. 2, 
§7.5). The most central type is illustrated in [iia], which corresponds to the active 
clause Only two airlines jly the Brussels-Dallas route. The bracketed sequence in 
[iib] is a subordinate passive clause with no subject and without the auxiliary verb 
be that appears in [iia]. 
The 'participle' component of the name is based on the use of the fonn in con­
structions like [5iib], which is comparable to [4iia] above. Flown in [5iib] is the 
head of a subordinate clause modifying the noun route, which makes it functionally 
similar to an adjective, such as unpopular in A [very unpopular] route is bound to 
be expensive. There is, however, nothing adjective-like about the use ofjlown in the 
perfect [i], or indeed in the central passive construction [iia]. 
The 'past' component of the name, on the other hand, derives from its use in the 
perfect construction. The perfect is a kind of past tense, and in [5i], for example, the 
flying is located in past time. But there is no past time meaning associated with 
flown in passive clauses like those in [5ii]. 
1 .2 
Verb-fonns and shape sharing 
We have seen that different inflectional fonns of a verb may share the 
same shape. In our example paradigm for walk given in [2], this applies to the 
preterite and the past participle (both walked) and to the plain present and the plain 
fonn (both walk). We look further at these two major cases of shape sharing in this 
section; there are also certain minor cases that will be left to Ch. 16, where we pres­
ent a systematic description of English inflectional morphology. 
(a) Shape sharing between preterite and past participle 
Walk is an example of a regular verb, i.e. one whose inflectional forms are all 
predictable by general rule. An irregular verb, by contrast, is one where the shape 

34 
Chapter 3 Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
of at least one inflectional form has to be specified for that particular verb. Show, 
for example, has an irregular past participle: a dictionary needs to tell us that it has 
the shape shown. And for fly, both preterite (flew) and past participle (flown) are 
irregular. 
All regular verbs have identical shapes for the preterite and the past participle, 
and so indeed do most of the 200 or so irregular verbs. Nevertheless, there are a 
good number like fly which have distinct shapes. 
We can set out the paradigms for walk andfly in chart form, with lines indicating 
distinctions in shape (the order of presenting the forms is chosen purely to make it 
easy to represent where shape-sharing occurs): 
[6] 
Regular verbs like walk 
Irregular verbs like fly 
PRIMARY 
SECONDARY 
PRIMARY 
SECONDARY 
3rd sing present 
gerund-participle 
3rd sing present 
gerund-participle 
walks 
walking 
flies 
flying 
plain present 
plain form 
plain present 
plain form 
walk 
fly 
walked 
flew 
flown 
preterite 
past participle 
preterite 
past participle 
When preterite and past participle share the same shape, we can tell which one 
we have in any given sentence by a substitution test: we select a verb in which 
preterite and past participle are distinct and substitute it in the example to see which 
shape is required. The following examples will illustrate the idea: 
a. 
11 a. 
[8] 
a. 
ii a. 
EXAMPLES WITH walk 
She usually walked there. 
It would be better if we 
walked more. 
She has walked a lot. 
We were walked to 
the door. 
fly SUBSTITUTED FOR walk 
b. She usually flew there. ) 
b. It would be better ifwe 
[preterite] 
flew more. 
b. She has flown a lot. ) 
b. We were flown to 
[past participle] 
New York. 
We can see that the walked of [7] is a preterite form, because the experiment of 
substituting fly in these constructions requires flew. Flown would be quite 
impossible here: *She usually flown there and *It would be better if we flown 
more. Notice that in [ii] we have again chosen a construction where the preterite 
does not indicate past time. You can't decide whether a form is preterite or 
not by asking whether it refers to past time: the matter has to be determined 
grammatically. 

§ 1 .2 Verb-forms and shape sharing 
35 
Similarly, we can see that the walked of [8] is a past participle, since in these con­
structions (the perfect in [i] and the passive in [ii]) the formjiown is required. The 
[b] examples would be ungrammatical withjiew: *She hasjiew a lot, *We werejiew 
to New York. 
(b) Shape sharing between plain present and plain form 
Almost all verbs have a present tense form that is identical in shape with the plain 
form. The only verb with a plain form distinct from all its present tense forms is be: 
it has three present tense forms (am, is, and are), all different in shape from its plain 
form, be. We can therefore use a substitution test involving be to distinguish plain 
present forms and plain forms of other verbs. Consider, for example, the following 
forms of the verb write: 
[9] 
a. 
11 a. 
1Il a. 
IV a. 
v a. 
EXAMPLES WITH write 
They write to her. 
Write to her. 
It's vital that he write to her. 
It's better to write to her. 
He must write to her. 
be SUBSTITUTED FOR write 
b. They are kind to her. 
[present tense] 
b. Be kind to her. 
} 
b. It's vital that he be kind 
to her. 
[plain form] 
b. It's better to be kind to her. 
b. He must be kind to her. 
The underlined verbs in [i] are present tense forms, while those in [ii-v] are plain 
forms. It is this contrast between are in rib] and be in the other [b] examples that 
provides the main justification for saying that there are two inflectional forms with 
the shape write, not just one. 
Note, however, that even with be, we have the same form in all of [9ii-v] (that is, 
in the imperative, the subjunctive, the to-infinitival, and the bare infinitival). The dif­
ference between these constructions is purely syntactic: they are different kinds of 
clause, but they all require the same inflectional form of the verb. 
The present tense forms in [9i] contrast in the tense system with preterite forms, 
and show agreement with the subject, as we see in [10]: 
[ 1 0] 
a. They wrote to her. 
b. They were kind to her. 
b. He 1£ kind to her. 
[preterite] 
[3rd sing present] 
ii a. He writes to her. 
No such contrasts apply to the plain form verbs in [9ii-v]. For example, the con­
struction in [9iv] doesn't allow either the preterite or the 3rd singular present: 
[ I l ] 
a. *It's better to wrote to her. 
ii a. *It's better to writes to her. 
b. *It 's better to was kind to her. 
b. *It 's better to 1£ kind to her. 
The plain present tense and the plain form thus enter into quite different sets uf 
contrast within the verb paradigm. And this is the basis for the different names we 
have given to the forms: the write of [9ia] is a present tense form, but that of 
[9iia-va] is not. 

36 
Chapter 3 Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
2 
Finite and non-finite clauses 
There is an important distinction between two kinds of clause, related to 
the distinction between main and subordinate clauses. Clauses may be either finite 
or non-finite. Finite clauses may be either main or subordinate; non-finite clauses 
are always subordinate. 
Traditional grammars classify VERBS as finite or non-finite, and then classify 
CLAUSES according to whether or not they contain a finite verb. But historical change 
has reduced the number of inflectionally distinct verb-forms in such a way that the 
distinction between finite and non-finite clauses can no longer be satisfactorily 
defined purely in terms of verb inflection. There is one verb-form, the plain form, 
that occurs in both finite and non-finite clauses, while the other forms are restricted 
to just one or other of the two classes of clause. In Present-day English the relation 
between clause finiteness and verb inflection can be stated as follows: 
[ 1 2] 
If the verb is a primary form, the clause is finite. 
ii 
If the verb is a gerund-participle or a past participle, the clause is 
non-finite. 
III 
If the verb is a plain form, the clause may be finite or non-finite; 
specifically: 
a. Imperative and subjunctive clauses are finite. 
b. Infinitival clauses are non-finite. 
That gives us a partial fit between finiteness and verb inflection that looks like this: 
[ 1 3] 
VERB-FORM 
CONSTRUCTION 
PRIMARY FORMS 
{
IMPERATIVE: 
SUBJUNCTIVE: 
ii 
iii PLAIN FORM 
iv 
EXAMPLE 
FINITENESS 
She brings her own food. 
) 
_B_ri_n_g_yo_u_r_o_w_n_fi_o_od_.______ 
FINITE 
We insist [that she bring her own food]. 
INFINITIVAL: 
It's rare [for her to bring her own food]. 
) 
-=V9G:.::E:R:U:N;D-<P.:A:.RT=I>CI::P.:.LE::.. ________ S[h:e:.:r,:.:eg\r,.:.e:ts][=br=in=g=i=ng^he:.:r_o`w::.nafibocod]:::.. 
_ 
NON-FINITE 
VI PAST PARTICIPLE 
This is the food [brought by my sister]. 
The structure of non-finite subordinate clauses differs more radically from that of 
main clauses than does that of finite subordinate clauses. That is why we draw the 
line between finite and non-finite after [iii] in [ 1 3] rather than after [i]. 
Imperatives belong in the finite category because they occur as main clauses: the 
non-finite constructions in [iv-vi] are always subordinate. 
Subjunctives occur predominantly as subordinate clauses (in main clauses they 
are restricted to more or less fixed expressions like God bless you, etc., 

§3. 1 Distinctive properties of auxiliary verbs 
37 
mentioned above). Nevertheless, subordinate subjunctives like [iii] are struc­
turally very like subordinate clauses with primary verb-forms: compare We insist 
[that she brings her own food with her] (and, as we noted in § 1 . 1  above, many 
speakers use this instead of [iii]). The subordinate clauses in [iv-vi], however, 
differ quite markedly in their structure from clauses with primary verb-forms. In 
[iv] the clause is introduced by for rather than that, and the subject pronoun 
appears in the form her rather than she. And in [v-vi] there is no subject. 
3 
Auxiliary verbs 
We turn now to an important division within the category of verbs 
between roughly a dozen auxiliary verbs and all the rest, which we call lexical 
verbs. The auxiliary verbs (or more briefly, auxiliaries) differ sharply in gram­
matical behaviour from lexical verbs, and figure crucially in a number of 
common constructions. 
Within the auxiliaries there are also major differences between the special sub­
class known as modal auxiliaries and the rest of the class, which we will call 
non-modal; the significance of the term 'modal' will be explained in §8, when 
we consider the meanings expressed by these verbs. The classification is like 
this: 
[ 14] 
modal __ 
VERB (miliary \ 
non-modal -
lexical _______ _ 
can, may, must, will, shall, ought, need, dare 
be, have, do 
allow, bring, come, drink, eat,find, go, hold, 
invite ,jostle , know, learn, meet, navigate . . .  
The forms could, might, would, should are the preterite forms of the modals can, 
may, will, and shall, respectively. They differ very considerably in their uses 
from ordinary preterites, however, and thus may not at first appear to be 
preterites (see §8.3). 
We begin by looking at some of the most important grammatical properties dis­
tinguishing auxiliaries from lexical verbs. We then turn in §3.2 to the distinctive 
properties of the modal auxiliaries. There is some overlap between auxiliary and 
lexical verbs and in §3.3 we examine four such cases: need, dare, have and do. 
Finally, §3.4 gives a general definition of auxiliary verb. 
3. 1 
Distinctive properties of auxiliary verbs 
Auxiliary verbs behave differently from lexical verbs in a number of ways. 
The two most important ways involve subject-auxiliary inversion and negation. 

38 
Chapter 3 Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
(a) Subject-auxiliary inversion 
We have seen that interrogative clauses differ from declaratives in the position of the 
subject. In interrogatives the subject follows a primary verb-form, instead of preced­
ing the verb as it always does in canonical clauses. This inversion of positions 
between subject and verb is permitted only with auxiliary verbs. It is referred to as 
subject-auxiliary inversion. Compare: 
[ 15] 
AUXILIARY VERB 
a. She has taken the money. 
ii a. Has she taken the money? 
LEXICAL VERB 
b. She takes the money. 
b. *Takes she the money? 
[ declarati ve ] 
[interrogative] 
Interrogative clauses with lexical verbs have to be constructed in a different 
way. To form the interrogative of She takes the money we add the auxiliary verb 
do. This has no meaning of its own - it simply permits compliance with the 
grammatical requirement that this kind of interrogative clause should contain an 
auxiliary verb. We refer to it therefore as the dummy auxiliary do. It cannot be 
used in combination with another auxiliary verb, so the [b) example in [ 1 6] is 
ungrammatical. The present tense in [a] is marked on do; take is a plain form. 
[ 16] 
DUMMY do + LEXICAL VERB 
a. Does she take the money? 
(b) Negation 
DUMMY do + AUXILIARY VERB 
b. * Does she have taken the money? 
There are two ways in which auxiliaries differ from lexical verbs with respect to 
negation. In the first place, the simplest type of negative clause construction, where 
the negation is associated with a primary verb-form, is permitted with auxiliary 
verbs, but not with lexical verbs: 
[ 1 7] 
AUXILIARY 
LEXICAL VERB 
a. She has taken the money. 
ii a. She has not taken the money. 
b. She takes the money. 
b. * She takes not the money. 
[positive] 
[negative] 
To form the negative of She takes the money we have to add dummy do, just as we 
did to form the interrogative, and again this do cannot combine with another auxil­
iary verb: 
[ 1 8] 
DUMMY do + LEXICAL VERB 
DUMMY do + AUXILIARY VERB 
a. She does not take the money. 
b. * She does not have taken the money. 
In the second place, auxiliaries have negative inflectional forms. They all end in n 't, 
and are found in the preterite and present tense: 
[19] 
PRETERITE 
11 PRESENT 
He couldn 't swim. 
She wouldn 't help us. 
He can 't swim. 
She won 't help us. 
They hadn 't finished. 
They haven 't finished. 
No lexical verb has forms of this kind: *tookn 't, *taken 't, etc., are completely impos­
sible. Historically the negative forms arose through contraction, with could + not 

§3.2 Modal auxiliaries 
39 
being reduced to couldn 't, and so on. But in Present-day English they are best 
regarded as inflectional forms, for two reasons. 
Some of them are quite irregular. There is, for example, no general rule of con­
traction that would yield won 't from will + not: we simply have to note that 
won 't is an irregular negative form, just as would is an irregular preterite form. 
Similarly for can 't and shan 't. 
In subject-auxiliary inversion constructions they occur in positions where 
verb + not would generally be impossible. We have, for example, Isn 't it ready?, 
but not *ls not it ready? 
3.2 
Modal auxiliaries 
There are two inflectional properties that distinguish the modal auxil­
iaries from all other verbs. They also share a purely syntactic property that distin­
guishes the prototypical ones from nearly all other verbs. 
(a) Lack of secondary inflectional forms 
Modals have only primary forms and hence simply cannot occur in constructions 
requiring a secondary form - a plain form, gerund-participle or past participle. We 
can see this clearly when we contrast the modal auxiliary must with have, which 
can have a very similar meaning but is not a modal auxiliary: 
[20] 
MODAL AUXILIARY 
NOT MODAL AUXILIARY 
a. I must work late tonight. 
b. I have to work late tonight. 
[primary form] 
11 a. *1 will must work late. 
b. I will have to work late. 
[plain form] 
111 a. *1 am musting work late. 
b. I am having to work late. 
[gerund-participle] 
iv a. * I've often must work late. 
b. I've often had to work late. 
[past participle] 
(b) No distinct 3rd singular agreement form in the present tense 
The modal auxiliaries show no agreement with the subject, having a single present 
tense form. There are no special 3rd singular forms (*cans, *mays, *musts, *wills, 
etc.). Note again, then, the contrasting behaviour of must and have: 
[21 ]  
a. I must leave now. 
11 a. She must leave now. 
b. I have to leave now. 
b. She has to leave now. 
(c) Bare infinitival complement 
[I st singUlar subject] 
[3rd singular subject] 
The prototypical modal auxiliaries take a single complement with the form of a 
bare infinitival clause. Nearly all other verbs that select infinitival complements 
take the to-infinitival kind: here again we can note the contrast between must and 
have in [20-2 1 ] .  There are some verbs that take bare infinitivals (one is help, as 
in We helped wash up), but very few. There is also one verb that qualifies as a 

40 
Chapter 3 Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
modal auxiliary by criteria (a)-(b) but takes (for most speakers) an infinitival with 
to. This is ought, as in You ought to be more careful. 
3.3 
Dually-classified verbs 
A few verbs belong to both auxiliary and lexical verb classes, exhibiting 
auxiliary behaviour under certain circumstances and lexical verb behaviour else­
where. The main ones are do, have, need and dare. 
(a) Do 
Dummy do is an auxiliary, but in other uses - e.g. in She did her best, etc. - do is a 
lexical verb. This is evident from the fact that to form the interrogative or negative 
in such cases we use dummy do, just as with other lexical verbs: 
[22] 
WITHOUT DUMMY do 
a. * Does she her best? 
(b) Have 
WITH DUMMY do 
b. Does she do her best? 
Have is always an auxiliary when it marks perfect tense (where it normally 
occurs with a following past participle). 
When it occurs in clauses describing states, expressing such meanings as posses­
sion (He has enough money) or obligation (You have to sign both forms), usage 
is divided. Most speakers treat it as a lexical verb, but some treat it as an auxil­
iary, especially in the present tense. Those speakers accept % Has he enough 
money? and similar examples. We refer to this use as 'static have'. 1 
'Dynamic have', by contrast, occurs in clauses describing events, like He had a 
fit. Dynamic have is a lexical verb for all speakers. 
These facts are illustrated in [23]: 
[23] 
AUXILIARY USAGE 
a. Have you told her? 
11 a. % Has he enough money? 
iii a. % Have I to sign both forms? 
iv a. *Has he a fit when you do that? 
(c) Need 
LEXICAL VERB USAGE 
b. *Do you have told her? 
b. Does he have enough money. } 
b. Do I have to sign both forms? 
b. Does he have a fit when 
you do that? 
[perfect] 
[static] 
[dynamic] 
Need behaves as an auxiliary (a modal auxiliary) when it has a bare infinitival com­
plement (overt or understood). Elsewhere, it is a lexical verb. Auxiliary need has 
only present tense forms, and occurs only in non-affirmative contexts - i.e. in neg­
atives, interrogatives and related constructions: 
J Static have as an auxiliary is used more by older than by younger speakers, and is more characteris­
tic of BrE than AmE. 

[24] 
AUXILIARY USAGE 
a. Need we tell anyone? 
ii a. She needn 't go. 
iii a. *Need she any help? 
§3.4 The general concept of auxiliary verb 
41 
LEXICAL VERB USAGE 
b. Do we need to tell anyone? 
b. She doesn 't need to go. 
b. Does she need any help? 
Note that in [i-ii] auxiliary need takes a bare infinitival complement (tell anyone 
and go), whereas lexical need takes a to-infinitival. 
(d) Dare 
Auxiliary dare (again, a modal) is very much like auxiliary need, in that it occurs 
only in non-affirmative contexts and takes a bare infinitival complement. Lexical 
dare mostly occurs in non-affirmative contexts too, but is not restricted to them. 
[25] 
AUXILIARY USAGE 
a. I daren 't tell anyone. 
LEXICAL VERB USAGE 
b. I didn 't dare to tell anyone. 
ii a. Dare they accept her challenge? 
iii a. [no auxiliary counterpart] 
b. Do they dare to accept her challenge? 
b. She had dared to contradict him. 
There is no auxiliary counterpart to [iiib], for two reasons. In the first place, dared 
is a past participle whereas modal auxiliaries have only primary forms. Secondly, 
this is not a non-affirmative context. 
3.4 
The general concept of auxiliary verb 
The grammatical properties outlined in §3. 1 serve to distinguish auxil­
iary verbs from lexical verbs in English. There are many languages, however, that 
have auxiliary verbs, so we need to shift focus at this stage and consider what is 
meant by auxiliary verb as a general term. 
A general definition of auxiliary verb can be given along the following lines. 
Auxiliary verbs form a small subclass of verbs whose members are characteristi­
cally used to mark tense, aspect, mood or voice. These categories are also often 
marked in languages by inflection, so auxiliary verbs tend to convey meanings 
which elsewhere are expressed by inflection of the verb. 
The subclass of verbs in English with the distinctive properties concerning inver­
sion and negation clearly satisfies this general definition. Most members of the class 
do serve to mark tense, aspect, mood or voice, as shown in [26]: 
[26] 
AUXILIARY VERB 
have 
ii be 
iii may, can, must, etc. 
iv be 
CATEGORY MARKED 
perfect tense 
progressive aspect 
mood 
passive voice 
EXAMPLE 
Sue has written the preface. 
Sue is writing the preface. 
Sue may write the preface. 
The preface was written by Sue. 
What is meant by the general terms tense, aspect, mood and voice will be explained 
as we describe these categories for English. The full set of verbs for [iii] comprises 
the modal auxiliaries listed in [ 14]: 'modal' is the adjective corresponding to the cat­
egory 'mood'. 

42 
Chapter 3 Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
It is worth emphasising again, however, that a general definition of a category 
does not provide criteria for deciding which expressions in English belong to that 
category: it provides a principled basis for naming a category that has grammati­
cally distinctive properties in a range of languages (see Ch. I ,  §3). To determine 
which verbs in English are auxiliaries we need to apply the grammatical criteria 
relating to subject-auxiliary inversion and negation. 
In the first place this excludes verbs like begin, continue, keep, stop even though 
in constructions like They beganlcontinuedlkeptlstopped interrupting her the mean­
ing belongs in the same family as that of progressive be in They were interrupting 
her - and indeed a good number of traditional grammars do analyse these verbs as 
auxiliaries of aspect. 
Conversely, be qualifies as an auxiliary verb not just when it is marking progres­
sive aspect or passive voice, but also when it is the only verb in the clause, taking a 
complement with the form of an AdjP, NP, etc. Its behaviour with respect to inver­
sion and negation is the same in this construction as in those where it is marking 
progressive aspect or passive voice. This is shown in [27], where this use of be is 
compared with the one marking progressive aspect:2 
[27] 
be AS ASPECT MARKER 
be AS ONLY VERB 
a. He is acting strangely. 
b. He is insane. 
II a. Is he acting strangely? 
b. Is he insane? 
1Il a. He isn 't acting strangely. 
b. He isn 't insane. 
4 
Perfective and imperfective interpretations 
In the remainder of this chapter we examine the meaning and use of four sys­
tems associated with the verb that are marked by the formal devices described above - by 
inflection or by auxiliary verbs. There are two systems of tense to consider: a 'primary' 
one marked by the inflectional contrast between preterite and present tense, and a 'sec­
ondary' one marked by the the perfect auxiliary have. The other two systems we shall be 
dealing with are progressive aspect, marked by the progressive auxiliary be, and mood, 
marked by the modal auxiliaries.3 The four systems are shown with examples in [28]: 
[28] 
SYSTEM 
TERMS 
MARKING 
EXAMPLE 
Primary tense 
Preterite 
preterite inflection 
went 
Present 
present tense inflection 
goes 
II Secondary tense 
Perfect 
have with past participle 
has gone 
Non-perfect 
[no special marking] 
goes 
iii Aspect 
Progressive 
be with gerund-participle is going 
Non -progressive [no special marking] 
goes 
iv Mood 
Modal 
modal with plain form 
can go 
Non-modal 
[no special marking] 
goes 
2 Traditional grammar does not analyse the be of the [b I examples as an auxiliary, but since it does not 
provide syntactic criteria for determining what verbs are auxiliaries in English, membership of the 
class is ill defined and varies from one grammar to another. 
J The use of auxiliary be in It was written by Kim is not covered in this chapter. It marks passive voice. The 
passive is one of the constructions described in the chapter on information packaging (see Ch. 15, §2). 

§4 Perfective and imperfective interpretations 
43 
The preterite and the perfect are different kinds of past tense: note that both She 
went home and She has gone home locate her going home in past time. 
Before we begin our survey of the four systems listed in [28] we need to intro­
duce an important semantic distinction that is relevant to all of them. We use situa­
tion as a cover term for the kinds of things that are described by a clause - actions 
like publishing a novel, processes like growing tall, states like being a student, etc. -
and we distinguish two kinds of clause interpretation that look at situations in 
different ways. 
When a clause describes a situation in a way that considers it as a whole, in its 
totality, without reference to any internal temporal structure or subdivision it 
might have, we say that the clause has a perfective interpretation. 
When a clause describes a situation in a way that makes reference to its internal 
temporal structure or subdivisions, we say that the clause has an imperfective 
interpretation. 
The following examples illustrate the distinction: 
[29] 
PERFECTIVE 
IMPERFECTIVE 
a. She wrote a novel. 
b. She was writing a novel. 
11 a. She spent last summer with her parents. 
b. She still lived with her parents. 
The natural interpretation of [ia] is perfective: it simply describes an event that 
took place in the past. Example rib], by contrast, has an imperfective interpreta­
tion: we are not concerned with the total event of her writing a novel, but with just 
part of it, some part in the middle during the process of its composition. Note that 
it does not follow from [ib] that she ever actually completed the novel. This clause 
has progressive aspect, and clauses with this form are almost always interpreted 
imperfective I y. 
But imperfective interpretations are not confined to progressive clauses. While 
[iia] is perfective - it talks about the summer as a whole - [iib] has an imperfec­
tive interpretation (despite not being in the progressive aspect). In [iib], just as in 
rib], we are not concerned with any situation in its totality. The situation of her 
living with her parents obtained at the time in the past that is being talked about, 
and the still indicates that it had also obtained at an earlier time, and there is noth­
ing to say that it ended. She might still live with her parents now, at the time of 
speaking. 
Perfective vs perfect 
It is important to distinguish the term 'perfective' from 'perfect' , which we intro­
duced earlier in the chapter. 
Perfect is the name of a grammatical category, a type of past tense; 
Perfective applies, as far as English is concerned, to a kind of semantic interpre­
tation. 

44 
Chapter 3 Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
The potentially confusing similarity between the terms reflects the fact that both are 
derived from a Latin word meaning "complete". There are, however, two entirely 
different kinds of completeness involved. With the perfect the key concept is that of 
past time. In examples like She has written a novel, the novel-writing is a completed 
event in the past. With the perfective it is a matter of viewing the situation as a com­
plete whole, but it need not be in the past. In She will write a novel, for example, the 
novel-writing situation is still perfective, but it is in future time, not the past. It is 
best to think ofthe two terms as quite independent, with the similarity between them 
being based on their historical origin rather than being indicative of any close cor­
relation between them. 
5 
Primary tense 
The primary tense system contrasts the preterite, an inflection ally 
marked past tense, with the present tense: 
[30] 
PRETERITE 
PRESENT TENSE 
a. She was in Bonn. 
b. She U in Bonn. 
A tense system is a system associated with the verb where the basic contrasts in 
meaning have to do with the location in time of the situation, or the part of it under 
consideration. This clearly applies to the system illustrated in [30]. The clauses are 
interpreted imperfectively, and the preterite in [i] indicates that the state in question 
obtained at a time in the past, while the present tense in [ii] indicates that it obtains 
in the present. Past and present time are relational concepts. Usually past time is 
understood as time preceding the time of speaking and present time is time simulta­
neous with the time of speaking. 
The examples in [30] illustrate the most central use of the two primary tenses, but 
both have a range of other uses too: the relation between tense and time in English 
is not at all straightforward. We'll show this for each of the two tenses in the primary 
system. 
5 . 1  
The present tense 
(a) Present time 
The most basic use of the present tense is to indicate present time - more specifi­
cally, time that coincides with the time of utterance, as in [30b]. 
But the time of utterance is of course very short. It often takes only a second 
or two to utter a sentence. So naturally there are severe restrictions on the use of 
the present tense in clauses with perfective interpretations. Compare these two 
examples: 
[3 1 ]  
I promise to be back for lunch. 
11 Sue mows the lawn. 
[perfective] 
[imperfective] 

§S. l The present tense 
45 
The salient interpretation of [i] is perfective: there is a single act of promising 
which is perfonned by uttering the sentence. The act of promising and the utter­
ing of the sentence thus occupy the same brief period of time (two or three 
seconds). 
But [ii] cannot under any normal circumstances be interpreted in tenns of a sin­
gle act of mowing the lawn at the time of speaking. It takes much longer to 
mow a lawn than to utter a sentence, so the present time cannot be the time of 
the situation considered as a totality. The natural interpretation, then, is an 
imperfective one: we take the sentence to describe a state of affairs where Sue 
regularly or habitually mows the lawn. This state - like that in [30b] - holds at 
the time of speaking, but began before then and will (presumably) continue 
after it. 
To talk about a single act of mowing the lawn while it is going on we would 
nonnally use the progressive aspect version: Sue is mowing the lawn. Here the 
progressive picks out a point within the total duration of the act, which means the 
interpretation is an imperfective one. 
(b) Future time, I: the futurate 
The present tense is often used for situations located in future time. In main clauses 
this is restricted to cases where it can be assumed that we have present knowledge 
of a future event, as in: 
[32] 
The next high tide iJ. at 4 o 'clock. 
The sun rises tomorrow at 6. 10. 
ii Exams start next week. 
We arrive home two days before Easter. 
This construction is called the futurate. The future time is usually specified by a 
time adjunct, marked here by double underlining. The two most common cases 
involve: 
recurrent events in nature whose time can be calculated scientifically (as in [i)); 
events that are arranged or scheduled in advance (as in [ii)). 
(c) Future time, 1 1 :  subordinate clauses 
The present tense is used with future time reference without the above restrictions 
in certain types of subordinate clause. Three cases of this kind are illustrated 
in [33]: 
[33] 
Please bring the washing in if [it rains]. 
11 I'll give it to you before [I leave]. 
1Il I hope [you are feeling better soon]. 
The underlined verbs are present tense but clearly make future time references. 
In [i] the subordinate clause is complement within a conditional adjunct; 
In [ii] it is complement within a temporal adjunct; 
In [iii] it is complement of the verb hope. 

46 
Chapter 3 Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
(d) Past time: the historic present 
In certain types of narrative, especially in informal style, the present tense is used 
instead of the preterite for past time events, even in discourses that have begun in the 
preterite: 
[34] 
I was waiting at the bus-stop when this guy drives up and otters me a lift in 
his BMW, so I il)'. 'Well, I don 't know,' and he says 'You can trust me, I'm a 
grammarian,' so I gg1 in, and off we gQ. 
5.2 
The preterite 
(a) Past time 
The central use of the preterite is to locate the situation, or the part of it under con­
sideration, in past time. Compare the present tense examples in [3 1] with their 
preterite counterparts: 
[35] 
i I promised to be back for lunch. 
ii Sue mowed the lawn. 
[perfective] 
[imperfective or perfective] 
Here [i] again has a perfective interpretation: it reports a promise made in the past. 
Example [ii], however, can be interpreted either imperfectively or perfectively. In 
the former case it is the past time analogue of [3 lii], with Sue habitually or regularly 
mowing the lawn. This state of affairs held at the time that's being referred to. 
We noted above that perfective interpretations of present tense clauses with pres­
ent time reference are restricted to situations of very short duration, since they have 
to be co-extensive with the act of utterance. No comparable constraint applies with 
the preterite, however, and thus [35ii], unlike [3 1ii], can readily be used perfectively 
to denote a single act of mowing the lawn located as a whole in past time. 
(b) Modal remoteness: the modal preterite 
There is a second important use of the preterite where the meaning has to do not 
with time but with modality. We call this the modal preterite use. Modality is a 
type of meaning that is characteristically associated with mood rather than tense and 
is explained further in §8. At this point it's enough to say that it covers various kinds 
of case where the situation described in a clause is not presented as factual. The 
modal preterite is used to present the situation as, in varying degrees, modally 
remote. What this means can best be understood by comparing the modal preterite 
with the present tense in such examples as those in [36], where in each pair the time 
is the same in [b] as in [a]. 
[36] 
PRESENT TENSE 
a. I'm glad they live nearby. 
11 a. I hope she arrives tomorrow. 
11l a. If he loves her, he 'll change his job. 
iv a. If you leave now, you 'll miss the 
rush-hour traffic. 
MODAL PRETERITE 
b. I wish they lived nearby. 
b. I'd rather she arrived tomorrow. 
b. Ifhe loved her, he 'd change his job. 
b. If you !&.f1. now, you 'd miss the 
rush-hour traffic. 

§5.2 The preterite 
47 
Because of the contrasting meanings of glad and wish, we understand from [ia] 
that they do in fact live nearby, and from [ib] that they don't. In [ib] they lived 
nearby is thus interpreted counterfactually, i.e. as contrary to fact, or false: this 
is the highest degree of modal remoteness. 
A lesser degree of modal remoteness is seen in [iib]: this doesn't imply that she 
definitely won't arrive tomorrow, but it suggests that it may well be that she 
won't (perhaps I'm proposing a change to current arrangements where she's 
arriving at some other time). In these two examples the modal preterite is gram­
matically obligatory, for wish requires a preterite form of the verb in a finite com­
plement, and so does the idiom would rather. 
In [iii-iv], we find something different again: here there is a choice between pres­
ent tense and preterite. These examples illustrate an important distinction between 
two kinds of conditional construction, open, as in [iiiaJiva], vs remote, as in 
[iiib/ivb ]. 
The open type characteristically leaves it open as to whether the condition is or 
will be fulfilled: he may love her or he may not; you may leave now or you may'­
not. 
The remote type, by contrast, generally presents the fulfilment of the condi­
tion as a more remote possibility. So [iiib] suggests a readiness to believe that 
he doesn't love her; this is the version I'd use, for example, in a context where 
he's not planning to change his job and I'm arguing from this that he doesn't 
love her. Similarly, [ivb] presents your leaving now as somewhat less likely 
than in the case of [iva]: it would generally be preferred, for example, in a con­
text where your current plans or inclinations are to leave later. 
(c) Backshift 
A third use of the preterite shows up in indirect reported speech. Notice the contrast 
between has and had in this pair: 
[37] 
i Kim has blue eyes. 
ii I told Stacy that Kim had blue eyes. 
[original utterance: present tense] 
[indirect report: preterite] 
If I say [i] to Stacy, I can use [ii] as an indirect report to tell you what I said to Stacy. 
I'm repeating the content of what I said to Stacy, but not the exact wording. My 
utterance to Stacy contained the present tense form has, but my report of it contains 
preterite had. Nonetheless, my report is entirely accurate. This kind of change in 
tense is referred to as backshift. 
The most obvious cases of backshift are with verbs of reporting that are in the 
preterite, like told or said. It would not occur with present tense verbs of saying; in 
the present tense, my report would have been I tell Stacy that Kim has blue eyes. In 
fact, even with preterite reporting verbs backshift is often optional: you can keep the 
original present tense instead of backshifting it. Instead of [37ii], therefore, we can 
have: 
[38] 
I told Stacy that Kim has blue eyes. 

48 
Chapter 3 Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
Although indirect reported speech represents the most obvious case, backshift 
also happens quite generally in constructions where one clause is embedded within 
a larger one containing a preterite verb: 
[39] 
i Stacy didn 't know that Kim had blue eyes. 
ii I wondered at the time whether they were genuine. 
iii I wish I knew if these paintings were genuine. 
All the underlined verbs have backshifted tense. Notice in particular that the knew of 
[iii] is actually a modal preterite, and doesn't refer to past time at all; but it still pro­
vides a context in which backshift can take place. So backshift can't be understood 
at all on the basis of some simple idea about preterite tenses referring to past time; 
it's a special grammatical principle about the use of the preterite tense inflection. 
6 
The perfect 
The perfect is a past tense that is marked by means of an auxiliary verb 
rather than by inflection, like the preterite. The auxiliary is have, which is followed by 
a past participle. Examples are given in [40] along with their non-perfect counterparts: 
[40] 
PERFECT 
NON-PERFECT 
a. She has been ill. 
b. She iJ. ill. 
u a. She had left town. 
b. She !&.f1 town. 
III a. She is said to have spoken fluent Greek. 
b. She is said to speak fluent Greek. 
In [ia] and [iia] the auxiliary have is itself inflected for primary tense, has being 
a present tense form, had a preterite. These constructions thus have compound 
tense: [ia] is a present perfect, [iia] a preterite perfect. In [iiia] have is in the plain 
form, so this time there is no primary tense, no compound tense. 
In all three cases the perfect encodes past time meaning. This is very obvious in 
[i] and [iii] where the [a] examples refer to past time and the [b] ones to present time ­
but we will see below that it also holds for [ii]. 
The present perfect is the most frequent of the constructions in [40], and we will 
begin with this even though the combination of present and past tenses makes it the 
most complex of the three. 
6. 1 
The present perfect 
The present perfect, like the simple preterite (the non-perfect preterite) 
in its central use, locates the situation, or part of it, in past time: 
[41 ] 
PRESENT PERFECT 
SIMPLE PRETERITE 
a. She has read your letter. 
b. She read your letter. 
The difference in meaning results from the fact that the present perfect is a com­
pound tense combining past and present, whereas the simple preterite is purely a 

§6. 1 The present perfect 
49 
past tense. The fonner includes explicit reference to the present as well as the past, 
whereas the latter does not. We can see the significance of the present tense compo­
nent in two ways. 
(a) Time adjuncts 
Under certain conditions the present perfect allows time adjuncts referring to the 
present. The preterite does not. And conversely, the present perfect more or less 
excludes time adjuncts referring to the past, since they divorce the situation from 
present time. So we have these contrasts: 
[42] 
a. We have by now finished most of it. 
b. *We by now finished most of it. 
ii a. * She has finished her thesis last week. 
b. She finished her thesis last week. 
(b) Current relevance 
With the present perfect the past time situation is conceived of as having some kind 
of current relevance, relevance to the present, whereas the preterite does not express 
any such relationship. Compare: 
[43] 
a. She has lived in Paris for ten years. 
b. She lived in Paris for ten years. 
ii a. She has met the President. 
b. She met the President. 
iii a. The premier has resigned. 
b. The premier resigned. 
iv a. You 've put on some weight. 
b. You put on some weight. 
In [ia] the connection with the present is that she is still living in Paris. In [ib], by 
contrast, the period of her living in Paris is located wholly in the past. 
In [iia], a natural interpretation would be that we are concerned with her past 
experience as it affects her status now: some past experience of hers at some 
indefinite time puts her in the present state of being among the relatively small 
class of people who have met the President. If I use [iib], on the other hand, I'm 
simply reporting a past event, and it will typically be clear from the context what 
time period I am talking about. 
In [iiia] we see an example of the present perfect as used to report hot news. 
Examples like [iiia] are very common in radio and TV news broadcasts (and, of 
course, not at all common in history books). 
Example [iva] illustrates the common use of the present perfect where the con­
cern is with present results of past events. The salient context is one where you 
are now somewhat heavier than you were before. In [ivb] there is no such con­
nection with the present: it simply describes a past event, and it could well be that 
the extra weight was subsequently lost.4 
4 On the last point, colloquial AmE differs somewhat from BrE. The adjunct already calls attention to 
the early occurrence and present results of an event; but American speakers will often say I did that 
already where a BrE speaker would say I've already done that. AmE speakers understand the use of 
the perfect in such contexts, but use it less frequently. 

50 
Chapter 3 Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
6.2 
The preterite perfect 
In §5.2 we distinguished three main uses of the preterite, and all three of 
them are found in the preterite perfect, i.e., the construction where the perfect aux­
iliary is in the preterite form had: 
[44] 
She had gone to bed. 
[past time] 
[modal remoteness] 
[backshift] 
ii It would have been better if she had gone to bed. 
iii You said she had gone to bed. 
The central use of the preterite is to indicate past time, and when the preterite 
combines with the perfect we then have two components of past time. So in [i] 
her going to bed is located in the past relative to some other past time - such as 
the time of our arrival in She had already gone to bed when we arrived. 
In [44ii] the preterite indicates not past time but modal remoteness. In this exam­
ple the conditional has a counterfactual interpretation: she didn't go to bed. 
Because the preterite is marking modal remoteness, it can't also indicate past 
time, so the perfect has to be used for this purpose. (Compare the non-perfect 
It would be better if she went to bed, where the time is the immediate future, not 
the past.) 
For [44iii], a natural context would be to report you as having said She went 
to bed or She has gone to bed. Here the preterite or the present perfect of the orig­
inal utterance is backshifted to a preterite perfect. 
6.3 
The perfect in clauses without primary tense 
The third case to consider is where auxiliary have appears in a second­
ary form, so that there is no primary (inflectional) tense. The perfect in this case 
serves to locate the situation in past time, just like the preterite in clauses that do 
have primary tense. Compare the following pairs: 
[45] 
PRIMARY TENSE: PRETERITE 
a. We believe that she was in Bonn 
at the time. 
II a. As we reached agreement yesterday, 
we don 't need to meet today. 
NO PRIMARY TENSE: PERFECT 
b. We believe her to have been in Bonn 
at the time. 
b. Having reached agreement yesterday, 
we don 't need to meet today. 
In each pair, there is reference to past time in both [a] and [b]. The past time is 
expressed by the preterite in [a] and the perfect in [b]. 
Examples like these show why we refer to the preterite as the primary past tense 
and the perfect as the secondary one. The preterite represents the most common, or 
default, way of locating the situation in past time, but it can't be used in clauses 
without inflectional tense, such as the non-finite clauses in [45ib/iib]: the perfect is 
then called into service to perform the job that in the [a] examples is performed by 
the preterite. The same point applies to examples like [44ii] above. As we noted, this 

§7 Progressive aspect 
5 1  
i s  a conditional construction with the preterite expressing modal remoteness: this 
means that the preterite can't also serve to locate the situation in past time, so this 
has to be done by the perfect. 
6.4 
The continuative perfect 
One difference between the perfect and the preterite is that we can use 
the perfect to indicate that the situation lasted over a period starting before a certain 
time and continuing up to that time. We call this the continuative use of the perfect, 
as opposed to the non-continuative use: 
[46] 
NON-CONTINUATIVE PERFECT 
a. She has already gone to bed. 
CONTINUATIVE PERFECT 
b. She has been in bed for two hours. 
11 a. She had already gone to bed when 
we arrived. 
b. She had been in bed for two hours 
when we arrived. 
In the [a] examples the perfect simply locates her going to bed in the past - rela­
tive to the time of speaking in the present perfect [ia] and to the time of our 
arrival in the preterite perfect [iia]. 
In the [b] examples, however, her being in bed continued over a period of time: 
in rib] it began two hours before the time of speaking, lasting until now, while in 
[iib] this period began two hours before we arrived, lasting until then. The con­
tinuative interpretation is imperfective, so there is no implication in [ib/iib] that 
the situation of her being in bed ended at the time of utterance or when we 
arrived. (Similarly for [43ia], which is also continuative.) 
The continuative use of the perfect is much less common than the non-continua­
tive one, and is usually marked explicitly by a duration expression giving the length 
of the period in question, such as for two hours in [46]. 
7 
Progressive aspect 
The progressive is formed by means of auxiliary be followed by a 
gerund-participle. Compare: 
[47] 
PROGRESSIVE 
NON-PROGRESSIVE 
a. She was writing a novel. 
b. She wrote a novel. 
The concept of aspect 
A grammatical form or construction qualifies as an aspect if its main use is to indi­
cate how the speaker views the situation described in the clause with respect not to 
its location in time but to its temporal structure or properties. 
Thus in [47] the time referred to is past in both [a] and [b], but the situation is 
viewed in different ways. In [b] it is considered in its totality, as a complete event, 

52 
Chapter 3 Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
whereas in [a] the situation is presented as being in progress at a certain time. The 
two clauses have the same tense - the preterite - but they differ in aspect. 
The progressive and imperfectivity 
Clauses with progressive form usually have imperfective interpretations. We 
have just noted, for example, that while [47b] is concerned with her writing a 
novel as a whole, [47a] is not: the former has a perfective interpretation, the latter 
an imperfective one. Not all clauses with imperfective interpretations, however, 
have progressive form - cf. the discussion of [29] in §4. The characteristic mean­
ing of progressive aspect involves a specific kind of imperfectivity - it presents 
the situation as being in progress. This implies that the situation has the following 
two properties: 
it has duration, rather than being instantaneous, or 'punctual' ;  
it i s  dynamic, rather than static: states don't progress, they simply hold or obtain. 
Clauses describing punctual or static situations thus generally appear in the non­
progressive: 
[48] 
a. I finally found my key. 
ii a. She has blue eyes. 
b. At last it has stopped raining. 
b. This jug holds two pints. 
[punctual] 
[static] 
Finding one's key (as opposed to searching for it) is punctual, and one wouldn't say 
* I was finally finding my key. Having blue eyes is a state - hence the striking pecu­
liarity of *She is having blue eyes. It's the same with the other examples. 
Contrasts between non-progressive and progressive 
The basic meaning of the progressive is to present the situation as being in 
progress, but this general meaning tends to interact with features relating to the 
kind of situation being described to yield a more specific interpretation, a more 
specific difference between a progressive clause and its non-progressive counter­
part. Writing a novel, for example, is a situation with a determinate endpoint (when 
the novel is completed), and thus while [47b] entails that the novel was indeed 
completed, [47a] does not: she may or may not have gone on to complete it. But 
there is no such sharp difference in the pair They watched TV and They were watch­
ing TV. Watching TV (as opposed to watching a particular programme) does not have 
a determinate endpoint, and so we find that if They were watching TV is true, so is 
They watched TV. 
Here are four contrasting pairs of examples where the grammatical difference is 
purely that one is non-progressive and the other is progressive: 
[49] 
NON-PROGRESSIVE 
a. He nodded. 
ii a. He is very tactful. 
iii a. She lives with her parents. 
iv a. She reads the 'New Scientist'. 
PROGRESSIVE 
b. He was nodding. 
b. He is being very tactful. 
b. She is living with her parents. 
b. She is reading the 'New Scientist'. 

§8 Mood 
53 
A salient interpretation of [ia] is that there was just one nod. But a nod is punc­
tual, so [ib] cannot normally involve a single nod: it conveys the idea of a 
sequence of nods. 
The default interpretation of [iia] is as a state: we take it to describe his charac­
ter/personality. The progressive requires a dynamic component of meaning, and 
we interpret [iib] in terms of behaviour rather than character: "He is behaving 
very tactfully". 
Non-progressive [iiia] again describes a state, while the progressive [iiib] conveys 
that the situation is a relatively temporary one - it is progressing towards its end. 
The usual interpretation of [iva] is as a state, with regular, habitual reading of 
the 'New Scientist' : reading it takes too long to permit an interpretation with 
a single reading in present time. The most salient interpretation of [ivb] 
(though not the only one) is then of a single reading in progress at the present 
moment. 
The progressive futurate 
There are certain cases where clauses with progressive form do not have the usual "in 
progress" meaning. The most important involves the futurate construction (see §S. l ): 
[50] 
a. I see my broker today. 
b. I'm seeing my broker today. 
In both clauses we are concerned with a future act of seeing someone. Version [ia] 
is an ordinary futurate use of the present tense, and conveys that an appointment has 
been set up or is regularly scheduled, whereas [ib] may suggest simply that I intend 
to go and see my broker today. 
8 
Mood 
Mood is a grammatical category associated with the semantic dimen­
sion of modality. Mood is to modality as tense is to time: tense and mood are cate­
gories of grammatical form, while time and modality are the associated categories 
of meaning. 
Modality deals mainly with two related contrasts: factual vs non-factual, and 
asserted vs non-asserted. The meaning differences seen in [S l i] and [S l ii] are dif­
ferences in modality. 
[5 1 ] 
NON-MODAL 
I 
MODAL 
a. She saw him. 
b. She must have seen him. 
ii a. He leaves today. 
b. He must leave today. 
c. She may have seen him. 
c. He can/may leave today. 
In [i] the [a] version presents her seeing him as a matter of fact, whereas in [b] it is 
an inference and in [cl simply a possibility. In [ii] the [a] version has the force of an 
assertion, whereas [b] can be used as a kind of directive, imposing an obligation, 
and [cl can be used to give permission. 

54 
Chapter 3 Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
Modality can be expressed by a great variety of formal means. The possibility 
meaning of [5 l ic], for example, could also be expressed by means of an adverb 
(Perhaps she saw him), an adjective (It's possible that she saw him), a noun (There 's 
a possibility that she saw him), and so on. But for English at least the term 'mood' 
is restricted to grammatical systems associated with the verb. 
In §8. 1 we look at the kinds of meaning expressed by the modal auxiliaries. Then 
in §8.2 we take up the issue of the relation between modality and future time in the 
context of an examination of the auxiliary wil. In §8.3 we look at the preterite forms 
of the modals. The final section, §8.4, deals with the use of were in constructions 
like I wish she were here - a relic of an earlier system of mood marked by inflection, 
rather than by auxiliaries. 
8. 1 
Uses of the modal auxiliaries 
There are three main families of meanings that the modal auxiliaries 
express: epistemic, deontic and dynamic. The first two, illustrated in [5 1 i-ii] 
respectively, are the most central ones, and we will take these two together in order 
to bring out the important contrast between them. We will then conclude the section 
with a discussion of dynamic modality. 
The epistemic vs deontic contrast 
Epistemic modality expresses meanings relating primarily to what is necessary or 
possible given what we know (or believe): the term derives from the Greek word for 
"knowledge". Deontic modality expresses meanings relating primarily to what's 
required or permitted: this term derives from the Greek word for "obligation". The 
two kinds of meaning are illustrated in the following pairs: 
[52] 
EPISTEMIC 
DEONTIC 
a. He must have overslept. 
b. He must apologise. 
11 a. She may be ill. 
b. She may take as many as she needs. 
111 a. The storm should be over soon. 
b. We should call the police. 
In the [a] examples the modals are interpreted epistemically: the varying degrees 
of non-factuality that they convey reflect limitations on the speaker's knowledge. 
In [ia], I may not know that he overslept, but I'm inferring that he did. In [ib], I 
don't know that she's ill, but I also don't know that she isn't, and am counte­
nancing it as a possibility. In [ic], I don't know how long the storm will last, but 
the probability or expectation is that it will be over soon. 
The [b] examples are interpreted deontically: the meanings have to do with obli­
gation or permission of various kinds. More specifically, the operative notion in 
[ib] is obligation, in [iib] permission, and in [iiib] a milder kind of obligation 
where it is a matter of what is the right thing to do. These notions all have to do 
with authority and judgement rather than knowledge and belief. Very often 

§8. 1 Uses of the modal auxiliaries 
55 
declarative clauses with deontic meanings of modals are used to try and influence 
what happens rather than simply to make assertions. 
The link between the two families of meanings is that the concepts of necessity and 
possibility - the key concepts in modal logic - apply to both. But with epistemic 
modality, necessity and possibility relate to whether or not something is the case, is 
true, whereas with deontic modality they relate to whether or not something hap­
pens, or is done. In [52i], for example, I'm saying in [a] that it is necessarily the case 
that he overslept, and in [b] that it is necessary for him to apologise: in neither do I 
countenance any other possibility. 
Epistemic and deontic meanings are not in general associated with different 
expressions. Many examples are ambiguous, allowing either kind of interpretation 
for the modal: 
[53] 
You must be very tactful. 
[epistemic or deontic] 
There is an epistemic interpretation of this under which it means I have evidence 
that leads me to believe you're very tactful. And there is also a deontic one that I 
might use to tell you there is an obligation or need for you to be very tactful (and 
perhaps thus to tell you to behave with tact). 
Dynamic interpretations 
Some of the modals have uses concerned with properties or dispositions of per­
sons or other entities involved in the situation: 
[54] 
She can speak five languages. 
ii I've asked him to help us but he won 't. 
iii I daren 't tell you any more. 
These are called dynamic interpretations, and are somewhat peripheral to the con­
cept of modality. In [i], can is used to describe an ABILITY of hers; in [ii], the nega­
tive form of wil talks about VOLITION (his unwillingness to help us); in [iii], dare 
says something about whether my COURAGE is sufficient for me to tell you any 
more. (Dare is unique among the modals in that it has ONLY a dynamic use.) 
With can we find clear cases of ambiguity between a dynamic and either an epis­
temic or a deontic interpretation: 
[55] 
You can 't be serious. 
II She can drive. 
[epistemic or dynamic] 
[deontic or dynamic] 
The epistemic interpretation of [i] denies the possibility that you are being seri­
ous: it suggests a context where you have said something that I take to be absurd. 
The dynamic interpretation says something about your personality: you are inca­
pable of being serious. 
In [ii] the deontic reading is that she has permission to drive, while the dynamic 
one attributes an ability to her - she knows how to drive. 

56 
Chapter 3 Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
Prescri ptive grammar note 
Some people insist that can is not to be used in a deontic sense - that pennission should be 
expressed by may instead. There is absolutely no truth to this claim about can, which is used 
frequently in all of the thre types of meaning we have distinguished, and has been for cen­
turies. No evidence whatever supports the view that the deontic use is in some way incorrect. 
8.2 
Futurity, modality, and will 
In this section we treat a special feature of the meaning of one modal, 
will. There are some languages that have a three-term tense system contrasting past, 
present and future. Contrary to what is traditionally assumed, English is not one of 
them: it has no future tense. It does have several ways of talking about future time, 
and the most basic one does involve the auxiliary will. Nonetheless, will belongs 
grammatically and semantically with the auxiliaries that mark mood rather than 
with the various markers of tense. 
There is an intrinsic connection between future time and modality: we don't have 
the same kind of knowledge about the future as we do about the past and the present, 
so it isn't possible to be fully factual about future events or situations. It shouldn't be 
too surprising, then, that a modal auxiliary might be used for talking about the future. 
The close association between will and modality may be illustrated with the fol­
lowing sets of contrasts: 
[56] 
a. She beat him in under an hour. 
b. She will beat him in under an hour. 
11 a. He likes you. 
b. He will like you. 
[57] 
a. She left Paris yesterday. 
b. She will have left Paris yesterday. 
11 a. That is the plumber. 
b. That will be the plumber. 
[58] 
a. Australia meets Sweden in the 
b. Australia will meet Sweden in the 
Davis Cup final in December. 
Davis Cup final in December. 
The examples in [56] illustrate the difference that is commonly found between 
statements about the past or present and those about the future: [ia] and [iia] will 
be construed as statements of fact, whereas [ib] and [iib] have more of the char­
acter of predictions. 
In [57], will is used in the [b] versions with situations located in past and present 
time, and the difference between them and the [a] versions is clearly one of 
modality, not time. The [a] versions are presented as statements of fact, the [b] 
ones as inferences. 
Both versions of [58] locate the situation in future time, so again the difference 
between them is one of modality, not time reference. The [a] version is more 
assured, and appropriate only in a context where the finalists have been deter­
mined; the [b] version could be used to make a prediction earlier in the competi­
tion (when it isn't clear who will survive until December without being knocked 
out of the tournament). 

§8.3 The preterite fonns of the modals 
57 
In all three cases, the version without a modal is more assured than the one that has 
will. The differences are related to the speaker's knowledge. The meanings con­
tributed by will therefore belong in the epistemic family.5 
8.3 
The preterite fonns of the modals 
Four of the modal auxiliaries, can, may, will and shall have preterite 
fonns - could, might, would and should respectively. It is quite clear that they are 
preterites, but it must also be stressed that they are highly exceptional in their behav­
iour. We'll look briefly at both the similarities and the differences between the 
preterites of the modals and other preterites. 
(a) Similarities with ordinary preterites 
Could and would can be used with past time meaning and in the subordinate part of 
a remote conditional, and all four preterites are found in backshift: 
[59] 
I asked him to help me, but he couldn 't/wouldn 'to 
11 We 'd save a lot o/money if you could/would cycle to work. 
1lI I thought I could/would/%should/might see her yesterday, 
but I had to work late at the office. 
[past time] 
[remote conditional] 
[backshift] 
Note that backshift is obligatory in the context of [iii], so that it would be ungram­
matical to replace the preterite fonns by present tense can/willfA'shall/may.6 
(b) Differences from other preterites 
With other verbs the modal remoteness use of the preterite is restricted to a few sub­
ordinate constructions, but with the modals it occurs freely in main clauses, in 
examples like these: 
[60] 
I could/wouldfA'should/might do it if they offered to pay me. 
ii You could/might have been killed! 
III You should apologise. 
iv Could/Would you help me move these boxes? 
Example [i] is a remote conditional construction (the open counterpart being I 
can/willfA'shall/may do it if they offer to pay me). Both the modal auxiliary and 
offered are modal preterites, but while any modal preterite can occur in the sub­
ordinate clause, only a modal auxiliary can occur in the main clause. 
5 With some predictions there isn't much doubt - e.g., when I say She 'll be two tomorrow on the day 
before a child's birthday. But there's no grammatical distinction between cases like this and cases like 
the ones in [56]. In some varieties of English, especially BrE, shall is used with I st person subjects 
as an alternant of will for future time situations, so we get %1 shall be glad when it's all over. This use 
is epistemic. But the most common use of shall is in interrogative clauses like Shall 1 pick you up at 
six? This shall is deontic because I'm asking you to tell me what to do. 
6 Actually, some speakers do allow may here, which shows that for them the two forms have become 
separated - might is no longer the preterite form of lTUly for these speakers, so it isn't substituted for 
may in backshifting. 

58 
Chapter 3 Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
The salient interpretation of [ii] is that you have done something reckless, putting 
you at risk of being killed - but in fact you weren't killed. 
In [iii] you owe someone an apology: the right thing for you to do is to apologise. 
In Present-day English, this use of preterite should is not perceived as semanti­
cally related to present tense shall: neither BrE nor AmE speakers normally say 
%You shall apologise. 
In [iv], interrogative clauses are used as directives: I'm asking for your help (cf. 
Ch. 9, §4.4). The preterites here sound more polite and diffident than present 
tense can and will. 
8.4 
Irrealis were 
English once had an inflectional mood system applying, like tense, to all 
verbs. Over the centuries this has been almost entirely lost. The meaning distinc­
tions are now conveyed by tense. We noted earlier the difference in meaning con­
trasts between preterite and present in [61i] and [61 ii]: 
[6 1 ]  
PRETERITE TENSE 
a. He loved her. 
ii a. If he loved her he 'd change his job. 
PRESENT TENSE 
b. He loves her. 
b. Ifhe loves her he 'll change hisjob. 
In [i] the contrast is straightforwardly one of time: [ia] refers to past time, [ib] to 
present time. In [ii], however, the contrast is one of modality: [iia] presents his lov­
ing her as a somewhat more remote possibility than [iib]. It is for this reason that we 
refer to loved in [iia] as a modal preterite - a use of the preterite where the mean­
ing has to do with modality, not time. 
Now consider what happens when the verb concerned is be, and the subject is 1st 
or 3rd person singular. One possibility is that we have a set of relationships just like 
those in [61]: 
[62] 
PRETERITE TENSE 
a. He was in love with her. 
ii a. If he was in love with her he 'd go. 
PRESENT TENSE 
b. He is in love with her. 
b. If he is in love with her he 'Il go. 
Was in [ia] has the central preterite meaning of past time; was in [iia] is a modal 
preterite. 
It is also possible, however, to have the form were in place of was in [iia] but not 
[ia]. In this case the temporal and modal meanings are not different meanings of a 
single form: they are meanings of different forms. Was is a tense form, but this were 
is a mood form. We call it irrealis, indicating that it conveys varying degrees of 
remoteness from factuality: 
[63] 
IRREALIS MOOD 
a. If he were in love with her he 'd 
change his job. 
PRESENT TENSE 
b. If he is in love with her he 'Il 
change his job. 

§8.4 Irrealis were 
59 
The difference between [63a] and [62iia] is one of style level: were is here somewhat 
more formal than was. 
This use of were is highly exceptional: there is no other verb in the language 
where the modal remoteness meaning is expressed by a different inflectional form 
from the past time meaning. The irrealis mood form is unique to be, and limited to 
the 1 st and 3rd person singular. It is an untidy relic of an earlier system, and some 
speakers usually, if not always, use preterite was instead. 
Be is also unique in having three different present tense forms (instead of the 
usual two) and two different preterite forms (instead of one). This is by far the most 
irregular verb in the entire English vocabulary. Here is its full paradigm: 
[64] 
PRIMARY FORMS 
NEUTRAL 
NEGATIVE 
1 st sg 
3rd sg 
Other 
1 st sg 
3rd sg 
Present 
am 
is 
are 
aren 'P 
isn 't 
Other 
aren 't 
Preterite 
was 
were 
wasn 't 
weren 't 
Irrealis 
were 
-
weren 't 
SECONDARY FORMS 
PLAIN FORM 
PAST PARTICIPLE 
GERUND-PARTICIPLE 
be 
been 
being 
We include the irrealis forms among the primary forms, because there is a negative 
irrealis form, and also because of the close relation with preterite was and wasn 't. 
This is why we distinguish the two major subsets of inflectional forms as 'primary' 
vs 'secondary' rather than by the more transparent (and more usual) terms 'tensed' 
and 'non-tensed' .8 
7 Aren 't appears with I st person singular subjects only in clauses where it precedes the subject: we get 
Aren 't I? but not 'I aren 't. The form %amn 't is restricted to certain regional British dialects, and 'ain 't 
is definitely (notoriously) non-standard, so there isn't a standard 'n 't form of be for the I st person sin­
gular present when the subject precedes. However, I'm not is available, using the reduced 'm form of 
am with the separate word not instead of a negative form of be. 
g The non-negative forms in [64] are labelled 'neutral' rather than 'positive' because they occur in both 
positive and negative clauses (e.g. That iJ. true and That iJ. not true). Traditional grammar calls our 
irrealis a 'past subjunctive', contrasting with 'present subjunctive' be. But there are no grounds for 
analysing this were as a past tense counterpart of the be that we find in constructions like It's vital that 
he be kind to her. We don't use 'subjunctive' as a term for an inflectional category, but for a syntactic 
construction employing the plain form of the verb (cf. § I . I ). 
-

60 
Chapter 3 Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
Exercises 
1 .  For some but not all of the following verb lex-
ernes, the preterite and past participle fonns 
have distinct shapes. Say for each whether the 
shapes are the same or different, and make up 
examples to show that you are right. 
burn 
vi forget 
ii buy 
vii hold 
iii draw 
viii ride 
iv drink 
ix run 
v fall 
x sing 
2. The underlined verbs below are fonns of 
lexemes whose preterite and past partici-
pie have the same shape. Use the substitu-
tion test to detennine which fonn occurs in 
these instances, citing the evidence you use. 
I don 't think they found anything 
suspicious. 
5. 
ii That's not the edition I recommended. 
iii She wasn 't one of those arrested. 
iv Do you think we 'll get charged? 
v Haven 't you seen the mess they made? 
vi Get it repaired without delay. 
vii Who said it was mine? 
viii I don 't want anyone hurt. 
ix I met him on a Monday. 
x I don 't believe we 've met. 
3. Detennine whether the underlined verbs 
below are plain forms or plain present 
6. 
tense fonns. Again, present the evidence 
on which you base your decision. 
i The twins, he says, seem quite 
distraught. 
ii It would be best not to my. anything 
about it. 
iii He thinks they didn 't like him. 
iv They wouldn 't help me change the tyre. 
v Let's gQ to the movies. 
VI We have written to the editor. 
vii They apreciate what you 're doing 
for them. 
viii Tell me what you want. 
ix I doubt whether you really know her. 
7. 
x Do you know what time it is? 
4. The verb beware (as in Beware of the dog) 
is highly exceptional in its inflection. 
Construct example sentences containing 
the following kinds of clause with a fonn 
of beware as verb, marking the ones that 
turn out to be ungrammatical with *. 
a clause with 3rd person singular 
subject and present tense verb; 
ii a clause with plural subject and 
present tense verb; 
iii an imperative clause; 
iv a subjunctive clause; 
v an infinitival clause; 
vi a gerund-participial clause; 
vii a past-participial clause. 
On the basis of your data give a paradigm 
for beware, leaving blank any position where 
the inflectional fonn is missing for this verb. 
Classify the underlined clauses below as 
finite or non-finite. 
Everyone arrested at the demonstration 
has now been released. 
ii It is essential that he cOll1/l.lete the course. 
iii I think thO'. ma)! not have read the 
instructions. 
iv Having been through a similar 
experience m)!selt I sympathise. 
v I'd advise you not to take it too seriousl)!. 
vi Hurry up. or we 'll be late. 
Change the following declarative clauses 
into interrogatives, write out the result, 
and say on this basis whether the under-
lined verbs are auxiliaries or lexical verbs. 
They were informed of the change. 
ii She would rather we met later. 
iii They ought to accept the offer. 
iv They used to live together. 
v We have to keep them informed. 
vi They need to replace the cartridge. 
vii I should inform the police. 
viii They had it repaired. 
ix You usually help clear up. 
x They keep telling her that. 
Use the two negation tests to determine 
the status of the underlined verbs as auxil-
iaries or lexical verbs. Cite the evidence 
on which you base your answer. 

You must get involved. 
ii It iJ. going to rain. 
iii They tend to disagree. 
iv She would like to see them. 
v I saw them leave. 
vi He wants to tell her. 
vii He might have told her. 
viii I'm going to solve it. 
IX They can sardines to preserve them. 
X They can preserve sardines. 
8. In the uses illustrated in the following 
examples, the three underlined verbs bear 
some semantic and/or syntactic similarity 
to the modal auxiliaries, though syntacti­
cally they're not similar enough to modals 
to be included in the class. 
i You are to report for duty at 8 a.m. 
ii We have to ask what's best for the child. 
iii They don 't like it. 
Take the three verbs in turn and deter­
mine which, if any, of the thre modal aux­
iliary properties described in this chapter 
apply to them. Construct examples where 
necessary, and explain your reasoning. 
9. Determine whether the underlined verb­
forms in the following examples are 
instances of the auxiliary lexemes have, 
need and dare or instances of the corre­
sponding lexical verbs. 
They had better hurry or they'll miss it. 
ii They had their house burgled. 
iii They had to call the police. 
iv I had the staff do a thorough search. 
v I have an idea about that. 
vi I doubt whether we needed to see it. 
vii We need more time to finish the work. 
viii I don 't think you need have any worries. 
IX Did anyone dare remind him of his 
promise? 
x Not one of them dare voice any criticism. 
10. During a 1 954 Senate committee hearing, 
US Army attorney Joseph Welch 
addressed to US Senator Joseph McCarthy 
a famous pair of rhetorical questions: 
Have you no shame? and Have you no 
shred of decency? What does the syntax of 
these interrogative clauses tell you about 
American English of that period? 
Exercises 
6 1  
1 1 . Which of the following allow a perfective 
interpretation? Consider just the main 
clauses, ignoring any subordinate ones 
embedded within them. 
I think it's a disgrace. 
ii I suggest you give up the idea. 
iii I now add a sprinkling of pepper. 
iv I want to get out of here. 
v I do my own shopping. 
12. We have seen in this chapter that subordi­
nate clauses functioning as complement of 
before, ifand hope can have a future time 
interpretation. For example, if it rains in 
We 'll postpone the match ifit rains doesn't 
mean "if it is raining now", it means "if 
rain falls at some future time". For each of 
the following five prepositions and five 
verbs, construct an example to show 
whether or not it permits a future time 
interpretation of a present tense in its 
complement. 
PREPOSITIONS 
VERBS 
after 
vi bet 
II although 
vii expect 
III because 
viii realise 
iv unless 
ix regret 
v until 
x wish 
(You should avoid examples with a futu­
rate interpretation like I know that we leave 
for Berlin next Tuesday. For these, subordi­
nation is irrelevant: the interpretation is the 
same as for the main clause We leave for 
Berlin next Tuesday. Thus futurate examples 
don't provide relevant evidence.) 
1 3. Classify the following conditional con­
structions as open or remote. For the open 
ones, give their remote counterparts, and 
conversely for the remote ones give their 
open counterparts. 
It won 't matter if I'm a little late. 
ii He could easily get a job if he wanted one. 
iii It would be disastrous if they saw the files. 
iv lfyou don 't pay up they 'll call the 
police. 
v You can stay here if you 're stuck. 
(Note that some open conditionals lack 
remote counterparts, and some remote 
conditionals lack open counterparts. Here 

62 
Chapter 3 Verbs, tense, aspect, and mood 
we are considering only cases where the 
two constructions are in contrast.) 
14. For each of the following statements, 
imagine that someone called Jill made that 
statement yesterday. Write reports of the 
speech events in question, in the form Jill 
said that . . .  For each one give a back­
shifted report, and in those cases where 
backshift is optional give a non-back­
shifted report too. (For example, given It's 
too late you would supply Jill said it was 
too late and Jill said it's too late.) 
i My father has a weak heart. 
ii Ed is arriving this evening. 
iii I have a terrible headache 
iv I'm moving to Florida this month. 
v Everyone thinks I'm overreacting. 
15. For the following examples, give counter­
parts in which the clause with the under­
lined verb has ben put in the perfect tense. 
i I hope to finish soon. 
ii You should 1dJ. her the truth. 
iii They mislaid the file. 
iv He admined being an alcoholic. 
v She i! very helpful. 
16. Describe, as carefully as you can, the dif­
ference in meaning or use between the [a] 
and [b] members of the following pairs. 
a. I've been in the army for two years. 
b. I was in the army for two years. 
ii a. Have you seen Jill? 
b. Did you see Jill? 
iii a. It was the best meal I've had all week. 
b. It was the best meal I had al that week. 
iv a. She has gone to Moscow. 
b. She went to Moscow. 
v a. I've got the milk. 
b. I got the milk. 
17. As in Exercise 13, classify the following 
conditionals as open or remote, and give 
the counterpart of the opposite category. 
These examples differ from the earlier 
ones in that they all involve the perfect 
construction. 
i If she hadn 't sold her shares she would 
be very rich. 
ii If the secretary hadn 't called the police 
someone else would have. 
iii If Ed has gone on holiday you can stay 
in his room. 
iv If Jill didn 't report the fault, Max may 
have. 
v If you hadfinished your work yesterclay, 
you could come with us tomorrow. 
18. Give progressive aspect counterparts to 
the following examples. 
She lived in Berlin. 
ii He may regret his impulsiveness. 
iii They neglect their children. 
iv I have read the newspaper. 
v He didn 't pay any attention. 
19. Discuss the difference in meaning or use 
between the [a] and [b] members of the 
following pairs. 
a. I cycle to work. 
b. I'm cycling to work. 
ii a. When Tom called she phoned me. 
b. When Tom called she was phoning 
me. 
iii a. The train arrived. 
b. The train was arriving. 
iv a. You annoy me. 
b. You 're annoying me. 
v a. He wrote an editorial. 
b. He was writing an editorial. 
20. Discuss the interpretation of the following 
examples with respect to the distinction 
between epistemic, deontic, and dynamic 
modality, bearing in mind that some of 
them are ambiguous. 
i You needn 't bother to answer. 
ii It must surely rain soon. 
iii They should be in Paris by now. 
iv She can 't live with her parents. 
v It may easily be shown that this is false. 
vi These animals can be dangerous. 
vii It needn 't have been Jill that wrote the 
note. 
viii Bill is one of those people who must 
always have the last word. 
ix There could be some other reason. 
x Could I have another beer, please? 

Clause structure, complements 
and adjuncts 
I Introduction 
63 
2 The subject 
67 
3 The object 
70 
4 Predicative complements 
73 
5 Five canonical clause structures 
77 
6 Adjuncts 
78 
In this chapter we investigate the structure of canonical clauses, the syntactically 
most elementary type of clause. Various kinds of non-canonical clause will be intro­
duced from time to time, but solely for the purpose of illuminating the structure of 
canonical clauses. Very often the best evidence for analysing one construction is 
provided by a comparison between it and a different but related construction. 
Canonical clauses have the potential to stand alone as sentences, and we therefore 
follow the standard convention of citing examples with the punctuation of sen­
tences, i.e. with an initial capital letter and final full stop. 
1 
Introduction 
Every canonical clause has a head element with the form of a verb 
phrase (VP). Every VP in turn has as its head a verb (V). Thus a canonical clause 
always contains a V which is the head of a VP which is the head of the clause. The 
verb is the most important element in determining what the rest of the clause is like. 
From now on we'll refer to the verb as the head word of the clause. 
Predicates and predicators 
The term 'head' was not introduced into grammatical theory until the latter half of 
the twentieth century, and in talking about clause structure we will generally use the 
traditional, long-established terminology where the two major elements in the 
clause are called subject and predicate. In Cats like water, the NP cats is subject 
and the VP like water is predicate. The idea is that in elementary examples like this 
the predicate represents what is 'predicated of' - i.e. said about - the referent of the 
subject. 'Predicate' ,  therefore, is a more specific term than 'head' when the con­
struction concerned is a clause. Similarly, predicator is used for the head of the VP, 
i.e. for the verb like in this example. 
63 

64 
Chapter 4 Clause structure, complements and adjuncts 
Diagramming clause structure 
The structure of a clause like Cats like water can be represented in diagram form as 
shown in [1]. 
[1] 
Clause 
 
Subject: 
Predicate: 
NP 
VP 
 
Predicator: 
Object: 
V 
NP 
I 
D 
cats 
like 
water 
This diagram expresses in graphic form information about the function and cate­
gory of the various units or constituents (i.e. words, phrases, clauses, etc.): 
cats like water belongs to the category 'clause' ; 
the clause is divided into two constituents functioning as subject and predicate; 
the subject precedes the predicate; 
the subject takes the form of a noun phrase (NP), and the predicate is a VP; 
the VP contains a predicator and an object; 
the predicator precedes the object; 
the predicator is a v and the object is an NP. 
No function is assigned to the clause itself because it is not part of any larger con­
struction; the other units, however, are given two labels: the first indicates their 
function in the construction containing them, the second gives their category. 
The diagram omits, deliberately, some information that is irrelevant here: it does 
not show anything about the internal structure of the two NPs. The parts of the dia­
gram under the NP labels are just shown as triangles, which indicates that the details 
of the internal structure (like what is the head of the NP) have been left out to sim­
plify things since it is not the focus of interest and we have not yet covered the struc­
ture of NPs (that is done in Ch. 5). In this chapter we are interested merely in how 
phrases combine to make clauses. 
Predicators select key content of clauses 
What can occur in a clause is very largely determined by the predicator. For exam­
ple, it is a crucial property of the verb like that it permits occurrence of an object 
(indeed, it normally requires one in canonical clauses). 
A large percentage of the verbs in English allow or require an object. Some do 
not: examples include elapse,Jall, lie, mew, vanish, etc. Thus *Cats mew water is 
not a grammatical clause, though Cats mew is. 

§ 1 Introduction 
65 
Some verbs allow or require not only an object but also some other phrase. For 
example, give allows an object and a preposition phrase (PP) with the preposition to 
as head, so we have clauses like Lucy gave the key to the landlord, where the NP the 
key is an object and the PP to the landlord is also included in the VP. We show the 
structure of that clause in [2], again without bothering to show details of the inter­
nal structure of the NPs or the PP. 
[2] 
Clause 
Subject: 
Predicate: 
NP 
VP 
Predicator: 
Object: 
Complement: 
V 
NP 
PP 
I 
D 
G 
Lucy 
gave 
the key 
to the landlord 
The important point to note is that in order to tell whether some object or comple­
ment is allowed in a clause, you have to know what specific verb is serving as the 
predicator of the clause. 
Complements and adjuncts 
The dependents of the predicator in the VP are of two main kinds: complements 
and adjuncts. The admissibility of a complement depends on the predicator belong­
ing to a particular subclass of verbs. The term we use for this is licensing: comple­
ments have to be licensed by their head. 
The object is one kind of complement, and we can illustrate the concept of licens­
ing by considering the occurrence of an object with the three verbs shown in [3]: 
[3] 
a. Sue used the cheese. 
ii a. Sue ate the cheese. 
111 a. * Sue disapeared the cheese. 
b. * Sue used. 
b. Sue ate. 
b. Sue disapeared. 
[object obligatory] 
[object optional] 
[object excluded] 
An object such as the cheese is admissible with, hence licensed by, the verbs use 
and eat, but not disappear: [iiia] is ungrammatical, as is any other clause with dis­
appear as head and an object as dependent. There is a further difference between 
use and eat. With eat the object is optional whereas with use it is obligatory: [iib] is 
grammatical, but rib] is not. The status of a dependent as a complement is most 
obvious when it is obligatory for at least some heads. But this is not essential: the 
crucial feature of licensing is that the admissibility of the element depends on the 
presence of an appropriate head. 
The occurrence of adjuncts is not restricted in this way. They occur more freely, 
essentially without regard to what the predicator is. 

66 
Chapter 4 Clause structure, complements and adjuncts 
The examples in [4] illustrate the difference between complements (marked by 
double underlining) and adjuncts (single underlining). 
[4] 
i The box was useless because it had a hole in it. 
ii I saw your father this morning. 
iii They still think they were right. 
In [i], useless (an adjective phrase, or AdjP) is a complement, since it has to be 
licensed by the predicator. Again this can be shown by replacing be with a verb 
such as leak, which gives us the ungrammatical *The box leaked useless because 
it had a hole in it. 
On the other hand, because it had a hole in it is an adjunct in [i]. We cannot find 
two different subclasses of verb that differ in whether they accept a because 
phrase as dependent. The box leaked because it had a hole in it, for example, is 
just as grammatical as [4i]. It doesn't make sense, of course, to say #She spoke 
excellent French because it had a hole in it, but that is due to the semantic con­
tent of this particular because phrase. She spoke excellent French because she 
had spent a year in Paris as a student is clearly impeccable. Licensing is a matter 
of grammar, and when we test by making replacements we have to be prepared 
to make adjustments of this kind to the semantic content. There are no verbs that 
exclude because phrases in general. 
In [ii], your father is a complement licensed by see. If see were replaced by fall, 
say, we would have an ungrammatical sentence. This morning in [ii], by contrast, 
is an adjunct; a temporal NP of this kind is compatible with any verb. 
In [iii], still is an adjunct, again because it is compatible with any verb. But the 
subordinate clause they were right is a complement, licensed by think. Again it 
is easy to find verbs like alter or lose or work that are incompatible with a sub­
ordinate clause of this kind, whatever its particular semantic content. 
The subject as a kind of complement 
We have shown that the object is a kind of complement since it satisfies the licens­
ing requirement. The subject is rather different: all canonical clauses contain a sub­
ject, so in a sense subjects are compatible with any verb. However, certain syntactic 
kinds of subject are restricted to occurrence with particular kinds of verb, so the 
concept of licensing applies here too. Take, for example, the subject of [Si]: 
[5] 
i 
Whether we will finish on time depends primarily on the weather. 
ii *Whether we will finish on time ruined the afternoon. 
The underlined expression in [Si] is a subordinate clause functioning as subject of 
the larger clause that forms the whole sentence. It is, more specifically, a subordi­
nate interrogative clause: the main clause counterpart is Will we finish on time? 
A subject of this syntactic form has to be licensed by the verb (or VP). It is admissi­
ble with depend, but there are innumerable other verbs such as ruin, see, 
think, yearn, etc., that do not accept subjects of this form; so [Sii], for example, is 
ungrammatical. 

§2. 1 Distinctive syntactic properties of the subject in English 
67 
Subjects do satisfy the condition for being complements, therefore. But they are 
different from other types of complement in an obvious way: they are positioned out­
side the VP. We will refer to the subject as an external complement. The other com­
plements that are internal to the VP will be referred to as internal complements. 
2 
The subject 
2. 1 
Distinctive syntactic properties of the subject in English 
It is typical for the subject of a clause to be an NP. The only other form 
of subject common enough to merit mention here is a subordinate clause, as illus­
trated in [Si]. 
The subject is sharply distinguished from other elements in clause structure by 
the combination of a number of syntactic properties. The following survey covers 
four particularly important ones. 
(a) Basic position before the verb 
The basic position of the subject - the position it occupies in canonical clauses - is 
before the V (and the whole VP). This is the most obvious feature that distinguishes 
the subject from the object in English: 
[6] 
a. Sue loved Max. 
b. Max loved Sue. 
Only the conventional English order of elements tells us that Sue is subject in [a], 
while Max is subject in [b] - and thus that in [a] we are talking about Sue's feelings, 
and in [b] we are talking about Max's. There are non-canonical constructions where 
the subject does not occur in this position but, overall, location before the verb is the 
major overt property that picks out the subject. 
(b) Case 
For just a handful of NPs, there is an inflectional distinction of case that separates 
subjects from most non-subjects. The NPs concerned are mainly those consisting of 
the pronouns listed in [7]. 
[7] 
NOMINATIVE 
11 ACCUSATIVE 
I 
me 
he 
him 
she 
her 
we 
us 
they 
them 
As subjects of finite clauses, these pronouns have to appear in the nominative case­
form, while in object function they appear in the accusative case-form: 
[8] 
a. She loved him. 
b. He loved her. 
She and he are marked as subjects by having nominative form, while accusative him 
and her are objects. 
With NPs that don't themselves have a contrast between nominative and accusa­
tive forms, we can generally use the case property indirectly by asking which form 

68 
Chapter 4 Clause structure, complements and adjuncts 
is required when we substitute one of the pronouns in [7]. In The dogs barked at the 
visitors, for example, the dogs could be replaced by nominative they and the visitors 
by accusative them. This shows that the subject is the dogs, not the visitors. 
(c) Verb agreement 
As explained in Ch. 3, § 1 . 1 ,  all verbs other than the modal auxiliaries agree with the 
subject in the present tense, while be also shows agreement in the preterite: 
[9] 
i a. Sue loves the children. 
ii a. Sue was fond of the children. 
b. The children love Sue. 
b. The children were fond of Sue. 
This property of determining the form of the verb is another key property of the sub­
ject. The inflectional form of the doubly underlined verbs shows that Sue (3rd per­
son singular) is subject of the [a] examples, while the children (3rd person plural) is 
subject of the [b] ones. 
In clauses where the verb does not show agreement, we can again use the test 
indirectly by changing to a construction where the verb does agree. Kim must sign 
both forms, for example, where the modal auxiliary must is invariable, can be 
changed to Kim has signed both forms, where has agrees with the subject Kim. 
(d) Subject-auxiliary inversion 
In a number of constructions, including most kinds of interrogatives, the subject 
appears after rather than before the verb, which has to be an auxiliary. This enables 
us to confirm that Sue is subject of the [a] examples in [9], and the children is 
subject of the [b] ones. We just compare these clauses with their interrogative 
counterparts: 
[10] 
i a. Does Sue love the children? 
ii a. Was Sue fond of the children? 
b. Do the children love Sue? 
b. Were the children fond of Sue? 
In [ii] we have simply inverted the subject and the auxiliary verb be, whereas in [i], 
where the declarative contains no auxiliary verb, we have inserted do and this is 
inverted with the subject (see Ch. 3, §3. 1 ). In either case, the subject ends up in the 
distinctive post-auxiliary position. 
2.2 
Traditional errors in defining the subject 
There are two semantic observations that can be made about subjects. 
They are sound enough in themselves, but they have been used as the basis for def­
initions of the subject that suffer from the shortcomings we discussed in Ch. 1 ,  §3. 
The two observations are these: 
In canonical clauses that describe an action, the subject of the clause normally 
corresponds semantically to the performer of the action. For example, when we 
say Oswald assassinated Kennedy, the subject is Oswald, and the person it refers 
to (Lee Harvey Oswald) is the actor, the alleged performer of the assassination. 

§2.2 Traditional errors in defining the subject 
69 
The subject NP commonly (but by no means invariably) identifies a topic for the 
clause, i.e. what the clause is primarily about, and the predicate makes some sort 
of comment about that topic. For example, Paris is lovely in the spring has Paris 
as the subject, and it is likely to be interpreted as saying something about Paris; 
Spring is a great time to visit Paris has spring as the subject, and it is likely to be 
interpreted as saying something about spring. 
Many definitions of the subject given in grammars and dictionaries represent a mas­
sive overgeneralisation of the first point: the subject is simply defined as the performer 
of the action expressed in the verb. Less commonly, it is defined as the topic of the 
sentence, the part that identifies what the sentence is about - a similarly massive over­
generalisation of the second point. There is something in both of these that is relevant 
to a definition of the subject at the general level: many languages have a function in 
the clause that is often associated with the semantic role of actor or with the topic and 
that shows other signs of primary syntactic importance in the clause (though some 
languages seem to be organised rather differently). But the correlation in English 
between subject and actor or topic is far too complex for the above definitions to work 
at the language-particular level. Let us examine the two definitions in turn. 
(a) Subject and actor 
The old-fashioned definition of the subject as the performer of the action expressed 
in the verb works well enough with a sentence like We wandered down the street; 
but it fails completely with examples like those in [ 1 1]: 
[ 1 1 ] 
i She knows him well. 
ii Ernie suffered a heart attack. 
iii My mother was attacked by the neighbour's dog. 
She is the subject of [i], but knowing isn't an action. Notice that [i] can't be used 
in answer to a do question (such as What does she do?), so nothing in [i] talks 
about anyone performing an action. If we took the old-fashioned definition seri­
ously we would have to say that there is no subject here. But she has all four of 
the syntactic properties that are the relevant ones for English: it's before the verb, 
it's in nominative case, the verb agrees with it, and it follows the auxiliary in the 
corresponding interrogative (Does she know him well?). 
In [ii] we do have a description of an event (rather than a state, as in [iD, but that 
still doesn't mean there is a performer of an action. Suffering isn't an action that 
Ernie performed on the heart attack. Again, then, the referent of the syntactic 
subject doesn't have the semantic role of actor. 
Example [iii] does describe an action, but it's a passive clause (the corresponding 
active clause would be The neighbour's dog attacked my mother), and the actor 
role is associated not with the subject, my mother, but with the complement of the 
preposition by, namely the NP the neighbour's dog. 
So the subject of an English clause certainly cannot be identified on the basis of 
semantic role: it can be associated with a range of roles, depending on the kind of 
situation described and whether the clause is active or passive. 

70 
Chapter 4 Clause structure, complements and adjuncts 
(b) Subject and topic 
In Paris is lovely in the spring it is natural to take the subject as expressing the topic, 
and in Spring is a great time to visit Paris we would be inclined to say that spring is 
the topic; but it is easy to find examples where it would be completely implausible 
to take the subject to be a topic: 
[ 1 2] 
i Something is wrong with this disk drive. 
ii In space, nobody can hear you scream. I 
iii Il s time these kids were in bed. 
In [i], the subject NP is something, but it would be nonsensical to suggest that 
something tells us what the topic is. The topic is obviously the disk drive, and the 
comment is that it has a fault. 
In [ii], the topic is obviously not expressed by the subject nobody. The clause is 
about what it's like in the airless void of space, and if any phrase identifies that 
topic it's the preposed adjunct in space. 
And in [iii], the subject it is a dummy pronoun with no identifiable meaning. It 
can't possibly pick out a topic. In fact this kind of main clause isn't properly 
described in terms of a distinction between a topic and a comment at all. Not all 
clauses have topic phrases. 
English does not indicate the topic of a clause by any grammatical marker (though 
some languages do), and it certainly does not always make topics subjects. There is 
very often no clear-cut single answer to the question of what the topic of a clause is: 
it will depend very much on the context. 
In English, then, there is nothing like a one-to-one relation either between subject 
and actor or between subject and topic. The lesson is that, at the language-particu­
lar level, we cannot define the syntactic term 'subject' in terms of the partially cor­
related semantic concepts 'performer of the action' or 'topic of the clause' . 
3 
The object 
3. 1 
Distinctive syntactic properties of the object in English 
The object in a clause almost always has the form of an NP. Unlike the 
subject, it is normally located within the VP, and is not so sharply distinguished 
from other dependents as is the subject. Nevertheless, there are a number of syntac­
tic properties that make it fairly easy to identify in all but a small minority of cases. 
We summarise them in [ 1 3]: 
[ 1 3] 
An object is a special case of a complement, so it must be licensed by the 
verb. 
11 With some verbs, the object is obligatory. 
I This may look familiar: it's a famous film slogan, from the posters for Alien ( 1979). 

§3.2 Direct and indirect objects 
7 1  
1Il The object typically corresponds to the subject of an associated PASSIVE 
clause. 
IV The object can nonnally take the fonn of a PRONOUN (which must be in 
accusative if it is one of those listed in [7]). 
v The basic object position is IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE VERB. 
Consider how these properties distinguish the object NP in [ 1 4a] from the adjunct 
NP in [b]: 
[ 14] 
OBJECT 
ADJUNCT 
a. I Ed I told I the manager. I 
b. 
Ed I arrived I last week. I 
The object the manager is licensed by the verb tell: it could not occur with a verb 
like arrive (*Ed arrived the manager is ungrammatical). But every verb is com­
patible with the adjunct last week. 
With tell it is possible to omit the object (Ed won 't tell is grammatical), but some 
verbs have to have an object when they occur in a canonical clause: attempting to 
use verbs like accost, delineate, entail or force without an object always yields 
ungrammatical results. But no verb requires that an adjunct like last week be 
present in the clause. 
Example [ 14a] has an associated passive clause with the manager as subject: The 
manager was told (by Ed). This is not possible for [b]: *Last week was arrived 
(by Ed). 
The manager in [a] can be replaced by an appropriate pronoun: e.g. Ed told her. No 
such replacement is possible for last week in [b]: * Ed arrived i1 is quite impossible. 
In [a] we cannot in general insert elements between the verb and its object: com­
pare *Ed told unexpectedly the manager. (Instead we have Ed unexpectedly told 
the manager or Ed told the manager unexpectedly.) There is no such restriction 
in [b]: Ed arrived unexpectedly last week. 
3.2 
Direct and indirect objects 
There are two subtypes of object: direct and indirect objects. We represent 
them as Od and 0; when labelling examples. The two kinds may occur together, and 
when they co-occur in canonical clauses, the indirect object precedes the direct object: 
[ 1 5] 
s 
P 
a. 
Sue I gave I Max I the photo. 
s P 
b. 
I I bought I them I some shoes. 
The traditional labels 'direct' and 'indirect' are based on the idea that in clauses 
describing an action the referent of the direct object is apparently more directly 
involved in being acted on in the situation than the referent of the indirect object. 
In [a], for example, it is the photo that actually changes hands and becomes one of 

72 
Chapter 4 Clause structure, complements and adjuncts 
Max's possessions. And in [b] it is the shoes that are directly acted on by being pur­
chased and taken away. 
The indirect object is characteristically associated with the semantic role of recip­
ient, as in these examples. But it may have the role of beneficiary (the one for whom 
something is done), as in Do me a favour or Call me a taxi, and it may be interpreted 
in other ways, as seen from examples like This blunder cost us the match, or 1 envy 
you your goodfortune. 
Alternation with prepositional construction 
Most (but not all) verbs that license two objects also admit a different construction 
where there is a direct object and a pp complement (C) headed by to or for. 
Compare [ 1 5] with [ 1 6]: 
[16] 
s 
p 
C 
a. I Sue I gave I the photo I to Max. 
s 
p 
c 
b. 
We I bought I shoes I for them. 
Although the meanings are the same as in [15], the syntactic structure is different. 
The PPs to Max andfor them are complements (they are licensed by give and buy, 
respectively), but they are not objects: they don't have properties [ 13iii-v]. And 
since they are not objects, they can't be indirect objects.2 
Syntactic distinction between direct and indirect object 
The main syntactic property distinguishing the two kinds of object is position: when 
both occur within the VP - as in canonical clauses - the indirect object precedes the 
direct object. Compare [ 15] above with the ungrammatical orders *Sue gave the 
photos Max and *1 bought some shoes them. 
In addition, the direct object readily undergoes fronting in various non-canonical 
constructions, whereas the indirect object is quite resistant to it. Judgements about 
the acceptability of clauses with fronted indirect objects vary considerably, depend­
ing in part on the construction, in part on the verb - and in part on the speaker mak­
ing the judgement. But there is no doubt that in general the acceptability of fronted 
indirect objects is significantly lower than that of direct objects. In [17] we illustrate 
with four non-canonical constructions: 
[ 1 7] 
FRONTED DIRECT OBJECT 
a. Everything else. she gave him. 
II a. What did she buy him? 
iii a. He kept the gifts [which she 
had given him]. 
IV a. What a lot of work he gave them! 
FRONTED INDIRECT OBJECT 
b. %Him. she gave everything else. 
b. * Who did she buy these shoes? 
b. %They interviewed everyone [whom 
she had given gifts]. 
b. * What a lot of them he gave work! 
2 Nevertheless, traditional grammars analyse to Max and for them (or just Max and them) in [ 1 6] as 
indirect objects. The similarity between between these elements and the corresponding ones in [ 15], 
however, is purely semantic: there is no justification for equating them in terms of syntactic function. 

§4 Predicative complements 
73 
In [i] we have preposing of a complement: the canonical version is She gave him 
everything else. The [a] version is completely acceptable, the [b] version rare and 
marginal, at least for many speakers. 
In [ii] we have a type of interrogative clause differing from those considered so 
far in that it begins with an interrogative word. In [a] what is direct object (cf. She 
bought him some shoes), and in [b] who is indirect object (cf. She bought Tom 
these shoes). The difference in acceptability in this pair is very sharp. 
The bracketed clauses in [iii] are relative clauses. Which is direct object (cf. 
She had given him the gifts), while whom is indirect object (cf. She had given 
everyone gifts). Construction [b] is not so bad here, but still considerably less 
common and natural than [ a]. 
In [iv] we have a type of construction not encountered so far. They are exclama­
tive clauses, with a fronted exclamative phrase. Again the fronted phrase in [a] is 
direct object (cf. He gave them a lot of work) and indirect object in [b] (cf. He 
gave a lot of them work). This construction is one where the fronted indirect 
object seems particularly bad. 
4 
Predicative complements 
The next kind of dependent of the verb we consider is the predicative 
complement (PC in labels of example displays). A predicative complement com­
monly has the form of an NP, and in that case it contrasts directly with an object (0). 
Look at these [a] and [b] pairs: 
[ 1 8] 
PC 
a. 
Stacy 
was 
a good s/l.eaker. 
ii a. 
Lee 
became a friend o[mine. 
b. 
b. 
Stacy 
Lee 
o 
found 
a good s/l.eaker. 
insulted a friend o[mine. 
There is a sharp semantic distinction in elementary examples of this kind. The 
object NPs refer to PARTICIPANTS in the situation: in each of [ib] and [iib] there are 
two people involved. The predicative NPs, however, do not refer to participants like 
this. There is only a single person involved in the [a] examples, the one referred to 
by the subject NP. The predicative complement NP denotes a PROPERTY that is 
ascribed to this person. 
PCs are most clearly illustrated by examples like [1 8ia]. The verb be here has 
basically no semantic content. It is quite common in other languages for the verb to 
be completely missing in this kind of construction. The most important thing that be 
does in this example is to carry the preterite tense inflection that indicates reference 
to past time. The meaning of the clause is really just that Stacy spoke in an enter­
taining manner. So although a good speaker is syntactically an NP complement, it 
is semantically comparable to a predicate like spoke well. This is the basis for the 

74 
Chapter 4 Clause structure, complements and adjuncts 
term 'predicative complement' :  the complement typically represents what is predi­
cated of the subject-referent in a way that is similar to that in which a whole 
predicate does. 
A few verbs can take either a PC or an 0, but with obvious differences in 
meaning: 
[ 1 9] 
PC 
o 
a. 
This 
proved 
a ĝreat asset. 
This 
proved 
my./loint. 
11 a. 
He 
sounded 
a decent ĝuy'. 
b. 
b. 
He 
sounded 
the ĝonĝ. 
Again, the objects denote participants but the predicative complements don't. This 
is perhaps made clearer by examples contrasting a reference to one person with a 
reference to two: 
[20] 
i Honestly, I felt a fool standing there alone on the platform. 
ii Suddenly, I felt a fool pushing in front of me on the platform. 
[afool = PC] 
[afool = Od] 
The obvious meaning of [i] involves just me, feeling foolish alone on the platform; 
but [ii] refers to two people: me, and the fool I could feel pushing in front of me on 
the platform. 
4. 1 
Syntactic differences between predicative complements 
and objects 
The two functions PC and 0 are distinguished syntactically in a number 
of ways. Our survey covers four of them. 
(a) PC can have the form of AdjP 
Both 0 and PC can have the form of an ordinary NP, but only PC can also have the 
form of an adjective phrase (AdjP): 
[21 ]  
PC 
a. 
He 
seemed 
a vea nice guy'. 
1 1  a. 
He 
seemed 
vea nice. 
b. 
b. 
He 
*He 
met 
met 
o 
a vea nice guy'. 
vea nice. 
With seem, a very nice guy is PC and hence can be replaced by the AdjP very 
nice. 
With meet, no such replacement is possible because a very nice guy is object. 
(b) PC can have the form of a bare role NP 
A bare role NP i s  a singular NP that i s  'bare' in the sense of lacking the determiner 
which would elsewhere be required, and that denotes some kind of role, office, or 

§4. 1 Syntactic differences between predicative complements and objects 
75 
position. A PC can have the form of a bare role NP, but an 0 can't: 
[22] 
PC 
a. 
She became 
the treasurer. 
II a. 
She became 
treasurer. 
b. 
b. 
She 
*She 
o 
knew 
the treasurer. 
knew 
treasurer. 
In [i] both the [a] and [b] examples are fine because an ordinary NP like the treas­
urer can be either a PC or an O. 
In [ii], treasurer is a bare role NP, so it is permitted with become, which takes a 
PC, but not with know, which takes an object. 
(c) PC does not correspond to the subject of a passive clause 
We noted earlier that a typical object in an active clause corresponds to the subject 
of the passive clause that has the same meaning. A PC shows no such relationship: 
[23] 
ACTIVE 
a. Ed insulted a friend of mine. 
ii a. Ed became a friend of mine. 
PASSIVE 
b. A friend of mine was insulted by Ed. 
b. *A friend of mine was become by Ed. 
• 
In [ia] afriend of mine is a direct object, and accordingly can be subject in a pas­
sive clause with the same meaning, [ib]. 
• 
But in [iia], a friend of mine is a PC, and so there is no corresponding passive, as 
evident from the ungrammaticality of [iib]. 
(d) PC can have the form of a nominative pronoun 
There is a rather formal style of English in which the pronouns listed in [7] can 
appear in the nominative case when functioning as PC, while objects allow only 
accusative case: 
[24] 
PC 
o 
a. 
It I was I he I who said it. 
b. 
They 
accused I llim.  I of lying. I 
The point here is not that nominative case is required on pronouns in PC function. 
Some older prescriptive gramars say that, but it is not true. A question like Who 's 
there? is normally answered It's me; it sounds very stiff and formal to say It is I. Many 
speakers of Standard English would say It was him who said it rather than [24a]. So 
NPs in PC function can be accusative pronouns. What separates PC from 0 , however, 
is that no matter whether you use nominative or accusative case on PC pronouns, 
nominative case is absolutely impossible for 0 pronouns. No native speaker, even in 
the most formal style, says *They accused I of saying it, or *Please let I in? 
3 We are concerned here with clauses where the pronoun constitutes the whole of the object: when there 
is coordination within the object some speakers do have nominatives, as in 'kThey invited Kim and I 
to lunch (see Ch. 5, §8.3). 

76 
Chapter 4 Clause structure, complements and adjuncts 
This provides further evidence that English gramar distinguishes the PC and 0 
functions - though it is not as generally applicable a test as the other three, because 
be is really the only verb that accepts these pronouns as predicative complement. 
4.2 
Subjective and objective predicative complements 
In the examples given so far the predicative complement relates to the 
subject. Most predicative complements are of this kind, but there is also a second 
kind in which they relate to the object: 
[25] 
SUBJECT + SUBJECTIVE PC 
OBJECT + OBJECTIVE PC 
a. Max seems highly untrustworthy. 
b. I consider lim highly untrustworthy. 
In [a] the PC relates to the subject, Max: the property of being highly untrustworthy 
is ascribed to Max. In [b] the same property is ascribed to Jim, but in this case lim 
is a direct object. 
The element to which a PC relates is called its predicand. Where the predicand 
is subject, the PC is said to be subjective, or to have subject orientation. Where the 
predicand is object, the PC is said to be objective, or to have object orientation. 
4.3 
Ascriptive and specifying uses of the verb be 
There is an important distinction to be made between two uses of the 
verb be, as illustrated in [26]: 
[26] 
ASCRIPTIVE 
i a. Mike was a loyal party member. 
ii a. What they gave me was useless. 
SPECIFYING 
b. The last person to leave was lane. 
b. What they gave me was a gold pen. 
In the ascriptive construction the predicative complement denotes a property 
that is ascribed to the referent of the predicand. In [ia] a loyal party member 
denotes a property that Mike is claimed to have had - it doesn't specify who 
Mike was, it only ascribes party membership and loyalty to him. And in [iia], 
useless denotes a property that I claim is possessed by their gift to me - but it 
doesn't specify what the gift was. 
In the specifying construction there is a relation of identity between the two ele­
ments. In [ib] lane specifies the identity of the last person to leave, and similarly 
in [iib] a gold pen implicitly answers the question What did they give you ? 
Ambiguities 
There may be ambiguity between ascriptive and specifying uses of be. Example [27] 
has this kind of ambiguity: 
[27] 
I thought he was afriend of mine. 
One salient context for this is where I am reporting a mistake I made. But it could 
be a mistake about either the PROPERTIES he has or his IDENTITY. 

§5 Five canonical clause structures 
77 
In the first case, a friend of mine is ascriptive. I might be talking about someone 
I had thought of as a friend but who let me down. The mistake was in believing 
he had the properties one expects of a friend. 
In the second case, a friend of mine is specifying. Here I might be talking about 
someone who looked like my oid friend Bob, so I gave him a big hug, and then 
realised that I was hugging a total stranger. The mistake in this case was believ­
ing him to be Bob. 
Predicative complements with verbs other than be are ascriptive 
With verbs other than be, predicative complements are almost always ascriptive. 
Notice, for example, that such verbs as seem and become could replace be in the 
[a] examples of [26], but not in the [b] ones (e.g., Mike seemed a loyal party mem­
ber is fine, but *The last person to leave seemed lane is not). And when we said in 
the discussion of [ 1 8] that predicative complements do not refer to people or other 
kinds of participant in a situation, we were considering only the ascriptive use: 
predicative complements of the specifying type can be referential, as lane in [26ib] 
clearly is. 
Syntactic differences 
The semantic difference illustrated in [26] is reflected in the syntax in various ways. 
The most important concerns the effect of reversing the order of the expressions in 
subject and predicative complement position. Compare: 
[28] 
ASCRIPTIVE 
i a. The next point is more serious. 
ii a. More serious is the next point. 
SPECIFYING 
b. The one they arrested was Max. 
b. Max was the one they arrested. 
When we reverse the order in the specifying construction we change the func­
tions. Thus while Max is predicative complement in [ib], that is not true in [iib]: 
there Max is subject. This can be demonstrated by applying the interrogative test 
for subjects: the interrogative of [iib] is Was Max the one they arrested?, with 
Max in the distinctive subject position following the auxiliary. 
With the ascriptive construction it is often not possible to reverse the two ele­
ments, but when reversal is acceptable the effect is merely to reorder them, not 
to change their functions. Thus more serious is predicative complement in non­
canonical [iia] just as it is in [ia]. Note, for example, that we cannot invert it 
with the auxiliary verb to form an interrogative (cf. *Is more serious the next 
point?). 
5 
Five canonical clause structures 
As we have seen, all canonical clauses contain a subject and a predica­
tor, but the presence of complements of different sorts (objects and predicative com­
plements, for example) depends on the choice of verb. We can now distinguish five 

78 
Chapter 4 Clause structure, complements and adjuncts 
major structures for canonical clauses on the basis of which internal complements 
are present: 
[29] 
NAME 
ORDINARY INTRANSITIVE 
ii COMPLEX-INTRANSITIVE 
iii ORDINARY MONOTRANSITIVE 
iv COMPLEX-TRANSITIVE 
V DITRANSITIVE 
STRUCTURE 
S-p 
S-P-PC 
S-p-Od 
S-p-Od_PC 
S_p_Oi_Od 
EXAMPLE 
We hesitated. 
We felt happy. 
We sold our house. 
We made them happy. 
We gave them some food. 
There are two partially independent dimensions of contrast involved here: whether 
there are objects (and, if so, how many), and whether there are predicative 
complements. 
The dimension that relates to the number of objects in the clause is called tran­
sitivity. An intransitive clause has no objects, a monotransitive clause has one 
object, and a ditransitive clause has two objects, indirect and direct. In canoni­
cal clauses an indirect object cannot occur without a following direct one, so the 
single object of a monotransitive is always a direct object. 
The other dimension concerns the presence or absence of a predicative comple­
ment. We give compound names to clauses containing a predicative complement: 
complex-intransitive for an intransitive one and complex-transitive for a tran­
sitive one. Those without predicative complements are ordinary intransitives 
and transitives, but since the compound names are used when the clause is not 
ordinary, we can nonnally omit the word 'ordinary' .  
The labels apply to clause, verb phrase, and verb alike: We hesitated i s  an intransi­
tive clause, hesitated is an intransitive VP, and hesitate is an intransitive verb. It 
should be borne in mind, however, that most verbs occur in more than one of the 
clause constructions. For example, make occurs in monotransitive clauses ( We 
made lunch) and ditransitive clauses ( We made them lunch) as well as complex­
transitive clauses, like [29iv]. When the tenns are used for verbs, therefore, they 
typically apply to particular USES of the verbs. 
This concludes our discussion of complements for this chapter. There are other 
kinds besides those we have examined - notably complements with the fonn of PPs 
or subordinate clauses - but these are best dealt with in the chapters dealing with 
those categories: see Ch. 7, §7, for complements with the fonn of PPs, Ch. 10 for 
finite subordinate clauses, and Ch. 1 3, §§3-4, for non-finite subordinate clauses. 
6 
Adjuncts 
The crucial distinction between complements and adjuncts is that the for­
mer have to be licensed by the particular head verb whereas adjuncts do not. 
Adjuncts are thus less closely dependent on the verb, and their occurrence is in gen­
eral less constrained by grammatical rules. There is a great range of different kinds 
of adjunct, and we have space here only to deal with them very summarily. 

§6.3 Modifiers and supplements 
79 
6. 1 
Semantic kinds of adjunct 
Grammars traditionally classify adjuncts on the basis of meaning - as 
adjuncts of place, time, reason, and so on. Because this classification is based on 
meaning rather than grammatical form, it is inevitably open-ended and the bound­
aries between the different kinds are often quite fuzzy. There isn't really an answer 
to questions about exactly how many kinds of adjunct there are. In [30] we illustrate 
a number of the most frequent and obvious categories: 
[30] 
MANNER 
U PLACE 
iii TIME 
iv DURATION 
V FREQUENCY 
VI DEGREE 
VU PURPOSE 
viii RESULT 
ix CONDITION 
X CONCESSION 
He drove quite recklessly. 
They have breakfast in bed. 
I saw her last week. 
We lived in London for five Years. 
She telephones her mother every Sunday. 
We very much enjoyed your last novel. 
I checked all the doors to make sure they were shut. 
It rained all day, with the result that they couldn 't work. 
/fit rains the match will be postponed. 
Although he 's rich. he lives very simply. 
6.2 
The fonn of adjuncts 
The adjunct function can be filled by expressions belonging to a range 
of different categories, as illustrated in [3 1 ] :  
[3 1 ]  
ADVERB (PHRASE) 
ii pp 
iii NP 
iv FINITE CLAUSE 
V NON-FINITE CLAUSE 
He thanked us profusely. We quite often have tea together. 
I cut it with a razor-blade. I'll help you after lunch. 
We saw her several times. They arrived this morning. 
I couldn 't do it, however hard I tried. 
I kept my mouth shut, to avoid giving any more o@nce. 
Adverbs, or AdvPs, and PPs are found in adjuncts belonging to more or less all 
of the semantic types of adjunct. 
NPs, by contrast, occur in a very limited range of adjunct types. The semantic 
type depends heavily on the head noun: several times, for example, indicates fre­
quency, this morning indicates time. NP adjuncts cannot have the form of pro­
nouns: we couldn't replace those in [iii], for example, by them and it - and we 
couldn't question them with what. 
For adjuncts with the form of subordinate clauses, see Ch. 10, §4.4, Ch. 1 3, §3. 
6.3 
Modifiers and supplements 
We use the term adjunct to cover both modifiers of the verb or VP and 
supplements. Modifiers are tightly integrated into the structure of the clause, 
whereas supplements are only loosely attached. In speech the distinction is marked 
by intonation. Supplements are set apart intonationally from the rest of the clause: 
they are spoken as separate units of intonation, typically marked off by what is 

80 
Chapter 4 Clause structure, complements and adjuncts 
perceived as a slight pause. Modifiers, by contrast, are intonationally unified with the 
verb or VP. In writing, supplements are typically set apart by punctuation - commas, 
or stronger marks such as dashes or parentheses. There is, however, a good deal of 
variation in the use of punctuation, so that the distinction between modifiers and 
adjuncts is not as clearly drawn in writing as in speech. 
The distinction is illustrated in the following examples: 
[32] 
MODIFIER 
a. They were playing f1gpjJy. outside. 
II a. I did it because they told me to. 
SUPPLEMENT 
b. Hapily. they were playing outside. 
b. I did it - because they told me to. 
In [ia] happily is understood as an adjunct of manner, indicating how they were 
playing. In [ib], however, where it is set apart at the beginning of the clause, it 
doesn't belong in any of the semantic types illustrated in [30], but gives the 
speaker's evaluation of the situation. The meaning in this case is much the same 
as that of fortunately - perhaps I was glad that they were playing outside as this 
enabled me to do something I didn't want them to know about. 
In [ii] there is no such difference in the semantic type: the because phrase indi­
cates reason in both. But in [i] it is presented as part of a larger item of informa­
tion, whereas in [ii] it is set apart as a piece of information on its own. In [iia] it 
could be that you already know I did it, and I'm here simply telling you why. But 
in [iib] I'm informing you that I did it, and then adding as supplementary infor­
mation what my reason was. 
We will not develop this distinction between modifiers and supplements further at 
this point, but there are other places where it is relevant. In particular, we will take 
it up again in our discussion of relative clauses in Ch. 1 1 . 
Exercises 
1 .  Use the licensing criterion to determine 
whether the ten underlined expressions in 
the examples below are complements or 
adjuncts. In the case of complements, cite 
three verbs that license such a comple­
ment, and three that do not. (There are ten 
expressions in all; for reference, they're 
labelled with small roman numeral 
subscripts. ) 
They suddenlY[ij ran to the gate[iij' 
I wonder ifhe' II be sate[iiij all the time. 
I'm keeping the dog[ivj, whatever you 
W[vj' 
You'd better put the cat[viJ m!(viiJ now. 
It's always been easy for you[viiiJ> hasn't it? 
They swam in the sea[ixj even though it was 
raining[xj' 
2. In the following examples, show how 
either case or agreement can be used to 
provide evidence that the underlined 
expression is subject. 
i This letter embarrassed the government. 
ii Sue will lend you her car. 
iii Everything will be OK. 
iv 11 must be the twins he 's referring to. 
v One of the twins took the car. 
3. Identify the subject in each of the exam­
ples below (ignoring the subordinate 
clause in [iv]). Present the reasoning that 
tells you it is the subject. Use the syntactic 

tests that are appropriate, and explain why 
the other tests are not appropriate. 
Tomorrow Pat will be backfrom skiing. 
ii Is today some kind of holiday? 
iii Down the road ran the crazy dog. 
iv It isn 't the program that's at fault. 
v Dan got bitten on the neck by a bat. 
4. For which of the following clauses would 
it be implausible to say that the subject 
identifies the performer of an action? Give 
reasons for your answer. 
She 's very like her mother. 
ii The decision was made by my aunt. 
iii My father closed the door. 
iv I've just received a letter from the mayor. 
v She underwent surgery. 
5. For which of the following is it implausi­
ble to say that the subject identifies the 
topic? Give reasons for your answer. 
i At this time of year you 're likely to get 
violent thunderstorms. 
ii Any fool could make a better job of it 
than that. 
iii My sister has just won the marathon. 
iv Close tabs were kept on all the directors. 
v Their house is worth a million and a half. 
6. In each of the following pairs pick out the one 
in which the underlined expression is object. 
Give syntactic reasons for your answer. 
a. We all enjoyed that summer. 
b. We all worked that summer. 
ii a. She fasted a very lonf time. 
b. She wasted a very lonf time. 
iii a. He seemed an amazinfly bad 
film-maker. 
b. He screened an amazinfly bad film. 
7. For each of the verbs below, determine 
(citing relevant examples) which of the 
Exercises 
8 1  
following three structures they can occur 
in: (a) a structure with two NPs, like [15]; 
(b) a structure with one NP and a pp 
headed by to; (c) a structure with one NP 
and a pp headed by for. 
award 
vi obtain 
ii borrow 
vii owe 
iii envy 
viii return 
iv explain 
ix send 
v fine 
x transfer 
8. Determine whether the underlined expres­
sions below are objects or predicative 
complements. Give syntactic evidence in 
support of your answers. 
i They arrested a member of the party. 
ii She remained a member ofthe party. 
iii It looks a barfain to me. 
iv He proposed a barfain to me. 
v They continued the investifation. 
9. Recall the classification of canonical clause 
types into (a) ordinary intransitive; (b) 
complex-intransitive; (c) monotransitive; 
(d) complex-transitive; and (e) ditransi­
tive. For each of the verbs below, deter­
mine which of the five constructions it 
can enter into, and construct relevant 
illustrative examples. 
appear 
iii judge 
ii consider 
iv keep 
v promise 
viii show 
vi save 
ix turn 
vii send 
x wish 
10. Explain the ambiguities of the following 
two sentences (they can each be under­
stood either as complex-transitive or as 
ditransitive ): 
i I found her a good lawyer. 
ii He called me a nurse. 

.-: 
Nouns and noun phrases 
I Introductory survey 
82 
2 Number and countability 
85 
3 Determiners and determinatives 
90 
4 Complements 
93 
5 Internal modifiers 
95 
6 External modifiers 
97 
7 The fused-head construction 
97 
8 Pronouns 
1 00 
9 Genitive case 
1 08 
1 
Introductory survey 
Distinctive properties of prototypical noun phrases 
(a) Function. The main functions in which NPs occur are these four: 
[ I ] 
In clause structure: 
SUBJECT 
OBJECT 
PREDICATIVE COMPLEMENT 
ii In PP structure: 
COMPLEMENT 
A student helped us. 
They elected a student. 
She is a student. 
We were talking [to a student]. 
(b) Form. A typical NP consists of a noun serving as head word and (possibly) 
various accompanying dependents. 
Distinctive properties of prototypical nouns 
(a) Inflection. Nouns typically inflect for number (singular or plural) and case 
(plain or genitive): 
[2] 
PLAIN CASE 
GENITIVE 
SINGULAR 
student 
student's 
PLURAL 
students 
students ' 
(b) Function. Nouns can normally fill the head position in phrases with any of the 
four functions listed in [ I ]. 
82 

§ 1 Introductory survey 
83 
(c) Dependents. There are various kinds of dependent that occur exclusively or 
almost exclusively with nouns as head. Examples of such items are underlined in [3]. 
[3] 
CERTAIN DETERMINATIVES 
the door; {! year; every book, which paper 
young children, a f2ig dog, recent events 
the guy who fainted, the book I'm reading 
ii PRE-HEAD ADJECTIVES 
iii RELATIVE CLAUSES 
Nouns and concrete objects 
The noun category includes words denoting all kinds of physical objects (people, 
animals, places, things) and substances: apple, dog, fire, London, sister, water, etc. 
We can't use this as the criterion for identifying English nouns, though, because 
there are also large numbers of nouns denoting abstract entities: absence, debt,fear, 
love, silence, work, etc. But we can use it as the basis for a general definition apply­
ing across languages: 
[4] 
NOUN: a grammatically distinct category of words which includes those 
denoting all kinds of physical objects, such as persons, animals and inanimate 
objects. 
Types of dependent 
Dependents in the structure of the NP are of three main types. We introduce them 
briefly here, and then deal with them in more detail in §§3-6. 
[5] 
DETERMINERS 
ii COMPLEMENTS 
iii MODIFIERS 
the news, {! pear; some cheese, two new films, no reason 
the loss of blood, a ban on smoking, the fact that she 's alive 
a young woman, a friend from Boston, people who complained 
The determiner is a kind of dependent found only in NP structure. It is normally 
an obligatory element in NPs with certain types of singular noun as head. 
Compare The door is open and *Door is open, or compare 1 bought {! book and 
*1 bought book. 
Complements have to be licensed by the head noun - as complements in clause 
structure have to be licensed by the head verb. Compare his loss of blood with He 
was losing blood. Note that nouns like fact, knowledge, or suggestion can be 
accompanied by such subordinate clauses as that she 's alive, but nouns like boy, 
madness, or inquiry cannot. 
Modifiers are the default type of dependent, lacking the above special features; 
there is no limit to the number of modifiers that can occur in an NP. Those in [iii], 
for example, can combine in a single NP: a young woman from Boston who 
complained. 
Nominals 
In clause structure we have recognised a unit intermediate between the clause and 
the verb, namely the verb phrase. In the same way we recognise a unit intermediate 
between the noun phrase and the noun, which we call a nominal. In the guy who 

84 
Chapter 5 Nouns and noun phrases 
fainted or a young woman, for example, the first division is between the determiner 
and the rest, with guy who fainted and young woman each forming a nominal. 
Simplified structures are as shown in [6]: 
[6] 
a. 
NP 
b. 
NP 
A 
A 
Determiner: 
Head: 
Determiner: 
Head: 
Detenninative 
Nominal 
Detenninati ve 
Nominal 
E 
F 
Head: 
Modifier: 
Modifier: 
Head: 
Noun 
Relative clause 
Adjective 
Noun 
I 
D 
I 
I 
the 
guy 
whofainted 
a 
young 
woman 
Here the noun is head of the nominal, and not directly of the NP, but we will often 
simplify by talking of NPs with various kinds of noun as head. 
Internal and external dependents 
Dependents in the structure of the NP may be distinguished as internal or external, 
according as they fall inside or outside the head nominal. Complements (with the 
exception of the type discussed in §9. 1 )  are always internal, and determiners are 
always external. All the modifiers illustrated so far are internal, but there are also 
external modifiers. Compare the following examples, where underlining marks the 
dependent and brackets surround the head nominal: 
[7] 
COMPLEMENT 
internal 
external 
internal 
external 
a [knowledge of Latin], the [idea that he liked it] 
these [old papers], some [people / met] 
II DETERMINER 
III MODIFIER 
Subclasses of noun 
a [Qig dog], the [book I'm reading] 
almost the [only survivor], even a [young woman] 
The three major subclasses of noun are pronouns, proper nouns, and common 
nouns: 
[8] 
PRONOUNS 
ii PROPER NOUNS 
iii COMMON NOUNS 
/, me, my, mine, myself, you, he, she, it, who, what, . . .  
Kim, lones, Beethoven, Boston, Canada, Nile, Easter, . .  . 
cat, day, furniture, window, fact, truth, perseverance, . .  . 
Pronouns constitute a fairly small class of words distinguished from other nouns 
most clearly by their inability to combine with determiners (cf. *the me, *a 
myself, etc.). The most central ones differ inflectionally from other nouns - e.g. 
in having a contrast between nominative and accusative forms (l vs me, he vs 
him, etc.). 

§2.2 Count and non-count nouns 
85 
Proper nouns characteristically function as the head of NPs serving as proper 
names, names individually assigned to particular people, places, festivals, etc. 
They also occur, derivatively, in other kinds of NP (cf. Let's listen to [some 
Beethoven]). 
Common nouns represent the default subclass, lacking the special properties of 
pronouns and proper nouns. 
2 
Number and countability 
Number is the name of the system contrasting singular and plural. 
In the first instance, it applies to noun inflection: nouns typically have contrasting 
singular and plural forms. Thus cat and cats are the singular and plural forms of the 
noun cat, and so on. 
2. 1 
Nouns with fixed number 
Although most nouns have variable number, there are nevertheless many 
that do not - nouns which are invariably singular or invariably plural. 
(a) Singular-only nouns 
Examples of nouns which have a singular form but no plural are given in [9]: 
[9] 
i crockery, dross,footwear, harm, indebtedness, nonsense, perseverance 
ii italics, linguistics, mumps, news, phonetics, physics 
Those in [ii] look like plurals, but the final s is not in fact a plural marker, like that in 
cats. This is evident from the fact that we say The news is good (not are), and so on. 
(b) Plural-only nouns 
Nouns with a plural form but no singular are illustrated in [10] :  
[ 1 0] 
i alms, auspices, belongings, clothes, genitals, scissors, spoils, trousers 
ii cattle, police, vermin 
Those in [i] contain the plural suffix ·s, but it cannot be dropped to form a singular. 
In most cases there is some fairly transparent connection to plurality in the ordinary 
sense of "more than one": belongings denotes things that belong to someone, 
clothes is a cover term for articles of clothing, while scissors and trousers denote 
objects with two main parts. The nouns in [ii] have no inflectional marking of plu­
rality, but behave syntactically as plurals. Note, for example, that we say these 
cattle, not *this cattle; The police have arrived, not * The police has arrived. 
2.2 
Count and non-count nouns 
Closely related to the distinction between nouns of variable and invari­
able number is that between count nouns and non-count nouns. As the names 

86 
Chapter 5 Nouns and noun phrases 
imply, count nouns can take cardinal numerals (one, two, three, etc.) as dependent, 
while non-count nouns cannot. 
Non-count nouns that are invariably singular 
Non-count nouns are usually invariably singular. The possibilities forfurniture, for 
example, are shown in [1 1], where it is contrasted with the count noun chair: 
[ 1 1  ] 
SINGULAR WITH 
SINGULAR WITH 
PLURAL WITH 
DETERMINER THE 
NUMERAL ONE 
NUMERALS 
COUNT NOUN 
the chair 
one chair 
two chairs 
NON-COUNT NOUN 
the furniture 
*one furniture 
*two furn itu res 
Furniture cannot combine with any numeral, not even one, which goes with singu­
lar forms. The same restrictions apply to such nouns as clothing, equipment, 
footwear or the abstract nouns eagerness, perseverance, wetness. 
Non-count nouns that are invariably plural 
There are a fairly small number of non-count nouns that are invariably plural. Com­
pare the possibilities for count corpse and non-count remains shown in [ 1 2]: 
[ 1 2] 
PLURAL WITH 
SINGULAR WITH 
PLURAL WITH 
DETERMINER THE 
NUMERAL ONE 
NUMERALS 
COUNT NOUN 
the corpses 
one corpse 
two corpses 
NON-COUNT NOUN 
the remains 
*one remain 
*two remains 
Remains is invariably plural, but even so, it cannot combine with numerals like two 
or three, etc. Other nouns of this kind include credentials, genitals, proceeds, etc. 
Nouns with count and non-count uses 
Nouns that have only a count interpretation or only a non-count interpretation are in 
a minority. Most nouns can be used with either kind of interpretation. The [a] and 
[b] pairs in [ 1 3] are fairly typical. 
[ 1 3] 
COUNT INTERPRETATION 
NON-COUNT INTERPRETATION 
a. Would you like a cake? 
b. Would you like some more cake? 
11 
a. I'll have to borrow your football. 
b. I'm going to play football. 
III a. The cover of this book is torn. 
b. The awning provides some cover. 
IV a. I suggested afew improvements. 
b. There 's been little improvement. 
When we speak of count and non-count nouns, therefore, we are referring to nouns 
as used with a count and non-count interpretation. Thus cake is a count noun in [ia] 
but a non-count noun in [ib], and so on. 

§2.2 Count and non-count nouns 
87 
The meaning distinction between count and non-count 
A count noun generally denotes a class of individual entities of the same kind. The 
count noun table, for example, denotes the whole class of tables (one table provides 
a way of referring to a single member of the class, two tables talks about two mem­
bers, and so on). An individual member of this class cannot be divided into smaller 
entities of the same kind as itself. That is, a table can be chopped up into smaller 
parts, but those parts are not themselves tables. Likewise, if you cut a loaf in half, 
what you have is not two loaves, but two halves of a loaf. 
Non-count nouns typically have the opposite property. A good number of them 
denote physical substances that can be divided into smaller amounts of the same 
kind. If you cut up some bread, the pieces can still be described by the non-count 
noun bread. If you take some wood and cut it into shorter lengths, these can still be 
referred to by means of the non-count noun wood - the same noun is applicable to 
the same stuff in smaller quantities. 
Marking of the count vs non-count distinction 
In many but by no means all cases, grammatical features of the NP force or strongly 
favour either a count or a non-count interpretation. 
(a) 
Plurality favours the count interpretation 
A plural head noun will generally indicate a count interpretation. In She described 
the improvements they had made, for example, we interpret improvements in a count 
sense like that of [ 13iva] (/ suggested a few improvements) rather than the non-count 
sense of [ l 3ivb] (There 's been little improvement). That is, it implies a set of sepa­
rable, individual improvements that you could count. As noted above, there are 
some non-count plural nouns, like remains, but they are restricted to a relatively 
small number of particular lexemes. 
(b) 
Singular common noun head with no determiner favours the 
non-count interpretation 
In general, common nouns can occur in the singular without a determiner only if 
they have a non-count interpretation. That's why we get these contrasts: 
[ 14] 
i a. * She was reading book. 
ii a. *We made table. 
b. She was drinking water. 
h. We made progress. 
Book and table normally have count interpretations, and so the [a] examples are 
inadmissible, whereas non-count water and progress occur readily without a deter­
miner because they're interpreted in a non-count sense. Count nouns are found 
without determiners only in a very limited range of special syntactic constructions. 
Two of them are illustrated in [ 15]: 
[ 1 5] 
a. Who wants to be treasurer? 
ii a. They were living together as 
husband and wife. 
h. * Who wants to be millionaire? 
h. *I've met husband, but J don 't think 
I've ever seen him with wife. 

88 
Chapter 5 Nouns and noun phrases 
Treasurer in [ia] is what we have called a bare role NP (one without a deter­
miner: see Ch. 4, §4. 1 ). Nouns that do not denote some kind of role or office can­
not occur without a determiner in predicative complement function, as evident 
from the contrast between treasurer and millionaire in [i]: treasurer is a role in 
an organisation, but millionaire is just a status that anyone has as soon as their net 
worth reaches a million dollars, pounds, etc. 
In [iia] we have two closely related nouns in a coordination construction, which 
sometimes allows omission of the determiner. But the same nouns need deter­
miners when they are not in a coordination, as we see from [iib]. 
(c) 
Certain determinatives are generally restricted to one or other 
interpretation 
Determinatives such as the, this, that, what, and no occur with either type of noun, 
but in singular NPs the determinatives listed in [16] are generally restricted to one 
or the other, as illustrated in [ 1 7] :  
[16] 
COUNT 
11 NON-COUNT 
one, another, each, every, either, neither; also to some extent a 
much, little, a little, enough, sufficient; also to some extent all 
[17] 
a. Every table was inspected. 
ii a. *He didn 't read much book. 
b. * Every furniture was inspected. 
b. He didn 't drink much water. 
We have set aside a and all at the end of the lists because with these determinatives 
there are some exceptions, as in He has a high regard for them (where regard is non­
count) and He spent all day at the races (where day is count). 
2.3 
Subject-verb agreement 
Number is the major factor involved in subject-verb agreement. 
Compare: 
[ 1 8] 
SINGULAR SUBJECT 
a. Their dog eats a lot. 
ii a. Their dog was eating. 
PLURAL SUBJECT 
b. Their dogs eat a lot. 
b. Their dogs were eating. 
As we change from a singular subject in [a] to a plural subject in [b] the inflectional 
form of the verb changes too, and the verb is accordingly said to agree with the sub­
ject. The agreement applies in the present tense with all verbs except the modal aux­
iliaries. In the preterite, only the verb be displays agreement: other preterites such 
as ate occur in the same form with all kinds of subject. 
Subject-verb agreement involves person as well as number, for 1 st person I, 
although singular, requires eat, not eats. Eats occurs with 3rd person singular sub­
jects and eat with all others: i.e. plurals, 1 st person I, or 2nd person you. But most 
of the complexities regarding agreement arise with respect to number, and that is 
why we will now focus on number in more detail. There are four special cases to be 
noted. 

Measure expressions 
2.3 Subject-verb agreement 
89 
Expressions like ten days, twenty dollars, five miles, etc., are plural in form but the 
quantity or measure they denote can be conceptualised as a single abstract entity, 
and this singular conceptualisation can override the plural form in determining the 
form of the verb. So the following examples have plural subjects with a singular 
agreement form of the verb: 
[ 1 9] 
a. Ten days iJ. a long time to be on your own. 
b. Twenty dollars seems far too much to pay for a takeaway pizza. 
11 a. That ten days we spent together in Paris was wonderful. 
b. Another three eggs iJ. all we need. 
Ten days can be seen as a single block of time; twenty dollars is a price; three eggs 
can be viewed as a single quantity of food. Note that in the [ii] cases the measure 
expression not only takes a singular verb, it even occurs with a determiner that nor­
mally selects a singular head (cf. that day, another egg). 
Quantificational nouns 
There are a few nouns expressing quantification which can occur in the singular as 
head of an NP whose number for agreement purposes is determined by a smaller NP 
embedded within it: 
[20] 
SINGULAR 
PLURAL 
[A lot of mono] was wasted. 
[A lot of things] were wasted. 
[The rest of the meat] is over there. 
[The rest of the eggs] are over there. 
(not possible) 
[A number of faults] were found. 
The head of the bracketed NP in each case is marked by double underlining. Notice 
that each head is singular, but the form of the verb depends on the single-underlined 
NP that is complement to the preposition of The meaning of number is such that the 
embedded NP must be plural, so the bottom left position in the table can't be filled. 
Collective nouns 
Nouns such as board, committee, jury, staff, team are collective nouns in that they 
denote a collection, or set, of individuals. When they occur in the singular as head 
of the subject NP the verb can, especially in BrE, be either singular or plural, though 
AmE clearly favours the singular: 
[2 1 ]  
SINGULAR VERB 
a. The committee has interviewed her. 
11 a. The jury is still deliberating. 
III a. The board consists entirely of men. 
PLURAL VERB 
b. %The committee have interviewed her. 
b. %The jury are still deliberating. 
b. The crew are all over forty. 
The choice of a plural verb focuses on the individuals that make up the collection, 
on the members of the committee or jury or whatever, rather than on the collection 
as a unit, the official body that the members constitute. 

90 
Chapter 5 Nouns and noun phrases 
The examples in [iii] are cases in which variation would be less likely. In [iiia], 
the property of consisting entirely of men can only apply to the board as a whole; it 
can't apply to any individual member of the board, so a plural verb is much less 
likely (though not all BrE speakers would dismiss %The board consist entirely of 
men as impossible). In [iiib], by contrast, the property of being forty or older can 
apply only to the individual members of the crew, not the crew as a whole, and the 
adjunct all reinforces the focus on the individuals; so [iiib] with its plural agreement 
is much more likely than %The crew is all over forty (though in AmE the latter might 
nonetheless occur). 
Any, no, none, either, neither 
We also find alternation between singular and plural verb agreement in examples 
like [22]: 
[22] 
a. [None of the objections] was valid. 
ii a. [Neither of them] seems valid. 
b. [None of the objections] were valid. 
b. [Neither of them] seem valid. 
Subjects with any, no, and none occur freely with either singular or plural agree­
ment. With neither, and even more with either, singular agreement is usual; plural 
agreement is informal, and condemned by prescriptivists. The difference is that any 
and no can function as determiner to both singular and plural nouns: both No objec­
tion was valid and No objections were valid are grammatical. Either and neither 
occur only with singulars: Neither objection was valid is grammatical, but *Neither 
objections were valid is definitely not. 
3 
Determiners and determinatives 
The determiner position in an NP is usually filled by one of two kinds 
of expression. 
• In all the examples so far it has been a determinative, and some of these can be 
accompanied by their own modifiers, making a determinative phrase, abbrevi­
ated DP. 
'", In addition, the determiner may have the form of a genitive NP. 
Examples, with the determiners underlined, are given in [23]: 
[23] 
DETERMINATIVE 
DP 
GENITIVE NP 
the city 
almost all politicians 
her income 
some rotten eggs 
very few new books 
the senator's young son 
In this section we focus on determinatives and DPs. Genitive determiners are dis­
cussed in §9. 1 .  
The determiner is generally an obligatory element with count singular common 
nouns, as discussed in connection with [14-16] above. It is, by contrast, incompat­
ible with pronouns: we have l am ready, not *The I am ready, and so on. 

3.1 
Definiteness 
§3. l Definiteness 
91 
The main semantic contribution of the determiner is to mark the NP as 
definite or indefinite. The is known as the definite article and a as the indefinite 
article since these are the most basic and elementary markers of definite and indef­
inite NPs, but all NPs can be classified as definite or indefinite. 
Definite article 
What is meant by definite here can best be understood by looking at some examples 
containing the definite article. In the following the definite NP is enclosed in brack­
ets; the part following the is the head. 
[24] 
i [The President of France] has appointed a new prime minister. 
ii Where did you put [the key] ? 
The indicates that the head of the NP is considered SUFFICIENT IN THE CONTEXT TO 
IDENTIFY THE REFERENT. 
<l; Only one person can be President of France at a given time, so using that descrip­
tion in [i] uniquely identifies a person . 
. '1' Although any number of keys might exist, [ii] will be used only in a context that 
makes clear which one I'm talking about (e.g., the key to the car you just told me 
to unload). 
Use of the can be thought of as pre-empting a which question. It would obviously be 
inappropriate for you to respond to [i] with Which President of France? because 
there is only one. And in [ii], my use of the reflects my assumption that you won't 
need to ask Which key? 
The unique identification can be more indirect, and it can depend on the meaning 
of the rest of the sentence or other linguistic context, as these examples illustrate: 
[25] 
i [The father of one of my students] emailed me yesterday. 
ii [The only language she spoke] was Tzotzil. 
<" 
In the case of [i] you won't know precisely who I am referring to because I don't 
identify the student. But a which question consisting of which + the head of the 
NP would still make no sense. You can't ask Which father of one of your stu­
dents ?, because nobody has more than one father. So if you let one of my 
students serve to pick out a certain student (you just imagine a certain student X 
that so far you don't know much about), then the nominal father of one of my 
students can provide a uniquely identifying description: the unique person who 
is the father of X. 
c 
You can see this limited kind of identifiability in [25ii] as well. The nominal only 
language she spoke must pick out a single language, so the question Which only 
language she spoke? would be nonsense. But of course I don't assume that you 
can name the language, since the whole point of the rest of the sentence is to tell 
you its name. The head nominal describes a unique entity, but at the moment 

92 
Chapter 5 Nouns and noun phrases 
when you hear that nominal you know very little about it. The predicate of the 
clause then goes on to give a fuller identification of it. 
Indefinite article 
The indefinite article does not indicate that the description in the head is defining. 
The description is not presented as unique in the context. Take these examples: 
[26] 
i [£1 cabinet minister] has been arrested. 
ii I'll give you [Q. key]. 
.. A cabinet contains a number of ministers, and if I don't know (or am not bother­
ing to say) which one of them got arrested I will use a rather than the. Here, of 
course, a which question is perfectly appropriate: Which one? would be a natural 
response to [i]. 
Cl The context for [ii] is likely to be one where it is clear which lock you'll be using 
the key in, but it will be a lock for which there are multiple keys, and if I haven't 
decided (or don't care) which of them I'll give you, I will again use the indefinite 
article. 
Articles with plural NPs 
Article use has been illustrated so far with singular NPs, but of course the also 
occurs in plurals: 
[27] 
i [The Presidents of France and Italy] will be meeting again tomorrow. 
ii Where did you put [the keys] ? 
These are very much like the singulars. Again a which question would be inappro­
priate . 
.. In [i] the head uniquely defines a set of two people, so the referent is clearly 
identifiable. 
II In [ii] I'm talking about a bunch of keys, and the context is assumed to make 
clear which bunch. 
Which determiners are definite and indefinite 
The words that mark the NP as definite or as indefinite when they serve as deter­
miners are given in [28i] and [28ii]. 
[28] 
DEFINITE 
11 INDEFINITE 
the; this, that; all, both; relative which, whichever, what, 
whateverl 
a; each, every; some, any; either, neither; no; another; a 
few, a little, several; many, much, more, most,few,fewer, 
little, less; enough, sufficient; interrogative which, 
whichever, what, whatever; one, two, three,four,five, . . .  
I Relative which, whichever, etc., occur in relative clauses: see Ch. 1 1 , §§2, 4. 

§4 Complements 
93 
Apart from the interrogatives, all the indefinite markers have to do with quantifica­
tion. Among the definite markers, all and both are also quantificational, but illus­
trate the special case of quantification that involves totality. 
This and that are unique among the detenninatives in that they inflect for num­
ber, in agreement with the head noun: compare this book and these books, that day 
and those days. 
3.2 
Determinatives as modifiers 
It should be borne in mind that although determinatives are a class of 
words that most commonly function as determiners (hence the similarity of the 
terms), many are also found in other functions, particularly modifier? Compare, for 
example: 
[29] 
DETERMINER 
a. [The younger son] had died. 
ii a. Who 's [that tall guy over there] ? 
iii a. [Manv people] were offended. 
MODIFIER 
b. I feel [all the better] for my holiday. 
b. He shouldn 't have driven [that fast]. 
b. He listed [its manyfailings]. 
While the underlined determinative is determiner in NP structure in the [a] exam­
ples, it is a modifier in the others: a modifier in an AdjP in rib], in an AdvP in [iib], 
and in an NP in [iiib]. 
3.3 
Determinative phrases 
A number of the quantificational determinatives accept dependents of 
their own. A determinative with dependents functions as the head of a phrase which 
we call a determinative phrase (DP). In most cases the dependents are modifiers 
preceding the head of the DP. In the following examples, brackets enclose the NP, 
with underlining marking the DP inside it: 
[30] 
a. [Not many people] turned up. 
ii a. [Almost every copy] was torn. 
III a. [Some thirty paintings] were stolen. 
4 
Complements 
b. There were [at most fifty applications]. 
b. We have [hardly any milk] left. 
b. I haven 't [very much money] on me. 
One striking difference between nouns and verbs is that NOUNS DON' T 
TAKE OBJECTS. With nouns that are morphologically related to transitive verbs, as 
2 We use 'detenniner' for the function tenn and 'detenninative' for the category tenn since the suffix ·er 
matches that in the function tenn 'modifier', while ·ive matches that in the category tenn 'adjective'. 

94 
Chapter 5 Nouns and noun phrases 
criticism is related to criticise, the complement of the noun that corresponds to the 
object of the verb has the form of a PP: 
[3 1) 
VERB + OBJECT 
a. I criticised her decision. 
ii a. He abandoned his ship. 
iii a. Sandy married Pat. 
NOUN + pp COMPLEMENT 
b. my criticism of her decision 
b. his abandonment of his ship 
b. Sandy 's marriage to Pat 
The preposition is usually of, as in lib] and [iib], but with certain nouns other prepo­
sitions are selected, as in [iiib]. 
Complements in NP structure are therefore virtually restricted to PPs and subor­
dinate clauses. 
pp complements 
Dependents with the form of PPs qualify as complements when they are licensed 
by the particular head noun. The clearest cases have one or more of the following 
properties. 
(a) They correspond to object or subject NPs in clause structure. The object case 
has been illustrated in [3 1), while correspondence with a subject is seen in [32]: 
[32) 
SUBJECT + VERB 
a. The warriors returned. 
ii a. The premier attacked. 
NOUN + pp COMPLEMENT 
b. the return of the warriors 
b. an attack by the premier 
This type of PP complement can combine with one corresponding to the object in 
a clause, as in the removal of the files by the secretary - cf. The secretary removed 
the files. (For the construction with a genitive NP, as in the warriors ' return or the 
premier's attack, see §9. l .) 
(b) The choice of preposition is specified by the head noun. Many nouns take 
complements headed by a particular preposition: 
[33) 
their belief in God, its effect on the audience, familiarity with the data, 
the introduction to the book, a request Jm:. more staff, secession from the 
alliance 
(c) The PP is obligatory because the noun makes little sense without it. 
[34) 
the advent of the steam engine, the abandonment of sensible budgetary 
policies, a dearth of new ideas, the feasibility of the proposal, a paucity gJ 
reliable data 
The nouns in [34] almost always occur with a PP headed by of, and even if someone 
did say something like What's the feasibility?, we would have to understand them 
as having asked about the feasibility of some particular planned action that they had 
left to be understood from the context. 

Subordinate clause complements 
§5 Internal modifiers 
95 
Subordinate clauses may be finite or non-finite, and both types are found as com­
plements to nouns: 
[35] 
FINITE 
ii NON-FINITE 
the claim that he was ill, a suspicion that it was a hoax 
her ability to complete the task, his eagerness to redeem himself 
For discussion of these constructions, see the chapters on subordinate clauses, 
Ch. 10 and Ch. 1 3. 
Indirect complements 
Consider now the following examples, where brackets enclose the NP and under­
lining marks the complement. 
[36] 
i We had to put up with [a longer delay than we had bargained for]. 
ii He gave [so complicated an explanation that I was completely bafJlerJ. 
iii It was [too serious a problem for us to ignore]. 
We call these indirect complements because although they follow the head noun it 
is not the head noun that licenses them. 
't, In [i] the complement is licensed by the comparative adjective longer: if we drop 
this the NP becomes ungrammatical (*a delay than we had bargainedfor). 
*; Similarly, in [ii] the complement is licensed by the so that modifies complicated. 
Ø In [iii] it is licensed by too. This time we could drop too serious without loss of 
grammaticality - but it would have a dramatic effect on the interpretation of the 
infinitival clause. A problem for us to ignore means Ha problem that we 
can/should ignore", whereas the NP in [iii] means Ha problem that was so serious 
that we could/should not ignore it". 
5 
Internal modifiers 
Nouns accept a very wide range of modifiers within the nominal. 
Because they are inside the nominal they are called internal modifiers. Some 
precede the head of the NP, while others follow. 
(a) Pre-head modifiers 
[37] 
ADJP 
a long letter, this latest problem, some very irate customers 
II DP 
another two candidates, the more than thirty candidates 
1Il NOMINAL 
a brick wall, high octane petrol, a United States warship 
IV VP 
the condemned man, a sleeping child, a recently discovered fossil 
'l' The most common type of pre-head modifier is an adjective, either alone or with 
its own dependents, as in [37i]. 

96 
Chapter 5 Nouns and noun phrases 
Ô Determinatives, again alone or with dependents, are modifiers when they FOLLOW 
a determiner rather than functioning as one themselves, as in [ii]. 
'l The modifiers in [iii] are nominals consisting of nouns, either alone or (as in the 
second and third examples) with their own internal dependents. Note that a mod­
ifier cannot contain its own determiner: it is a nominal, not an NP. We cannot 
have, for example, *a the United States warship. 
11' VP modifiers as in [iv] have either a gerund-participle or a past participle form of 
the verb as head. 
Dependents within a pre-head modifier almost always precede the head of that 
modifier. To take the last phrase in [37iv] as an example, we can say This fossil was 
discovered recently (where discovered recently is a complement of the verb be), but 
we cannot refer to it with the phrase *a discovered recentlyfossil. We have to place 
the adverb dependent recently before the verbal head discovered, to make the NP a 
recently discovered fossil. 
(b) Post-head modifiers 
[38] 
pp 
11 ADJP 
1Il APPOSITIVE NP 
iv NON-APPOSITIVE NP 
V FINITE CLAUSE 
vi NON-FINITE CLAUSE 
the tree by the ĝate,Jood for the baby, a hut in the forest, 
a house of ill repute, a man without scruples 
people fond of animals, the ones most likely to succeed 
the opera 'Carmen ', my wife Lucy, our friend the mayor 
a woman my age, someone your own size, a rug this colour 
the guy who spoke first, the knife with which he cut it, 
the money that he gave me, some people I met on the 
train 
the person for you to consult, students living on campus, 
a letter written by his uncle 
,× The PPs in [i] are NOT syntactically licensed by the head like those in [3 1-34] 
above. 
01> AdjPs in post-head position usually contain their own dependents, especially post­
head ones; the AdjPs shown in [ii] would not be possible before the head noun . 
.;I Appositive NP modifiers are distinguished from the non-appositive ones by their 
ability to stand alone in place of the whole NP: instead of They invited my wife 
Lucy we could have simply They invited Lucy. 
Õ Finite clause modifiers are all relative clauses. 
Ö Non-finite clauses may be infinitival, gerund-participial, or past-participial. 
Combinations of modifiers 
There is no grammatical limit to the number of modifiers that can occur within a 
single NP. The following examples contain two, three, four and five respectively: 
[39] 
a l!ig black dog 
11 the two French novels we had to study 
iii an old Italian woman with six kids who was complaining bitterly 
iv that nice little old man at the library with the umbrella 

§ 7. 1 Three kinds of fused head 
97 
There are preferences as to relative order, especially among pre-head modifiers. A 
big black dog, for example, will be strongly preferred over a black big dog. Numeral 
modifiers usually precede adjectives, as in the three young nurses, but under 
restricted conditions the reverse order is found, as in an enjoyable three hours. 
6 
External modifiers 
External modifiers in an NP are located within the NP but outside the 
head nominal. There are various subtypes, all highly restricted with respect to the 
range of expressions admitted. Here we illustrate just three of these subtypes: 
[40] 
i all the children, both her sons, half a day, twice the amount we 'd askedfor 
ii such a disaster, too risky a venture, so difficult an assignment 
iii even the children, only a politician, the prime minister alone, the boss herself 
Those in [i] are quantificational expressions that occur before various determiners. 
Those in [ii] are adjectives or AdjPs which occur as external modifier only before 
the indefinite article a(n). 
Those in [iii] do not require the presence of a determiner: they occur, for exam­
ple, with proper nouns, as in even Kim, Julia herself, etc. 
7 
The fused-head construction 
In all the NP examples so far the head element has been distinct from the 
dependents and filled by a noun. We turn now to a construction where the head is 
combined, or fused, with a dependent element, usually the determiner or an internal 
modifier. That is, a single word is at the same time a determiner or modifier and also 
the head. We call this the fused-head construction. 
7. 1 
Three kinds of fused head 
We distinguish three subtypes of the fused-head construction, illustrated 
in [41], where square brackets enclose the NP and underlining marks the fused head: 
[4 1 ]  
SIMPLE 
11 PARTITIVE 
iii SPECIAL 
Kim has lots of friends, but Pat doesn 'f seem to have [ill,Y]. 
[Some of his remarks] were quite flattering. 
I have two photos of her, but [both] are out offocus. 
[Manyl would disagree with you on that point. 
[explicit] 
[implicit] 
In all these examples the underlined word is a determinative combining the func­
tions of determiner and head. 
The simple subtype 
Here it is possible to expand the fused-head NP into an ordinary NP with a separate 
head - one retrieved from the context. Thus in [41 i] we could replace any by any friends. 

98 
Chapter 5 Nouns and noun phrases 
The partitive subtype 
Partitive is intended to suggest denoting a part rather than the whole thing. 
• In an explicit partitive, the fused head is followed by a partitive PP comple­
ment, such as of his remarks in our example. The NP some of his remarks is par­
titive in the sense that it denotes a subset of the set consisting of his remarks: we 
understand it to mean "some remarks from the set of his remarks". Note, how­
ever, that in this case we cannot expand into a construction with a separate head: 
we can't say *some remarks of his remarks. 
• In the implicit partitive the of complement is understood rather than being 
overtly expressed. Thus in the second example of [4l ii] both is understood 
as "both of them" (i.e. "both of the two photos of her"). This case is accordingly 
different from the simple fused-head construction: any in [i] is understood as 
"any friends", not "any of them" . 
The special subtype 
• In [41iii] many is understood as "many people", but this represents a special 
interpretation of fused-head many: people is not retrievable from the surrounding 
text - or even from the presence of people in the situation of utterance. 
• In I don 't think [much] has happened while you 've been away fused-head much 
has an inanimate, abstract interpretation. 
7.2 
Fused detenniner-heads 
Further examples of fused determiner-heads, with the determinatives 
eight, several, and this, are given in [42]: 
[42] 
SIMPLE 
ii PARTITIVE 
iii SPECIAL 
They sent six copies though / had ordered [eight]. 
They sent twenty copies but [several] were damaged. 
[This] is infuriating. 
Almost all determiners can occur in this construction, the main exceptions being 
the two articles the and a, together with every and what. 
The, 0, every 
These have substitutes in fused structures: the is replaced by the appropriate form of 
that; a is replaced by one; and every is replaced by every one: 
[43] 
a. *The impact of war is more serious than the of drought. 
b. The impact of war is more serious than that of drought. 
ii a. */ need a pen, but / haven 't got q. 
b. / need a pen, but / haven 't got one. 
iii a. *He inspected a dozen cars, but every (of them) was defective. 
b. He inspected a dozen cars, but every one (of them) was defective. 

What 
§7.3 Fused modifier-heads 
99 
In the case of what we need to distinguish carefully between two items: the deter­
minative what and the pronoun what. The determinative functions as determiner 
the way other determinatives do, while the pronoun functions as (non-fused) head 
the way other pronouns do: 
[44] 
i [What course] are you taking? 
ii [What] do you want? 
[determinative functioning as determiner] 
[pronoun functioning as head] 
The way we can tell that there are two items here is that there is a clear difference in 
meaning between them. 
11 The pronoun what is non-personal: it does not apply to human beings (we need 
personal who instead: Who do you want?) . 
.., The determinative what, on the other hand, is neutral with respect to the per­
sonal vs non-personal distinction: in [i] it accompanies a head that does not 
denote a human being, but in What philosophers have you read? it accompanies 
a human head noun. (Compare the impossibility of * What wrote this article?) 
With what, then, we do not get a fused determiner-head structure: what is either the 
determiner or the head, and we can tell which by checking the possibility of human 
denotation. 
No 
Unlike the determinatives discussed above, no does occur in the fused determiner­
head construction, but we find a difference in inflection, with the form none occur­
ring in the fused-head construction, and no everywhere else: 
[45] 
Kim had [no money], and Pat also had [none]. 
7.3 
Fused modifier-heads 
Fusion of modifier and head of an NP is seen in the following examples, 
where an adjective serves as modifier and as head at the same time: 
[46] 
i SIMPLE 
ii PARTITIVE 
iii SPECIAL 
Should I wear the red shirt or [the blue] ? 
[The youngest of their children] was still at school. 
[The French] don 't take these things too seriously. 
• In [i] we understand the blue to mean "the blue shirt". 
• In [ii] the reference is to the youngest member of the set consisting of their children. 
• In [iii] the French has a special interpretation: it means French people in general. 
Modifiers cannot fuse with the head as readily as determiners can. Examples like 
these are not grammatical: 
[471 
*Kim had hoped for a favourable review, but Pat wrote [a critical]. 
ii *That mattress is very soft: I'd prefer [a har4J. 
iii *Look through this box of screws and pick out [some small]. 

100 
Chapter 5 Nouns and noun phrases 
Instead of the fused-head construction in cases like these we use an NP with one as 
head: a critical one, a hard one, some small ones. 
The modifiers which most readily fuse with the head include these: 
• detenninatives used in modifier function following a determiner (e.g. these two) 
• superlatives and comparatives (the best, the most important of them, the taller 
of them) 
• ordinal numeral words (the second, the eighth) 
o certain semantic categories of adjective, e.g. colour adjectives as in the blue and 
nationality adjectives that aren't also count nouns, as in the French, the English, 
the Dutch (we don't get *The Belgian are very courteous because we use the 
count noun instead: The Belgians are very courteous). 
7.4 
Compound fonns 
There are a number of forms where the fusion of determiner and head has 
become a morphological fact: every, some, any, no have formed compound words with 
nouns like body, one, and thing, making words like everybody, someone, and nothing. 
(Body and one have the special meaning "person" in these compounds.) There is a sim­
ple way to tell that the determiner is fused with the head: it is not possible to insert a 
modifier between them. Adjectival modifiers follow the head instead of appearing in the 
usual pre-head position. The contrasts between the [a] and [b] cases in [48] show this: 
[48] 
FUSED HEAD 
i a. somebodvfamous 
ii a. nothing harmful 
SEPARATE HEAD 
b. Ԣfamous person 
b. no harmful thing 
Notice that no one is a compound although it is usually written with a space as if it 
were two words (it is sometimes written as no-one, but not as *noone). The test just 
mentioned shows that it is a compound: No one famous showed up at the premiere 
cannot be expressed in the form *No famous one showed up at the premiere. 
8 
Pronouns 
Pronouns form a subclass of nouns distinguished syntactically from 
common nouns and proper nouns by their inability to take determiners as depend­
ent. We say 1 am ill, not *This I am ill; we say She likes him, not *The she likes the 
him. They nevertheless occur as head of NPs functioning in the main NP positions 
of subject, object, predicative complement, complement of a preposition. They form 
a subclass of nouns rather than being a separate category. 
There are several different kinds of pronoun, illustrated in [49]: 
[49] 
PERSONAL 
ii RECIPROCAL 
iii INTERROGATIVE 
iv RELATIVE 
L like them 
They dislike each other 
Who saw them leave? 
the guy who helped us 
Your sister underestimates herself. 
We were helping one another. 
What do you want? 
the book which you recommended 

§8. 1 Deictic and anaphoric uses of pronouns 
101 
In this section we deal with just the first two types: the others will be covered in the 
chapters that deal with interrogative and relative clauses: see Ch. 9, §2.4, and 
Ch. 1 1 , §§3-4. 
8. 1 
Deictic and anaphoric uses of pronouns 
Most pronouns are characteristically used either deictically or anaphor-
ically. 
(a) Deictic uses of pronouns 
The term deixis applies to the use of expressions in which the meaning can be traced 
directly to features of the act of utterance - when and where it takes place, and who 
is involved as speaker and as addressee. In their primary meaning, for example, now 
and here are used deictically to refer respectively to the time and place of the utter­
ance. Similarly, this country is likely to be interpreted deictically as the country in 
which the utterance takes place. Several of the pronouns are predominantly used 
deictically, with I and we referring to the speaker and a group including the speaker, 
you to the addressee(s) or a set including the addressee(s). 
(b) Anaphoric uses of pronouns 
The term anaphora applies to the use of expressions in which the meaning is 
derived from another expression in the surrounding linguistic material. That other 
expression is called the antecedent. The pronouns in [50] are underlined and their 
antecedents are doubly underlined. 
[50] 
il said she was unavailable. 
ii The victim 's daughter didn 't come to the meeting. Liz said she was unavailable. 
iii When I last saw her, il seemed to be extremely busy. 
!:! In the most obvious interpretation for [i], she refers to Liz - and it does so by 
virtue of its anaphoric relation to the antecedent Liz in the main clause. 
l) That is not the only interpretation, however. In [ii], the same sentence occurs in 
a context where she is much more likely to be interpreted as referring to the 
victim's daughter. The antecedent is located in an earlier sentence . 
• The antecedent usually precedes the pronoun (the Latin prefix ante· means 
"before"), but under certain conditions it can follow, as in [iii]. 
The traditional term 'pronoun' has a Latin origin (like 'antecedent'), and the mean­
ing suggests it serves for or on behalf of a noun. This is based on the anaphoric use, 
but it unfortunately suggests that a pronoun is used in place of a noun, which is 
not correct. An anaphoric pronoun stands in place of a full noun phrase. In [ii], 
for example, she could be replaced by the antecedent NP (Liz said the victim 's 
daughter was unavailable), but not by the head noun (*Liz said daughter was 
unavailable). 

102 
Chapter 5 Nouns and noun phrases 
The examples of deixis given above included not only pronouns but also 
other kinds of expression (this country, here, now), and it is likewise not only 
pronouns that are used anaphorically. In I warned Jack about that, but the fool 
wouldn 't listen, for example, the N P the fool is anaphorically related to the 
antecedent Jack. 
8.2 
Personal pronouns 
The prototypical members of the set of personal pronouns are as follows: 
[5 1 ] 
1 ST PERSON 
2ND PERSON 
3RD PERSON 
SINGULAR 
1 
you 
he, she, it 
PLURAL 
we 
you 
they 
The term 'personal' should not be thought to imply that these pronouns are used to 
refer to persons: obviously, this doesn't apply to almost all cases of it and many of 
they. This subclass is called 'personal' because it is the one to which the grammati­
cal distinction of person applies. 
The category of person 
• 1st person indicates reference to the speaker. We follow the widespread practice 
in linguistics of using this term to cover the writer of written language as well as 
the speaker of spoken language. 
• 2nd person usually indicates reference to the addressee(s) - not everyone who 
hears (or reads) the utterance, but the person or persons addressed by the speaker. 
• 3rd person is the default term in the system, giving no indication that the speaker 
or the addressee is included, and thus typically excluding them. Notice that ALL 
NPs headed by a common or proper noun or a pronoun other than 1, we, or you 
are 3rd person. 
The terms ' 1st', '2nd' and '3rd' reflect a hierarchical ordering. We can see this 
clearly by looking at how we select plural pronouns: 
• We first ask whether the set of people being referred to includes the speaker(s).3 
If so, the 1 st person plural we is the pronoun to use. That might include the 
addressee(s) too (Let's leave now, so we don 't have to rush) or it might not ( We're 
better off without you). 
• Next, if the set being referred to does not include the speaker(s), we ask whether 
it includes the addressee(s). If so, then the 2nd person you is the right pronoun. 
That might include someone other than the addressee(s) (When your husband 
3 Note that there may be more than one speaker: in writing this arises with joint letters, jointly authored 
works, etc., in speech in communal prayer, chants, etc. 

§8.2 Personal pronouns 
103 
comes out of hospital Y.QH should take a holiday together} or it might not ( Will 
you now please turn to page 58). 
Last, if both questions get a negative answer, a 3rd person form is used. That 
means any 3rd person NP will normally be taken to refer to people (or things) 
other than the speaker and addressee, though in a few cases we find the speaker 
or addressee being referred to in the 3rd person. For example, in formal writing, 
expressions like the writer or the reader are sometimes used instead of I st or 2nd 
person pronouns. 
Non-deictic use of you 
There is a secondary, non-deictic, use for 2nd person you in which it does not 
refer to any particular person(s}: You could hear a pin drop or You can 't do that 
kind of thing when you 're pregnant (which could be addressed to a man no less 
than to a woman). Here it is used to talk about people generally, and is equivalent 
to the slightly formal one, a less prototypical member of the personal pronoun 
category. 
Gender 
The 3rd person singular pronouns contrast in gender, which is a classification of 
NPs that has a variety of dimensions in some languages but in English revolves 
mainly around sex. 
The masculine gender pronoun he is used for males - humans or animals that 
have salient enough sexual characteristics for us to think ofthem as differentiated 
(certainly for gorillas, usually for ducks, probably not for rats, certainly not for 
cockroaches). 
The feminine gender pronoun she is used for females, and also, by extension, for 
certain other things conventionally treated in a similar way: political entities 
(France has recalled her ambassador) and certain personified inanimates, espe­
cially ships (May God bless her and all who sail in her). 
The neuter pronoun it is used for inanimates, or for male or female 
animals (especially lower animals and non-cuddly creatures), and sometimes for 
human infants if the sex is unknown or considered irrelevant: The baby grunted 
again, and Alice looked very anxiously into its face to see what was the matter 
with ft. 
Choice of a singular human pronoun without sex specification 
No singular 3rd person pronoun in English is universally accepted as appropriate for 
referring to a human when you don't want to specify sex. The need for such a pro­
noun is often acute, especially where no particular person is referred to and the 
antecedent is indefinite and applicable to both males and females. The pronoun 
most widely used in such cases is they, in a secondary use that is interpreted seman­
tically as singular. (In its primary use, of course, it refers to groups and has plural 

104 
Chapter 5 Nouns and noun phrases 
antecedents.) Examples of semantically singular they are given in [52]: 
[52] 
Nobodv in their right mind would do a thing like that. 
11 Everyone has told me to. think I made the right decision. 
III We need a manager who is reasonably flexible in their approach. 
IV In that case the husband or the wife will have to give up their seat on the 
board. 
Notice that this special interpretation of they doesn't affect verb agreement: we have 
they think (3rd plural) in [ii], not *they thinks (3rd singular). Nonetheless, they can 
be INTERPRETED as if it were 3rd person singular, with human denotation and 
unspecified gender. 
The pronoun he used to be recommended for these uses. That would give us 
%Nobody in his right mind would do a thing like that instead of [52i]. However, this 
now seems inappropriate to a large proportion of speakers, who systematically 
avoid the use of he in such contexts (hence the per cent sign on the example just 
given). 
This avoidance of he can't be dismissed as just a matter of political correctness. 
The real problem with using he is that its primary sense unquestionably colours the 
interpretation, sometimes inappropriately. If his were used in place of their in 
[52iii], it would suggest that the speaker assumes the manager will be a man. And 
he is impossible for just about all speakers in cases like [52iv], where the antecedent 
is a coordination of a masculine and a feminine NP joined by or: you could hardly 
say ?In that case the husband or the wife will have to give up his seat on the board. 
This shows that he doesn't have a genuinely sex-neutral sense. 
Some speakers use disjunctive locutions like he or she in preference to the sexist 
use of he: We need a manager who is reasonably flexible in his or her approach. But 
this sounds absurd when there are repeated occurrences: examples like ?Everyone 
agreed he or she would bring his or her lunch with him or her are far too cumber­
some for use. And *Everyone 's here, isn 't he or she? is flatly ungrammatical, 
because the interrogative component in this construction is required to contain just 
an auxiliary and a pronoun. The only natural non-sexist alternative would be: Every­
one 's here, aren 't they? 
Among younger speakers today, semantically singular they is extending its 
scope: people use it even with definite NP antecedents, sidestepping any presump­
tions about the sex of the person referred to, as in You should ask your partner what 
they think, or The person I was with said they hated the film. 
There is just one problem area for they with singular antecedents: what to use 
in the reflexive construction (the one containing compound forms like myself, 
ourselves, etc.). Everybody enjoyed themselves seems fine, because we're talking 
about a number of people; but ?Somebody here obviously considers themselves 
above the law, with the visibly plural selves, sounds odd given that there's just one 
person involved and the verb is a 3rd person singular form. The obvious solution 
would be to have a singular form themself. This is found, and has a long history 
in English, but at the moment it is quite rare, and can't really be regarded as 
standard. 

§8.3 Inflection 
105 
Prescri ptive grammar note 
Usage manuals vary considerably in their attitude to semantically singular they. The more 
factually based ones treat it as acceptable, recognising that it has been in the language for 
several hundred years, used by writers of impeccable standing - Chaucer, Shakespeare, 
Milton, Austen, Wilde, and large numbers of other authors. The more conservative man­
uals, however, insist that the conflict between the primarily plural form and the singular 
meaning makes this use of they incorrect. In fact there are manuals still in print that 
directly recommend the use of he. But defenders of this advice must face an awkward 
question: why should an extension from plural to singular sense for they be unacceptable, 
if extension from masculine to sex-neutral sense for he is supposed to be all right? 
We don't think there is any way to answer this question, or to defend the conservative 
position. Semantically singular they is well established in fine literature and completely 
natural in both conversation and writing. 
8.3 
Inflection 
The personal pronouns exhibit a greater amount of inflectional variation 
than other nouns. In the first place there is a distinction between reflexive and 
non-reflexive forms, and secondly they have up to four different case-forms. The 
following table displays in full the forms of the central personal pronouns. 
[53] 
NON-REFLEXIVE 
REFLEXIVE 
Nominative 
Accusative 
Genitive 
Plain 
Plain 
Dependent 
Independent 
I 
I 
me 
my 
mine 
myself 
II 
you 
you 
your 
yours 
yourself 
III 
he 
he 
him 
his 
himself 
IV 
she 
she 
her 
her 
hers 
herself 
v 
it 
it 
its 
itself 
VI 
we 
we 
us 
our 
ours 
ourselves 
vii 
you 
you 
your 
yours 
yourselves 
viii 
they 
they 
them 
their 
theirs 
themselves 
Reflexive forms 
The reflexive pronouns have two main uses: one where they function as complement, 
and an emphatic use where they function as modifier in clause or NP structure: 
[54] 
COMPLEMENT USE 
a. Sue hurt herself. 
ii a. Sue was talking to herself. 
EMPHATIC USE 
b. Sue designed the house herself. 
b. Sue herself admitted it was a mistake. 

1 06 
Chapter 5 Nouns and noun phrases 
g. In the complement use the reflexive forms generally contrast with non-reflexive 
ones: [ia] contrasts with Sue hurt her, and so on. In [ia], Sue is the antecedent for the 
pronoun, so the meaning is that the person hurt was the same as the one who caused 
the hurt: "Sue hurt Sue". In Sue hurt her, by contrast, Sue cannot be the antecedent, 
and hence we understand that Sue hurt some other female. Complement reflexives 
occur in a close syntactic relation to the antecedent. In the simplest and most com­
mon case, illustrated here, the antecedent is subject of the clause containing the 
reflexive as complement of the verb, as in [ia], or of a preposition, as in [iia] . 
• In the emphatic use only reflexive forms are permitted: we can't say *Sue 
designed the house her. In [ib] the reflexive emphasises that it was Sue who 
designed the house: she didn't have someone else do it. In [iib] it emphasises that 
Sue made the admission: perhaps she was the one who made the mistake. 
The nominative-accusative contrast of case 
The grammatical category of case applies to a system of inflectional forms whose 
primary use is to mark various syntactic functions. This is clearly the major factor 
determining the choice between nominative and accusative forms in English, but 
style level is an important secondary factor. Compare: 
[55] 
They wrote the editorial. 
11 Kim met them in Paris. 
J1l I was talking to them yesterday. 
IV It was they/them who complained. 
[subject: nominative 1 
[object of verb: accusative] 
[object of prep: accusative] 
[PC: nominative or accusative] 
Ó When the pronoun is subject of a finite clause it appears in nominative form, and 
when it is object - of the verb, as in [ii], or of a preposition, as in [iii] - it appears 
in accusative form. 
• When the pronoun is predicative complement both forms are found - though the 
nominative is largely restricted to constructions of the form it + be + pronoun, 
as in [iv]. Here the nominative is quite formal in style, with the accusative some­
what informal. However, in constructions like The only person who didn 'f com­
plain was me a nominative could hardly replace the underlined accusative. 
Case in verbless constructions 
There is also alternation between the two case-forms in certain verbless constructions: 
[56] 
a. She 's a year younger than I. 
b. She 's a year younger than me. 
Again, the nominative in [a] is strongly formal in style, and the accusative is much 
more common in ordinary conversation. 
Prescriptive grammar note 
The more authoritarian and conservative manuals claim that only a nominative is gram­
matically correct in [55ivl, where the pronoun is predicative complement, and [56], 
where it is understood as subject of an elliptical clause (cf. younger than I am). But that 
is to confuse correctness with formality, as we pointed out in Ch. 1 ,  §2: the accusative 
variants are unquestionably grammatical in Standard English. 

Plain case 
§8.3 Inflection 
107 
In Present-day English the contrast between nominative and accusative fonns is found 
only with personal pronouns and with interrogative and relative who (discussed in 
Ch. 9, §2.4, Ch. 1 1, §3). Other nouns appear in the same fonn in all the above con­
structions: cf. The minister wrote the editorial, Kim met the minister in Paris, and so 
on. We use the tenn plain fonn here: to say that minister was nominative in the 
first and accusative in the second would be to make the mistake of confusing 
INFLECTIONAL CASE with GRAMMATICAL FUNCTION. 
Case in coordinations 
For many speakers the above rules extend to constructions where the pronoun is 
coordinated, but there are also many who use special rules for coordinative con­
structions. Note the status markers on the following examples: 
[57] 
a. Kim and 1 went over there. 
ii a. They invited Sandy and me. 
b. !Kim and me went over there. 
b. %They invited Sandy and l. 
The whole coordination is subject in [i] and object in [ii], so in the absence of coor­
dination we would have nominative I in [i] (I went over there) and accusative me in 
[ii] (They invited me). Construction rib] is not accepted as Standard English, though 
it is very common in non-standard speech. Construction [iib], however, is used by 
many highly educated people with social prestige in the community; it should be 
regarded as a variant Standard English fonn. 
Prescriptive grammar note 
The pattern in [iib] is heard constantly in the conversation of people whose status as 
speakers of Standard English is clear, but it is nevertheless condemned as incorrect or 
illiterate by many usage manuals. For this reason it is not so common in print: editors will 
often 'correct' it. Nonetheless, examples are certainly found. Those who condemn it sim­
ply assume that the case of a pronoun in a coordination must be the same as when it stands 
alone. Actual usage is in conflict with this assumption. (Note that we have already come 
across another instance of coordinated NPs differing in form from non-coordinated ones: 
recall the discussion of husband and wife in [15iia].) 
Genitive case 
While the nominative-accusative contrast is found only with a handful of pronouns, 
genitive case applies to nouns quite generally - and hence is discussed in a separate 
section below (§9). The distinction between dependent and independent forms of 
the genitive, however, is restricted to personal pronouns. Compare: 
[58] 
DEPENDENT FORM 
a. I've lost lID'. key. 
ii a. He objected to lID'. taking notes. 
INDEPENDENT FORM 
b. This is mine. 
b. Your proposal is better than mine. 

108 
Chapter 5 Nouns and noun phrases 
4ft The dependent form usually functions in NP structure as determiner to a follow­
ing head, as in [ia]. It also occurs as subject of a gerund-participial clause, as in 
[iia], where it is a dependent of the VP head; this latter use is somewhat formal in 
style, with accusative me as an informal alternant. 
• The independent form occurs as head in NP structure - a pure head in rib], a 
fused determiner-head in [iib], where we understand "my proposal". 
8.4 
Reciprocal pronouns 
There are two reciprocal pronouns, each other and one another. They are 
written with a space as if they were two words, but the parts are inseparable and they 
are best regarded as single pronouns. There is no difference in meaning between them. 
The reciprocal pronouns are similar to the reflexives (in their complement use) in 
that they have to be in a close syntactic relation to their antecedent. Compare: 
[59] 
REFLEXIVES 
a. Lee and Pat cursed themselves. 
ii a. * Lee and Pat knew that I would 
curse themselves. 
RECIPROCALS 
b. Lee and Pat cursed each other. 
b. * Lee and Pat knew that I would 
curse each other. 
Usually, the antecedent is subject of the clause containing the pronoun, as in [i]. It 
cannot normally be in a different clause, as shown in [ii]. It should be clear that lack 
of meaning is not the problem. Just as [ib] means that Lee cursed Pat and Pat cursed 
Lee (as the term 'reciprocal' suggests), so [iib] could have meant (if it were gram­
matical) that Lee knew that I would curse Pat and Pat knew that I would curse Lee. 
The reciprocals differ from the reflexives, however, in two major respects. 
• First, they do not display person agreement with their antecedent. 
" Second, they have genitive forms, as seen in Lee and Pat blamed each other's 
parents. 
9 
Genitive case 
Leaving aside interrogative and relative whose and the personal pro­
nouns (which have the irregular forms listed in [53]) the genitive is marked in writ­
ing by . 's (dog 's) or by the apostrophe alone (dogs '): for the distinction between 
these, see Ch. 16, §4.2. 
9. 1 
Genitive NPs as subject-determiner 
The most frequent use of genitive case is to mark a dependent in the 
structure of an NP: 
[60] 
a. [The teacher's car] was stolen. 
b. They phoned [Ԡ mother). 
11 a. [These people 'state] is unknown. 
b. I met [the Secretary of State 's son]. 

§9. 1 Genitive NPs as subject-detenniner 
109 
Underlining here marks the genitive dependent, while brackets enclose the NP in 
which it functions. The genitive dependent is an NP: we have one NP functioning 
in the structure of another. Thus the first division of the bracketed NP in [ia], for 
example, is the teacher's + car (not the + teacher's car). This is particularly clear 
in examples like those in [ii]. 
• In [iia] plural these obviously belongs with plural people, not singular fate. 
• And in [iib] the person I met was the son not of the State but of the Secretary of 
State. 
The . 's suffix occurs at the end of the genitive NP; the latter usually has the head in 
final position, as in [ia] and [iia], but it can contain a relatively short post-head 
dependent, like of State in [iib]. Compare, similarly, someone else 's responsibility 
or the guy next door's voice. 
Dual function of the genitive NP 
The genitive NPs in [60] combine the functions of detenniner and complement. The 
construction is semantically equivalent to one where the two functions are realised 
separately, by a definite detenniner and a post-head of phrase complement. Compare: 
[6 1 ]  
i a. the patient's condition 
ii a. one patient'sfather 
b. the condition ofthe patient 
b. the fathe r of one patient 
The single dependent of the [a] examples does the work of the two dependents of 
the [b] examples. 
• As a detenniner, the genitive is always definite. Note, for example, that [iia] 
corresponds to the father of one patient, not qfather of one patient. 
.. As a complement, the genitive is comparable to the subject of a clause. It occurs 
before the head nominal as a clause subject occurs before the head VP. And 
where the noun is morphologically related to a verb the genitive has the same 
role as a clause subject. Compare Kim 's criticism of the report and Kim criticised 
the report, and so on. 
For this reason we refer to the genitive NPs in [60-61 ]  as subject-determiners. 
'Genitive' vs 'possessive' 
The tenn 'possessive' is often used instead of 'genitive', especially for pronouns, 
but it is important to see that the semantic relation between the genitive NP and the 
following head is by no means limited to that of possession. Consider these cases, 
and think about which of them (if any) could possibly be said to have something to 
do with possessing: 
[62] 
her father, her friends, her birth, her infancy, her anger, her lack of money, 
her acceptance of your offer, her refusal to compromise, her rapid action 
Not one of these pennits a natural paraphrase with possess , in the way that her car can 
be paraphrased as the car she possesses. Often there will be a range of interpretations 

1 10 
Chapter 5 Nouns and noun phrases 
available. Her letter might be the letter she wrote or the letter she received, and 
there are other possibilities available in special contexts. In the context of a language­
teaching class, for example, it could be the letter that has been assigned to her to 
translate. 
9.2 
Other uses of the genitive 
Genitive case is also used in the following constructions: 
[63] 
SUBJECT 
ii FUSED HEAD 
iii OBLIQUE 
She didn 't approve of [his being given a second chance]. 
They accepted Kim 's proposal but not Pat's. 
iv PREDICATIVE 
V ATTRIBUTIVE 
The argument was sparked by a casual remark of Kim 'so 
Everything in this room is Mary's. 
They 've just moved to an old people 's home. 
.. In formal style the subject of a gerund-participial clause that is functioning as 
complement (of a verb or preposition) appears in genitive case, as in [i]. 
• Like most other determiners, a genitive can fuse with the head, as in [ii], under­
stood as "Pat's proposal". 
• The oblique genitive occurs as complement to of in a post-head dependent. Note 
the contrast between a casual remark of Kim 's in [iii], which is marked as indef­
inite by the article a, and Kim 's casual remark, which is marked as definite by the 
genitive subject-determiner . 
• The predicative genitive functions as complement of be, become, etc., and here 
it does indicate possession, as in [iv]. 
• The attributive genitive functions as internal modifier in NP structure. Note that 
in [v] an is determiner to the larger nominal (old people 's home), not the genitive 
one (old people 's); this contrasts with [60iia] above. 
Exercises 
1. Write out or type the following passage 
(it's the opening paragraph of the preface 
to Steven Pinker's book The Language 
Instinct) with the nouns underlined and the 
NPs enclosed in square brackets. (Don't 
forget that one NP can occur within another: 
in a phrase like I met the father of the bride, 
for example, the bride is an NP within the 
larger NP the father of the bride, so you 
would write [the/other of [the bridell.) 
J have never met a person who is not inter­
ested in language. J wrote this book to try to 
satisfy that curiosity. Language is beginning 
to submit to that uniquely satisfying kind of 
understanding that we call science, but the 
news has been kept a secret. 
2. There are a number of nouns that are 
plural-only in some of their senses, but not 
in all. For example: 
PLURAL-ONLY 
ORDINARY 
Eat more greens. 
Those greens don't match. 
For the first nine of the following give two 
examples containing the word in an appro­
priate context, one where it has its plural­
only sense, and one where it is an ordinary 
plural with a contrasting singular form. For 
the last item, people, give one example 

where it is a plural-only noun, and one 
where it is a singular: 
arts 
ii beginnings 
iii brains 
vi holidays 
vii letters 
viii spectacles 
iv compliments 
ix spirits 
v customs 
x people 
3. Say whether the underlined nouns in the 
following examples have a count or a non­
count interpretation. In each case construct 
another example in which the noun has the 
opposite interpretation. 
i You needn 't have gone into so much detail. 
ii I've run out of 1lfJIlil.. 
iii Can I have another sausage? 
iv He has jet-black hair. 
v They treat their new help appallingly. 
4. Are the underlined NPs below definite or 
indefinite? Give reasons for your answer. 
i Those shoes are filthy. 
ii Both copies Qjthe report are missing. 
iii I need two copies of your report. 
iv Either time would be OKfor me. 
v We found several big mushrooms. 
5. In the following examples give (a) the 
function within NP structure, and (b) the 
category, of the underlined expressions 
(there are twenty in all; for reference 
they're labelled with small roman numeral 
subscripts). 
ǰi] interest in language!ii] 
g!iii] brick!iv] wall 
the!v] people who need most helprvi] 
three!vii] Canadian]viii] soldiers 
its!ix] many!x] virtues 
a very useful!xi] discussion <lithe problem]xii] 
a person Q,fimpeccable taste]xiii] 
even]xiv] the director herselftxv] 
several]xvi] things you forgot to saYrxvii] 
a Vietnam war!xviii] veteran 
that larger xix] a deficit!xx] 
6. Classify the fused heads in the following 
examples as (a) simple; (b) partitive; or 
(c) special: 
Exercises 
III 
i lill has two children and her sister three. 
ii Which of her arguments did you find 
the most convincing? 
iii Thousands of people saw it, and most 
thought it was first-class. 
iv You 've made progress, but much still 
remains to be done. 
v There were several slices, and as usual 
Tom took the largest. 
vi The show verges on the obscene. 
vii There are wolves out there; I saw 
several. 
viii The first letter is P and the ǝ 
is Q. 
ix The good die young. 
x Many are called but.kJf. are chosen. 
7. Select an appropriate case-form of the 
pronoun I for the blank positions in the 
following examples. If more than one 
case-form is admissible in Standard 
English, list them all and comment on the 
difference between them. 
i Your father and _ have been consider­
ing this matter. 
ii In the other photo, the guy in the middle 
of the front row is _. 
iii They 've arrangedfor you and _ to 
meet with Dr lackson this evening. 
iv They went to the same school as _. 
v They 're seeing Kim before you and _. 
8. What kind of genitive do we have in the 
following examples: (a) subject-determiner; 
(b) subject; (c) fused-head; (d) oblique; 
(e) predicative; or (f) attributive? 
i A friend of mine told me you 're leaving 
the country. 
ii Your application has been approved but 
lW's is still being considered. 
iii This book belongs to Pat, but the rest 
are yours. 
iv Do you know if there 's a men 's toilet 
around here? 
v He objects to your being paid more than 
everybody else. 

_Adjectives and adverbs 
1 Adjectives 
1 1 2 
2 Adverbs 
1 22 
1 
Adjectives 
1 . 1  
Distinctive properties of prototypical adjectives 
Adjectives typically denote properties of objects, persons, places, etc.: 
properties relating to age (old, young), size (big, small), shape (round,flat), weight 
(heavy, light), colour (black, blue), merit or quality (good, bad), and so on. Syntac­
tically, prototypical adjectives in English have the following three properties. 
(a) Function 
They have attributive and predicative uses. Attributive adjectives function as inter­
nal pre-head modifier to a following noun; predicative adjectives function mainly 
as predicative complement in clause structure: 
[ I ] 
ATTRIBUTIVE USE 
ii PREDICATIVE USE 
(b) Grade 
an old car 
The car is old. 
black hair 
Her hair is black. 
good news 
The news is good. 
They either inflect for grade, showing a contrast between plain, comparative and 
superlative forms, or else form comparative and superlative adjective phrases 
(AdjPs) marked by more and most: 
[2] 
PLAIN 
She is tall. 
II This is useful 
(c) Modification 
COMPARATIVE 
She is taller than you. 
This is more useful than that. 
SUPERLATIVE 
She is the tallest of them all. 
This is the most useful one. 
They can be modified, usually by adverbs, as in [3] (the adverbs are double­
underlined): 
[3] 
too old remarkably tall extremely useful to us 
1 12 

1 .2 
Adjectives vs nouns 
§ 1 .2 Adjectives vs nouns 
1 1 3 
The properties given above make it a generally easy matter to distin­
guish adjectives from nouns, especially when taken together with the properties of 
nouns presented in Ch. 5, § 1 .  
In this section we pick out a selection of the most decisive properties that do dis­
tinguish between nouns and adjectives. We use judge, size, and silk as examples of 
words that occur as nouns but not as adjectives, and wise, big, and smooth as exam­
ples of words that occur as adjectives but not as nouns. 
(a) Inflection 
Nouns typically have plural inflected forms; adjectives (in English) never do. 
Conversely, many adjectives have comparative and superlative inflected forms, 
but no nouns do: 
[4] 
PLURAL FORMS WITH ·s OR ·es 
SUPERLATIVE FORMS WITH ·est 
a. N 
judges sizes silks 
b. *judgest *sizest 
*silkest 
ii a. ADJ *wises 
*bigs *smooths 
b. wisest 
biggest 
smoothest 
Not all nouns have plural forms and not all adjectives have comparative and superla­
tive forms, but where the forms do exist the difference between nouns and adjectives 
is particularly clear. 
(b) Determiners 
Nouns take determiners as dependent but adjectives do not. Some of the determi­
natives that function as determiner in NP structure, however, can also function as 
modifier in AdjP structure, so in applying this test we need to select items which 
cannot modify adjectives. This can be done by picking genitives, or the determina­
tives which and some: 
[5] 
N 
ii ADJ 
which judge? 
*which wise? 
(c) Modifiers 
my llig 
*my llig 
some silk 
* some smooth 
Nouns and adjectives take different kinds of modifiers. Most importantly, NOUNS 
TAKE ADJECTIVES as modifier, but adjectives don't normally take other adjectives 
as modifier. Adjectives most often take adverbs. There are enormous numbers of 
adjective-adverb pairs that differ just by the presence of the suffix ·ly on the adverb, 
as in remarkable vs remarkably, and in those cases it is the word without the ·ly that 
modifies a following noun, and the one with ·ly that modifies a following adjective, 
as the examples in [6] show: 
[6] 
i N 
ii ADJ 
a remarkable judge 
remarkably wise 
its incredible llig 
incredibly llig 
this wonderful silk 
wonderfully smooth 
Switching adjectives and adverbs makes ungrammatical phrases in every case: *a 
remarkably judge, *remarkable wise, etc. 

1 14 
Chapter 6 Adjectives and adverbs 
(d) Function 
The attributive and predicative uses of adjectives do not provide a good test for dis­
tinguishing them from nouns because nouns can also function as attributive modi­
fiers or predicative complements. But there is a function-based test that separates 
nouns from adjectives fairly well: the ability of nouns to head phrases in subject 
and object position. We illustrate in [7]. 
[7] 
N 
ii ADJ 
SUBJECT 
The judge arrived. 
*Wise arrived. 
Overlap between the categories 
SUBJECT 
Its sjzg amazed me. 
* f1jg amazed me. 
OBJECT 
I like silk. 
*1 like smooth. 
It should be borne in mind that there are a good many lexemes that belong to both 
noun and adjective categories. They have the positive properties of both. One exam­
ple is cold: 
'.. it can be an adjective denoting a low temperature (This soup is cold); 
It can also be a noun denoting a minor illness (I caught a bad cold). 
Compare, then: 
[8] 
INFLECTION 
11 DETERMINERS 
1lI MODIFIERS 
iv FUNCTION 
ADJECTIVE 
colder, coldest 
terribly cold 
NOUN 
colds 
my cold, which cold? 
a terrible cold 
The cold was nasty. Don 't catch a cold. 
", The adjective has comparative and superlative forms while the noun has a plural. 
,. The noun takes determiners as dependent. 
The modifier contrast is evident in [iii], with the adjective taking an adverb and 
the noun an adjective as modifier. 
The noun occurs as head of a phrase in subject or object function. 
The fused modifier-head construction 
One complication in distinguishing between adjectives and nouns is that a limited 
range of adjectives can appear as fused modifier-head in an NP, as described in 
Ch. 5, §7. Further examples are given in [9]. 
[9] 
SIMPLE 
11 PARTITIVE 
III SPECIAL 
Thefirst version wasn 't very good but [the second] was fine. 
I couldn 't afford [even the cheapest of them J. 
This tax cut will benefit [only the rich). 
Precisely because they are in head position in NP structure, the underlined words 
might at first glance be thought to be nouns. But they're not nouns: they're adjec­
tives. In the simple and partitive constructions this is fairly easy to see: 
Note the possibility of adding a repetition of the noun version in [i]. 
In [ii] we have a superlative form, cheapest, which certainly can't be a noun. 

§ 1 .3 Adjectives vs verbs 
1 1 5 
Less obvious, however, is the construction in [iii] with its special interpretation. 
In most cases, nevertheless, the form in the special construction can be clearly iden­
tified as an adjective. 
.. This is shown first of all by the modifier test: the extremely rich provides evi­
dence that rich is an adjective because it is preceded by a modifying adverb (a 
noun would be modified by an adjective). 
• Notice also that in this special fused modifier-head use, the only determiner per­
mitted is the - a person who is rich can't be referred to as *a rich or *some rich. 
And although the NP the rich is plural (hence the verb agreement in The rich are 
the beneficiaries), it doesn't have plural inflection on rich - two rich people can't 
be referred to as *two riches. Rich thus behaves very differently from a noun. 
Overall, there is strong evidence that the rich in [9iii] contains an adjective but no 
noun. 
1 .3 
Adjectives vs verbs 
The properties given in § 1 . 1  together with those presented in Ch. 3, § I 
for the verb enable us to distinguish adjectives from verbs in a similar way. We'll 
apply a selection of the most decisive properties to distinguish the adjectives fond, 
sad, appreciative from the verbs love, regret, enjoy. 
(a) Inflection and grade 
Verbs have a richer system of inflection than any of the other parts of speech. Most 
distinctive are the preterite and 3rd person singular forms. As already mentioned, 
comparative and superlative inflection is found with adjectives but not verbs. We 
illustrate in [ 1 0] with preterite and comparative forms: 
[ 1 0] 
i a. V 
ii a. ADJ 
PRETERITE FORMS 
loved 
regretted 
*fonded * sadded 
enjoyed 
*appreciatived 
COMPARATIVE FORMS 
b. *lover 
b. 
fonder 
*regretter *enjoyer 
sadder 
[n/a] 
The asterisks in rib] mark impossible comparative forms (lover is of course estab­
lished in a quite different sense as a noun, but the point here is that it's not the com­
parative of love). We wouldn't expect a comparative inflectional form for apprecia­
tive, because adjectives of this length don't take grade inflection, but even with 
appreciative there is a comparative marked by more. And that suffices to distinguish 
it from a verb, since when more combines with a verb it doesn't precede it: 
[ 1 1] 
1 V 
*1 more love you. 
1 love you more. 
ii ADJ 
I'm more a[!preciative than you. 
*I'm a[!preciative than you more. 
(b) Modifiers 
Unlike nouns, verbs take largely the same modifiers as adjectives: compare Kim 
loved Pat immensely and Kim was immensely fond of Pat. Nevertheless there are 
some adverbs that can modify adjectives but not verbs. They include very; pretty, in 

1 16 
Chapter 6 Adjectives and adverbs 
the sense "fairly, quite"; and too, in the sense "excessively". The adverb too can also 
mean "as well", and in this sense it can modify verbs, so in the following examples 
we add the subscript 'x' to make explicit that we are concerned with too in the 
"excessively" sense: 
[12] 
V 
ii 
iii ADJ 
{ *1 very love her. 
*1 love her very. 
I'm very fond of her. 
*He pretty regrets it. 
*He regrets it pretty. 
He 's pretty sad. 
*She toox enjoyed it. 
*She enjoyed it toox• 
She was too" alpreciative. 
Not all adjectives are semantically compatible with the degree modifiers very, too 
and pretty. They have to denote a property that can hold to a greater or lesser 
extent - what we will call a scalar property. For those adjectives that do denote 
scalar properties, the degree modification seen in [ 1 2iii] provides a very clear indi­
cation of their status as adjectives as opposed to verbs. 
(c) Function 
A major difference between verbs and adjectives is that verbs function as predicator 
(head of a VP) in clause structure whereas adjectives do not. In their predicative use, 
adjectives occur not as predicator but as complement to a verb such as be, become, 
seem, etc.: 
[13] 
i V 
ii ADJ 
They love you. 
They are fond of you. 
We regret it. 
You ԡ it. 
We became sad. 
You seem appreciative. 
The predicator in each case in [ii] is the double-underlined word, not the adjective. 
Overlap between the categories 
Again we need to bear in mind that there are some items that belong to both cate­
gories. Tame, for example, is a verb in We tame them but an adjective in They are 
tame. In pairs like this, where the adjective is identical with the plain form and plain 
present tense of the verb, it is very easy to distinguish between them in terms of the 
above criteria. 
. The verb has the preterite form tamed and the 3rd person singular present tense 
tames. And it can't take very as modifier: *We very tame them or *We tame them 
very. 
" The adjective has the comparative form tamer and the superlative tamest. And it 
can be modified by very: They are very tame. 
When the verb-form involved is a gerund-participle or past participle form, things 
are not so obvious, because these verb-forms can occur after be in the progressive 
and passive constructions. That means there can be ambiguity between verb and 
adjective interpretations, as in [14]: 
[ 14] 
a. They are entertaining. 
b. The clock was broken. 
For [a], the verbal interpretation is "They are currently receiving guests", while 
the adjectival interpretation is "They are enjoyable". The former is excluded if 

§ l A  Adjectives vs determinatives 
1 17 
we add very (They are very entertaining can only mean "They are very enjoy­
able") or replace be by seem or become (e.g., They became entertaining). The 
adjectival interpretation is excluded if we add an object for the verb (They are 
entertaining some colleagues), since virtually no adjectives take objects. 
'. For [b] the verbal interpretation describes an event: "Someone or something 
broke the clock". The adjectival interpretation, by contrast, describes a state: 
"The clock was in an inoperative condition". Brokenness tends to be thought of 
as a yes-or-no property, so in general the adjective broken doesn't take very as 
modifier, but it certainly can (in fact very broken is a common phrase among 
computer programmers). And the seem test is also relevant: It seemed broken can 
only be adjectival. 
1 .4 
Adjectives vs determinatives 
The distinction between adjectives and determinatives is not as sharply 
drawn as those between adjectives and nouns or adjectives and verbs. Nevertheless, 
the definite article the and the indefinite article a differ strikingly from prototypical 
adjectives with respect to both syntax and meaning: 
;;> The articles can be obligatory: in most cases NPs with a count singular noun as 
head must have some kind of determinative, so in The dog barked or A dog 
barked, the article is required: * Dog barked is not grammatical. 
" The articles are non-gradable. 
" The articles cannot be used predicatively. 
Ò. The articles serve to mark the NP as definite or indefinite rather than denoting 
some property of the referent. 
Other items can then be assigned to the determinative category by virtue of hav­
ing one or more of the following properties: 
[ 15] 
i They don't occur with articles, and articles don't occur with them. 
ii They can occur as the only pre-head dependent of a count singular noun. 
iii They can occur as fused head in a partitive construction. 
The examples in [ 1 6] show how these properties distinguish the determinative some 
from the adjective good: 
[ 1 6] 
DETERMINATIVE 
a. * She gave me the some apples. 
11 a. Some guy called to see you. 
1lI a. I took some of the books. 
ADJECTIVE 
b. He gave me the good apples. 
b. *Good guy called to see you. 
b. *1 took good of the books. 
In [i], [a] is inadmissible because some cannot follow the. 
In [ii], guy is a count singular noun and requires a determiner, such as some. 
In [iii] some is fused head with a partitive complement, a construction which 
does not admit adjectives except for comparative and superlatives (the younger of 
the two, the best of the lot). 

1 1 8 
Chapter 6 Adjectives and adverbs 
1 .5 
Gradable and non-gradable adjectives 
We have said that prototypical adjectives have comparative and superla­
tive forms and take degree modifiers such as very, too ("excessively") and pretty. 
Adjectives of this kind are said to be gradable. They denote scalar properties that 
can apply in varying degrees. Good, old, big and so on denote properties of this 
kind - and one can ask about the degree to which the property applies with how: 
How big is it?, etc. 
Not all adjectives are of this kind. There are also non-gradable adjectives, as in 
an alphabetical list. It makes no sense to ask how alphabetical a list is, or to say that 
one list is more alphabetical than another. Alphabetical thus denotes a non-scalar 
property. Other examples of non-gradable adjectives are seen in [17]: 
[ 1 7] 
the chief dificulty 
federal taxes 
glandular fever 
my !&.f1 arm 
a medical problem 
phonetic symbols 
pubic hair 
their tenth attempt 
Some adjectives can be used in either way: like the distinction between count and 
non-count in nouns, the gradable vs non-gradable distinction applies to uses rather 
than lexemes as such. Compare: 
[ 1 8] 
NON-GRADABLE USE 
a. in the public interest 
11 
a. the British government 
GRADABLE USE 
b. a very public quarrel 
b. a very British response 
1Il 
a. The motorway is now open. 
b. He was more open with us than the boss. 
Typically, as in these examples, the non-gradable sense is the basic one, with the 
gradable sense representing an extended use. 
1 .6 
The structure of adjective phrases 
An AdjP consists of an adjective as head, alone or accompanied by one 
or more dependents. The dependents may be complements, licensed by the head, 
or modifiers, less restricted in their occurrence. 
(a) Complements 
The complements are almost always PPs, as in [19], or subordinate clauses, as 
in [20]: 
[ 1 9] 
[20] 
afraid of the dark 
kind to children 
glad it was over 
busy making lunch 
bent on revenge 
remote from reality 
uncertain what to do 
dificult for us to see 
conversant with it 
unaltered bv heat 
good at chess 
unfit for use 
eager to win 
hard to grasp 
thankful that no one had been hurt 
The choice of preposition in [19] depends on the head adjective: we couldn't 
have, for example, *afraid on the dark or *bent of revenge. With certain adjec­
tives (in particular senses) the PP is obligatory: the sense of bent shown here, for 

§ 1 .7 Predicative complements and predicative adjuncts 
1 19 
example, requires a PP complement with on (or upon); and conversant cannot 
occur at all without a complement. 
The kind of subordinate clause likewise depends on the adjective: we couldn't 
have *glad what to do, *busy to make lunch, and so on. 
(b) Modifiers 
The most common type of modifier is an adverb (or AdvP), as underlined in [21 i], 
but other categories are also found: determinatives (underlined in [2I ii]), PPs (as in 
[2l iii]), and in a very limited range of cases, NPs (as in [21 iv]): 
[21 ]  
extremely hot morally wrong 
| useful almost completely watertight 
11 this young 
that old no diferent much better 
ill'. smaller old enough 
iii cautious to excess dangerous in the extreme an [in some respects good] idea 
iv five years old two hours long 
a great deal smaller a bit overpowering 
PPs generally follow the head, but in attributive AdjPs they normally precede, as in 
the last example of [iii], where we have put brackets round the whole AdjP. 
1 .7 
Predicative complements and predicative adjuncts 
In their predicative use, adjectives (or AdjPs) generally function as com­
plement in clause structure. As we saw in Ch. 4, §5, predicative complements occur 
in complex-intransitive and complex-transitive clauses: 
[22] 
COMPLEX-INTRANSITIVE CLAUSE 
a. 
The suggestion I is I ridiculous. 
S 
P 
PC 
COMPLEX-TRANSITIVE CLAUSE 
b. I I  I consider I the suggestion I ridiculous. I 
s P 
o 
PC 
The adjective is related to a predicand (the suggestion), which is subject in the 
complex-intransitive construction, and object in the complex-transitive con­
struction. 
In addition to being complements, licensed by the head, predicative AdjPs can be 
adjuncts. Compare, for example: 
[23] 
PREDICATIVE COMPLEMENT 
11 PREDICATIVE ADJUNCT 
Max was unwilling to accept these terms. 
Unwilling to accept these terms. Max resigned. 
In [i] the AdjP is a complement licensed by the verb (be), but in [ii] it is an adjunct, 
with no such licensing - it is, more specifically, a supplement, detached by intona­
tion or punctuation from the rest of the clause. It is nevertheless still predicative, in 
that it is related to a predicand. We understand in [ii], no less than in [i], that the 
unwillingness to accept these terms applies to Max. 

1 20 
Chapter 6 Adjectives and adverbs 
1 .8 
Adjectives restricted to attributive or predicative function 
Although most adjectives can be used both attributively and predicatively, 
there are nevertheless many that are restricted to one or other of these two uses: 
[24 ] 
ATTRIBUTIVE USE 
PREDICATIVE USE 
a. a huUe hole 
ii a. utter nonsense 
iii a. *the asleep children 
b. The hole was huUe. 
b. *That nonsense was utter. 
b. The children were asleep. 
Huge illustrates the default case, where the adjective appears both attributively 
and predicatively. 
Utter is an exceptional case: an attributive-only adjective, which can't be used 
predicatively (as shown in [iib)). 
Asleep is the opposite kind of exception, as evident from [iii]; it can occur pred­
icatively but not attributively: it is a never-attributive adjective. 
(a) Attributive-only adjectives 
NPs containing a sample of other adjectives that are attributive-only are given in [25]: 
[25] 
these damn budget cuts 
our future prospects 
the only drawback 
the putative father 
the eventual winner 
the main problem 
their own fault 
the sole survivor 
(b) Never-attributive adjectives 
her former husband 
a mere child 
the principal advantage 
a veritable jungle 
Here are some further examples of predicative uses of never-attributive adjectives: 
[26] 
The house was ablaze. 
Something was amiss. 
It is liable to flood. 
The boy seemed afraid. 
It was devoid of interest. 
The baby looked content. 
Restrictions may apply to senses rather than lexemes 
The child was alone. 
Corruption was rik.. 
I was utterly bereft. 
As with the gradable vs non-gradable distinction, the restrictions often apply just 
to certain senses of a lexeme. In [27], for example, it is ONLY IN THE SENSES 
ILLUSTRATED that the underlined adjectives in [i] are attributive-only, and those in 
[ii] never-attributive: 
[27] 
i a certain country 
ii I feel faint 
the late queen 
He was Ulad to see her. 
Structural restrictions on attributive adjectives 
the lawful heir 
I'm sorry you missed it. 
Attributive AdjPs mostly cannot contain dependents that follow the head. The typi­
cal case is as in [28], where the underlined adjective licenses a post-head dependent 
(double-underlined), and the AdjP is allowed only predicatively as in the [a] cases, 
not attributively as in the [b] cases. 

[28] 
PREDICATIVE 
a. She was devoted to her children. 
11 a. She was cautious to excess. 
§ 1 .9 Other functions of AdjPs 
1 2 1  
ATTRIBUTIVE 
b. *a devoted to her children mother 
b. *a cautious to excess manager 
There are a few post-head dependents that can occur with attributive adjectives, 
though, as seen in [29]. 
[29] 
i a. The house was f2jg enough. 
ii a. The result was better than expected. 
iii a. It was better than anyone expected. 
b. a f2jg enough house 
b. a better than expected result 
b. a better result than anyone expected 
Enough is allowed quite generally after gradable adjectives, as in [i]. 
Than expected in [iib] is a short comparative complement that is permitted within 
an attributive AdjP. 
A longer phrase would have to be located after the head noun, as in [iiib], where 
it functions as indirect complement (see Ch. 5, §4). 
1 .9 
Other functions of AdjPs 
Besides the two major functions discussed above, there are two rela­
tively minor functions in which adjectives and AdjPs are found. 
(a) Postpositives 
Postpositive adjectives function in NP structure as post-head internal modifier. 
There are three cases to consider: 
[30] 
i everything useful somebody rich 
somewhere safe 
those responsible 
ii children keen on sport a report full of errors a suggestion likely to oU-end 
iii the only modification possible the ones asleep the president elect 
The examples in [i] have fused determiner-heads, making it impossible for the 
adjectives to occur in the usual pre-head position - compare everything useful 
with every useful thing. 
The modifiers in [ii] would be inadmissible in pre-head position because the adjec­
tive has its own post-head dependents; the postpositive construction provides a way 
of getting around the fact that such AdjPs cannot be used as attributive modifiers. 
A limited number of adjectives can occur postpositively without their own 
dependents and with a non-fused head noun, as in [iii]: possible can also be 
attributive whereas asleep (as we have seen) cannot. Elect (meaning "recently 
elected but not in office yet") is one of a very small number of exceptional adjec­
tives that occur only postpositively. 
(b) External modifiers 
Certain forms of AdjP occur right at the beginning of the NP, before the indefinite 
article a: 
[3 1] 
a. [How long a delay] will there be? 
ii a. It seemed [such a bargain]. 
b. He 'd chosen [too dark a colour]. 
b. [What a/ool] I was. 

1 22 
Chapter 6 Adjectives and adverbs 
One type are AdjPs containing how, as, so, too, this or that as modifier, as in [i]. 
There are two adjectives that can appear by themselves in this position: such and 
the exclamative word what, shown in [ii]. 
2 
Adverbs 
The adverb is the fourth and last of the categories of lexemes that we 
call open - the categories with huge and readily expandable membership. Noun and 
verb are the major open categories. Every canonical clause, even the simplest, must 
contain at least one of each (Kim laughed, Clouds formed, They moved). Such ele­
mentary constructions can be expanded by adding adjectives and adverbs as modi­
fiers. Nouns take adjectives as their simplest and most typical modifiers, while verbs 
take adverbs. 
The main thing that makes the adverb category open is that such a high propor­
tion of adverbs are morphologically derived from adjectives by adding the suffix ·ly. 
It is with these related adjective-adverb pairs that we can see most clearly the con­
trast between the modifiers of nouns and the modifiers of verbs: 
[32] 
MODIFICATION OF NOUN 
MODIFICATION OF VERB 
a. a ԝ family 
b. They all lived © ever after. 
ii a. a ĝreedy child 
b. The child devoured it ĝreedily. 
iii a. a passionate lover 
b. They loved each other passionately. 
Here double underlining marks the head word, and single underlining marks the 
modifier - an adjective in [a], an adverb in [b]. 
2. 1 
Adverbs as modifiers of categories other than the noun 
The term 'adverb' is based on the function of these words as modifiers 
of verbs. But to a very large extent the words that are used for modifying verbs also 
function as modifiers to adjectives; and a good many modify other adverbs as well: 
[33] 
a. a virtual disaster 
b. *his almost death 
ii a. It virtually evaporated. 
b. He almost died. 
[noun] 
[verb] 
iii a. It was virtually impossible. 
b. He was almost dead. 
[adjective] 
iv a. He spoke virtually inaudibly. 
b. He was wounded almost fatally. 
The annotations on the right give the category of the (double-underlined) head 
word. 
In the [a] set, on the left, we have the adjective virtual modifying the noun, with 
the corresponding adverb virtually modifying the other three heads. 
In the [b] set the adverb almost modifies a verb, adjective or adverb; but since 
it isn't derived from any adjective there is no matching noun modifier to com­
plete rib]. 
[adverb] 

§2.2 Adverbs vs adjectives 
1 23 
Not only do adverbs modify verbs, adjectives and other adverbs, they also modify 
determinatives, PPs and NPs. Again we double-underline the head that is modified 
in [34]. 
[34] 
a. Virtually all copies are torn. 
11 a. I did it virtually by myself. 
III a. I'm virtually his only friend. 
b. I have almost no money left. 
b. It lasted almost until midnight. 
b. I bought almost the last copy. 
[determinative] 
[PP] 
[NP] 
Note that in [iii] the adverb functions as external modifier, not internal modifier like 
virtual in [33ia] (see Ch. 5, §6). 
The basic division, then, is between words that modify nouns, and words that 
modify other categories (categories of words or of larger constituents). The noun­
modifiers are adjectives, and the others are adverbs. I By no means all adverbs can 
modify all of this wide range of head elements, but there is a significant amount of 
overlap. Moreover, in all of these positions we find adverbs that are recognisable as 
such by virtue of being derived from an adjective by the addition of ·ly. 
2.2 
Adverbs vs adjectives 
In § 1 . 1  we listed three major properties of adjectives, having to do 
with function, grade and modification. The last two apply to adverbs as well as 
adjectives. 
Prototypical members of the adverb category enter into the system of grade, 
though the ·er and ·est suffixes are incompatible with the ·ly suffix (we find neither 
*quicklier nor *quickerly), so for the most part comparatives and superlatives are 
formed by means of more and most rather than by inflection, as in quickly, more 
quickly, most quickly. And adverbs, like adjectives, take adverbs as modifier, as 
illustrated in [33]. The crucial distinction between adverbs and adjectives is thus a 
matter of function. 
One aspect of this has already been discussed: adjectives modify nouns whereas 
adverbs modify other categories. But there is another functional difference that is no 
less important. Most adjectives can function as predicative complement as well as 
noun modifier, but adverbs do not normally occur in this function. Again the differ­
ence is most easily seen by taking adjective-adverb pairs related by ·ly: 
[35] 
MODIFIER 
a. an impressive performance 
11 a. She performed impressively. 
PREDICATIVE COMPLEMENT 
b. Her performance was impressive. 
b. *Her performance was impressively. 
[adjective] 
[adverb] 
I This is slightly oversimplified. There is a construction where we find an adverb modifying a noun. as 
in Industrial action resulted in the withdrawal indefinitely of the vehicular ferry service or A Ģ 
of timber internationally led to a steep rise in prices. The construction is subject to severe constraints; 
most importantly. adverbial modifiers of nouns are restricted to post-head position - compare the 
indefinite withdrawal of the vehicular ferry service. where the pre-head modifier is required to be an 
adjective. There are also constraints on the kind of adverb permitted. Manner adverbs. for example. 
are normally excluded. so that we have his il1W reaction. but not *his reaction anrily. 

1 24 
Chapter 6 Adjectives and adverbs 
Impressive and impressively can both function as modifier (here of noun and verb 
respectively), but only the adjective can be used predicatively. The same applies to 
those adverbs that are not derived from adjectives - they cannot be used as predica­
tive complements: 
[36] 
a. She almost succeeded. 
b. *Her success was almost. 
Overlap between the categories 
We do find some overlap between the adjective and adverb categories - items that 
belong to both by virtue of occurring in both sets of functions.2 Compare: 
[37] 
1 ADJ 
ii Anv 
their early departure 
They departed early. 
that ̉ day 
It's ̉ good. 
I don 't feel well. 
I didn 't play well. 
With some items, such as early, the meaning is the same, while in others it is 
different. 
The adjective very, for example, means something like "particular": it empha­
sises the identity of the day (that one, not any other). The adverb very, on the 
other hand, means approximately "extremely". 
The adjective well means "in good health", while the adverb means "in a good 
way" or "to a good standard". 
Warning: addition of '/y sometimes forms adjectives, not adverbs 
Although the addition of ·ly usually forms an adverb from an adjective, it does not 
invariably do so. In particular, there are some adjectives that are formed from nouns 
in this way; examples are given in [38]: 
[38] 
N 
ii ADJ 
beast 
beastly 
coward 
cowardly 
death 
deathly 
father 
fatherly 
friend 
friendly 
prince 
princely 
woman 
womanly 
It is clear that despite the ·ly ending the words in [ii] are adjectives, not adverbs. 
They can function attributively and predicatively, but do not modify verbs, as illus­
trated for friendly in [39]: 
[39] 
ATTRIBUTIVE USE 
a friendly old man 
PREDICATIVE USE 
He seems quite friendly. 
2.3 
The structure of AdvPs 
MODIFYING VERB 
*He behaved friendly. 
The structure of AdvPs is similar to that of AdjPs, but somewhat sim­
pler. Dependents can again be divided into complements and modifiers. 
2 The overlap is much greater in some non-standard varieties than in Standard English: a well-known 
non-standard feature, for example, omits the ·ly in many adverbs modifying verbs, as in !They pay the 
rent regular. 

Complements 
Exercises 
1 25 
A few adverbs fonned with the ·ly suffix license complements: 
[40] 
i Purchase of State vehicles is handled similarly to all State purchases. 
ii Happilyfor the boys, the class was cancelled. 
In one type, the adverb licenses the same kind of complement as the adjective 
from which it is formed. Compare [i], for example, with Purchase of State 
vehicles is similar to all State purchases. Other adverbs of this kind (with the 
preposition they go with shown in parentheses) include separately (from), 
independently (of), and equally (with). 
A very few adverbs, such as happily in [ii], take complements that are not 
licensed by a corresponding adjective with a matching sense: compare *The 
cancellation of the class was happy for the boys. 
Modifiers 
Modifiers are mostly AdvPs (as in [41 i]), but again detenninatives ([ii]), PPs ([iii]) 
and certain NPs ([iv]) are also found: 
[4 1] 
She sang | well. 
I did it rather hurriedly. 
He spoke remarkablv Ԟ. 
ii I didn 't do it that well. 
They arrived much sooner than we had expected. 
iii They behaved badly in the extreme. 
He didn 't answer at all convincingly. 
iv We arrived three hours late. 
It had all happened a bit suddenly. 
Exercises 
I . For each of the following adjectives, decide 
whether it can be used in attributive func­
tion, whether it can be used in predicative 
function, and whether it can be used in 
postpositive function. Give your evidence 
in detail. 
i alone 
ii available 
vi latter 
vii marine 
iii ersatz 
viii previous 
iv galore 
ix prime 
v immune 
x sleepy 
2. Classify the underlined words below as 
adjectives or nouns, justifying your answer 
by reference to the criteria given in Chs. 5 
and 6. 
i She is secretary of the Film Society. 
ii I've always admired the Irish. 
iii That's not a government responsibility. 
iv I want the original. not a copy. 
v What they say is nonsense. 
vi That sounds stupid. 
vii It verges on the obscene. 
viii She 's quite a comic. 
ix Do it the French way. 
x He's learning French. 
3. Among younger generation speakers, espe­
cially in AmE, we find not only That was a 
lot of fun, How much fun will we have?, and 
I thought it was fun, but also some con­
structions that older-generation speakers do 
not use, like these: 
% It was so fun. 
%1 can think of a lot of things funner than that. 
%It's thefunnest thing I've ever done. 
What is the change that has occurred to sep­
arate the two age groups' dialects? 
4. Which of the underlined words below are 
adjectives, which are verbs, and which are 

1 26 
Chapter 6 Adjectives and adverbs 
ambiguous between the two categories in 
the examples given? Give evidence for your 
answers. 
i The trains aren 't l1l1l!il1g today. 
ii What we said was simply Ǯ. 
iii She sounded quite impressed. 
iv It was a rewardin& experience. 
v His act is not amusin&. 
vi His act is not amusin& the crowd. 
vii We were surrounded. 
viii The bill was pgid. 
ix He was H1l!1. in the leg. 
x Let sleepin& dogs lie. 
5. For each of the following adjectives say 
whether it is (a) gradable; (b) non­
gradable; or (c) ambiguous, usable in two 
senses of which one is gradable and the 
other is not. In case (c), give examples of 
the two uses, commenting on the difference 
in meaning. 
i certain 
vi philosophical 
ii Christian 
vii true 
iii feminine 
viii worthy 
iv latter 
ix primary 
v main 
x childlike 
6. For each of these examples, identify the 
predicand of the underlined predicative 
AdjP. 
i We found your suggestion veO' helpful. 
ii The problem was thought insoluble by 
many. 
iii Unable to contain hjs an&er, Max 
stormed out of the room. 
iv We find the accused 8JliD!" your 
honour. 
v Eventually, too tired to cO'. the two 
children fell asleep. 
7. Which of the following adjectives license 
pp complements with a particular preposi­
tion as head? Give examples for those that 
do. If you cannot find any example in which 
the adjective has a pp complement, just 
write 'none'. 
i able 
vi easy 
ii capable 
vii free 
iii careful 
viii intent 
iv clever 
ix long 
v concise 
x responsible 
8. Classify the underlined words below as 
adjectives or adverbs, giving your reasons 
in each case. 
i Fortunately, he had plenty of time. 
ii He was going far too Jim. 
iii She seemed a very kindly old soul. 
iv We were annoyed at their ǜ arrival. 
v They 're becoming increasin&ly 
unruly. 
vi I was feeling quite /lJlJlIl. 
vii She works extremely lJm:d. 
viii We made lflJ2. many concessions. 
ix KirYIlx refrain from smoking. 
x That was very un&entiemanly. 
9. Construct convincing examples in which 
the adverb quite modifies: [i) a verb; [ii] an 
adjective; [iii] an adverb; [iv] a PP; and 
[v] an NP. 

.: 
Prepositions and preposition phrases 
1 The traditional class of prepositions 
1 27 
2 Extending the membership of the class 
1 28 
3 Further category contrasts 
1 33 
4 Grammaticised uses of prepositions 
1 36 
5 Preposition stranding 
1 37 
6 The structure of PPs 
1 39 
7 pp complements in clause structure 
142 
8 Prepositional idioms and fossilisation 
146 
1 
The traditional class of prepositions 
Prepositions make up a much smaller class of lexemes than the open 
categories of verb, noun, adjective and adverb. There are only about a hundred 
prepositions in current use. Traditional grammars list even fewer than that, but 
we don't follow the tradition on this point. Although all words traditionally clas­
sified as prepositions are classified as prepositions in our treatment too, we 
recognise a good number of other prepositions, formerly classified as adverbs, or 
as 'subordinating conjunctions'. We begin this chapter with an account of the 
category of prepositions as traditionally understood, and then explain why we 
have chosen to expand it. 
We give in [ I ]  a sampling of the words that (in at least some of their uses) belong 
to the category of prepositions. 
[ 1 ]  
above 
across 
after 
against 
at 
before 
behind 
below 
between 
beyond 
by 
down 
for 
from 
in 
into 
of 
off 
on 
over 
round 
since 
through 
to 
under 
up 
with 
without 
These words share the following properties. 
(a) They take NPs as complement 
In general, words are traditionally analysed as prepositions only if they have 
complements with the form of NPs. In the following pairs, for example, tradi­
tional grammar accepts the underlined words in [a] as prepositions, but not those 
in [b] : 
1 27 

1 28 
Chapter 7 Prepositions and preposition phrases 
[2] 
TRADITIONALLY A PREPOSITION 
TRADITIONALLY NOT A PREPOSITION 
a. The sun sank [below the horizon]. 
ii a. I haven 't seen her [,since Easter]. 
iii a. They set off [ԟ the rain]. 
b. I went [below]. 
b. I haven 't seen her [since she left town]. 
b. We stayed indoors [because of the rain]. 
b. He jumped [out of the window]. 
iv a. %Hejumped [out the window]. 
'\l Below fails to qualify in [ib] because it has no complement at all. 
" The other items in [b] fail because they have complements that are not NPs: a 
clause in [iib] and a pp headed by of in [iiib/ivb] . 
. ' With out there is divided usage. In AmE it can sometimes take an NP comple­
ment, as in [iva], but in BrE it requires of - so it can be a preposition in AmE but 
not in BrE. 
(b) No inflection 
The prepositions of traditional grammar do not inflect. We have just at, for example: 
there are no forms *atter, *ats, or whatever. 
(c) Meaning: relations in space or time 
Most traditional prepositions have meanings to do with relations in space or time: at 
the post office identifies a spatial location, into the garden fixes a direction of travel, 
after lunch locates a time period as following lunchtime, etc. Not all prepositions 
have this kind of meaning (for example, despite in [2iiia] doesn't), so this can't be 
used as a condition for belonging to the class of prepositions; but it is relevant to a 
general definition of prepositions, and we will take it up again in §4. 
(d) Function: head of wide range of dependents 
Prepositions head phrases that characteristically occur in a range of functions, 
notably dependents of either nouns or verbs, including as a special case the com­
plement of the verb be. In the following examples single underlining marks the PP, 
double underlining the head on which it is dependent: 
[3] 
DEPENDENT OF NOUN 
a house at the beach 
ii the chair in the corner 
iii the woman from Paris 
iv a bottle of milk 
DEPENDENT OF VERB COMPLEMENT OF BE 
He saw her at school. 
He i! at lunch. 
She k1 in the pool. 
We were in the pool. 
She comes from Paris. 
She is from Paris. 
I don 't approve ofit. 
That i! ofinterest. 
2 
Extending the membership of the class 
The reason why we extend the membership of the preposition class 
beyond the words that traditional grammar calls prepositions is that we see no jus­
tification for restricting it to words that have NP complements. That is, we don't 
think the condition discussed under (a) in § I should be regarded as essential. 

§2. 1 Prepositions vs subordinators 
1 29 
Notice first the effect of the NP complement condition on how we have to clas­
sify the word before in the three constructions shown in [4]. We compare before 
with the verb know: 
[4] 
TYPE OF COMPLEMENT 
NP 
before AS HEAD 
We left before the last act. 
That was before he died. 
know AS HEAD 
We know the last act. 
I know he died. 
ii CLAUSE 
iii NO COMPLEMENT 
I had seen her once before. 
Yes, I know. 
In [i] the complement of before or know (marked by double underlining) is an NP; 
in [ii] it is a subordinate clause; and in [iii] there is no complement. Everyone agrees 
that this difference in the complements has no bearing on the classification of know: 
it is a verb in all three examples. Know happens to be a verb that licenses either an 
NP or a clause as complement, and where the complement is optional. 
But traditional grammar treats before in a completely different way. It is treated 
as a preposition in [i], a 'subordinating conjunction' in [ii], and an adverb in [iii]. 
We see this triple assignment as an unnecessary complication. It is much simpler to 
give before a uniform analysis, treating it as a preposition in all three, just as know 
is a verb in all three. 
Notice in the first place that before has the same meaning in all of [i-iii]. Sec­
ondly, it takes the same modifiers in these three contexts. We could, for example, 
insert such items as long, shortly, an hour, a short while in front of before in all 
three examples in [4]. The difference between the three instances of before is thus 
solely a matter of the complement. Nowhere else in the grammar is a part-of-speech 
distinction based purely on a difference of this kind. 
Our extension of the preposition category involves redrawing the boundaries 
between prepositions and subordinators, and between prepositions and adverbs. We 
take up these two pairs in turn. 
2. 1 
Prepositions vs subordinators 
The traditional class of subordinating conjunctions contains (among 
others) the words in [5]: 
[5] 
i 
after 
ii a. although 
b. if; 
before 
because 
that 
since 
till 
ifc 
lest 
whether 
until 
provided 
though 
unless 
We need to distinguish two words with the shape if. 
One has a conditional meaning, as in I'll help you if[ can: we show this above 
as ifc. 
The other occurs in subordinate interrogative clauses like See ifthere are any 
vacancies, corresponding to main clause Are there any vacancies ?: we show 
it as i/;. This is a variant of whether: compare See whether there are any 
vacancies. 

1 30 
Chapter 7 Prepositions and preposition phrases 
The words in [i] traditionally belong to the preposition class as well, whereas those in 
[ii] do not. We have argued against a dual classification treatment of the [i] words, 
analysing them simply as prepositions that license different kinds of complement. But 
once we reconsider the distinction between prepositions and subordinators we find there 
are good reasons for reassigning the words in [iia] as well to the preposition class. This 
leaves a very small subordinator class, with that, whether and ifi as its main members. 
The major argument for drawing the boundary between prepositions and subor­
dinators between [iia] and [iib] is that that, whether and ifi function as markers of 
subordination whereas the other words in [5] function as heads of the constituents 
they introduce. Consider the following examples: 
[6] 
a. 
b. 
ii a. 
b. 
I think [(that) she 's probably right]. 
I don 't know [whether they have received our letter yet]. 
She stayed behind for a few minutes [after the others had left]. 
They complained [because we didn 't finish the job this week]. 
In [i] the bracketed constituents are subordinate clauses with that and whether 
simply marking the subordination: the main clause counterparts are She is prob­
ably right (declarative) and Have they received our letter yet? (interrogative). In 
this context the that is optional (as indicated by the parentheses): the clause is in 
the position of complement to think, so it is not obligatory to mark its subordi­
nate status in its own structure. Whether is not omissible because it marks the 
clause as interrogative as well as subordinate: it is just with the default declara­
tive type that the subordinator is often optional. 
After and because in [ii] by contrast are not grammatical markers of subordination. 
They have independent meaning, and it is by virtue of this meaning that we interpret 
the bracketed constituents as adjuncts of time and reason respectively. This makes 
them like heads -just as after is head in the time adjunct after the departure of the 
others. They are not themselves part of the subordinate clause; rather, the subordi­
nate clauses are just the others had left and we didn 't finish the job this week, and 
these function as complement within the phrases headed by after and because. 
2.2 
Prepositions vs adverbs 
Prepositions with optional NP complements 
We begin the task of redrawing the boundaries between prepositions and adverbs by 
looking further at words like before in [4], which can occur either with an NP com­
plement or without a complement. There are a fair number of words of this kind; a 
sample are listed in [7]: 
[7] 
aboard 
above 
beneath 
beyond 
over 
past 
across 
after 
along 
by 
down 
in 
behind 
below 
off 
outside 
round 
since 
through 
under 
up 
As we have noted, these are traditionally analysed as prepositions when they have 
an NP complement but as adverbs when they have no complement: 

[8] 
TRADITIONAL PREPOSITION 
a. She went aboard the liner. 
11 a. He sat outside her bedroom. 
§2.2 Prepositions vs adverbs 
1 3 1  
TRADITIONAL ADVERB 
b. She went aboard. 
b. He sat outside. 
It has often been suggested that the traditional adverb category has something of 
the character of a classificatory wastebasket, a dumping ground for words that don't 
belong in any of the other more clearly defined categories. This criticism certainly 
seems valid in the present case. Aboard in [ib] and outside in [iib] don't, on the tra­
ditional account, qualify as prepositions because prepositions are defined in such a 
way that they require NP complements. They are obviously not nouns, verbs, adjec­
tives or conjunctions, so there is nowhere to put them except in the adverb category. 
We put it this way because it is important to see that these words do not in fact 
satisfy the definition that traditional grammar gives to the adverb category: 'An 
adverb is a word that modifies a verb, an adjective or another adverb'. They typi­
cally occur, for example, in the three functions given in [3] for PPs: 
[9] 
DEPENDENT OF NOUN 
the conditions aboard 
11 the temperature outside 
DEPENDENT OF VERB 
She went aboard. 
He sat outside. 
COMPLEMENT OF BE 
She i§, still aboard. 
He i§, outside. 
(Contexts for the first example in each set might be I won 't attempt to describe [the 
conditions aboard] and [The temperature outside] was over 40°.) 
The first and third of the functions illustrated in [9] are characteristic of preposi­
tions, but not of adverbs. Let us consider them in turn. 
(a) 
Dependents of nouns 
Adverbs do not normally occur as dependents of nouns: in related adjective-adverb 
pairs it is the adjective that appears in this function. No such restriction applies to 
prepositions. Compare: 
[10] 
PP 
a. She criticised them with tact. 
ii a. [A manager with tact] is needed. 
ADVERB 
b. She criticised them tactfully. 
b. *[A manager tactfully] is needed. 
The underlined expressions in [i] modify the verb, and we see that both PP and 
adverb are admissible. 
In [ii], however, they modify the noun manager and here the PP is admissible but 
the adverb is not; instead we need an adjective: a tactful manager. 
(b) 
Complement of the verb be 
Adverbs cannot normally function as complement to be in its ascriptive sense: here 
we again have adjectives, in their predicative use. As with (a) above, there is no 
comparable constraint applying to prepositions. Compare: 
[1 1] 
PP AS COMPLEMENT OF BE 
a. The key is under the mat. 
11 a. The meeting is on Tuesday. 
ADVP AS COMPLEMENT OF BE 
b. *Lucy was enthusiastically today. 
b. *Rain is again. 

1 32 
Chapter 7 Prepositions and preposition phrases 
The [a] examples, with a PP functioning as complement of be, are impeccable, but 
the [b] ones, with an adverb in this function, are ungrammatical. 
Instead of [ib] we have Lucy was enthusiastic today, with the corresponding 
adjective. 
Since the adverb again has no adjective counterpart we cannot correct [iib] in the 
same way; for this particular example we could have It is raining again, with 
again now functioning as modifier to the verb rain. 
The classification of words like aboard and outside as adverbs is thus inconsistent 
with the traditional definition of that category. The best way to remove this inconsis­
tency is to amend the definition of prepositions so that they are no longer required to 
have an NP complement. Aboard, outside and similar words will then be prepositions 
both when they have NP complements and when they occur alone. This revision 
simultaneously gets rid of the complication of a dual classification for these words 
and removes from the adverb class words which differ radically in their syntactic 
properties from genuine adverbs, thus making it a significantly more coherent class. 
Notice in particular that with our more restricted class of adverbs, but not with the 
larger class of traditional grammar, all functions that can be filled by adverbs accept 
some of the most central type, the type formed from adjectives by adding ·ly. 
This revision of the traditional analysis is not an original idea of ours. The core of 
it was first put forward as early as 1924 by the great Danish grammarian Otto 
Jespersen, and it is adopted in much work in linguistics since the 1970s. 
One reason why traditional grammarians have not taken it up may have to do with 
the etymology, or historical source, of the term 'preposition' . This suggests a word 
placed in front of another word - the traditional preposition is a word placed in front 
of a noun (or NP, in our analysis). It may therefore seem undesirable to apply the 
term to a word which is not positioned in front of an NP. But there are three points 
to be made in favour of doing so. 
First, prepositions do not always precede their complements: in What are you 
looking for? the prepositionfor does not precede its complement what (see §5 for 
more discussion of this construction). 
Second, no one worries that the etymology of 'adverb' suggests a word depend­
ent on a verb, although the term applies also to words modifying adjectives, other 
adverbs, and so on. 
Third, the term 'preposition' is so deeply ingrained in the grammatical tradition 
that there would inevitably be a great deal of opposition to a newly invented 
replacement; it is better just to recognise that words often change their meanings, 
and to accept a change in the meaning of 'preposition' .  The property of being 
placed before an NP will still apply in central cases, but not in all. 
Further extensions of the preposition category 
Once we remove the requirement that a preposition must have an NP complement, 
the way is open for us to reassign to this category a number of other words that are 
traditionally analysed as adverbs. There are a good number of words that behave like 

§3. 1 Prepositions vs adjectives 
1 33 
prepositions, not adverbs, with respect to one or both of constructions (a) and (b) 
above, but which NEVER take NP complements. We list in [12] a number of those that 
occur both as dependents of nouns and as complement to be, as illustrated in [13]: 
these are words which should very clearly be reassigned to the preposition category. 
[12] 
abroad 
downstairs 
here 
outdoors 
overboard 
overseas there 
ii ahead 
because 
instead 
[13] 
DEPENDENT OF NOUN 
a. You can use [the office downstairs]. 
ii a. [Water instead of wine] won 't do! 
COMPLEMENT OF BE 
b. The spare chairs are downstairs. 
b. This is instead of your usual lunch. 
The words in [ 1 2i] normally occur without complements; four are compounds 
incorporating a core preposition (down, out, over) as the first element. 
Those in [ 1 2ii] take complements with the form of PPs: ahead of us, because gJ 
the weather, etc. 
3 
Further category contrasts 
The differences between prepositions and nouns are too obvious to merit 
further discussion, but it may be helpful to compare the syntactic properties of 
prepositions with those of adjectives and verbs - not so much with a view to redraw­
ing the boundaries between these categories, but simply to clarify the differences 
between them. 
3. 1 
Prepositions vs adjectives 
We deal here with the main features that distinguish between the prepo­
sition and adjective categories in the great mass of clear cases, setting aside a very 
small number of highly exceptional words whose status as adjective or preposition 
is problematic and controversial. 
(a) NP complements 
Prototypical members of the preposition class license NP complements. Adjectives 
do not. 
(b) Inflection and gradability 
Prototypical adjectives inflect for grade (with plain, comparative and superlative 
forms such as big, bigger, biggest) or else have comparatives and superlatives 
marked by the modifiers more and most (e.g. useful, more useful, most useful). More 
generally, they are gradable, accepting a range of degree modifiers including, most 
distinctively, very and too ("excessively") - cf. Ch. 6, § 1 .3. 
Prepositions, by contrast, are normally non-gradable. There are, however, some 
PPs with specialised meanings that do permit certain kinds of grading - PPs such as 
those in [14]: 

1 34 
Chapter 7 Prepositions and preposition phrases 
[14] 
at home with X ("familiar with X, knowledgeable about X"), in control, in 
the know ("informed"), on top of the world ("extremely happy"), out of order 
("inappropriate"), out of sorts ("unwell, discontented") 
Thus I might say You 're more at home with trigonometry than f am or ffeel more in con­
trol of the situation than f used to. The gradability, however, doesn't apply to the prepo­
sition by itself but to the larger expression, and hence comparison in these cases is not 
marked inftectionally: we don't say * You 're alter home with trigonometry than f am. 
(c) The predicand requirement for adjectives 
An important difference between adjectives and prepositions is revealed by certain 
facts about adjuncts. We have seen that in their predicative use adjectives are 
related to a predicand, and this applies not only with predicative complements but 
also with predicative adjuncts (see Ch. 6, § 1 .7). All prepositions, on the other hand, 
can head adjuncts that are unassociated with any predicand. The contrast is seen in 
the following examples: 
[ 15] 
EXAMPLES WITH anxious (ADJECTIVE) 
a. [Anxious to make amends], the 
dean threw a party for the students. 
11 a. *[Anxious to make amends], 
there was a party for the students. 
EXAMPLES WITH after (PREPOSITION) 
b. [After the end of the semester], the 
dean threw a party for the students. 
b. [After the end of the semester], 
there was a party for the students. 
The bracketed constituents are adjuncts: an AdjP adjunct in [a] and a PP adjunct in 
[b]. The difference in grammaticality of the examples in [ii] shows that the AdjP is 
subject to a constraint that does not apply to the PP: THE ADJP MUST BE RELATED TO 
A PREDICAND. This requirement is satisfied in [ia], where the predicand is the sub­
ject the dean: we understand that the dean was anxious to make amends. But it's not 
satisfied in [iia]: the adjunct is not related to a predicand, and hence there's no indi­
cation of who was anxious to make amends. 
Notice, the claim is NOT that adjuncts with the form of a PP CANNOT be related to 
a predicand. They certainly can be. The crucial point, though, is that there is no gen­
eral constraint that they MUST be. Compare, for example: 
[16] 
[In control of the situation at last,] Sue began to feel more relaxed. 
ii [In this country] there is less than 5% unemployment. 
In [i] Sue is predicand for the bracketed adjunct: we understand that Sue was in con­
trol of the situation at last. But there is no such relation in [ii]. So the preposition in 
can be the head of an adjunct that is not related to a predicand. And this holds quite 
generally for prepositions, but not for adjectives. 
This gives us a test for prepositions: they differ from adjectives in ALWAYS being 
able to head phrases in adjunct function which have no semantic relation to a 
predicand. 

(d) Complement of become 
§3.2 Prepositions vs verbs 
1 35 
One of the main functions in which AdjPs appear is that of predicative complement -
complement to such verbs as be, appear, become,feel, seem, etc. A high proportion 
of prepositions can head PPs functioning as complement to be, but they occur less 
readily with the other verbs. Most importantly, they do not normally occur with 
become. So in general, if you take a PP that can be the complement of be, you will find 
it cannot be the complement of become, but with AdjPs there is no such restriction: 
[ 1 7] 
ADJP COMPLEMENTS 
a. We are grateful to you. 
11 a. We became grateful to you. 
pp COMPLEMENTS 
b. 
We are in your debt. 
b. *We became in your debt. 
Even PPs like in a bad temper, which are semantically very like adjectives, do not 
appear with become: we get The boss became angry but not *The boss became in a 
bad temper. 
Adding a modifier to a PP complement to become may improve acceptability a 
great deal. Compare, for example, *They became in love, which is ungrammatical or 
at best marginal, with They became more and more in love, which is acceptable. We 
therefore need to formulate the distinction in this way: adjectives can normally head 
complements to become, whereas prepositions without modifiers normally cannot. 
3.2 
Prepositions vs verbs 
In general, there is little difficulty in distinguishing verbs from preposi­
tions. Verbs usually function as predicator in clause structure, and in finite or infini­
tival clauses they are easily recognisable as verbs by this function. There is, for 
example, no doubt about the status offollow as a verb in [ 1 8]: 
[ 1 8] 
a. We always follow the manual. 
b. I advise you to follow the manual. 
There are, however, a number of prepositions which have the same shape as the 
gerund-participle or past participle forms of verbs. These are cases where historical 
change led to a word taking on the properties of a preposition in addition to its orig­
inal verbal properties, so that it now belongs to both categories. Three examples, 
with the relevant word underlined, are given in [ 19]: 
[ 1 9] 
PREPOSITION 
a. Following the meeting, there 
will be a reception. 
11 a. Owing to the drought, many 
farms are going bankrupt. 
III a. Liz did remarkably well, given 
her inexperience. 
VERB 
b. Following the manual, we tried to 
figure out how to assemble the unit. 
b. Owing so much to the bank, 
farmers can 't afford any luxuries. 
b. Liz was given only three months 
to live. 
The difference is very similar to the predicand requirement that we discussed above 
in connection with the difference between prepositions and adjectives. Predicative 

1 36 
Chapter 7 Prepositions and preposition phrases 
adjectives have to be related to a predicand, and verbs in predicator function have to 
be related to a subject, either overt or understood. 
In [ib]following is predicator in a gerund-participial clause functioning as adjunct; 
this clause itself has no overt subject, but an understood subject is retrievable from 
the subject of the main clause: the sentence implies that WE were following the 
manual. 
Owing in [iib] is interpreted in a similar way: we understand that it is farmers 
who owe so much to the bank. (See Ch. 1 3, §2.2, for further discussion of this 
construction. ) 
Example [iiib] is a passive clause, and Liz is the subject - compare the active 
version They gave Liz only three months to live. 
But in the [a] examples, there is no such predicational relationship to a subject. The 
underlined words derive historically from verbs, but they have developed meanings 
distinct from the verbal ones, and in this use these words belong to the preposition 
category. Following means "after"; owing to X means "because of X"; and given X 
means roughly "if we take X into account". 
4 
Grammaticised uses of prepositions 
An important property that applies to about a dozen of the most frequent 
prepositions is that they have what we call grammaticised uses, as illustrated in 
these examples: 
[20] 
The article was written in'. a first-year student. 
11 [The sudden death gfthe president] stunned the nation. 
III I [transferred several hundred dollars to them]. 
iv [Their request /QL assistance] was ignored. 
v They all seem [quite keen on the idea]. 
The role of the underlined prepositions here is not to express spatial relations as 
prepositions often do, but just to mark certain grammatical functions. 
Example [i] is a passive clause, and by marks the NP (a first-year student) that 
corresponds to the subject of the corresponding active (A first-year student wrote 
the article). 
The bracketed sequence in [ii] is an NP within which of marks the NP (the pres­
ident) that corresponds to the subject of the corresponding clause (The president 
suddenly died) or the genitive subject-determiner in an equivalent NP (the 
president's sudden death). 
To,for, and on in the PPs in [iii-v] mark the complements of a verb (transfer), a 
noun (request), and an adjective (keen), respectively. These words license a PP 
complement containing a particular preposition: we say that the preposition is 
specified by the head (double-underlined) of the bracketed construction. 

§5 Preposition stranding 
1 37 
What makes 'grammaticised' an appropriate tenn for such prepositions is that where 
they are placed in sentences depends not on what they mean but entirely on rules of 
the grammar. The underlined prepositions in [20] don't have any identifiable meaning 
of their own, and there is no possibility of replacing them by any other preposition. 
In other examples, these same prepositions do have meaning, of course. In a sen­
tence like I sat ilJ!. the door, the word by expresses a relation of being fairly close to 
the door. In a sentence like He went to Paris, the word to indicates the endpoint in 
a process of movement. And so on. But in these cases we can replace them with 
prepositions of different meaning while keeping everything else the same: we 
could say I sat oposite the door, or He went across Paris. But it is not possible to 
make changes like this in [20] without changing the grammatical construction. 
Only a few prepositions have grammaticised uses, the main ones being the single­
syllable words as, at, by,for,from, in, of, on, than, to, and with. These make up only 
a small minority of the words belonging to the preposition category, but their gram­
maticised uses account for a considerable proportion of the actual occurrences of 
prepositions in texts. 
The property of occurring in grammaticised uses helps to distinguish the category 
as a whole from other categories. We can now give a fairly useful general definition of 
'preposition', one that provides a basis for using the same tenn in different languages: 
[21] 
The tenn preposition applies to a relatively small category of words, with 
basic meanings predominantly having to do with relations in space and time, 
containing among its prototypical members grammaticised words that serve 
to mark various grammatical functions. I 
5 
Preposition stranding 
In certain non-canonical clause constructions the complement of a 
preposition may be fronted so that it precedes the preposition (usually with inter­
vening material) instead of occupying the basic complement position after the 
preposition. In the following examples the preposition is marked by double under­
lining, the complement by single underlining: 
[22] 
i Who did they vote Jm:.? 
ii I can 't find the book [which she was referring to]. 
[interrogative] 
[relative] 
The preposition is here said to be stranded, i.e. located before a site from which its 
understood complement is missing. 
I In some languages, e.g. Japanese, words corresponding to English prepositions occur AFTER their 
NP complements. In such languages the category is generally called 'postposition' rather than 'prepo­
sition'. The difference in position is not really important, though. Japanese verbs, for example, are 
normally at the end of the clause (i.e., transitive verbs follow their objects), but that doesn't cast doubt 
on their being verbs. We might therefore want to apply the same general term to both languages. For 
this reason our general definition (unlike standard dictionary definitions) makes no reference to posi­
tion. The intention is that the definition and the term should be applicable in both kinds of language, 
just as with • verb' . 

1 38 
Chapter 7 Prepositions and preposition phrases 
Prescriptive grammar note 
A stranded preposition quite often occurs at the end of the sentence. Prescriptive manuals 
generally discuss preposition stranding in terms of sentences that end with a preposition, and 
some of the more old-fashioned ones still state that ending a sentence with a preposition is 
incorrect or at least inelegant. This is a case of a particularly silly prescriptive rule that is 
clearly and massively in conflict with actual usage. All fluent users of English use stranded 
prepositions, and most usage books now recognise that. Nonetheless, some schoolbooks still 
seem to be trying to teach students to avoid stranded prepositions, and some speakers who 
mistakenly believe in the old rule struggle to obey it. The truth is that the construction illus­
trated in [22] has been grammatical and commonplace in English for hundreds of years. 
An alternative to the stranding construction of [22] is available. It places the 
preposition at the beginning of the clause so it accompanies the NP that is under­
stood as its complement. We call it preposition fronting. The fronting alternatives 
to the sentences in [22] are shown in [23]. 
[23] 
For whom did they vote? 
ii I can 't find the book [to which she was referring]. 
[interrogative] 
[relative] 
The choice between the stranding and fronting constructions 
There are some factors that influence the choice between stranding and fronting, 
and in certain cases one or the other is not grammatical. Two kinds of factor are 
involved, one having to do with style, the other with particular syntactic features of 
the clause concerned. 
(a) 
Style 
The fronted construction is more formal than the stranded one. This can be seen in 
such a pair of interrogative clauses as: 
[24] 
STRANDED PREPOSITION 
FRONTED PREPOSITION 
a. Where did this come from? 
b .  From where did this come? 
Version [ a] is by far the more natural of the two, with [b] sounding stiff and strange 
to most speakers. Interrogatives with preposition fronting are heard in prepared and 
organised speech, as in a planned interview (To what do you attribute this trend?), 
but in ordinary conversation the stranding construction is strongly preferred. 
(b) 
Syntactic factors that disfavour or exclude the stranded version 
Although the traditional prescriptive warning about preposition stranding is non­
sense, there are some syntactic circumstances (hardly ever mentioned in the 
books that say stranding is bad grammar) that can make preposition stranding 
almost or completely impossible. We list a small sample of such circumstances 
in [25]: 

[25] 
STRANDED PREPOSITION 
a. *This is the safe [which the 
key to was stolen]. 
ii a. *1 have a lecture ending at two 
[which I'll be free all day after]. 
iii a. * What way am I annoying you in? 
§6. 1 Complements 
1 39 
FRONTED PREPOSITION 
b. This is the safe [IQ which the key 
was stolen]. 
b. I have a lecture ending at two 
[afte r which I'll be free all day]. 
b. In what way am I annoying you? 
In [ia] the stranded preposition occurs within a subject NP (the subject of was 
stolen). That is fairly clearly ungrammatical. 
In [ii] the pp is in adjunct rather than complement function, specifically an 
adjunct of time. There is a tendency for the stranding construction to be avoided 
in adjuncts generally. With adjuncts of place it is not so strong, so you may hear 
sentences like ?That's the town [which lfirst met her in] ;  but the tendency is quite 
strong for many other adjuncts, like adjuncts of time or duration. 
This is more than just a tendency with some fixed adjunct expressions: the man­
ner adjunct in what way, as in [iiib], can never be split up by stranding. 
(c) 
Syntactic factors that disfavour or exclude the non-stranded version 
One thing that is never made clear in the books that recommend against stranding 
prepositions is that there are also syntactic circumstances that make the non­
stranded version, with preposition fronting, almost or completely impossible. Again 
we illustrate with just a few examples: 
[26] 
STRANDED PREPOSITION 
a. That depends on [who I give it to]. 
11 a. What did you hit me /,g£? 
iii a. Which metals does it consist f][? 
FRONTED PREPOSITION 
b. *That depends on [to whom I give it]. 
b. * For what did you hit me? 
b. ? Qiwhich metals does it consist? 
In [i] the clause containing the preposition (bracketed) is a subordinate interrog­
ative clause functioning as complement to a preposition (on); here stranding is 
obligatory. 
In [H] we have the idiom what for meaning "why", wherefor is never fronted. 
The verb consist in [iii] is one of those that license a pp complement with a spec­
ified preposition (like transfer in [20iH]), and there is a fairly strong preference 
for the stranding construction with such verbs. The [b] version isn't grammati­
cally forbidden, but it sounds very stiff and formal. 
6 
The structure of PPs 
Prepositions function as heads of phrases, and as such can take various 
dependents, both complements and modifiers. 
6. 1 
Complements 
Prepositions take a range of complement types comparable to that of verbs: 

140 
Chapter 7 Prepositions and preposition phrases 
[27] 
OBJECT NP 
ii PREDICATIVE 
iii pp 
iv ADVP 
V CLAUSE 
I was talking [to a friend]. 
I regard her [as a friend]. 
I stayed [until after lunch]. 
It won 't last [[m: long]. 
I left [because I was tired]. 
(a) Object and predicative 
I'm looking [[m: my glasses]. 
I took him [[m: dead]. 
[According to Ed,] it's a hoax. 
I hadn 't met her [till recently]. 
We agreed [on how to proceed]. 
As with verbs, we need to make a distinction between objects and predicative com­
plements: the friend examples above contrast in the same way as those in [28]: 
[28] 
OBJECT NP 
ii PREDICATIVE 
I was visiting a friend. 
I consider her [a frien4J. 
The crucial syntactic difference is again that a predicative can have the form of an 
AdjP (I regard her as very bright, where as is the preposition) or a bare role NP 
(They elected her as treasurer); see Ch. 4, §4. 1 for discussion. 
Almost all predicatives in PP structure occur with as, but one or two verbs, such 
as take, license PP complements consisting of for + predicative. 
(b) PPs 
PP complements to prepositions are of two kinds. 
First, there are PPs denoting times or places which occur with a few prepositions 
that usually take NPs - compare I stayed until after lunch with I stayed until the 
afternoon. Other examples of this type are from behind the curtain and since 
before lunch. 
Second, there are prepositions that take complements with a specified preposi­
tion as head: to is selected by according, due, owing, prior, pursuant, etc.; of is 
selected by ahead, because, instead, out, etc.; from is selected by away, apart, 
aside, etc. 
(c) AdvPs 
There are a handful of PreP + AdvP combinations, which could be seen as prepositions 
taking adverb phrases as complements. But there are very few: in addition to the 
ones in [27iv], we find before 10ng, Jor later, until recently, and a very few others. 
They are basically fixed phrases (for example, we get before long but not *after 
long). 
(d) Subordinate clauses 
A good number of prepositions take various kinds of subordinate clause as 
complement. These include the prepositions that were traditionally classified as 
'subordinating conjunctions' :  see [Siliia] above. 

Prepositions with no complement 
§6.2 Modification 
141 
Although most PPs contain a complement, there are some prepositions that take no 
complement: they can occur on their own. We discussed some of these above: She 
went aboard ([8ib]), The spare chairs are downstairs ([1 3ib]), and so on. 
The exceptional preposition ago 
There is one preposition that is strikingly exceptional in that it invariably FOLLOWS 
its complement. This is ago, as in She arrived two weeks ago, where two weeks is 
complement of ago. The order here reflects the historical origin of ago: it derives 
from the form agone, containing the past participle of go. Originally two weeks ago 
meant something like "two weeks gone", i.e., located at a point in time that is now 
two weeks gone by into the past. 
Dictionaries classify ago as an adverb, but there is compelling evidence that it is 
a preposition, exceptional only in its position relative to its complement. Consider 
the following data: 
[29] 
a. I spent two weeks in Paris. 
H a. *She arrived two weeks. 
1lI a. I recall his behaviour two weeks ago. 
b. *1 spent two weeks ago in Paris. 
b. She arrived two weeks ago. 
b. That was two weeks ago. 
Examples [i-ii] show that ago is head of the phrase two weeks ago: the distribution 
of the whole phrase is quite different from that of two weeks alone. 
In [iii] we see that ago phrases readily modify nouns or function as predicative 
complement to verbs like be: these functions are characteristic of PPs, not 
AdvPs, as we noted in §2.2. 
6.2 
Modification 
Some of the main types of modification in the structure of PPs are illus­
trated in [30], where the modifiers are underlined: 
[30] 
We had to leave [a few minutes before the end]. 
ii It landed [wav behind us]. 
III We went [straight home]. 
IV It all seemed [completely out of this world]. 
NPs measuring extent commonly occur with temporal and spatial prepositions, 
as in [i]. 
Measurement of extent can also be expressed, as in [ii], by adverbs like just, 
directly, soon, shortly, way, etc. 
The words straight and right occur as adjectives, but they can also occur as 
adverbs in modifier function. But they only modify prepositions: we find It flew 
right under the bridge, but in Standard English we don't have *It was right large 
or * We drove right slowly. 

142 
Chapter 7 Prepositions and preposition phrases 
A number of PPs with metaphorical or idiomatic meanings are gradable, and 
these accept degree modifiers such as completely, quite, very much, etc. So we 
get completely out of his mind, quite in tune with my ideas, very much within the 
spirit of our policy, etc. 
7 
pp complements in clause structure 
PPs function as complement or modifier to a wide range of heads -
verbs, nouns, adjectives, and so on. In this section we focus on those functioning 
as complement of a verb, elaborating on the description of clause structure that 
was begun in Ch. 4. 
7. 1 
Goal, source and location 
PPs are the most usual form for complements indicating goal, source 
and location. Goal and source are found in clauses expressing motion (or anything 
viewed metaphorically as motion). The goal is the place to which something moves, 
and the source the place from which it moves: 
[3 1 ]  
We drove from Boston to New York. } 
ii He jumped off the table into her arms. 
iii She fell into the pool. 
[source + goal] 
[goal] 
Goal and source PPs clearly qualify as complements since they need to be licensed 
by the verb - normally, a verb of motion. PPs expressing location complements are 
seen in examples like these: 
[32] 
The suitcase is underneath my bed. 
II She stayed in her bedroom all morning. 
7.2 
The complements of prepositional verbs 
We have seen that a dozen or so prepositions have grammaticised uses, 
and prominent among them are those where a particular preposition is specified by 
the head of the larger construction, by a verb, noun or adjective. 
There are many verbs that take a PP complement of this kind. They are called 
prepositional verbs, and occur in a range of constructions, as illustrated in [33]: 
[33] 
She abided by their decision. 
He asked for water. 
I'm counting on her help. 
We came across some errors. 
The meal consists of fruit and vegetables. 
II He accused her of fraud. 
I won 't hold it against you. 
He 'll treat me to lunch. 
She convinced us of her innocence. 
They suplied us with weaeons. 
iii That counts as satisfactory. He had passed for dead. 
I served as secretary. 
iv I regard that as unfair. 
They rated it as a success. He took me for a fool. 

§ 7.2 The complements of prepositional verbs 
143 
The prepositions that begin the underlined PPs are not in contrast with other prepo­
sitions like those in [3 1-32]. The complement-licensing properties of the verbs 
specifically mention the particular preposition that heads the complement.2 
The examples in [33i] are all intransitive. 
Those in [ii] are transitive - the PP complement follows an NP object. 
In [iii-iv] the complement of the preposition is predicative - again, this is evident 
from the possibility of its having the form of an AdjP or bare role NP. 
Fossilisation 
Some verb + preposition combinations are fossilised, in the sense that they don't 
permit any variation in their relative positions. An example of such a fossilised 
combination is come + across, meaning "find by chance", as in I came across some 
letters written by my grandmother. It is contrasted in [34] with the non-fossilised 
combination ask + for, "request": 
[34] 
NON-FOSSILISED 
a. I asked /Qr. some information. 
ii a. the infonnation [which I asked /Qr.] 
iii a. the infonnation [/Qr. which I aske4J 
FOSSILISED 
b. I came across some letters. 
b. the letters [which I came across] 
b. *the letters [across which I came] 
The difference is illustrated in the relative clause construction enclosed in brackets 
in [ii-iii]. These examples include relative clauses containing the relative pronoun 
which functioning as complement to a preposition. As we saw in §5, there are ordi­
narily two variants of this construction: 
In the stranded preposition construction, which occupies front position in the 
clause, and the preposition occurs after the verb, separated from its complement. 
This is the variant shown in [ii]. 
In the frooted preposition construction, the preposition is fronted along with its 
complement which, as in [iii], so it appears immediately before its complement 
as normal. 
Both variants are permitted with ask for, but only the first is permitted with come 
across: [iiib] is not grammatical. The reason is that the second type of relative 
clause construction separates the preposition from the verb which specifies it, 
whereas fossilisation doesn't allow any departure from the fixed order of verb + 
preposition. The fronted preposition construction is not grammatically compatible 
with the fossilised come across that means "find by chance". 
2 Some verbs occur with more than one specified preposition. But the resultant preposition-verb com­
binations generally have very different meanings. For example, we get He was looking after me, He 
was looking m me, and He was looking fQL me, involving utterly different notions - caring, watching, 
and searching, respectively. 

144 
Chapter 7 Prepositions and preposition phrases 
The same kind of fossilisation is found in transitive clauses. Compare: 
[35J 
NON-FOSSILISED 
a. He accused her gf a crime. 
FOSSILISED 
b. I In him gf some work. 
ii a. the crime [which he accused her oiJ 
iii a. the crime [gfwhich he accused herJ 
b. the work [which I Let him gfJ 
b. *the work [gfwhich I Let himJ 
Let + off, meaning "allow not to do", is fossilised in that the preposition must fol­
low the verb, with only the object intervening. Again, then, the stranded preposition 
construction is permitted in both [iiaJ and [iibJ, whereas the fronted preposition 
construction is permitted in [iiia] but is quite inadmissible in [iiib]. 
7.3 
Particles 
Particles are the only complements which can freely come between the 
verb and its direct object. Compare, for example, the particle down with the non­
particle downstairs in [36]: 
[36J 
PARTICLE 
i a. She took the suitcase down. 
ii a. She took {/Q}jm the suitcase. 
NON-PARTICLE 
b. She took the suitcase downstairs. 
b. *She took downstairs the suitcase. 
Both down and downstairs can follow the object, but only down can occur between 
verb and object, as in [ii]. Down is a particle, but downstairs is not. 
Particles are short words (one or two syllables) that with just one or two excep­
tions are all prepositions unaccompanied by any complement of their own. Some of 
the most common prepositions belonging to the particle category are listed in [37]: 
[37J 
aLong 
away 
off 
on 
back 
by 
down 
forward 
in 
out 
over 
round 
under 
up 
Particles can never precede an unstressed personal pronoun object 
One general constraint on the order 'particle + object' is that it is inadmissible if the 
object has the form of an unstressed personal pronoun. For example, we can 
replace the suitcase by unstressed it in [36ia] but not in [iia]: 
[38J 
a. She took i1. gf. 
7.4 
Verbal idioms 
b. * She took gf i1.. 
An idiom is a combination of words whose meaning is not predictable 
from the meanings of the components. A verbal idiom is an idiom beginning with a 
verb. Kick the bucket, with the sense "die", is a familiar example: you can't guess 
the meaning just by knowing the meanings of the words (it has nothing to do with 
kicking or buckets). 
There are huge numbers of verbal idioms in English, and many of them contain 
prepositions. Some of the examples used earlier in this section contain verbal 
idioms - e.g. hold NP against NP in [33ii]; come across NP in [34]; let NP off NP in 

§7.4 Verbal idioms 
145 
[35]; and so on. Two other constructions that often contain such verbal idioms are 
illustrated in [39]: 
[39] 
He finally backed down. 
Her father passed away. 
When will you grow up? 
Kim and Pat have fallen out. 
Do you think the idea will catch on? 
ii This ties in with your first point. I'm not going to put up with this any longer. 
Lizjust gets by on her pension. 
You should stand up to him. 
Those in [i] consist of a verb and a preposition without a complement. Non­
idiomatic examples of this construction are seen in She came in or She went out, 
where in and out are goal complements. 
The idioms in [ii] consist of a verb + a preposition with no complement + a 
preposition with an NP complement. In in tie in with, for example, has no com­
plement while with has your first point as its complement. A non-idiomatic 
example of this construction is She came in with her uncle. 
Idioms need not be syntactic constituents 
Idiom is a lexical concept. Idioms have to be listed and described in a dictionary of 
the language, because of their particular form and special idiomatic meanings. But 
it would be a mistake to assume that what counts as a lexical unit will necessarily 
form a syntactic unit as well. This is not so. The underlined expressions in [39i] do 
happen to be syntactic constituents: they are VPs with the verb as head and the pp 
as complement. But those in [39ii] are not; here the lexical and syntactic units do 
not match up. 
Take as an example the sentence This ties in with your first point. As we have 
said, with is a preposition taking your first point as its complement, so with your 
first point forms a PP. Syntactically, the VP consists of three constituents (ties + 
in + with your first point), not two (ties in with + your first point). This is evident 
from the way the idiom behaves in the relative clause construction discussed 
above. For alongside the stranded preposition version a point which this ties in 
with we have the more formal version with preposition fronting a point with 
which this ties in, where the fronted with which clearly forms a PP. Note also the 
possibility of inserting a clause adjunct after in: This ties in well with your first 
point. 
More obvious are examples like hold NP1 against NP2 from [33ii], since here the 
verb has an object which separates it from the preposition and isn't part of the 
idiom. For example, in I won 't hold it against you if you refuse, there is a special 
idiomatic meaning associated with the use of hold together with against (roughly, 
"I won't judge you adversely if you refuse"), but there is no syntactic constituent 
consisting solely of hold and against: they aren't even adjacent in the sequence of 
words. 
The important thing about idioms, then, is that they have special and unpre­
dictable meanings, but that is the only respect in which they are special. They do not 
also constitute special syntactic units with peculiar structure. In syntactic structure 

1 46 
Chapter 7 Prepositions and preposition phrases 
they are generally quite ordinary, and often identical to the structure the same 
sequence of words has when the meaning is the literal and predictable one.3 
8 
Prepositional idioms and fossilisation 
In the last section we were concerned with verbal idioms - idioms 
beginning with a verb. There are also a large number of prepositional idioms -
idioms beginning with a preposition. In particular, we examine here a sample of 
expressions with the form preposition + noun + preposition that are idiomatic in 
meaning and largely or wholly fossilised in syntax. Examples are given in [40i-ii], 
which contrast with the ordinary sequences in [iii]: 
[40] 
by means of hard work 
11 by virtue of her age 
iii in photos of their parents 
on behalfQ,f my son 
in front q.f the car 
to lJ.uestions of ethics 
with effect from today 
in league with the devil 
with knowledge of his goals 
Fossilisation means that the parts cannot be varied independently as freely as in 
ordinary sequences. One reflection of this is that we cannot drop the first preposi­
tion in [i-ii], to yield NPs that can be used elsewhere, though we can do this in [iii]: 
[41] 
i *Means of hard work enabled her to pass the exam. 
ii *Virtue of her age led them to drop the charges. 
iii Photos of their parents were lying on the table. 
The expressions photos of their parents, questions of ethics and knowledge of his 
goals are obviously NPs which in [40iii] happen to be functioning as complement 
of a preposition but which can also appear in the normal range of NP functions, such 
as subject in [41iii]. 
The analysis of [40i-ii], however, is much less obvious. Many writers treat the 
underlined sequences here as syntactic units, commonly called 'complex preposi­
tions' .  The motivation for this lies in the meaning: in front of the car is semantically 
comparable to behind the car, and this tempts grammarians to see in front of as an 
element of the same kind as behind, only more complex in its internal structure. It 
is a mistake, however. Semantic relations of this kind do not provide a reliable guide 
to syntactic analysis. 
For examples like those in [40i] there is compelling evidence that the structure is 
the same as for [40iii], with the first preposition taking an NP as complement. 
Notice that the noun can take pre-head dependents: 
[42] 
by similar means 
on my son 's behalf 
with immediate effect 
These show that the fossilisation is only partial. The changes made here to the 
sequence following the first preposition demonstrate clearly that it has the status of 
3 Many grammars use the term 'phrasal verb' for some or all of the expressions we have been consid­
ering in §§7.3-4. We have not adopted this term. It is thoroughly misleading. It's not the whole 
expressions fall out, tie in with, etc., that are verbs; it's just the lexemesfall, tie, etc. 

Exercises 
147 
an NP. If by means of were really a single preposition, we wouldn't expect to be able 
to insert similar after the first part of it and drop the last part to get by similar means. 
Changes of this kind are not possible in [40ii], where the degree of fossilisation 
is greater. A case can be made for treating the first two words as forming a unit that 
takes the remainder as its complement. In front of the car, for example, will have a 
unitary preposition in front as head, and of the car will be its complement. 
That, however, is very different from taking in front of as a whole as a complex 
preposition. The of in infront of the car actually belongs with the car, not with the 
head in front. This is evident from the fact that if we omit the car when it is retriev­
able from the context, we must also drop the of Compare, for example: 
[43] 
i a. She stood infront of the car. 
ii a. She stood behind the car. 
b. She stood in front. 
b. She stood behind. 
You can't say *She stood in front of From a syntactic point of view, therefore, it is 
clearly not in front of that behaves like behind, but just in front; it differs from 
behind in that it takes an optional complement with of, rather than an NP. 
The same general point applies to the second preposition in the other sequences 
in [40ii]. 
Take in league with. We can have The two of them are in league with the devil or 
just The two of them are in league (understood as "in league with each other"). 
This shows that from a syntactic point of view with belongs in the first instance 
with the following NP, not with league. 
In by virtue of her age we cannot omit of her age, but we can still show that of 
forms a pp with her age. One piece of evidence is that the of can be repeated in 
coordination, as in by virtue other age and other tamily commitments. The coor­
dinator and here is linking the two constituents that are underlined. They are PPs. 
And that means by virtue of is not a preposition, not a syntactic unit of any sort. 
Exercises 
1. For each of the following sentences (all 
from the opening pages of Mary Shelley's 
novel Frankenstein), underline the 
complement of the doubly underlined 
preposition - all the words that make up 
the complement, but no other words. In each 
case give the category of the complement. 
i What may not be expected i!: a 
country of etemal light? 
ii Six years have passed since I resolved 
on my present undertaking. 
iii I commenced l2J! inuring my body to 
hardship. 
iv My life might have been passed i!: 
ease and luxury. 
v They fly quickly over the snow in their 
sledges. 
2. List ten word sequences other than the 
ones discussed in this chapter that are 
standardly described (or could plausibly 
be taken) as 'complex prepositions' .  
Provide evidence for their degree of 
fossilisation, classifying them as less 
fossilised (like the cases in [40i] of this 
chapter, e.g., by means of) or more 
fossilised (like those in [40ii]). 

1 48 
Chapter 7 Prepositions and preposition phrases 
3. Determine which of the verbs below 
belong to the class of prepositional verbs. 
For those that do, identify the preposi­
tion(s) they select and provide relevant 
examples. (Do this exercise with the help 
of a good dictionary.) For each verb + 
preposition sequence say whether or not it 
is fossilised, and provide evidence that 
your claim about fossilisation is correct. 
i bank 
vi hope 
ii believe 
iii convince 
vii see 
viii sllnd 
iv fall 
ix treat 
v feel 
x wait 
4. The word up is a particle in We folded up 
the map but not in We climbed up the 
mountain. What syntactic differences can 
you find between the two constructions? 
Use these differences to say for each of 
the following which of the two kinds of 
construction it belongs to. 
I looked over my shoulder. 
11 We must bring il. the washing. 
III We 'd better run gjJsome more copies. 
iv I knocked over the vase. 
v He never got over his disappointment. 
5. For each of the following words, decide 
whether it is a preposition or an 
adjective, and give arguments to support 
your view: [i] about; [ii] ahead; [iii] aloof; 
[iv] aloft; [v] around. 
6. Construct an example, complete with as 
much context as necessary, to show that 
when the context is right a pronoun can 
FOLLOW the particle in a verb + particle 
construction like rip you off or call him out 
or turn them down, if it is contrastively 
stressed. 
7. Which of the following prepositions can 
occur in declarative main clauses either 
with or without an NP complement? Give 
examples to illustrate both uses, noting 
those which occur without an NP comple­
ment only in a restricted subset of their 
uses/meanings: 
against 
vi throughout 
ii between 
vii to 
iii despite 
viii underneath 
iv inside 
ix until 
v opposite 
x within 
8. The following examples have stranded 
prepositions. Construct corresponding 
examples with a fronted preposition. If you 
find any of your examples ungrammatical, 
mark them with * in the usual way. 
They couldn 't agree on who it referred 
to. 
ii What am I supposed to cut this thing 
with? 
iii He 's the man I showed the photo to. 
iv The place we 're going to is so informal 
they don 't have table cloths. 
v It was the only proposal which every 
department member agreed with. 
9. The following examples have fronted 
prepositions. Construct corresponding 
examples with a stranded preposition. 
If the example turns out to be ungrammati­
ca), mark it with *. 
Under what circumstances would you 
agree? 
ii In what year was she born ? 
iii He came to the bed in which Goldilocks 
had been sleeping. 
iv It appealed to everyone with whom he 
discussed it. 
v It was a situation in which it would 
have been hard for anyone to form a 
judgement concerning what to do. 
10. Classify the following words as adverbs or 
prepositions, basing your answers on the 
criteria discussed in Ch. 7 and citing the 
relevant evidence: [i] ahead; [ii] always; 
[iii] indoors; [iv] often; [v] overseas. 

__ 
Negation and related phenomena 
I Negative and positive clauses 
149 
2 Subclausal negation 
1 50 
3 Clausal negation 
1 5 1  
4 Non-affinnative items 
154 
5 Scope of negation 
156 
1 
Negative and positive clauses 
Negation is marked by individual words (such as not, no, never) or by 
affixes within a word (such as ·n 't, un·, non·). Very often, however, there is an effect 
on the whole clause. In pairs like those in [ 1 ], for example, we have a contrast 
between a positive clause and the corresponding negative clause: 
[ I ]  
POSITIVE CLAUSE 
NEGATIVE CLAUSE 
a. He has signed the agreement. 
b. He hasn 't signed the agreement. 
The grammatical system in which positive and negative contrast is called polarity: 
clause [a] has positive polarity, while [b] has negative polarity. 
Semantically, a simple pair of positive and negative clauses like these are related 
in such a way that they cannot both be true, but they also cannot both be false. One 
of them has got to be true: either he has signed the agreement or he hasn't. 
Syntactically, positive is the default polarity. All canonical clauses are positive. 
Negative clauses are marked as such by the presence of a specific negative element, 
like the negative verb-form hasn 't in [ I  b]. And positive and negative clauses differ 
in the way they combine with other expressions in the structure of larger units. Here 
are the three major differences. 
(a) Addition of not even 
After a negative clause we can add a constituent introduced by not even, and it 
makes sense. This is not possible with positive clauses: 
[2] 
POSITIVE CLAUSE: 
ii NEGATIVE CLAUSE: 
* I have read your book, not even the introduction. 
I haven 't read your book, not even the introduction. 
The addition in [ii] is interpreted as "I haven't even read the introduction". The 
not isn't obligatory (cf. I haven 't read your book, even the introduction) but the 
149 

1 50 
Chapter 8 Negation and related phenomena 
crucial point is that it can occur in the negative clause [ii] but is impossible in the 
positive [i]. 
(b) The connective adjuncts so and neither or nor 
When we add a related clause of the same polarity, the positive pair may be linked 
by so, the negative pair by neither or nor: 
[3] 
POSITIVE CLAUSE: 
ii NEGATIVE CLAUSE: 
1 have read your book, and so have my students. 
1 haven 't read your book, and neither have my students. 
Switching the connectives leads to ungrammaticality: *1 have read your book and 
neither have my students; *1 haven 't read your book and so have my students. 
(c) Confirmatory tags 
A common device for seeking confirmation of what one says is to add a truncated 
interrogative clause known as a tag. It generally consists of just an auxiliary verb + 
personal pronoun subject, and its polarity is the reverse of that of the clause to which 
it is attached: 
[4] 
POSITIVE CLAUSE + NEGATIVE TAG: 
11 NEGATIVE CLAUSE + POSITIVE TAG: 
They have read my book, haven 't they? 
They haven 't read my book, have they? 
In [a] the negative tag (haven 't they?) attaches to the positive clause, while in [b] the 
positive tag (have they?) attaches to the negative clause. 
These reversed polarity tags have to be distinguished from those with constant 
polarity. These don't ask for confirmation, but suggest an attitude such as surprise, 
disbelief, disapproval or the like: an author might say So they 've read my book, have 
they? Amazing! For many speakers constant polarity tags aren't used with negative 
clauses: % So they haven 't read my book, haven 't they? will be rejected by many 
speakers of Standard English. For those speakers, if a negative tag is acceptable on 
a clause, the clause must be positive. 
2 
Subclausal negation 
We have seen that the effect of a negative element is very often to make 
the clause containing it negative. Negative elements don't always have this effect, 
however. In the cases where they don't, the negation is subclausal. 
Affixal negation 
The most obvious case where negative elements don't make a clause negative is 
where the negative element is an affix other than the n 't that appears on auxiliary 
verbs. Take negative prefixes as in dislike, inattentive, non-negotiable, or unwilling, 
or suffixes such as ·less in homeless. We can use the constructions shown in [2-4] to 
show that these affixes don't make the whole clause negative. Compare, for exam­
ple, He was unkind, which contains the prefix un·, with He wasn 't kind, which 

§3 Clausal negation 
1 5 1  
contains a negative verb-form. The latter clause is of course negative, but the former 
is positive, as is evident from the following data: 
[5] 
SUBCLAUSAL NEGATION 
a. *He was unkind, not even to me. 
ii a. He was unkind, and so was Sue. 
iii a. He was unkind, wasn 't he? 
CLAUSAL NEGATION 
b. He wasn 't kind, not even to me. 
b. He wasn 't kind, and neither was Sue. 
b. He wasn 't kind, was he? 
He wasn 't kind behaves just like the earlier I haven 't read your book: it accepts not 
even, takes neither (or nor) as connective, and selects a positive confirmation tag. 
He was unkind, by contrast, behaves like the obviously positive I have read your 
book: it doesn't accept not even, it does take so as connective, and it selects a 
negative tag. 
We call the negation in He was unkind subclausal because it works below the level 
of the clause. 
Notice that there is a semantic difference between He was unkind and He wasn 't 
kind. If He wasn 't kind is false, then He was kind must be true; but if He was unkind 
is false, it doesn't follow that He was kind is true: he could be neutral, neither kind 
nor unkind. 
Other cases of subclausal negation 
Some further contrasts between subclausal and clausal negation are illustrated in [6]: 
[6] 
ii 
iii 
iv 
a. 
a. 
a. 
a. 
SUBCLAUSAL NEGATION 
She works for nothing. 
It was no mean achievement. 
This is a not uncommon mistake. 
Not surprisingly, he complained. 
CLAUSAL NEGATION 
b. She 's interested in nothing. 
b. It was no great deal. 
b. This is not an uncommon mistake. 
b. Surprisingly, he did not complain. 
Again the tests differentiate clearly between the [a] and [b] examples: the right con­
firmation tag for [ia] would be doesn 't she?, while the one for lib] would be is she?, 
and so on. 
Nothing and no generally mark clausal negation. In [ia] and [iia] we have excep­
tional cases where they don't. 
The contrast in [iii] is due to the fact that the not in [a] is in an attributive modifier 
in NP structure (not uncommon), whereas in [b] the not is modifying the verb is. 
In [iva], not modifies surprisingly, and the main predication is positive: "He 
complained, which wasn't surprising". In [ivb], by contrast, the negation applies 
to complain: "He didn't complain, which was surprising". 
3 
Clausal negation 
Within clausal negation we make a further distinction between verbal 
and non-verbal negation: 

152 
Chapter 8 Negation and related phenomena 
[7] 
VERBAL NEGATION 
NON-VERBAL NEGATION 
a. She didn 't tell me anything. 
b. She told me nothing. 
ii a. She does not live here any more. 
b. She no longer lives here. 
Verbal negation is marked either by negative inflection on the verb, as in [ia], or 
by modification of the verb by the separate word not, as in [iia]. 
3. 1 
Verbal negation 
The grammatical significance of the distinction between verbal and non­
verbal negation is that verbal negation requires the insertion of the dummy auxil­
iary do under certain conditions, whereas non-verbal negation never does. This 
difference is evident in [7] above, where do is required in the [a] examples but not 
the [b] ones. 
Conditions for the insertion of dummy do with verbal negation 
(a) In clauses with a primary verb-form 
Negative clauses of this kind require the presence of an auxiliary verb. If there is no 
auxiliary in the corresponding positive clause, formation of the negative involves 
the insertion of do as described in Ch. 3, §3. 1 ,  and illustrated in [8]: 
[8] 
POSITIVE 
a. She is lenient with them 
ii a. She rejected his offer. 
NEGATIVE 
b. She isn 't lenient with them. 
b. She didn 't reject his offer. 
In [ia] be is an auxiliary verb, so we do NOT insert do when negating the clause. 
In [iia] reject is a lexical verb, so we must insert do to form the negative. 
(b) In imperative clauses 
Imperative clauses with verbal negation ALWAYS require do: 
[9] 
a. Be lenient with them. 
ii a. Reject his offer. 
b. Don 't be lenient with them. 
b. Don 't reject his offer. 
Notice, then, the difference between [9ib] and [8ib]: do is added in the imperative, 
but not in the declarative. 
Inflectional verb-form vs not 
We said that verbal negation is marked either by negative inflection on the verb 
itself or by using the separate word not to modify the verb. Inflectional negation is 
admissible only in those constructions where dummy do occurs (under the condi­
tions described above): that is, in clauses with a primary verb-form and in impera­
tive clauses, as illustrated in [8] and [9] respectively. Elsewhere, neither do nor neg­
ative inflection is permitted, as seen in the subjunctive clauses in [10] :  

[10] 
MARKING BY INFLECTION 
a. * It is vital [that we ben 't disturbed]. 
11 a. * It is vital [that he don 't delay]. 
§3.2 Non-verbal clausal negation 
1 53 
MARKING BY NOT 
b. It is vital [that we not be disturbed]. 
b. It is vital [that he not delay]. 
Notice that where marking by not is the only option, the not normally comes before 
the verb rather than after it. 
In constructions that permit both kinds of verbal negation, the difference between 
them is primarily one of style. Marking by not is characteristic of more formal style 
than inflectional negation. 
3.2 
Non-verbal clausal negation 
Non-verbal clausal negation is marked either by not modifying a 
constituent other than a verb, or else by various negative words that are not used for 
verbal negation: nothing, never,few, etc. 
Not as a marker of non-verbal negation 
Not can modify a considerable range of non-verbal elements, but by no means all. 
In a comprehensive grammar we would need to detail all the possibilities, but in this 
short introduction we will merely provide a sample, including some that illustrate 
the limitations on the use of not as a modifier. 
In the following examples, single underlining highlights not and double under­
lining marks the element that it modifies - admissibly in the [a] examples, inadmis­
sibly in the [b] examples: 
[ 1 1  ] 
ADMISSIBLE 
a. Not everybody agrees with you. 
11 a. Not all her friends supported her. 
III a. Not even Tom liked it. 
INADMISSIBLE 
b. *Not somebody agrees with you. 
b. *Not each of her friends supported her. 
b. *Not Tom liked it. 
Other markers of non-verbal negation 
We confine our attention here to items that can mark clausal negation. This excludes 
the affixes un', non', in', etc., which - as illustrated in [5] above - mark subclausal 
negation. There are two groups to consider: absolute negators and approximate 
negators. 
(a) 
Absolute negators 
These are listed in [12], with some examples of clausal negation given in [ 1 3]: 
[ 1 2] 
no, none, nobody, no one, nothing, nowhere I 
ii neither, nor, never 
[ 1 3] 
a. Nobody objected to her plan. 
1I a. We found no mistakes. 
b. Neither Kim nor Pat has arrived. 
b. He never apologises. 
I For infonnal AmE, no place (synonymous with nowhere) can be added to this list. 

154 
Chapter 8 Negation and related phenomena 
Where the negator follows the subject in clausal negation, as in [1 3ii], there is usu­
ally an equivalent clause with verbal negation: 
[ 14] 
NON-VERBAL NEGATION 
EQUIVALENT VERBAL NEGATION 
a. Wefound no mistakes. ( = [ 1 3iia)) 
b. We didn 't find il1,)! mistakes. 
II a. There is no one here. 
b. There isn 't anyone here. 
III a. He never apologises. ( =  [ 13iib)) 
b. He doesn 't ever apologise. 
The versions with verbal negation have forms with any, anybody, anyone, etc., in 
place of the negators in [ 12i], and either, or, and ever in place of those in [12ii]. 
(b) 
Approximate negators 
These are listed in [15], and in [16] we again give examples involving clausal negation: 
[ 15] 
few, little; rarely, seldom; barely, hardly, scarcely 
[ 16] 
i a. Few of them realised it was a hoax. 
ii a. She hardly spoke a word all evening. 
b. He rarely goes to church nowadays. 
b. There 's scarcely any food left. 
Few of them comes close in meaning to none of them: none indicates absolutely 
zero, while few puts the number within a small part of the scale down at the end 
close to zero. This is why we say it is an approximate negator. In a similar way, 
rarely approximates to never; hardly spoke a word approximates to didn 't speak a 
word; and scarcely any food approximates to no food. 
Although only approximate semantically, these items largely follow the pattern 
of the absolute negators with respect to the tests for clausal negation. In particular, 
the confirmation tags for the examples in [16] are those that attach to absolute neg­
ative clauses. For [ia] we have did they?, for [ib] does he?, for [iia] did she?, and for 
[iib] is there ? Note here the contrast between few, which is negative, and a few, 
which is positive - witness A few of them realised it was a hoax, didn 't they? 
4 
Non-affirmative items 
A fair number of words or larger expressions are polarity-sensitive in 
the sense that they occur readily in clauses of one polarity but not of the other. 
Compare, for example: 
[ 1 7] 
POSITIVE 
a. I have some objections to make. 
II a. *1 have il1,)! objections to make. 
NEGATIVE 
b. *1 don 't have some objections to make. 
b. I don 't have il1,)! objections to make. 
Some is by no means wholly excluded from negative clauses, but it is subject to 
restrictions that do not apply to the positive: we say, therefore, that it has positive 
orientation. 
Conversely any (in the sense it has here) has negative orientation: it occurs 
freely in negatives but is excluded from positives like [iia]. 

§4 Non-affinnative items 
1 55 
The majority of polarity-sensitive items have negative orientation, and our main 
focus here will be on these. 
What excludes any from [ 1 7iia] is not just that the clause is positive: it is 
also declarative. If we look instead at an interrogative clause, we find it is freely 
admitted: 
[ 1 8] 
a. Have you mu: objections to make? 
b. Who has mu: objections to make? 
We refer to items like any, therefore, as non-affirmatives. (The verb affirm con­
trasts with question and hence suggests declarative; the adjective affirmative is a 
synonym of positive.) 
In general, then, the restriction on non-affinnative items is that they cannot occur 
in clauses that are both declarative and positive. 
A sample of non-affinnative items is given in [ 1 9]. Some items are non-affinna­
tive only in certain senses or uses (though often the most frequently occurring of 
their uses), and we mark those with a subscript n. 
[ 1 9] 
anYn, anybodYn, any longer/more, anyonen, anythingn, anywheren 
ii at all, eithern, evern, longn' much, till/until, whatevern, yetn 
iii daren, needn, bother (+ infinitival), budge, can bearn, can standn, give a 
damnlfig, have a cluen, lift afingern, move a musclen, see a thingn 
The following examples illustrate the differences between polarity-sensitive and 
non-polarity-sensitive versions of the five items anybody, either, ever, long, and can 
stand: 
[20] 
NON-AFFIRMATIVE 
a. Did you see anybody? 
11 a. I didn 't see either of them. 
111 a. Will it ever end? 
IV a. I won 't stay long. 
v a. No one can stand the pressure. 
NOT POLARITY-SENSITIVE 
b. Anybody can make promises. 
b. Either version would do. 
b. It will last for ever. 
b. It has been a long day. 
b. Everyone can stand for a minute. 
Notice also that dare and need are non-affinnative as modal auxiliaries but not as 
lexical verbs; see Ch. 3, §3.3. 
Other constructions that accept non-affirmatives 
It is not only negatives and interrogatives that allow non-affinnative items to appear. 
They are also found in a number of other constructions, as illustrated in [21]. 
[2 1 ]  
i She was too taken aback to say anything. 
ii She ranfaster than she had ever run before. 
iii We slipped away without anyone noticing. 
The constructions concerned all have semantic affinities with negation. 
Because of the too in [i], we understand that she did NOT say anything. 
Because of the comparative, [ii] indicates that she had NEVER run that fast before. 
Because of the meaning of without, it follows from [iii] that NO ONE noticed. 

1 56 
Chapter 8 Negation and related phenomena 
Prescriptive grammar note 
There are non-standard varieties of English - widespread in Britain, North America, and 
Australasia - that use negative items in place of Standard English non-affirmative items 
in clauses with verbal negation: 
[22] 
STANDARD 
a. I didn 't see anybody. 
ii a. He didn 't say anything to anybody. 
NON-STANDARD 
b. !I didn 't see nobody. 
b. !He didn 't say nothing to nobody. 
The [b) examples here mark the negation in two or more places: once in the verb, and then 
again in the underlined negative words. This phenomenon is called negative concord 
('concord' being another term for 'agreement'): selection of nothing and nobody is deter­
mined by agreement with the preceding negative. 
Prescriptive manuals are right to say that the negative concord construction is not Stan­
dard English. But they also commonly condemn it as illogical. It isn't. To think that 
the non-standard dialects that use negative concord are illogical is to confuse logic and 
grammar. 
It is true that in logic two negatives cancel each other out and make a positive: It's not 
the case that he didn 't speak to her is true if and only if he spoke to her. And in Standard 
English I didn 't see nobody (with stress on nobody) implies that I did see somebody. But 
that isn't what it means in the non-standard dialects: as everyone knows, there it means 
that I didn't see anybody. In examples like [22ib] we have two grammatical negatives, 
but only one semantic negative. 
The kind of gramar that the non-standard dialects follow is also found in some stan­
dard languages: in Standard French, Italian, and Polish for example. There are also collo­
quial Standard English constructions that mark negation twice: Pick up some cement? Not 
in my car you won 't! means "You won't pick up cement in my car", but it expresses the 
negation twice; this emphatic construction is informal in style, but it isn't non-standard. 
Even formal Standard English has some constructions where negation is expressed 
more than once. One example is I saw neither Kim nor Pat, where neither expresses nega­
tion once and nor expresses it again - compare I didn 't see either Kim or Pat, which 
means the same but has only one grammatical negative. 
Negative concord as in !I didn 't see nobody is not illogical; it just happens to be a feature 
of non-standard varieties that is absent from the standard variety. And of course Standard 
English speakers know about it: when the Rolling Stones sing I can 't get no satisfaction, 
everyone understands that the meaning is "I am unable to obtain satisfaction" - not "I am 
unable to obtain zero satisfaction"! 
5 
Scope of negation 
The scope of negation is the part of the sentence that the negative applies 
to semantically. Scope is best understood by examination of contrasts like the one 
in [23]: 
[23] 
NEGATION HAS SCOPE OVER MANY 
MANY HAS SCOPE OVER NEGATION 
a. Not many people believed him. 
b. Many people didn 't believe him. 

§5 Scope of negation 
1 57 
The difference in meaning is considerable: [a] entails that the number of people who 
believed him is relatively small, but certainly [b] does not (we might be talking, for 
example, about a major political figure in a country with a huge population, where 
there are many people who didn't believe him and many others who did). 
In [a] the negation applies to many: the number of people who believed him was 
not large. We say then that many falls within the scope of the negation - or that 
the negation has scope over many. 
In [b], however, the negation does not apply to many: it does not have scope over 
it. On the contrary, the quantification expressed by many has scope over the nega­
tion, since it gives the size of the set of people who had the property that they 
didn't believe him. 
The same kind of contrast is found in the following pairs, where again the item 
with double underlining has scope over the one with single underlining: 
[24] 
i a. I didn 't omit my name deliberately. 
ii a. You needn 't tell anyone about it. 
b. I deliberately didn 't omit my name. 
b. You mustn 't tell anyone about it. 
In [ia] the negative has scope over the adjunct deliberately: omitting my name 
was not something I made a point of doing. In [ib], by contrast, deliberately has 
scope over the negation: I made a point of not omitting my name. 
In [iia] the negation has scope over the modal auxiliary need, expressing deontic 
necessity: "It isn't necessary for you to tell anyone about it". In [iib], however, 
modal must, likewise expressing deontic necessity, has scope over the negation: 
"It is necessary that you not tell anyone about it". 
Note that in cases where some element has scope over the negation, it is normally 
possible to find a paraphrase in which the negative marker is located in a subordi­
nate clause. 
For [23b], for example, we have There were many people [who didn 't believe 
him]. 
For [24ib]: I deliberately chose [not to omit my name]. 
For [24iib], You are required [not to tell anyone about it]; and so on. 
There is a significant degree of correlation between semantic scope and gram­
matical order. Very often, a negative element has scope over what follows but is 
within the scope of elements that precede. For example, in [23] and [24i] the nega­
tive marker in [a] precedes the element over which it has scope and in [b] follows 
the element which has scope over it. But the correlation is clearly only partial. In 
[24ii], for example, there is no difference in grammatical structure between [a] and 
[b]: the scope difference is attributable to specific properties of the modal auxiliaries 
must and need. 

1 58 
Chapter 8 Negation and related phenomena 
Exercises 
1 . Are the following clauses grammatically 
positive or negative? Give evidence for 
your answers. 
i You 're so negative I want to strangle 
you. 
ii I disagree with all of you. 
iii They 're always complaining about 
things of no importance at all. 
iv I can do nothing to help you. 
v Never before had they offered such 
good terms. 
vi That's absolute nonsense, you brainless 
ninny. 
vii We finished the job in no time. 
viii Everybody hates lying, mealy-mouthed, 
pontificating little weasels like you. 
ix We can 't just not answer their letter. 
x There 's hardly any chance of them 
changing their mind. 
2. The following examples have non-verbal 
clausal negation; construct equivalent 
examples with verbal negation. 
i He had told neither the boss nor her 
secretary. 
ii They were impressed by none of the 
candidates. 
iii We have nowhere to hide. 
iv I saw no one on the road. 
v We 're taking neither of them with us. 
3. Discuss the difference in meaning between 
the following: 
i He had read a few books on the 
subject. 
ii He had read few books on the subject. 
4. For each of the following words or expres­
sions, construct one example where it 
behaves as a non-affirmative item and 
one where it is not polarity-sensitive: 
[i] anything; [ii] kick the bucket; [iii] need 
(verb); [iv] whatever; [v] yet. 

Clause type: asking, exclaiming, 
and directing 
I Clause type and speech acts 
1 59 
2 Interrogatives and questions 
1 6 1  
3 Exclamatives 
1 68 
4 Imperatives and directives 
1 70 
5 Minor clause types 
1 72 
1 
Clause type and speech acts 
Philosophers use the tenn speech acts for things you can do with sen­
tences of your language - things like making statements, asking questions, issuing 
commands, or uttering exclamations. (All of these speech acts can of course be 
perfonned with written language too.) Which of these you can do with a given sen­
tence depends to a large extent on its syntactic fonn. The syntax of English distin­
guishes a set of clause types that are characteristically used to perfonn different 
kinds of speech acts. The major types are the five illustrated in [ I ]: 
[ 1  ] 
DECLARATIVE 
II CLOSED INTERROGATIVE 
11l OPEN INTERROGATIVE 
IV EXCLAMATIVE 
V IMPERATIVE 
You are very tactful. 
Are you very tactful? 
How tactful are you? 
How tactful you are! 
Be very tactful. 
(See §2 below for an explanation of closed versus open interrogatives.) 
Although the correspondence between these clause types and the speech acts 
they can be used to perform is not one-to-one, speech acts do have a characteristic 
correlation with clause types. We show the default correlation in [2]: 
[2] 
CLAUSE TYPE 
declarative 
II closed interrogative 
11l open interrogative 
IV exclamative 
v imperative 
CHARACTERISTIC SPEECH ACT 
making a statement 
asking a closed question 
asking an open question 
making an exclamatory statement 
issuing a directive 
1 59 

160 
Chapter 9 Clause type: asking, exclaiming, and directing 
fl Directive covers commands, instructions, requests, entreaties and the like. 
• A closed question is one with a closed set of answers. For example, there are just 
two answers to the closed question Is Sue here? - namely Yes, she 's here and No, 
she isn 't here. 
.. Where is Sue?, by contrast, is an open question: the set of answers is open-ended. 
The correlations in [2] could provide for general definitions of the clause types. 
For example, the imperative clause type can be defined as a clause construction 
CHARACTERISTICALLY USED TO ISSUE DIRECTIVES. 
However, it's important that 'imperative' and 'directive' are terms for entirely dif­
ferent things, and they DO NOT ALWAYS CORRESPOND. They cannot be used as 
language-particular definitions. This chapter is concerned with the syntactic proper­
ties of the clause types and the way in which they line up with clause meanings and 
speech acts. The correlation isn't anywhere near as simple as you might have 
expected. 
Where the correlation fails 
One example in [3] shows a directive that isn't expressed by an imperative, and the 
other shows an imperative that doesn't express a directive: 
[3] 
CLOSED INTERROGATIVE 
11 IMPERATIVE 
Could you please open the door. 
Turn up late and you 'll be fired. 
Example [i] would normally be used and understood as a directive (specifically, 
a polite request); but it is of closed interrogative form. It's not an imperative. 
The underlined clause of [ii] has imperative form, but would not be naturally 
interpreted as a directive: I'm not telling you to turn up late. The whole sentence 
is understood as if it had a conditional adjunct: it means "If you turn up late, 
you'll be fired". This of course implies that you should NOT turn up late, so the 
sentence does the opposite of telling you to turn up late! 
This shows that we have to distinguish carefully between CLAUSE TYPE and SPEECH 
ACT - between imperative and directive, between interrogative and question, and so 
on. Clause type is the major factor determining what kind of speech act will be per­
formed, but it is not the only one. 
Clause type, not sentence type 
As the term makes clear, the clause types are categories of CLAUSE. In the simplest 
cases the terms can be applied derivatively to sentences, but in more complex cases 
they cannot. Consider the following examples: 
[4] 
Kim made a mistake. 
ii Kim made a mistake, but does it really matter? 
III Do you think Kim made a mistake? 
In [i] we have a sentence with the form of a declarative clause, so this is one of the 
simple cases where we could say, derivatively, that [i] is a 'declarative sentence' . 

§2 Interrogatives and questions 
1 6 1  
In [ii] the sentence has the form of a coordination of clauses, the first of declara­
tive type and the second of closed interrogative type. In such cases it doesn't 
make sense to ask which of the five types the sentence as a whole belongs to. 
In [iii] the underlined sequence of words is a declarative clause, but it is merely 
a part of the larger clause that forms the whole sentence. The underlined clause 
isn't a sentence, and therefore it's not a declarative sentence. 
Clause type in main and subordinate clauses 
The reason we say that Kim made a mistake is a declarative clause in [4iii], when it 
isn't a main clause and doesn't make a statement, is that essentially the same con­
trasts are found in subordinate clauses as in main clauses. There is one exception: 
imperatives are normally confined to main clauses. But the other categories are 
applicable to subordinate clauses too. This is illustrated in [5], where underlining 
marks the subordinate clauses in the [b] examples: 
[5] 
MAIN CLAUSE 
SUBORDINATE CLAUSE 
a. It was a success. 
b. Sue thinks it was a success. 
11 a. Was it a success? 
b. She didn 't say whether it was a success. 
1 1 1  a. How big a success was it? 
b. She wants to know how big. a success it was. 
IV a. What a success it was! 
b. He told me what a success it was. 
This further reinforces the need to distinguish between clause type and speech acts: 
by saying [ib] I don't claim it was a success, by saying [iib] or [iiib] I'm not asking 
questions about its success, and by uttering [ivb] I'm not making an exclamation 
about how successful it was. 
In this chapter, though, we'll confine our attention to main clauses; clause type in 
subordinate clauses is dealt with in Ch. 10. 
Declarative as the default clause type 
The declarative type can be regarded as the default clause type - the type that all 
canonical clauses belong to. Declaratives simply lack the special syntactic properties 
of the other clause types. In this chapter, then, we can focus on the non-declarative 
clause types: closed and open interrogatives (§2), exclamatives (§3); and impera­
tives (§4), with a few other minor types illustrated in §5. 
2 
Interrogatives and questions 
We've mentioned interrogative clauses in earlier chapters without draw­
ing the distinction between the types that we now call closed and open. The syntac­
tic structure of the two is significantly different. 
The terms 'closed' and 'open' 
These terms apply in the first instance to questions. As noted above, a closed ques­
tion like Is Sue here ?  has just two answers, whereas an open question like Where 

162 
Chapter 9 Clause type: asking, exclaiming, and directing 
is Sue? has an open-ended set of answers. The terms are then applied derivatively to 
interrogatives: closed interrogatives and open interrogatives are clause types 
characteristically used to ask closed and open questions respectively. 
Note that we distinguish between an answer to a question and a response to it. A 
response is whatever someone says as a result of being asked some question. I might 
ask: Is Sue here ?, and you might say I'm not sure. That would be a response, but not 
an answer. It was a closed question, and it has only two answers: Yes or No. 
(Lawyers often have to remind witnesses about this.) If I ask: Where is Sue ?, I've 
asked an open question whose answer will give the location of Sue, but again, if you 
said: Why do you ask?, that would be a response, not an answer to my question. 
2. 1 
The form of closed interrogatives 
Closed interrogative form is marked by subject-auxiliary inversion: the 
subject occurs after the auxiliary verb, as in the [b] members of the pairs in [6]. 
[6] 
DECLARATIVE 
CLOSED INTERROGATIVE 
a. It is raining. 
b. Is it raining? 
11 a. He can 't swim. 
b. Can 't he swim? 
111 a. The doctor recommended it. 
b. Did the doctor recommend it? 
In [i-ii] the closed interrogative differs from its declarative counterpart by having 
subject and auxiliary verb in the reverse order. 
If, as in [iiia], the declarative does not contain an auxiliary, the dummy auxiliary 
do appears in the interrogative, as described in Ch. 3, §3. 1 .  
Closed interrogatives vs other subject-auxiliary inversion clauses 
Inversion is not restricted to closed interrogatives, but elsewhere it normally 
occurs only when certain kinds of element occupy initial position in the clause, as 
in [7]: 
[7] 
i Never had I seen her so furious. 
} 
ii Jill approved of it and [so did her husband]. 
iii Why are you looking at me like that? 
[declarative] 
[open interrogative] 
In [i] and [ii], belonging to the default declarative category, the inversion is trig­
gered by the occurrence in initial position of a negative element (never) and a 
connective (so). 
In [iii] the inversion is triggered by the initial interrogative element why, a 
marker of the open interrogative type. 
Rising intonation as a marker of questions 
A closed question can be signalled by means of a rise in the intonation (represented 
by '/" )  instead of by a different syntactic form: 
[8] 
i You 're sure you can afford it? /' 
ii So they offered her $50 but she refused? /' 

§2.2 Polar questions and alternative questions 
163 
These are closed QUESTIONS, but they are not closed INTERROGATIVE CLAUSES. 
Use of intonation to mark a question does not change syntactic clause type. This is 
evident from examples like [ii]. We saw above that clause type applies specifically 
to clauses, but here we have a coordination of clauses, and the rising intonation 
gives a question meaning to the coordination as a whole, not the individual clauses. 
The answers are Yes, they offered her $50 but she refused and No, it's not the case 
that they offered her $50 but she refused. The two clauses are declaratives, but 
INTONATION OVERRIDES CLAUSE TYPE in determining what kind of speech act is per­
formed. As we pointed out in § I ,  clause type is the major factor in determining what 
kind of speech act is performed, but it isn't the only one. Intonation is one of the 
additional factors. 
2.2 
Polar questions and alternative questions 
There are two kinds of closed question, depending on how the answers 
are derivable from the question: polar questions and alternative questions. 
[9] 
a. POLAR QUESTION 
b. 
ii a. 
b. ALTERNATIVE QUESTION 
(a) Polar questions 
{ Did he read her note? 
Didn 't he read her note? 
{ Is the meeting today, tomorrow, or next Monday? 
Is the Kensington Runestone genuine, or is it a hoax? 
In a polar question one answer is derivable directly from the question itself, while 
the other is its polar opposite, i.e. its negative or positive counterpart. 
In [ia] one answer is Yes, he read it, and the other is its negation: No, he didn 't 
read it. 
These are also the answers to [ib], but here it's the negative answer, No, he didn 't 
read it, that is derivable directly from the question itself. 
(b) Alternative questions 
An alternative question contains a coordination of elements linked by or, and the 
answers derive from the separate coordinated elements. 
In [iia] there are thus three answers: It is today; It is tomorrow; and It is next 
Monday. 
Similarly in [iib] there are two answers: It is genuine, and It is a hoax. 
Note that the or in [9iib] joins whole clauses, so it's not a marker of a distinct clause 
type. What we have is a coordination of TWO CLOSED INTERROGATIVE CLAUSES 
expressing A SINGLE ALTERNATIVE QUESTION. 
While an or-coordination is an essential component of an alternative question, 
it's possible to have an or-coordination in other kinds of speech act, which means 

1 64 
Chapter 9 Clause type: asking, exclaiming, and directing 
that an or-coordination may occur coincidentally in a polar question. However, we 
can tell them apart because of an intonation difference, as seen in [10]: 
[10] 
i Do you want me to give it to mum /' or dad '\&? 
ii Do you want me to give it to mum or dad /'? 
[alternative question] 
[polar question] 
The arrows indicate the main direction of the intonation towards the end. 
Version [i), with rising intonation on mum and falling intonation on dad, is an 
alternative question: I take it for granted that you want me to give it to one par­
ent, and ask which one. The answers are thus I want you to give it to mum and 
I want you to give it to dad. 
Version [ii] does not have a separate intonational rise on mum, but has a rise at 
the end. It is a polar question, with the answers Yes, I want you to give it to mum 
or dad and No, I don 't want you to give it to mum or dad. 
2.3 
Interrogative tags 
A special case of the closed interrogative is in the interrogative tags 
that are appended to some clauses, usually declaratives: 
[ 1 1 ] 
i Your brother looked pretty embarrassed, didn 't he? 
ii We haven 't done anything wrong, have we? 
The tags here are closed interrogatives reduced to just an auxiliary verb and a 
pronoun subject. Everything else is left implicit, because it's recoverable from the 
preceding clause. 
As noted in Ch. 8, § 1 ,  the most usual construction has a reversed polarity tag: 
the polarity of the tag is the reverse of that of the first clause. 
In [i), for example, the declarative is positive and the tag negative. 
In [ii], by contrast, the declarative is negative and the tag positive. 
Such tags express a need for confirmation of the statement expressed in the 
declarative. 
2.4 
The form of open interrogatives 
Open interrogatives are marked by the presence of one (or more) of the 
interrogative words given in [12] :  
[ 1 2] 
who 
whom 
whose 
what which 
when 
where 
why 
how 
Interrogative phrases and their position 
The interrogative word, alone or in combination with other words such as the head 
noun in what books or which version, forms an interrogative phrase. This can have 
a variety of functions in the clause, such as subject, object, predicative complement, 
and so on. 

§2.4 The form of open interrogatives 
1 65 
The important syntactic distinction is between subjects and non-subjects. Non­
subjects are usually fronted. That is, they are placed before the subject, rather than 
later, where non-subject elements in canonical clauses would go . 
[13] 
SUBJECT 
ii 
iii NON-SUBJECT 
iv 
.H:'fu2 called the police? 
{ Which version did they recOmmend?} 
What are they? 
And after that they went where? 
[fronted] 
[not fronted] 
In [i], the interrogative phrase who is subject. It's in the usual subject position, 
before the predicator. 
In [ii], which version is object of recommend, and in [iii], what is predicative 
complement. They are non-subjects. They occur fronted, and the fronting is 
accompanied by obligatory subject-auxiliary inversion. 
In [iv], where is a locative complement, i.e., a non-subject. It is not fronted, 
though. It occurs in the position where you'd expect a locative pp to be in a 
canonical clause. 
The last construction is restricted to contexts that typically involve sustained ques­
tioning: in court, or in quizzes or game shows (TIrana is the capital o/which European 
country ?). In other contexts, non-subject interrogative phrases are normally fronted. 
Case 
Who, whom and whose are respectively nominative, accusative and genitive forms 
of the pronoun who. The choice between who and whom - like the choice between 
nominative and accusative forms of the personal pronouns (Ch. 5, §8.3) - depends 
on two factors: function and style level. The style factor, however, applies differ­
ently than it does with the personal pronouns. With the personal pronouns the accu­
sative form is used in certain constructions as a less formal variant of the nomina­
tive. With who, things are the other way round: it's the nominative form that is less 
formal. Compare [ 14] with [55] of Ch. 5: 
[14] 
ii 
Who wrote the editorial? 
Whom / Who did Kim meet in Paris? 
[subject: nominative] 
[object of verb: accusative or nominative] 
iii a. To whom / *To who is he talking? } [object of prep: accusative or nominative] 
b. Whom / Who is he talking to? 
iv 
Who was she? 
[PC: nominative] 
When the pronoun is subject of a finite clause it again appears in the nominative, 
as in [i], but this is the only place where who follows the pattern of the personal 
pronouns. 
When it is object of the verb, as in [ii], both cases are found, but whom is formal; 
who is preferred in conversational spoken English by most people. 
When the pronoun is object of a preposition we need to distinguish between the 
two constructions discussed in Ch. 7, §5. 
o In [iiia] the preposition is fronted with who and forms part of the interrogative 
phrase. This is quite formal, and normally requires accusative whom. 

166 
Chapter 9 Clause type: asking, exclaiming, and directing 
o In [iiib] the preposition is stranded (and hence not part of the interrogative 
phrase). This is very much more common except in formal style, and strongly 
favours who. 
When fronted who is a predicative complement it is always nominative, as 
in [iv]. 
Multiple interrogative phrases 
It is possible to have more than one interrogative phrase in a clause; but only one 
can be fronted: 
[ 15] 
Who went where? 
ii How much did you give to whom? 
2.5 
Open questions and their answers 
We've said that open interrogatives are characteristically used to express 
open questions - questions with an open-ended set of answers, derivable from the 
questions by replacing the interrogative phrases by appropriate non-interrogative 
ones which we'll call replacement phrases. Thus possible answers to the questions 
in [ 1 3] are given in [16] (the replacement phrase is underlined): 
[ 16] 
Her father called the police. 
ii They recommended the most recent version. 
iii They are microscopes. 
iv And after that they went home. 
Very often the answer is reduced to JUST THE REPLACEMENT PHRASE, since the rest 
is recoverable from the question without alteration. 
Appropriate replacements 
What counts as an appropriate replacement phrase depends on the interrogative 
phrase, especially on the particular interrogative word it contains. Here are some 
very simple cases where the interrogative word is head of the interrogative phrase: 
Who and whom need replacements denoting personal entities - humans, or 
sometimes animals and robots (Who is that bone for? - Rex). 
Whose is personal too, but needs a genitive replacement (Whose is this bike? -
Mary's). 
What is non-personal (What was he wearing ? - A suit), but when it's a predica­
tive complement its replacement can be an indication of occupation, religion, etc. 
(What is Jill? - She 's a Catholic). 
When, where and why call for replacements denoting times, places and reasons, 
respectively (When did they leave? - Yesterday; Where are you going ? - To the 
bank; Why are you late? - Because I missed my flight). 
When how is an adverb in adjunct function it generally questions manner or means 
(How did you fix it? - By changing the battery; How did you sleep? - Very well). 

§2.7 Echo questions 
167 
How can also be an adjective, functioning as predicative complement. Here it 
permits a fairly small range of answers, typically indicating state of health or 
evaluation (How are you ? - Very well; How was the concert? - Excellent). 
There are also cases where the interrogative word is a dependent: 
When what and which function as determiner in NP structure, the replacements 
must be consistent with the head noun. So What video shall we get? and Which 
video shall we get? need replacements referring to a video. (The difference 
between what and which is that the latter implies selection from some definite 
set; in the example given, which suggests prior mention of a number of videos, 
with the question asking for a choice between them.) 
How can function as degree modifier of adjectives, determinatives or adverbs, 
and the replacement must have the right sort of meaning to fit the function: How 
wide is it? - Two inches (or Two inches wide); How many copies do you need? ­
Fifteen ;  How fast were they going? - About fifty miles an hour. 
2.6 
Information questions and direction questions 
In all the questions considered so far, the answers have been statements. 
We call these information questions. There's also a less frequent type of question, 
direction questions, whose answers are directives. The questions in the [a] exam­
ples in [17] are closed (polar), those in the [b] ones open. 
[ 1 7] 
INFORMATION QUESTION 
POSSIBLE ANSWER (STATEMENT) 
a. Did you open the window? 
Yes, I did. 
b. What did you give her? 
I gave her a CD. 
ii 
DIRECTION QUESTION 
POSSIBLE ANSWER (DIRECTIVE) 
a. Shall I open the window? 
Yes, please do. 
b. What shall we give her? 
Let's give her a CD. 
2.7 
Echo questions 
One distinctive type of (information) question is the echo question, 
uttered in response to a preceding utterance which we call the stimulus: 
[ 1 8] 
STIMULUS 
A: She wrote to the minister. 
11 A: He invited Arthur. 
ECHO QUESTION 
B: She wrote to the minister? 
B: He invited who? 
[closed (polar)] 
[open] 
Echo questions serve to check or clarify a stimulus that wasn't clearly perceived or 
was surprising. They can be closed or open. Closed echo questions are usually ofthe 
polar type. 
A polar echo typically repeats the stimulus in full or in reduced form and has 
sharply rising intonation; it's used to check whether I correctly heard what you 
said (or meant to say). 

1 68 
Chapter 9 Clause type: asking, exclaiming, and directing 
An open echo repeats the stimulus with a question word substituted for part of 
it - the part that's specifically in need of confinnation or clarification. The echo 
question word is never fronted: it occupies the same position as the part of the 
stimulus that it substitutes for. 
3 
Exclamatives 
3. 1 
The structure of exclamative clauses 
Exclamative clauses are marked by an exclamative phrase containing 
what or how. Again, this phrase may have a range of functions, the major dis­
tinction again being between subject and non-subject. An exclamative subject 
occupies its basic position, whereas an exclamative non-subject is obligatorily 
fronted: 
[ 1 9] 
SUBJECT 
What unpleasant people work in this restaurant! 
11 
iii NON-SUBJECT 
{ How clever you are! 
What a disaster would it be if they were to appoint his son! 
When a non-subject is fronted the subject itself usually precedes the verb, as in [ii]. 
It is possible to have subject-auxiliary inversion, as in [iii], but this is much less 
likely than the uninverted What a disaster it would be if they were to appoint his 
son! 
Exclamatives and exclamations 
There are many ways of conveying exclamatory meaning besides using exclama­
tive clause type. Compare, for example: 
[20] 
a. Get the hell out of here. 
ii a. Look at that fantastic sunset! 
iii a. Don 't be so pathetically stupid. 
b. What the hell are you doing? 
b. Who saw that fantastic sunset? 
b. Why are you so pathetically stupid? 
The exclamatory meaning is expressed here by the hell in [i],fantastic [ii], and so 
pathetically in [iii], but these are independent of clause type. They combine with 
imperative structure in the [a] examples and with open interrogatives in the [b] ones. 
What and how in [19], by contrast, are restricted to the particular clause type we call 
exclamative. Note, for example, the impossibility of inserting them in imperatives 
or open interrogatives: 
[21 ] 
a. * Don 't be what a tyrant. 
b. * Why are you what a tyrant? 
That's why we originally gave the characteristic use of exclamatives (in [2]) as 
making an exclamatory statement, rather than simply an exclamation. 

§3.2 Exclamative what and how 
1 69 
3.2 
Exc1amative what and how 
What and how occur in either exclamative or open interrogative clauses, 
but with some differences in grammar and meaning. 
(a) What 
Exclamative what has the syntax of an adjective. It always occurs in NPs with a fol­
lowing head, and can never be a pronoun like the interrogative pronoun what (as in 
What was that ?). The difference between exclamative what and interrogative what 
is clearest in count singular NPs, where exclamative what precedes the indefinite 
article a. Compare: 
[22] 
a. COUNT SING 
ii a. PLURAL 
iii a. NON-COUNT 
EXCLAMATIVE 
What a car that was! 
What siĝhts we saw! 
What talent she had! 
INTERROGATIVE 
b. What car was that? 
b. What siĝhts did we see? 
b. What talent did she have? 
In [i], where singular car has a count interpretation, we see an overt difference 
between exclamative what a car (with a as determiner, and what as external modi­
fier) and interrogative what car (with what as determiner). In [ii-iii] the exclamative 
and interrogative phrases are alike, but we still have the same meaning difference as 
in [i]. 
Interrogative what questions identity: answers to the [b] questions will identify 
the relevant car, sights and talent. 
Exclamative what is concerned with quality or degree: a remarkable car, remark­
able sights, remarkable talent. 
(b) How 
Exclamative how is invariably an adverb: it has no use comparable to the interroga­
tive predicative adjective how of How was the concert?, etc. Exclamative and inter­
rogative uses of adverbial how are contrasted in [23]: 
[23] 
EXCLAMATIVE 
INTERROGATIVE 
a. How old he is! 
b. How old is he? 
11 a. How they deceived us! 
b. How did they deceive us? 
In [i], the adverb how is a degree modifier in AdjP structure. The exclamative use 
in [ia] indicates a notably high degree - it comments on his being amazingly old. 
The interrogative use in [ib] merely asks what his age is (he may be very young). 
In [ii], how is an adjunct in clause structure, but of two different semantic types. 
The exclamative use in [iia] suggests some really major deception. The interrog­
ative use in [iib] merely questions the manner (it means "In what way did they 
deceive us?"). 

170 
Chapter 9 Clause type: asking, exclaiming, and directing 
4 
Imperatives and directives 
4. 1 
The form of imperative clauses 
The major syntactic features distinguishing imperative clauses from 
declaratives are as stated in [24]. Examples are given in [25]. 
[24] 
A 2nd person subject is omissible. 
ii The verb is in the plain form. 
III Auxiliary do is required in verbal negation even with be. 
[25] 
DECLARATIVE 
IMPERATIVE 
a. You told her the truth. 
b. Tell her the truth. 
11 a. You are more tolerant. 
b. Be more tolerant. 
III a. Everybody follows me. 
b. Everybody follow me. 
iv a. You aren 't impetuous. 
b. Don 't be impetuous. 
In [ia] the subject is obligatory, whereas [ib] illustrates the usual form of imper­
atives, with the subject you understood. It's possible to include you (You tell her 
the truth!), but this is much less common. 
Examples [ii] and [iii] show the verb-form difference: are and follows are pres­
ent tense forms; be and follow are plain forms. As we noted in Ch. 3, § 1 .2, plain 
present tense forms and plain forms are nearly always the same; as a result, the 
verb in an imperative is distinct from that of a present tense declarative in just 
two cases: with the verb be as in [ii], and with a 3rd person singular subject, like 
the everybody of [iii]. 
In [iv] we see the difference with respect to auxiliary do: it's not permitted in the 
declarative version but it's required in the imperative. 
4.2 
First person imperatives 
Most imperative clauses have a 2nd person subject, either overtly 
expressed as you or understood that way. In some cases 3rd person subjects are 
found, like everybody in [25iii] (it means "everybody among you"). But there is also 
a distinct subtype of imperative construction understood as 1st person plural. It is 
marked by a specialised use of the verb let, differing from the ordinary verb let 
("allow") in four ways: 
[26] 
ORDINARY LET 
1ST PERSON IMPERATIVE LET 
a. They let us have our ball back. 
b. Let's get our ball back. 
11 a. He didn 't let us attend the meeting. 
b. Don 't let 's attend the meeting. 
III a. He let us not attend the meeting. 
b. Let's not attend the meeting. 
The specialised let CANNOT HAVE A SUBJECT (cf. * You let's get our ball back). It's 
the verb FOLLOWING let that is understood with a 1st person plural subject. 
There's a clear meaning difference between [iia] and [iiia]: [iia] means "He 
refused us permission to attend" (let is WITHIN the scope of negation), while 

§4.3 Uses of the imperative 
1 7 1  
[iiia] means "He gave us permission to stay away" (let is OUTSIDE the scope of 
negation). There's no such difference between [iib] and [iiib]: let is just a marker 
of the construction, with no independent meaning, so the question of whether or 
not it falls within the scope of the negation doesn't arise. 
Specialised let allows reduction to 's for the pronoun us (in fact it's almost 
always reduced; spelling it out as us is very formal style). This is not possible 
with ordinary let. 
Normally us can refer to either you and me or me and someone else (see Ch. 5, 
§8.2). But in 1 st person imperatives the us (or 's) is always understood as 
INCLUSIVE OF THE ADDRESSEE(S): in [ib], for example, it's a matter of me and you 
getting our ball back. 
4.3 
Uses of the imperative 
(a) Imperatives as directives 
Issuing directives is the characteristic use of imperatives. Directives include a wide 
range of more specific types of speech act: 
[27] 
ORDERS: 
11 REQUESTS: 
iii INSTRUCTIONS: 
iv ADVICE: 
v INVITATIONS: 
vi PERMISSIONS: 
Stand up. Keep off the grass. Get out of my way. Take aim! 
Please pass the salt. Kindly tell Sir Randolph we 're here. 
Shake well before using. Press TUNE MODE and select 'Manual'. 
Sell now while prices are high. Watch your step. 
Come and have lunch. Step this way. Feel free to contact me. 
Come in. Make yourself at home. Take as many as you need. 
What kind of directive an utterance is understood to issue will depend on such fac­
tors as context and tone of voice, though there are some linguistic devices that serve 
to distinguish requests from orders, such as please and kindly in [ii]. 
(b) Imperatives as wishes 
Imperatives can be used to express certain kinds of wish: 
[28] 
Sleep well. 
Have a great week-end. 
Get well soon. 
These differ from directives in that the situations concerned are generally not 
regarded as being under your control. I'm not instructing you to sleep well, have a 
great weekend, recover: I'm expressing a hope. This usage is restricted to a quite 
narrow range of situations like being comfortable, having fun, getting well. 
(c) Imperatives as conditions 
[29] 
i Invite one without the other and there '11 be trouble. 
ii Help me this once and I'll never ask you again. 
Here the imperative clauses (underlined) are the first element in a coordination con­
struction that has a conditional interpretation: "If you invite one without the other, 
there'lI be trouble", "If you help me this once I'll never ask you again". The sec­
ond element in the coordination indicates the consequence of fulfilling the condition 

1 72 
Chapter 9 Clause type: asking, exclaiming, and directing 
that is indirectly expressed in the imperative. The interpretation of the whole depends 
on whether the consequence is assumed to be undesirable or desirable. 
In [i], trouble is undesirable, so you certainly won't take the imperative as a directive. 
In [ii], however, the consequence (my never asking you for help again) is desir­
able, so the imperative retains its force as a request. 
4.4 
Non-imperative directives 
The imperative construction can be used for various kinds of directive, 
both telling (where I expect compliance) and asking (where you may decline). But 
other clause types are often used to make the speaker's intentions somewhat clearer. 
(a) Interrogatives as directives 
It is particularly common for closed interrogatives to be used for requests: 
[30] 
i Will you feed the cat. 
ii Could you help me with the washing-up. 
iii Would you mind turning your radio down a little. 
In many contexts directives of this form are considered more polite than imperatives. 
(b) Declaratives as directives 
[3 1 ]  
i I order/beg you to leave while there 's still time. 
ii You will drive her to the airport and then report back to me. 
iii I want you to mow the lawn this week-end. 
In [i] the verbs order and beg denote speech acts and hence make explicit what 
kind of directive is intended: an order or an entreaty. 
In [ii] I'm telling you what you will be doing, but since the situation is under your 
control (you're the driver), in effect I'm giving you an order, though indirectly 
and implicitly. 
In [iii] I'm saying what I want you to do, and in a context where I have some relevant 
kind of authority or control over you I am indirectly or implicitly telling you to do it. 
5 
Minor clause types 
Most main clauses fall into one or other of the five clause types listed in 
[ 1 ]  at the beginning of this chapter. But there are a few other minor patterns, mostly 
involving fixed formulae or fragmentary structures. The following is a small sam­
ple, the examples in [i] being main clause subjunctives, as mentioned in Ch. 3, §2: 
[32] 
Long live the Queen. 
Suffice it to say that the matter is being investigated. 
So be it. 
God help you if you do this again. 
God bless America. 
ii May you be forgiven. 
Would to God I had never heard of Enron. 
111 Out of my way! 
Offwith his head! Hands up! Into the bin with it! 
IV The more the merrier. 
No pain, no gain. 
Out of sight, out of mind. 

Exercises 
1 .  Classify the following according to clause 
type, and say what kind of speech act they 
would most likely be used to perfonn. 
i Please tum the light on. 
ii I advise you to accept their offer. 
iii I advised her to accept their offer. 
iv Can you close that door please. 
v You 're leaving already? 
vi Where shall I put my coat? 
vii What a senseless waste of human life it 
was. 
viii Have a nice day. 
ix Aren 't we lucky! 
x Allow me to congratulate you. 
2. Fonn open interrogatives from the follow­
ing declaratives, replacing the underlined 
phrase with a corresponding interrogative 
phrase such as who, what, when, etc. 
i She said something to them. 
ii Someone has taken my umbrella. 
iii He sold his car to someone. 
iv He thinks they 'll appoint someone. 
v They left early for some reason. 
vi You told her I was going somewhere. 
vii You first suspected he was the 
murderer at some time. 
viii Things have changed for you ǯ 
way since last year. 
ix You think someone has the most 
influence with these people. 
x We can get somebody to clear up this 
mess. 
3. Attach the proper reverse polarity tags to 
the following declaratives. 
i You don 't know where to put it. 
ii She believes everything you say. 
Exercises 
1 73 
iii Everyone thought it was impossible. 
iv They used to live in Baltimore. 
v There is no future for us. 
4. Interrogative tags can also be attached to 
imperative clauses, as in Don 't tell anyone, 
will you? What tags could naturally be 
added to the following? (Where both 
reversed and constant polarity tags can be 
used, give them both, and comment on any 
difference between them.) 
i Give this letter to Angela. 
ii Don 't show the letter to Angela. 
iii Take your feet off the sofa. 
iv Let's take a break. 
v Let's not waste any more time. 
5. The following clauses are given without 
any final punctuation mark to avoid preju­
dicing things, so they don't confonn to 
nonnal written English. For each one, say 
whether it is (a) an open interrogative; 
(b) an exclamative; or (c) ambiguous 
between open interrogative and exclamative. 
If your answer is (a) or (b), explain what 
grammatical factors make the clause unam­
biguous. If your answer is (c), comment on 
the difference in meaning. 
i Who thinks it was awesome 
ii How much remains to be done 
iii How did you convince them 
iv What a disappointment it was 
v How often have I told you to lock up 
vi What idiot devised this plan 
vii Who cares about your stupid project 
viii What kind of fool do you take me for 
ix How geeky I look in that propeller hat 
x Why don 't you give them a chance 

'-SUbordination and content clauses 
I Subordinate clauses 
174 
2 Clause type in content clauses 
175 
3 Declarative content clauses 
175 
4 Interrogative content clauses 
177 
5 Exclamative content clauses 
1 80 
1 
Subordinate clauses 
Subordinate clauses characteristically function as dependent within some 
larger construction. The next higher clause in the structure is called the matrix clause. 
Subordinate clauses often differ in their internal structure from main clauses. 
Some typical differences are illustrated in [1]: 
[ I ] 
MAIN CLAUSE 
SUBORDINATE CLAUSE 
a. Sue is the best candidate. 
b. I agree that Sue is the best candidate. 
II a. He was looking at a book. 
b. This is the book he was lookinĝ at. 
iii a. I gave him my address. 
b. I made a mistake in ĝiving him m)!. address. 
The underlined clause in [ib], a dependent in clause structure, is marked as sub­
ordinate by its introductory word that, which is a subordinator. 
The underlined clause in [iib], a dependent in NP structure, is marked as subor­
dinate by having a missing NP, the understood object of the preposition at. 
The underlined clause in [iiib], a dependent in pp structure, is marked as subor­
dinate by having its subject left understood and its verb in gerund-participle 
form. 
The differences are generally greater in non-finite clauses than in finite ones, so in 
this and the next two chapters we focus on finite subordinate clauses (such as those 
in [ib/iib)), returning to non-finites (such as [iiib)) in Ch. 13. 
Content clause as the default kind of finite subordinate clause 
There are three major subclasses of finite subordinate clause, illustrated in [2]: 
[2] 
RELATIVE CLAUSE 
1 74 
II COMPARATIVE CLAUSE 
III CONTENT CLAUSE 
They weren 't among the people who had been invited. 
More people came than had been invited. 
I don 't think that these people had been invited. 

§3. 1 The subordinator that 
175 
The relative clause underlined in [i] has as its subject a relative pronoun who with 
the preceding noun people as its antecedent. 
The comparative clause underlined in [ii] has no overt subject at all. 
Content clauses lack special properties of this kind. We can regard them as the 
default kind of finite subordinate clause, from which relative and comparative 
clauses differ in certain distinctive ways described in Ch. I I  and Ch. 12. 
The content clause in [iii] is introduced by the subordinator that, but the rest of 
the clause does not differ from that of the main clause These people had been 
invited. And the subordinator is in fact optional here: I don 't think these people had 
been invited is also grammatical. 
Content clauses function predominantly as complement within the larger con­
struction: the one cited here, for example, is complement of the verb think. 
2 
Clause type in content clauses 
The system of clause type described for main clauses in Ch. 9 applies 
also to content clauses, except that imperatives are normally restricted to main 
clauses. In [3] we illustrate main clause and content clauses of the other four types: 
[3] 
MAIN CLAUSE 
CONTENT CLAUSE 
DECLARATIVE 
Liz is in Paris. 
He says that Liz is in Paris. 
ii CLOSED INTERROGATIVE 
Is she ill? 
I wonder whether she is ill. 
m OPEN INTERROGATIVE 
What do l!0U want? 
Tell me what l!0U want. 
iv EXCLAMATIVE 
What a bargain it is! 
Tell her what a bargain it is. 
In the following three sections we survey declarative, interrogative and exclamative 
content clauses respectively. 
3 
Declarative content clauses 
3. 1 
The subordinator that 
The major feature that can distinguish declarative content clauses from 
their main clause counterparts is the subordinator that. It is sometimes obligatory, 
sometimes optional, and sometimes inadmissible: 
[4] 
OBLIGATORY 
II INADMISSIBLE 
m OPTIONAL 
WITH SUBORDINATOR that 
That I need helv is clear. 
*1 left before that he arrived. 
I know that it's genuine. 
WITHOUT SUBORDINATOR that 
* I need help is clear. 
I left before he arrived. 
I know it's genuine. 
The main place where that is obligatory is where the content clause is subject of 
the matrix clause, as in [4i]. It is likewise obligatory if the content clause is pre­
posed so as to precede the subject, as in That I need help I can 't deny. 

1 76 
Chapter 10 Subordination and content clauses 
That is inadmissible in a clause that is complement to a preposition like before in 
[ii]. Most prepositions exclude that; there are only a very few (such as notwith­
standing, in order, and provided), which allow it. 
Elsewhere, that is in general optional, as we see in [iii]. It is more likely to be 
omitted in informal than in formal style, and it is more likely to be omitted after 
short and common verbs than after longer and less frequent ones. For example, 
in This will demonstrate that it is genuine the subordinator would probably not 
be omitted. 
3.2 
Declaratives as complement 
Declarative content clauses mostly function as complement of a verb, 
noun, adjective, or preposition. The range of complement functions is illustrated 
in [5]: 
[5] 
SUBJECT 
That they refused didn 't surprise us. 
u EXTRA POSED SUBJECT 
It didn 't surprise us that they refused. 
III 
{ I ",a/i" that you fuel in,ulled. 
IV INTERNAL COMP OF VERB 
She informed me that she had been insulted. 
v 
The problem is that we iust can 't atlord it. 
VI COMP OF NOUN 
You can 't ignore the fact that he was drunk. 
vu COMP OF ADJECTIVE 
I'm glad that you could come. 
Vlll CO MP OF PREPOSITION 
You can go provided that you are careful. 
In [i] the content clause is subject. It is licensed by surprise. 
In [ii] we see a much more frequent kind of case than [i], but synonymous with 
it: the subordinate clause is extraposed (see Ch. 1 5, §3. 1 ). 
In the next three examples, the content clause is internal complement to the 
verb of a clause: in [iii], the sole complement of realise; in [iv], the second com­
plement of inform; and in [v], the complement of be in its specifying sense. 
In the next two the content clause is complement to the nounfact ([vi]) and the 
adjective glad ([vii]). 
Finally in [viii] the content clause is complement of a preposition. As noted 
above, most prepositions disallow that, but provided (historically derived from 
the past participle of a verb) is one of the few that allow it.l 
3.3 
The mandative construction 
One special construction with a declarative content clause as complement 
is the mandative. This term is based on the element mand that is found in demand and 
mandatory, two lexemes that license mandative complements. The meaning of 
I The tenn 'content clause' is not used in traditional grammar. The clauses that function as comple­
ments are traditionally called 'noun clauses', but this is a highly misleading tenn. Content clauses 
aren't nouns, and it should be clear from the examples in [5] that they don't behave like nouns or NPs. 
Most importantly, nouns and NPs don't nonnally function as extraposed subject, or as complement to 
a noun or an adjective. 

§4 Interrogative content clauses 
1 77 
mandatives includes a component of meaning comparable to that expressed by the 
modal auxiliary must (see Ch. 3, §8. l on deontic modality). The sentences in [6] 
illustrate; they are all similar in meaning to He must be told immediately. 
[6] 
SUBJUNCTIVE MANDATIVE 
It is essential that he be told immediately. 
11 Should MAN DATIVE 
III COVERT MANDATIVE 
It is essential that he should be told immediately. 
It is essential that he is told immediately. 
Variant [i] involves the sUbjunctive use of the plain form of the verb be. 
In [ii] we have a special use of the modal auxiliary should; this should mandative 
is more common in BrE than in ArnE, where the subjunctive mandative is gener­
ally preferred. 
With the covert variant [iii], nothing in the form of the content clause itself dis­
tinguishes the mandative use from ordinary non-mandative declaratives, as in I 
hope that he is told immediately (clearly non-mandative, since hope does not 
license a subjunctive complement). 
With verbs other than be, and with subjects other than 3rd person singulars, the sub­
junctive and the covert mandative have the same form: It is essential that they tell 
him immediately. 
Potential ambiguity 
While content clause complements of demand, essential, mandatory, vital, and the 
like are always mandative, there are some lexemes such as insist and important that 
license both mandative and non-mandative complements, and here we see ambigu­
ities that show us the distinctness of the two constructions. These two examples 
make a sharp contrast: 
[7] 
i I insisted that he meet her. 
ii I insisted that he met her. 
[not ambiguous: SUbjunctive mandative] 
[either non-mandative or covert mandative] 
Example [i] is unambiguously mandative by virtue of its subjunctive form. It car­
ries the deontic meaning "I made it a requirement for him to meet her". 
Example [ii], by contrast, is ambiguous. It can be understood as either a covert 
mandative meaning "I made it a requirement that he meet her" or (more proba­
bly) a non-mandative with the meaning "I emphatically asserted that he met her". 
The same sort of ambiguity is found with important: a doctor who says It's impor­
tant that he drinks a lot might mean either "He should take plenty of fluids" or "The 
fact that he's a heavy drinker is significant"! 
4 
Interrogative content clauses 
Main clause interrogatives are characteristically used to ASK questions; 
subordinate interrogatives EXPRESS questions, but do not themselves ask them. 
Usually (but not always) the construction can be glossed with the formula "the 
answer to the question": 

1 78 
Chapter 10 Subordination and content clauses 
[8] 
I know where he is. 
11 I told her what it was. 
"I know the answer to the question 'Where is he?'" 
"I told her the answer to the question 'What was it?' "  
4. 1 
Closed interrogatives and the subordinators whether and if 
Whereas main clause closed interrogatives are marked by subject­
auxiliary inversion, their subordinate counterparts are normally introduced by one 
of the interrogative subordinators whether and if,2 followed by basic subject­
predicate order: 
[9] 
MAIN 
a. Did he accept the offer? 
ii a. Will you chair the meeting? 
SUBORDINATE 
b. I'm unsure whether he accepted the offer. 
b. He asked me if/'d chair the meeting. 
Note that the inversion in [ia] requires the insertion of the dummy auxiliary do, but 
since there is no inversion in the subordinate version [ib], no do appears here. 
4.2 
Open interrogatives 
Open interrogatives, whether main or subordinate, are marked by the 
presence of an interrogative phrase containing one of the interrogative words 
who, what, which, etc. In main clauses the interrogative phrase usually occupies ini­
tial position, and, if it is not subject, its placement in this position triggers 
subject-auxiliary inversion. In subordinate clauses, on the other hand, the interrog­
ative phrase is initial and there is normally no inversion: 
[ 10] 
MAIN 
a. Which candidate spoke first? 
ii a. Why did she resign? 
SUBORDINATE 
b. I can 't say which candidate spoke first. 
b. It's obvious why she resigned. 
4.3 
Interrogatives as complement 
Like declaratives, interrogative content clauses usually function as 
complements, as illustrated in [1 1]: 
[ 1 1 ] 
SUBJECT 
What caused the delay remains unclear. 
ii EXTRA POSED SUBJECT 
It remains unclear what caused the delay. 
iii 
{ I've di,eo", .. d whae they keep the key. 
iv INTERNAL COMP OF VERB 
I asked them what progress they had made. 
v 
The only issue is whether he was lying. 
vi COMP OF NOUN 
The question whether it's legal was ignored. 
vii COMP OF ADJECTIVE 
I'm uncertain what we can do about it. 
viii COMP OF PREPOSITION 
That depends on how much time we have. 
2 Recall that the interrogative subordinator if is to be distinguished from the preposition if that 
expresses conditional meaning: see Ch. 7. §2. 1 .  

§4.4 Interrogatives as adjunct 
1 79 
The range of functions is almost like that illustrated for declaratives in [5]. One dif­
ference from declaratives, however, is that prepositions are often optional; for 
example, we could add o/after question in [vi], and we could omit on in [viii]. 
There is only partial overlap between the items that license declaratives and those 
that license interrogatives. 
Know. for example, accepts both: 1 know she 's right; 1 know what he did. 
Insist accepts only declaratives: 1 insist that she 's right; *1 insist what he did. 
Inquire accepts only interrogatives: *1 inquire that he 's ill; 1 inquired what he did. 
We have also noted that very few prepositions license declaratives, but there are 
more that accept interrogatives (like on in [viii]). 
4.4 
Interrogatives as adjunct 
There is one construction where subordinate interrogatives appear in 
adjunct function: 
[ 1 2] 
CLOSED 
ii OPEN 
He 'l! complain, whether we meet during the week or at the week-end. 
He 'l! complain, whatever you ask him to do. 
It follows from [i] that he'll complain if we meet during the week, and he'll com­
plain if we meet at the week-end, and these two conditions exhaust the options. 
So we know he'll complain. 
Similarly in [ii], he'll complain if you ask him to peel the potatoes and he'll com­
plain if you ask him to set the table and so on: he'll complain for every possible 
x where you ask him to do x, so again it follows that he'll complain. 
We call this the exhaustive conditional construction. It uses an interrogative 
clause to express a set of conditions that exhaustively cover the possibilities. 
Why would this exhaustive conditional meaning be expressed by an interrogative 
form? Because the interrogative expresses a question whose answers define an 
exhaustive set of conditions. 
For [i] the question is "Do we meet during the week or at the week-end?"; and 
this has a closed set of answers (just two of them). 
For [ii] it is "What do (or will) you ask him to do?", which has an open set of 
answers. 
Each possible answer represents a 'case', and the examples say that he will com­
plain no matter which of the possible cases turns out to be realised. 
Note that the exhaustive element of meaning applies equally in an example like 
He 'll complain, whether we meet on Saturday or Sunday. Although there are other 
days than these two, the sentence presupposes, or takes it for granted, that we will 
meet on one or other of the two days mentioned, so in this context there are in fact 
just these two possible 'cases' .  

1 80 
Chapter 10 Subordination and content clauses 
Variants of the exhaustive conditional construction 
There are two variants of the exhaustive conditional construction, one where the 
interrogative clause itself realises the adjunct function, as in [12], and one where the 
adjunct has the fonn of a larger phrase headed by independently, irrespective, 
regardless, or no matter, as in [ 1 3]. 
[ 1 3] 
He 'll complain, [regardless of whether we meet during the week or at the week-end!. 
ii He 'll complain, [no matter what you ask him to do]. 
Here the interrogative clauses are complements, as they are in [1 1 ]  (in the case of 
independently, irrespective, and regardless, complements of the preposition of). 
In [12], where the interrogative clause is the adjunct, the internal fonn differs 
slightly from that of interrogatives in complement function. With open interroga­
tives, the interrogative word is compounded with 'ever, as in [ l 2ii] - or He 'll com­
plain, whenever the meeting is held. With closed interrogatives the special feature is 
less obvious: an or-coordination is obligatory. Compare these: 
[ 14] i He 'll complain, whether we record the proceedings or not. 
ii He 'll complain, regardless of whether we record the proceedings (or not!. 
Or not is omissible from [ii], where the interrogative is complement, but not from 
[i], where it is adjunct. 
5 
Exclamative content clauses 
Exclamative clauses, main or subordinate, are marked by an initial 
exclamative phrase containing how or what. In main but not subordinate clauses, 
subject-auxiliary inversion is PERMITTED if the exclamative phrase is in non­
subject function, but it is rare. For the most part, therefore, there is no internal dif­
ference between subordinate and main exclamatives. Compare: 
[15] 
MAIN 
a. How very kind you are! 
ii a. What a shambles it was! 
Exclamatives as complement 
SUBORDINATE 
b. I told them how very kind you are. 
b. I remember what a shambles it was. 
Exclamative content clauses function exclusively as complements. They occur with 
much the same range of complement functions as other content clauses, though they 
are licensed by a far smaller set of lexemes. Examples are given in [16]: 
[ 1 6] 
SUBJECT 
ii EXTRA POSED SUBJECT 
iii INTERNAL COMP OF VERB 
iv COMP OF PREPOSITION 
V COMP OF ADJECTIVE 
What a bargain it was hadn 't yet struck me. 
It's incredible how much he wanted to charge. 
I'dforgotten what a fine speaker she is. 
She was surprised at how ill he looked. 
She was surprised how ill he looked. 

Exclamatives vs open interrogatives 
Exercises 
181 
In main clauses, exclamatives may be distinguished from open interrogatives solely 
by the absence of subject-auxiliary inversion, but since such inversion doesn't nor­
mally occur in subordinate interrogatives there may be ambiguity between excla­
mative and interrogative content clause constructions: 
[17] 
Do you remember how big it was? 
[ambiguous: exclamative or interrogative] 
". The exclamative interpretation presupposes it was remarkably big and asks 
whether you have recollections of that. 
The interrogative content clause interpretation doesn't presuppose any size; it 
asks whether you remember the answer to the question "How big was it?". It may 
have been anywhere on the scale from extremely small to extremely big. 
Exercises 
1. Classify the following subordinate clauses 
(underlined) as finite or non-finite. 
i They told us not to start without them. 
ii Why peQple behave like that is a mystery 
to me. 
iii They insisted that eveO'one have eQual 
voting rights. 
iv We object to their being given mecial 
privileges. 
v Everyone knows YOU cringe when she 
walks by. 
2. In each of the following pairs, embed a 
subordinate counterpart of the main clause 
[a] in the position marked '[ . . .  ]' in [b], and 
identify the clause type and function of the 
subordinate clause. 
i a. Why did she resign? 
b. It's not clear to me [ . . .  ]. 
ii a. It was a hoax. 
b. Few people believe the rumour [ . . .  ]. 
iii a. Is it a serious threat? 
b. [ . . .  ] remains to be seen. 
iv a. Who originated the idea? 
b. No one knows [ . . .  ]. 
v a. They moved to Boston. 
b. I met them several times before [ . . .  ]. 
vi a. What a bargain it was. 
b. She told me [ . . .  ]. 
vii a. You will get your money back. 
b. I'm determined [ . . .  ]. 
viii a. Can we rely on them? 
b. I'm not certain [ . . .  ]. 
ix a. It was a serious mistake. 
b. [ . . .  ] is now indisputable. 
x a. Do you have any idea how much it 
cost? 
b. I'm not sure [ . . .  ]. 
3. For each of the lexemes below, say whether 
or not it can license the following types of 
content clause complement : (a) mandative; 
(b) other declarative; (c) closed interroga­
tive; (d) open interrogative; (e) exclama­
tive. (Note that closed interrogatives some­
times occur more readily in non-affirmative 
than in affirmative contexts: before giving a 
'no' answer for (c), therefore, test with a 
negative matrix clause as well as a positive 
one.) Give an example to support each 'yes' 
answer. 
i advise 
vi idea 
ii ask 
vii inquire 
iii convince 
viii learn 
iv doubt [verb] 
ix realise 
v forget 
x sense [verb] 
4. Here is another selection of complement­
taking lexemes; the instructions are the same 
as for the previous exercise, except that for 
the two adjectives the issue is whether they 
license the various kinds of content clause as 
subject (or as extraposed subject). 

1 82 
Chapter 10 Subordination and content clauses 
i amazing 
vi important 
ii belief 
vii know 
iii decision 
viii question [noun] 
iv feel 
ix require 
v grasp [verb] 
x wonder 
5. For each of the underlined content clauses 
below say whether it is (a) an open interrog­
ative; or (b) an exclamative; or (c) ambigu­
ous between open interrogative and excla­
mative. If your answer is (a) or (b), explain 
what grammatical factors make the clause 
unambiguous. If your answer is (c), com­
ment on the difference in meaning. 
i She didn 't know how valuable it was. 
ii I'dforgotten what a difficult route it was. 
iii He asked how old I was. 
iv That depends on how much we have to 
Ļ. 
v You won 't believe who they 're Jllannin 
to apoint. 
6. Which of the following prepositions 
license a declarative content clause as 
complement? For each 'yes' answer give 
an example, and say whether or not the 
subordinator that is permitted in the 
content clause. 
i above 
ii as 
iii because 
iv despite 
v for 
vi in 
vii on 
viii though 
ix unless 
x with 
7. Here is another selection of prepositions 
that may or may not license a declarative 
content clause complement; the instructions 
are the same as for the previous exercise. 
i after 
vi notwithstanding 
ii at 
vii since 
iii by 
viii through 
iv during 
ix until 
v given 
x without 

Eelative clauses 
I Relative clauses as modifiers of nouns 
1 83 
2 Integrated vs supplementary relatives 
1 87 
3 Relative words in integrated and supplementary relative clauses 
1 89 
4 Fused relatives 
1 9 1  
A relative clause is a special kind of subordinate clause whose primary function is 
as modifier to a noun or nominal. We examine the case of relative clause modifiers 
in NPs first, and then extend the description to cover less prototypical relative 
constructions. 
1 
Relative clauses as modifiers of nouns 
Examples of the noun-modifying relative clause are given in [ I ] :  
[ I ] 
The secretary wrote to [all the members who were absent from the meeting]. 
ii [The film which I needed] is unobtainable. 
In [i] the underlined relative clause modifies members and combines with it to 
form the head nominal of the bracketed NP: members who were absent/ram the 
meeting. 
Similarly in [ii] the relative clause modifies film, and film which I needed forms 
the head nominal that is determined by the. 
The relative clauses here are introduced by the relative pronouns who and which, 
whose interpretation is provided by their antecedents, members and film respec­
tively. The relation between a pronoun and its antecedent is called anaphora 
(cf. Ch. 5, §8. 1 ), and it is a crucial property of relative clauses that they always con­
tains an element - actually present or understood - that is anaphorically related to 
an antecedent from which it derives its interpretation. This is the basis for the term 
relative clause, and likewise for relative pronoun, which applies to the who and 
which in [1]. In the construction we are dealing with in this section, the antecedent 
is always the head noun or nominal modified by the relative clause. 
In order to draw attention to this essential feature of relative clauses, which 
distinguishes them from other kinds of finite subordinate clause, we will use the 
symbol 'R' for the element in them that is anaphorically related to an antecedent. 
1 83 

1 84 
Chapter 1 1  Relative clauses 
For the relative clause in [ I i] we thus have "R were absent from the meeting". 
R has members as antecedent, so we understand that some members were absent 
from the meeting, and it is to all of these that the secretary wrote. 
For [ii] we similarly have "I needed R". The antecedent isfilm, so I needed some 
film and this film is unobtainable. 
The way this feature distinguishes relative clauses from content clauses is illustrated 
in [2]: 
[2] 
RELATIVE CLAUSE 
II CONTENT CLAUSE 
They rejected the suggestion which your son made. 
They rejected the suggestion that your son was lying. 
For [i] we have "your son made R", with suggestion as the antecedent: we under­
stand that your son made some suggestion, and they rejected it. 
In [ii], however, there is no such R element in the subordinate clause. The clause 
does not contain any anaphoric link to the head noun suggestion: it merely gives 
the content of the suggestion. I 
Wh and non-wh relative clauses 
Although it is an essential feature of the modifying relative clause that it contain an 
anaphoric link to the head noun, there doesn't have to be an overt pronoun to 
express that link, as there has been in each of the examples so far. 
The relative clauses that do contain an overt anaphoric link like who or which are 
called wh relatives. There are others that don't, and they are the non-wh relatives. 
They come in two sUbtypes: one kind that is introduced by the clause subordinator 
that (which also occurs in declarative content clauses such as [2ii]) and another kind 
that doesn't. So we have this picture so far: 
[3] 
WH RELATIVE: 
11 iii NON-WH: 
{THAT RELATIVE 
BARE RELATIVE 
The film which I needed is not obtainable. 
The film that I needed 
is not obtainable. 
The film I needed 
is not obtainable. 
The non-wh relatives with the subordinator, as in [ii], are called that relatives. 
Those where the subordinator is omitted, as in [iii], are called bare relatives. 
There is no relative pronoun in [ii] or [iii], but there is still an anaphoric relation to 
the head nounfilm; these, no less than [i], can be represented as "I needed R", with 
R functioning as object and interpreted as some film. The idea that needed in [ii-iii] 
has a covert object is evident from a very simple fact: although need is transitive, and 
has to have an object in canonical clauses, here we cannot add an overt object for it: 
[4] 
*Thefilm that I needed more time was not obtainable. 
J There is also an important functional distinction between the two constructions. The content clause is 
a complement and is licensed by only a small proportion of nouns: we could not, for example, replace 
the relative clauses in [ I )  by content clauses. The relative clause is a modifier and hence not subject 
to such licensing restrictions. 

§ 1 Relative clauses as modifiers of nouns 
185 
Here the NP more time has been added as a direct object (and an appropriate one: 
I needed more time is fully grammatical as a main clause). But it makes the sentence 
ungrammatical. Why is that? Because needed has already got a direct object; it 
just isn't overt in this relative clause construction. The ' _ '  notation in [iiliii] thus 
indicates the covert presence of the R element. 
The relativised element 
The overt or covert element R that is anaphorically linked to the head noun is called 
the relativised element. It can have a range of functions within the relative clause, 
as illustrated in [5] (where we use wh relatives because the relativised element is 
overt): 
[5] 
SUBJECT 
ii OBJECT 
iii COMP OF PREPOSITION 
iv ADJUNCT OF TIME 
V ADJUNCT OF PLACE 
vi ADJUNCT OF REASON 
some friends [who saw her] 
a key [which she found] 
those books [which I referred to] 
the day [when you were born] 
a place [where you can relax] 
the reason [why she got angry] 
Notice the different words beginning with wh that are used here: who for people, 
which for things, when for times, where for places, why for reasons. 
Non-wh counterparts of the wh relatives in [5] are shown in [6], where the 
notation ' _ '  again marks the position of the covert R element: 
[6] 
SUBJECT 
ii OBJECT 
1lI COMP OF PREPOSITION 
IV ADJUNCT OF TIME 
V ADJUNCT OF PLACE 
VI ADJUNCT OF REASON 
some friends [that _ saw her] 
a key [(that) she found _] 
those books [(that) I referred to _] 
the day [(that) you were born _] 
a place [(that) you can relax _] 
the reason [(that) she got angry _] 
Parentheses around that indicate as usual that it is optional: in such cases both 
that and bare relatives are permitted. 
Where the gap is in subject position, that is not omissible. We can have, for 
example, Anyone who wants this stuff can have it, but !Anyone wants this stuff 
can have it is not Standard English. 
The non-wh construction is not always available when the relativised element is 
adjunct (or complement) of place; the example in [v], with the head noun place, 
is perfectly acceptable, but in sentences with head nouns less likely to suggest 
location, a wh relative would normally be required.2 
R element within an embedded clause 
It is possible for the R element to be located within a content clause embedded 
inside the relative clause: 
2 That is, we would say This is the web page where the claim was first made, not *This is the web page 
the claim was first made. 

1 86 
Chapter 1 1  Relative clauses 
[7] 
a. a key [which he says shefoundJ 
ii a. some boys [who he says saw her] 
b. a key [(that) he says she found_] 
b. some boys [(that) he says _ saw her] 
In [i] R is object offound, and the found clause is a content clause functioning as 
complement of says: "He says she found R". We understand that he says she 
found some key, and that's the key the whole NP refers to. 
In [ii] R is subject of the embedded saw clause: "He says R saw her". Note that the 
that is omissible in [iib]: this differs from [6i] above in that the R element is sub­
ject not of the relative clause itself but of the content clause embedded within it. 
The relative phrase 
We turn now to a more complex kind of relative construction found only in the wh 
type. It is illustrated in [S]: 
[8] 
i She hasn 't been able to contact [the people whose house she 's renting]. 
ii This is [the article from which they were fJuoting). 
iii He set us [a problem the answer to which can be found in the textbook]. 
The doubly underlined expressions here contain not just the relative pronouns 
whose and which, but other material as well. We need therefore to distinguish 
between two concepts: 
the relative phrase - the constituent occupying initial position in the clause; 
the relativised element - the element that is anaphorically related to the head 
noun, the element we have been representing as R. 
In earlier examples such as some friends [who saw her], the relative phrase consists 
solely of the relativised element (i.e. who), but in [S] this is not so: the relative 
phrase is the one marked by double underlining, while the relativised element is just 
whose or which. It is just the latter, not the whole relative phrase, that is anaphori­
cally related to the head noun. 
In [i], for example, it is just whose, not whose house, that has people as its 
antecedent. We can represent the clause as "she's renting R's house", with R 
anaphorically related to people. We understand that she's renting some people's 
house and she hasn't been able to contact these people. 
Similarly, in [ii-iii] the head nouns article and problem are antecedent just for 
the pronoun which. We have, for [ii], "they were quoting from R" - i.e. they were 
quoting from some article and this is it. And, for [iii], "the answer to R can 
be found in the textbook" - i.e. the answer to some problem can be found in the 
textbook and he set us this problem. 
For [Sii-iii], but not for [Si], there are other versions in which less material is 
fronted, so that the relative phrase is a smaller constituent: 
[9] 
i * She hasn 't been able to contact [the people whose she 's renting house]. 
ii This is [the article which they were fJuoting from]. 
iii He set us [a problem to which the answer can be found in the textbook]. 

§2 Integrated vs supplementary relatives 
1 87 
Example [i] is ungrammatical because whose requires that we front the whole of 
the NP in which it is determiner. 
In [9ii] the preposition from is left on its own - the term we use is stranded -
instead of being fronted along with its complement, as in [Sii]. (The relation 
between preposition fronting and preposition stranding is discussed in Ch. 7, §5.) 
In [9iii] what is fronted is just the pp functioning as complement of answer 
instead of the whole NP, as in [Siii]. 
2 
Integrated vs supplementary relatives 
The relative clauses considered so far have all been tightly integrated 
into the structure of the NP containing them. As such, they contrast with another 
kind of relative clause that is more loosely attached. This second kind we call 
supplementary relative clauses. These examples illustrate the contrast: 
[10] 
INTEGRATED 
ii SUPPLEMENTARY 
Politicians who make extravagant promises aren 't trusted. 
Politicians, who make extravagant promises, aren 'f trusted. 
In this section we look in detail at the differences between integrated and supple­
mentary relatives with respect to three things: (a) intonation and punctuation, 
(b) interpretation, and (c) syntax. 
(a) Intonation and punctuation 
Integrated relatives are integrated intonationally into the larger construction. Sup­
plementary ones are set apart, spoken as a separate intonation unit. In writing, this 
difference is reflected in the punctuation, with supplementary relatives generally 
marked off by commas (or stronger punctuation, such as dashes or parentheses), as 
seen in [ l Oii]. Punctuation does not provide quite as reliable a criterion as intona­
tion, however, because we do find relatives which are clearly supplementary but are 
written without being set apart by punctuation. 
(b) Interpretation 
The names we have given to the two types of relative clause directly reflect the dif­
ference in meaning. 
The information expressed in an integrated relative is presented as an integral 
part of the larger message. 
The information expressed in a supplementary relative is presented as supple­
mentary to that expressed in the rest of the sentence: it is additional, often paren­
thetical, material. 
The examples in [10] iJIustrate an important special case of this difference. 
In [i] the relative clause serves to restrict the denotation of the head noun politi­
cians (i.e. the set of people to whom the term applies): the lack of trust doesn't 

1 88 
Chapter 1 1  Relative clauses 
apply to all politicians, but just the ones who make extravagant promises. The 
information given in the relative clause is an integral part of the larger message: 
it plays an essential role in defining who is being said to lack public trust. 
In [ii], by contrast, the property of not being trusted applies to politicians in gen­
eral, not to a subset of them. Instead of picking out a subset of politicans it makes 
the claim that none of them are trusted. But it also adds an extra assertion about 
politicians in general, namely that they make extravagant promises. 
On the basis of this kind of contrast, the two types of relative clause are traditionally 
called 'restrictive' (or sometimes 'defining') and 'non-restrictive' (or 'non-defin­
ing'), respectively. We don't use these terms. They are misleading: the integrated 
relative is NOT always restrictive, in the sense of picking out a subset of the set 
denoted by the head noun. Take these examples: 
[1 1] i Martha has [two sons who are still at school] and [two who are at university). 
ii Martha has [two sons she can rely on] and hence is not unduly worried. 
In [i] the relative clauses certainly are semantically restrictive: they distinguish 
two sets of sons (evidently Martha has at least four in all). 
In [ii], however, there is no restriction. There is no implication that Martha has 
more than two sons. The information given in the relative clause does NOT dis­
tinguish these two sons from any other sons that she might have. Nevertheless, it 
is presented as an integral part of the larger message. A natural reason for pre­
senting it as such is that it is essential to explaining WHY she was not unduly 
worried. (Having two sons doesn't necessarily keep a mother from worrying; but 
being able to rely on them does.) 
Here's another example, one that we found in a novel by Dick Francis, where the NP 
is definite rather than indefinite: 
[12] 
[The father who had planned my life to the point ormy unsought arrival in 
Brighton] took it for granted that in the last three weeks of his legal 
guardianship I would still act as he directed. 
Again the relative clause does not distinguish one father from another: the narrator 
here is talking about the only father he ever had. So the information given in the rel­
ative clause is NOT semantically restrictive. It is integrated, though. The reason for 
expressing it in an integrated relative is that it has crucial relevance to the rest of the 
message: it was because the father had planned the narrator's life hitherto that he 
assumed he would be able to continue to do so. 
(c) Syntax 
In addition to what we have just set out concerning the phonological (or punctua­
tional) and semantic facts about integrated and supplementary relatives, there are 
also a number of syntactic differences. We will mention four. 3 
3 We ignore in this chapter a special subtype of integrated relative found in what is called the 'cleft' 
construction, as in It was Kim who found the key; this construction is discussed in Ch. IS, §5. 

§3 Relative words in integrated and supplementary relative clauses 
1 89 
Wh relatives vs non-wh relatives 
Supplementary relatives are almost always of the wh type: the bare construction is 
not allowed at all as a supplementary relative, and supplementary that relatives are 
extremely rare and really only marginally present in Standard English. 
Antecedents allowed for supplementary relatives 
Supplementary relatives allow a wider range of antecedents than integrated ones. 
Most importantly, they accept clauses, and proper nouns without determiners, as 
in [ 1 3]: 
[ 1 3] 
i Max arrived late, which caused some delay. 
ii Max, who was usually very punctual. was twenty minutes late. 
In [i] the antecedent of which is the preceding clause. In our representation 
HR caused some delay", the R is interpreted as Max's arriving late. 
In [ii] the antecedent of who is Max: we understand that Max was usually very 
punctual. Proper nouns normally occur with integrated relatives only if there is a 
determiner, as in He 's not [the Max I was referring to]. 
Which as pronoun or determinative 
Which occurs in integrated relatives only as a pronoun, but in supplementary 
relatives it can also be a determinative: 
[14] 
This will keep us busy until Friday, by which time the boss will be back. 
Note that here the relativised element is which time (not which alone): it is this 
element that derives its interpretation from the antecedent Friday. 
Function 
Integrated relatives function as dependent - more specifically, modifier - within the 
construction containing them, but supplementary relatives are attached more 
loosely, and indeed may constitute a separate sentence, as in [ 1 5] (where, again, 
which has a clause as antecedent): 
[ 1 5] 
A: Our rent is due next week. 
B :  Which is why we shouldn 't be going out to dinner tonight. 
3 
Relative words in integrated and supplementary 
relative clauses 
in [ 1 6]: 
[ 1 6] 
The major relative words in the constructions discussed above are listed 
who 
whom 
whose 
which 
when 
where 
why 
When, where, and why indicate time, place, and reason respectively, as we illus­
trated in [5iv-vi]. 

190 
Chapter 1 1  Relative clauses 
Gender: personal vs non-personal 
Normally the word 'gender' is associated with sexual characteristics or identity, but 
as a grammatical term it has a broader sense. The primary gender system in English, 
discussed in Ch. 5, §8.2 for the 3rd person singular personal pronouns, is indeed 
based on sex, but not all gender systems in language are, and even in English there 
is also a secondary gender system that is based on the contrast between personal 
and non-personal. This applies to interrogative and relative pronouns - but in the 
relative construction that we are currently considering the non-personal pronoun is 
different from the interrogative: 
[ 1 7] 
PERSONAL 
11 NON-PERSONAL 
INTERROGATIVE 
Who did you see? 
What did you see? 
RELATIVE 
the person who annoys me most 
the thing which annoys me most 
Note also that while interrogative whose is personal, relative whose is neutral as to 
gender: compare personal a guy whose car was stolen and non-personal a book 
whose pages were falling out. (In interrogatives this doesn't happen: you can't ask 
about a collection of old books * Whose pages are falling out?) 
Who is used for humans primarily, but sometimes other entities, like robots, 
extraterrestrials, or animals, especially pets: She was stroking the cat, who was look­
ing extremely contented. 
Case: nominative vs accusative 
Who is a variable lexeme. In addition to its nominative form who and its genitive 
form whose, it also has an accusative form whom (though this is vastly less common 
than who). The factors affecting the choice between who and whom are essentially 
the same as for interrogatives (see Ch. 9, §2.4): 
The nominative is required in subject or predicative complement function. 
The complement of a fronted preposition is normally accusative (the woman 
to whom he was engaged). 
Elsewhere BOTH cases are found, with the accusative being more formal in 
style.4 
One difference from interrogative clauses, however, is that in integrated relatives 
the choice between the cases is very often avoided by use of the non-wh construc­
tion: [ 1 8iii] is used as a neutral way of sidestepping the choice between the dis­
tinctly formal [ 1 8ii] and the distinctly informal [ 1 8i]. 
[ 1 8] 
the applicants who we interviewed 
11 the applicants whom we interviewed 
III the applicants (that) we interviewed 
[nominative: informal] 
[accusative: formal] 
[non-wh: neutral] 
4 Particularly in supplementary relatives, the PP may be complement within a fronted NP, as in She 
hadn 't yet informed her colleagues, most of whom were still on holiday. The accusative in this con­
struction (which has no interrogative counterpart) is not markedly formal in style. 

Prescriptive grammar note 
§4 Fused relatives 
1 9 1  
Some prescriptive usage books and style guides insist that integrated (or 'defining' or 
'restrictive') relative clauses with non-personal heads should never be of the wh type -
that is, that an integrated relative should not begin with which. We have paid no attention 
to this so far (the second example in this chapter, [lii], is an integrated relative with 
which). Our reason is that the suggested restriction has no basis; no one who looked at the 
evidence could continue to believe in it. Integrated wh relatives with non-personal heads 
have been occurring in impeccable English for about 400 years. Among the most famous 
cases are sentences that everyone will recall hearing, such as Render therefore unto Cae­
sar the things which are Caesar's (the King James Bible, 161 1), and a date which will live 
in infamy (Franklin D. Roosevelt's often misquoted remark about the day of the 1941 
Pearl Harbor attack). Those who recommend against integrated which often turn out to 
use it in their own writing (one usage expert said 'I recommend using that with defining 
clauses', but then wrote a typical situation which a practiced writer corrects on the very 
next page!). Integrated relatives with which are grammatical in all varieties of English, 
and the notion that there is something wrong with them is just an invention of prescrip­
tivists. 
4 
Fused relatives 
The final relative construction we consider in this chapter is the fused 
relative, illustrated in [ 19]: 
[ 19] 
i Whoever said that was trying to mislead you. } 
ii I've eaten what you gave me. 
[fused relatives] 
This is a more complex construction than those dealt with above. Here the 
antecedent and the relativised element are fused together instead of being expressed 
separately as in simpler constructions. The underlined expressions here are thus 
NPs whose head is fused with the first element in the relative clause. 
Whoever in [i] is simultaneously head of the NP and subject of the relative 
clause, and its gender indicates that we are talking about some person. The mean­
ing is thus comparable to that of the non-fused The person who said that was 
trying to mislead you. 
What in [ii] is likewise head of the NP and object of gave in the relative clause, 
and the non-personal gender gives a meaning like that of the non-fused (and 
more formal) I've eaten that which you gave me. 
Relative words in the fused construction 
The major relative words that occur in this construction are as follows: 
[20] 
who 
11 whoever 
whom 
whomever 
what 
whatever 
which 
whichever 
where 
wherever 
when 
whenever 

1 92 
Chapter I I  Relative clauses 
,. The compound forms in [ii] do not occur in the other relative constructions, and 
nor, in Standard English, does what. 
" On the other hand, who, whom and which occur in the fused construction only 
under very limited conditions (usually with verbs like choose, want, like, as in 
I'll invite who I want). For example, in Present-day English who could not 
replace whoever in [ l 9i]: * Who said that was trying to mislead you. 
What as determinative 
The what of [19ii] is a pronoun, but what can also occur as a determinative: 
[21] 
What mistakes she made were very minor. 
The fusion here involves what mistakes. On the one hand, what is determiner and 
mistakes is head of the NP functioning as subject of were very minor - note that 
were agrees with plural mistakes. On the other hand, what mistakes is object of 
made in the relative clause. Mistakes thus has a role in both the subordinate clause 
and the matrix clause: we understand that she made some mistakes but those mis­
takes were very minor. 
Determinative what also implies a relatively small number or amount: [2 1] 
implies that she made only a small number of mistakes. 
Fused relatives and interrogative content clauses 
There is a considerable amount of overlap between fused relatives and interrogative 
content clauses. Compare: 
[22] 
I really liked what she wrote. 
11 I wonder what she wrote. 
1Il What she wrote is unclear. 
[fused relative] 
[interrogative content clause] 
[ambiguous: relative or interrogative] 
The verb like does not license an interrogative complement, so what she wrote in 
[i] is unambiguously a fused relative. The sentence can again be glossed with 
non-fused that which: "I really liked that which she wrote". 
Wonder, by contrast, licenses an interrogative complement, but does not nor­
mally allow an NP object. What she wrote in [ii] is therefore unambiguously an 
interrogative clause: "I wonder about the answer to the question 'What did she 
write?'" . 
Unclear, however, licenses both an interrogative and an NP subject, and [iii] can 
be interpreted in either way. The fused relative interpretation is "That which she 
wrote is unclear" - a letter or report, perhaps. In the interrogative interpretation, 
what is unclear is the answer to the question 'What did she write?' . On this inter­
pretation the implication is that I'm not sure what it was that she wrote. 

Exercises 
1. Underline the finite subordinate clauses 
in the following examples and say whether 
they are (a) relative clauses; (b) declara­
tive content clauses; or (c) ambiguous 
between the two. Give evidence in support 
of your answers. 
i She ridiculed the idea that he had pro­
posed. 
ii Thefact that it's illegal didn 't seem to 
bother them. 
iii I've lost the map that you lent me. 
iv He was motivated by the conviction 
that he had been seriously wronged. 
v They are spreading a rumour that is 
causing her great distress. 
2. All the following examples contain a finite 
subordinate clause: underline those that 
are relative, and for each of them identify 
the antecedent and the function of the 
(overt or covert) relativised element. 
I wonder who they have in mind for 
the job. 
11 I made a mistake I'll never forget. 
III Go back the way you came. 
iv The prize was awarded to the girl who 
spoke first. 
v He 's not the man he used to be. 
vi It's the best movie I've seen all year. 
vii The fact that they are cousins is 
irrelevant. 
viii She started a shelter for women whose 
husbands beat them. 
ix She goes to the same school that her 
mother went to. 
x Which is the one you said you liked 
best? 
3. Convert any non-wh relatives in the fol­
lowing examples into their wh relative 
counterparts. 
The reason he gave was that he wanted 
to spend more time with his family. 
ii The reason he resigned was that he 
wanted to spend more time with his 
family. 
Exercises 
1 93 
iii The one that impressed me most was 
your sister. 
iv Do you remember the time we first went 
out together? 
v The concept that the agency came up 
with is really insulting. 
vi The notion that he came up with was 
really ingenious. 
vii That's a person I wouldn 't want to 
cross a river with. 
viii Do you have a socket wrench I could 
borrow? 
ix They said that the one that I wanted 
was sold out. 
x That car made the one that I was 
driving look crummy. 
4. The following examples are presented 
without the usual internal punctuation so 
as to avoid giving any clues as to whether 
the relative clauses are integrated or sup­
plementary. Identify the relative clauses, 
and for each say whether it could be inter­
preted in either way (with corresponding 
differences in meaning and punctuation) 
or in only one way. In the latter case, 
specify which interpretation is required 
and explain why the other is excluded. 
This year we 're going to Majorca which 
is where we spent our honeymoon. 
11 The necklace which Elvis gave her is 
in the safe. 
m Usa has just gone down with flu which 
means that the wedding will be post­
poned. 
iv The only thing I can 't understand is 
why you appointed him in the first 
place. 
v They 're interviewing the neighbours 
who saw her leave. 
vi She was deeply offended by the letter 
which accused her of racism. 
vii No one who has studied the 
evidence could possibly doubt her 
innocence. 

194 
Chapter 1 1  Relative clauses 
viii He 's going to resign which is exactly 
the right course of action. 
ix I took with me any files that I was 
responsible for. 
x This is Pat who I am working with. 
5. Determine whether the underlined expres­
sions below are: (a) fused relatives; 
(b) open interrogative content clauses; or 
(c) ambiguous between the two. Give 
evidence to support your answer. 
I don 't know who caused the 
accident. 
ii You can do whatever you like. 
iii What she wrote is completely illegible. 
iv They 've already spent what I gave them 
yesterday. 
v I won 't be resigning, whatever the 
report says. 
vi I told them what you told me to tell 
them. 
vii I asked what else I could do. 
viii What Frankenstein has created will one 
day destroy him. 
ix What Frankenstein has created is so far 
unknown. 
x We must find whoever did this. 

.: 
Grade and comparison 
I Comparative and superlative grade 
1 95 
2 More and most 
1 97 
3 Less and least 
1 98 
4 Comparison of equality 
199 
5 Non-scalar comparison 
200 
6 Comparative clauses 
20 1 
1 
Comparative and superlative grade 
As we have seen in Ch. 6, § 1 . 1 ,  many adjectives inflect for grade: they 
have plain, comparative and superlative forms. This inflectional system applies 
also to a small number of other lexemes, most importantly certain determinatives 
and adverbs. Examples are given in [1]: 
[ 1 ] 
ADJECTIVE 
DETERMINATIVE 
ADVERB 
PLAIN 
tall 
many 
soon 
11 COMPARATIVE 
taller 
more 
sooner 
iii SUPERLATIVE 
tallest 
most 
soonest 
The inflected forms of tall and soon are regular (i.e., they are formed by general 
rules). The forms for many, however, are irregular. 
Although 'comparative' is the standard name for just one of the forms, the seman­
tic concept of comparison is relevant to the whole system of grade. All the differ­
ences between the forms in the columns in [ 1 ]  have to do with comparison. 
The superlative and set comparison 
In the case of the superlative we are concerned with set comparison. In these exam­
ples, it is comparison between the members of some set with respect to their posi­
tion on the scale denoted by the lexeme: one member (or one subset) is located 
at a higher position on that scale than the others. Consider such examples as the 
following: 
[2] 
Max was the tallest boy in the class. 
ii A prize will be given to whoever scores the most points. 
III I chose the life policy that will mature the soonest 
1 95 

1 96 
Chapter 12 Grade and comparison 
In [i], the comparison is between the set of boys in the class with respect to 
height: Max occupies a higher position on this scale than all the others. 
In [ii], the set is not expressed in the sentence itself but it is implicit: it consists 
of those participating in some competition in which points are scored. The scale 
is the number of points scored. The prize will be given to the participant who 
ranks top on this scale. 
In [iii], the comparison is between a set of life insurance policies, ranked by date 
of maturing. I chose the one that matures before all the others. 
The comparative and term comparison 
The comparative form, by contrast, is predominantly used in term comparison -
comparison between a primary term and a secondary term, as in [3]: 
[3] 
Max is taller than Tom. 
ii Sue scored more runs than I did. 
iii This policy will mature sooner than that one. 
In [i] the comparison is between Max's height and Tom's height. The sentence does­
n't say how tall either of them is absolutely, but expresses the relation between 
them. We can describe the meaning by using variables, as in algebra: "Max is x tall; 
Tom is y tall; x >  y (i.e. x exceeds y)". This format enables us to handle the distinc­
tion between this type of term comparison and that illustrated in [4]: 
[4] 
The aerial is taller than 100 feet. 
Here the comparison is between the height of the aerial and a specific height, 
100 feet. In this case there is only one variable: "The aerial is x tall; x >  100 feet". 
The primary term in [3i] is "Max is x tall", and the secondary one is "Tom is 
y tall". 
In [ii], "Sue scored x many runs" is primary and "I scored y many runs" is 
secondary. 
In [iii], "this policy matures x soon" is primary and "that policy matures y soon" 
is secondary. 
The secondary term can be left unexpressed if it is recoverable from the context, 
as for example in [5]: 
[5] 
Tim is quite tall, but [Max is taller]. 
ii That's better. [Imagine this being said after you have opened a window.] 
In [i], we understand "Max is taller than Tim", recovering "Tim" from the first 
clause. 
In [ii] (where better is an irregular form of gooQ) , we understand "That is better 
than it was before you opened the window"; the secondary term is recovered 
from the situation. 

§2 More and most 
1 97 
Set comparison with comparatives 
Comparative grade is also used in set comparison when the set has just two 
members: 
[6] 
COMPARATIVE 
SUPERLATIVE 
a. Kim is the taller of the two. 
b. Kim is the tallest of the three. 
The comparative form taller is inadmissible in [b]. 
Prescriptive grammar note 
Usage manuals commonly say that the superlative is incorrect when the set has only two 
members (the tallest of the twin towers). However, the superlative is the default for set 
comparison, and it's fairly common as an informal variant of the comparative with two­
member sets. It is relatively unlikely when the two-member status of the set is explicitly 
given in an of phrase, as in [6a], but sentences like Kim and Pat were the only candidates, 
and Kim was clearly the best are certainly grammatical. 
Non-inflectional marking of grade 
As we noted in Ch. 6, § 1 . 1 ,  comparative and superlative grade may be marked by a 
separate word, more or most, rather than by inflection. Examples are given in [7]: 
[7] 
PLAIN 
ii COMPARATIVE 
III SUPERLATIVE 
ADJECTIVE 
useful 
more useful 
most useful 
ADVERB 
rashly 
more rashly 
most rashly 
The choice between the two ways of marking comparative and superlative grade -
by inflection or by a separate word - is discussed in Ch. 16, §5. 
2 
More and most 
The two words more and most figure in both the tables given as [ 1 ]  and 
[7]: they can be either inflectional forms of the determinatives many and much or 
they can be adverbs marking non-inflectional comparatives and superlatives of 
adjectives and adverbs. 
(a) More as determinative 
[8] 
PLAIN GRADE 
a. He didn 't make many mistakes. 
11 a. We don 't have much time. 
111 a. I didn 't enjoy it much. 
COMPARATIVE GRADE 
b. He made more mistakes than you did. 
b. We have more time than we need. 
b. I enjoyed it more than last time. 
The more of the [b] examples here is a determinative, the comparative counterpart 
of plain many and much in the corresponding [a] examples. The determinative is 

198 
Chapter 12 Grade and comparison 
functioning as determiner in NP structure in [i] and [ii], and as an adjunct of degree 
in the clause in [iii]. 
Correspondence between the grades is complicated by the fact that the plain forms 
much (and to a lesser extent many) are non-affirmative items. This is why negative 
clauses are used in the [a] examples of [8]; it is not normal in present-day English to 
say, for example, *We have much time or * We enjoyed it much (see Ch. 8, §4). 
(b) More as adverb 
[9] 
i a. It's expensive. 
ii a. She behaved tactfully. 
b. It's more expensive than I expected. 
b. She behaved more tactfully than her son. 
Here more is an adverb. In [i] it modifies the adjective expensive; in [ii] it modifies 
the adverb tactfully. It is a marker of the comparative grade. The crucial difference 
between [9] and [8] is that there is no much or many in the plain grade version in [9]. 
Most 
The same distinction applies with most, though here we have an additional, non­
superlative, sense of the adverb (shown in [ l Oiiib D, where it means "extremely" or 
"very": 
[ 10] 
a. He didn 't make many mistakes. 
b. He made the most mistakes. 
11 a. It's expensive. 
1Il a. I found her helolul. 
b. It's the most expensive of them all. 
b. I found her most helpful. 
In rib], most is a determinative - the superlative form of many. 
In [iib], it is an adverb, marking the superlative grade of expensive. 
In [iiib], again it's an adverb, but it isn't a marker of superlative grade. There's no 
explicit comparison between members of a set: most just indicates a high degree. 
3 
Less and least 
The words less and least similarly belong to both the determinative and 
adverb classes. As determinatives they are inflectional forms of little; as adverbs 
they function as degree modifiers. These examples illustrate for the comparative: 
[ 1 1] 
i a. It has little value. 
ii a. It's expensive. 
iii a. She behaved tactfully. 
b. It has less value than he claimed. 
b. It's less expensive than I expected. 
b. She behaved less tactfully than her son. 
In rib] the determinative less has the same function, determiner, as little in [ia]. 
In [iib-iiib] the degree adverb less is added as modifier to an adjective or adverb. 
(a) The determinative less 
As a determinative, less is syntactically quite similar to its opposite more, but there 
are also significant differences. More is the comparative form of both many and 

§4 Comparison of equality 
1 99 
much, which occur with plural and non-count singular nouns respectively. The 
opposites of many and much are few and little, and these have distinct comparative 
forms fewer and less. Compare: 
[ 1 2] 
PLURAL 
a. He 's had more jobs than me. 
n a. He 's had fewer jobs than me. 
NON-COUNT SINGULAR 
b. He 's had more experience than me. 
b. He 's had less exoerience than me. 
Matters are complicated, however, by the fact that less (unlike little) is often used 
with plurals: 
[ 1 3] 
i It costs less than twenty dollars. 
ii Less/Fewer than twenty people attended the meeting. 
iii He 's had fewer/%lessjobs than me. 
In [i] twenty dollars is construed as a sum of money, rather than a set of individ­
ual dollars;jewer than twenty dollars would be unusual. 
In [ii], where we again have a numeral after than, both forms are possible, with 
fewer less common and somewhat formal. 
In [iii], the determinative is followed immediately by a plural noun. This use of 
less is informal; it is avoided by many speakers, and generally condemned by 
usage manuals. 
(b) The adverb less 
As an adverb, less also contrasts with more - the adverb more that marks compara­
tive grade. More marks superiority (a higher degree on the relevant scale), while less 
marks inferiority (a lower degree). Superiority, however, can also be marked inflec­
tionally, whereas there is no inflection corresponding to less. So we have this pattern: 
[ 1 4] 
COMPARISON OF SUPERIORITY 
a. Kim is taller than Pat. 
ii a. Kim is more energetic than Pat. 
4 
Comparison of equality 
COMPARISON OF INFERIORITY 
b. Kim is less tall than Pat. 
b. Kim is less energetic than Pat. 
Superiority and inferiority represent two kinds of inequality, but there 
are also comparisons of equality. This, like inferiority, is always marked by a mod­
ifying adverb, rather than by inflection: 
[ 1 5] 
1 Kim is as tall as Pat. 
ii Kim is as energetic as Pat. 
We use the standard term 'equality' to contrast this construction with those in [14], 
but it is important to emphasise that it is not a matter of EXACT equality. 
Example [ 1Si] says that Kim's height is AT LEAST equal to Pat's, not that it is 
identical. We can say, without contradiction: Kim is as tall as Pat, infact slightly 

200 
Chapter 12 Grade and comparison 
taller. And the negative Kim isn 't as tall as Pat entails that Kim is SHORTER than 
Pat, not simply that Kim's height is different (either lower or higher on the height 
scale). 
Similarly in [ 15ii]: Kim is at least as high on the energetic scale as Pat. As nor­
mally understood, energetic does not denote a quality that can be precisely 
measured, as height can, so the issue of whether Kim and Pat are exactly equal 
on this scale doesn't really arise. 
Each of the examples in [ 15] contains two occurrences of as. 
The first as is an adverb of degree, like more and less except that it can modify 
determinatives: I had as much cash as you (contrast *1 had more much cash than 
you). 
The second as is a preposition, like than. As is used for equality, and than for 
inequality. 
In some contexts, primarily negatives, the adverb as is replaceable by so, and in 
some familiar phrases it is omitted altogether: 
[16] 
i It wasn 't so straii-htforward as I'd been led to expect. 
ii The sea was f1gI as a pancake. 
5 
Non-scalar comparison 
All the comparisons considered so far have been concerned with relative 
positions on some scale - with relative degrees of some gradable property. There is 
also a type of comparison where the issue is not a matter of relative degree but sim­
ply of identity or similarity. We call this non-scalar comparison. The prepositions 
as and than are found here too, so we can generalise the contrast between equality 
(marked by as) and inequality (marked by than): 
[17] 
i EQUALITY 
ii INEQUALITY 
We went by the same route as we usually take. 
%We went by a different route than we usually take. 
The first expresses identity, the second non-identity, between the route we took 
(on the occasion in question) and the route we usually take. 
The % annotation indicates, as usual, that not all speakers use this construction (it 
is somewhat more frequent in AmE). Some speakers would use a more complex 
construction with from and an NP here: We went by a diferent route from the one we 
usually take. 
There are two items, however, that license a than complement for all speakers, 
namely other and else: 
[ 1 8] 
i There must be some other way of doing it than this. 
ii Anyone else than you would have complained. 
We only chose diferent in [17ii] because it permits a more direct contrast with same. 

§6 Comparative clauses 
201 
6 
Comparative clauses 
The prepositions than and as often take as complement a distinctive type 
of subordinate clause called a comparative clause: 
[19] 
She did better in the exam than we 'd thought she would. 
ii The treatment was less painful than it was last time. 
iii The pool is nearly as wide as it is long. 
iv They come from the same part of Britain as I come from. 
[superiority] 
[inferiority] 
[scalar equality] 
[non-scalar equality] 
There are two points about the terminology used here that should be noted. 
First, 'comparative' has a broader sense in 'comparative clause' than elsewhere. 
Comparative forms are always associated with comparisons of superiority, 
whereas comparative clauses are found in all the types of comparison considered 
above, as indicated in the annotations on the right. 
Second, 'comparative clause' applies to the subordinate clause expressing the 
secondary term in the comparison, not to the matrix clause that expresses the 
comparison as a whole. 
Comparative clauses constitute one of the three major kinds of finite subordinate 
clause that we introduced in Ch. 10, § 1 .  What distinguishes them from relative and 
content clauses is that they are obligatorily reduced in certain ways relative to the 
structure of main clauses. 
In [19i] the complement of would is left understood. We could add do, but there 
would still be a missing adjunct. The meaning can be given as "She did x well in 
the exam; we'd thought she would do y well; x >  y"; but the "y well" part cannot 
be syntactically overt. 
Similarly in [ 1 9ii] there is an obligatorily missing predicative complement; it's 
understood as "y painful". 
It is not so obvious that we have reduction in [ l9iii], since it is long can occur as 
an unreduced main clause. Nevertheless, in this comparative construction there is 
a missing degree modifier corresponding to the variable y: "The pool is nearly 
x wide; it is y long; x = y". The implicit presence of a degree modifier of long makes 
it impossible to add an overt one: *The pool is nearly as wide as it is very long. 
Finally, in [ l9iv] the preposition from occurs without a complement. This can't 
happen in canonical clauses. Again, a complement is understood ("She comes 
from x part of the country; I come from y part of the country; x = y"), but it can­
not be syntactically expressed. This represents a somewhat different case of 
preposition stranding from that discussed in Ch. 7, §5, since there is no corre­
sponding construction in which the preposition is fronted. 
A further case of as in non-scalar comparison of equality 
In the examples of preposition as + comparative clause given so far, the as is in con­
struction with the adverb as marking scalar equality (as in [ 19iii]) or with the 

202 
Chapter 12 Grade and comparison 
adjective same marking non-scalar equality (as in [19iv] or [17i]). As can also occur 
in non-scalar comparison without any such preceding item to license it: 
[20] 
i As we 'd expected, he refused to compromise. 
ii He didn 't behave as he usually does. 
In [i] the comparison is between what we'd expected to happen and what did in 
fact happen. We can gloss as "We'd expected x; y (i.e. he refused to compromise); 
x = y". Here the y corresponds to a whole clause rather than to just a part of a 
clause. 
In [ii] we are comparing his behaviour on a particular occasion with his usual 
behaviour. We understand: "He didn't behave in x manner; he usually behaves in 
y manner; x = y". 
Comparative clauses as complement to like 
In non-scalar comparison of equality we also find comparative clauses after the 
preposition like - though like takes content clauses as well. Compare, then: 
[2 1] 
i They don 't get on like they used to. 
ii It looks like it's going to rain. 
[comparative clause] 
[content clause] 
In [i] we have the familiar kind of comparison between the way they get on (now) 
and the way they used to get on. 
The content clause construction in [ii] most often occurs after look or sound, and 
the meaning is similar to that with appear + content clause: It appears that it 's 
going to rain. Unlike they used to in [i], it's going to rain is not reduced. 
Prescriptive grammar note 
Conservative usage manuals tend to disapprove of both constructions in [2 1], where like 
takes a finite clause as complement. They would recommend replacing like by as in [i] 
and by as if(or as though) in [ii]. The versions with like are relatively informal, but they 
are very well established, especially in AmE. 

Exercises 
I . Re-express the content of the following in a 
more natural way using comparative or 
superlative constructions. 
i The extent to which my dad is big 
exceeds the extent to which yours is. 
ii Brian is the swimmer who is ranked top 
in the world as regards speed. 
iii That is afish that is ugly beyond the 
ugliness of any fish I have ever seen. 
iv I wish I had a degree of intelligence that 
outstrips what I actually have. 
v The extent to which you are a good gui­
tarist would increase if the time you 
practised were to increase. 
2. Underline all the comparative clauses (and 
nothing else) in the following examples (all 
from Lewis Carroll's Alice books, Alice in 
Wonderland and Through the Looking 
Glass). 
It was as much as she could do, lying 
down on one side, to look through into 
the garden with one eye. 
ii 'But then,' thought Alice, 'shall I NE VER 
get any older than I am now?' 
iii 'If everybody minded their own busi­
ness,' the Duchess said in a hoarse 
growl, 'the world would go round a deal 
faster than it does.' 
iv This piece of rudeness was more than 
Alice could bear: she got up in great 
disgust, and walked off. 
v It was evidently more than he could 
manage by himself; however, she man­
aged to shake him out of it at last. 
3. Using variables as appropriate, give the 
primary and secondary terms in the com­
parisons expressed in the examples below, 
following the model used in the commen­
tary on [3-4] in the text. (For example, if 
we gave The hotel felt more comfortable 
than my own home did, you might write 
Exercises 
203 
"The hotel felt x comfortable [primary 
term]; my own home felt y comfortable 
[secondary term]".) 
Fido can run a lot faster than Rex. 
ii We 're hoping to finish as early as 
tomorrow. 
iii More people came to the meeting than 
we had seats for. 
iv The meeting lasted longer than 
expected. 
v You can take as many copies as you 
need. 
vi More people believed that it was gen­
uine than that it was a hoax. 
vii He had a more powerful motor-bike 
than I had had. 
viii Jill thinks Ed's better off than he is. 
ix Jill thinks Ed's better off than he does. 
x I got up later than usual this morning. 
4. Compare the following examples: 
i She knows far more people than I know. 
ii She 's the kindest person I know. 
The underlined expression is a compara­
tive clause in [i] but not in [ii]: what kind of 
a clause is it in [ii]? What grammatical evi­
dence is there for assigning I know to dif­
ferent subcategories of subordinate clause 
in the two examples? Show how the differ­
ence ties in semantically with the distinc­
tion we have drawn between term compar­
ison and set comparison. 
5. Same occurs in (among others) the con­
structions illustrated in the following: 
She stayed in the same hotel as we 
stayed in. 
ii She stayed in the same hotel we stayed 
in. 
Describe the syntactic difference between 
these constructions and explain why the 
examples have the same meaning even 
though they are syntactically different. 

Non-finite clauses and clauses 
without verbs 
I Four kinds of non-finite clause 
204 
2 The form of non-finite clauses 
204 
3 The functions of non-finite clauses 
2 1 1 
4 The catenative construction 
2 1 4  
5 Verbless clauses 
222 
1 
Four kinds of non-finite clause 
Clauses headed by a gerund-participle or a past participle are always non-finite, 
and clauses with a plain form verb are non-finite when they belong to the infiniti­
val construction. Infinitival clauses come in two varieties: with and without the 
special marker to. This gives us four major kinds of non-finite clause: 
[ I ]  
CONSTRUCTION 
EXAMPLE 
VERB-FORM 
TO-INFINITIVAL 
Liz wants to write a novel. } 
plain form 
11 BARE INFINITIVAL 
Liz might write a novel. 
III GER UND-PARTICIPIAL 
Liz dreams of writing a novel. 
gerund-participle 
IV PAST-PARTICIPIAL 
Liz has written a novel. 
past participle 
Notice that we use the suffix 'al (or 'ial) to form names for kinds of clause, so that 
they aren't the same as the traditional terms for inflectional forms of the verb. Writ­
ing and written are verb-forms - the gerund-participle and the past participle. 
The underlined sequences in [iii-iv] are clauses that have those forms as their head 
verb - we call them gerund-participial and past-participial clauses, respectively. 
There is no form in the English verb paradigm called 'the infinitive' . Infinitival 
clauses are non-finite clauses with the head verb in the plain form. There are also 
finite clauses with a plain form as head: imperative and SUbjunctive clauses (see 
Ch. 3, §2). The plain form serves as the form of the head verb in all these clause 
constructions. There is no special form for the infinitival ones. 
2 
The form of non-finite clauses 
Non-finite clauses contain a predicate that has the form of a VP headed 
by a secondary form of the verb. This means that they do not have primary tense. 
204 

§2. l Subordinators in to-infinitivals: to andfor 
205 
That in turn means that they can never contain a modal auxiliary (because, as you 
will remember from Ch. 3, §3.2, the modals have only primary verb-forms). 
Non-finite clauses are normally embedded within a larger construction. There 
are likely to be aspects of the meaning that can be figured out from this 
larger construction, but that are not explicitly expressed in the non-finite clause 
itself the way they usually would be in main clauses. These two examples 
illustrate: 
[2] 
i I remembered to talk to my doctor. 
ii I intended to talk to my doctor. 
If [i] is true, then I actually did talk to my doctor. The preterite inflection on 
remember locates both the remembering and the talking to the doctor in past 
time. 
If [ii] is true, however, that does NOT necessarily mean that I talked to my doctor. 
Indeed, it rather suggests that I didn't. Intend, unlike remember, has a meaning 
that involves projection into the future, so the time of the intended action is 
always later than the time of the intention. There is no guarantee that intentions 
get carried out. Thus there is no guarantee that my planned conversation with the 
doctor ever happened. 
If we look at the main clause I talked to my doctor we see a contrast. This clause is 
self-sufficient: the form of the clause itself indicates that the conversation took place 
in the past. That is what a non-finite clause such as to talk to my doctor can't do: it 
can't carry its own primary tense to convey the location in time of the action or 
situation it talks about. 
Various other features, not related to the verb-form, further distinguish non-finite 
clauses from main clauses (see §§2. 1-2.4 for more discussion): 
a non-finite clause can have special subordinators (to andfor); 
a non-finite clause can lack overt subjects despite not being imperative; 
when a non-finite clause has a personal pronoun as subject, that pronoun gener­
ally does not have the nominative case-form; and 
under certain conditions a non-finite clause may have a non-subjec̵ NP left 
understood. 
2. 1 
Subordinators in to-infinitivals: to andfor 
To-infinitivals are marked by the word to, which derives historically 
from the preposition to (notice the strong similarity in meaning between I went to 
the doctor and I went to see the doctor) but long ago lost its prepositional proper­
ties. It is now unique: no other item has exactly the same grammatical properties. 
We take it to be a member of the subordinator category - a special marker for VPs 
of infinitival clauses. 
When a to-infinitival contains a subject, it also contains the clause subordinator 
for, which appears at the beginning of the clause, right before the subject: 

206 
Chapter 13 Non-finite clauses and clauses without verbs 
[3] 
i [For John to lose his temper like that] is highly unusual. 
ii We can 't afford [[Qr everyone to travel business class]. 
Again, the history goes back to the preposition/or, and we see a strong similarity in 
meaning between [ longed iJ2r. your return and [ longed iJ2r. you to return. But this 
for behaves as a clause subordinator. It does for infinitival clauses with subjects 
what the subordinator that does for declarative content clauses. 
Prescri ptive grammar note 
There are still some prescriptive grammar books around that warn against what they call the 
'split infinitive'. They mean the construction illustrated in to really succeed, where an adjunct 
(really) comes between to and the verb. (The term 'split infinitive' is misleading, since 
English doesn't have an infinitive form of the verb in the way that, say, French does.) To suc­
ceed is not a verb; it's two words, the subordinator to and the verb succeed. There is no rule 
of grammar requiring them to be adjacent. Phrases like to really succeed have been in use for 
hundreds of years. Most usage manuals now recognise this, and also recognise that in some 
cases placing the adjunct between to and the verb is stylistically preferable to other orderings. 
2.2 
Subjectless non-finites 
Most non-finite clauses, including those in [1], have no overt subject. But 
in a sense we understand them as having subjects. For instance, the way we understand 
[li], Liz wants to write a novel, Liz wants more than just for a novel to get written; Liz 
also wants to be the author - she wants "Liz has written a novel" to become true. So in 
a sense we take Liz as the subject not only of want but also of write. But Liz is not actu­
ally present in the write clause: we therefore speak of it as the understood subject. 
Interpreting subjectless clauses 
There are actually two different ways in which an understood subject is associated 
with a predicate: one way involves a grammatical linkage that we will refer to as 
syntactic determination and the other does not. These examples illustrate: 
[4] 
a. Ed promised to resign from the board. 
} 
b. They called on Ed to resign from the board. 
ii a. It is unwise to go swimming straight after a meal. } 
b. It was unwise to invite Ed to the parfJI. 
[syntactic determination] 
[no syntactic determination] 
(a) 
Syntactic detennination 
In [i], there is syntactic determination, so we can immediately see what the under­
stood subject must be, simply by looking at a linguistic antecedent that appears in 
some particular syntactic function in the matrix construction. 
In [ia], the matrix clause has the verb promise as its head verb, which means Ed 
did the promising, and this is enough to tell anyone (provided they know the 
grammar and meaning of the verb promise !) the understood subject of resign. 

§2.2 Subjectless non-finites 
207 
In [ib], Ed was the one they called on, so again we know that Ed is the one whose 
resignation is being discussed. 
In such cases the retrieval of the missing subject is said to be syntactically deter­
mined: it is determined by a rule referring to the syntactic structure. Notice that in 
[ia] that rule picks out a subject NP, while in [ib] the rule picks out an NP that is a 
complement in a PP. With different verbs, NPs in different functions are identified 
as the appropriate antecedent. 
(b) 
No syntactic determination 
In [ii], by contrast, there is no syntactic determination. The meaning depends heav­
ily on inference. 
The salient interpretation of [iia] is that it applies quite generally: "It is unwise 
for anyone to go swimming straight after a meal." 
In [iib], however, we are talking about a particular event of inviting at some time in 
the past, and someone issued the invitation to Ed to the party, so the missing sub­
ject is understood as referring to that person. It might have been explicitly stated 
earlier in the preceding discourse who issued the invitation, or it might not. It 
doesn't matter. There doesn't have to be any prior mention of the person (an accus­
ing glance in your direction might be enough to suggest that it was you), and in any 
case the NP referring to the inviter certainly doesn't have to be located in some 
designated syntactic position in the matrix construction of the infinitival clause. 
Non-finite clauses functioning as adjunct 
One construction falls close to the boundary between the determined and non­
determined constructions. That is the case of non-finite clauses functioning as, or 
within, certain kinds of supplementary adjunct: 
[5] 
Having read the report, Mary was sure there had been a miscarriage of justice. 
Having read the report is an adjunct, and the missing subject of the non-finite is 
retrievable by looking at the subject of the matrix clause. It provides a plausible sub­
ject, and there is no other candidate, so we understand the sentence as saying that it 
was Mary who read the report. 
Users of English don't always make it so clear what the intended understood sub­
ject might be. They leave it dangling, for the reader or hearer to guess. This issue is 
a celebrated topic discussed in prescriptive works on English usage, where it 
appears under the name dangling modifiers (or sometimes dangling participles). 
In [5] the subject of the matrix clause is an appropriate basis for providing the 
clause with an understood subject, and that makes things easy. But we need to deal 
with two other cases: 
to some speakers a non-subject NP in the matrix clause seems just as good as a 
basis for figuring out what the understood subject in the adjunct should be 
(though speakers often don't agree on which ones); 

208 
Chapter 1 3  Non-finite clauses and clauses without verbs 
many sentences are found in which no NP in the sentence gives any clue as to the 
understood subject, so it must be filled in by guesswork from the context (and 
speakers don't all agree about when that is acceptable, either). 
(a) 
Understood subject given by non-subject NP 
The examples in [6] appeared in print, with the double-underlined NP as the 
intended antecedent for the missing subject of the underlined clausal adjunct. (The 
symbol '%', it will be recalled, indicates that by no means every speaker of Standard 
English would find them acceptable.) 
[6] 
%Bom and bred in Brisbane, the Sunshine Coast was always ll1Y. preferred 
destination to recharge and socialise from my teenage years. 
ii % lennifer Lopez stars as Marisa, a maid in a fancy New York City Hotel. 
While trying on a wealthy woman 's dress, a handsome and rich 
politician mistakes her for a society woman. 
In [i], the subject of the matrix clause is the Sunshine Coast, and that makes no 
sense as the subject of born and bred. We are forced to look for an alternative, 
and my provides one: we can assume that it is the speaker who was born and bred 
in Brisbane. 
In [ii] (from a description of the plot of Maid in Manhattan in a cinema's public­
ity leaflet), the second sentence is supposed to be saying that Marisa was trying 
on the dress. But the matrix clause subject, a handsome and rich politician, pro­
vides a distracting unintended meaning: that the handsome politician was trying 
on the dress. And there is nothing LINGUISTICALLY odd about He was trying on a 
wealthy woman 's dress. So we only turn to the assumption that Marisa (referred 
to by the object pronoun her) was trying on the dress when we decide that this 
makes a more reasonable plot for the movie being described. 
(b) 
Understood subject not given by any NP 
Sometimes no NP in the sentence gives us any clue about what we should take to be 
the understood subject. Here are two examples from print: 
[7] i % Being desperately poor, paper was always scarce - as was ink. 
ii % Having failed once, is the fear of failure any less this time around? 
In [i], the subject of being desperately poor is supposed to refer to the poet John 
Clare, son of an agricultural labourer; the example appeared in a review of a book 
about Clare's life. The matrix clause subject paper would make no sense as the 
understood subject (if poor denotes financial poverty), but Clare is not men­
tioned anywhere in the sentence. The surrounding sentences have to be read to 
see what the sentence is intended to mean. 
In [ii], the context makes it clear that the understood subject of having failed 
denotes the person addressed: the interviewer says, You 've just started up 
another company . . .  Having failed once, is the fear of failure any less this time 
around? 

§2.3 Non-finites with an overt subject 
209 
Examples of both the kinds illustrated in [6] and [7] are extremely common. Many 
speakers try to avoid them in careful writing (though it should be noted that the ones 
we have given appeared in carefully edited quality newspapers). And some expres­
sions of the type seen in [7] have become more fully established, and would be 
allowed by any editor: 
[8] 
i In the long run, taking everything into account, which is the wisest choice? 
ii Turning to last week, several numbers provided some reason for optimism. 
iii Speaking of heroes , there 's something kind of heroic about this show. 
Here no particular subject is intended for the underlined adjuncts: they could per­
haps be paraphrased with indefinite one ("when one takes everything into account") 
or non-deictic you ("when you turn to last week") or we referring to the speaker and 
addressee in a collaboration ("given that we're speaking of heroes"). 
The situation with understood subjects of the above adjuncts is thus rather differ­
ent from the situation illustrated in [4ia], where we illustrated syntactic determi­
nation: the subject of the infinitival in Ed promised to resign from the board MUST 
be interpreted with the subject of promise as its antecedent. No one understands it 
any other way. The adjunct construction shown in [5-8], on the other hand, is NOT 
syntactically determined. 
The main clue to the understood subject in this construction is often given by the 
matrix clause subject (as in [5]), but there is a wide range of other possibilities for 
interpretation of differing degrees of acceptability. 
Prescri ptive grammar note 
Many of the more conservative usage manuals, and many editors and writing teachers, 
disapprove of ambiguity about the understood subject of a non-finite clause, and regard 
'dangling modifiers' as errors. What they are claiming is (putting it in our terms) that the 
missing subject of a non-finite clause in adjunct function MUST be under obligatory syn­
tactic determination by the subject of the matrix clause. If that were true, it would be sur­
prising if anyone understood sentences like those in [6] and [7]. But what we find is that 
such sentences are extremely common, and have been throughout the history of English 
literature. (In Sh!lkespeare's Hamlet the ghost of Hamlet's father says 'TIs given out that, 
sleeping in mine orchard, a serpent stung me; the sleep clause subject does not have the 
matrix subject - a serpent - as antecedent.) Moreover, far from being uninterpretable, they 
are generally understood by everyone. The few that have disruptive or hilarious unintended 
meanings are actually rather rare (though they tend to be cherished and much quoted by 
usage writers). Naturally, a careful writer will examine first drafts to remove unintended 
ambiguities that would damage intelligibility; but the danger from adjunct non-finite 
clauses with missing subjects that are not syntactically determined is often exaggerated. 
2.3 
Non-finites with an overt subject 
When a subject is overtly present in the non-finite clause its form may 
differ from that of subjects in finite clauses. 

2 1 0  
Chapter 1 3  Non-finite clauses and clauses without verbs 
Infinitival clauses 
In to-infinitivals a personal pronoun with a nominative-accusative contrast always 
takes accusative form: I 
[9] 
[For them to refuse you a visa] was quite outrageous. 
ii All I want is [for us to be reunited]. 
Gerund-participials 
Here the facts are more complex. There are various case possibilities for subjects of 
gerund-participles, but they differ depending on whether the clause is a complement 
or an adjunct. 
Gerund-participial as complement 
In the following examples the clause is complement of the preposition on: 
[ 1 0] 
She insisted on [lli.Y / me being present throughout the interview]. 
II She insisted on [her father's / her father being present throughout the interview]. 
III She insisted on [there being a counsellor present throughout the interview]. 
Here, and in most other complement functions, we find both genitive and non-genitive 
subjects. 
If a personal pronoun subject is not in the genitive, then it takes accusative case, 
as with me in [i]. 
The choice between genitive and non-genitive depends partly on style and 
partly on the type of NP. The genitive is characteristic of fairly formal style, 
and overall it is relatively infrequent. It is most likely with personal pronouns, 
and next most likely with short singular NPs denoting humans, like her father's 
in [ii]. 
Some NPs, such as there in [iii], cannot take genitive case at all.2 
Gerund-participial as adjunct 
When a gerund-participial is in adjunct function, as in [ 1 1], genitive subjects are not 
permitted at all: the choice is between nominative and accusative: 
[ 1 1 ]  
She sought advice from Ed, [he being the most experienced of her colleagues]. 
II She sought advice from Ed, [him being the most experienced of her colleagues]. 
The accusative is markedly informal and somewhat unlikely: the construction itself 
is relatively formal, so the accusative tends to sound out of place here. 
I However, when the pronoun does not form the whole subject, but is part of a coordination, some 
speakers have a nominative: %They've arranged [for you and I to be picked up at six] (see Ch. 5, §8.3). 
2 This there is a dummy (i.e. meaningless) pronoun discussed further in §4.2 below. 

2.4 
Hollow non-finite clauses 
§3 The functions of non-finite clauses 
21 1 
We have noted that most non-finite clauses have no overt subject, but 
there is also a type where some non-subject element is missing yet recoverable from 
an antecedent expression: 
[12] 
The house will be ready [for you to inspect _] in afew days. 
11 The new car took me quite a long time [to get used to _]. 
1Il The report was far too long [to read _ in one evening]. 
IV They came up with a rather dificult argument [to refute _]. 
v Her new book is definitely worth [looking at _]. 
The 
'_' marks the place where there is an element missing but understood, and 
underlining marks the antecedent that provides an interpretation for the missing NP. 
Thus what you will be inspecting in [i] is the house; what I was getting used to in 
[ii] was the new car; what would have taken too long to read in [iii] was the report; 
what was difficult to refute in [iv] was the argument; what is worth looking at in [v] 
is her new book. 
The bracketed clauses here have incomplete structure - they have a hole some­
where inside them. We call them hollow non-finites. Their properties can be stated 
briefly as follows: 
Form: they are predominantly to-infinitivals. 
Function of missing element: this is normally direct object ([i], [iii-iv D or object 
of a preposition ([ii], [vD. 
Antecedent: the antecedent is normally an NP (often the matrix subject, as in 
[i-iii], [vD, or a nominal (head of the NP in which the hollow clause is embed­
ded, as in [iv D. 
Function of the hollow clause: the hollow clause can have a range of functions. 
o In [i] it's embedded within a predicative complement, licensed by ready 
(items like good, bad, and nice also allow this). 
o In [ii] it's a complement licensed by the VP take with a duration expression. 
o In [iii] it's an indirect complement licensed by too (sufficient(ly) and enough 
also allow this). 
o In [iv] it's complement within an NP, licensed by the attributive modifier 
dificult (easy, hard, simple, and a few other adjectives also allow this). 
o In [v] it's a complement licensed by the adjective worth. 
3 
The functions of non-finite clauses 
N on-finite clauses appear in a very wide range of functions, but there are 
major differences between the four types. We'll look at them separately in turn: first 
to-infinitivals, then bare infinitivals, then past-participials, then gerund-participials. 

212 
Chapter 1 3  Non-finite clauses and clauses without verbs 
3. 1 
To-infinitivals 
To-infinitivals function as complement or modifier/adjunct in a consid­
erable number of constructions: 
[ 1 3] 
SUBJECT 
II EXTRA POSED SUBJECT 
1Il EXTRAPOSED OBJECT 
IV 
INTERNAL COMP OF VERB 
V CO MP OF PREPOSITION 
VI 
ADJUNCT IN CLAUSE 
Vll COMP OF NOUN 
Vlll 
IX MODIFIER IN NP 
X COMP OF ADJECTIVE 
xi INDIRECT COMP 
To turn back now would be a mistake. 
It would be a mistake to turn back now. 
We considered it sensible to take leĝal advice. 
Her parents [intend to buy her a car]. 
I go to the gym [in order to keep fit]. 
I go to the gym to keep fit. 
It provides [an opportunity to broaden the min4J. 
{ Wefound [a big box in which to keep the CDs]. 
Wefound [a big box to keep the CDs in]. 
He was [anxious to make a ĝood impression]. 
He 's still [too young to be left alone]. 
As with content clauses, the construction with the infinitival as subject, as in [i], 
is much less common than the one where it is an extraposed subject, as in [ii]. 
With objects, the extraposed construction, [iii], is virtually obligatory: the infini­
tival could not occur where it is (*We considered to take legal advice sensible). 
In [iv] the infinitival is an internal complement of the verb - it's within the VP, 
not external like the subject. 
Leaving aside interrogatives (which we'll look at immediately below), infiniti­
vals don't generally function as complement to a preposition. The major excep­
tion is with the compound preposition in order (which historically originates in a 
construction where order was a noun), illustrated in [v]. 
Infinitivals occur as adjuncts of various kinds; the one in [vi] is a purpose 
adjunct, with the same meaning as the bracketed pp of [v]. 
In [vii-ix] the infinitival is a dependent in NP structure, either a complement 
(licensed by the noun) or a modifier. Modifier infinitivals are a special case of rel­
ative clauses - of the wh type in [viii], and the non-wh type in [ix]. In the wh type 
the relative phrase in initial position must consist of preposition + NP, and no 
subject is permitted. 
Infinitival complements are licensed by numerous adjectives, such as anxious 
in [x]. 
Finally, in [xi] the infinitival is an indirect complement in the structure of an 
AdjP. It is licensed by too, but it functions as a dependent in the phrase headed by 
young (see Ch. 5, §4). 
Interrogative infinitivals 
Infinitivals functioning as complement to verbs, prepositions, nouns and adjectives 
can be interrogative - if the head licenses one, of course. Some examples are given 
in [ 14], with the infinitival underlined and brackets round the phrase within which it 
has the complement function: 

[ 14] 
COMP OF VERB 
ii COMP OF ADJECTIVE 
111 COMP OF PREPOSITION 
IV COMP OF NOUN 
§3.3 Gerund-participials 
213 
I don 't [know whether to accevt their oU-er]. 
I'm not [sure how to proceedJ. 
They can 't agree [on what to do about it]. 
[A decision whether to go aheadJ hasn 't been made. 
Closed interrogatives are introduced by the subordinator whether and open ones by 
an interrogative phrase like who or which one or how. No overt subject is pennitted 
in either kind of interrogative infinitival. 
In [i-iii] the understood subject is syntactically detennined, with the matrix 
clause subject as the antecedent. 
In [iv] there is no syntactic detennination, and no antecedent: the interpretation 
will be heavily dependent on the context. 
The meaning of infinitival interrogatives is deontic, as if the modal auxiliary should 
were included. For example, [i] doesn't mean that I don't know whether I do accept 
their offer or did accept it, it means I don't know whether I should accept it. 
3.2 
Bare infinitivals 
In contrast to to-infinitivals, with their wide range of uses, bare infiniti­
val clauses occur in only a very limited set of functions. They hardly occur except 
as internal complements of certain verbs, with no subject pennitted: 
[ 1 5] 
You should take legal advice. 
ii I want you to help clear up the garage. 
iii The devil made me do it. 
[complement of modal auxiliary] 
[complement of help] 
[complement of make, let, see, etc.] 
[complement of specifying be] 
iv All I did was ask a simple guestion. 
3.3 
Gerund-participials 
The range of functions in which gerund-participial clauses are found is 
broadly comparable to that of to-infinitivals, but there are some important differences. 
[16] 
SUBJECT 
11 EXTRA POSED SUBJECT 
iii OBJECT 
iv EXTRAPOSED OBJECT 
V INTERNAL COMP OF VERB 
vi COMP OF PREPOSITION 
vii ADJUNCT IN CLAUSE 
viii MODIFIER IN NP 
Bringing your dad in on the deal was a great idea. 
It's been a pleasure talking to you both. 
I find talking to Max rather stressful. 
He considers it a waste of time going to meetings. 
I remember telling vou about her visit. 
He insists [on checking everything himself]. 
Having read the paper, I can 't see why you care. 
Who was [the doctor petjorming the operation] ? 
We have seen that with to-infinitivals there is a strong preference for extraposed 
rather than subject or object positions, but the reverse is the case with gerund­
participials; note that they can occur as object with a following predicative 
complement, as in [iii]. Infinitivals can't. 

2 1 4  
Chapter 1 3  Non-finite clauses and clauses without verbs 
Similarly, while prepositions generally don't accept to-infinitivals as comple­
ment, many can take gerund-participials, as on does in [vi]. 
In NP structure, gerund-participials commonly function as modifier, but they are 
not found as complements, and they are virtually excluded from being comple­
ments to adjectives too.3 
3.4 
Past-participials 
Past-participial clauses have a quite limited distribution. In the great 
majority of cases, they have one or other of the two functions shown in [ 1 7]: 
[ 1 7] 
ii INTERNAL COMP OF VERB 
iii MODIFIER IN NP 
{ She [has written another novel]. 
I could [have you dismissed on the spot]. 
[The guns stolen in the break-in] were recovered. 
As complement of a verb the past-participial may have a perfect or passive 
interpretation - perfect as complement of the perfect auxiliary have, as in [i], 
and otherwise passive, as in [ii]. 
As modifier, a past-participial clause is interpreted as passive: the underlined 
non-finite clause in [iii] is essentially equivalent to the finite relative clause which 
were stolen in the break-in. 
4 
The catenative construction 
4. 1 
Introduction 
One construction illustrated in the survey presented in §3 needs some further atten­
tion. This is the catenative construction. 
Most cases where a non-finite clause is an internal complement of a verb illus­
trate the catenative construction, if we set aside the exceptions illustrated in [ 1 8]: 
[ 1 8] 
NON-CATENATIVE INTERNAL COMPLEMENTS 
Our goal is to eliminate all these errors in the next version. 
\1 These rules are to protect the privacy of our clients. 
III This made working with them an unpleasant experience. 
iv I'd call that shirking your responsibilities. 
The non-finite clauses in [i] and [ii] are complements of be in its specifying and 
ascriptive senses respectively (recall Ch. 4, §4.3). 
In [iii] the non-finite clause is object, and is the predicand for the predicative 
complement an unpleasant experience. 
In [iv] the non-finite clause is a predicative complement of call, with the object 
that as its predicand. 
) In a sentence like I felt anxious watching you up there, the underlined clause is an adjunct in clause 
structure (it means "while I was watching you up there"); it's not a complement to anxious. 

§4. 1 Introduction 
215 
These can all be regarded as merely special cases of more general constructions in 
which the same function is filled by something other than a non-finite clause. For 
example, [i] has basically the same structure as Our goal is an error-free version, 
where the specifying be has an NP as complement; [ii] is like These rules arefor our 
clients ' protection, with a PP; [iii] is like This made the job an unpleasant experi­
ence, with an NP object; and [iv] is like I'd call that laziness, also with an NP. 
In the catenative construction, substitutions by other categories in similar ways 
are not possible. The examples in [ 1 9] illustrate catenative complements: 
[ 1 9] 
i CATENATIVE COMP WITH seem: 
Kim seemed to understand it. 
ii CATENATIVE COMP WITH begin: Kim began to understand it. 
iii CATENATIVE COMP WITH hope: 
Kim hoped to understand it. 
Now, it is true that seem, begin and hope can take other categories of complement 
as well: 
[20] 
NP (PREDICATIVE) WITH seem: 
Kim seemed a keen student. 
Kim began the journey. 
ii NP (OBJECT) WITH begin: 
iii pp WITH hope: 
Kim hopedfor a successful outcome. 
But the function of the infinitival complement to understand it in [19] cannot be 
equated with any of these - it's not a predicative complement as in [20i], it's not an 
object like the journey in [20ii], and it's not like a pp complement in [20iii]. Instead, 
the examples in [ 1 9] illustrate a distinct construction. 
The term 'catenative' is derived from the Latin word for "chain", for the con­
struction is repeatable in a way that enables us to form chains of verbs in which all 
except the last have a non-finite complement: 
[2 1] 
She seems to want to stop 1.!:Y.iJ1g to avoid meeting him. 
Each of the underlined verbs here has a non-finite clause as complement: 
[22] 
HEAD VERB 
seems 
ii want 
iii stop 
iv trying 
V avoid 
COMPLEMENT 
to want to stop trying to avoid meeting him 
to stop trying to avoid meeting him 
trying to avoid meeting him 
to avoid meeting him 
meeting him 
We'll apply the term 'catenative' to the complements, to the licensing verbs and to 
the construction. So all of the non-finite clauses in the complement column of [22] 
function as catenative complements; the matrix verbs in the first column of [22] are 
catenative verbs; and each verb + complement pair forms a catenative construction. 
Simple and complex catenative constructions 
We can distinguish two subtypes of the catenative construction depending on the 
absence or presence between the matrix and dependent verbs of an intervening NP -
an NP that is interpreted semantically as subject of the non-finite clause: 

216 
Chapter 1 3  Non-finite clauses and clauses without verbs 
[23] 
SIMPLE CATENATIVE 
a. I promised to read the report. 
ii a. We daren 't move the furniture. 
III a. Max regrets locking the door. 
iv a. Pat got nominated for treasurer. 
v a. Ed seemed to me to cheer them up. 
COMPLEX CATENATIVE 
b. We persuaded Sue to read the report. 
b. We helped Sue move the furniture. 
b. I remember Sue locking the door. 
b. He had Sue nominatedfor treasurer. 
b. We rely on Sue to cheer them up. 
There is never an intervening NP in the simple construction. Notice that me in 
[23va] is not an 'intervening NP' in the sense we have defined: it is not under­
stood as the subject of cheer. 
There is always an intervening NP in the complex construction, except when it 
is passive (that is, we treat Sue was persuaded to read the report as a complex 
catenative like [23ib D. 
4.2 
The simple catenative construction 
In the simple catenative construction the non-finite clause has no subject 
and there is no intervening NP that is understood as the subject. But as usual the 
interpretation requires that we supply an understood or implicit subject. In almost 
all cases this is syntactically determined by the subject of the matrix clause:4 the 
promise in [23ia] is about my reading the report; [23iia] is about our moving the fur­
niture; Max's regret in [23iiia] is about Max's having locked the door; the nominee 
for treasurer in [23iva] is Pat; and the cheerer-up in [23va] is Ed. 
Ordinary subjects vs raised subjects 
The subject of the catenative verb in the simple catenative construction may be an 
ordinary subject or a raised subject, depending on the particular catenative verb 
selected, and the difference is important. 
[24] 
ORDINARY SUBJECT 
RAISED SUBJECT 
a. Sara wanted to convince Ed. 
b. Sara seemed to convince Ed. 
An ordinary subject is semantically related to the verb (or VP). Thus in [a] the 
main clause subject Sara refers to the person who experienced the feeling of 
wanting to convince Ed. 
A raised subject, by contrast, doesn't have a direct semantic relation with the 
verb. Syntactically it is located in the matrix clause, but semantically it belongs 
solely in the embedded clause. The meaning of [24b] is very close to that of Sara 
seemingly convinced Ed, where we have the adverb seemingly instead of the 
catenative verb seem. 
4 The reason we say 'almost all cases' is that there are just one or two exceptional verbs like say, as in 
Your mother said to meet her at two 0 'clock. Here there is no syntactic determination: the understood 
subject is obtained from the context. You are to meet her, or we (you and I) are to meet her - it 
depends what the circumstances are. 

§4.2 The simple catenative construction 
217 
Two ways of testing for ordinary or raised subjects in 
catenative constructions 
This difference in the semantic status of the matrix subject is reflected in a number 
of ways. We'll consider just two: the effects of putting the non-finite clause into the 
passive voice, and the effects of considering clauses with dummy pronouns as 
subjects. 
(a) 
Using passive infinitivals 
In a matrix clause with an ordinary subject, changing the subject changes the core 
meaning - the claims made about who did what. To test this, try making a transitive 
non-finite clause passive and switching the matrix clause subject with the infinitival 
clause object. The matrix has an ordinary subject if the new sentence has a clearly 
different core meaning from the old one; if it has a raised subject the core meaning 
will remain the same. This table illustrates: 
[25] 
Active non-finite clause 
Passive non-finite clause 
Same meaning in both? 
ORDINARY SUBJECT 
Sara wanted to convince Ed. 
Ed wanted to be convinced 
by Sara. 
No 
RAISED SUBJECT 
Sara seemed to convince Ed. 
Ed seemed to be convinced 
by Sara. 
Yes 
What we mean by core meaning can be explained more precisely. This is the 
meaning which, in declarative clauses, determines the truth conditions, the condi­
tions under which they can be used to make a true statement. When we ask whether 
the two declarative clauses have the same core meaning, we are asking whether they 
have the same truth conditions, whether it is impossible for there to be any situation 
where one is true and the other false. 
Can you imagine any situation in which Sara wanted to convince Ed while Ed 
didn't want to be convinced? Obviously, yes. That means that want takes an 
ordinary subject. The subject of want denotes the person whose desires are 
being talked about. If Ed is the subject, Ed felt the desire; if Sara is the subject, 
Sara felt it. 
Now, can you imagine circumstances in which Sara seemed to convince Ed but 
Ed didn't seem to be convinced? This time the answer must be no: if you think 
about what must be true if Sara seemed to convince Ed, and what must be true if 
Ed seemed to be convinced by Sara, then it is fairly clear that you simply can't 
invent a situation where one is true and the other simultaneously false. That is the 
sign of a raised subject. The subject of seem makes its meaning contribution in 
the subordinate clause, but is positioned in the matrix clause. 
It's important not to be misled by the fact that the sentence with the passive infiniti­
val might sound unnatural. Consider this pair, for example: 

218 
Chapter 13 Non-finite clauses and clauses without verbs 
[26] i Max began to sweep the floor. 
ii '?The floor began to be swept by Max. 
It's true that [26ii] doesn't sound like something anyone would say. You might 
therefore be tempted to think that Max in [26i] is an ordinary subject. But that would 
be a mistake. When you consider the conditions that would make the sentences in 
[26] true or false, you see that you cannot devise a context in which one is true while 
the other is false. The only difference is that [i] is a more natural way of describing 
the situation than [ii]. If we change the examples slightly to make both members 
equally natural, it becomes much easier to see that they are equivalent: 
[27] 
Max's off-colour jokes began to offend the audience. 
11 The audience began to be offended by Max's off-colour jokes. 
This experiment reveals that begin takes a raised subject: its subject belongs 
semantically in the subordinate clause, and the meaning of begin applies to the sit­
uation described in that clause (in [27], the process of Max's off-colour jokes 
offending the audience); began focuses on the initial, transitional phase of this 
process. 
(b) U sing dummy pronouns 
A dummy element is one that has no independent meaning of its own but occurs in 
certain constructions simply to satisfy some syntactic requirement. 
An example we have referred to on quite a few occasions is the dummy auxiliary 
verb do. In interrogatives like Do they want it? and negatives like They don 't want it, 
dummy do occurs because these constructions require the presence of an auxiliary 
verb even though there is no auxiliary in the corresponding canonical construction 
They want it (see Ch. 3, §3. 1 ). 
There are also two dummy elements belonging to the category of pronoun, 
namely it and there, as used, for example, in the following constructions: 
[28] 
EXTRA POSITION 
11 EXISTENTIAL 
lJ. is likely that she 'll go. 
There is plenty of time. 
These are non-canonical constructions belonging in the information packaging 
domain. They are discussed in some detail in Ch. 15, though we have already had occa­
sion to mention extraposition. It and there here are dummy elements inserted to satisfy 
the requirement that finite clauses (other than imperatives) must contain a subject. 
c The canonical version of [i] is That she 'll go is likely; extraposition places the 
subordinate clause at the end of the matrix and inserts dummy it to fill the 
vacated subject position. 
The existential clause [ii] has no canonical counterpart. You can't say *Plenty of 
time is because the verb be normally requires an internal complement. Plenty of 
time is placed in internal complement function and the vacated subject position 
is again filled by a dummy, this time there. 

§4.2 The simple catenative construction 
219 
The significance of these dummy pronouns for the concerns of this chapter is that 
they cannot function as an ordinary subject to a catenative verb. This can be seen 
from the following table: 
[29] 
Extrapositional it 
Existental there 
Dummy subject allowed? 
ORDINARY SUBJECT 
*It wants to be likely that 
she 'll go. 
*There wants to be plenty 
of time. 
No 
RAISED SUBJECT 
It seems to be likely she 'Il go. 
There seems to be plenty 
of time. 
Yes 
An ordinary subject is semantically related to the catenative verb, and this is not 
possible with a meaningless dummy. But a dummy pronoun can occur as a raised 
subject provided the non-finite complement is of the appropriate kind, i.e. one cor­
responding to a main clause with a dummy subject, as those in the table correspond 
to the main clauses in [28]. 
Gerund-participials 
The distinction between the two kinds of subject is also found with gerund­
participials. Regret, for example, takes an ordinary subject, while keep is a raising 
verb: 
[30] 
ORDINARY SUBJECT 
a. Ed regrets interrupting me. 
n a. l regret being interrupted by Ed. 
iii a. * There regret being power black-outs. 
RAISED SUBJECT 
b. Ed keeps interrupting me. 
b. l keep being interrupted by Ed. 
b. There keep being power black-outs. 
The examples in [i-ii] involve the passive infinitival test. It's clear that [ia] and 
[iia] differ in truth conditions, for the first attributes regret to Ed, the second to 
me. But [ib] and [iib] are equivalent. Both say that the situation of Ed interrupt­
ing me occurred repeatedly: there is thus no direct semantic relation between 
keep and its subject. 
The dummy pronoun test gives the same results. Keep can take a dummy subject, 
but regret cannot. 
Auxiliary verbs 
Auxiliaries, when used as markers of tense, aspect, mood or voice, are catenative 
verbs, entering into the simple catenative construction. In general, they take raised 
subjects. Dare is exceptional. We can see that it takes an ordinary subject from 
examples such as the following: 
[3 1 ]  
a. Kim daren 't beat Sue. 
b. Kim may beat Sue. 
ii a. Sue daren 't be beaten by Kim. 
b. Sue may be beaten by Kim. 
1Il a. * There daren 't be a reporter present. 
b. There may be a reporter present. 

220 
Chapter 1 3  Non-finite clauses and clauses without verbs 
Example [iia] is not entirely natural-sounding, but it is certainly intelligible and dif­
ferent in meaning from [ia]; an authentic example of the construction with a passive 
infinitival is I daren 't be seen in public with him anymore. 
4.3 
The complex catenative construction 
This construction, in its basic form, contains an intervening NP, an NP 
located between the two verbs and interpreted as the subject of the dependent 
clause. Four sUbtypes can be distinguished: 
[32] 
We arranged/QI. them to meet the manager. 
ii We resented their being given extra privileges. 
iii We counted on them to support us. 
iv We believed them to be conspiring against us. 
In infinitival [i] the intervening NP is preceded by the subordinatorjor. This indi­
cates clearly that the intervening NP belongs syntactically in the embedded 
clause, as subject. 
In [ii] the genitive case on their marks this NP as subject of the gerund-participial. 
In [iii] them is complement of the preposition on, with on them complement of 
the prepositional verb count; them thus clearly belongs in the matrix clause, not 
the infinitival, though it is also, of course, understood as subject of the latter. 
Less obvious is [iv], where there are no such overt indications of the syntactic 
status of them. This construction needs further consideration. 
Although the syntactic status of the intervening NP in the infinitival construction 
[32iv] is not immediately obvious, there are several kinds of evidence showing that 
it belongs syntactically in the matrix clause. We illustrate here with three of them, 
contrasting the believe construction with the a"ange construction containing the 
subordinatorjor, as in [32i]: 
(a) Passives 
[33] 
i They were believed to be conspiring against us. 
ii It was arranged for them to meet the manager. 
With believe the intervening NP behaves like an object of the matrix clause in 
that it can be made subject of a passive, as in [i]. 
In the an'Clnge construction withjor, by contrast, the passive has dummy it as sub­
ject, with the catenative complement occurring as extraposed subject, as in [ii]. 
(b) Insertion of adjuncts 
[34] 
i *We believed later them to be conspiring against us. 
ii We arranged later for them to meet the manager. 
With believe the intervening NP also behaves like an object of the matrix clause 
in that it cannot be separated from the verb by an adjunct, such as later. The inad­
missibility of [i] is like that of *We believed later their story. 

§4.3 The complex catenative construction 
221 
In the for constructionfor them to meet the manager is, as a whole, a catenative 
complement and as such it can be separated from the matrix verb. 
(c) 
The 'pseudo-cleft' construction 
[35] 
i *What we believed was them to be conspiring against us. 
ii 
What we arranged was for them to meet the manager. 
The 'pseudo-cleft' is another construction belonging to the information packaging 
domain, and again the main discussion of it is in Ch. IS, §6. For present purposes it 
is sufficient to see in broad outline how [35ii] differs from the structurally more ele­
mentary [32i]. The latter has been divided into two parts (as reflected in the 'cleft' 
component of the name). One part (jor them to meet the manager) is made comple­
ment of the verb be, while the other (we arranged) is contained within the subject, 
which begins with the relative pronoun what. 
The examples in [35] show that the operation of forming a pseudo-cleft can be 
performed on [32i] but not on [32iv]. The reason is as follows: 
In [32i] for them to meet the manager is a syntactic constituent - a clause. As 
such, it can be placed in the position of complement to the verb be, as in 
[35ii]. 
In [32iv] them to be conspiring against us is not a syntactic constituent and hence 
cannot function as complement to be, as shown in [35i]. It is not a syntactic con­
stituent because it is a sequence of two complements of believe: them is object 
and to be conspiring against us is a non-finite clause functioning as catenative 
complement. 
The distinction between ordinary and raised objects 
In the simple catenative construction we have drawn a distinction between ordi­
nary and raised SUBJECTS: in the complex construction there is a parallel distinc­
tion to be drawn between ordinary and raised OBJECTS. An ordinary object is 
semantically related to the matrix verb, while a raised object is not: it is located 
syntactically in the matrix clause but belongs semantically in the catenative com­
plement. 
The following examples show how the distinction between the two types of 
object matches that discussed earlier for the two types of subject: 
[36] 
ORDINARY OBJECT 
RAISED OBJECT 
a. We urged a specialist to 
b. We wanted a specialist to 
examine Ed. 
examine Ed. 
ii a. We urged Ed to be examined 
b. We wanted Ed to be examined by 
by a specialist. ( *"  [ia]) 
a specialist. (= [ib]) 
iii a. *We urged there to be 
b. We wanted there to be 
an adult present. 
an adult present. 
iv a. * We urged i1 to be clear 
b. We wanted i1 to be clear 
to Ed that he was on probation. 
to Ed that he was on probation. 

222 
Chapter 1 3  Non-finite clauses and clauses without verbs 
In [ia] the object a specialist is semantically related to the verb urge, indicating 
the person we spoke (or wrote) to with the aim of getting them to examine Ed. 
In rib], however, there is no such direct semantic relation between a specialist 
and want. What we wanted was not a specialist, but the examination of Ed by a 
specialist. 
This difference between the urge and want constructions can be brought out by the 
passive infinitival and dummy pronoun tests, modified to distinguish between dif­
ferent kinds of object rather than different kinds of subject. 
Example [iia] differs sharply in core meaning from [ia] because this time it is Ed, 
not a specialist, that we were trying to influence. But [iib] has the same truth con­
ditions as rib]: again, what we wanted was not Ed, but the examination of Ed by 
a specialist. 
While [iiib/ivb] are perfectly normal, [iiia/iva] are inadmissible, because the 
semantically empty there and it cannot enter into a semantic relation with urge: 
they cannot indicate who we tried to influence.5 
5 
Verbless clauses 
Verbless clauses differ more radically in structure from canonical 
clauses than do non-finites: instead of merely failing to express primary tense or to 
allow for the marking of verbal mood, the predicator is missing altogether. They 
have a much more restricted distribution than non-finites, being associated prima­
rily with the adjunct function.6 Here they may function as complement to a preposi­
tion or else serve as adjunct directly. 
(a) Verbless clauses as complement to a preposition 
There is no preposition that licenses ONLY a verbless clause as complement, but with 
and without accept non-finite and verbless clauses, and a few others, such as although, 
if, once, and while, accept three kinds of clauses - finite, non-finite, and verbless: 
[37] 
a. He 'd been on the beach [without anyone noticing him]. 
b. He 'd been on the beach [without any sunscreen on]. 
11 a. [While I was working in Boston] I lived with my aunt. 
b. [While working in Boston] I lived with my aunt. 
c. [While in Boston] I lived with my aunt. 
[non-finite] 
[verbless] 
[finite] 
[non-finite] 
[verbless] 
5 The verb want is somewhat exceptional in that the matrix clause in the complex catenative construc­
tion cannot be passivised, as seen in the ungrammaticality of *There was wanted to be an adult 
present, etc. In other respects, however, it behaves like believe in [33), so that there is still evidence 
that the intervening NP is syntactically object of the matrix clause. Thus in the active it cannot be sep­
arated from the verb by an adjunct (cf. *We wanted desperately a specialist to examine Eel), and we 
can't have a pseudo-cleft like * What we wanted was a specialist to examine Eel). 
6 We leave aside in this chapter the construction where the absence of a verb is the result of 'gapping' 
in coordinative constructions, as in Kim arrived on Tuesday and everyone else the day after (see 
Ch. 14, §8.2). 

Exercises 
223 
In [ib], any sunscreen is the subject and on is the predicate, consisting of the 
locative complement on. The relation is like that expressed in finite clauses by be 
(cf. There wasn 't any sunscreen on him), though it would not be possible to insert 
be in [ib] itself. 
In [iic] the subject is missing as well as the predicator, but there is nevertheless a 
predicational relation understood: the adjunct can be expanded to while I was in 
Boston. 
(b) Verbless clauses functioning directly as adjuncts 
Verbless clauses with a subject + predicate structure can function as adjuncts, as 
illustrated in such examples as these: 
[38] 
i The meeting finally over, they all adjourned to the local cafe. 
ii The passengers, many ofthem guite elderly, were forced to line up in the sun. 
The predicational relationship is again like the one expressed in finite clauses by be, 
as in examples like The meeting was finally over, or Many of them were quite 
elderly. The adjunct in [i] has a temporal interpretation (it means "when the meet­
ing was finally over"). The one in [ii] is comparable to a supplementary relative 
clause ("many of whom were quite elderly"). 
Exercises 
1 .  For each of the following examples, (a) say 
whether there is an NP in the matrix clause 
that is intended to be the antecedent for the 
missing subject of the underlined non­
finite clause; (b) if there is, say which NP it 
is, or if there isn't, say what you would take 
to be the understood subject of the non­
finite clause; and then (c) say whether you 
think a prescriptive grammarian would 
regard the example as an instance of the so­
called dangling modifier construction. 
i From a 1987 opinion column by a 
British commentator: 
Having said all that, however; there is 
little doubt in my mind that Mrs. 
Thatcher is going to win and thoroughly 
deserves to do so. 
ii From a news story about causes of 
infantry battlefield deaths: 
Pinned down by gunfire and unreach­
able by medical evacuation teams, the 
main cause of death was loss of blood. 
iii In a restaurant review, describing a visit 
to a cafe: 
Meandering in at about 11 :30 a.m. on a 
Sunday - somewhere between breakfast 
and brunch - the place was packed. 
iv In an editorial about a demonstration: 
Even allowing for the strong feelings on 
both sides, the behaviour of the demon­
strators was indefensible. 
v From a journalist's description of a 
flight over the countryside: 
Flying low, a herd of cattle could be seen. 
2. The verbs in the bracketed clauses below 
are all plain forms. Which of the clauses 
are infinitival, and hence non-finite? 
i All I did was [give them your phone 
number]. 
11 You can stay at our cabin, but [make 
sure you bring plenty of warm clothes]. 
iii I recommend [that the proposal be 
approved without delay]. 
iv They advised me [to reject your offer]. 

224 
Chapter 13 Non-finite clauses and clauses without verbs 
v Should we [ive more money to charity 
than we do]? 
3. State the function of the underlined non­
finite clauses in the following examples: 
subject in clause structure, complement of 
noun, etc. 
i It gave us an opportunity to make a 
quick profit. 
ii This made obtainine a loan virtually 
impossible. 
iii We 're looking forward to seeine you 
aain. 
iv I can 't decide what to do about it. 
v They are saving up to buy a washine­
machine. 
vi They arrived home to find that the 
house had been bureled. 
vii Anyone knowin his whereabouts 
should contact the police. 
viii I'm afraid askin for special consider­
ation won 't do any good. 
ix The grid is to prevent cattle wandering 
gJ[ 
x I'm determined to do better next time. 
4. For each adjective listed below, give an 
example of its predicative use licensing a 
hollow infinitival clause if that is possible; 
otherwise write 'none' . (The ones in bold 
italics have comparative and superlative 
forms, and of course your examples can 
involve those forms if you wish.) 
i able 
vi impossible 
ii bad 
vii likely 
iii bright 
viii nice 
iv dificult 
ix ready 
v eager 
x suitable 
5. Classify the following catenative construc-
tions as simple or complex. 
i They invited me to join the board. 
ii I forgot to put the oven on. 
iii She intends at some stage to do a Ph.D. 
iv I appeal to you to give us a second 
chance. 
v I promised them to be back by six. 
vi Ed was told by his doctor to do exercises. 
vii Max was advised to seek medical advice. 
viii Get someone to help you. 
ix Try to keep your eye on the ball. 
x Not for nothing had I yearned to desist. 
6. Pick out the catenative verbs from the list 
of verbs given below, and for each of them 
answer the four questions: 
i conjecture 
xi lose 
ii continue 
xii make 
iii convert 
xiii pledge 
iv entertain 
xiv proceed 
v expect 
xv shower 
vi fail 
xvi sink 
vii fall 
xvii stop 
viii insist 
xviii telephone 
ix instruct 
xix tend 
x help 
xx wonry 
(a) Which catenative constructions does it 
occur in: simple, complex, or both? 
Give examples. 
(b) Which of the four types of non-finite 
clause does it license as catenative com­
plement? Give examples. (Bear in mind 
that many license more than one.) 
(c) If it occurs in the simple construction, 
does it take an ordinary or a raised 
subject? Cite relevant evidence. 
(d) If it takes an object in the complex con­
struction, is it an ordinary or a raised 
object? Again, give evidence. 
7. Think carefully about the syntax of these five 
verbs: [i] allege; [ii] know; [iii] say; [iv] 
stand; [v] think. Consider the full range of 
constructions in which each can appear. Are 
any of them catenative verbs in any of their 
uses? If so, what kind of non-finite subordi­
nate clause do they take? Do they occur in 
simple or complex catenative constructions? 
With ordinary or raised subject or object? 
Are there any special syntactic or semantic 
restrictions on their catenative uses? 

__ 
COOrdinatiOn and more 
1 Coordination as a non-headed construction 
225 
2 Distinctive syntactic properties of coordination 
227 
3 The order of coordinates 
230 
4 The marking of coordination 
23 1 
5 Layered coordination 
232 
6 Main-clause and lower-level coordination 
233 
7 Joint vs distributive coordination 
234 
8 Non-basic coordination 
234 
1 
Coordination as a non-headed construction 
In a coordination, two or more elements of equal status are joined to 
make a larger unit. Special words called coordinators are used to mark this kind of 
joining. In [ I ], the joined elements are underlined, the larger unit formed is in brack­
ets, and the coordinator is double-underlined. 
[ I ]  
[lane is a good teacher and her students really like her]. 
11 They offered us a choice of [red wine. white wine or beer]. 
III Her assistant is [very young but a quick learner]. 
The underlined constituents that are joined are called the coordinates. The coordi­
nators illustrated are the most common ones in English: and, or and but. 
Internal syntax: the composition of coordinate structures 
The coordinates of the examples in [ I ]  are equal in status: each makes the same sort 
of contribution to the whole thing. They cannot be distinguished as head vs depend­
ent(s). The constructions dealt with earlier (clauses, NPs, VPs, PPs, etc.) have all 
had heads. Coordination is different: it is a non-headed construction. 
The coordinator indicates the particular relation holding between the coordinates. 
But there is a difference between the RELATION holding between the coordinates 
and the POSITION of the coordinator in the structure. The coordinator is not one of 
the coordinates; it forms a constituent with the coordinate following it. 
For example, [ l i] is not in three parts; it has two parts. The first immediate con­
stituent is the clause lane is a good teacher. The second, and her students really like 
her, is also a clause, but it is marked with a coordinator. 
225 

226 
Chapter 14 Coordination and more 
A simple piece of evidence for this is that a sentence division can occur between 
the two clauses. The two sentences might even be spoken by two different people, 
one adding to what the other said. And when we separate the two clauses like this, 
the coordinator goes with the second: 
[2] 
A: She 's a good teacher. 
B :  And her students really like her. 
We therefore use the term 'coordinate' not only for her students really like her, but 
also for and her students really like her. We distinguish them, when we need to, by 
calling the first a bare coordinate and the second an expanded coordinate. Here 
are simplified diagrams representing the structure for [ l i] and [ l iii]: 
[3] 
a. 
Coordination 
 
Coordinate, : 
Coordinate2: 
Clause 
Clause 
A 
Marker: 
Coordinate2: 
Coordinator 
Clause 
I
C
 
Jane is a 
and 
good teacher 
her students 
really like her 
b. 
Clause 
 
Subject: 
NP 
Predicate: 
VP 
@ 
Predicator: 
PredComp: 
V 
Coordination 
? 
Coordinate, : 
Coordinate2: 
AdjP 
NP 
> 
Marker: 
Coordinate2: 
Coordinator 
NP 
I
B
 
her assistant 
is 
very young 
but 
a quick learner 
External syntax: where coordinate constituents can occur 
Whether a coordination is admissible in a certain position depends primarily on the 
individual coordinates. In the default case, if each of the bare coordinates can occur 
on its own in some position, the coordination can occur there. Thus the admissibil­
ity of [ liii] is predictable from that of the separate clauses Her assistant is very 
young and Her assistant is a quick learner. 
The fact that it is usually possible to replace a coordination by any one of the 
coordinates is the key reason for saying that coordination is a non-headed construc­
tion. This kind of replacement distinguishes coordination very sharply from head + 
dependent constructions, as illustrated in the following examples: 

§2.2 Bare coordinates must be syntactically similar 
227 
[4] 
HEAD + DEPENDENT 
a. Pat is [very young]. 
b. Ed is [fond of kids]. 
ii a. Pat is [young]. 
b. * Ed is [fond]. 
iii a. * Pat is [very]. 
b. * Ed is [of kids]. 
COORDINATION 
c. [ [  went in and sat down L 
c. [ went in. 
c. [ sat down. 
In the [a] and [b] examples the bracketed expression consists of a head (doubly 
underlined) and a dependent. The dependent, very, is optional in [ia]; the phrase 
can be replaced by the head alone ([iia]), but not by the dependent ([iiia]). In [ib] 
the dependent of kids is obligatory, and the phrase can't be replaced by either the 
head ([iib]) or the dependent ([iiib]). 
But in [ic] the bracketed expression is a coordination, with the bare coordinates 
underlined. And in this case each coordinate can replace the whole coordination. 
2 
Distinctive syntactic properties of coordination 
Prototypical coordination has three properties which we summarise 
in [5] and then explain in the following subsections. 
[5] 
The grammar sets no limit on how many coordinates a coordination can have. 
ii The bare coordinates are required to be syntactically similar in certain ways. 
1Il An expanded coordinate can never be preposed. 
2. 1 
Unlimited number of coordinates 
A coordinate construction can have any number of coordinates from two 
up. Examples [ l i] and [ liii] have two each, and [ l ii] has three, while the following 
have four, five and six respectively, and there is clearly no grammatical limit on how 
many there can be: I 
[6] 
[Free sexual expression. anarchism. mining ofthe irrational unconscious and 
giving it free rein] are what they have in common. 
ii .
. . [the caste system. witch-burning. harems. cannibalism, and gladiatorial 
combats] . . .  
iii Nothing [noble. sublime. profound. delicate. tasteful or even decent] canfmd 
a place in such tableaux. 
2.2 
Bare coordinates must be syntactically similar 
In an acceptable coordination the coordinates are syntactically similar. 
The examples given so far contrast with the ungrammatical combinations shown 
in [7], where the underlined elements are manifestly quite different in kind: 
J The examples in [6) are all from pages 74-8 of Allan Bloom's polemic against rock music in 
The Closing of the American Mind (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1987). 

228 
Chapter 14 Coordination and more 
[7] 
*We invited [the Smiths and because they can speak Italian]. 
11 * She argued [persuasively or that their offer should be reiectedl. 
Function rather than category is the crucial factor 
In a large majority of the coordinate structures found in texts, the coordinates 
belong to the same CATEGORY. Thus in [ l i] both coordinates are declarative main 
clauses, and in [ Hi] all are NPs. But coordinates do not have to be of the same cat­
egory. We saw this in [ 1  iii], where very young is an AdjP and a quick learner an NP. 
Other examples are given in [8]: 
[8] 
He won 't reveal [the nature of the threat or where it came from]. 
ii I'll be back [next week or at the end ofthe month]. 
iii He acted [selfishly and with no thought for the conseguences]. 
iv They rejected the [United States and British] objections. 
[NP + clause] 
[NP + PP] 
[AdvP + PP] 
[Nom + Adj] 
The coordinates here belong to the categories shown on the right; where it came 
from in [i] is, more specifically, a subordinate interrogative clause, while United 
States in [iv] is a nominal, the name we use for the unit intermediate between noun 
and noun phrase (Ch. 5, § 1 ). 
FUNCTION is more important than category in determining the permissibility of 
coordination. What makes the coordinations in [8] acceptable despite the differ­
ences of category is that each coordinate could occur alone with the same function. 
[9] 
a. He won 't reveal the nature ofthe 
b. He won 't reveal where it came from. 
threat. 
11 a. I'll be back next week. 
b. I'll be back at the. end ofthe monrh. 
III a. He acted selfishly. 
b. He acted with no thought [or the 
consegue.nces. 
IV a. They rejected the United States 
b. They rejected the British objections. 
objections. 
In each pair here the underlined element in [b] has the same function as that in [a]: 
complement of the verb in [i], time adjunct in [ii], manner adjunct in [iii], attribu­
tive modifier in [iv]. Contrast these examples with those in [10]: 
[10] i *We 're leaving [Rome and next week]. 
ii *1 ran [to the park and for health reasons]. 
[NP + NP] 
[PP + PP] 
Here the coordinates belong to the same category, but don't satisfy the requirement 
of functional likeness. Each could appear in place of the whole coordination, but the 
functions would be different: 
[ 1 1 ]  i a. We 're leaving Rome. 
ii a. I ran to the park. 
b. We 're leaving next week. 
b. I ran for health reasons . 
.. Example [ia] has Rome as direct object, but next week in [ib] is an adjunct of time. 
;t> In example [iia], to the park is a goal complement, butfor health reasons in [iib] 
is an adjunct of reason. 

§2.2 Bare coordinates must be syntactically similar 
229 
In [12] we state the likeness requirement a bit more precisely in the light of these 
observations. 
[ 1 2] 
A coordination of X and Y is admissible at a given place in sentence structure 
if and only if each of X and Y is individually admissible at that place with the 
same function. 
To see how this works, consider the examples given in [ 1 3]: 
[ 1 3] 
a. We invited [Kim and Pat]. 
11 a. We invited Kim. 
iii a. We invited Pat. 
b. She is [very young but a quick learner]. 
b. She is very young. 
b. She is a quick learner. 
In the [a] set, let X be Kim and let Y be Pat: we can replace Kim and Pat by Kim, 
and we can replace it by Pat, without change of function, so the coordination is 
admissible. 
The same holds in the Cb] examples, where the coordinates are of different 
categories: very young and a quick learner can both stand in place of the coordi­
nation with the same function (predicative complement), so again this is an 
admissible coordination. 
But [ lOi-ii] are not permitted by condition [12]. Although we can replace the 
coordination by each of the coordinates Rome and next week or to the park and for 
health reasons, the functions are not the same, as explained in the discussion of 
[ 1 1]. So condition [ 1 2] is not satisfied in these cases. 
A number of qualifications and refinements to [12] are needed to cover various 
additional facts,2 but [12] does represent the basic generalisation. And of course, 
[12] does not have any application to the combination of X and Y in a head + 
dependent construction. 
Relativisation across the board 
A special case of the syntactic likeness requirement applies in various constructions 
such as relative clauses. Compare the following examples: 
[ 14] 
Thev attended the dinner but they are not members. 
11 
The people [who attended the dinner but who are not members] owe $20. 
III * The people [who attended the dinner but they are not members] owe $20. 
In [i] we have a coordination of main clauses. If we embed this to make it a modi­
fier in NP structure, we have to relativise BOTH clauses, not just one. 
In [ii] both coordinates are relative clauses (marked by who): who attended the 
dinner is a relative clause and so is who are not members. That makes the coor­
dination admissible. 
2 One obvious case involves agreement features. Kim and Pat like it, for example, is sanctioned by the 
admissibility of Kim likes it and Pat likes it, not *Kim like it and *Pat like it. See also §7 below. 

230 
Chapter 14 Coordination and more 
In [iii], by contrast, just the first embedded clause is relativised: who attended the 
dinner is a relative clause but they are not members isn't, so the coordination is 
ungrammatical. 
Relativisation is thus said to work across the board, i.e. to all coordinates. Example 
[14iii] clearly doesn't satisfy condition [12]: the second underlined clause cannot 
occur alone in this context (*The people they are not members owe $20 is ungram­
matical), so the coordination of the two underlined clauses is inadmissible. 
We find a sharp contrast here with head + dependent constructions: 
[ I S] i They attended the dinner although they are not members. 
ii * The people [who attended the dinner although who are not members] owe $20. 
m 
The people [who attended the dinner although they are not members] owe $20. 
But in [14] is a coordinator. Although in [ I S] is not: it's a preposition with a content 
clause complement. When we relativise here, then, it is just the attend clause that is 
affected, as in [ lSiii] (the clause they are not members is the complement of a prepo­
sition inside the attend clause). Version [ 1Sii] is ungrammatical, because the rela­
tive clause who are not members is complement of a preposition. This is not a 
permitted function for relative clauses. 
2.3 
Impossibility of preposing an expanded coordinate 
It is completely inadmissible to prepose an expanded coordinate. There 
is a sharp contrast between the coordinator but and the preposition although when 
we apply preposing to [14i] and [ISi]: 
[ 1 6] i *But they are not members. they attended the dinner. 
ii Although they are not members. they attended the dinner. 
The adjunct in [16ii] is placed at the beginning of the clause (instead of the end, as 
in [ 1  Si]), and this is fully acceptable. But an expanded coordinate behaves quite dif­
ferently: changing the structure of [14i] in a comparable way makes [16i], which is 
completely unacceptable. 
3 
The order of coordinates 
In the simplest and most straightforward cases, the order of the coordi­
nates can be changed without perceptible effect on the acceptability or interpreta­
tion of the coordination: 
[ 1 7] i a. We can have [beans or broccoli]. 
ii a. I was [fum and tired]. 
b. We can have [broccoli or beans]. 
b. I was [tired and fum]. 
Coordination of this kind is called symmetric - and contrasts with asymmetric 
coordination, such as we find in [ 1 8]: 

§4 The marking of coordination 
23 1 
[ 1 8] 
i a. We were left [high and do!.]. 
ii a. I [ԛ and had breakfast]. 
b. *We were left [do!. and high]. 
b. 
I [had breakfast and gQl.JUZ]. 
High and dry ("above the tide line, abandoned") is fossilised, so that the order is 
fixed. There are a good number of expressions of this kind: aid and abet, betwixt 
and between, common or garden, hem and haw, and so on.3 
In [ii] the [a] and [b] versions are both fully acceptable, but they differ in their 
natural interpretations. This is because there is an implication that the events took 
place in the order described: in [iia] you understand that I got up and then had break­
fast, while in [iib] I had breakfast first (in bed) and then got up. 
There are a good many cases of and and or coordinations carrying implications 
beyond the basic additive or alternative meaning of the coordinator, and making the 
coordination asymmetric. A few examples are given in [19]: 
[ 1 9] 
i He [parked his car at a bus-stop and was fined $/00]. 
ii [Pay within a week and you 'll get a /0% discount]. 
iii [We need to pay the bill today or we won 't get the discount]. 
In [i] there is again an implication that the parking took place before the fining, but 
also a further implication that the fining was the CONSEQUENCE of the parking. 
In [ii] there is a conditional implication: "IF you pay within a week you get the 
discount". 
There is also a conditional implication in [iii], but with or the implicit condition 
is negative: "IF WE DON' T pay the bill today we won't get the discount". 
4 
The marking of coordination 
In all the examples so far the coordination construction has been marked 
by a coordinator introducing the final coordinate. This is the most common pattern, 
but not the only one. There are three other possibilities. 
(a) Unmarked coordination 
Sometimes no coordinator is used, so the coordination is just a list. Commas are 
used to separate the items in writing. 
[20] 
i Hefelt [tired, depressed, listless]. 
ii Did they ever offer you [red wine, white wine, beer] ? 
(b) Repetition of coordinator 
[and understood] 
[or understood] 
The coordinator can introduce all except the first of a series of coordinates. The rep­
etition of the coordinator gives added emphasis to the relation it expresses: 
3 There are also numerous expressions where the order is not rigidly fixed but one order is usual and 
familiar, so that reversal sounds a bit strange: knife and fork, hope and pray, men and women. 
Fossilised expressions are another example of something that condition [ 1 2] doesn't cover: hem and 
haw, for example, cannot be replaced by either of its coordinates. 

232 
Chapter 14 Coordination and more 
[21 ]  
Hefelt [tired. and depressed. and listless]. 
ii They offered us a choice of [red wine or white wine or beer]. 
(c) Correlative coordination 
Although the first coordinate is never introduced by a coordinator, it can be marked 
by one of the determinatives both, either, and neither, paired respectively with the 
coordinators and, or, and nor, yielding correlative coordination: 
[22] 
[Both the managing director and the company secretary] have been arrested. 
ii It's one of those movies that you 'll [either love or hate]. 
III [Neither Sue nor her husband] supported the plan. 4 
Two prescriptive grammar notes 
1. Both is restricted to two-coordinate constructions. Around 1900, usage books began to 
claim that this was also true of either and neither, but the evidence does not support them. 
2. Both, either, and neither are often found displaced from their basic position in one 
direction or the other. Thus we find phrases like both to [the men and their employers], 
where both is displaced to the left: the more basic order would be to [both the men and 
their employers], with both immediately before the first coordinate. We also find phrases 
like rapid changes [il either the mixed lig,uor or in the effluent], with either displaced to 
the right: the basic order would be rapid changes either [il the mixed lig,uor or in the 
effluent]. Most people accept the displaced versions without noticing them, but some pre­
scriptive grammarians insist that all displacements are errors. 
5 
Layered coordination 
Subject to a suitably refined condition along the lines of [12], a coordi­
nate can belong to virtually any syntactic category. And that means a coordinate can 
itself be a coordination: 
[23] 
[[Kim works in a bank and Pat is a teacher], but [Sam is still unemployed]]. 
11 You can have [[pancakes] or [gg and bacon]]. 
III [[Laurel and Hardy] and [Fred and Ginger]] are my favorite movie duos. 
Here we have layered coordination: one coordinate structure functioning as a 
coordinate within a larger one. The outer square brackets enclose the larger coordi­
nation, with the inner brackets enclosing the coordinates within it; underlining then 
marks the coordinates at the lower level. 
In [i) the larger coordination has the form X but Y; the Y is just a clause, Sam is 
still unemployed, but the X is a coordination of the two underlined clauses. At the 
4 This illustrates the usual pattern for neither, but sometimes or rather than nor is found paired with it, 
as in She was constrained by neither fashion Ǜ conformity. 

§6 Main-clause and lower-level coordination 
233 
top level we contrast employed with unemployed; at the lower level we distin­
guish two jobs. 
In [ii] we have X or Y expressing a choice, where X is an NP and Y is a coor­
dination. 
In [iii] we have X and Y at the top level, and at the lower level each of X and Y has 
the fonn of a coordination. 
In the first two examples we have contrasting coordinators: and and but in [i], or and 
and in [ii]. This itself is sufficient to indicate that there is layered coordination. A 
single coordination with more than two coordinates may have just one coordinator 
or multiple occurrences of the same coordinator (as in [21 ]), but not two different 
coordinators. 
6 
Main-clause and lower-level coordination 
Coordinations can occur at almost any place in constituent structure, 
from large constituents down to small ones like individual words. We make a gen­
eral distinction between main-clause coordination and lower-level coordination: 
[24] 
MAIN-CLAUSE COORDINATION 
[It was a perfect day and everyone was in good spirits.] 
11 
LOWER-LEVEL COORDINATION 
a. He [made a mistake or changed his mind]. 
b. We met [my bank manager and her husband] at the airport. 
c. She introduced me to her [mother and father]. 
Equivalent main-clause and lower-level coordinations 
[main clauses] 
[VPs] 
[NPs] 
[nouns] 
In many cases a lower-level coordination can be expanded into a logically equiva­
lent main-clause one. This is so with all of the examples in [24ii], which can be 
expanded as follows: 
[25] 
i He made a mistake or he changed his mind. 
ii We met my bank manager at the airport and we met her husband at the airport. 
iii She introduced me to her mother and she introduced me to her father. 
These are logically equivalent to [24iia-c]. There may be subtle meaning differ­
ences: the versions in [25ii-iii] do seem to separate the events more, so that you 
would be more likely to infer from [24iic] that she introduced me to her parents 
together, and from [25iii] that the introductions were on different occasions. But 
if [24iic] is true, then [25iii] is, and vice versa. That's what is meant by logical 
equivalence. 
Non-equivalent main-clause and lower-level coordinations 
There are some cases where pairs with lower-level and main-clause coordination 
are NOT logically equivalent: 

234 
Chapter 14 Coordination and more 
[26] 
a. One teacher was [popular and patient]. 
b. One teacher was popular and one teacher was patient. 
11 a. No one [stood up and complaine!lJ. 
b. No one stood up and no one complained. 
III a. She didn 't have any [tea or coffee]. 
b. She didn 't have any tea or she didn 't have any coffee. 
In [ia] we have a single teacher with two properties; [ib] talks about two teachers. 
In [iia] no one both stood up and complained. But standing without complaining 
and complaining while seated are both excluded by [iib]. 
In [iii], suppose she had tea but not coffee. Then [b] is true but [a] is false. 
(Compare with She didn 't have any tea and she didn 't have any coffee.) 
7 
Joint vs distributive coordination 
One special case where a lower-level coordination is not equivalent to a 
corresponding main-clause coordination is in joint coordination, as opposed to the 
default distributive coordination: 
[27] 
DISTRIBUTIVE COORDINATION 
a. [Kim and Pat] are fine players. 
ii a. [Lee, Robin and Sam] like you. 
JOINT COORDINATION 
b. [Kim and Pat] are a good pair. 
b. [Lee, Robin and Sam] like each other. 
In [i] the property of being a fine player applies to Kim and Pat separately - it's 
distributed between them; whereas that of making a good pair applies to the two 
of them jointly. 
In [ii] the property of liking you applies to Lee, Robin and Sam individually, but 
the property of liking each other can only apply to them jointly, as a group. 
Joint coordination is almost always marked by the coordinator and. The central 
cases are NP coordinations. In cases like [ib] and [iib] it is not possible to replace 
the coordination by either coordinate alone: it is incoherent to say * Kim is a good 
pair or *Lee likes each other. Condition [12], therefore, doesn't cover joint coordi­
nation. Joint coordination has the following properties: 
It requires that each coordinate denote a member of a set. 
It requires that the coordinates belong to the same syntactic category. 
It disallows correlative coordination (*Both Kim and Pat are a good pair). 
8 
Non-basic coordination 
So far we have focused on what can be called basic coordination con­
structions, the ones where all the following properties hold: 
[28] 
The coordination consists of a continuous sequence of coordinates. 
11 The coordinates are either bare or expanded (by a coordinator or determinative). 
III The coordinates can occur as constituents in non-coordination constructions. 

§8.3 Right nonce-constituent coordination 
235 
In this final section we very briefly discuss various kinds of non-basic coordina­
tion, which depart from that elementary pattern. 
8. 1 
Expansion of coordinates by modifiers 
An expanded coordinate can contain a modifier as well as (or instead of) 
a marker: 
[29] 
She comes home [every Christmas and sometimes at Easter as well]. 
II We could meet [on Friday or alternatively at the week-end if you prefer]. 
iii She can speak [French but not German]. 
iv He felt [not angry but rather deeply disappointed]. 
The underlined expressions here are neither markers of the relation holding between 
the coordinates nor part of the bare coordinates. They are modifiers of the coordi­
nate in which they are located. Sometimes they reinforce the relation expressed (as 
well or too reinforce the sense of and; alternatively or else reinforce or), and some­
times (as with but not) they indicate a contrast. 
8.2 
Gapped coordination 
The middle part of a non-initial coordinate can be omitted if it is recov­
erable from the corresponding part of the initial coordinate: 
[30] 
i Her son lives in Boston and her daughter _ in Chicago. 
ii Kimjoined the company in 1988, and Pat _ the following year. 
iii Sue wants to be a doctor, Max _ a dentist. 
The gap marked 
'_' is understood by reference to the first coordinate: in these 
cases "lives", "joined the company", and "wants to be". The gap normally includes 
the verb, but can include other material too (as in [ii]). The antecedent needn't be a 
syntactic constituent; it isn't in [iii] (wants to be a doctor is made up of wants plus 
to be a doctor, so wants to be isn't a phrase). 
8.3 
Right nonce-constituent coordination 
A third non-basic coordination construction is illustrated in [3 1]: 
[3 1] 
We gave [Kim a book and Pat a CD]. 
II They stay [in Boston during the week and with their parents at week-ends]. 
iii I could lend you [$30 now or $50 at the end ofthe week]. 
There are two distinctive properties here. 
Ñ, First, the coordinates do not form constituents in corresponding non-coordination 
constructions. In We gave Kim a book. for example, the underlined part does not 
form a single constituent: it is a sequence of two NPs. 

236 
Chapter 14 Coordination and more 
Second, the coordinates are required to be syntactically parallel: the separate ele­
ments of each coordinate must have the same functions in corresponding non­
coordination constructions. In the clauses We gave Kim a book and We gave Pat 
a CD, both the first elements (Kim and Pat) are indirect objects and both second 
elements (a book and a CD) are direct objects, so [3 l i] is acceptable. The coor­
dination is ungrammatical if the functions don't match in this way, as in *We 
gave [Kim $1,000 and generously to charity], with two objects in the first coor­
dinate and a manner adjunct plus pp complement in the second.5 
8.4 
Delayed right constituent coordination 
Another odd coordination construction is illustrated in the [a] members of 
the pairs in [32], where the [b] members are the corresponding basic coordinations: 
[32] 
ii 
a. 
b. 
a. 
b. 
She [noticed but didn 't comment on] his inconsistencies. 
She [noticed his inconsistencies but didn 't comment on them]. 
[Two perfect and four slightly damage4] copies were found. 
[Two verfect copies and four slightly damaged ones] were found. 
The delayed right constituent coordination construction has the following distinc­
tive properties: 
At least one of the coordinates does not form a constituent in a corresponding 
non-coordination construction. In She didn 't comment on his inconsistencies, for 
example, the underlined sequence is not a constituent, since on is head of the pp 
on his inconsistencies. Similarly two perfect does not form a constituent two 
perfect copies, which consists of the determiner two plus the head nominal per­
fect copies. 
The element on the right of the coordination (doubly underlined) is understood 
as related to each coordinate. In [i], for example, his inconsistencies is under­
stood both as object of the verb noticed and as object of the preposition on. 
The term delayed right constituent coordination reflects the salient difference 
between this construction and basic coordination. In the latter the doubly underlined 
expression occurs earlier, as the rightmost constituent of the first coordinate (and 
then is repeated, normally in reduced form, at the end of the second): She noticed 
his inconsistencies but didn 't comment on them. In the non-basic version, therefore, 
this element appears to be held back, delayed. 
8.5 
End-attachment coordination 
One more non-basic coordination construction we should mention is 
seen in the [a] members of the following pairs: 
5 Nonce constituents have constituent status only for one special occasion, by courtesy of the coordi­
nation relation. We call this construction right nonce-constituent coordination because the coordina­
tions occur to the right of the head (predicator) of the clause - gave, stay and lend in our examples. 

Exercises 
237 
[33] 
a. Kim was included on the shortlist, but not Pat. 
b. [Kim but not Pat] was included on the shortlist. 
ii a. They've charged the boss with perjury - and her secretary. 
b. They've charged [the boss and her secretary] with perjury. 
They differ from the more elementary [b] versions in that the second coordinate 
(including the coordinator) is not adjacent to the first but is attached at the end of the 
clause. The relation marked by the coordinators but and and is still expressed, but in the 
[a] examples the constituents related by the coordinators don't make up a constituent. 
Exercises 
1 .  Consider the determinatives both, either, 
and neither that occur in correlative 
coordinations. Which, if any, can occur 
introducing main clause coordinations? 
Give grammatical and ungrammatical 
examples to support your answer. 
2. In Ch. 7 we referred to cases like What are 
you looking at? as illustrating preposition 
stranding. Consider the question of 
whether coordinators can be stranded, 
illustrating your discussion with grammati­
cal and ungrammatical sequences of words 
as appropriate. 
3. Some prescriptive manuals and English 
teachers advise against beginning a 
sentence with a coordinator. Choose a 
published work that you think is a good 
example of written Standard English, 
preferably one that you enjoy and admire, 
and read from the beginning looking for a 
sentence that begins with a coordinator 
(And, Or, But). How many sentences did 
you have to read before you found one? 
4. Choose a published work that you think is a 
good example of written Standard English, 
preferably one that you enjoy and admire, 
and read it from the beginning, keeping 
count of each coordinate structure you 
encounter. At what point do you find the 
first one that has coordinates of different 
categories? How many sentences did 
you have to read before you found one? 
5. Explain why the following coordinations 
are asymmetric. 
i He lost control of the car and crashed 
into a tree. 
ii Talk to me like that again and you'll be 
fired. 
iii Don 't tell anyone or we'll be in heaps of 
trouble. 
iv You can 't work 18 hours a day and not 
endanger your health. 
v You can eat as much of this as you like 
and not put on any weight. 
6. Explain why the following lower-level 
coordinations are not equivalent to main­
clause coordination. 
i Who went to the movies and left the 
house unlocked? 
ii Did she take the car and go to the beach? 
iii The last and most telling objection 
concerned the cost. 
iv They could find nothing wrong with the 
battery or with the thermostat. 
v One guy was drunk and abusive. 
7. For each of the following examples, say 
which kind of non-basic coordination 
construction it exemplifies. 
i I'd expected Jill to back us, but not her 
father. 
ii It was criticised by some for being 
too long and by others for being too short. 
iii Both the British and the French dele­
gates supported the proposal. 
iv You can have a banana or else an apple 
instead. 
v Max left the country in May and the rest 
of the family in June. 

'-Information packaging in the clause 
I Introduction 
245 
2 Passive clauses 
247 
3 Extraposition 
254 
4 Existential clauses 
256 
5 The it-cleft construction 
258 
6 Pseudo-clefts 
26 1 
7 Dislocation 
262 
8 Preposing and postposing 
263 
9 Reduction 
265 
1 
Introduction 
The bulk of this chapter is concerned with a family of constructions 
which we illustrate initially in the [a) members of the following pairs: 
[ 1 ] 
a. Her son was arrested by the police. 
ii a. It's unusual for her to be this late. 
iii a. There were two doctors on the plane. 
b. The police arrested her son. 
b. For her to be this late is unusual. 
b. Two doctors were on the plane. 
Example [ia) belongs to the passive construction, [iia) to the extra position 
construction, and [iiia) to the existential construction. These constructions have the 
following properties in common: 
[2] 
They are non-canonical constructions; characteristically, they have a 
syntactically more elementary or basic counterpart, given here in the 
[b] examples. 
ii They generally have the same core meaning as their basic counterpart, but 
they present - or 'package' - the information differently. 
The basic counterpart 
The [b) examples in [ 1 )  are all structurally simpler than those in [a], as is evident 
from the fact that the latter contain extra words - the auxiliary be and the preposi­
tion by in [ia), the dummy pronouns it and there in [iia/iiia). In the examples chosen, 
the [b) versions are all canonical clauses, but there are similar pairs where both 
members are non-canonical, as in the negatives Her son wasn 't arrested by the 
police and The police didn 't arrest her son. 
238 

§ 1 Introduction 
239 
For the passive, there is an established name for the basic counterpart: [ l ib] is an 
active clause. But there is no established name for [iib]: this is simply the non­
extraposition counterpart of [iia]. Similarly, [iiib] is just the non-existential coun­
terpart of [iiia]. And this will be the case with the other constructions we deal with 
in this chapter: we have special names for the non-basic constructions, but not for 
their basic counterparts. 
Exceptional cases without a grammatically well-formed basic counterpart 
We said that the non-canonical clauses CHARACTERISTICALLY have syntactically 
more basic counterparts. There are exceptions. In some cases the basic counter­
part is in fact ungrammatical. This can arise, for example, with the existential 
construction: 
[3] 
EXISTENTIAL 
a. There was a bottle of wine on the table. 
ii a. There is plenty of time. 
NON-EXISTENTIAL 
b. A bottle of wine was on the table. 
b. * Plenty of time is. 
Both versions are permitted in [3i] (or in our original pair [ 1iii]), but only the exis­
tential version is grammatical in [3ii]. The verb be can't normally occur without an 
internal complement, so [3iib] is ungrammatical. There are other cases of this sort, 
as we'll see later. 
Core meaning and information packaging 
The pairs in [ 1 ]  have the same core meaning in the sense explained in Ch. 1 3, §4.2: 
since they are declarative clauses, having the same core meaning is a matter of 
having the same truth conditions. With pair [i], for example, if it's true that her son 
was arrested by the police it must be true that the police arrested her son, and vice 
versa. And likewise if [ia] is false, [ib] must be false too. The differences have to do 
not with the information presented but how it is organised and presented: the two 
clauses in each pair PACKAGE THE INFORMATION DIFFERENTLY. We refer collectively 
to the passive, extraposition and existential constructions - and others to be intro­
duced below - as information-packaging constructions: they depart from the 
most elementary syntactic structure in order to package the information in special 
ways. Our major concern in this chapter will therefore be to describe the syntactic 
differences between these constructions and their basic counterparts and to investi­
gate the factors which favour or disfavour the use of one of these constructions 
rather than the more basic counterpart. 
Exceptional cases where the core meanings are different 
We have said that clauses belonging to one of the information-packaging construc­
tions GENERALLY have the same core meaning as their basic counterpart: the qual­
ification is needed because there are special factors that can cause a difference in the 
core meanings. Consider the following existential/non-existential pair: 

240 
Chapter 15 Information packaging in the clause 
[4] 
EXISTENTIAL 
NON-EXISTENTIAL 
a. There weren 't many members present. 
b. Many members weren 't present. 
Suppose we are talking about the annual general meeting of a large organisation. It's 
perfectly possible for [b] to be true while [a] is false: thousands of members were 
not present, so [b] is true, yet thousands of others were present, making [a] false. 
These sentences are not saying the same thing in different ways: they're saying dif­
ferent things. 
The reason has to do with the fact that the clauses contain a quantifier (many) and a 
negative word (weren 't). The negative comes first in [a] but the quantifier is first in [b]. 
The relative order affects the scope of the negative, as explained in Ch. 8, §5. This isn't 
a fact about existential clauses: any clause in which a negative word precedes a quanti­
fier tends to be interpreted with the negative including the quantifier in its scope. 
Setting aside the special factor of scope, corresponding existential and non-exis­
tential clauses do have the same truth conditions, as illustrated in [3i]. And that is 
also true for the other constructions considered. In the remainder of this chapter we 
will set aside such special factors as scope. 
2 
Passive clauses 
The first information-packaging construction we consider is the passive 
clause. Passive clauses contrast with active clauses in a system called voice, so we 
consider that first. 
2. 1 
The system of voice 
A system of voice is one where the terms differ as to how the SYNTACTIC 
FUNCTIONS are aligned with SEMANTIC ROLES. Usually there are also formal 
differences either associated with the verb (e.g. special inflection or auxiliaries) or 
associated with the NPs (e.g. special case marking or prepositions). 
The general terms active and passive are based on the semantic role of the sub­
ject in clauses expressing actions: 
[5] 
In clauses describing some deliberate action, the subject is normally aligned 
with the active participant (the actor) in the active voice, but with the passive 
participant (the patient) in the passive voice. 
In [ l ib], for example, the police refers to the actor and is subject; her son refers 
to the patient, yet is subject in [ l ia]. 
There are also differences associated with the verb and one of the NPs: [ lia] con­
tains the passive auxiliary verb be, and the second NP is complement of the 
preposition by. 
Many clauses, of course, do not describe actions, but they can be assigned to the 
active and passive categories on the basis of their syntactic likeness to clauses like 
those in [li]: 

§2.2 Differences between active and passive clauses 
24 1 
[6] 
ACTIVE VOICE 
a. Everyone saw the accident. 
11 a. His colleagues dislike him. 
PASSIVE VOICE 
b. The accident was seen by everyone. 
b. He is disliked by his colleagues. 
Seeing and disliking aren't actions, but the syntactic relation between the members 
of these pairs is the same as that between [ 1  ib] and [lia], so they can be classified as 
active and passive pairs. 
2.2 
Differences between active and passive clauses 
Examples like [lia], and the [b] examples in [6], illustrate the most 
straightforward kind of passive clause. We'll look first at how they differ from their 
active counterparts, and then extend the account to cover other passive constructions. 
Structural diagrams for the examples in [6i] are shown in [7]. The syntactic 
differences are summarised in [8]: 
[7] 
a. 
Clause 
 
Subject: 
Predicate: 
NP 
VP 
D
prediect: 
V 
NP 
I

 
everyone 
saw 
the accident 
b. 
Clause 
 
Subject: 
Predicate: 
NP 
VP 
 
Predicator: 
Comp: 
V 
Clause 
I 
Predicate: 
VP 
 
Predicator: Internalised Comp: 
PP 
 
Head: 
Comp: 
Prep 
NP 
I 
 
seen 
by 
everyone 
[8] 
The subject of the active (everyone) appears in the passive as complement of 
the preposition by in a pp functioning as complement. 
ii The direct object of the active appears as subject of the passive. 
iii The passive has auxiliary be carrying the tense inflection and taking as 
complement a subjectJess non-finite clause with a head (seen) in past 
participle form. 
We use the term internalised complement to label the function of by everyone, I 
because when we replace an active clause by its corresponding passive, the active 
I It is more usually referred to as the agent, but we're avoiding that term because it is also in widespread 
use as the name of a semantic role, equivalent to 'actor' . As we just argued in discussing [6], the com­
plement of by very often does not have that semantic role. 

242 
Chapter 15 Infonnation packaging in the clause 
clause subject appears internal to the passive VP, like internal complements (see 
Ch. 4, § l ). 
The auxiliary be of passive clauses takes on the inflectional properties of the verb 
of the corresponding active, except that any person and number features are deter­
mined by AGREEMENT WITH THE PASSIVE SUBJECT (compare was above with were in 
The accidents were seen by everyone). 
Voice and information packaging 
The voice system provides different ways of aligning the two major NPs in a clause 
with the syntactic functions and hence of selecting their order of appearance. 
Generally the subject comes first in the clause and the object or internalised com­
plement later. A major factor influencing the choice between these orders of pres­
entation has to do with the familiarity status of the NPs. This involves the contrast 
between old (familiar) and new (unfamiliar) infonnation. 
To illustrate the contrast between old and new, suppose a conversation began with 
one of the following sentences: 
[9] 
The plumber says the dishwasher can 't be repaired, but I don 't think that's true. 
11 Mv neighbour came over this morning; she asked me if I'd seen her cat. 
In [i] the first underlined sequence represents new infonnation: I'm telling you 
this, not treating it as something you are already familiar with. The word that is 
interpreted as "the dishwasher can't be repaired", which is old - it's part of the 
information that has already been introduced. 
But infonnation is to be understood in a broad sense that covers entities as well 
as facts or propositions. My neighbour and her cat in [ii] refer to entities that 
haven't been mentioned previously, so they represent new information. She is old 
information, since it makes a second reference to my neighbour. Me and I count 
as old because the deictic 1st and 2nd person pronouns refer to participants in the 
discourse who can always be regarded as familiar (if I'm telling you something, 
then there are at least two people in the world that we can both agree that we 
already know about: me and you). 
In English there is a broad preference for packaging infonnation so that SUBJECTS 
REPRESENT OLD INFORMATION. It's only a preference, of course: there's no question 
of a ban on subjects being new (that's obvious from [9], where both the plumber and 
my neighbour are new). But the preference is strong enough to be a clear influence on 
the choice between equivalent active and passive clauses. Compare these: 
[10] 
a. A dog attacked me in the park. 
ii a. I bought a tie. 
b. I was attacked by a dog in the park. 
b. 'A tie was bought by me. 
In [i], the active example [a] has a new-infonnation subject, and [b], the passive, 
has an old-infonnation subject. The passive version will often be preferred in 
such pairs (though [ia] is nonetheless perfectly grammatical and acceptable). 

§2,4 Lexical restrictions 
243 
Things are different in [ii], however. Suppose the context is one where I've just 
said that I've been shopping: a tie is new, while I (or me) is old information. Here 
only the active version will normally be acceptable. 
Active is the default in the voice system. The use of actives is not restricted by 
actual constraints relating to the combination of old and new information, but the 
passive is. This is the generalisation that holds: 
[ 1 1 ]  
In a passive clause it is not normally possible for the subject to be new when 
the internalised complement is old. 
There is far more to the choice between active and passive clauses than there is 
space to discuss here. But all we want to point out is that while they normally have 
the same core meaning, they are NOT FREELY INTERCHANGEABLE. They differ in 
how the information is presented, and one important factor in the choice between 
them concerns the status of the two major NPs as representing old or new 
information. 
2.3 
Short passives 
In almost all cases the internalised complement is OPTIONAL. The 
passive clauses with no internalised complement are called short passives; the ones 
discussed so far are called long passives. Short passives are actually much more fre­
quent than long passives. They have an important function: they enable us to LEAVE 
OUT something that would be obligatory in the active, namely a main clause subject. 
In [12] the active versions are not grammatical, but the passive ones are fine: 
[ 1 2] 
ACTIVE VOICE 
a. *Built the house in 1960. 
ii a. *Damaged your car. 
III 
a. * Know little about the cause of ALS. 
iv a. *Made mistakes. 
PASSIVE VOICE 
b. The house was built in 1960. 
b. Your car was damaged. 
b. Little is known about the cause of ALS. 
b. Mistakes were made. 
The passive versions enable us to avoid saying anything about 
who built the house (we may have no idea who it was, or it may not be relevant); 
which employee of ours accidentally damaged your car (there are liability 
issues !); 
who exactly is ignorant (nobody knows the cause of amyotrophic lateral sclero­
sis); or 
who blundered (people don't always want to directly admit error). 
2.4 
Lexical restrictions 
Most transitive active clauses have passive counterparts, but not all. Some 
exceptional verbs are (either generally or in certain uses) inadmissible in passives: 

244 
Chapter 15 Infonnation packaging in the clause 
[ 13] 
a. The town boasts a great beach. 
b. *A great beach is boasted by the town. 
11 a. Max lacks tact. 
b. *Tact is lacked by Max. 
III a. Jill has three wondeiful kids. 
b. *Three wondeiful kids are had by Jilt. 
IV a. The jug holds three litres. 
b. *Three litres are held by the jug. 
Boast and lack occur only in active clauses. Have occurs in passive constructions, 
in its dynamic sense, as in She was happy to find there was both water and gas to be 
had. Hold occurs in passives like It was held in place by duct tape, but not where it 
means "contain". 
2.5 
Passives of ditransitive actives 
Ditransitive clauses have two objects. Usually the passive of a ditransi­
tive has a subject corresponding to the first one, the indirect object. However, some 
speakers (BrE rather than AmE) have an alternative passive construction, illustrated 
by [14iib], in which the subject corresponds to the direct object of the active ditran­
sitive, but the passive of the construction with one object and a pp complement, as 
in [14iiib], is widely preferred over it: 
[ 14] 
a. The boss gave me the key. 
ii 
a. The boss gave me the key. 
III a. The boss gave the key to me. 
2.6 
Prepositional passives 
b. I was given the key by the boss. 
b. %The key was given me by the boss. 
b. The key was given to me by the boss. 
The subject of a passive may correspond to an object of a preposition 
rather than of the verb (we cite short passives in [15] for greater naturalness; the [b] 
examples are not exactly equivalent to the actives shown in [a]): 
[ 1 5] 
a. People are looking into the matter. 
ii a. They took advantage gf us. 
iii a. Someone has slept in this bed. 
b. The matter is being looked into. 
b. We were taken advantage qJ. 
b. This bed has been slept in. 
In the [b] examples the doubly underlined preposition is stranded: no actual com­
plement follows it, but an understood complement is retrievable from the subject. 
Clauses of this kind are called prepositional passives. Two sUbtypes can be distin­
guished. 
(a) Specified preposition 
In [ 15i-ii] the preposition is specified by the preceding verb or verbal idiom. Look 
is a prepositional verb (see Ch. 7, §7.2) specifying into as preposition for the mean­
ing "investigate", and the idiom take advantage specifies of This type of passive 
has lexical restrictions on its availability: some verbs or verbal idioms pennit the 

§2.8 Bare passives 
245 
prepositional passive and some don't. Come across (meaning "encounter") and lose 
patience with don't permit it: 
[ 1 6] 
a. We came across some old letters. 
II a. He lost patience with the children. 
(b) Unspecified preposition 
b. * Some old letters were come across. 
b. *The children were lost patience with. 
In [ 15iii] the preposition is not specified; it has its ordinary meaning and in the 
active can be replaced by other prepositions: Someone has slept under / on / near 
this bed. Passives of this type are admissible only if the clause describes some sig­
nificant EFFECT on the subject referent or some significant PROPERTY of it. Example 
[15iiib] is acceptable because sleeping in a bed affects it (that's why we change 
the sheets). And Nauru can be driven around in about half an hour is accept­
able because if you can drive around a country in two hours, it is very small, and 
that's a significant property. On the other hand, * The bed was sat near is not accept­
able: sitting near the bed wouldn't affect it, and doesn't suggest any significant 
property of it. 
2.7 
Get-passives 
The passive clauses considered so far have the auxiliary be; we can call 
them be-passives. There is also a passive with get instead of be: 
[17] 
BE-PASSIVE 
GET-PASSIVE 
a. Pat was bitten by a snake. 
b. Pat gQ1 bitten by a snake. 
II a. They weren 't charged until later. 
b. They didn 't gg1 charged until later. 
III a. She was elected mayor in 1990. 
b. She gQ1 elected mayor in 1990. 
IV a. Several shots were heard. 
b. * Several shots gQ1 heard. 
Be is an auxiliary verb, but get isn't. In the negative and interrogative, therefore, get­
passives require the dummy auxiliary do, as seen in [iib]. 
The be-passive is stylistically neutral, but get-passives are a mark of informal 
style. They are used for describing situations where the subject-referent is involved 
in bringing the situation about, or where there is an adverse or beneficial effect on the 
subject-referent, as in [i-iii]. If no such factor is present, as with the inanimate sub­
ject in [iv], only the be-passive is acceptable. 
2.8 
Bare passives 
Be-passives and get-passives have be and get as catenative verbs with 
past-participial complements. Past-participial clauses also occur elsewhere with 
passive interpretation, and we call these bare passives because they lack the be and 
get markers. They can be either complements or modifiers. 

246 
Chapter 15 Information packaging in the clause 
(a) Bare passives as complement in complex catenatives 
A few verbs that occur in the complex catenative construction - the one with an 
'intervening NP' (Ch. 1 3, §4.3) - license bare passives as complement. They 
include have, get (in a different use from that of get-passives), order, and certain 
sense verbs, such as see: 
[ 1 8] 
We had the documents checked by a lawyer. 
ii You should Ul yourselfvaccinated a¦ainst measles. 
iii She ordered the records destroyed. 
iv He saw his son knocked down by a bus. 
(b) Bare passives as modifier 
As modifiers, bare passives function in the structure of NPs: 
[ 19] 
We want [a house built after 1990]. 
ii [The complaint made by her lawyer] is being investigated. 
These are comparable to relative clauses in be-passive form: a house which was 
built after 1990; the complaint that was made by her lawyer. 
2.9 
Adjectival passives 
Be can be followed by an adjective, and sometimes an adjective is 
formed from the past participle of a verb. This case must be distinguished from the 
be-passive. We can see this from the ambiguity of examples like [20], which can be 
either: 
[20] 
a. Her leg was broken. 
b. They were married. 
As a passive clause, [a] describes an event, as in Her leg was broken in a hockey 
accident. But it can also be a complex-intransitive clause - an intransitive 
clause containing a predicative complement, as in Her leg was sore. In this inter­
pretation, [a] describes a state resulting from an earlier event: She was using 
crutches because her leg was broken. Here we say that broken (not the whole 
clause) is an adjectival passive. 
The be-passive reading of [b] also involves an event, as in They were married in 
the College Chapel, but the complex-intransitive interpretation describes a state 
resulting from a prior event, as in They were still happily married. 
The key syntactic difference between the constructions is that THE ADJECTIVAL 
PASSIVE CAN OCCUR WITH COMPLEX-INTRANSITIVE VERBS OTHER THAN BE: 
[2 1 ]  
a .  Her leg felt broken. 
b. They stayed married. 
Here broken and married have only their adjectival, state interpretation. 

Prescri ptive grammar note 
§3. 1 Subject extraposition 
247 
Some writers on scientific topics appear to think that passives are required for objectivity 
(The mice were anaesthetised rather than We anaesthetised the mice). At the other 
extreme, some usage books and style guides insist that the passive is better avoided alto­
gether. Both policies are excessive: passives are fully grammatical and acceptable, and a 
passive is often the right stylistic choice. 
Short passives are sometimes criticised for a lack of frankness: they conceal the iden­
tity of the agent. In Mistakes were made we are not told who made the mistakes. But that 
is not an objection to passive clauses; there are many ways of avoiding identifying the 
responsible agent. For example, Mistakes occurred does not specify who made the mis­
takes either, but that is not a passive clause. 
3 
Extraposition 
There are actually two extraposition constructions: subject extraposition 
and internal complement extraposition. Subject extraposition (the one illustrated in 
our original example [ liia]) is more commonly encountered, so we'll deal with it first. 
3. 1 
Subject extraposition 
Clauses with a subordinate clause subject generally have variants with 
the subordinate clause at the end and dummy it as subject: 
[22] 
BASIC VERSION 
a. That he was acguitted disturbs her. 
11 a. How she escaped remains a mystery. 
III a. To give up now would be a mistake. 
VERSION WITH EXTRA POSITION 
b. /1 disturbs her that he was acguitted. 
b. /1 remains a mystery how she escaped. 
b. /1 would be a mistake to give up now. 
At least two distinctive properties of the subject outlined in Ch. 4, §2. l show that the 
dummy it must be the subject: it occurs before the VP, in the basic subject position, and 
it occurs after the auxiliary when there is subject-auxiliary inversion (the closed inter­
rogative counterpart of [ib], for example, is Does i1 disturb her that he was acquitted?). 
We call the subordinate clause in the [b] version an extraposed subject, but that 
doesn't mean it's a kind of subject; it's an element in extraposed position, outside 
the VP, that CORRESPONDS to the subject of the basic version. 
With minor exceptions, extraposition is admissible only with subordinate 
clauses. Note, for example, the contrast between [22i] and [23]: 
[23] 
a. His letters disturb her. 
b. */1 disturbs her his letters. 
The subject in [a] is an NP and cannot be extraposed. The subordinate clauses con­
cerned are predominantly declarative and interrogative content clauses and infiniti­
vals, as in [22i-iii] respectively. (Gerund-participials are also found extraposed under 
sharply limited conditions; l1's been a pleasure talking to you is an example.) 

248 
Chapter 15 Infonnation packaging in the clause 
Extraposition: more frequent and less constrained than the alternative 
In [22] we have labelled the version on the left as the syntactically basic one: the one 
on the right has the extra pronoun it, and has a structure not found in any canonical 
clause. However, in pairs like these there are good reasons for regarding the version 
with extraposition as the default, as far as infonnation packaging is concerned. 
In the first place, it is much more common. This is because subordinate clauses 
tend to be heavier (longer and structurally more complex) than NPs, and there is in 
general a preference for placing heavy material at the end of the matrix clause, 
where it's easier to process. 
Secondly, there are infonnational constraints applying to the version without 
extraposition but not to the one with extraposition, so extraposition is acceptable in 
a wider range of contexts. The context for a non-extraposed subject must pennit its 
content to be taken as old infonnation - familiar to the addressee, either through 
previous mention or the addressee's current knowledge. Take the following two pas­
sages, from a science article on human skin: 
[24] 
It is not easy to see, however, what positive advantages may have been 
responsible for human evolution toward nakedness, as compared with other 
primates. [It has been suggested that lack ora heavy fur may have had some 
adaptive value for runnin¦ and huntin¦ in the open savannas], but this is 
conjectural. 
ii In the effort to enhance its attractiveness, men and women submit their skin 
to systematic stretching, scraping, gouging, soaking and burning . . .  To give 
it a 'healthy ' tan, the skin is ritualistically exposed to excessive and injurious 
doses of sunlight and wind. 
[That the skin survives these daily torments is a remarkable tribute to its 
toughness. ] 
The non-extraposed version of the bracketed clause in [i] would be completely 
unacceptable in that context. The content of the underlined clause can't be con­
strued as old. The writer is introducing a new idea that might represent a positive 
advantage of nakedness: the content clause expresses the main infonnational 
content of the bracketed clause, and has to be extraposed. 
In [ii] the first paragraph lists a number of 'tonnents' inflicted on the skin, and 
then we get a non-extraposed subject clause (underlined) that does represent old 
information: the reader of course knows already that our skin survives. What is 
new in this sentence is that our skin's durability indicates how tough it is. That 
means the constraint on using the non-extraposed version is satisfied. It doesn't 
mean, though, that we MUST use the extraposed version. It would also be accept­
able to use the default version, with extraposition: It is a remarkable tribute to its 
toughness that the skin survives these daily torments. 
3.2 
Internal complement extraposition 
Extraposition of an internal complement is found predominantly in 
complex-transitive constructions, where it is just about obligatory: 

§4 Existential clauses 
249 
[25] 
a. *lfind that he uave up disappointing. 
b. I find i1. disappointing that he uave up. 
11 
a. * She considers that I didn 't consult 
her quite outrageous. 
b. She considers i1. quite outrageous 
that I didn 't consult her. 
In [b] dummy it appears as object and the subordinate clause as extraposed 
object. 
The [a] versions are inadmissible by virtue of having the subordinate clause 
located between the verb and another complement. 
4 
Existential clauses 
The pronoun it is not the only pronoun used as a dummy in English. The 
spelling there is today used for two different words, one a locative rhyming with 
dare and meaning "in or at that place" (as in Put it there), and the other a dummy 
pronoun pronounced unstressed with a reduced vowel. The primary role of the 
dummy there is to fill the syntactic subject position in clauses like the [b] examples 
in [26], which are called existential clauses: 
[26] 
BASIC VERSION 
a. Some keys were near the safe. 
ii a. A nurse was present. 
EXISTENTIAL CLAUSE 
b. There were some keys near the safe. 
b. There was a nurse present. 
There is the subject of the existential clauses in [26], just as it is subject in the extra­
posed subject construction, and similar arguments support this conclusion: 
there occupies the basic subject position before the VP; 
in subject-auxiliary inversion constructions it occurs after the auxiliary, as in 
Was there a nurse present? 
It is significant that there also occurs as subject in interrogative tags, as in: 
[27] 
There was a nurse present, wasn 't there ? 
Only pronouns are admissible in a tag like the one here, as we noted in Ch. 9, §2.3. 
That means we not only know dummy there is a subject, we know it is a pronoun. 
We will refer to some keys and a nurse in [26ib] and [26iib] as displaced subjects. 
A displaced subject (like an extraposed subject) is not a kind of subject; it's the 
phrase that corresponds to the subject of the syntactically more basic construction.2 
Bare existentials 
One common kind of existential clause contains just dummy there, the verb be, and 
a displaced subject (possibly with optional adjuncts that have no bearing on the 
2 There is an unusual kind of subject: it has no inherent number but takes on the number of the dis­
placed subject - plural in [26ibl, with were as the verb, and singular in [iibl, with was. It's compara­
ble to the relative pronouns which and who, which take on the number of their antecedent (the  
who were talking vs the W who ĺ talking). Note, however, that in informal style, especially in 
present tense dec1aratives with reduced is, many speakers treat there as always singular: they say 
%There 's a few problems instead of There are a few problems. Prescriptivists disapprove, but the 
usage is too well established to be treated as an occasional slip. 

250 
Chapter 15 Information packaging in the clause 
structure or acceptability). We call these bare existentials. They have NO CORRE­
SPONDING BASIC VERSION. The verb be normally requires an internal complement, 
so the basic versions that would have corresponded to bare existentials are all 
ungrammatical: 
[28] 
BARE EXISTENTIAL CLAUSE 
a. There is a god. 
UNGRAMMATICAL BASIC VERSION 
b. *A god is. 
11 a. There are many species of spiders. 
III a. There has been no news of them. 
IV a. There was a serious accident. 
b. *Many species of spiders are. 
b. *No news of them has been. 
b. *A serious accident was. 
The general term 'existential' is based on examples like [ia] and [iia] in [28], which 
are used to assert the existence of various things. But the existential construction 
described in this section covers other uses than merely talking about existence. 
Extended existentials 
There are also extended existentials, which contain an additional element, the exten­
sion, within the VP. Some examples are given in [29], with the extension underlined. 
[29] 
LOCATIVE 
11 TEMPORAL 
iii PREDICATIVE ADJECTIVE 
iv HOLLOW INFINITIVAL 
There 's a snake in the grass. 
There 's another meeting this afternoon. 
There are still some seats available. 
There is poor old Albert to consider. 
Locative complements as in [i] are particularly common extensions. 
Temporal extensions occur with displaced subjects that denote events, e.g. 
another meeting in [ii]. 
. Predicative complement extensions are restricted to a range of adjectives denot­
ing temporary states as in [iii], e.g. absent, available, missing, present, vacant, 
and wrong (as in There 's something wrong). Most adjectives don't occur as 
extensions like this: a sentence like Some politicians are honest doesn't have a 
corresponding bare existential * There are some politicians honest. 
Infinitival extensions are hollow clauses in the sense of Ch. 13, §2.4: they have a gap 
in internal complement function, usually object, as in [iv], where there is a missing 
object for consider: we interpret [iv] as being about consideration for poor old Albert. 
Constraints on the use of basic and existential constructions 
We showed in [28] that bare existential clauses don't have non-existential counter­
parts. The same is true of existentials extended by a hollow infinitival: [29iv] cannot 
be reformulated as *Poor old Albert is to consider. With other kinds of extended 
existential we cannot make a general statement about either the existential or the 
non-existential version being the default: there are constraints applying to both ver­
sions. We'll briefly mention two that apply to both bare and extended existentials. 
(a) Indefinite NPs 
With indefinite NPs there is a PREFERENCE FOR THE EXISTENTIAL CONSTRUCTION. 
In fact sometimes only the existential is acceptable: 

§5 The it-cleft construction 
25 1 
[30] 
i a. A policeman is here. 
b. There 's a policeman here. 
ii a. *Two holes were in my sock. 
b. There were two holes in my sock. 
In [i] both versions are possible, but the second is considerably more likely. 
In [ii] the basic version is unacceptable (this is generally the case with NPs 
denoting abstract entities). 
(b) 
Definite NPs 
With definite NPs the preference is reversed, with the NON-EXISTENTIAL MORE 
LIKELY: 
[3 1 ] 
a. Your mother is here. 
b. ·'There 's your mother here. 
Displaced subjects are presented as information that is new to the addressee. 
Definite NPs tend to be associated with old information, but they don't have to be. 
Consider this example: 
[32] 
A: 
B: 
Who could we get to give a lecture on intonation ? 
Well, [there 's Sue lones,] I suppose. 
The underlined definite NP represents new information - the name is offered as a 
suggestion. 
Presentationals 
A construction similar to the existential, known as the presentational clause, has 
dummy there as subject not of be but of an intransitive verb such as appear, emerge, 
follow, or remain : 
[33] 
a. Many problems remain. 
b. There remain many problems. 
5 
The it-cleft construction 
We turn now to a number of information-packaging constructions not 
illustrated in the introduction to the chapter, beginning with the it-cleft construc­
tion. This generally provides more than one variant of the corresponding non-cleft 
clause - at least one for each NP, in fact: 
[34] 
NON-CLEFT 
TT-CLEFT 
{b. It was Sue who introduced lim to Pat. 
a. Sue introduced lim to Pat. 
c. It was lim who Sue introduced to Pat. 
d. It was Pat who Sue introduced lim to. 
To form an it-cleft clause from a syntactically more basic non-cleft we divide it into 
two parts - hence the 'cleft' component of the name. One part (marked here by dou­
ble underlining) is foregrounded, while the other (single underlining) is 
backgrounded. A considerable range of elements can be selected as the fore­
grounded element: for example, in [b] it is the subject, in [c] the object, in [d] the 
complement of the preposition to. 

252 
Chapter 15 Information packaging in the clause 
Syntactic structure of the it-cleft 
The foregrounded element functions as complement to be. The subject is invariably 
it, a meaningless dummy pronoun. The backgrounded part is expressed as a relative 
clause, with the foregrounded element as antecedent for the relativised element, 
here who (see Ch. 1 1 , § 1). So the structure of [b] is as follows: 
[35] 
Clause 
Head: 
Dependent: 
Clause 
Clauserel 
 
 
Subject: 
Predicate: 
Subject: 
Predicate: 
NP 
VP 
NP 
VP 
< 
= 
Predicator: 
PredComp: 
Predicator: Object: 
Comp: 
V 
NP 
V 
NP 
PP 
I 
I 
I 
I 
6 
it 
was 
Sue 
who 
introduced 
Jim 
to Pat 
The relative clause is of the integrated type (cf. Ch. 1 1 , §2), but it's not a depend­
ent of Sue: the words Sue who introduced Jim to Pat do not form a syntactic con­
stituent. In an ordinary integrated relative like They were [people who needed 
help], the bracketed sequence people who needed help IS a constituent, an NP. 
This means there may be ambiguity between it-clefts and ordinary integrated 
relatives: 
[36] 
It was the song that impressed them. 
As an it-cleft, this means The song impressed them, and the it is a dummy. It 
might be used to answer the question What impressed the record company? 
As a non-cleft, you can imagine [36] as an answer to Why did they choose that 
song to release as a single? Here it is an ordinary pronoun referring to the song, 
and the song that impressed them does form a constituent. 
The foregrounded element 
In our initial example, [34b-d], the foregrounded element was an NP whose func­
tion in the corresponding non-cleft clause was subject, object, and complement of a 
preposition. There are many other possibilities, a few of which are illustrated in [37] 
(where the relative clauses are of the non-wh type): 

[37] 
NON-CLEFT 
a. They think YQM. should leave. 
ii a. Sue introduced Jim to Pat. 
iii a. He signed the bill with this pen. 
iv a. She doesn 't often miss a class. 
v a. I resigned to avoid beinu fired. 
§5 The it-cleft construction 
253 
IT-CLEFT 
b. It's YQM. they think should leave. 
b. It was to Pat that Sue introduced Jim. 
b. It was with this pen that he signed the bill. 
b. It isn 't often that she misses a class. 
b. It was to avoid beinu fired that I resigned. 
In [ia] you is subject of an embedded content clause (you should leave is com­
plement of think). 
In [iia] to Pat is a pp in complement function; note that [iib] is a variant of [34d], 
more formal in style, avoiding the stranded preposition; see Ch. 7, §5. 
The underlined elements in the other [a] examples - a PP, an adverb, and a non­
finite clause respectively - are all adjuncts of various kinds. 
This wide range of possibilities further distinguishes this type of relative clause 
from the prototypical type that modifies a noun. For example, that he signed the bill 
in [iiib] couldn't occur as modifier to pen: we couldn't say *This is [the pen that he 
signed the bill] (we'd need to include the preposition: This is [the pen that he signed 
the bill with]). 
Backgrounded element as presupposition 
The effect of backgrounding is to present the information in question as a presup­
position - information that is taken for granted, its truth not being at issue. In [37ib] 
I take it for granted that they think someone should leave, and assert that you're the 
one they have in mind. And in [37iib] it is not at issue whether Sue introduced Jim 
to someone: the question is who. 
Presuppositions are normally not affected when we negate the containing 
construction, and this is the source of a sharp difference between clefts and their 
non-cleft counterparts: 
[38] 
a. Sue didn 't introduce Jim to Pat. 
b. It wasn 't to Pat that Sue introduced Jim. 
The non-cleft [a] simply denies that Sue introduced Jim to Pat: it doesn't convey 
that she introduced Jim to someone else. The cleft [b] is different: the presupposi­
tion that Sue introduced Jim to someone stands, and what's denied is that Pat was 
that person. 
In likely uses of all the examples considered so far, the presupposition will be old 
information, introduced into the prior discourse or inferrable from it. The natural 
context for [37iib] and [38b], for example, is one where Sue is introducing Jim 
to someone who has already been mentioned. But this is not a necessary feature of 
it-clefts. The backgrounded material may introduce new information into the 
discourse. This happens in [39]: 
[39] 
The Indians were helpful in many ways. [It was they who taught the settlers 
how to plant and harvest crops successfullY in the New World.] 

254 
Chapter 15 Information packaging in the clause 
6 
Pseudo-clefts 
The pseudo-cleft is quite similar to the it-cleft in some ways: again we 
have a division between foregrounded and backgrounded elements, with the back­
grounded material representing presupposed information. But in the case of pseudo­
cleft, the backgrounded material is placed in a fused relative construction: 
[40] 
NON-CLEFT 
PSEUDO-CLEFT 
a. We need more time. 
b. What we need is more time. 
n a. He claims he was insulted. 
b. What he claims is that he was insulted. 
III a. I'll postpone the meeting. 
b. What I'll do is gostgone the meeting. 
Again we use single underlining for the backgrounded element and double under­
lining for the foregrounded one. The backgrounded material forms a fused rela­
tive construction in the sense explained in Ch. 1 1 , §4 (compare what we need with 
the non-fused relative that which we need). In rib], for example, I take it for 
granted that we need something and assert that that something is more time. As 
before, the presupposition normally survives negation: if I say What we need is 
not more time, it's some fresh ideas, I'm still taking it for granted that we need 
something. 
The foregrounded element 
There is only partial overlap between the elements that can be foregounded in the 
pseudo-cleft and those that can be in the it-cleft. Thus we could have an it-cleft 
instead of [40ib] (It 's more time that we need), but not the others (*It is that he 
was insulted that he claims, *It 's postpone the meeting that I'll do). Pseudo­
clefts accept subordinate clauses as foregrounded element much more readily 
than it-clefts do. 
Who is not normally found in fused relatives in present-day usage, so pseudo-clefts 
don't allow foregrounding of personal NPs: we don't find *Who introduced Jim to 
Pat was Sue. Instead we use an it-cleft or a non-fused relative construction such as 
The one who introduced Jim to Pat was Sue. 
Pseudo-clefts and the specifying be construction 
The pseudo-cleft is really just a particular case of the specifying be construction dis­
cussed in Ch. 4, §4.3. As usual, subject and complement can be reversed, giving 
More time is what we need, and so on. 
Note also that the pseudo-cleft is less systematically related to non-clefts than the 
it-cleft. There are cases of pseudo-clefts with no non-cleft counterparts: 
[41 ] 
PSEUDO-CLEFT 
a. What 1 object to is that he lied. 
ii a. What 1 like about her is that she 
always means what she says. 
NON-CLEFT 
b. *1 object to that he lied. 
b. *1 like about her that she 
always means what she says. 

7 
Dislocation 
§7 Dislocation 
255 
The prototypical dislocation construction has an extra NP located to the 
left or right of the main part of the clause, consisting of subject and predicate, which 
we call the nucleus. The extra NP serves as antecedent for a personal pronoun 
within the nucleus: 
[42] 
NON-DISLOCATED CLAUSE 
a. One of my cousins has triplets. 
11 a. I think the man next door's 
car was stolen. 
III a. Her father can be very judgemental. 
DISLOCATED CLAUSE 
b. One of my cousins, she has triplets. 
b. The man next door, I think his car 
was stolen. 
b. He can be very judgemental, her father. 
Examples [ib/iib] illustrate left dislocation (the NP in question is positioned to the 
left of the clause nucleus), while [iiib] has right dislocation. Both are characteristic 
of relatively informal style, such as conversation, especially oral personal narrative. 
The pronoun may be the subject within the nucleus, as in [ib] and [iiib]. It can 
also be direct or indirect object, complement of a preposition, and so on. In [iib] it 
is subject-determiner within the subject of an embedded clause. 
Dislocated constructions can be easier to understand than their basic counterpart. 
Left dislocation may put a complex NP early in the sentence, replacing it with a 
pronoun in the nucleus, so the nucleus is structurally simpler. (Note that in 
[42iib] the subject-determiner in the dislocated version is simply his, whereas in 
[42iia] it is the more complex genitive the man next door's.) 
Right dislocation often has an NP that clarifies the reference of the pronoun. 
(Imagine that [42iiib] was uttered following Tom didn 't dare tell her father: the 
NP her father would make clear that he means her father, not Tom.) 
Extraposition is not right dislocation 
The extraposition construction discussed in §3 above looks superficially like a 
special case of right dislocation, but in fact it isn't. The differences are as 
follows: 
In dislocation the NP placed to the left or right of the nucleus is set apart prosod­
ically from the rest of the clause, but extraposition clauses usually have unbroken 
intonation. 
The it of extraposition is a dummy, not a referential pronoun like the he of 
[42iiib]. Thus the extraposed clause doesn't 'clarify the reference' of it: the it has 
no reference. If the extraposed clause were omitted, the speaker's intended mean­
ing would normally be lost. The right dislocation [42iiib], by contrast, would 
make sense even without the final NP. 
Extraposition is stylistically quite neutral, whereas right dislocation, as noted 
above, belongs mainly to informal style. 

256 
Chapter 15 Information packaging in the clause 
8 
Preposing and postposing 
All the information-packaging constructions considered so far in this 
chapter differ structurally from their syntactically more elementary counterpart in a 
way which involves one or more functions: 
Ð a passive clause has a different subject from the corresponding active; 
s a cleft clause has as complement of be a foregrounded element that can have a 
range of functions within the non-cleft counterpart; 
f> extraposition and existentials have dummy subjects; 
4l dislocation involves pronouns substituting for dislocated NPs. 
In this section we review some constructions where there are no such changes to the 
syntactic functions in the clause; rather, constituents with given functions appear in 
an unexpected position in the sentence. We look in turn at preposing, postposing 
and two kinds of inversion. 
[43] 
PREPOSING 
ii POSTPOSING 
iii INVERSION 
Some ofthem he hadn 'f even read. 
I understood eventually the reason for their antagonism. 
{ a. Never had lfelt so alone. 
[subject-auxiliary inversion] 
b. In the drawer was a gun. 
[subject-dependent inversion] 
;l Preposing involves putting an element before the subject of a clause when its 
basic position would be after the verb. 
11< Postposing involves putting an element at or near the end of the clause rather 
than in the earlier position that would be its default place. 
• In [iiia] there is inversion of subject and auxiliary verb following preposed 
never. 
,. The inversion in [iiib] combines preposing (of a PP) and postposing (of the 
subject NP). 
(a) Preposing 
The contrast between basic order and preposing is seen in such pairs as the following: 
[44] 
BASIC ORDER 
a. I wasn 't allowed to watch TV when 
I was at school. 
ii a. I said he could have the others. 
iii a. They made costume jewellery. 
iv a. Mr Brown is not humble. 
v a. I said I'd pay for it, [and I will 
Day for itl. 
PREPOSING 
b. When I was at school I wasn 'f 
allowed to watch Tv. 
b. The others I said he could have. 
b. Costume jewellery, they made. 
b. Humble, Mr Brown is not. 
b. I said I'd pay for it, [and 
pay for it I will]. 
The preposed element in [ib] is an adjunct. Preposing of adjuncts occurs relatively 
freely. In the other examples it is a complement that is preposed. This is more con­
strained; a preposed complement serves as a link to the preceding discourse, and 
must be closely related to information previously introduced into the discourse: 

§8 Preposing and postposing 
257 
In [iib], the others refers to a subset of some set of things already mentioned. 
The original preceding context for [iiib] was this: So when I left school I took 
some of those things to show to a jewellery manufacturer and asked for a job. 
There is previous mention of jewellery, and the preposed element denotes a kind 
of jewellery. 
The original full version of [ivb] was this: His humility must have been invented 
by the adman, for humble, Mr Brown is not. So humble relates to the earlier men­
tion of humility. 
In [vb] we see a special case of complement preposing that occurs with comple­
ments of auxiliary verbs and typically serves to emphasise the truth of what is 
being asserted. 
(b) Postposing 
Further examples of postposing are given in [45], along with their default order 
counterparts: 
[45] 
BASIC ORDER 
a. They brought an extraordinarily 
lavish lunch with them. 
II a. A man whom I'd never seen before 
came in. 
POSTPOSING 
b. They brought with them an 
extraordinarily lavish lunch. 
b. A man came in whom I'd never 
seen before. 
The postposed element is an object in [ib] (as in [43ii]), and a dependent (modifier) 
within the subject NP in [iib]. 
The major factor leading to the choice of a postposing construction is relative 
weight. Weight of constituents is primarily a matter of length and complexity. In 
[45i] the object NP is quite heavy in comparison with the pp complement with them, 
and for this reason can readily be put at the end of the clause instead of in the default 
object position immediately after the verb. Note two things: 
If the object were simply lunch then the basic order would normally be required. 
If we lengthened it to something like an extraordinarily lavish lunch that their 
daughter had helped them prepare, then postposing would be more or less 
obligatory. 
A postposed element occurs in a position that tends to receive greater phonolog­
ical prominence and where complex material is easier to process. Extraposition is 
syntactically distinct from postposing in that it introduces the dummy pronoun it 
into the structure, but it shares with postposing the effect of positioning heavy mate­
rial (a subordinate clause) at the end of the matrix clause. 
(c) Subject-auxiliary inversion 
[46] 
BASIC ORDER 
a. The pain was so bad that I fainted. 
II a. I realised my mistake only later. 
SUBJECT-AUXILIARY INVERSION 
b. So bad was the pain that I fainted. 
b. Only later did I realise my mistake. 

258 
Chapter 15 Information packaging in the clause 
This type of inversion, as the name implies, requires the presence of an auxiliary 
verb. If there is no auxiliary in the basic order version, then dummy do is inserted, 
as in [iib ] (cf. Ch. 3, §3. 1). 
Subject-auxiliary inversion is found in a considerable range of constructions, 
some of which have nothing to do with information packaging; most obvious 
among the latter is the closed interrogative construction, with inversion distinguish­
ing interrogative Is it ready?, say, from declarative It is ready (Ch. 9, §2. 1). Here, 
though, we're concerned with subject-auxiliary inversion as an accompaniment of 
preposing. In the examples given, subject-auxiliary inversion is triggered by the 
preposing of so bad and only later. The main elements that trigger inversion like this 
include: 
negatives, as in [43iiia]; 
expressions containing so or only, as in [46] - or Sue is going, and so am [. 
similar forms with such: Such a fuss did !l:J&:i make that we abandoned the idea. 
(d) Subject-dependent inversion 
[47] 
BASIC ORDER 
i a. A bowl offruit was on her desk. 
SUBJECT-DEPENDENT INVERSION 
b. On her desk was a bowl of fruit. 
ii a. The view from the top is even better. 
b. Even better is the view from the top. 
This time the elements inverted are the subject and another dependent of the verb. 
The latter is usually a complement - most commonly a locative or an adjectival 
predicative complement, as in [47]. The verb is most often be, but other verbs of rel­
atively little informational content, such as appear, lie, sit, etc., are also found. 
This type of inversion puts the subject in final position, where it typically 
receives greater phonological prominence than in its basic position. It very often 
represents new information, and we will not normally have inversion if the sub­
ject is old and the dependent new. Compare [a] and [b] in [48], where the version 
with old + new is completely natural while the one with new + old is highly 
unnatural: 
[48] 
OLD 
NEW 
a·1 In the drawer I was I Q.gil1·1 
9 
Reduction 
NEW 
OLD 
b· 1 ?In a drawer I was I ¨· I 
In this final section of the chapter we review summarily a number of con­
structions where a constituent representing old information is reduced to a pronoun or 
similar form or else omitted altogether. We use ellipsis for the omission of old infor­
mation and introduce the modem term pro-form in place of 'pronoun or similar form' : 
[49] 
i I'd like to go with you but I can 't _. 
ii My father said he would help you. 
[reduction by ellipsis] 
[reduction by pro-form] 

9. 1 Reduction of NPs 
259 
In [i] the VP can 't is understood as "can't go with you", the missing infinitival 
complement being recoverable from the preceding clause. We can generalise the 
concepts of anaphora and antecedent to cover such cases of ellipsis (cf. Ch. 5, 
§8. 1): the ellipted complement is thus anaphorically related to the antecedent go 
with you in the first clause. 
In the salient interpretation of [ii] it is a matter of my father helping you: the 
pronoun he is anaphoric to the antecedent my father. 
Pro-form VS pronoun 
The reason why we need the term 'pro-form' as well as 'pronoun' can be seen from 
such examples as the following: 
[50] 
PRONOUN? 
PRO-FORM? 
i A: Was she arrested? 
B: I'm afraid so. 
ii It's time to go. 
Who broke the vase ? 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
In [i], so is a pro-form (interpreted anaphorically as "she was arrested"), but it 
isn't a pronoun. It couldn't be: afraid takes a clause as complement (I'm afraid 
she was arrested) but not any kind of NP (*I'm afraid her fate; *I'm afraid it). 
In [ii], it and who are pronouns: they head NPs in subject position and do not 
permit determiners. But they are not pro-forms: they do not represent old infor­
mation retrievable in full from the context. 
9. 1 
Reduction of NPs 
There are three main types of reduction to consider under this heading. 
(a) Personal pronouns 
This is the central case illustrated in [49ii]; it was discussed in Ch. 5, §8. 1 and needs 
no further commentary here. 
(b) The pro-forms one and other 
[5 1 ]  
She left us six pears; this one is riper than the others / the other ones. 
These forms always have a count interpretation, and unlike pronouns they have an 
antecedent that is not a full NP: in this example it is pears, not six pears. Syntacti­
cally they are common nouns, not pronouns. 
They differ from pronouns in that they take determiners, such as this and the 
in [5 1]. 
They are like prototypical common nouns in having an inflectional contrast 
between singular one/other and plural ones/others. 
(c) The fused head construction 
What we have called the simple and implicit partitive uses of the fused head 
construction (Ch. 5, §7. 1) are generally interpreted anaphorically: 

260 
Chapter 15 Information packaging in the clause 
[52] 
i I need some ink, but I can 't find mu:. 
ii I had put some mangoes on the table and as usual Max took the largest. 
The fused determiner-head any is interpreted anaphorically as "any ink" and the 
fused modifier-head largest as "largest of them", i.e., "largest of the mangoes". 
9.2 
Reduction of clauses, VPs and other phrases 
(a) Clause reduction 
[53] 
He says fill informed the press, but that can 't be true. 
ii She may change her mind, but I doubt ft. 
III I'm not sure I'll finish today, but I hope so. 
IV She 's coming round to see us, but she didn 't say when _ . 
. Ï NPs such as that, this and it can have clauses rather than NPs as antecedent, as 
in [i-ii]. 
, So can serve as a kind of 'pro-clause', as in [iii] and [50i] above. It functions 
mainly as internal complement to such verbs as believe, think, seem (as in It 
seems so), etc. 
In [iv] we see ellipsis of everything but the initial phrase of an interrogative 
content clause. 
(b) VP reduction 
[54] 
He suggested we put the house on the market, but I don 't want to do that yet. 
11 She drove us to the station, but she did so reluctantly. 
iii Ed isn 't ready, but I am _. 
Come if you can _. 
I saw it and Pat did _ too. 
iv You can come with us if you want to _. 
v I don 't promise to get it finished today, but I'll try _. 
vi They asked me who informed the press, but I don 't know _. 
" The NPs this, that and it can combine with the lexical verb do to form a 'pro-YP' ; 
do that in [i] is interpreted anaphorically as "put the house on the market". 
So combines with do in a similar way: did so in [ii] is understood as "drove us to 
the station". 
The examples in [iii] involve the ellipsis of the complement of an auxiliary verb. 
This is another construction where the dummy auxiliary verb do is used if there 
would not otherwise be an auxiliary verb present, as in the third example ("Pat 
saw it toO").3 
Quite similar is the ellipsis of a YP following the infinitival marker to, as in [iv]. 
A relatively small number of lexical catenative verbs allow ellipsis of their non­
finite complement: try in [v] is understood as "try to get it finished today". 
Similarly, some verbs, such as know in [vi], permit ellipsis of a content clause 
complement: "I don't know who informed the press". 
3 A further construction of this kind is the one where stress is used to emphasise that a clause is posi­
tive, not negative: I HAVE told you. Dummy do is needed if there is no other auxiliary to carry the 
stress: I DID tell you (contrasting with non-emphatic I told you). 

Exercises 
261 
(c) Pro-forms for predicative complements and locative PPs 
[55] 
i She was extremely bright I an excellent manager; or at least she seemed so. 
ii He was born in Boston and lived there all his life. 
" So has other anaphoric uses than those mentioned above; in particular, it can func­
tion as predicative complement, allowing a variety of categories of antecedent, 
such as the AdjP extremely bright or the NP an excellent manager in [i]. 
The preposition there is commonly used anaphorically with a locative expression 
as antecedent, as in [ii]. It can also be used deictically, as in Just put it over there. 
Exercises 
1 .  For each of the main clauses below say 
whether it is canonical or non-canonical. 
If it's non-canonical, say which non­
canonical construction it belongs to. 
It doesn 't matter any more. 
ii That'll be the day. 
iii I'm looking for someone to love. 
iv It's so lucky that you found me. 
v I want money. 
vi Do you love me? 
vii What a time we had. 
viii What's wrong with me? 
ix I feel so bad. 
x This son of thing I have no patience with 
2. Classify the main clauses of the following 
examples with respect to voice, saying 
whether each is active or passive. 
i A bus blew up in Jerusalem today. 
ii Buses often get blown up in Jerusalem. 
iii Someone blew up a bus in Jerusalem. 
iv A bus was blown up in Jerusalem. 
v They blew up a bus in Jerusalem. 
vi Was a bus blown up in Jerusalem today? 
vii The attack was planned by an 
unknown terrorist group. 
viii An unknown terrorist group is 
responsible. 
ix An unknown terrorist group is thought 
to be responsible. 
x An unknown terrorist group is thought by 
intelligence specialists to be responsible. 
3. For each of the following active clauses, if 
it has a passive counterpart, supply it; if 
not, do your best to give a general state-
ment of why this sort of clause doesn't 
have a passive. (For example, if given Jim 
remains chairman you might say that 
chairman is a predicative complement and 
as such could never become the subject of 
a corresponding passive clause, as seen by 
*Chairman is remained by Jim.) 
The weather ruined our holiday. 
ii The secretary gave a copy of the 
repon to all board members. 
iii Both her children have malaria. 
iv One of the guests sat on my glasses. 
v My sister lives just around the 
corner. 
vi Your letter arrived this morning. 
vii Most people believe them to be 
genuine. 
viii Your new proposal looks a real 
improvement on the last one. 
ix The college awarded her a prize. 
x My schoolmates often made fun of me 
because of my accent. 
4. Express each of these examples with all 
clauses entirely in the active voice. 
I'm afraid I was robbed by bandits on 
the way to class and my homework was 
stolen. 
ii It is clear that your goldfish has been 
killed by an evildoer. 
iii 'You should have that looked at by an 
expert,' I was told by all my friends. 
iv On Thursday I was hit by the bad news 
that we were being shut down by the 
police. 

262 
Chapter 15 Infonnation packaging in the clause 
v She went swimming and was attacked 
by a crocodile. 
5. For each of the following, say whether it 
is (a) a passive clause (a be-passive or a 
get-passive); (b) a complex-intransitive 
clause with an adjectival passive as com­
plement; or (c) ambiguous between the 
two. For the ambiguous cases, describe the 
difference in meaning. 
The motion was carried unanimously. 
ii The rod was magnetised. 
iii The farm was surrounded by troops. 
iv One of the letters wasn 't signed. 
v Several people were injured during 
the demonstration. 
vi I got bitten by the neighbours ' dog. 
vii They got reprimanded for it. 
viii They were lost. 
ix They got dressed. 
x One of the letters didn 't get signed. 
6. For each underlined clause, give an extra­
posed counterpart if one is available, or if 
none is available, explain why. 
Why you put up with it is incompre­
hensible. 
11 It isn 't clear to me whether he was 
even listening. 
III The fact that they are married should 
make no diference. 
iv It feels good to be back in my home town. 
v For you to do that would be deeply 
unethical. 
vi I appreciate that you returned it 
sincerely. 
vii That I should have to clean it all up 
seems a bit unfair. 
viii I'm afraid whining about the pain is 
no use. 
ix Why she had to do that will always be 
a mystery. 
x Meeting you and your family has been 
a great pleasure. 
7. Give existential or presentational coun­
terparts of the following clauses if they are 
available. If none is available explain why. 
Carpentry tools are available for your 
use. 
ii A friend of yours is on the phone. 
III His wife was very rich. 
iv Only one doctor was present. 
v Several important points emerged. 
vi A beggar followed her home. 
vii One key was missing. 
viii His father died on the plane. 
ix Something is wrong with the battery. 
x Is your job available? 
8. Give non-existential counterparts of the 
following clauses if one is available, and 
where none is available explain why. 
There 's a serious mistake in your 
argument. 
ii There were two students on the com­
mittee. 
iii There 's nothing to worry about. 
iv There had been a violent demonstra­
tion against the new bill. 
v There's no doubt that he 's the main culprit. 
9. For each of the following, give an it-cleft 
counterpart with the same truth conditions, 
with the underlined constituent as the 
foregrounded element. 
I blame )!QM. 
ii Most of the leaf growth occurs in the 
spring. 
iii They left the campground only 
reluctantly. 
iv George took the Volvo. 
v I liked the other one most. 
10. For each of the following, give a pseudo­
cleft with the same truth conditions, 
with the underlined constituent as the 
foregrounded element. 
The absurd waste ofit all bothers me. 
ii Most of the leafrowth occurs in the 
spring. 
III The backgrounded material gets put in 
the fused relative construction. 
iv George took the Volvo. 
v I liked the music most. 
1 1 . Classify the following examples as (a) left 
dislocation; (b) right dislocation; (c) 
preposing; or (d) postposing. Underline 
the dislocated or reordered constituent. In 
cases of dislocation, also underline the 

personal pronoun in the nucleus that has 
the dislocated phrase as its antecedent. 
To my son Ben [ leave my collection 
of antique chess pieces. 
ii They said he was a professional, the 
guy that stole your stuff. 
iii Richard, who built this wall, he 's my 
brother, and he lives in England. 
iv The garage, [ don 't really use it 
except for storing junk. 
v We explained to the police everything 
they asked us to explain. 
Exercises 
263 
vi People like that you can never really 
trust. 
vii Was she just crazy, that teacher who 
had an affair with that boy? 
viii Surprise everyone you certainly did! 
ix You should get it checked out, 
soon, that rattling sound in the trans­
mission. 
x The Monkey Club is proud to present 
for the first time in Grenville this 
coming Saturday at eight p.m. the 
fabulous Rockmonsters. 

.-: 
Morphology: words and lexemes 
I Inflectional morphology and lexical morphology 
264 
2 Basic concepts in inflectional morphology 
265 
3 Some general spelling rules 
269 
4 Verb inflection 
273 
5 Noun inflection 
277 
6 Grade 
280 
7 Lexical morphology 
28 1 
1 
Inflectional morphology and lexical morphology 
Morphology deals with the composition and internal structure of 
words, and the way that structure determines the word meaning, rather than the way 
they combine to make larger units like phrases and clauses. We divide the topic into 
inflectional and lexical morphology. 
Inflectional morphology deals with the differences between the shapes of the 
inflectional forms of variable lexemes; for example, the formation of the verb-forms 
endangers, endangered and endangering from the lexical base endanger. 
Lexical morphology deals with the formation of lexical bases - with the forma­
tion of endanger, for example, from en· and danger. This includes the formation of 
the lexical bases of invariable lexemes, such as cleverly. This doesn't inflect (there 
are no forms *cleverlier or *cleverliest), but the fact that it is made up out of clever 
and ·Iy is a fact of lexical morphology. 
The motivation for dividing morphology into these two branches can be illus­
trated by means of an example such as the following: 
[ I ]  
LEXEME 
i friend (N): 
ii friendly (Adj): 
friend 
friendly 
INFLECTIONAL FORMS 
friends 
friend's 
friendlier 
friendliest 
friends ' 
Within each of the two rows, the different words are inflectional forms of the same 
lexeme. But row [i] lists forms of a different lexeme from row [ii]. Most ordinary 
dictionaries would have just two entries to cover these words: one for the noun 
friend and one for the adjectivefriendly. 
Inflectional morphology deals with the horizontal relationships in [ 1 ] :  the differ­
ent shapes that share the lexical base of a lexeme. In [i] the shapes are based on 
friend; in [ii] the shapes are based onfriendly. 
264 

§2 Basic concepts in inflectional morphology 
265 
Lexical morphology deals with the vertical dimension in [ I ] :  the structure of, and 
relation between, the different lexical bases. In this example, the noun base friend is 
morphologically simple, while the adjective base friendly is formed from it by the 
addition of ·ly. 
The reason we treat the relation between the formsfriendly,friendlier,friendliest 
differently from that between friendly and friend is that there are rules of syntax 
that determine where the various inflectional forms of a lexeme may or must appear. 
Suppose, for example, that we want to insert the noun lexemefriend in the contexts 
shown in [2i] and the adjective lexemefriendly in those shown in [2ii]: 
[2] 
i a. She 's been a good __ . 
ii a. He 's 
than his brother. 
b. Their 
own car was a vw. 
b. He 's the __ of them all. 
If you want to use friend to fill the gaps in [i], you must use the plain singular form 
friend in [ia], and you must use a genitive form in lib] - either singular (their 
friend's own car) or plural (theirfriends ' own car). And if you want to fill the blanks 
in [ii] withfriendly, you need the comparative formfriendlier in [a] and the superla­
tive form friendliest in [b] - no other choices are allowed. 
These rules apply quite generally: context [ia] requires the plain singular form of 
any noun you might want to substitute for the blank; rib] needs a genitive, [iia] 
needs a comparative, and [iib] needs a superlative. 
But there is no rule of syntax saying that an adjective appearing in [ii] must be 
formed from a noun, in the way that the base friendly is formed from friend. The 
blanks in [iia-b] could just as well be filled by older and oldest, respectively, forms 
whose lexical base is morphologically simple, not formed from anything else. 
Nor is there a rule saying that the lexical base of nouns filling the blanks in [i] 
must be morphologically simple, like friend. We could fill the blank in [ia], for 
example, with teacher (which is derived from the verb teach by adding ·er). It 
doesn't matter how the lexical base of the lexeme is made up internally. All that 
matters is whether you have picked a syntactically admissible inflectional form of 
the lexeme you decide on. 
So, to summarise, inflectional morphology ties in mainly with syntax, while 
lexical morphology is mainly relevant to the content of the dictionary. Inflectional 
forms matter for rules of syntax, whereas lexical morphology relates only to the 
structure of the words in the dictionary and the formation of new words added to it. 
Most of this chapter will concern inflection, in keeping with the focus throughout 
the book. Our main concern is with the syntax of English, not the dictionary -
explaining how sentences are built rather than how lexemes are constructed or 
related to each other. 
2 
Basic concepts in inflectional morphology 
In this section we introduce the basic concepts and terminology needed 
in the description of English inflection. 

266 
Chapter 1 6  Morphology: words and lexemes 
(a) Lexical base 
The lexical base of a lexeme is the starting-point for describing the inflectional 
forms. In English, the lexical base is almost always identical with one of the inflec­
tional forms. For example, the noun lexeme friend has the lexical base friend, and 
the plain (i.e. non-genitive) singular form is identical with the lexical base. Like­
wise, the adjective lexemefriendly has the lexical base friendly, and the plain form 
is identical with this. The other forms - the plural and genitive forms of the noun, 
the comparative and superlative forms of the adjective - consist of the lexical base 
with various suffixes added. 
There are a few exceptional lexemes whose lexical base is not identical with any 
of the inflectional forms. They are lexemes that don't have the full set of inflectional 
forms normally associated with their category. Specifically, there are plural-only 
nouns: examples include auspices, binoculars, clothes, condolences, credentials, 
and scissors. These plurals are formed in the usual way by adding a suffix to the lex­
ical base (auspice, binocular, clothe, etc.), but the lexical base is not normally found 
standing alone as a form of the noun lexeme. 
(b) Morphological operations 
Inflectional forms of a lexeme are formed in various ways, by different operations 
on lexical bases; an example would be the operation of suffixation of 's, i.e., adding 
·s to the end of the base. In English, suffixation is the main operation in the inflec­
tional system, but modification of the base also plays an important role. Examples 
from plural nouns and preterite verbs are shown in [3]: 
[3] 
SUFFIXATION 
11 MODIFICATION 
PLURAL NOUN FORMATION 
dog + ·s = dogs 
goose modified = geese 
PRETERITE VERB FORMATION 
want + ·ed = wanted 
take modified = took 
The two operations may combine: the plural wive·s is formed from wife by suffixa­
tion of ·s and changing the final consonant of the base from f to v. A few other 
(relatively minor) operations will be introduced below. 
(c) Shape sharing 
As we saw in our discussion of verb inflection in Ch. 3, § 1, the various inflectional 
forms of a lexeme are not always overtly distinct: two (or more) of them may share 
the same shape. With want, for example, not only the preterite but also the past par­
ticiple has the shape wanted. The same phenomenon is found with nouns. The plu­
rals of some nouns are identical with the lexical base and hence share the same 
shape as the singular. With bison, for example, the singular and plural forms share 
the same shape, bison; similarly for series, and others listed in §S. l below. 
(d) Alternation 
Very often a given inflectional form is formed in different ways for different subsets 
of lexemes. For example, while many nouns form their written plural by adding the 
suffix 's, there are others that add ·es: compare dog·s and fox·es. This use of the 

§2 Basic concepts in inflectional morphology 
267 
suffixes ·s and ·es for the same purpose in different contexts is called an alternation. 
The two shapes are called aiternants, and the rules of inflectional morphology need 
to specify the conditions under which one alternant or the other is required. 
(e) The priority of speech 
So far in this book we haven't had to talk much about how words or sentences are 
pronounced. We've just shown them in written form. But when we deal with the 
internal structure of words, we have to pay some attention to speech, for at least two 
reasons. 
[4] 
In the first place, there are alternations in speech that don't show up in writing. 
The plural suffixes in cats and dogs, for example, are written the same way but 
they sound different. Try saying this aloud: Let the cats in. The last part sounds 
like sin. Now say: Let the dogs in. The last part sounds like zin. That difference 
is never shown in English spelling. 
Secondly, and more importantly for our purposes, the choice between alternants 
in writing often depends on features of the pronunciation. Consider these two 
plural nouns: 
LEXEME 
stomach 
ii coach 
SINGULAR 
stomach 
coach 
PLURAL 
stomach·s 
coach·es 
The reason why we have the ·s alternant in stomachs but ·es in coaches can't be 
explained by looking at the spelling of the lexical base: both bases end in ch (with 
a before that). Rather, the alternation reflects the fact that in speech the suffix in 
stomachs is simply a consonant sound, whereas in coaches it is made up of a vowel 
sound plus a consonant sound. And in speech the reason we select the vowel-plus­
consonant alternant spelled as ·es has to do with the phonetic properties of the lex­
ical base. This suffix is added to a lexical base that ends in a sibilant, a 'hissing 
sound' like the sounds at the ends of bases like kiss, quiz, bush, rouge, bench, 
judge. 
Despite the frequent relevance of pronunciation, we don't attempt a full descrip­
tion of inflection in spoken English here. There are several reasons for focusing on 
writing in a short introductory book like this. 
One is that writing is much more uniform than speech. There are extensive dif­
ferences in pronunciation between British English and American English, and 
between these and other regional varieties, whereas differences in spelling are 
few in number, small in scale, and easy to describe in full. 
A second reason is that the writing system has the advantage of familiarity. 
Examples in written English can just be shown in their usual written form, 
whereas exhibiting spoken forms would call for a phonetic alphabet. There is an 
International Phonetic Alphabet which would serve this purpose, but although it 
is being used in an increasing number of dictionaries, not everyone knows it, and 
it would take some space to explain. 

268 
Chapter 16 Morphology: words and lexemes 
So what we do here is to continue presenting words and parts of words in ordinary 
spelling, making reference informally to how they're pronounced when we need to 
explain spelling rules. 
(f) Letters and symbols 
In describing spelling alternations we need to distinguish between letters of the 
alphabet and symbols for sounds. These aren't the same. 
In very simple cases like hit, letters and symbols coincide, because each letter 
happens to be a symbol for a single sound. 
In heat there are four letters, though still only three sounds: ea is a composite 
symbol representing a single vowel sound. 
In heath there are two composite symbols: ea again, and th standing for a single 
consonant sound. 
In sheath we have six letters, but again only three sounds: sh, ea and th are com­
posite symbols. 
Vowel and consonant are terms that by themselves apply purely to speech 
sounds. Vowels have unimpeded smooth continuing airflow through the mouth, 
whereas with consonants there is some kind of audible constriction that makes a dif­
ference to the sound. When we talk about vowel symbols and consonant symbols, 
all we'll mean is symbols representing vowel sounds and symbols representing 
consonant sounds. 
We will have no use at all for the traditional classification of letters into five vow­
els (a, e, i, 0, u) and twenty-one consonants (all the rest). Take y, for example: it's a 
consonant symbol in you and yacht; it's a vowel symbol in by and pity; and in boy 
and guy it's neither - it's simply part of a composite symbol. 
(g) Regular and irregular forms 
An inflectional form is regular if it is formed by a general rule and irregular if it is 
formed by a rule applying only to some fixed number of particular lexemes. 
Take the preterite verb-form killed, for example. We say it's a regular form 
because it is formed by adding ·ed to the lexical base, like the preterite of nearly 
all verbs, with only a limited number of special exceptional ones (there are only 
about 200 of them, compared with an essentially unlimited number of regular 
verbs). 
We say that the preterite drank, on the other hand, is irregular: the modification 
of the base vowel here (replacing the vowel heard in ring by the vowel heard in 
gang) is found with only a handful of lexemes including drink, begin, ring, 
swim, etc. 
In a few cases, regular and irregular forms co-exist as variants for the same 
inflectional form. The verb burn, for example, has regular burned and irregular 
burnt as variants of the preterite and past participle forms, and a number of other 
verbs behave similarly (spelled - spelt, dreamed - dreamt, etc.). 

§3. 1 Consonant doubling 
269 
We call an entire lexeme regular only if ALL its inflectional forms are regular: the 
general rules must correctly account for every single one of its forms for it to be a 
regular lexeme. 
For the most part, forms that are regular in speech are regular in writing, and vice 
versa. But there are some exceptions in most people's speech, such as those in [5]: 
[5] 
i says 
ii paid 
3rd sing present tense of say 
preterite / past participle of pay 
SPEECH 
irregular 
regular 
WRITING 
regular 
irregular 
Says is perfectly regular in writing, but for most speakers, it is irregular in speech 
because it has a different vowel from the lexical base (it rhymes with/ez, not/aze). 
Conversely, paid is regular in speech but irregular in writing: the regular form 
would be *payed (compare pray - prayed), but the spelling actually used is differ­
ent from that. 
3 
Some general spelling rules 
In this section we introduce four spelling rules that apply in the forma­
tion of more than one inflectional form. The first three actually apply in lexical as 
well as inflectional morphology. In all of them we need to take account of the pro­
nunciation of bases and suffixes in accordance with the point made above concern­
ing the priority of speech over writing. Keep in mind, though, that relevant features 
of the spelling system were established several centuries ago, and may reflect pro­
nunciations that are no longer current for all or some varieties of English. There are 
two cases of this kind we should mention here: 
The suffix used to form regular preterites and past participles is now pronounced 
with a vowel only after bases ending in a t or d sound, as in waited or landed: else­
where it is pronounced as a consonant, as in scoffed (which rhymes with soft), 
feared (which rhymes with beard), etc. In earlier centuries the ·ed ending was pro­
nounced with a vowel in all cases, and as far as the writing system is concerned it 
still behaves in all cases as if it were a suffix beginning with a vowel sound. 
In some varieties of English, the sound represented by the letter r now occurs 
only before a vowel: it occurs, for example, in ram but not in mar, which is pro­
nounced just like ma. Most varieties of British English are of this kind, whereas 
most American varieties still have this sound both before and after vowels. This 
variation is irrelevant to the writing system, however: bases like mar are treated 
as ending in a consonant sound in all varieties. 
3. 1 
Consonant doubling 
Consonant doubling is illustrated in sets of forms like the ones in [6], 
where stop has one p but stopped has two, and so on: 

270 
Chapter 16 Morphology: words and lexemes 
[6] 
VERB 
ii ADJECTIVE 
iii NOUN 
stop 
fat 
quiz 
stoJlJ2ed 
faller 
quil.l.es 
stoJlJ2ing 
fallest 
stops 
There is a rule that describes where you get this doubling and where you don't. It 
can be stated like this: 
[7] 
The final consonant letter of the base is doubled if all of the following 
conditions are satisfied: 
(a) it occurs before a suffix beginning with a vowel sound; 
(b) the base ends in a single consonant sound represented by a single letter; 
(c) the consonant letter follows a single-letter vowel symbol; 
(d) the base is stressed on the final (or only) syllable. 
(a) Doubling occurs before suffixes beginning with a vowel 
As we noted above, the suffix ·ed is treated as beginning with a vowel whether or not 
it is still pronounced with a vowel in Present-day English (stopped used to be pro­
nounced more like stop Ed, and the spelling rules have largely remained the same 
since then). So in [6i] we get doubling in stopped as well as stopping. But there is 
no doubling in stops, where the suffix consists of a consonant. In plural nouns we 
have doubling in quizzes, where the suffix begins with a vowel, but not in hats, 
where again it consists of a consonant. 
(b) Base ends in single consonant 
There is no doubling in forms like grasping, where the base ends in a sequence of 
two consonants. Nor is there doubling in sawing, boxing and the like. The base saw 
ends in a vowel, not a consonant, while box again ends in a sequence of two conso­
nants (x represents the two sounds that in the word phonetics are represented sepa­
rately by c and s). Note that we do have doubling in marring: as noted in above, mar 
is treated as ending in a consonant even in those varieties where the final 'r' sound 
has been lost. 
(c) Consonant letter follows single-letter vowel symbol 
The consonants doubled in [6] are preceded by the vowel symbols 0, a and i respec­
tively - note that the u in quiz represents a consonant. There is no doubling in fOTITIS 
like beating, roaring, cooler, etc., where the vowel is represented by the complex 
symbols ea, oa, 00. 
(d) Stress on final (or only) syllable 
This condition accounts for the difference in such verbs as prefer and offer: 
[8] 
a. prefer preferred preferring 
b. offer 
offered 
offering 
The base prefer has the stress on the second syllable, so doubling applies, but offer 
has the stress on the first syllable, which prevents doubling. 

§3.3 Final y replacement 
27 1 
The rule does most of the work, but English spelling is always quite difficult and, 
sure enough, there are some exceptions to this last condition. 
Firstly, non-final stress does not prevent doubling of final I in British English, as 
in travelling or crueller (American English spelling has traveling and crueler, in 
keeping with the rule). 
Secondly, there are a number of other verbs with non-final stress where doubling 
is found, either obligatorily (e.g. formatted, leapfrogged) or optionally (benefittedl 
benefited, worshippedlworshiped), and those you just have to learn by 
acquaintance. 
3.2 
Final e deletion 
Bases ending in e often lose this e when a suffix beginning with a vowel 
is added. There are two different cases, though. The first is where the e is what some 
children are taught to call the 'magic e', which we will call 'mute e' The second 
case is where the e is part of a composite symbol. 
[9] 
MUTE e 
11 PART OF COMPOSITE SYMBOL 
(a) Mute e 
hopg 
subdug 
hoping 
subduing 
hoped 
subdued 
The term mute e applies to a base-final e that is preceded by a consonant symbol 
and does not itself represent a sound. In speech, for example, the base hope ends in 
a consonant, so the written e is mute. 
Mute e always drops before a suffix beginning with e, and normally does so 
before the ·ing suffix of gerund-participles. The few verbs where e is retained before 
·ing include a number whose base ends in inge; the e is obligatory in singeing (keep­
ing the e distinguishes the gerund-participles of singe and sing). In the British and 
Australian word whinge ("complain passively"), the e remains optionally: both 
whingeing and whinging are found. 
(b) Composite vowel symbols ending in e 
The e at the end of subdue is part of a composite symbol, ue. A final e of this kind 
always drops (like mute e) before a suffix beginning with e, and sometimes also 
before ·ing. It generally drops when the composite symbol is ue, but not when it is 
ee (freeing), oe (hoeing) or ye (dyeing). The composite symbol ie is usually replaced 
by y before ·ing, as in lying. Note the contrast between dying, a form of die ("cease 
living"), and dyeing, a form of dye ("colour with chemicals"). 
3.3 
Final y replacement 
The third rule applies with bases ending in y as a single-letter vowel 
symbol. Before a suffix we have the alternation shown in [ I O]: 

272 
Chapter 16 Morphology: words and lexemes 
[ 10] 
TREATMENT OF Y 
CONTEXT 
Y is retained 
before ·ing or . 's 
11 replaced by ie 
before ·s 
III replaced by i 
elsewhere 
EXAMPLES 
deny deny·ing 
baby 
baby· 's 
deny denie·s 
baby 
babie·s 
deny deni·ed 
pretty pretti·er 
The replacement of y by ie occurs in verbs before 3rd person singular present tense 
·s (denies), and in nouns before plural ·s (babies), but never before genitive · 's 
(baby 's). Replacement by i is found in verbs before ·ed (denied) and in adjectives 
before comparative ·er and superlative ·est (prettier, prettiest). I It also occurs before 
various suffixes in lexical morphology (as in denial, embodiment, etc.). 
As we said earlier, all of this applies only when y represents a vowel by itself; 
when y is part of a composite symbol, it is retained in all contexts, as in buys, boys, 
played, coyer, etc. 
3.4 
Alternation between ·s and · es 
This alternation occurs with the 3rd person singular present tense suffix 
in verbs and the plural suffix in nouns. In speech, the corresponding alternation is 
also found with the genitive suffix in singular nouns but in writing this is invariably 
. 's (in regular forms). Thus in speech it is found not only in plural cats andfoxes but 
also in genitive singular eat's andfox 's, which sound exactly the same as the plurals. 
In writing things are quite different: the genitives have the same suffix, and it is dif­
ferent from the plural one. 
The alternation between ·s and ·es can best be described by taking ·s as the default 
form of the suffix and stating where it is that you have to use ·es instead. There are 
two cases to consider. 
(a) The ·es alternant represents spoken vowel + consonant 
The ·es alternant is added to bases which in speech take a suffix with the form of vowel + 
consonant. As noted above, these are bases that end in a sibilant, or hissing sound: 
[ 1 1 ] 
i kiss 
ii kiss·es 
rose 
ros·es 
bush 
bush·es 
rouge 
roug·es 
bench 
bench·es 
judge 
judg·es 
A good number of bases which in speech end in a sibilant end in writing with mute 
e: in the examples in [ 1 1 ]  this applies to rose, rouge andjudge. However, this mute 
e drops by the general rule of e deletion described in §3.2 above, and the suffixed 
forms in [ii] can be treated in a uniform way. 
(b) The ·es alternant is commonly required after bases ending 
in consonant + 0 
Bases ending in 0 commonly take ·es if the 0 follows a consonant symbol; otherwise 
they take the default ·s alternant. This rule is illustrated in [ 1 2]: 
I Dry and shy are exceptions, having dryer/dryest and shyer/shyest as optional variants of regular 
drier/driest and shier/shiest. 

§4.2 The 3rd person singular present tense 
273 
[12] 
When the 0 follows a consonant symbol, we typically get ·es: 
go·es 
hero·es 
potato·es 
tomato·es 
torpedo·es 
veto·es 
11 When the 0 does not follow a consonant symbol, we invariably get ·s: 
boo·s 
embryo·s 
folio·s 
radio·s 
video·s 
zoo·s 
There is some difference between verbs and nouns here. With verbs, the ·es alternant 
is almost invariably used when 0 follows a consonant - as in the verb uses of goes, 
torpedoes and vetoes. The same applies to nouns which are identical in form to 
verbs (goes, torpedoes, vetoes, echoes and embargoes can be either 3rd singular 
present tense verbs or plural nouns). But a good number of other nouns with 0 fol­
lowing a consonant take the default ·s instead: this is obligatory for dynamo, kilo, 
piano, Eskimo, and optional with bongo, buffalo, halo, motto, volcano, and some 
others. 
4 
Verb inflection 
The inflectional categories of verbs were introduced in Ch. 3, § 1 ,  where 
we discussed their meaning and syntactic distribution. In this chapter we're con­
cerned solely with their morphological formation - which forms have which suf­
fixes, and how the results are spelled. Our main focus will be on lexical verbs (i.e. 
verbs other than auxiliaries). 
Almost all lexical verbs have six inflectional forms. The plain form and the plain 
present tense are identical with the lexical base, so we don't need to say any more 
about them. Of the others, the gerund-participle and the 3rd person singular present 
tense are very straightforward, so we'll deal with them first. Then we'll turn to the 
preterite and past participle forms, where we find virtually all of the considerable 
complexity in English verb inflection. 
4. 1 
The gerund-participle 
The gerund-participle is invariably formed by adding the suffix ·ing to the 
lexical base. In speech, that is all there is to it; even be·ing is completely regular. In 
writing, addition of the suffix may lead to modification of the base involving conso­
nant doubling, e deletion and replacement of ie by y, as described in §§3. 1-3.3: 
[ 1 3] 
LEXICAL BASE 
ii GERUND-PARTICIPLE 
see 
stop 
hope 
subdue 
hoe 
lie 
see·ing 
stopp·ing 
hop·ing 
subdu·ing 
hoe·ing lying 
4.2 
The 3rd person singular present tense 
This is normally formed by adding ·s or ·es to the base. But in this case 
be is irregular: we get is, not *bes. Have is also irregular, losing the ve of the base: 
has, not *haves. In speech, does is also irregular in that the vowel differs from that 

274 
Chapter 16 Morphology: words and lexemes 
of the base (it rhymes with buzz, not booze). The same applies to says (as we noted 
in connection with [Si], for most speakers it rhymes withfez, notfaze). 
The choice between ·es and the default alternant ·s has been described in §3.4. 
A sample of forms is given in [ 14]: 
[ 14] 
LEXICAL BASE 
miss 
miss·es 
lose 
los·es 
touch 
go 
boo 
stop 
ii 3RD SING PRESENT 
touch·es 
go·es 
boo·s 
stop·s 
4.3 
The preterite and past participle 
We take these two forms together, since for all regular verbs and a high 
proportion of irregular ones they are morphologically identical - they share exactly 
the same shape. Where they share shape we'll simplify tabular presentations by giv­
ing only the preterite form, but when the past participle is different we'll show it 
separately. 
Regular forms 
We begin with verbs whose preterite and past participle are regular in speech. In 
writing, these are formed by the addition of the suffix ·ed, with consonant doubling, 
e deletion and replacement of y by i applying as described in §§3. 1-3.3. Examples 
are given in [ 15]: 
[ 15] 
LEXICAL BASE 
1 1  PRETERITE 
laugh 
stop 
prefer 
hope 
laugh·ed 
stopp·ed 
preferr·ed 
hop·ed 
subdue 
subdu·ed 
deny 
deni·ed 
Irregular forms with preterite and past participle identical 
Many irregular verbs are like regular ones in having shape sharing between preterite 
and past participle. There are a dozen or so where there is variation between a reg­
ular form and a mildly irregular one, as with spell, whose preterite can be spelled or 
spelt. 
We find a considerable range of morphological relations between the preterite / 
past participle and the lexical base. A sample of these are illustrated in [16], with 
commentary given below: 
[ 1 6] 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
BASE 
hit 
bend 
burn 
keep 
flee 
think 
dig 
11 PRETERITE 
hit 
bent 
burnt 
kept 
fled 
thought 
dug 
Type A. 
Preterite identical with base 
There are over twenty verbs where the preterite is identical with the lexical 
base. Most of them have bases ending in t, but there are also a few in d, such 
as shed. Some lexemes, such as quit, have variant regular forms: He quit or He 
quilted. 
H 
stand 
stood 

§4.3 The preterite and past participle 
275 
Type B. 
Base-final d replaced by t 
Similar to Type A are those where the preterite is not identical to the base but differs 
simply in the replacement of final d by t. They include build, send, spend, etc. 
Type c. 
Preterite fonned by addition of ·t 
This is a small class with all members having regular variants too: burnt or burned. 
Bases ending in ll lose one I before ·t: smell - smelt. Other examples include dwell, 
learn, spoil. 
Type D. 
Addition of ·t with modification of the base 
These are similar to Type c, but the addition of ·t is accompanied by modification of 
the base. The modification is usually just a change in the vowel, but a more exten­
sive modification is found in leave - left. Other members of the class include feel, 
mean, sleep. Leap is Type D in speech, but Type c in writing. 
Type E. 
Addition of ·d with modification of the base 
A small number of verbs add ·d rather than ·t, in all cases with modification of the 
base. Others include hear, say, sell. 
Type F. 
Preterites in ought or aught 
A handful of verbs have highly irregular preterites with ought or aught (which are 
pronounced alike) replacing vowel + any following consonants in the base. Others 
include buy, catch, seek. They might be subsumed under Type D, but the final t can 
hardly be analysed as a suffix. 
Type G. 
Preterite formed by vowel change 
In a fair number of verbs the preterite differs from the base just in respect of the 
vowel. A variety of different vowel pairs are found: compare hang - hung, find -
found, shine - shone, etc. 
Type H .  
Miscellaneous 
There are a few verbs that don't fit into any of the above patterns, and have a unique 
difference between preterite and base. Stood differs from stand in the vowel and loss 
of n; had and made differ from have and make in the second consonant. 
Irregular forms with preterite and past participle distinct 
We turn finally to verbs where the preterite and past participle are different in form. 
In most cases the past participle contains a distinctive suffix spelled in three alter­
nant ways shown in [ 1 7]: 
[ 1 7] 
i n 
ii ne 
iii en 
after vowel symbol or re: 
for bear, do, and go: 
elsewhere: 
grown 
borne 
broken 
lain 
done 
chosen 
seen 
gone 
fallen 
sewn 
swollen 
torn 
taken 

276 
Chapter 16 Morphology: words and lexemes 
• Grow, see and sew end in complex vowel symbols, and ·n is added directly to 
them. With lay we have a special case of y replacement. When the suffix is added 
to tore and wore, the mute e following r is deleted. 
<i' The items in [ii] are simply exceptions; there is no general rule that assigns them 
the ne spelling. 
Î. The ·en alternant is found in all other cases. When it is added to a form ending in 
mute e, the ordinary rule of e deletion applies, as we see in broken, chosen, and 
taken. 
Again we find a variety of morphological relations between lexical base, preterite 
and past participle. Here's a sample of examples, with discussion following. 
[ 1 8] 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
BASE 
show 
take 
ride 
lie 
drink 
fly 
11 PRETERITE 
showed 
took 
rode 
lay 
drank 
flew 
iii PAST PARTICIPLE 
shown 
taken 
ridden 
lain 
drunk 
flown 
Type A. 
Preterite: regular; past participle: base + suffix 
Showed is a regular preterite, while shown consists of the base and the distinctive 
past participle suffix. Other such verbs include mow, prove, sew. All have a regular 
past participle as a variant of the irregular one. 
Type B. 
Preterite: vowel change; past participle: base + suffix 
Here the past participle is formed in the same way as in Type A, but the preterite is 
irregular, formed by vowel change. Other examples: blow, eat, give. 
Type c. Preterite: vowel change; past participle: modified base + suffix 
These verbs differ from those of Type B in that the base to which the past participle 
suffix is added is modified. In speech the base vowel is changed; in writing mute e 
is dropped and d or t is doubled. Other examples: smite, stride, write. Such verbs as 
drive and rise belong here in speech but in Type B in writing. 
Type D. 
Preterite: vowel change; past participle: preterite form + suffix 
In this type the past participle suffix is added not to the lexical base but to the 
preterite form. Other examples: break, choose, tread (with the general rule of con­
sonant doubling applying with the last to give trodden for the past participle)? 
Type E. 
Three different vowels; no suffix 
With a few verbs the three forms are distinguished solely by their vowels. Other 
examples include begin, ring, swim. All have the same pattern of vowel change: 
i - a  - u. 
2 There are a few differences in verb inflection between AmE and BrE. One of the most striking is that 
get belongs in this class in AmE (with the three forms get, got, gotten), whereas in BrE the past par­
ticiple has the same shape as the preterite, got. with get thus belonging in Type G of [ 1 61. 

§5. 1  Plural fonnation 
277 
Type F. 
Miscellaneous 
There are a few verbs which don't fit into any of the above patterns. Withfty, the 
three fonns have different vowels but the past participle also contains the suffix; 
similarly with do. 
With be and go the preterite bears no resemblance at all to the lexical base, while 
the past participle consists of base + suffix. With come and run the past participle 
is identical with the lexical base but the preterite is fonned by vowel change. 
5 
Noun inflection 
Nouns inflect for number and for case. The non-genitive singular, or 
plain singular, is identical with the lexical base. What we need to consider here is 
the marking of plural number and genitive case. We do not cover the inflection of 
pronouns in this chapter; the fonns are listed in Ch. 5, and there is nothing inter­
esting we can add here about how they are fonned.3 
5. 1 
Plural formation 
Plurals which are regular in speech are fonned in writing by adding ·es 
or the default ·s to the lexical base. The choice between these alternants has been 
discussed in § 3.4 and is illustrated again in [ 19]: 
[19] 
LEXICAL BASE 
cross 
horse 
edge 
echo 
book 
studio 
11 PLURAL 
cross·es 
hors·es 
edg·es 
echo·es 
book·s 
studio·s 
Plurals that are irregular in speech we discuss under four headings. 
(a) Modification of the base-final consonant 
With a good number of nouns, addition of the plural suffix is accompanied by a 
modification of the consonant at the end of the base. When the consonant in ques­
tion is represented in writing by f, the modification is reflected in the spelling, as in: 
[20] 
BASE 
calf 
knife 
leaf 
loaf 
thief 
wife 
wolf 
11 PLURAL 
calve·s 
knive·s 
leave·s 
loave·s 
thieve·s 
wive·s 
wolve·s 
The consonant symbolfis changed to v, and mute e is added if not already present. 
The default is for noun bases not to undergo such modification: words such as 
belief, chief, proof, safe don't, and when an invented word ending infis added to the 
lexicon, its plural does not show the modification (the noun Smuif appeared in 
English with a TV cartoon series in the 1980s, and the plural is of course Smuifs). 
Some words, such as dwaif and hoof, have both regular and irregular plurals: 
dwaifs and hoofs or dwarves and hooves. 
J For the same reason we omit consideration of the inflectional number contrast in the demonstratives 
this and that; see again Ch. 5, §3. 1 .  

278 
Chapter 16 Morphology: words and lexemes 
In speech the noun house undergoes a similar modification, and so do some 
nouns ending in the consonant represented as th (e.g. mouth), but this is not reflected 
in the spelling. 
(b) Vowel change and the suffix ·en/fen 
With a small number of nouns the plural is formed by changing the vowel and/or 
adding the suffix ·en or ·ren. Examples are given in [2 1]: 
[21 ] 
BASE 
II PLURAL 
man 
men 
woman 
foot 
tooth 
women 
feet 
teeth 
mouse 
mice 
ox 
ox-en 
child 
child·ren 
With woman, both vowels are changed in speech (women rhymes with him in), but 
only the second in writing. With mouse (and also louse) the vowel change is accom­
panied by a change in the consonant symbol. In speech, children shows both a suffix 
and a vowel change in the base (notice that child rhymes with filed, but the 
beginning of children sounds like chill). 
(c) Base plurals 
A fair number of nouns have plurals that are, like the singular, identical with the base: 
[22] 
BASE = PLURAL 
sheep 
cod 
bison 
barracks 
series 
Chinese 
Roma 
Most of these nouns belong to one or other of the following categories: 
Nouns denoting edible fish and game animals - creatures that are traditionally 
hunted. Cod and bison from [22] belong here; others include salmon, trout, deer, 
grouse, reindeer. Some (such as elk) have a regular plural alternant. For animals 
that have never been the target of hunting or fishing, the base plural is impossi­
ble: *three cockroach, *several spider, *two large dog. 
Nouns with bases ending in s (a single s, not double): barracks, headquarters, 
means, series, species, etc. (we never find *three diferent barrackses). 
Nationality nouns in ·ese: Chinese, Japanese, Vietnamese, etc. (we never find 
*millions of Chineses). 
Many names of tribes and ethnic groups: Apache, Bedouin, [nuit, Kikuyu, 
Navajo, Roma, etc. With most of these a regular plural alternant is sometimes 
used, but not as commonly as the base plural. 
(d) Foreign plurals 
A considerable number of nouns of Latin, Greek and various other origins have plu­
rals taken from those languages. Many belong to scientific or otherwise relatively 
learned vocabulary. A good proportion have regular plurals as variants, and these 
tend to be preferred in informal contexts. Some examples are given in [23]: 
[23] 
BASE 
II FOREIGN PLURAL 
iii REGULAR PLURAL 
formula 
larva 
stimulus syllabus 
formulae larvae stimuli 
syllabi 
formulas 
syllabuses 
phenomenon chassis 
phenomena 
chassis 

§5.2 Genitive formation 
279 
With some of these nouns the foreign plural is much more common than the sin­
gular, and for some speakers has been learned as a singular. Examples include 
data (from datum), media (medium), algae (alga), bacteria (bacterium), criteria 
(criterion) and phenomena (phenomenon). There is considerable variation, how­
ever, with respect to how far this singular usage has become established as a vari­
ant of the plural. Singular data and media are firmly established in Standard 
English (examples like The data is reliable or The media keeps hounding her are 
widely used and considered acceptable); but singular criteria and phenomena def­
initely are not (expressions like !this criteria or !a new phenomena are regarded as 
non-standard). Various other items, such as algae and bacteria, belong in the 
middle ground. 
5.2 
Genitive formation 
The genitive forms of the personal pronouns and the interrogative! 
relative genitive pronoun whose have been described in Ch. 5, §8.3, and Ch. 1 1 , §3: 
in this chapter we confine our attention to other genitive forms. 
From a morphological point of view, there are two kinds of genitive, the 's geni­
tive and the bare genitive: 
[24] 
's GENITIVE 
11 BARE GENITIVE 
girl - dirl 's 
girls - dirls ' 
woman - woman 's women - women 's lames - lames 's 
barracks - barracks' 
lames - lames ' 
The 's genitive is the default form: we need only give the particular conditions under 
which the bare genitive must or may occur, and can then say that the 's genitive is 
used for the remainder. 
(a) The bare genitive 
In speech, the bare genitive is not overtly marked at all, being identical in form with 
its non-genitive counterpart. In writing, it is marked by a final apostrophe. 
The bare genitive is virtually restricted to nouns ending in s. It is usually obliga­
tory, but it may also be optional, alternating with the 's genitive: 
[25] 
PLURALS FORMED WITH THE -sl-es SUFFIX 
ii NOUNS IN s WITH BASE PLURALS 
iii CERTAIN PROPER NOUNS IN s 
obligatory 
obligatory 
optional 
girls ' 
barracks ' 
lames' 
foxes '  
series ' 
Socrates' 
The obligatory bare genitives are found with plural nouns marked as such by the 
·s or ·es suffix (including those with modification of the lexical base, as in 
wives'), and with nouns ending in s that have base plurals, as described in §5. 1 
above. Note that barracks ' and series ', like the non-genitive counterparts, can be 
either singular or plural. 
The optional bare genitive is found in proper nouns ending in a single s, espe­
cially classical ones. It is more likely in writing than in speech, and more formal 
than the variant with 's. 

280 
Chapter 1 6  Morphology: words and lexemes 
(b) The 's genitive 
In writing, the 's genitive is invariably formed by adding 's to the non-genitive coun­
terpart - which may be a singular (woman 's) or a plural that is not marked by the 
·sl·es suffix (women 's). In speech it has the same form and alternation as the regular 
plural suffix: Jox's, for example, is pronounced the same asJoxes. 
The genitive 's sounds exactly like the plural suffix ·sf.es, but there is an interest­
ing difference: the genitive does not trigger any modification of the base. The geni­
tive of wife is wife 's, not *wive 's - and in speech mouth 's is pronounced differently 
from mouths. 
6 
Grade 
The last of the three inflectional systems of English to consider is that of 
grade, with three contrasting terms: plain, comparative and superlative. It applies 
primarily to adjectives, but is found also with a few lexemes from other categories, 
most clearly adverbs and determinatives. Regular forms are illustrated in [26]: 
[26] 
ADJECTIVE 
ADVERB 
DETERMINATIVE 
PLAIN 
cold 
hot 
rare 
easy 
soon 
few 
ii COMPARATIVE 
cold·er 
hoft·er 
rar·er 
easi·er 
soon·er 
few·er 
iii SUPERLATIVE 
cold· est 
hoft·est 
rar·est 
easi·est 
soon·est 
few·est 
The plain form is identical with the lexical base while the comparative and superla­
tive forms are marked by the suffixes ·er and ·est. These begin with a vowel, which 
triggers the modification of the base by the general spelling rules given in 
§§3. l-3.3 above: consonant doubling with hot, e deletion with rare, y replacement 
with easy. 
There are a few lexemes where the comparative and superlative forms are highly 
irregular, bearing little if any resemblance to the plain form. These include the fol­
lowing: 
[27] 
PLAIN 
11 COMPARATIVE 
III SUPERLATIVE 
good / well 
better 
best 
bad / badly 
worse 
worst 
much / many 
more 
most 
little 
less 
least 
Good and bad are adjectives, while well and badly can be either adjectives (as in 
I'mJeeling well/badly) or adverbs (He behaved well/badly). 
Much, many and little are determinatives. The determinative little (as in It has 
little merit) is a different word from the adjective little (as in a little creature), 
which we're not referring to here: the adjective has regular inflection.4 
4 The inflected fonns, however, are now rare, smaller and smallest being usually preferred. 

§ 7. 1 The structure of words 
281 
Inflectional and non-inflectional marking of grade 
The comparative and superlative categories differ from those discussed in §§4-5 
above in that they can be marked by the separate words more and most as well as by 
means of inflection. Some lexemes have only inflectional comparatives and superla­
tives, others have only the non-inflectional type, while others accept both. These 
comparative examples illustrate: 
[28] 
INFLECTIONAL COMPARATIVE 
i INFLECTIONAL ONLY 
This is better than that. 
ii NON-INFLECTIONAL ONLY *This is use fuller than that. 
iii EITHER TYPE 
This is gentler than that. 
NON-INFLECTIONAL COMPARATIVE 
*This is more good than that. 
This is more useful than that. 
This is more gentle than that. 
Very few lexemes accept only the inflectional type. The clearest examples are the 
determinative few from [26] and the irregular lexemes given in [27]. 
The ·ly suffix is never compatible with grade inflection: neither *clearlier nor 
*clearerly is possible. That means grade for ·ly adverbs must always be 
expressed in the non-inflectional way (You should speak more clearly). 
Lexemes with monosyllabic bases nearly always prefer the inflectional type, 
but with some such as fake, ill, right, and wrong the inflected forms are very 
rare. 
Adjectives with two-syllable bases accept non-inflectional grade marking, but 
inflected forms are often not available, especially for the ones that do not have 
final stress. Bases of this kind formed with 'y do take inflection (sticky, stickier, 
stickiest), but examples of adjectives that do not accept inflection include brutish, 
careful, legal, jealous, public, and others formed with the suffixes ·ish, jul, ·al, 
'ous, and ·ic. 
7 
Lexical morphology 
Lexical morphology is concerned with the formation and structure of 
the lexical bases of lexemes. It is complementary with inflectional morphology: it 
deals with those aspects of the formation and structure of words that are NOT a mat­
ter of inflection. 
7. 1 
The structure of words 
Words may be morphologically complex or simple: 
[29] 
COMPLEX WORD: 
ii SIMPLE WORD: 
a word that can be analysed into a sequence of 
smaller morphological units, such as un· usual, 
gentle·man·ly, luck·y 
a word that is not complex, such as usual, gentle, 
man. luck 

282 
Chapter 16 Morphology: words and lexemes 
Bases and affixes 
The two main kinds of morphological unit are bases and affixes. Of the units 
appearing in the examples in [29], luck, usual, gentle, man are bases, while un·, ·ly, 
and .y are affixes. As a starting-point we can distinguish between bases and affixes 
as follows: 
[30] 
BASE: 
ii AFFIX: 
usually a free element, one able to stand alone as a word 
a bound element, one unable to stand alone as a word 
This covers the examples given so far. But there is a complication: not all bases are 
free. Two kinds of bound base are illustrated in dur·able and scissor·like . 
." The dur· in durable is a base in another language (it comes from Latin via Old 
French), and the word durable was borrowed as a whole, not created by the oper­
ations of word formation in English. The other component of the word, ·able, is 
recognisable as the suffix that combines with free bases in innumerable words 
like enjoyable, perishable, readable, retrievable. Thus although it is bound, dur· 
occupies the same place in word structure as free bases like enjoy, perish, read, 
retrieve, etc. 
I\) As we noted in §2, there are a number of plural-only nouns which have no 
singulars. A base like scissor· is bound, occurring in scissors and certain derived 
words, but not on its own. 
Once we allow for bound bases, the following two claims hold without exception: 
."j; 
ALL complex words contain at least one base. 
" 
ALL affixes attach to bases. 
Individual affixes typically attach to a good number of bases, whereas bases typi­
cally combine with just a small number of affixes. Of the affixes mentioned above, 
for example, un·, ·ly and ·able occur with innumerable bases, and .y with a consid­
erable number, whereas the base luck combines with just .y and ·less (lucky, 
luckless), usual with un·, ·ly, ·ness (unusual, usually, usualness), and so on. 
The layered structure of words 
Bases containing more than two elements almost always have a layered structure 
defining a hierarchy, very similar to the hierarchical structure we see in syntax. For 
example: 
" In the adjective gentle·man·ly the bases gentle and man combine to form gentleman, 
and the suffix ·ly is added to that: it's not gentle + manly, it's gentleman + ·ly. 
In whistle·blow·er the suffix ·er is added to blow to form the base blower, 
and whistle combines with this: it's not whistleblow + ·er, it's whistle + 
blower. 
A similar difference in the hierarchical structure is seen in such a pair as 
un·couth·ness (with un· added to couth, and ·ness to uncouth) and un·luck·y (with .y 

§7.2 Morphological operations 
283 
added to luck, and un· to lucky). Structural diagrams for the four examples are 
shown in [3 1]: 
[3 1 ]  
gentle man ly 
whistle blow er 
un couth ness 
un luck y 
7.2 
Morphological operations 
A wide range of morphological operations are involved in the formation 
of lexical bases - considerably more than are used in inflectional morphology. In the 
following brief survey, the first three are the most important operations, the others 
being relatively minor and small-scale. 
(a) Compounding 
Compounding forms a complex base from a combination of smaller bases - almost 
always two. We illustrate here with compound nouns, adjectives and verbs: 
[32] 
11 
III 
NOUNS 
birdcage 
gentleman 
hangman 
loudmouth outpatient 
stage-manager 
ADJECTIVES 
dirt-cheap heart-breaking heart-broken skin-deep 
snow-white stress-free 
VERBS 
baby-sit 
blow-dry 
handwash 
over-react sleepwalk 
underachieve 
Compound nouns constitute by far the largest and most varied category. Most 
denote a subset of what is denoted by the second component: a birdcage is a kind 
of cage, a gentleman is a kind of man, and so on. But there are certainly a good 
number that do not have this interpretation: a loudmouth is not a kind of mouth 
(but a person with a loud mouth - one who talks a lot, typically in an offensive 
way). The second base is most often a noun, while the first can belong to a range 
of categories: bird is a noun, gentle an adjective, hang a verb, out a preposition. 
Compound adjectives often similarly have a denotation included in that of the 
second element: if something is dirt-cheap, then it must be cheap, and if it's 
snow-white, it's white. But there are numerous cases where this is not so. A 
stress-free job is not a free job (it's free of stress), and something that is only 
skin-deep is not deep. Heart-breaking and heart-broken illustrate a frequent type 
where the first base is a noun and the second a gerund-participle or past partici­
ple form of a verb. 
There are many compound verbs with a preposition such as over, under, out as 
first base, but for the rest compound verbs are far less numerous than compound 
nouns and adjectives. 
One distinctive type of compound noun combines two normally bound bases 
taken from Greek or Latin, as in: osteometry, osteopath, psychopath, pathology, 

284 
Chapter 16 Morphology: words and lexemes 
psychology, etc. Such 'neo-classical' compounds figure very prominently in the 
learned and scientific vocabulary of the language. 
(b) Affixation 
In affixation a base is expanded by the addition of a prefix at the beginning of the 
base or a suffix at the end. Very often the effect of affixation is to change the part­
of-speech category of the base - to form a noun from an adjective or verb, to form 
a verb from a noun or adjective, and so on. We speak here of category-changing 
affixes, as opposed to category-preserving affixes: 
[33] 
PREFIX 
II SUFFIX 
CATEGORY-CHANGING 
befriend 
en·danger 
wet·ness 
achiev·able 
CATEGORY-PRESERVING 
un· happy 
re·open 
green· ish 
lion·ess 
Befriend and endanger are verbs formed from nouns, while wetness is a noun 
formed from an adjective, and achievable is an adjective formed from a verb. Most 
category-changing affixes are suffixes. 
Some affixes can be used in EITHER a category-changing OR a category-preserving 
way. 
The suffix ·ly, for example, often derives adverbs from adjectives (rapid·ly) and, 
much less often, derives adjectives from nouns (jriend·ly, gentleman·ly, 
prince·ly), so it can be category-changing. 
In a few cases, however, it derives adjectives from more elementary adjectives. 
These are not that common in the contemporary language, but examples include 
good·ly "considerable", kind·ly "benevolent", and poor·ly "not in good health".5 
Affixation is commonly accompanied by modification of the base, sometimes 
just in spelling, and sometimes in pronunciation as well. In achievable, for example, 
the mute e of achieve is dropped, while in persuasion we have a change in the con­
sonant at the end of persuade. 
(c) Conversion 
Whereas the verb hospitalise is formed from hospital by adding the suffix ·ise, the 
verb bottle (as in Where do they bottle Coca-Cola ?) is formed from the noun bottle 
without any change of shape at all. This is called conversion: a base of one category 
is formed by extending the use of a base of another category. The main types are 
illustrated in [34]: 
[34] 
NOUN TO VERB 
ii VERB TO NOUN 
PRIMARY USE 
The plants need waterN' 
I'll !n?v to persuade her. 
CONVERSION 
I'll watery the plants. 
It was a good !n?N' 
5 Kindly and poorly also exist as adverbs, of course. But notice that grade inflection distinguishes them: 
grade inflection never occurs with ·ly adverbs, but for the adjective kindly we have comparative kind­
lier and superlative kindliest, and these can never be used as adverbs. 

§7.2 Morphological operations 
285 
1Il ADJECTIVE TO NOUN 
iv ADJECTIVE TO VERB 
V VERB TO ADJECTIVE 
She 's very professionalADJ' 
The bottle is fl1J2tr.ADJ' 
The film was boringv us. 
She 's a professionalN' 
Please fl1J2tr.v the bottle. 
It's a boringADJfilm. 
Type [v] differs from the others in that it is not the plain form, or lexical base, of the 
verb that undergoes conversion, but an inflected form. In this example it is a gerund­
participle, but it can also be a past participle as in It had boredv them, which gives, 
by conversion, They were very boredADJ. 
There is nothing in the base created by conversion to mark it as such. The direc-
tion of conversion reflects the distinction between primary and extended SENSES: 
the primary sense of bottle is to denote a narrow-necked container for liquids, 
and the verb bottle incorporates that sense: it means "put into a bottle"; 
the primary sense of water is that it denotes the physical substance H20, and the 
verb water incorporates this sense: it means "provide with water". 
(d) Derivation by base modification 
There are also cases where the extension of a base from one category to another 
is accompanied merely by a phonological modification of the base, not the addi­
tion of any affix. Usually the modification is a change in the vowel or final con­
sonant, or a shift in the stress from one syllable to another. With minor excep­
tions, such modifications are not reflected in the spelling. We illustrate here with 
noun-verb pairs, marking stressed syllables where relevant by putting them in 
SMALL CAPITALS, but without attempting to indicate which form is the primary 
one: 
[35] 
NOUN 
a. This is the document you need. 
11 a. I want to stay in this house. 
1Il a. The interview was sheer TORment. 
VERB 
b. We will document its development. 
b. We must house them locally. 
b. They want to torMENT me. 
In [i) the noun and verb usually differ in the vowel of the last syllable. The last 
syllable of the noun has a reduced vowel, so it sounds the same as the last sylla­
ble of informant. The verb, however, has a full vowel, so it rhymes with bent. 
In [ii] there is a difference in the final consonant: the noun rhymes with mouse, 
whereas the verb rhymes with rouse. 
In [iii] the noun has the stress on the first syllable, while the verb has it on the 
second. 
(e) Back-formation 
A kind of opposite of affixation is found in some cases where the history of a word 
is that a word with an affix is taken to have a related form without that affix. We get 
a derived word that is formed by SUBTRACTING an affix from a base rather than 
adding one. This book is mostly not concerned with facts about the history of 
English, but this is one historical process that is worth noting. 

286 
Chapter 16 Morphology: words and lexemes 
The verb self-destruct is a clear example. It was formed from the noun self­
destruction by dropping the ·ion suffix. Notice that the verb related to destruction 
is destroy, not *destruct. The verb self-destruct came into the language after the 
noun, not the other way round. This backwards derivation by removing an affix 
is known as back-formation. 
The classic example is the verb edit, which is known to have arisen through 
back-formation from the noun editor: again, the noun preceded the verb his­
torically. 
There is nothing in the forms themselves that enables one to distinguish between 
affixation and back-formation: it's a matter of historical formation of words rather 
than of their structure. In fact, we have already listed two compound verbs that are 
back-formations: baby-sit and sleepwalk in [32iii]. These arose by back-forma­
tion from the nouns baby-sitter and sleepwalking. Structurally they are 
compounds, since they consist of two bases, but they did not arise historically by 
compounding. 
(f) Clipping 
Clipping is another minor process of word formation that removes part of a base 
(sometimes with a change in spelling for the part that remains), as in these examples: 
[36] 
FULL FORM 
CLIPPING 
delicatessen 
deli 
microphone 
mike 
helicopter 
telephone 
copter 
phone 
influenza 
flu 
Deli and mike lose the last part of the original word; copter and phone lose the first 
part; and influ both the beginning and the ending of the original base is lost, leav­
ing a middle syllable (which in the original base is not even stressed). 
Clipping should not be confused with back-formation. The two key differences 
are these: 
".. The clipped form does not differ in meaning from the original: it is merely a 
variant with the same meaning, usually a more informal one (though the degree 
of perceived informality changes over time: today phone is not particularly more 
informal than telephone). 
, What is removed in a clipping is typically not any kind of morphological ele­
ment: . . .  catessen, . . .  rophone, and . . .  enza, for example, are certainly not 
bases or affixes or anything else (though tele· happens to be a bound base mean­
ing "far away", seen also in telepathy, telescope). 
(g) Blending 
The process of blending is comparable to compounding, except that part of one (or 
both) of the source bases is dropped at the boundary between them. Examples are 
given in [37]: 
[37] 
SOURCE 
BLEND 
breath analyser parachute troops chocolate alcoholic motor hotel 
breathalyser 
paratroops 
chocoholic 
motel 

§7.3 Productivity and lexicalisation 
287 
In breathalyser the beginning of the second base (the an of analyser) is lost; in 
paratroops the end of the first base (the chute of parachute) is lost. In the others, 
both bases lose parts. 
(h) Initialism 
The final word-formation process we consider creates bases from the initial letters 
of a sequence of words (or, in a few cases, of parts of words). We call this process 
initialism. There are two subtypes (though people often confuse them): an 
acronym is formed by initialism in a way that picks initials that spell out a pro­
nounceable word. An abbreviation is pronounced simply by uttering the names of 
the letters. 
[38] 
ACRONYM 
11 ABBREVIATION 
NATO (t:J.orth d.tlantic Ireaty Qrganisation) 
AIDS (gcquired immune deficiency D'ndrome) 
CIO (Chief Information Qficer) UN (!l.nited t:J.ations) 
DNA (deoxyribollucleic gcid) 
TV (lele)!.ision) 
«. In acronyms the word spelled out by the letters is pronounced the way we would 
expect a word with that spelling to be pronounced: NATO rhymes with Plato, 
AIDS rhymes with maids. 
{ In abbreviations we just string together the letter names: CIO sounds like sea eye 
owe. (It would be possible to pronounce CIO as 'sigh-oh' or UN as 'un', but peo­
ple don't. This means that when you first see an initialism in print, you may not 
always know whether it is an acronym or an abbreviation, and you might guess 
wrong. There is no way to tell until you hear someone say it.) 
Initialisms are usually written with upper-case letters. The most common excep­
tions to this are abbreviations of Latin phrases: e.g. (exempli gratia "for example"), 
i.e. (id est "that is"), and others (dictionaries commonly contain lists of these). 
Some words written in lower case originated as acronyms but are now not easily 
recognisable as such. They include scuba (Self-Contained Underwater Breathing 
Apparatus) and radar (from RAdio Detecting And Ranging). These have been in the 
language for decades, and many speakers will be unaware of their origin as acronyms. 
7.3 
Productivity and lexicalisation 
A word-formation operation is said to be productive if it is still avail­
able for the creation of new words, and non-productive if it is not. 
Affixation by means of such suffixes as ·able, 'ness, ·er or such prefixes as un· and 
pre· is productive. You can generally put these affixes even on words that have only 
entered the language relatively recently: emailable, nerdiness, rapper, ungoogled, 
prexeroxed. 
But there are other affixes which are no longer productive in Present-day English, 
like the ones underlined in bond·Qg., duck-li1g, drunk·ard, en·able, inform·ant, or 
young·ster. 

288 
Chapter 16 Morphology: words and lexemes 
Productive affixes have different degrees of productivity - they have differing 
ranges of bases they can attach to. Among suffixes forming nouns, for example, 
·ness is highly productive, ·ity somewhat less so, while ·dom is of very low produc­
tivity (though it is productive nevertheless, as evident from such a recent coinage as 
yuppiedom). 
At the highest degree of productivity it is unnecessary, and indeed not feasible, to 
list in the dictionary all the words formed by the process in question. For example, 
·like can be added very freely indeed to nouns to form such compound adjectives as 
catlike, doglike, mouse like, wolflike, apple-like, banana-like, pear-like, and it would 
be a mistake to try and include all words of this kind in the dictionary. 
Words which couldn't be formed with their present meaning by means of opera­
tions still productive in the grammar today are said to be lexicalised: they 
absolutely have to be included in a dictionary. These include words formed through 
processes in the past that have not given rise to productive operations in the lan­
guage as it is now, such as drunkard, bondage, and so on, because merely from hav­
ing seen drunk and bond and ·ard and ·age we can't figure out what words can be 
made from them (*bondard, *drunkage?) or what they would mean. But lexicali­
sation covers other cases too, notably: 
Words like durable, knowledgeable, perishable: although ·able suffixation is a 
highly productive operation, what's productive is its use on transitive verb bases, 
not bound bases (dur·), nouns (knowledge), or intransitive verbs (perish). 
Some words have meanings not predictable from the combination of their com­
ponent parts. The meanings have to be specified individually. For example, the 
salient meaning of considerable doesn't match that of numerous words like 
achievable ("can be achieved") or climbable ("can be climbed"): it doesn't mean 
"can be considered", but "large, significant, or notable". Similarly, the compound 
loudmouth mentioned in §7.2 doesn't mean "mouth which is loud", but "person 
who talks a lot, typically one who gives offence". And gentleman doesn't mean 
"gentle man", but "man of chivalrous manner and good breeding or high social 
position" - or it may be just a courteous variant of man. 
Information about words like this must appear in the dictionary, because no matter 
how well you are acquainted with the general principles of lexical morphology, you 
can't figure out what you need to know about them. In general, the grammar of a 
language can only cover the rule-governed aspects of its ways of structuring words 
or sentences. To complete the description we also need a dictionary, to list the 
unpredictable parts. 

Exercises 
1 . Explain why ·ing is an inflectional suffix 
in [i] but a lexical one in [ii] : 
They 're buildiIlg more town houses at 
the end of the street. 
ii We left the buildiIlg by the back exit. 
2. Explain carefully why the suffix ·ish (as in 
greenish, sweetish, newish) is N OT one of 
the inflectional suffixes of English. 
3. Explain why there is consonant doubling 
in the first member of the following pairs, 
but not in the second: 
hopping 
hoping 
ii referring mothering 
iii stemming steaming 
IV quizzing 
boxing 
V starred 
stars 
4. For each of the following verbs say 
whether the final e is deleted or retained 
when the gerund-participle is formed. 
Relate your answers to the rule of e 
deletion discussed in §3.2. 
age 
vi judge 
11 be 
V11 plane 
iii centre [BrE] 
viii sortie 
iv impinge 
ix tinge 
v implore 
x wage 
5. For each of the following lexical bases 
give the inflectional form specified below, 
and show how the treatment of the final y 
follows the rule of final y replacement. 
dry 
gerund-participle 
ii embody 
preterite 
iii guy 
plural 
iv silly 
superlative 
v try [V] 
3rd sing present 
6. Rewrite these examples with all noun 
phrases changed to their plural counter­
parts and all present-tense verbs changed 
to the correct preterite form. 
The other student sings in a rock band. 
ii The TV series made from that novel is 
as good as any film ever made. 
Exercises 
289 
iii The bison roams the prairie and the 
wolf preys on the deer in the forest. 
iv The man drives the Mercedes into a 
garage and hopes no thief has a key to 
the building. 
v The chief focus of this task is investi­
gating the larva and developing a 
criterion for distinguishing its 
response to an environmental stimu­
lus from any similar phenomenon at a 
later stage. 
7. The following irregular verbs have shape­
sharing between the preterite and the 
past participle. Assign them to one or 
other of Types A-H in [ I 6] according to 
the relation between these forms and the 
lexical base, and note those which also 
have regular variants of the preterite and 
past participle. 
bind 
vi hold 
ii burst 
iii dig 
iv dream 
vii kneel 
viii leave 
ix lend 
v fight 
x meet 
8. As in the previous exercise, these are 
irregular verbs with shape-sharing 
between the preterite and the past 
participle. Assign to a type, noting 
those which also have regular variants 
of the preterite and past participle: [i] 
slide; [ii] spell; [iii] spread; [iv] strike; 
[v] weep. 
9. The following irregular verbs have distinct 
preterite and past participle forms. 
Assign them to Types A-H in [ I 8] accord­
ing to the way these forms are related to 
the lexical base. 
i fall 
vi get [A mE] 
ii give 
iii shrink 
iv sow 
v swell 
vii grow 
viii slay 
ix strive 
x wake 

290 
Chapter 1 6 Morphology: words and lexemes 
10. For each word in the sentence Our 
children said those earlier stories had 
been her worst, say what inflectional 
form it is, and what lexeme it belongs to: 
our 
vi stories 
ii children 
vii had 
iii said 
viii been 
iv those 
ix her 
v earlier 
x worst 
(For example, if we had given the sentence 
Pigs will fly, then for the word pigs you 
would say that it is the plural form of the 
lexeme pig. For inflection of personal pro­
nouns, recall the analysis given in Ch. 5, §S.) 
1 1 . Show for some plural-only words other 
than scissors that the lexical base 
sometimes occurs in compounds. 
1 2. Discuss the choice between the ·es and ·s 
altemants of the plural suffix with the 
following nouns, after gathering evidence 
about how they are actually spelled in real 
texts: 
cameo 
vi lunch 
ii echo 
vii mango 
iii eunuch 
Vlll patio 
iv garage 
ix photo 
v innuendo 
x piano 
13. Nouns with lexical bases ending inf or fe 
either have (a) obligatory modification of 
the base in plural formation; (b) optional 
modification; or (c) no modification. Give 
plurals of the following nouns, grouping 
them into these three types: 
elf 
vi sheaf 
ii handkerchief 
vii shelf 
iii life 
viii spoof 
iv oaf 
ix waif 
v self 
x wharf 
14. Give plurals of the following nouns, group­
ing them into three types: (a) those with 
only foreign plurals; (b) those that have 
foreign and regular plurals as variants; or 
(c) those with only regular plurals. 
i alumnus 
III appendix 
ii amoeba 
iv crucifix 
v desideratum 
vi foetus 
viii millennium 
ix phobia 
vii mausoleum 
x radius 
15. Give genitives of the following nouns, 
grouping them into three types: (a) those 
with only bare genitives; (b) those that 
have 's and bare genitives as variants; 
or (c) those with only 's genitives: 
[i] children; [ii] lones; [iii] kids; 
[iv] species; [v] Xerxes. 
16. Construct examples (grammatical and 
un grammatical as the case may be) to 
show clearly that the adjective kindly 
can inflect for grade despite being 
formed with the ·ly suffix, but the adverb 
kindly cannot be inflected for grade at 
all .  
17. List all the bases that occur i n  the 
following words, bearing in mind that one 
base can be contained within another. 
clothes-drier 
vi injustice 
ii handwriting 
vii upbringing 
iii disinterestedness viii babysitting 
iv self-righteously 
ix unavoidability 
v taxpayer-funded 
x underachiever 
I S. Discuss the form of the underlined lexical 
bases in the following examples: identify 
the morphological operations and the 
bases and affixes involved in their 
formation. 
I got it from a CNN newscast. 
ii It was fonned by a process of ad;ecti­
valisation. 
iii She works for UNESCO. 
iv We didn 't have lead-free fuel in those 
days. 
v They are involved in some illeǭal 
operation. 
vi They have decided to euthanase the 
whale. 
vii Calm down. 
viii He 's always mouthing off about his 
boss. 
ix I'll meet you in the lab. 
x I was working as a window-cleaner. 

Further reading 
In this short book we do not even try to incorporate all the bibliographical refer­
ences that would be appropriate; to even sketch the vast array of scholarship on 
English grammar from 1580 to the present would take a separate book. We will just 
give some pointers to a few useful works for the student who wants to read further, 
and signal a few of our most important intellectual debts in linguistics. I 
For the general reader 
This book is based on our much larger work The Cambridge Grammar of the 
English Language (Rodney Huddleston & Geoffrey K. Pullum et aI., CUP, 2002; 
henceforth CGEL). That is the first place to turn to for further details of the analysis 
we adopt. 
An influential earlier work that inclines more to the older tradition in English 
grammar is Randolph Quirk et aI., A Comprehensive Grammar of the English 
Language (London: Longman, 1985); this was of great value to us in preparing 
CGEL, but see Rodney Huddleston's critical review (Language 64 ( 1988): 345-54) 
for a number of reasons for disagreeing with its analyses. 
A still earlier grammar is Otto Jespersen's classic Modern English Grammar on 
Historical Principles (7 vols.; London: AlIen & Unwin, 1909-49). Jespersen was a 
radical rather than a traditionalist, and made many important innovative proposals, 
too many of which were overlooked. 
An example of a nineteenth-century grammar worth looking at is Henry Sweet, 
New English Grammar (2 vols.; OUP, 1 89 1 ). His statement that 'the rules of gram­
mar have no value except as statements of facts: whatever is in general use in a lan­
guage is for that very reason grammatically correct' (§ 1 2) expresses forthrightly the 
point of view we state in Ch. I of this book. The prescriptive grammars of the twen­
tieth century might have been more useful if they had paid more attention to Sweet 
instead of simply trying to transmute personal prejUdice into authority. 
The best usage manual we know is Merriam-Webster's Dictionary of English 
Usage (Merriam-Webster, 1994), which contains a wealth of examples from print 
sources and always draws its advice from scholarly study of the actual facts of 
1 In our citations, 'CUP' means Cambridge University Press, 'oUP' means Oxford University Press, 
'et aI.' means 'and other authors' .  Publication details are shortened or omitted for extremely well­
known works that are easy to find. 
29 1 

292 
Further reading 
usage. But usage manuals should in general be treated with caution, because many 
of the best-known ones are dogmatic, uninformed, and much more out of date than 
you might think. For example, much of the content of The Elements of Style by 
William Strunk & E. B. White (4th edn; Allyn & Bacon, 2000) is about a hundred 
years old (Strunk was born in 1 869 and had published the first version of this slim 
book by 1918); its advice is often ludicrously old-fashioned, rooted in claims about 
'correctness' that cannot be taken seriously. 
Practical matters like punctuation and spelling are not systematically covered in 
the present book. Our concern has been rather to provide the grammatical basis on 
which a better understanding of punctuation could be based (there is no profit in 
being told that it is unacceptable to put a comma between subject and predicate if 
you cannot identify the subject and the predicate). But there are many good practi­
cal guides to punctuation in various works for writers, e.g., the MLA Handbook 
for Writers of Research Papers (6th edn, ed. Joseph Gibaldi; New York: Modem 
Language Association, 2003), and particularly The Chicago Manual of Style ( 15th 
edn; University of Chicago Press, 2003). There is a thorough and more theoretical 
treatment of punctuation in Ch. 20 of CGEL. 
One of the best practical investments a student of English can make is to pur­
chase a good dictionary or to become well acquainted with one that is regularly 
accessible in a library. Most university libraries will have the greatest of all dic­
tionaries of English: the Oxford English Dictionary (2nd edn, 20 vols., 1989), a 
crucial scholarly resource for the study of English and its history, generally 
known as the OED. For American English specifically, the staunchly descriptive 
Webster's Third New International Dictionary is deservedly a classic, and The 
American Heritage Dictionary is also very useful. For purchase and everyday use 
by students, a number of publishers including CUP, OUP, HarperCollins, and 
Macmillan offer excellent, compact, affordable, up-to-date, descriptively oriented 
dictionaries. 
For linguistics students 
The review article by Peter Culicover (Language 80 (2004): 127-4 1 )  relates CGEL, 
and thus indirectly this book, to current issues in linguistics. James McCawley's 
encyclopaedic work The Syntactic Phenomena of English (2nd edn; University of 
Chicago Press, 1998) is an excellent introduction to the analysis of a wide range of 
syntactic facts in transformational-generative terms. Our discussion of the impor­
tant distinction between general (universal) and language-particular definitions 
(Ch. 1 )  draws on ideas of John Lyons (see 'Towards a "notional" theory of the 
"parts of speech" ', Journal of Linguistics 2 ( 1 966): 209-36; expanded reprinting in 
his Natural Language and Universal Grammar, CUP, 199 1 ). 
Our analysis of the verb (Ch. 3), the clause (Ch. 4) and the noun (Ch. 5) rests on 
a vast literature. One indication of this is that whole books have been written on 
most of the individual classificational features relevant to the grammar of verb 
phrases and noun phrases; CUP has published Aspect (Bernard Comrie, 1976), Case 

Further reading 
293 
(Barry J. Blake, 2001 ), Definiteness (Chris Lyons, 1999), Gender (Greville Corbett, 
199 1 ), Mood and Modality (F. R. Palmer, 2001), Number (Greville Corbett, 2000), 
Person (Anna Siewierska, 2001), and Tense (Bernard Comrie, 1985), all of which 
will be of interest in comparing the grammar of English with that of other 
languages. 
This book treats auxiliaries as heads, not dependents, rejecting the dependent­
auxiliary analysis implicit in the work of both most traditional grammarians and 
also most generative grammarians (with some dissenters, such as J. R. Ross and 
J. D. McCawley). CGEL, pp. 1209-20, offers detailed justification. The generative 
literature is reviewed by Gerald Gazdar et aI., 'Auxiliaries and related phenomena 
in a restrictive theory of grammar' (Language 58 (1982): 591-638). 
With regard to adjective and adverb phrase structure (Ch. 6), as well as various 
other topics, we drew on Ray Jackendoff's monograph X Syntax (MIT Press, 1977), 
though we discovered he was wrong about whether adverbs take complements (quite 
a few do); and our analysis of prepositions (Ch. 7) was much influenced by Joseph E. 
Emonds, 'Evidence that indirect object movement is a structure-preserving rule' 
(Foundations of Language 8 (1972): 546-61 )  and Ray S. Jackendoff, 'The base rules 
for prepositional phrases' (in S. R. Anderson & P. Kiparsky (eds.), A FestschriJt for 
Morris Halle, 345-56; New York: Holt Rinehart & Winston, 1973). Both were 
interestingly foreshadowed by Jespersen (The Philosophy of Grammar, 87-90; Lon­
don: AlIen & Unwin, 1924). 
Our description of negation (Ch. 8) owes a great deal to three works: Edward 
Klima ('Negation in English', in J. A. Fodor & J. J. Katz (eds.), The Structure of 
Language, 246-323; Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1964); Laurence Horn 
(A Natural History of Negation; University of Chicago Press, 1989); and William 
A. Ladusaw (Polarity Sensitivity as Inherent Scope Relations; New York: Garland, 
1980). The relation between clause type and illocutionary force (Ch. 9) connects 
grammar to the classification of speech acts begun by the philosopher of language 
J. L. Austin in How to Do Things with Words (OUP, 1962). The importance of 
semantics in the interpretation of subjectless non-finites (Ch. 13) is demonstrated 
by Ivan A. Sag & Carl J. Pollard, 'An integrated theory of complement control' 
(Language 67 ( 1991 ): 63-1 1 3). 
The rich technical literature on subordination, coordination, and unbounded 
dependencies raises many intertwined issues. Important generative works include 
John Robert Ross, Infinite Syntax! (New York: Ablex, 1986; originally a 1967 MIT 
doctoral dissertation called 'Constraints on Variables in Syntax'); Joan Bresnan & 
Jane Grimshaw, 'The syntax of free relatives in English' (Linguistic Inquiry 9 
(1978): 33 1-9 1 ); Joan Bresnan, 'Syntax of the comparative clause construction in 
English' (Linguistic Inquiry 4 ( 1 973): 275-343); Gerald Gazdar, 'Unbounded 
dependencies and coordinate structure' (Linguistic Inquiry 12 (198 1 ): 155-84); and 
Ivan A. Sag et aI., 'Coordination and how to distinguish categories' (Natural 
Language & Linguistic Theory 3 (1985): 1 17-7 1 ). All of these are technical works 
giving various kinds of theoretical accounts of subsets of the facts dealt with here in 
Chs. 10-14. Many others that have influenced us could be cited. 

294 
Further reading 
Betty Bimer & Gregory Ward discuss information packaging (Ch. 15) in their 
Infonnation Status and Noncanonical Word Order in English (Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins, 1998), and many further references to the rest of the literature are cited 
there. Our treatment of inflection in Ch. 16 owes much to F. R. Palmer, The English 
Verb (2nd edn; London: Longman, 1987), and Peter Matthews, Morphology 
(2nd edn; CUP, 199 1 ). A linguistic defence of this lexeme-based rather than mor­
pheme-based view of morphology is given by Stephen R. Anderson, A-Morphous 
Morphology (CUP, 1992). 

Glossary 
The aim of the glossary is to provide brief reminders of the meaning of a subset of 
the technical terms used in the book: we do not include terms used only in the sec­
tion where they are introduced and explained. Fuller explanations can be found by 
using the index. 
Accusative. The inflectional case of the pronouns me, him, her, us, them, whom. 
Contrasts with nominative. 
Active. Opposite of passive. 
Adjective. A category of lexemes characteristically denoting properties of persons 
or objects (old, big, round, blue, good). The prototypical adjective can be used 
both attributively and predicatively (hot soup, The soup is hot), participates in 
the system of grade (occurs in the comparative and superlative), and takes 
adverbs as modifier (extremely hot, very useful). 
Adjunct. A modifier in clause structure (The meeting ended on Sunday) or a 
supplement attached to a clause (It was, on Sunday, already too late). 
Adverb. A category of lexemes whose prototypical members are derived from adjec­
tives by adding ·ly: audibly, cleverly, remarkably, softly, etc. Generally function as 
modifiers of verbs (speaks clearly) and other categories other than nouns. 
Affix. A prefix or suffix, added to a base to make up a word (or larger base): 
!&lJ/riend/J!., I21:Jriended. 
Agreement. Change in inflectional form to match properties of another con­
stituent: in She loves you the verb loves agrees with the subject (replacing she by 
they yields They love you). 
Anaphora. The relation between a personal pronoun or similar form and an 
antecedent from which it gets its interpretation: they is anaphoric to my col­
leagues in I thanked my colleagues for the support they had given me. 
Antecedent. Constituent whose meaning dictates the meaning of a pronoun or other 
such expression in cases of anaphora. 
Ascriptive. The use of be illustrated in Mike was a loyal party member, where the 
predicative complement (underlined) expresses a property that is ascribed to 
Mike. Contrasts with specifying. 
Aspect. A verbal category mainly indicating the speaker's view of the temporal 
structure of the situation the clause describes, such as whether it is habitual or 
complete. The English progressive (He is working) is an aspect conveying a 
view of the situation as being in progress. 
295 

296 
Glossary 
Attributive. Applies to an adjective or other pre-head internal modifier in NP 
structure: a hot day illustrates attributive use of hot. 
Auxiliary verb. A subclass of verb that prototypically marks tense, aspect, mood 
or voice. In English, auxiliaries can invert with the subject in interrogatives 
(Can you swim ?), and have special primary negation forms (She hasn 't seen it). 
Backshift. Prototypically, a shift from present tense to preterite in reported speech: 
you ask Has she seen it? and I report your question by saying You asked whether 
she had seen it. 
Bare coordinate. A coordinate not marked with a coordinator. 
Bare infinitival clause. An infinitival clause lacking the marker to: you must do 
your best. 
Bare role NP. Singular NP like treasurer with no determiner, denoting a role or 
office. Can be predicative complement (She became treasurer) but not subject 
(*Treasurer resigned). 
Base. One of the two main kinds of unit found in the structure of words; contrasts 
with affix. In friendly the ·ly is an affix attached to the base friend, making 
another base, friendly. 
Base plural. Plural noun identical with the lexical base for the lexeme: sheep, cod, 
barracks. 
Canonical clause. Declarative, positive, non-coordinate, main clause not 
belonging to any of the special information-packaging constructions (passive, 
it-cleft, etc.). The syntactically most basic form of clause; e.g., We must get some 
milk. 
Case. An inflectional system of the noun with the primary use of marking various 
syntactic functions, such as subject and object in clause structure or determiner 
in NP structure. In English the main distinction is between genitive and plain 
case (e.g. Kim 's vs Kim). A few pronouns have distinct nominative and accusa­
tive cases (e.g. I vs me) instead of a plain case. 
Catenative complement. A non-finite clause functioning as internal complement 
of a verb (with a few exclusions, e.g., those where the clause is complement to be 
in its ascriptive and specifying senses). Examples: You seem to like her; I regret 
doing it; We arranged/or them to meet; I believe it to be genuine. 
Catenative verb. Verb with catenative complement: You seem to like her; I regret 
doing it. 
Clause type. A classification of clauses into syntactic types, associated in main 
clauses with different kinds of speech act. See: declarative, exclamative, 
imperative, interrogative. 
Closed interrogative. A sUbtype of interrogative clause characteristically used, in 
main clauses, to ask a closed question. Marked in main clauses by 
subject-auxiliary inversion (Is it raining?; Is he alive or dead?), and in subor­
dinate clauses by whether or if (I wonder whether it's raining; I don 't know if 
he 's alive or dead). 
Closed question. Question with a closed set of answers: Is it raining? (answers: 
Yes, No); Is he alive or dead? (answers: He 's alive, He 's dead). 

Glossary 
297 
Collective noun. A noun denoting a collection of individuals. In BrE especially, can 
function as head of a singular NP taking plural verb agreement: %The committee 
have not yet decided. 
Common noun. The default subclass of noun, lacking the distinctive properties of 
pronouns and proper nouns: cat, boy, woman, window, etc. 
Comparative (grade, form). The term in the system of grade indicating "more than"; 
it is marked either inflectionally (as in hotter) or by the adverb more (more useful). 
Comparative clause. A kind of subordinate clause (usually finite) functioning as 
complement to than, as or like and expressing one of the two terms in a compar­
ison: It is colder [than it was yesterday]; I went to the same school [as she di4J. 
Complement. A kind of dependent that must be licensed by the head. In It shakes 
the building, the building is a complement because it's allowed only with a cer­
tain kind of head verb: shake licenses dependents of this kind, but quake doesn't 
(*It quakes the building). 
Complex catenative construction. A clause containing a catenative complement 
whose verb is separated from the verb of the matrix clause by an NP understood 
as subject of the non-finite clause: I asked her to help me; I knew them to be 
friends. 
Complex-intransitive. A clause containing a predicative complement but no object 
(I'm sorry; It looks promising), or a verb used in such a clause (be, look - in the 
sense illustrated). 
Complex-transitive. A clause containing a predicative complement and an object (I 
find that incredible), or verb used in such a clause (find - in the sense illustrated). 
Composite symbol. A sequence of two or more letters representing a single sound: 
in heat the vowel (sound) is represented by the composite symbol ea. 
Conditional (construction). Prototypically, one containing an adjunct introduced 
by if I'll do it if you pay me. 
Consonant, consonant symbol. A consonant is a sound produced by means of 
some audible constriction of the airflow; a consonant symbol is a letter or 
sequence of letters representing a consonant. In quick there are three consonant 
symbols: q, u, and ck. 
Content clause. The default kind of finite subordinate clause, lacking the special 
properties of relative and comparative clauses: I think you 're right; I wonder 
whether it is. 
Continuative perfect. A use of the perfect indicating a situation lasting over a 
period starting before a certain time and continuing up to it: She had been in bed 
for two hours when we arrived means she was in bed two hours before we arrived 
and continued to be until we arrived (and possibly after that). 
Coordinate. An element in a coordination construction. Sue or her son has two 
coordinates: Sue (a bare coordinate) and or her son (an expanded coordinate). 
Coordination. A construction with two or more constituents of equal status, 
prototypically linked by a coordinator (and, or, but): It rained and it snowed 
(coordination of clauses); Sue or her son (coordination of NPs); some rice and 
beans (coordination of nouns). 

298 
Glossary 
Coordinator. A small lexeme category (part of speech) whose members serve to 
mark one element as coordinate with another: Kim and Pat; today or tomorrow; 
poor but happy. 
Correlative coordination. Coordination with the first coordinate marked by a 
determinative (both, either, or neither): Both Sue and her husband went; It's 
neither illegal nor unethical. 
Count noun. Noun denoting an entity that is countable; hence a noun that can com­
bine with numerals: two cats, a hundred times. 
Declarative clause. The default clause type; in main clauses, characteristically 
used to make a statement: The dog is barking; She can swim. 
Default. What holds if nothing special is stated. The default position of the subject 
of a clause is before the verb, though where the verb is an auxiliary, it may, 
under restricted conditions, follow the verb. 
Definite article. The determinative the. Prototypically functions as determiner in 
NP structure with the sole meaning of indicating that the head is sufficient in the 
context to identify the referent: when I ask, Where 's the car?, I assume you know 
which car I'm referring to. 
Definite NP. NP marked by the definite article the or by certain other determiners 
(e.g., this, that, my), or with no determiner but having a proper noun as head. 
Characteristically used when the content of the NP is sufficient in the context to 
identify the referent. 
Deictic. Used in a way that allows the interpretation to be determined by features of 
the act of utterance like when and where it takes place, and who the speaker and 
addressee are; e.g. l (refers to the speaker), now (refers to a time that includes the 
time of utterance). 
Deontic modality. Meaning relating prototypically to requirement or permission: 
must in You must help expresses deontic necessity; may in You may come in 
expresses deontic possibility. 
Dependent. An element in the structure of a phrase or clause other than the head: 
the new doctor; wrote a book; Ĺ old. Covers complements, modifiers and 
determiners. 
Dependent vs independent genitive. A few personal pronouns have two genitive 
forms, a dependent one used with a following head (vour house) and an inde­
pendent when it is fused with the head (Her house is bigger than yours) or is 
head by itself (All this is yours). 
Determinative. A category of words (or lexemes) which can function as deter­
miner in an NP, marking it as definite or indefinite: the, a, this, that, some, any, 
few, etc. Most can occur with other functions too: e.g., that is modifier of an 
adjective in It wasn 't that great. 
Determinative phrase (DP). A phrase with a determinative as head: not many, 
almost every. 
Determiner. A kind of dependent occurring only in NP structure, and serving to mark 
the NP as definite or indefinite. Usually has the form of a determinative (the dog), 
a determinative phrase (very few errors), or a genitive NP (this guy 's attitude). 

Glossary 
299 
Direct object. The default kind of object of a verb (not an indirect object). In a 
canonical clause, a single object is always a direct object: Jill paid the bill. In 
canonical clauses with two objects, the first is indirect, the second direct: He 
gave me the key (me is indirect object). 
Directive. Cover term for requests, commands, orders, instructions and similar 
speech acts aimed at getting the addressee(s) to do something. 
Ditransitive. Clause with two objects (/ lent her my bike) or verb of such a clause 
(lend). 
Dummy. A meaningless word required in some construction to satisfy a syntactic 
requirement; e.g. do in Does she know him ?, where the construction requires an 
auxiliary verb. 
Epistemic modality. Meaning relating to what's necessary or possible given our 
beliefs: must in You must be exhausted expresses epistemic necessity; may in You 
may be right expresses epistemic possibility. 
Exclamative clause. A clause type characteristically used, in main clauses, to 
make an exclamatory statement: What a mess they made!; How stupid I was! 
Existential clause. A clause which prototypically has the dummy pronoun there as 
subject and a complement corresponding to the subject of a more basic construc­
tion: There was a key on the table. Here a key corresponds to the subject of the 
more basic A key was on the table. 
Expanded coordinate. Coordinate prototypically beginning with a coordinator. 
External. Located outside the VP or the nominal: (She [lost her key]); (this big {l 
hole). 
Extraposed object. A postverbal element, normally a subordinate clause, in a 
clause with dummy it as object: I consider it a scandal that we weren 't paid. 
Extraposed subject. A postverbal element, normally a subordinate clause, in a 
clause with dummy it as subject: It is fortunate that you could come. 
Extraposition. A clause construction which prototypically has dummy it as subject 
and a postverbal subordinate clause: It isfortunate that you could come. 
Finite clause. Clause that is either headed by a primary verb-form (Ed is careful) 
or is imperative (Be careful) or is subjunctive (/ insist that he be careful). Main 
clauses are always finite, subordinate clauses may be finite or non-finite. 
Fossilised. Of a word combination, lacking the syntactic variation that would be 
expected. Come across ( = "find by chance") is fossilised in that the preposition 
must immediately follow the verb: the letters which I came across, not *the 
letters across which I came. 
Fronted preposition. Preposition placed along with its complement at the front of 
the clause: [To whom] are you referring? 
Fused relative construction. NP in which the relative word (what and whoever) 
functions simultaneously as head of the NP and as an element within a modify­
ing relative clause, as in What you say is true or Whoever told you that is 
mistaken. 
Fused-head construction. An NP where the head is fused with a dependent ele­
ment, usually a determiner or internal modifier. In We have three eggs but 

300 
Glossary 
[two] are cracked, two is both determiner and head. In the poor the adjective 
poor is simultaneously modifier and head. 
Futurate. Prototypically, a use of the present tense, permitted in main clauses, to 
indicate future time: The week ends tomorrow; Exams start next week. Also cor­
responding uses of the preterite: I thought that exams started next week. 
Gender. A grammatical classification which in English applies primarily to the 
3rd person singular personal pronouns. It correlates largely (not perfectly) with 
sex: he (masculine) usually refers to males, she (feminine) to females, and it 
(neuter) to inanimates. 
Genitive. An inflectional case of the noun whose primary use is to mark an NP as 
determiner within the structure of a larger NP: Kim 's book. Some pronouns have 
two genitive forms: dependent genitive (my) and independent genitive (mine). 
Gerund-participial. Clause with a gerund-participle as head verb: I recall her 
being there. 
Gerund-participle. The form of the verb marked by the suffix ·ing: They are 
sleeping. 
Goal. Clause constituent prototypically indicating where something moves to: I 
went home. 
Gradable. Denoting a property that can apply in varying degrees. Gradable adjec­
tives take degree modifiers: very hot, rather good, slightly dubious, etc. 
Grade. The system of contrasts between plain, comparative, and superlative. 
Head. The function of the most important element in a phrase. Often stands alone 
without any dependents, as in Dogs were barking: the subject NP contains just 
the head noun dogs. 
Hollow clause. Non-finite clause with missing non-subject element such as an 
object deriving its interpretation from an antecedent: He 's easy to get on with; 
It's a dificult thing to do. 
Idiom. Combination of words with meaning not systematically derivable from the 
meanings of those words: kick the bucket ( = "die"); tie the knot ( = "get 
married"). 
Imperative clause. Clause type characteristically used to express a directive: 
Don 't move; Please sit down. Verb in plain form; subject usually omitted but 
understood as "you". 
Imperfective interpretation. An interpretation of a clause making reference to the 
internal temporal structure of a situation rather than taking it as a whole: Kim was 
writing a letter. 
Indefinite article. The determinative a (or an), prototypically used as determiner 
in count singular NPs indicating that the content is not sufficient to identify a 
specific referent: q bus. 
Indefinite NP. An NP that is not definite: a book, some dogs, several students. 
Independent genitive. See dependent vs independent genitive. 
Indirect complement. Complement licensed not by the head but by a dependent. 
In a longer delay than we expected the than phrase is in the NP but licensed by a 
modifier (longer). 

Glossary 
301 
Indirect object. Object of a verb prototypically (but not invariably) having the 
semantic role of recipient. Precedes the direct object in canonical clauses: I 
gave Max the key. 
Infinitival clause. Subordinate clause containing a plain form of the verb (subject 
marked by for if there is one). Covers to-infinitivals (To err is human) and bare 
infinitivals (I will gQ). 
Inflection, inflectional form. Inflection is variation in the form of a lexeme deter­
mined by syntactic properties like singular or plural number in nouns, preterite 
or present tense in verbs. Cat (singular) and cats (plural) are the two non-geni­
tive inflectional forms of the lexeme cat. 
Information-packaging construction. Construction presenting information differ­
ently from the way a canonical clause would, prototypically having the same 
truth conditions as a syntactically more basic counterpart. Examples: passive, 
existential, extra position, it-cleft, etc. Compare It was Kim who broke the vase 
(it-cleft) with Kim broke the vase (canonical). 
Integrated vs supplementary. Relative clauses are integrated if spoken as an inte­
gral part of the containing construction and normally not marked off by commas, 
their meaning being presented as an integral part of the message. They are sup­
plementary if spoken as a separate intonation unit and generally marked off by 
commas, dashes, or parentheses. Politicians who make extravagant promises 
aren 't trusted has an integrated relative clause (underlined); Politicians, who 
make extravagant promises, aren 't trusted has a supplementary one. 
Internal. Within the VP, like the underlined complement in I [lost Ԝ], or in NP 
structure, within the head nominal, like the underlined constituents in that [new 
biography of Stalin]. 
Interrogative clause. A clause type characteristically used, in main clauses, to ask 
a question: Are you ready? (closed interrogative); What have you done? (open 
interrogative) . 
Interrogative tag. Truncated interrogative clause added to the end of another 
clause, generally requesting some kind of confirmation: He hasn 't seen her, has 
he? 
Interrogative word. Word such as who, whom, what, which, when, etc., appearing 
in an open interrogative clause: What do you want? 
Intransitive. Having no object, as with a verb like faint or a clause like I fainted. 
Irrealis (mood). The special mood form instanced solely by were with 1 st or 
3rd person singular subject: I wish she were here. Often replaced by the less 
formal preterite form was. 
Irregular lexeme. Lexeme whose inflectional forms are not all predictable by 
general rule: build is irregular because the preterite and past participle form is 
built (not *builded). 
It-cleft. A clause like It was Sue who had the key, which corresponds to the more 
basic Sue had the key, but divides it in two: Sue is foregrounded as complement 
of be in a main clause with dummy it subject; had the key is backgrounded and 
expressed in a relative clause. 

302 
Glossary 
Lexeme. Unit corresponding to a word seen abstractly enough to include all of its 
inflectional forms: take, takes, took, taken, and taking are the forms of the 
lexeme take. 
Lexical base. Starting point for describing inflectional forms of a lexeme. Usually 
one form is identical with the lexical base; the others are formed from it by 
suffixes or modifications. 
Lexical verb. A verb belonging to the vast majority that are not auxiliary verbs. 
Licensing. A head licenses a dependent when only a subset of expressions filling 
the head position allow a dependent of that kind. In I broke a cup, for example, 
the object a cup is licensed by break since it can occur with only some verbs -
not, for example, with sneeze. 
Main clause. Normally, a clause that is not embedded as a dependent within 
some larger clause. A prototypical main clause can stand alone as a sentence: It 
is raining. 
Matrix clause. Clause within which a subordinate clause is embedded. In I think 
she said he was ill, the underlined clause is the matrix clause in which he was ill 
is embedded. 
Modal auxiliary. Auxiliary verb that marks mood: can, may, must, will, etc. Modals 
lack secondary forms and prototypically license a bare infinitival complement. 
Modal preterite. Use of the preterite where the meaning has to do with modality 
rather than past time: in He 'd be upset if you knew the preterite suggests that you 
may not know (not that you knew). 
Modality. A kind of meaning involving non-factuality or non-assertion: He may 
know her presents his knowing her as a possibility; You must go presents your 
going as an obligation. 
Modifier. Optional dependent that does not have to be licensed by the head: ripe 
tomatoes; met him in the morning; extremely rich; girl that everyone likes. 
Mood. Verbal category expressing various kinds of modality. Mostly marked in 
English by modal auxiliaries. The were of I wish that were true is an isolated 
irrealis mood form. 
Mute e. The letter e when it occurs at the end of a base in written English following 
a consonant symbol, and does not itself represent any sound: the e of hopf;., sizf;., 
pleasf;.. 
Negative clause. The simplest negative clauses are marked by not modifying the 
verb (She is not here) or by a verb containing the suffix ·n 't (She isn 't here); the 
verb in such cases must be an auxiliary. A negative declarative clause prototyp­
ically has the opposite truth conditions to its positive counterpart: in a context 
where She is here is true, She is not here will be false, and vice versa. 
Negative word. Word such as not, isn 't, can 't, nothing, or never that can mark 
a negative clause, or a word containing an affix like un· or dis· with meaning 
similar to not. 
New information. The information in a sentence which is not old information. 
Nominal. Unit intermediate between the NP and the noun, head of the NP. The 
nominal in the guy who fainted is underlined. It has the noun guy as its own head. 

Glossary 
303 
Nominative. The inflectional case of I, he, she, we, they, who. Contrasts with 
accusative. 
Non-affirmative contexts. Negative, interrogative and certain related construc­
tions where we can get expressions like at all which do not occur in positive 
assertions. Notice: He didn 't complain at all; Did he complain at all?; * He com­
plained at all. 
Non-affirmative items. Words or expressions such as at all, ever, and modal need, 
nonnally found in non-affirmative contexts: You needn 't go, but not * You need 
go. 
Non-count noun. Noun denoting an entity that is uncountable; hence a noun unable 
to combine with cardinal numerals: *one furniture, *two remains. 
Non-finite clause. Subordinate clause headed by gerund-participle (his writing 
it), past participle (having written it), or plain form in the infinitival construc­
tion (to write it). 
Non-personal. The gender of what as contrasted with who. See personal vs non­
personal. 
Noun. A category of lexemes that includes those denoting all kinds of physical 
objects, such as persons, animals and inanimate objects. They prototypically 
inflect for number (dog vs dogs), and head phrases functioning as subject or as 
object of a verb or preposition (The dog barked, 1 found a dog, Give it to the 
dog). 
Number. The grammatical contrast of singular vs plural, as with most nouns (cat vs 
cats). 
Object. Internal complement in VP or pp with the fonn of an NP: Jill paid the bill. 
Distinguished from predicative complement (Jill is a genius). Prototypically 
corresponds to subject of the corresponding passive: The bill was paid by Max. 
Old information. Infonnation assumed to be familiar to the addressee(s) via earlier 
mention in discourse, features of the utterance situation, or (in some cases) back­
ground knowledge. 
Open conditional. Conditional characteristically neutral as to whether the condi­
tion is or will be met: If he loves her he 'll change leaves it open whether he loves 
her or not. 
Open interrogative clause. Interrogative clause characteristically used, in main 
clauses, to ask an open question: Who said that? Contains at least one interrog­
ative word. 
Open question. A question with an open-ended set of answers: Who broke it? (with 
an open-ended set of answers of the form X broke it, where X stands for some 
person or persons). 
Paradigm. The set of inflectional forms of a lexeme together with their grammat­
ical labels (in the paradigm of verbs, preterite, 3rd person singular present 
tense, etc.). 
Partitive fused-head construction. NP construction with an explicit or understood 
of phrase, denoting part of larger set or quantity: [Some of the photos] are great; 
[some] are not. 

304 
Glossary 
Passive clause. Prototypically, a clause with auxiliary be followed by a past 
participle followed optionally by by + NP, and having an active counterpart: 
The record was broken by Lance (compare active Lance broke the record). 
Past participial. A clause with a past participle as head verb: a letter written by my 
aunt; Elvis has left the building. 
Past participle. Verb form used in the perfect (She has gone) and passive (It was 
cancelled). 
Past tense. Tense primarily indicating past time: wrote (preterite); have written 
(perfect). 
Perfect (tense). A past tense formed by means of the auxiliary have, normally fol­
lowed by a past participle: She has gone home; They may have seen you. 
Perfective interpretation. An interpretation of a clause describing a situation 
considered as a whole without reference to its temporal structure: Kim wrote a 
letter. 
Person. The grammatical system classifying primarily a subset of pronouns (and 
then derivatively NPs) in terms of the roles of speaker and addressee. 1st per­
son I and we normally indicate reference to (a group containing) the speaker; 
2nd person you normally indicates reference to (a group containing) the 
addressee but not the speaker. 3rd person is the default category with no indica­
tion of reference to either. 
Personal pronoun. The subclass of pronoun to which the system of person 
applies: I and we are 1st person, you is 2nd person, he, she, it, etc. are 3rd 
person. 
Personal vs non-personal. A gender system applying primarily to interrogative 
and relative pronouns, contrasting e.g. personal who (for persons and sometimes 
certain animals) vs non-personal what. Who is that? asks about a person; What is 
that? asks about something else. 
Plain case. A non-genitive case that is neither accusative nor nominative: you, cat, 
cats, etc. 
Plain form. Verb-form identical with the lexical base that is not a present tense; 
used in imperatives (Stop), subjunctives (It's vital that he stop), and infinitivals 
(I tried to stop; You must stop). 
Plain present. Present tense form of the verb identical with its lexical base and nor­
mally used with subjects that are either plural or 1 st or 2nd person: [ like it; you 
do too. 
Polarity. The system contrasting positive and negative: I'm ready has positive 
polarity, while I'm not ready has negative polarity. 
Positive clause. Non-negative clause: She is here (contrasts with negative She isn 't 
here). 
Predicand. What a predicative complement or adjunct relates to (usually an NP): 
Sue seems capable; [ consider Sue capable (Sue is the one who is thought 
capable). 
Predicate. The head of a clause, a function filled by a verb phrase: We washed 
the car. 

Glossary 
305 
Predicative adjunct. Phrase functioning as adjunct in clause structure, related to an 
overt or understood predicand. Unwilling to lie. Max confessed (Max is the one 
who was unwilling to lie). 
Predicative complement. Complement of V or P related to a predicand: Sue seems 
capable; I regard Sue [as capable] (the property of being capable is assigned to 
Sue). 
Predicative use. Use of an adjective or other expression as predicative comple­
ment or adjunct (as opposed to modifier): I'm hot illustrates the predicative use 
of hot. 
Predicator. Head of a VP, the function of the verb: in I [saw you] the predicator is 
saw. 
Prefix. An affix that attaches to the beginning of a base. 
Preposing. Placement before the subject of an element whose position in a more 
basic clause construction would be after the verb: Most of them he hadn 't even 
read. 
Preposition. A category of words whose most prototypical members denote rela­
tions in space or time (in, on, under, before, etc.) and take NPs as complement 
(in the car, on the chair). 
Prepositional verb. A verb taking a complement consisting of a PP with a particu­
lar preposition as head: ask in I asked for help; come in I came across some old 
letters. 
Present tense. An inflectional category of verbs whose primary use is to indicate 
present time. 
Preterite. A past tense marked by inflection: took is the preterite form of the 
lexeme take. 
Primary tense. The tense system marked by verb inflection, contrasting preterite 
tense (I knew her) with present tense (I know her). 
Primary verb-form. For verbs other than be the primary forms are those marked 
for tense (present or preterite). For be they also include irrealis mood were (as 
in if I were you). 
Progressive (aspect). Construction marked by auxiliary be taking a gerund­
participle complement: She was writing a novel; usually represents a situation 
as being in progress. 
Pronoun. A small subclass of noun not taking determiners. Includes personal 
pronouns (he, us, etc.), interrogative and relative pronouns (who, what, etc.), 
reciprocals (each other). 
Proper noun. A large subclass of noun characteristically functioning as head of 
proper names - names individually assigned to particular people, places, etc.: 
Bach, Paris, Islam, July. 
Pseudo-cleft. Construction like What we need is a knife, splitting the basic coun­
terpart We need a knife into two parts: a knife is foregrounded in an extra clause 
as complement of be, and the residue is backgrounded in a fused relative 
construction (what we need). 
Reciprocal pronoun. One of the pronouns each other and one another. 

306 
Glossary 
Reflexive pronoun. One of the personal pronouns ending in ·self(or, in the plural, 
·selves). 
Regular lexeme. Lexeme with inflectional forms all predictable by general rule. 
Relative clause. Subordinate clause of which the most central type functions as 
modifier to a noun: I've met the woman who wrote it. The noun serves as 
antecedent for an element within the relative clause which may be overt (like 
who in the above example) or merely understood (as in I've met the woman )!Ql. 
are referring to). 
Relative pronoun. One of the pronouns who, which, what, etc. as used in a relative 
clause or fused relative construction: He 's the one [who caused the trouble]; 
[What she said] is true. 
Relativised element. What is anaphorically linked to an antecedent in a relative 
clause; e.g., which in the book [which she reviewed], where the relativised ele­
ment is object. 
Remote conditional. Conditional where the condition is not fulfilled (I wouldn 't do 
that if I were you) or presented as a relatively remote possibility (If he loved her 
he 'd change). 
Reversed polarity tag. An interrogative tag with the opposite polarity to that of the 
clause it's attached to: You told them, didn 't you?; You didn 't tell them, did you? 
Scope of negation. The part of the sentence that the negative applies to semantically. 
In I didn 't log out purposely (with no pause), purposely is IN the scope of the neg­
ative: it means "I logged out, but not purposely". But I purposely didn 't log out 
has purposely OUTSIDE the scope of negation: it means "I chose not to log out". 
Secondary form. A non -primary inflectional form of the verb: plain form, 
gerund-participle, or past participle. 
Secondary tense. The tense system contrasting perfect tense (I have lived in Paris) 
and absence of perfect tense (I live in Paris). 
Shape. Spelling or pronunciation; different from inflectional form in that different 
inflectional forms may share a shape (the preterite and past participle of tie 
share the shape tied). 
Simple fused head. Construction where fused head can be replaced by dependent 
plus an understood head: in Should I wear the red shirt or [the blue] ? (blue 
means "blue shirt"). 
Situation. What is described in a clause, such as an action (She raised her hand), a 
process (The snow melted), or a state (He is asleep). 
Special fused head. Construction where the interpretation is not derivable from 
anything in the context: Many would disagree (many has the special interpreta­
tion "many people"). 
Specified preposition. Preposition whose presence in a PP is determined by the 
head verb, noun or adjective of which the PP is complement: rely on it; gifts to 
charity; afraid gf her. 
Specifying. The use of be illustrated in The last one to leave was lane, where 
the predicative complement specifies (i.e., identifies) the last one to leave. 
Contrasts with ascriptive. 

Glossary 
307 
Speech act. An act like making a statement, asking a question, or issuing a directive. 
Stranded preposition. Preposition which is not followed by the NP that is under­
stood as its complement: Who did you give it to?; This is the book [/ was talking 
about]. 
Subject. The function in clause structure (usually filled by an NP; before the pred­
icate in canonical clauses) that in active clauses describing action normally 
denotes the actor: Ed ran away. 
Subject-auxiliary inversion. Placement of the subject after (instead of before) the 
auxiliary: Is he ill? 
Subject-determiner. A genitive NP combining the functions of determiner and 
complement in NP structure: Kim 's house. 
Subjunctive clause. One of the three major constructions headed by a plain form 
verb (the others are imperatives and infinitivals): It is vital that I be kept 
informed. 
Subordinate clause. Normally, a clause embedded as a dependent in a larger 
clause, often differing in form from a main clause; e.g., This is the book she 
reviewed. 
Subordinator. A small class of words generally serving to mark a clause as subor­
dinate: I know [that it's possible]; I wonder [whether she 's ill]; [For her to be 
late] is quite unusual. 
Suffix. An affix that attaches to the end of a base. 
Superlative (grade, form). The term in the grade system indicating "most"; 
marked either inflectionally (as in hottest) or by the adverb most (most useful). 
Supplement. Loosely attached expression set off by intonation (and usually punc­
tuation) presenting supplementary, non-integrated content. Usually an adjunct 
(Luckily, we don 't have to do that) or a supplementary relative clause (I saw 
her son, who 's quite worried). 
Symbol. A letter or sequence of letters representing a single sound. In heat there are 
three symbols: h, ea (a composite symbol), and t. 
Tag. Truncated interrogative clause added to the end of another clause, requesting 
some kind of confirmation: He hasn 't seen her, has he? 
Tense. A system marked by verb inflection or auxiliaries whose basic use is to 
locate the situation in time: I liked it (past tense, past time), I like it (present tense, 
present time). 
To-infinitival clause. Infinitival clause containing the marker to: I want to see 
them; We arranged for them to meet. 
Transitive. A clause containing at least one object (I broke the vase), or verb used 
in such a clause (break). 
Truth conditions. The conditions that must be satisfied for the statement made by 
uttering a declarative main clause in a given context to be true: Oswald shot 
Kennedy and Kennedy was shot by Oswald have the same truth conditions, 
because if one is true the other is. 
Verb. A category of lexemes whose most distinctive property is that they normally 
inflect for tense (She was ill vs She id ill; We liked it vs We like it). 

308 
Glossary 
Verbal idiom. Idiom with a verb as the main element: kick the bucket ("die"),jall 
out ("quarrel"). 
Verbal negation. Negation of the verb, marked either by not (You need not answer) 
or by a verb-form containing the suffix ·n 't (You needn 't answer). 
Voice. The grammatical system contrasting active and passive clauses: Ed broke it 
is in the active voice, It was broken by Ed is in the passive voice. 
Vowel. Speech sound produced with unimpeded smooth airflow through the mouth. 
Vowel symbol. Letter or sequence of letters representing a vowel: u is a vowel 
symbol in hut, but not in quick. 

Index 
abbreviation, 287 
absolute negator, 153-4 
accusative, 5, 67-8,105-7, 165-6, 
190,210,295 
acronym, 287 
across the board, 229-30 
active clause/voice, 26, 239-43, 295 
addressee, 101-3, 171 
adjectival passive, 246 
adjective, adjective phrase, 16, 
18-20,96, lOO, 112-24, 133-5, 
195,280-1,295 
adjunct, 65-7, 71, 78-80,179-80, 
195,295 
adverb, adverb phrase, 16, 19-20, 
122-5,130-3,140,280-1,295 
affix, affixation, 27, 150-1, 282, 284, 
295 
affixal negation, 150-1 
agreement, 39, 68, 88-90, 108, 229n, 
242,295 
alternation, 266-7 
alternative question, 163-4 
American English vs British English, 
2,40n, 49n, 57n, 89-90, 128, 
153n, 177,200,202,267,269, 
271,276n 
anaphora, 101-2, 183-4,259,295 
answer, 162, 166-7 
antecedent, 101-2, 106, 183-4, 189, 
191,206-7,211,259,295 
appositive, 96 
approximate negator, 153-4 
ascriptive use of be, 76-7, 295 
aspect, 41-2,51-2,295 
asymmetric coordination, 230-1 
attributive (adjective, etc.), 18, 112, 
296 
attributive genitive, 11 0 
attributive-only adjective, 120 
auxiliary verb, 18,37-42, 152, 
219-20,260,296 
back-formation, 285-6 
backgrounded element, 251, 253-4 
backshift,47-8,50,57,296 
bare coordinate, 226-7, 296 
bare existential, 249-50 
bare genitive, 279 
bare infinitival, 31-2, 213, 296 
bare passive, 245-6 
bare relative, 184-5 
bare role NP, 74, 88, 140,296 
base, 27, 282, 296 
base plural, 278-9, 296 
be-passive, 245 
blending, 286-7 
bound element, 282 
British English: see American 
English vs British English 
canonical clause, 24-7, 63, 77-8, 296 
cardinal numeral, 86 
case,67-8,82, 106-7, 165-6, 190, 
210,296 
category, 14-15, 93n, 228-9 
category-changing/preserving affix, 
284 
catenative, 214-22, 245-6, 260, 296 
clausal negation, 151-4 
clausal sentence, 12 
clause, 12-14 
clause reduction, 260 
clause structure, 63-80 
clause type, 24-5,159-72,175,296 
clipping, 286 
closed interrogative/question, 
159-63,167,175,178-80,296 
collective noun, 89-90, 297 
command,8 
common noun, 17,84-5,297 
comparative (grade, etc.), lOO, 112, 
115,123,195-9,280-1,297 
comparative clause, 174-5,201-2, 
297 
comparison, 195-202 
comparison of equality, 199-200 
complement, 22-3, 65-7, 93-5, 
118-19,125,139-42,175-6,178, 
180,256,297 
complex catenative, 220-2, 297 
complex preposition, 146--7 
complex word, 281-2 
complex-intransitive/transitive, 78, 
119,246,248-9,297 
composite symbol, 268, 297 
compound, compounding, lOO, 
283-4 
compound sentence, 12 
compound tense, 48 
conditional,47, 171,231,297 
conjunction, 21 
consonant, 268, 297 
consonant doubling, 269-71 
constant polarity tag, 150 
constituent, 64, 145,221,234-6,252 
content clause, 174-81, 184, 192, 
202,247,297 
continuative perfect, 51, 297 
conversion, 284-5 
coordinate, coordination, 12, 16,25, 
88, 104, 107, 147, 161, 163, 21On, 
225-37,297 
coordinator, 16,21,225-6,230-3, 
298 
core meaning, 217, 222, 238-41 
correlative coordination, 232, 298 
count noun,85-8,169,259,298 
current relevance, 49 
dangling modifier, 207-9 
declarative, 8-9, 24, 159-61, 164, 
172,175-7,298 
default, 13, 26, 50, 53, 83, 85, 102, 
120,130, 149, 159, 161, 174, 197, 
226,234,243,248,250,256--7, 
272-3,277,279,298 
definite, definiteness, 19,91-3, 
250-1,298 
definite article, 91-2, 117, 298 
definitions, 5-9 
deictic, deixis, 101-2,242,261,298 
delayed right constituent 
coordination, 236 
denotation, 187 
309 

310 
Index 
deontic modality, 54-6, 57n, 157, 
177,213,298 
dependent, 13,22-3,225-7,230, 
298 
dependent genitive, 105, 107-8, 298 
descriptive grammar, 4-5 
determinative, determinative phrase, 
determiner, 16, 19,23,83,88, 
90-3,96,98-100,117,195, 
280-1,298 
dialect, 3-4 
direct object, 71-3, 299 
direction question, 167 
directive, 8, 53, 160, 167, 170-2,299 
dislocation, 255 
displaced subject, 249 
distributive coordination, 234 
ditransitive, 78, 244, 299 
dummy element, 38, 40, 152, 
218-22,249,252,255,260,299 
dynamic modality, 54-5 
echo question, 167-8 
ellipsis, 258-60 
end-attachment coordination, 236-7 
epistemic modality, 54-5, 57, 299 
exclamative, 73, 168-9, 175, 180-1, 
299 
exhaustive conditional, 179-80 
existential, 218, 238-40, 249-51, 
299 
expanded coordinate, 226, 230, 235, 
299 
extended existential, extension, 250 
external (complement, etc.), 67, 84, 
97,121-2,299 
extraposed object, 212-13, 249, 299 
extraposed subject, extraposition, 
26-7,176,178,180,212-13,218, 
238-9,247-9,255,257,299 
familiarity status, 242 
feminine, 103-5 
final e deletion, 271 
final y replacement, 271-2 
finite, 36-7, 96, 174,299 
first person imperative, 170-1 
foregrnunded element, 251-4 
foreign plural, 278-9 
formal vs informal style, 3-5, 75, 90, 
106, 110, 138-9, 153, 156, 165-6, 
171,176,190-1,199,202,210, 
245, 249n, 253, 255,278-9,286 
fossilisation, 143, 231, 299 
free element, 282 
fronting, 72-3, 138, 143, 165, 168, 
187,299 
function, 14-15,64,77, 93n, 107, 
228-9 
fused determiner-head, 98-9 
fused head,97-IOO, 110,117, 
259-60,299-300 
fused modifier-head, 99-100, 
114-15 
fused relative, 191-2, 254, 299 
futurate, 45, 53, 300 
future tense, 56 
gapped coordination, gapping, 222n, 
235 
gender, 103-5, 190, 300 
general definition/term, 7-9, 41-2, 
68-70,83,128,137,160 
genitive, 23, 90, 105, 107-10, 
279-80,300 
gerund,32 
gerund-participial/participle, 30, 
32-3,96,116,135-6,204,210, 
213-14,219,247,273,300 
get-passive, 245 
goal, 142,300 
gradability, gradable, 19, 118, 133-4, 
300 
grade, 112, 115, 123, 195-202, 
280-1,300 
grammatical, 2 
grammaticised use of preposition, 
136-7, 142 
head, 13,22-3,63, 130,225-7,230, 
300 
heavy element, 248 
historic present, 46 
hollow clause, 211, 250, 300 
idiom, 144-7,300 
imperative, 8-9, 24-5, 31-2, 36,152, 
161,170-2,300 
imperfective, 42-3, 52, 300 
incorrect, 4-5 
indefinite article, 92, 97, 117, 300 
independent genitive, 105, 107-8,300 
indirect complement, 95, 121, 
211-12,300 
indirect object, 71-3, 301 
infinitival, 31-2, 36, 96, 210, 
215-19,247,260,301 
inflection, 15-16, 17, 19,29-35,82, 
93, 105, 112, 128, 133-4, 152-3, 
199,264-81,301 
informal style: see formal vs 
informal style 
information packaging, 26-7, 
238-61,301 
information question, 167 
initialism, 287 
integrated relative, 187-91,301 
internal (complement, etc.), 67, 84, 
95-7,248,301 
internalised complement, 241-3 
interrogative, 8, 14,24,68, 139, 155, 
161-8, 172, 177-80, 190, 192, 
212-13,301 
interrogative phrase, 164, 178 
intervening NP, 215-16,220 
intonation, 162-4, 187,255 
intransitive, 78, 30 I 
inversion, 256-8 
irrealis, 58, 301 
irregular, 33-4, 268-9, 301 
it-cleft, 251-3, 301 
joint coordination, 234 
language-particular definition, 7-9, 
69-70 
layered coordination, 232-3 
left dislocation, 255 
letter, 268 
lexeme, 15-22,264-5,302 
lexical base, 31, 264-6, 302 
lexical morphology, 264-5, 
281-8 
lexical verb, 18, 37, 302 
lexicalisation, 287-8 
licensing, 65-6, 95, 302 
location, 142 
long passive, 243 
lower-level coordination, 233-4 
main clause, 25, 36, 161, 174, 186, 
302 
main-clause coordination, 233-4 
mandative, 176-7 
masculine, 103-5 
matrix clause, 174, 302 
modal auxiliary, 37, 39-41, 54-8, 
302 
modal preterite, 46-8, 58, 302 
modal remoteness, 46-8, 50 
modality, 53, 56-7 
modifier, 20, 22-3, 79-80, 99-100, 
119,125,141-2,302 
monotransitive, 78 
mood,41-2,53-9,302 
morphological modification, 266 
morphological operation, 266 
morphology, 6, 264-88 
multiple marking of negation, 3, 
156 
mute e 271, 302 

nationality adjective, 100 
negation, negative, 24, 38-9, 
149-57,200,253-4,258,302 
negative concord, 156 
negative orientation, 154-5 
neo-classical compound, 284 
neuter, 103-5 
never-attributive adjective, 120 
new information, 242-3, 251, 253, 
258,302 
nominal, 83-4, 95-6, 183,302 
nominative, 5, 67-8, 75, 105-7, 
165-6,190,205,210,303 
non-affirmative context/item, 40-1, 
154-5,198,303 
non-basic coordination, 234-7 
non-canonical clause, 24-7 
non-count noun, 85-8, 169, 199 
non-finite, 36-7, 96, 174,204-22, 
303 
non-gradable, 118 
non-personal (gender), 99, 190, 303 
non-restrictive, 188 
non-scalar comparison, 200 
non-standard, 2, 4, 124n, 156,279 
non-verbal negation, 151-4 
non-wh relative, 184-5, 189,212 
noun, noun phrase, 12-17,82-110, 
113-15,277-80,303 
noun clause, 176n 
nucleus, 255 
number, 31, 82, 85-90, 93, 249n, 
303 
object, 23, 64-8, 70-6, 140,303 
objective predicative complement, 76 
oblique genitive, I 10 
old information, 242-3, 251, 253, 
258,303 
open category, 122 
open conditional, 47, 303 
open interrogative/question, 159-62, 
164-9, 175, 178-81,303 
ordinal numeral, 100 
paradigm, 29-30, 303 
participle, 32 
particle, 144 
partitive fused head, 97-9, 114, 117, 
259-60,303 
parts of speech, 16-22 
passive, 26, 33, 71, 75, 217-22, 
238-47,304 
past tense, 6-8, 30, 43, 304 
past-participial, past participle, 20, 
33,96,116,135-6,204,214, 
274-7,304 
perfect, 33, 43-4, 48-51, 304 
perfective, 42-5, 52, 304 
peyon,31,88, 102,304 
personal (gender), 96, 166, 190,304 
personal pronoun, 102-8, 210, 255, 
259,304 
phonological modification, 285 
phrasal verb, 146n 
phrase, 13, 16,22-3 
plain case, 105, 107, 304 
plain form (of verb), 31-2, 35, 304 
plain grade, 112, 280 
plain present tense, 31, 35, 304 
plural, 15, 17,82-3,85-90,92, 
102-3, 112-13, 115, 169-70, 199, 
259,266-7,272-3,277-9 
plural-only noun, 85-6, 266 
polar question, 163 
polarity, 24, 149,304 
polarity-sensitive, 154-5 
positive, 24 
positive orientation, 154 
possessive, 109 
postposing, 256-7 
postpositive, 121 
predicand,76, 119, 134,304 
predicate, 12-14,63-5,304 
predicative (adjective, etc,), 18, 112, 
305 
predicative adjunct, 119, 134, 305 
predicative complement, 23, 73-8, 
119, 123-4, 135, 140, 190,305 
predicator, 63-5, 305 
prefix, 27,284,305 
preposing, 26, 73, 230, 256-7, 305 
preposition, preposition phrase, 16, 
20,94,96,127-47,176,179, 
222-3,230,305 
prepositional idiom, 146-7 
prepositional passive, 244-5 
prepositional verb, 142-4,244,305 
prescriptive grammar, 4-5, 56, 75, 
90, 105-7, 138, 156, 191, 197, 
202,206,209,232,247,249n 
present perfect, 48-9 
presentational, 251 
presupposition, 179, 253 
preterite, 17,30-1,33,46-50,57-8, 
274-7,305 
primary tense, 42, 44-8, 205, 305 
primary term (in comparison), 196 
primary verb-form, 30, 39, 59, 152, 
305 
productivity, 287-8 
pro-form, 258-61 
progressive, 41, 51-3, 305 
pronoun, 17,84, 100-8,259,305 
Index 
311 
proper noun, 17,84-5, 189,305 
prototype, 22 
present tense, 31, 44-6, 273-4, 305 
pseudo-cleft, 221, 254, 305 
punctuation, 187 
question, 159-68 
raised subject/object, 216-22 
reciprocal pronoun, 108, 305 
reduction, 258-61 
reflexive pronoun, 104-6, 108,306 
regular, 33, 268-9, 306 
relative clause, 25, 83, 96, 143, 
174-5,183-92,212,229-30,306 
relative phrase, 186 
relative pronoun, 183, 306 
relativised element, 185-7, 191, 
306 
remote conditional, 47, 57, 306 
replacement phrase, 166 
reported speech, 47-8 
response, 162 
restrictive relative, 188 
reversed polarity tag, 150, 154,306 
right dislocation, 255 
right nonce-constituent coordination, 
235-6 
rules of grammar, 5 
scope of negation, 156-7, 170-1, 
240,306 
secondary term (in comparison), 
196 
secondary tense, 42, 306 
secondary verb-form, 30, 39, 59, 
204,306 
semantics, 6 
sentence, 12, 160-1 
set comparison, 195-7 
sexist use of he, 104 
shape, shape sharing, 30, 33, 266, 
274,306 
short passive, 243 
sibilant, 267, 272 
simple catenative, 215-20 
simple fused head, 97-9, 114, 
259-60,306 
simple sentence, 12n 
simple word, 281 
singular, 15, 17,23,31,74,82-3,85, 
87-90,102,112-15,117,169, 
199,277,279 
singular-only noun, 85-6 
situation, 17, 43, 306 
source, 142 
speaker, 101-3 

312 
Index 
special fused head, 97-9, 114-15, 
306 
specified preposition, 136-7, 
139-40, 142, 143n, 244, 306 
specifying use of be, 76-7, 176, 
213-14,254,295,306 
speech act, 159-60, 172,306 
speech vs writing, 267-9 
spelling rules, 269-73 
split infinitive, 206 
Standard English, 1-4 
statement, 159, 167 
stimulus, 167-8 
stranding of preposition, 137-9, 187, 
201,244,306 
subclausal negation, 150-1 
subject, 12-15, 66-70, 136, 176, 
178,180,212-13,247-8,306 
subject-auxiliary inversion, 38-9, 
68, 162, 168, 178, 180-1,247, 
249,257-8,306 
subject--<lependent inversion, 258 
subject-determiner, 108-10, 306 
subjective predicative complement, 76 
subjectless non-finite, 206-9 
subjunctive, 31-2, 36, 59n, 172, 177, 
306 
subordinate clause, subordination, 
16,25,37,45,95, 130, 140, 157, 
161,174-81,247,306 
subordinating conjunction, 129 
subordinator, 16,21,129-30,174-6, 
178,184,205-6,306 
suffix, 27, 266, 284, 306 
superlative, 100, 112, 115, 123, 
195-8,280-1,306 
supplement, 79-80, 119,207,306 
supplementary relative, 187-9,301 
symbol, 268, 301 
symmetric coordination, 230 
syntactic determination, 206-9, 213, 
216 
syntax, 6, 265 
tag, 150-1, 154, 164,249,306 
tense, 41, 44-51, 306 
term comparison, 196 
that relative, 184-5 
to-infinitival, 31-2, 211-13, 306 
topic, 69-70 
traditional grammar, 11-13, 17, 
19-21,32,42,56, 59n,68-70, 
72n, 127-32, 176n, 188 
transitive, 78, 306 
truth conditions, 217, 306 
understood subject, 206-9 
variable lexeme, 29 
verb, verb phrase, 12-13, 16-17, 
29-59,63-4,115-17,135-6, 
273-7,306 
verbal idiom, 144-6,306 
verbal negation, 151-3, 170,306 
verbless clause, 222-3 
voice, 41, 240-1, 306 
vowel, 268, 306 
VP reduction, 260 
weight, 257 
wh relative, 184-6, 189-91,212 
word, 15-22,27,264-90 

