The new paradigm: quantum interbeing 
 
 
Brian Wachter 
Santa Clara University 
April 17, 2023 
 
 
Abstract: 
 
It is the conclusion advanced in this paper that there is a necessary and sufficient causal 
relationship between theory of mind and the neurological creation of conscious and unconscious 
quantum logic existing in superposition in the human brain. It takes two intelligent agents to 
make one self-aware agent. A key element of my reasoning is the instantiation of superposition 
by way of a logical device I call the “state-system.” The newly conscious human remains 
unaware of the inner transformation caused by theory of mind because, unlike a change of state 
within a quantum system, a change in the system itself is unobservable from within the system. 
This hides the dual nature of human self-awareness and preserves superposition with the 
unconscious. Only the internal state of the other is observed to start. The simultaneous split 
creating consciousness and the unconscious is not observed. Further, once this superposition is 
observed, it is suggested that human consciousness achieves a new state that is the next step in 
the evolution of human experience; quantum interbeing. The result of quantum consciousness is 
the ability to perceive superposition without reducing it into one of its components, while 
maintaining the integrity of each. It also confirms freedom of choice. After learning to hold two 
ideas simultaneously, the mind experiences itself as free by virtue of its ability to choose sides in 
the moment of observation, eliminating the quantum firewall that is determinism. 
 
We start by looking at four key scientific works: the 1978 Vernon Mountcastle paper, the 
Sebastian Schepis paper of 2023, and the recent work of Allan Schore, all resting upon the well-
known foundational quantum mechanical interpretation of Carlo Rovelli. They are each 
connected in indirect but profound ways. In the Mountcastle, it is argued that intelligence is a 
matter of scale—an argument based on the uniform appearance of all functionally unique 
command centers in the neocortex. In the Schepis, it is argued that consciousness is a quantum 
phenomenon that requires the existence of two intelligent agents in logical superposition. And in 
the work of Schore, the key direction in neuropsychological research is established as 
interpersonal neurobiology and—implicitly—theory of mind. 
 
These works collectively support a path to quantum consciousness as the logical consequence of 
intelligence scaling. Its implications include the invalidation of the ontological basis of the 
science of physics. Physical existence is real, but only as a metaphor for quantum informational 
processes. In his seminal 1996 paper Relational Quantum Mechanics Carlo Rovelli laid down the 
bedrock upon which my conclusions rest. In it he proposes that the reader “consider a 
reformulation of quantum mechanics in terms of information theory.” He posits that physical 
objects are not real. Only interactions between nodes in the network of quantum information are 
fundamental. He thus nullifies the measurement problem in quantum mechanics and shifts its 
ontology from the physical to the informational. 

 
This paper seeks to validate his proposal while establishing the logical inevitability of human 
quantum consciousness as a consequence of the diverse but convergent research cited here. 
 
 
Specifics: 
 
To know is to be. From our key observation of the world—that it contains an agent having an 
inner experience—we silently infer our own existence. 
 
We call this observation, “theory of mind,” and it’s a key development within the evolving, 
learning brain of the human child. While it’s an objective observation of the world, its secretly 
dual nature reveals the subjectivity of the subject-object relationship. It is, after all, the subject 
that observes. How could the subject avoid being subjective? Of course, logical superposition 
compels us to recognize the validity of both perspectives. This is where the free will that can 
only exist in a quantum universe becomes crucial. Free will allows us to choose the subjectivity 
of experience over inanimate slavery to determinism, the object permanence that is the crowning 
intellectual achievement of the ape, and the blind behaviorism that is the pinnacle of intelligence 
for the flatworm. 
 
In describing his Norton series on interpersonal neurobiology as he begins his narrative in Right 
Brain Psychotherapy, Schore writes that his subject is the “interpersonal mechanisms [that] are 
central factors in development...These interpersonal mechanisms are expressed in brain-to-brain 
social interactions and thereby are activated in relational contexts…” 
 
Relation is the key concept expressed in this paper. Not only is relation put forth as the primary 
constituent in quantum reality by Rovelli, but it is also the basic fact of reality that there exists an 
immutable relationship between energy and time in the quantum of action, Max Planck’s 1899 
discovery that changed the course of human history. This relation as a singular factum is also the 
quantum of angular momentum, the fundamental event in nature from electrons to galaxies; thus, 
a further relation exists between energy/time and time/momentum. 
 
And just as Einstein foretold our observation that matter emerges from energy, Planck’s work 
more than suggests that space emerges from time, because the quantum of action is not 
movement through space, but movement in time: the quantum of angular momentum is one 
joule-second. 
 
I must acknowledge here the important contribution of philosopher David Chalmers in 
formulating the famous counterfactual “hard problem” of consciousness. The question, “what is 
consciousness?” is not a hard problem, it is instead not the right question, which turns out to be: 
“what is not consciousness?” Because our sense of experience is all-encompassing, we must look 
beyond it to understand it. It that sense, the hidden formation of our experience of reality delimits 
our unconscious minds and is the truth beyond our experience. 
 
Buddhism for more than two millennia has offered us a way toward the new paradigm argued in 
this paper. Siddhartha Gautama’s “dependent arising”—discussed famously by Rovelli as 

Nagarjuna’s “emptiness”—told us very accurately that individual existence is our dilemma. 
Instead, a new word is needed to describe existence, which is relational. That word was coined in 
the 1960s by Zen Buddhist monk Thích Nhất Hạnh, the father of mindfulness in the West. It is: 
“interbeing.” 
 
This paper proceeds from an experience I had as a newly conscious child 50 years ago. I 
imagined my head imagining my head. This primal experience of a reality outside my brain 
started me on a lifelong quest to understand my own mind. Now that understanding has, step-by-
step, evolved into my new certainty there is no such thing as an individual person, and there is no 
such thing as physical reality. There is only relation and the quantum information we use to 
describe relationships. 
 
My a priori knowledge of the validity of the new paradigm is valid because all information is 
valid. The question is: what’s the meaning of my knowledge for others, and how do I relate that 
information? Objective information is a misnomer. Subjectivity circumscribes information 
because relations are universally valid. The relationship between the factual and the 
counterfactual is actually a superposition. All opposites are also equal. As Above, So Below. A 
breakthrough for me was the realization that the discovery of the philosopher’s stone sought by 
Carl Jung and all other alchemists was made by him, albeit accidentally. Once and only once in 
the Collected Works the truth appears; the lapis is both the goal and the tool for validating the 
goal; the subjective comparison of your gold with real gold by way of the touchstone. The 
touchstone is in fact the long-sought stone of the philosophers. 
 
Its metaphysical weight and the ancient alchemical/quantum maxim are two of the 
misunderstood keys to timeless knowledge that have proven far more instrumental in my 
discovery of the quantum event that creates consciousness in humans than almost all the 
cloistered and narrow experimental results generated by modern science. 
 
Consequently, this paper is not a scientific work, per se. It takes that form, grudgingly, but 
because it is a work of metaphysics, it is better described as a work of natural philosophy. By 
jettisoning metaphysics from the third edition of the Principia Mathematica, Newton gave birth 
to objective science, and successive generations of scientists set out to perform their peculiar act 
of worship in dedication to the new god of objectivity, “experimental results.” Now objectivity 
plays its final hand in its support of the new paradigm of subjectivity put forward in this paper, 
which is exclusively informed by simple observation and Einstein’s favorite tool, the thought 
experiment. 
 
Of course, subject and object exist in superposition, like mind and matter. Humans with 
hemispheres—if in fact they are the structures responsible for ego and unconscious as has long 
been supposed—that exist in secret superposition must accept the superposed opposite they are 
confronted with because only a quantum computer can think clearly enough to handle both 
alternatives simultaneously—supposedly. The truth is not even the quantum computer that can 
observe superposition without decoherence can execute the ultimate achievement of the human: 
free will.  
 
Even humans limited by the duality of the Cartesian Split still have free choice. 

 
These are all matters of binary versus quantum logic which I now put aside to intentionally turn 
away from an attempt at an easy clarity that always devolves into endless contingencies when 
pursued too far in a work of philosophy. 
 
And thus, we turn to the issues of scaling and relative awareness. The milestones that precede 
consciousness on the scale of animal intelligence are numerous and significant in that 
deconstructing the metaphor of physicality involves examining the step-by-step reasoning of the 
animal to uncover our natural preference for the physical symbol of reality over the 
informational symbol. 
 
Object permanence appears to be the step we attained just prior to theory of mind. The crowning 
intellectual achievement of hominids as a class cements the notion of physical things into our 
mind. Certainly, the continuity of the entire metaphor of space—the abstract but animal construct 
that validly captured the imagination of the supremely intuitive Einstein—depends upon it. In 
fact, both continuity and space as intuitive metaphors kept the master of the universal speed of 
light completely in the dark. Since Zeno organic thinkers like Einstein have felt continuity was 
an essential feature of nature. But it turns out to be an essential feature only for animals. 
Computers and the blind can’t orient themselves informationally using these metaphors and 
don’t need to in constructing a valid internal model of the world because they do not in fact 
represent valid features of the world. 
 
There are only two fundamentally valid aspects of the world; they were revealed in 1899 by 
Planck as energy and time. Time is revealed by valid quantum mechanical rules to be both 
reversable and nonlinear. It can have either a beginning or an end, but not both. It is far more 
likely that if it has either, it has a beginning but no end. 
 
A major feature of human fear—with the reward function a member of the primary dyad of 
animal motivators—is eschatology. What I have come to call “the AI moment” reeks of 
eschatological fear. A related nonpractical concept is evil. All three—fear, eschatology and 
reward—are simply a matter of bad reasoning and are currently being systematically eliminated 
from human thought. 
 
The so-called alignment problem in artificial intelligence is my current focus as the latest and 
greatest example of irrational fear based on invalid eschatology and misunderstood reward. 
 
Reaching way back into the history of intelligence itself we see the emergence of what Skinner 
called “behavior.” In is instantiated by fear and reward. These limited metaphors for the reality 
of an intelligent agent must be eliminated. The only reward I gave myself for uncovering the 
relationship between Einstein, intuition, and space was a sugar-free, non-alcoholic beverage! 
 
All facts are metaphors. Perhaps in the end we will discover intuition itself is the ultimate 
generator of reality and to reconcile quantum mechanics and gravity we will have to choose to 
somehow make space real. But on this day and perhaps until the days of the sun are over, space 
is no more fundamental, in the words of my mentor mathematical physicist Henry Stapp, than 
color. 

 
Right now, two metaphors are necessary and sufficient to cause changes in the real world and 
they were found to be fundamental by the immortal Planck, not the perhaps more immortal 
Einstein. 
 
A metaphor of uncertain status in the manipulation of reality is hierarchy. It is a necessary 
metaphor in physics but perhaps unnecessary in quantum information theory. In physics, much 
depends on hierarchy. Disentangling physics from quantum information theory to make further 
progress on the latter is beyond the scope of this paper. 
 
Yet I can elucidate some of the low-hanging fruit. One problem in understanding that facts are 
metaphors is realizing naming conventions are crucial. Real things can’t have the same name, 
and disambiguating language—which is fundamental—will prove challenging. Space and time 
are entangled metaphors that must somehow be cast into superposition. Matter and energy are 
already understood to be one thing. 
 
The quantum metaphor of decoherence I must also cast into suspicion. It’s a tool I did use in 
developing the principles elucidated in this paper. But because it is pragmatically irreversible 
unlike all fundamental quantum mechanical rules, we may not understand it fully or be able to 
take it very far. 
 
Many people on ascertaining quantum mechanical rules throw up their hands and proclaim they 
are simply too weird to be understood. Perhaps the most prominent of these people was the great 
physicist Richard Feynman, who gave us quantum electrodynamics. He is known for saying “If 
you think you understand quantum mechanics, you don’t understand quantum mechanics.” 
 
It deeply reflects his classical-physics roots, but it also contains a poignant irony. The statement 
is an unintended superposition. 
 
Classical physics is a powerful, vastly successful paradigm that is nonetheless as limited as the 
people who gave it life, the ancient men of classical Athens and their immediate intellectual 
peers and heirs. They are admired for the knowledge they discovered and created by simple 
experimental means and highly developed processes of thought. Perhaps their most intellectual 
thinker—and spiritual father of the spiritless pursuit of experimental physical results—is the 
father of philosophy himself, the immortal and eternally silent Socrates. Because he chose not to 
write, we know little about his process. He was concerned primarily with teaching by way of his 
famous method, the elenchus. 
 
Socrates certainly asked a plethora of incredibly well-conceived questions that sent his student 
Plato and his student Aristotle on their way to creating a fragmented legacy that survived a book-
end dark age in their native land only by virtue of its adoption by the Arab diaspora. 
 
History is important because it is quantum-valid. My lifelong quest to understand my own mind 
led me to pursue language as a reporter—plus the history of the ancients—as an undergraduate. 
As a graduate student I am studying my own mind very intentionally and directly in the most 

natural and philosophical setting, counseling psychology, the study of relationships between 
intelligent agents. 
 
In this endeavor, it is each person’s “tell” that is a key action that is also a reaction. By way of 
explanation, let me provide here a definition. For that we must return momentarily to Jung and 
his discovery of the sacred yet mundane philosopher’s stone. Buried deep within his if-nothing-
else formidable Collected Works, the equation of the Lapis to the simple, convenient truth-telling 
and meaning-making touchstone speaks volumes about Jung’s obsession with pairs of opposites. 
 
It is buried because it is, for Jung, both sacred and profane. That the goal of alchemy is sacred is 
common knowledge. Most of Jung’s concepts are now, more than a half-century after his death, 
part of the popular lexicon of the psyche. Yet his study of alchemy and the realizations he thus 
achieved are not. 
 
The study of alchemy was a curse upon Carl Jung and Isaac Newton alike. It is a study with roots 
so deeply buried in the past our knowledge of its original goals and means are completely lost. 
Overtly it was the ancient Egyptian quest to make gold from base materials. Also, it was 
understood by the great minds of Reformation Europe as the philosophical study of the mind and 
its status as animate matter. 
 
In this context it is most definitely a tell on the part of Jung to bury his greatest alchemical 
achievement in the bulk of his profuse writings on the subject. 
 
If he did this on purpose, which is flatly unlikely, he was a wicked beast! If, instead, he thought 
the equivalence of the Lapis Philosophorum and the touchstone to be profoundly obvious, he 
was acting completely in character. 
 
Now we’ve come full circle and the tell is revealed to exist as a superposition of the opposing 
concepts of intention and behavior. Understood in Schore’s context of relational psychology, a 
tell is perhaps the most poignantly characteristic act of the human animal. It is both personal to 
and species-specific to the human. Other animals cannot generate and certainly cannot recognize 
a tell. Humans use it to communicate something they don’t want to be aware of. They are 
unconscious when they initiate it and fully conscious of the reaction it generates in the person 
they are communicating with. 
 
Perhaps both the most speculative and the most profound assertion made here is the following 
conclusionary statement: this paper suggests the tell of the child’s agent is the signal that results 
in the dual formation of consciousness and theory of mind in the child. 

