Vol.:(0123456789)
Synthese (2021) 199:5107–5124
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-020-03017-z
1 3
The concreteness of objects: an argument 
against mereological bundle theory
Uriah Kriegel1
Received: 15 June 2020 / Accepted: 28 December 2020 / Published online: 7 January 2021 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. part of Springer Nature 2021
Abstract
In a series of publications, L. A. Paul has defended a version of the bundle theory 
according to which material objects are nothing but mereological sums of ‘their’ 
properties. This ‘mereological’ bundle theory improves in important ways on ear-
lier bundle theories, but here I present a new argument against it. The argument 
is roughly this: (1) Material objects occupy space; (2) even if properties have spa-
tial characteristics, they do not quite occupy space; (3) on no plausible construal 
of mereological composition does a mereological sum of non-space-occupying 
entities occupy space; therefore, (4) material objects are not mereological sums of 
properties.
Keywords Material objects · Bundle theory · Mereological bundle theory · L.A. 
Paul · Concrete/abstract
1  Mereological bundle theory and its attractions
The more you examine a material object, such as a table or a ﬂower, the more prop-
erties of it you come to know. First you establish that the table is brown, rectangular, 
four-legged, and hard; later you discover that it is made of cherry wood, weighs 53 
kilos, is 140 cm across, is manufactured in Taiwan, and is more precisely sienna-
brown; ultimately you might learn what percentage of the table is carbon, oxygen, 
hydrogen, and so on, what the table’s exact mass is, and the like ‘scientiﬁc proper-
ties.’ But however long you examine the table, you will never detect something that 
goes beyond the table’s properties, say a bare substrate that ‘supports’ the properties.
According to the bundle theory of material objects, there is a very simple reason 
for this: all a material object is is the collection of its properties. Our table is nothing 
more than a bundle of table-y properties. Very generically, the bundle theory says 
this:
 * Uriah Kriegel 
 
theuriah@gmail.com
1 
Department of Philosophy, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA

5108
 
Synthese (2021) 199:5107–5124
1 3
(BUNDLE) For any material object O, there is a bundle B of properties, such 
that O = B.
(BUNDLE) faces a number of immediate challenges, however. One way to bring out 
the attraction of mereological bundle theory, as developed notably by Paul (2002, 
2006, 2017a, b), is to consider the way it elegantly responds to these challenges.
Perhaps the ﬁrst challenge (BUNDLE) faces is that it is unclear what a bundle is. 
It is perhaps most natural to construe bundles as sets. However, sets are typically 
understood as abstract objects, whereas tables are concrete (Hoﬀman and Rosenk-
rantz 1994, p. 61). By Leibniz’s Law, O cannot be identical with B if O is concrete 
and B is abstract.
One might take bundles to be simply pluralities. On this construal, what the table 
is identical to is just the table-y properties  P1, …Pn ‘taken together.’ This approach 
faces its own embarrassment, however, insofar as it involves an identity on one side 
of which is a plurality and on the other side a single individual. This is quite puz-
zling: again, by Leibniz’s Law, we might expect that if B is a plurality whereas O 
is a oneness, then B ≠ O. Although there are certainly live approaches to many-one 
identities (see Contoir and Baxter 2014), it is mutatis mutandis preferable for the 
bundle theory if it can avoid getting mired in this particular can of worms.
Mereological bundle theory oﬀers a simple way out, construing bundles as mere-
ological sums. Unlike sets, sums are not by nature abstract; on the contrary, a sum 
of concreta is itself concrete. At the same time, the sum of table-y properties is one 
whole: the whole is one, even though its parts are many. According to mereological 
bundle theory, then, the table’s properties are parts of the table, and the table is the 
(one) whole which they jointly compose.
Peter Simons (1994, p. 563) has argued that if you break down an airplane to its 
various parts, you do not ﬁnd its weight among them. As an objection to mereologi-
cal bundle theory this would misﬁre, though, insofar as it presupposes that the air-
plane’s only parts are spatial parts. In Paul’s mereological bundle theory, the table’s 
properties are neither spatial nor temporal parts of the table, but what Paul (2002) 
calls logical parts. The notion of logical part certainly calls for elucidation, but one 
way to characterize logical parthood is in terms of the mereological axioms that 
govern its behavior (see Paul 2002, p. 585).
A second challenge (BUNDLE) faces concerns arbitrarily bundled properties. 
Imagine a world with only two tables: one brown and rectangular, the other beige 
and round. Intuitively, the bundles comprising (1) brownness and rectangularity and 
(2) beigeness and roundness correspond to material objects, whereas the bundles 
comprising (3) brownness and roundness and (4) beigeness and rectangularity do 
not. But what separates the former pair from the latter?
In addressing this challenge, one’s ﬁrst instinct is to require that the properties be 
‘co-instantiated.’ The problem here is that ‘co-instantiated’ seems to mean ‘instan-
tiated by the same object,’ which presupposes that we already have objects. More 
commonly, bundle theorists identify objects with bundles of compresent (i.e., col-
located) properties (Russell 1950, p. 128). But this has its own cost, insofar as ‘com-
present’ seems to mean ‘present in the same location,’ which presupposes that we 
can identify locations independently of objects—something that relationalist about 

5109
1 3
Synthese (2021) 199:5107–5124 
space will deny. (It would be a shame if bundle theory were viable only for philoso-
phers who reject relationalism.)
The mereological bundle theorist has a much more straightforward response to 
oﬀer, namely, restricted composition of properties. It is true that in Classical Mere-
ology composition is unrestricted, such that for any plurality of xs, there is a sum 
that the xs compose. But non-classical mereologies that do not include the axiom 
of unrestricted composition are available as well, and so mereological bundle the-
ory may avail itself of one of them. It is important in this context to underline a 
distinction between pure and applied mereology. The pure/applied distinction is 
familiar from mathematics: all consistent and complete mathematical systems are 
equally good from the ‘pure’ standpoint, but only some of them actually apply to—
i.e., accurately describe—worldly phenomena. Euclidean geometry and Riemannian 
geometry are equally good as purely formal systems, but only the latter describes 
the spatial structure of the world. Likewise, although many purely formal mereo-
logical systems are possible, the mereological bundle theorist might insist that only 
those with restricted composition of properties describe the compositional structure 
of objects—as far as their logical composition from properties is concerned. The 
bundle theorist can of course allow that composition of objects is unrestricted, as 
long as the composition of properties is restricted.
There is an independent question, of course, as to what principles govern—
restrict—the composition of properties. A fully developed mereological bundle the-
ory would have to include a story about this. But as Paul (2017a, p. 39) points out, 
one option—her favorite—is to embrace ‘brutal composition’ of properties. Because 
it has proven diﬃcult to ﬁnd a principled way to draw the distinction between 
sum-composing pluralities and non-sum-composing ones (Van Inwagen 1990), 
one option in the extant literature has been primitivism about composition: it is a 
brute fact that these pluralities over here compose a sum and those over there do not 
(Markosian 1998). This kind of brutal composition can be recruited by the bundle 
theorist, especially given that some prominent traditional bundle theorists held any-
way that the privileged relation that distinguishes object-constituting bundles from 
non-object-constituting ones is primitive (Goodman 1951).
A last major bundle-theoretic challenge worth discussing here is Max Black’s 
(1952) two-sphere case. There is a possible world in which there are only two mate-
rial objects—two qualitatively indistinguishable spheres that persist from the begin-
ning of the world to its end. In fact, there are many such possible worlds. In some of 
them, space might be absolute, so that the two spheres actually have diﬀerent spatial 
properties: one sphere is located in  L1 whereas the other is located in  L2. But unless 
it is a necessary truth that space is absolute, in some two-sphere worlds space is rela-
tional, so that the spatial properties (including relational spatial properties) of each 
sphere mirror those of the other. In those worlds, the two spheres would appear to 
have the exact same properties. Accordingly, there is only one bundle of properties 
in them, albeit two material objects. And this seems to suggest that neither object 
can really be nothing but that bundle of properties.
The extant literature contains a number of responses, including that the relevant 
worlds—at least as described—are not really possible (O’Leary-Hawthorne 1995). 
But a safer response, respecting the apparent possibility of the relevant worlds, 

5110
 
Synthese (2021) 199:5107–5124
1 3
distinguishes the two spheres by construing the properties being bundled as so-
called tropes. Traditionally, properties have been construed either as in re universals, 
that is, entities which can be wholly present in diﬀerent places at the same time; or 
as ante rem universals, that is, entities not present in any place and either not present 
at any time or present at all times.1 A trope construal casts properties as ‘individ-
ual accidents’ or ‘abstract particulars’ (Williams 1953): entities such as this desk’s 
roundness, that table’s woodenness, and yonder ﬂower’s pinkness, which are each 
present in only one place at a time. Corresponding to these three construals of prop-
erties are three diﬀerent kinds of bundle theory, identifying objects with bundles of 
ante rem universals, bundles of in re universals, or bundles of tropes. Mereologi-
cal bundle theory does not as such have to commit to any one of these. However, a 
mereological trope bundle theory will diﬀuse the two-sphere problem most straight-
forwardly, since corresponding to the two spheres are two bundles of numerically 
distinct tropes: two sphericality tropes, two grayness tropes, and so on (see Camp-
bell 1981, pp. 482–483).
In its bid to expel material objects from the fundamental furniture of the world, 
assaying them instead as derivative upon properties, bundle theory belongs to a long 
ontological tradition of trying to shrink as much as possible the minimal base of 
reality. Its own history is illustrious, going back at least to Porphyry’s Isagoge in 
the third century, with its ﬁrst trope version showing up in the twelfth-century scho-
lastic logician Gilbert of Poitiers’ work (Erismann 2014). Arguably, however, it is 
the recently developed mereological version of the theory that is most promising. 
Nonetheless, I will now argue, it faces a major challenge, to which no comfortable 
response is available. In the next section, I will present my basic argument against 
mereological bundle theory. In the subsequent sections, I will defend the argument’s 
central premises.
2  The space-occupation argument
One recurring but somewhat impressionistic complaint against bundle theory is that 
a collection of properties just does not seem ‘substantial enough’ to make up a mate-
rial object (cf. Paul 2017a, p. 34). The thingy-ness of the object seems lost, so to 
speak. Now, put this way, the bundle theorist is entitled to reject the complaint as 
question-begging. The bundle theory just is the theory that a corporeal substance is 
a collection of properties; simply asserting that, no, a collection of properties is not 
corporeal, or not substantial, does not constitute new input to the dialectic.
The complaint, or one very like it, may however admit of a less question-beg-
ging articulation. The purpose of this section is to present such an articulation. The 
resulting argument is roughly this: (1) Material objects occupy space; (2) proper-
ties do not occupy space; (3) mereological sums of non-space-occupying entities 
do not occupy space; therefore, (4) material objects are not mereological sums of 
properties.
1 I use the term ‘entity’ not for concrete particulars but in the most generic way possible, to stand for the 
ontological summum genus.

5111
1 3
Synthese (2021) 199:5107–5124 
***
Material objects are concrete particulars. Their particularity consists in the fact 
that they can be wholly present in only one place at a time. What their concreteness 
consists in is a more controversial aﬀair. Although the notion of concreteness is not 
my direct concern here, reﬂection on the fact that material objects are paradigmati-
cally concrete entities is helpful in introducing the notion that does concern me—
namely, that material objects occupy space.
Material objects have spatiotemporal properties, and this may be thought to con-
stitute their concreteness. This is problematic, however: Chess was invented in India 
(spatial property) in the 6th century (temporal property), yet intuitively, chess—not 
this or that speciﬁc chess set, but chess as such—is an abstract entity (Rosen 2017).
It might be suggested that concreta are distinguished from abstracta in having not 
just spatiotemporal properties, but spatiotemporal locations. Intuitively, however, 
tropes have locations too, despite being abstract particulars (hence not concrete 
particulars). What trope theorists have often suggested is that tropes are abstract 
because there can be many of them in the same place at the same time—they do not 
‘exclude each other’ from the same space (e.g., the desk’s brownness, its rectangu-
larity, and its solidity are all in L).2 In contrast, the desk itself is concrete, in that it 
cannot be in the same place as the chair or the computer at the very same time—
these do ‘exclude each other.’ Concreta, on this view, are those entities of which 
there can be only one in a place at a time.
The problem with this approach is that it is incompatible with the (rather com-
mon) view that a material object and its matter are not identical, despite being per-
fectly collocated (see Baker 1997; Fine 2003 among many others). On the assump-
tion that both the material object and its matter (e.g., both the statue and the lump of 
clay of which it is made) are concrete, concreta can be collocated—i.e., located in 
the same spatial region at the same time—and thus fail to ‘exclude each other.’ This 
is not a problem for ‘one-thingists’ about the statue and the clay, of course. Nonethe-
less, ‘two-thingists’ can coherently claim that both the statue and the clay are con-
crete entities, and this means there must be some other notion of concreteness they 
are working with.
What underlies the intuition that both the statue and the clay-lump are concrete, 
even if they fail to ‘exclude each other’ spatially? I suggest that it is the fact that 
each occupies a portion of space. It is okay for two concrete entities to occupy the 
same region of space, so long as each occupies some region of space. What underlies 
this conception of concreteness is the idea that a concrete entity is not only located 
at a region, but occupies it. A statue does not only allow us to locate it through 
coordinates in space, it ﬁlls up the space delimited by those coordinates. Moreover, 
I would suggest, it is precisely because tropes, although located in space, do not 
occupy space, that we take tropes to be abstract rather than concrete particulars.
2 There is another strand in trope theory that construes abstractness as a certain type of incomplete-
ness—tropes are abstract because they are only fragments of being. However, as Donald Williams him-
self noted, strictly speaking this leads to the conclusion that ‘everything but the World All is abstract in 
this broad sense’ (1953, p. 14).

5112
 
Synthese (2021) 199:5107–5124
1 3
What does it mean to “occupy” a region? We can obtain an initial grasp of this 
notion by contrasting material objects with such particulars as tropes, states of 
aﬀairs, and events. We are comfortable saying that the desk’s trope of costing $70 
plus tax is located where the table is, but it feels odd to say that the table’s costing-
$70-plus-tax trope occupies the space occupied by the table. Ditto for the state of 
aﬀairs of the statue’s costing $70 and the event of the statue being sold for $70. This 
is related to the fact that the statue is something you can grab with your hands and 
move from one region to another, whereas it is impossible to grab in one’s hands a 
state of aﬀairs, an event, or a trope—except, of course, by grabbing the associated 
material object. States of aﬀairs, events, and tropes are all particulars, and accord-
ingly have a location. But they diﬀer importantly from material objects in their mode 
of being, insofar as they do not occupy the region at which they are located. This dif-
ference is captured by the conception of concreteness under consideration.
Oﬀering a theoretical analysis of the occupation relation is a trickier issue. It is 
important to me to insulate the argument to follow from the dialectical vicissitudes 
likely to attend any speciﬁc analysis of the sort. But the following is clearly a central 
feature of space-occupying entities: every spatial proper part of the region occupied 
by the entity is occupied by some spatial proper part of the entity. If a $70 statue 
occupies region R, and P is a spatial proper part of R, then the statue has a spatial 
proper part that occupies P. (Note well: This is not to say that the statue must have 
a physical part that occupies P! A statue has many tiny empty spaces inside it—
‘empty’ in the sense that no physical object occupies them—but these are still parts 
of the statue, i.e., spatial parts.) Obviously, this is the case also for any material 
object collocated with the statue, such as the clay-lump, and is also the case with 
extended simples, if such there be: an extended simple has no physical parts but, 
being extended, certainly has spatial parts. In contrast, the same is not true of the 
statue’s trope of costing $70: even if the trope is located in R, and therefore also in P, 
there does not seem to be a spatial proper part of the trope that is located exactly in 
P. Similar comments can be made about states of aﬀairs and events.
***
It follows from what has been said so far that unlike tropes as standardly con-
strued, it is essential to material objects such as tables, statues, and lumps of clay 
that they occupy space. No material object can exist without occupying some por-
tion of space—indeed, it may belong to the very mode of being of material objects 
that they occupy space.
If one thing that distinguishes tropes from material objects is that material objects 
occupy space whereas tropes do not, then it is hard to see how any mereological sum 
of tropes could amount to a material object. When you put together four entities, 
each of which with a volume of 1 m cube, you may produce a bigger entity whose 
volume is four meters cube. But if you put together four entities that do not have any 
volume, you have not started to make progress toward producing any entity with 
nonzero volume. Here, then, is a ﬁrst anti-bundle argument:
1. Material objects occupy space;
2. Tropes do not occupy space;

5113
1 3
Synthese (2021) 199:5107–5124 
3. A mereological sum of entities that do not occupy space does not occupy space; 
therefore,
4. Mereological sums of tropes are not material objects.
This argument bears two signiﬁcant improvements.
First, if tropes do not occupy space, then plausibly universals do not either. This 
is obviously the case with ante rem universals, which are by deﬁnition altogether 
a-spatial. But as I will argue in Sect. 3, it is also true of in re universals. So Premise 
2 can be generalized to all properties however construed.
Secondly, the premises above are stated as generics.3 But if we opt for a more 
precise formulation featuring quantiﬁers, we gain another degree of freedom: since 
the denial of (BUNDLE) is a mere existential, we can proﬁtably demote Premise 1 to 
an existential, namely, that at least some material objects occupy space. It seems to 
me that the only reasonable way to deny this premise is by denying that there are 
material objects. That would be true either if there were no objects at all or if there 
were only immaterial objects. Perhaps one of these claims could be defended (some 
ontic structural realists defend the ﬁrst, Berkeleyan idealists defend the second). But 
accepting either would only mean that the bundle theory of material objects has no 
subject matter—there is nothing it is a theory of. The aim of my argument, however, 
is to show that even if the bundle theory of material objects has a subject matter, it 
cannot be a correct theory of it. (Either way, the upshot would be that there is noth-
ing of which the bundle theory is true.)
Combining these two improvements, we obtain the following anti-bundle 
argument:
1. Some material objects occupy space;
2. No properties occupy space;
3. No sum of entities that do not occupy space occupies space; therefore,
4. Some material objects are not sums of properties.
Call this the space-occupation argument. One may oﬀer the space-occupation argu-
ment as a way to ‘dress up in words’ the pretheoretic intuition that collections of 
properties are not ‘substantial enough’ to constitute a material object. But the argu-
ment has whatever force it has regardless of whether it captures accurately that 
intuition.4
3 Typically, generics are produced with so-called bare plurals, as in ‘Dogs have four legs.’ The fact that 
some dogs are three-legged makes the universally quantiﬁed claim ‘All dogs are four-legged’ false, but 
depending on how many and which dogs are three-legged, the fact that some dogs are three-legged is 
consistent with the truth of the generic ‘Dogs are four-legged.’ What the correct semantics for generics is 
a lively area of debate in both linguistics and philosophy (see Leslie and Lerner 2016); we need not take 
a stand on it here.
4 Some attempts to address the insubstantiality worry may manage to address other aspects of what we 
expect substances to be like, but fail to recover this aspect of concreteness. Simons (1994), for instance, 
attempts to recover existential independence of substances within a trope-bundle framework. Even if 
Simons succeeded, however, this would not yet capture the aspect of space-occupation.

5114
 
Synthese (2021) 199:5107–5124
1 3
It is important to distinguish the space-occupation argument from a nearby argu-
ment that would be a simple instance of the fallacy of composition. Thus, the fol-
lowing is clearly fallacious:
1. Some tables are visible;
2. No particle is visible; therefore,
3. Some tables are not sums of particles.
This is clearly a fallacious argument, and so would this be:
1. Some material objects occupy space;
2. No properties occupy space; therefore,
3. Some material objects are not sums of properties.
But the space-occupation argument is of course very diﬀerent from this last argu-
ment—it contains an extra premise, to the eﬀect that no sum of entities that do not 
occupy space occupies space. This renders it perfectly valid. Indeed, the following is 
also a perfectly valid argument:
1. Some tables are visible;
2. No particle is visible;
3. No sum of entities which are invisible can be visible; therefore,
4. Some tables are not sums of particles.
There is no fallacy in this argument, of composition or otherwise. The only problem 
with it is that it contains a manifestly false premise—the third. But as I argue in 
Sect. 4, the corresponding premise in the space-occupation argument—that no sum 
of entities that do not occupy space occupies space—is highly plausible.
The remainder of this paper oﬀers a sustained defense of the argument’s prem-
ises: of Premise 2 in Sect. 3 and Premise 3 in Sect. 4. I do not pursue a defense of 
Premise 1 (i.e., that some material objects occupy space), since as noted the only 
reasonable way to deny it is by denying that the bundle theory of material objects 
has a subject matter.
3  Space-occupying properties?
In this section, I consider the mereological bundle theorist’s options for denying 
that properties do not occupy space. This would probably be Paul’s approach to the 
space-occupation argument. In general, it is Paul’s consistent aim to reject any ulti-
mate object-property dichotomy, that is, to collapse the distinction between objects 
and properties, identifying a single nature shared by both (i) the kinds of entities 
philosophers traditionally consider to be objects and (ii) those they traditionally con-
sider to be properties. If objects and properties have a single nature, there should be 
no obstacle to ‘generating’ the former by summing the latter.

5115
1 3
Synthese (2021) 199:5107–5124 
The issue, from our perspective, is whether this can really be done. If it is true 
that objects occupy space whereas properties, although located in space, do not 
occupy it, then this would appear to constitute an obstacle to collapsing the object-
property distinction and generating objects from properties.5 It is thus natural for the 
mereological bundle theorist to seek an account of properties as occupying space 
after all. In this section, I consider ﬁrst the prospects for space-occupying tropes, 
then the prospects for space-occupying universals.
It might be suggested that all a bundle theorist needs, in order to ensure that a bun-
dle of properties occupies space, is the claim that one of the properties therein bun-
dled is the property of occupying space. However, this faces the following dilemma: 
does the property of occupying space occupy space or not? If it does not occupy 
space, it is unclear how merely bundling it with other entities which do not occupy 
space could make it the case that the bundle occupies space. It must be part of the 
suggestion, then, that the property of occupying space occupies space. We must real-
ize, though, that this in no way falls out of the nature of the property. The nature of 
the property of being blue is not that it is blue; indeed, on most views properties are 
colorless. What the nature of the property of being blue is is that whatever instanti-
ates it is blue. Because an object has the property, the object is blue—whether or not 
the property is. Given this, to claim that the property of occupying space occupies 
space, the bundle theorist would have to argue that the property of occupying space 
self-instantiates. But this is perplexing at many levels. Properties do not in general 
self-instantiate (pace Giberman 2014, pp. 456–457). A table’s property of costing 
$70-plus-tax does not itself cost $70. In our formal economy there is no recognized 
way to purchase properties, however construed (except perhaps when bundled). So 
there would have to be some special reason why the space-occupation property has 
this peculiarity that only it is self-instantiating.
The better option, it would seem, is to hold that all properties, by their nature, 
instantiate the property of occupying space—that is, that properties are in fact 
space-occupying entities. Some trope theorists seem to construe tropes in a way that 
suggests they very much occupy space. This is perhaps most explicit in Keith Camp-
bell’s work:6
5 Consider for example the option of interpreting bundle theory as holding that objects turn out to be 
really just complex properties. (This is an odd way to interpret bundle theory, since there is no role for 
bundling in it at all, but let us bracket that issue.) If the thought is that reﬂection on the very notion of a 
material object instructs us that there is no object-property dichotomy because the notion of an object is 
really just the notion of a complex property, this is certainly false. The very subject-predicate structure of 
our language and thought indicate clearly a presumption of dichotomy. If the thought is instead that onto-
logical investigation instructs us that the ultimate nature of objects is just the nature of complex proper-
ties, this would be more plausible but would run straight into the problem raised by the space-occupation 
argument: if a material object occupies space, whereas a complex property does not, it is unclear how 
they could share a nature.
6 More recently, Giberman (2014) has proposed an account of tropes that casts them as space-occupying 
entities. However, Giberman’s idea of a trope is highly heterodox, insofar as he understands tropes to be 
not abstract particulars but concrete particulars (2014, p. 455). This construal suggests that the kind of 
entity he has in mind is very diﬀerent from the kind of entity most trope theorists have had in mind. I 
will return to the possibility of construing tropes as concrete particulars at the end of my discussion of 
Campbell.

5116
 
Synthese (2021) 199:5107–5124
1 3
Form and volume are not tropes like any others. Their presence in any particu-
lar sum of tropes is not an optional, contingent, matter… Form [i.e., shape] 
and volume are therefore best considered not as tropes in their own right at all. 
Real tropes are qualities-of-a-formed-volume. The distinctions we can make 
between color, shape, and size are distinctions in thought to which correspond 
no distinctions in reality. (Campbell 1981, p. 486)
This approach does not treat an object’s volume as a trope among others, but instead 
considers volume an aspect or dimension of every trope. The table’s brownness trope 
is a brown table-shaped volume; the table’s solidity trope is a solid table-shaped vol-
ume; the table’s 53 k-weight trope is a 53 k table-shaped volume; and so on.
It is questionable whether Campbell-style voluminous tropes—call them 
v-tropes—have what it takes to ‘make up’ material objects. If a blue balloon is being 
inﬂated, we would like to say that there is a single material object that expands. 
If this material object is partially constituted by a blueness trope, then we should 
be able to say that that blueness trope expands. But since volume is essential to 
v-tropes’ identity conditions, we must see the inﬂation instead as a process of con-
tinuous destruction and replacement of an inﬁnite series of instantaneous blueness 
tropes.
More importantly, it seems to me that depending on how v-tropes are exactly 
construed, they are either concrete particulars or not really intelligible. To see why, 
consider a solid brown round table. Its solidity trope is a solid table-shaped volume, 
according to Campbell. Let us now ask: What is this v-trope’s color? Two potential 
answers present themselves: either (a) the solidity v-trope is brown or (b) it is color-
less.7 Both answers are highly problematic, however.
It is, in truth, quite hard to see how the solidity v-trope could be colorless. The 
solidity v-trope, on the present conception, is a certain volume of space, and vol-
umes of space are the kinds of thing where color properties are instantiated. They 
are colorful things. Indeed, as we look in good lighting at the relevant table-shaped 
volume of space, the visual experience we enjoy is as of brown. What could be 
meant by the claim that this volume is colorless despite the testimony of our eyes? I 
think the idea must be that just as the statue and the clay are collocated but distinct, 
the solid table-shaped volume and the brown table-shaped volume are collocated 
but distinct; and because they are distinct the solid table-shaped volume is not itself 
brown. But while it seems coherent to say that there are two distinct objects collo-
cated in the same volume of space, it is of questionable coherence to say that there 
are two distinct volumes of space in the same… what? It is important to appreciate 
the diﬀerence between embracing co-occupation of regions of space and embracing 
a kind of doubling of space itself. It is the latter that seems to be presupposed by the 
notion that the solidity table-shaped volume is not brown.
Suppose, then, that the solidity v-trope is brown. Then it would seem that the 
trope under discussion is not really a solidity trope but a solidity-cum-brownness 
7 Campbell himself does not seem to take a stand on this. Giberman (2014) appears to construe tropes 
along the (b) option.

5117
1 3
Synthese (2021) 199:5107–5124 
trope. Next, though, we will ask whether this solidity-cum-brownness trope is 
round or shapeless, and if the answer is again that it is round, then in truth this is 
a solidity-cum-brownness-cum-roundness trope. The process will continue until 
we end up with a single v-trope for the whole table: a volume of space which is 
solid, brown, round, … [insert all other properties of the table]. At this point, 
though, the theory is no longer a bundle theory, but a theory proposing a speciﬁc 
ontological assay of familiar material objects, namely, that they are variously-
qualiﬁed volumes of space.
Might the v-trope theorist resist this by claiming that the solidity v-trope is essen-
tially solid and only accidentally brown and round, whereas the brownness v-trope 
is essentially brown and only accidentally solid and round? This would maintain 
the plurality of distinct v-tropes, which could then be mereologically bundled into a 
material object.
However, in this conception it is no longer clear why v-tropes are not themselves 
material objects. Just like the table itself, the solid table-shaped volume has deter-
minate color, determinate weight, and more generally is qualitatively fully determi-
nate. At the same time, it occupies space and can be wholly present in only one 
place at a time. In this scenario, the solid table-shaped volume and the brown table-
shaped volume are qualitatively indistinguishable and diﬀer only in which qualities 
are essential to them. In this respect they are rather like the statue and the clay-lump: 
two fully qualitatively determinate space-occupants that happen to coincide in space 
but have diﬀerent essential properties (e.g., the statue is essentially goat-shaped, 
whereas the clay is only accidentally so). As we have seen, though, the statue and 
the clay-lump are collocated material objects, and it would seem we should say the 
same of the solidity v-trope and brownness v-trope: they are collocated material 
objects.
(To be sure, in the present conception there is a plenitude of coinciding 
v-tropes—perhaps one for every possible distribution of essentiality and accidental-
ity across the qualities instantiated in any given volume. But this kind of plenitude 
can be applied to concrete objects themselves and in fact has been recently argued 
to eﬀectively be implied by any kind of statue-clay pluralism—see Bennett (2004), 
Leslie (2011) and Fairchild (2019) inter alia.)
If tropes are material objects, then naturally, mereological sums of tropes can 
occupy space. But that would no longer oﬀer a reductive account of material objects 
in terms of something that is not material objects. It would just oﬀer a reductive 
account of some material objects in terms of others. It would no longer attempt to 
assay concrete particulars in terms of entities from a diﬀerent ontological category. 
It thus would not threaten the notion that material objects are part of the world’s 
ontological bedrock—part of the fundamental furniture of reality.
***
I conclude that Premise 2 of the space-occupation argument cannot be seriously 
challenged by appealing to space-occupying tropes, at least not if mereological bun-
dle theory hopes to assay material objects in terms of entities that are not mate-
rial objects. What about resisting the premise through appeal to space-occupying 

5118
 
Synthese (2021) 199:5107–5124
1 3
universals? Obviously, ante rem universals by deﬁnition cannot occupy space; but 
perhaps in re universals may be allowed to occupy the spaces in which they are 
located?8
I think the distinctive mode of being that in re universals claim for themselves 
makes this exceedingly diﬃcult to envisage. Recall that by deﬁnition in re universals 
can be wholly present in diﬀerent places at the same time. Now suppose for reduc-
tio the conjunction of the following two claims: (a) brownness is wholly present in 
diﬀerent places at the same time and (b) brownness occupies the space in which 
it is present. Then since brownness is wholly present in non-overlapping regions R 
and R* at the same time, it occupies in its entirety both R and R* at the same time. 
For instance, brownness in its entirety ﬁlls up the region occupied by my desk. The 
whole of brownness can therefore be found in this region, which is inside my oﬃce. 
If the whole of x can be found in some region R inside my oﬃce, though, then pre-
sumably none of x can be found to ﬁll up some region in my neighbor’s kitchen. But 
lo and behold, in this case it turns out that some of x also occupies some portion of 
my neighbor’s kitchen’s space, namely, the portion ﬁlled by his brown cutting board. 
In fact, all of x is entirely conﬁned to the neighbor’s kitchen—while at the same time 
being entirely conﬁned to my oﬃce. In consequence, and given that the distance 
between my oﬃce and my neighbor’s kitchen is exactly one mile, we can say that 
the entity we are interested in—brownness as a space-occupying in re universal—
lies at exactly one mile from itself.
To be clear, I am not claiming to fully understand what the last few sentences 
are saying. Rather, I am claiming that these are some of the sentences we would 
need to understand in order to make sense of a space-occupying in re universal. 
And my point is not simply that in re universals’ ability to be wholly present in dif-
ferent places at the same time involves certain oddities—this has been pointed out 
already (see, e.g., O’Leary-Hawthorne 1995 on immanent/in re universals’ non-zero 
distance from themselves); my point is rather that combining these oddities with 
the notion that in re universals occupy the space at which they are present—and in 
consequence occupy in their entirety the space at which they are wholly present—
makes the resulting entities scarcely intelligible.9
With this I close my defense of Premise 2 of the space-occupation argument. 
Next we take up the defense of premise 3.
8 This would make them concrete universals, as opposed to the abstract universals they are typically 
taken to be. Trope theorists also allowed for entities they called concrete universals, but they had in mind 
something quite diﬀerent, properties such as being Socrates and being Quine.
9 In a diﬀerent but somewhat related context, Cody Gilmore (2003) has proposed that apparent two-
place spatial relations, such as ‘x is a mile from y,’ are in reality four-place relations, in this case ‘x in 
location  Lx is a mile from y in location  Ly.’ It is not clear how to apply this to ‘x is a mile from x’ (where 
this does not mean ‘a part of x is a mile from another part of x’). But even if we knew how to apply it, a 
bundle theorist could not make use of it unless, as noted in §1, she could identify locations independently 
of objects—which she may not wish to do.

5119
1 3
Synthese (2021) 199:5107–5124 
4  Composition, Fundamental Science, and Fundamental Ontology
Might there be something about the operation of fusing that somehow generates 
the space-occupying character of its product? It is important to keep in mind here 
that despite the “productive” sound of the word “fusing,” all it means in the mere-
ological context is summing. And it is unclear how summation could radically 
transform the nature of the items summed. Paul is not confused about this:
Do not be tempted by the fallacious idea that fusing is what somehow 
‘makes’ the ordinary object… chunky or substantial. That’s not how fusing 
works: it makes many into one, it doesn’t make non-substances into sub-
stances or abstract things into concrete ones. (2017a, p. 42)
So for Paul, denying Premise 3 of the space-occupation argument is a non-starter. 
Nonetheless we should consider whether someone else might explore this way of 
defending mereological bundle theory.
In Sect. 2, this premise was presented, basically, as an a priori claim: it is arm-
chair reﬂection which instructs that mereological summation of entities that do 
not occupy space cannot yield an entity that does occupy space. But a mereologi-
cal bundle theorist might object that contemporary physics portrays a picture of 
the material world where tables and ﬂowers are ultimately composed of entities 
whose relationship to spacetime is much more ambiguous.
‘This is an area into which fools rush at their own risk,’ warns Simons (1994, 
p. 569). Still, some superﬁcial remarks may prove useful. In particular, I would 
like to suggest that while contemporary physics oﬀers a ‘surprising’ portrait of 
the fundamental physical level(s), no evidence can be found in contemporary 
physics that fundamental particles do not occupy space.
One of the few things contemporary physics tells us clearly is that tables are 
made of elementary particles. In particle physics’ Standard Model, these parti-
cles are of two kinds: (i) fermions, notably electrons and up and down quarks, 
which (very roughly) are like units of matter, and (ii) bosons, such as photons, 
which (again very roughly) mediate interactions between units of matter. Now, 
some bosons are massless, and this might raise the suspicion that they do not 
occupy space. But all fermions have nonzero mass, and this ought to raise the 
corresponding suspicion that they do occupy space.
The ontological oddity of fermions concerns not their space-occupation but 
their individuality (see French 1989). If you have two children, the probability 
that you have two daughters is .25, the probability that you have two sons is .25, 
and the probability that you have one daughter and one son is .5. The reason the 
last option is double as probable is that it amalgamates two distinct possibilities: 
that your ﬁrst child is a daughter and your second a son, and that your ﬁrst is a 
son and your second a daughter. Oddly, this is not how things work with particles. 
Suppose you have two particles each of which can be either here or there. You 
might expect a similar probability distribution: the probability that both are here 
would be .25, the probability that both are there would be .25, and the probabil-
ity that one is here and one is there would be .5. But in quantum mechanics, the 

5120
 
Synthese (2021) 199:5107–5124
1 3
three scenarios are assigned equal probability. What this means is that quantum 
mechanics does not recognize two numerically distinct states of aﬀairs, one where 
particle Jimmy is here and particle Johnny is there and another where Johnny is 
here and Jimmy is there. And if there is no diﬀerence between the states of aﬀairs 
of x being in L and y being in L, this can only mean that x and y are not distinct 
individuals.10
However, note that these legitimate concerns about the individuality of particles 
do not entail anything about their status as space-occupants. Even if we strip the 
two fermions of their status as individuals on these grounds, it does not follow that 
they do not occupy space. It is perhaps indeterminate whether this fermion is here or 
there, but either way it occupies some space—some space there if it is there, some 
space here if it is here.
One way to think of the philosophical lesson here is this: What quantum mechan-
ics brings out is that being an individual requires more than just being a space-occu-
pying concrete particular; it requires also that permutations of space-occupying con-
crete particulars could constitute distinct states of aﬀairs. Because some particles do 
not in fact satisfy this additional requirement, they do not qualify as individuals. But 
they still occupy space, as beﬁts their status as concrete particulars and indeed as 
material objects.
A distinct challenge might be thought to hail from superstring theory, according 
to which tables and ﬂowers are ultimately made of one-dimensional entities interact-
ing within a ten-dimensional space. Since one-dimensional entities have no volume 
and so do not occupy space, superstring theory may rightly be taken to imply the 
constitution of space-occupiers by collections of non-space-occupiers. The prob-
lem, however, is that superstring theory has remained resolutely and fantastically 
evidence-free for over four decades. And although absence of evidence is not evi-
dence of absence (at least in suﬃciently large-scale systems), the fact that after so 
many years there is still no trace of certain particles that superstring theory must 
hypothesize in order to work has led many physicists to despair of it. Given this 
predicament, it is simply false that superstring theory oﬀers evidence of space-occu-
piers built out of non-space-occupiers. What it oﬀers are elegant speculations to that 
eﬀect.11
The last move I want to explore on behalf of the mereological bundle theorist 
is that of retreating from the thesis that material objects are mereological sums of 
10 This phenomenon sometimes inspires the kind of ‘ontic structural realism’ according to which the 
only entities that are real at the fundamental physical level are the relations between particles, such as the 
distance between the particle here and the particle there (Ladyman and Ross 2007). Sometimes the view 
goes as far as to deny that there are really particles which serve as relata, sometimes it states (more mod-
estly) that the particles exist but only as junctures in a web of relations, hence as derivative rather than 
fundamental entities.
11 The attraction of superstring theory, it is worth noting, is mostly armchair-ish. The motivation for 
it has to do with a certain disunity in our fundamental understanding of the universe, namely, the fact 
that of four fundamental forces current physics posits, three are accounted for beautifully by quantum 
mechanics but the fourth (gravity) eludes quantum–mechanical explanation. Superstring theory oﬀers an 
elegantly uniﬁed treatment of all four forces, but as noted it suﬀers from complete absence of empirical 
evidence.

5121
1 3
Synthese (2021) 199:5107–5124 
properties to the more fashionable-sounding claim that mereological sums of prop-
erties ground material objects.12 This is a potentially good move, as the grounding 
of space-occupiers by sums of non-space-occupiers is not as immediately suspicious 
as the identity of space-occupiers with sums of non-space-occupiers; and at the same 
time, if material objects are grounded in sums of properties, then they are not among 
the ungrounded grounds of reality, the fundamental furniture of world.
(This dialectical situation has a certain historical precedent. Leibniz scholars have 
been confronted with an interpretive conundrum due to passages in which Leibniz 
seems to equate bodies with aggregates of monads. Given that monads are imma-
terial and bodies material, the notion that aggregates of the former could consti-
tute the latter has perplexed interpreters. The going interpretive hypothesis is that 
Leibniz could not possibly hold that bodies are aggregates of monads, and must 
therefore have had in mind that they rather result, or emerge, from monads—see, 
e.g., Jolley 2005, p. 77. Clearly, Leibniz scholars think that identifying bodies with 
monad-aggregates is too elementary a mistake to attribute to Leibniz. Some onto-
logical daylight must be introduced between the two, though without compromising 
the basic thought that the existence of bodies ontologically depends on the existence 
of monads.)
What are we to make of such a ground-theoretic mereological bundle theory? 
There is no question, of course, that it aﬀords extra room for maneuver. Still, there 
are two features commonly (though not universally) attributed to grounding that 
should give us pause, suggesting that a space-occupier could not in fact be grounded 
in a sum of entities none of which occupies space.
The ﬁrst feature is that grounding is supposed to undergird explanation (Fine 
2001, p. 15): if x grounds y, then y admits of a certain type of distinctively meta-
physical explanation in terms of x.13 We understand why {Socrates} exists when 
informed that Socrates exists, we understand why the desk is brown when informed 
that it is sienna-brown, and so on. Accordingly, if the ground-theoretic mereological 
bundle theory is true, then we should be able to explain the fact that there is a table 
here in terms of the fact that properties  F1, …,  Fn are mereologically fused here. We 
should be able to understand why there is a table here given that the right fusion of 
properties occurs here. However, if the space-occupation argument is sound, this is 
not at all the case. If the table occupies some space and none of the properties does, 
we cannot in fact see why there should be a table here given that there is the fusion 
of properties here. On the contrary, we are faced with a clear explanatory gap: it 
is mysterious how a space-occupying entity could arise from the coming-together 
of so many non-space-occupying entities. What this suggests is that the retreat to 
a ground-theoretic version of mereological bundle theory is only helpful if we can 
13 There are many debates about the nature of the relevant kind of explanation, as well as on its precise 
relationship to grounding. I bracket these debates here, hoping the point I want to make is neutral on 
them.
12 Typically, the relevant notion of grounding is construed as primitive and unanalyzable, picking out a 
sui generis asymmetric non-causal determination relation between facts, in which the fundament is onto-
logically prior to the terminus (Fine 2001).

5122
 
Synthese (2021) 199:5107–5124
1 3
independently overcome the space-occupation argument. But if we can, of course, 
retreat becomes unnecessary.
A second central feature of grounding is that it casts the grounded as nothing 
over and above the ground (Rosen 2010: Sect. 10), where this implies that adding 
grounded entities to one’s ontology does not worsen one’s ontological debit score 
(Schaﬀer 2015). Add up the costs of all the ungrounded entities in a certain theory 
of the world, and you have the full ontological cost of the theory. This feature of 
grounding suggests that grounded entities cannot be profoundly, categorically dif-
ferent from grounds. For adding categorically diﬀerent entities to one’s ontology 
should aﬀect the theory’s ontological cost. But now consider: if you start out with 
an ontology in which nothing occupies any space, and then decide to add to it enti-
ties the very mode of being of which is to occupy space, this seems intuitively like a 
substantive addition that ought to aﬀect the ontological cost of your overall theory.
These considerations suggest to me that the retreat from an identity to a ground-
ing formulation holds no genuine promise for the mereological bundle theory of 
material objects. In particular, as long as the mereological bundle theorist has not 
explained how summing non-space-occupiers could yield a space-occupying entity, 
the resulting explanatory gap undermines a grounding connection. This concludes 
my defense of Premise 3 of the space-occupation argument, and thus of the argu-
ment as a whole.
5  Conclusion
The argument of this paper is at bottom simple: properties do not occupy space 
whereas material objects do, and summing entities that do not occupy space cannot 
magically secrete anything that does occupy space. This argument’s conclusion is 
admittedly entirely negative, but it aliments a suspicion more positive in character: 
namely, that material objects, being uniquely space-occupying, cannot be ‘built up’ 
from any other types of entities and must consequently be taken as part of the fun-
damental furniture of the world. For any attempt to anchor the existence of material 
objects in more fundamental entities would run into the following dilemma: either 
those putative fundamentals would not occupy space, in which case it would be 
unclear how they could underlie the existence of material objects; or they would 
occupy space, in which case it would be unclear why they are not themselves mate-
rial objects. Either way, it would seem that space-occupying entities must be posited 
as part of the fundamental make-up of reality.14
To say that material objects are part of the fundamental furniture of the world 
is not to say that all of them are: the existence of some material objects may well 
14 Alternatively, the very existence of material objects could be denied. This would of course be a much 
more radical view (though certainly one defended by some metaphysicians, e.g. Ladyman and Ross 
2007), and not one in which sums of properties are used to account for material objects. This view is 
not subject to the space-occupation argument, since as noted my target is only views on which mate-
rial objects can be assayed in terms of bundles of properties, not views on which there are no material 
objects.

5123
1 3
Synthese (2021) 199:5107–5124 
be grounded in that of other material objects. Still, the category of material object 
would have to be considered fundamental, insofar as some material objects would be 
among the ungrounded grounds of reality. This is consistent with either (a) a poly-
categorial ontology that admits properties and perhaps other entities alongside mate-
rial objects or (b) a monocategorial ontology in which properties and other entities 
are ‘built up from’ material objects. My own sympathies lie with (b)—essentially, 
a form of what has historically been called ‘nominalism’ (see Kriegel 2021)—but 
that goes far beyond what I have tried to argue for here. The argument here was that 
mereological bundle theory cannot work until an account is provided of how space-
occupying entities may be ‘generated’ by the summation of non-space-occupying 
entities.
Acknowledgements This work was supported by the French National Research Agency’s Grant ANR-
17-EURE-0017, as well as by Grant 675415 of the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innova-
tion program. For comments on an earlier draft, I am indebted to Jonathan Schaﬀer and three anonymous 
referees for Synthese. I have also beneﬁted from presenting the paper at a June 2017 conference on com-
position at Collège de France; I am grateful to the audience there, in particular Alexandre Guay, Ghislain 
Guigon, Olivier Massin, and Achille Varzi. Finally, I beneﬁted also from discussing some of the central 
ideas in my Spring 2017 ENS seminar on the metaphysics of properties; I am grateful to my students 
there, in particular Sophia Arbeiter, Nicolas Chargelegue, Géraldine Carranante, Lylian Paquet, Victor 
Tamburini, Samuel Zamour, and especially Michele Impagnatiello.
References
Baker, L. R. (1997). Why constitution is not identity. Journal of Philosophy, 94, 599–621.
Bennett, K. (2004). Spatio-temporal coincidence and the grounding problem. Philosophical Studies, 118, 
339–371.
Black, M. (1952). The identity of indiscernibles. Mind, 61, 153–164.
Campbell, K. (1981). The metaphysic of abstract particulars. Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 6, 477–488.
Contoir, A. J., & Baxter, D. L. M. (Eds.). (2014). Composition as identity. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Erismann, C. (2014). Explaining exact resemblance: Gilbert of Poitiers’s conformitas theory reconsid-
ered. Oxford Studies in Medieval Philosophy, 2, 1–24.
Fairchild, M. (2019). The Barest Flutter of the smallest leaf: Understanding material plenitude. Philo-
sophical Review, 128, 143–178.
Fine, K. (2001). The question of realism. Philosophers’ Imprint, 1(1), 1–30.
Fine, K. (2003). The non-identity of a material thing and its matter. Mind, 112, 195–234.
French, S. (1989). Identity and individuality in classical and quantum physics. Australasian Journal of 
Philosophy, 67, 432–446.
Giberman, D. (2014). Tropes in space. Philosophical Studies, 167, 453–472.
Gilmore, C. S. (2003). In defence of spatially related universals. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 81, 
420–428.
Goodman, N. (1951). The structure of appearances. Cambridge: Harvard UP.
Hoﬀman, J., & Rosenkrantz, G. S. (1994). Substance among other categories. Cambridge: Cambridge 
UP.
Jolley, N. (2005). Leibniz. London: Routledge.
Kriegel, U. (2021). Nominalism and material plenitude. Res Philosophica, 98, 91–114.
Ladyman, J., & Ross, D. (2007). Every thing must go: Metaphysics naturalized. Oxford: Oxford UP.
Leslie, S.-J. (2011). Essentialism, plenitude, and paradox. Philosophical Perspectives, 25, 277–296.
Leslie, S.-J., & Lerner, A. (2016). Generic generalizations. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Markosian, N. (1998). Brutal composition. Philosophical Studies, 92, 211–249.

5124
 
Synthese (2021) 199:5107–5124
1 3
O’Leary-Hawthorne, J. (1995). The Bundle theory of substance and the identity of indiscernibles. Analy-
sis, 55, 191–196.
Paul, L. A. (2002). Logical parts. Noûs, 36, 578–596.
Paul, L. A. (2006). Coincidence as overlap. Noûs, 40, 623–659.
Paul, L. A. (2017a). A one category ontology. In J. A. Keller (Ed.), Being, freedom, and method. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Paul, L. A. (2017b). Mereological bundle theory. In H. Burkhardt, J. Seibt, & G. Imaguire (Eds.), Hand-
book of mereology. Munich: Philosophia Verlag.
Rosen, G. (2010). Metaphysical dependence: Grounding and reduction. In B. Hale & A. Hoﬀman (Eds.), 
Modality: Metaphysics, logic, and epistemology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rosen, G. (2017). Abstract objects. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Russell, B. (1950). 1995, An inquiry into meaning and truth. London: Routledge.
Schaﬀer, J. (2015). What not to multiply without necessity. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 93, 
644–664.
Simons, P. (1994). Particulars in particular clothing. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 54, 
553–575.
Van Inwagen, P. (1990). Material beings. Ithaca: Cornell UP.
Williams, D. C. (1953). On the elements of being: I. Review of Metaphysics, 7, 3–18.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published 
maps and institutional aﬃliations.

