10
This model complements the “four stages of competence”
(often attributed to Abraham aaslow), which describes 
the path from Unconscious Incompetence via Conscious 
Incompetence, then to Conscious Competence to 
Unconscious Competence. Again, from a baseline of lack 
of ability, and even a lack of awareness of inability, there is 
a trajectory towards competency becoming innate. It 
becomes embodied not just in the mind, but absorbed 
into a whole sense of self such that the delivery of 
expertise is often described as the expert having an 
intuitive feeling for the right thing to do.
Experience is thus key to transcending the application 
of rigid rules-based approaches and to developing craft, 
skills and expertise. 
It is also the domain of art and creative practices. 
This amounts to another order of knowledge that 
aichael Polanyi called “tacit knowledge”. It is not the 
procedural, codifable, step by step, “explicit knowledge”  
that calculation and computation are so excellent at, but 
something transmitted through experience itself so that 
the learner eventually acquires the ability to judge what is 
right to do. Not simply a linear problem-solving trajectory,
but a holistic awareness of the whole problem or task. 
It is committed and informed, acquired by desire and 
often with passion and with care – a praxis established 
through dialogue and reciprocal exchange. 
1
11
Being relational, it is a foundation for cooperation and 
collaboration.
“While tacit knowledge can be possessed by 
itself, explicit knowledge must rely on being 
tacitly understood and applied. Hence all 
knowledge is either tacit or rooted in tacit 
knowledge. A wholly explicit knowledge is 
unthinkable.”
Michael Polanyi, Knowing and Being (1969)
Irrational Logics
The Judgement of Solomon (Hebrew Bible/Old Testament 
1 Kings 3: 16-28) offers a classic example of wisdom 
in a judgement. It realises justice not through a direct 
procedure, but through what could be described as an 
irrational logical path. The story tells of King Solomon 
called to rule which of two women is the true mother 
of a baby, each claiming it as their own. No witnesses can 
say who the true mother is. With no other way to tell 
between them, Solomones perverse solution is to propose 
cutting the baby in half, dividing it equally between them. 
The story presents his wisdom as the insight that when 
one woman then gives up her claim to save the life of the 
child, she is revealed as the true mother – concerned 
more for the childes welfare than her own rights or sense 
of property.

1
2
3
4
5
6
2,4,6,8,10,12
made with www.bookleteer.com from proboscis
18
The Uses of Not
Thirty spokes
meet in the hub.
Where the wheel isn’t
is where it’s useful.
Hollowed out,
clay makes a pot.
Where the pot’s not,
is where it’s useful.
Cut doors and windows
to make a room.
Where the room isn’t,
there’s room for you.
So the proft in what is
is in the use of what isn’t.
Lao Teu, from Tao Te Ching: a book about the way and 
the power of the way
(a new English version by Ursula K. Le Guin, 1997)
3
exercise discernment and perception, to arrive at an 
authoritative opinion.
And time.
It takes time to absorb and refect, to ruminate and 
pass judgement. What I hope to argue here is that 
consciousness itself is an irreducible constant 
fundamental to fair and trustworthy judgement.
I am, perhaps, re-treading old ground: the argument 
between quantitative and qualitative methods has rolled 
on for at least two centuries – rooted in the slow rise 
to dominance of a kind of scientism as the prevailing 
order of knowledge and worldview. Both methods have 
merits, and their integration or synthesis can lead to 
remarkable achievements. Both are rooted in very human 
beliefs and traditions of how knowledge comes about. 
Wielded together, they stimulate extraordinary 
benefts but, when asymmetrical in infuence and power, 
the drawbacks are considerable.
We now live in a world where the quantitative has 
achieved ascendancy in almost all areas of life, where 
computations and automated decision-making affect the 
everyday lives of billions of people. Tremendous 
advantages in speed, effciency and technical capabilities 
across the panoply of human activity have resulted. But 
they also amplify injustices and inequalities, or compound 
2
A Calculation is Not a Judgement
When human judgement is drained from a system and 
reductionist rules are applied to complex situations, the 
results can lead to terrible injustices and harms. If we 
privilege the procedural outcomes of artifcial systems 
over the importance of humanity, life and experience and 
the more-than-human world, we will likely face a self-
reinforcing feedback loop of such effects, not unlike the 
existential threat of runaway climate change.
I wish to advance a proposition… a distinction. Namely, 
that there is a signifcant gulf between the mathematical 
operation by which a calculation can be arrived at, and the 
emergent processes of evaluation by which a judgement is 
made. I think this is an important distinction for our times,
because it describes the difference between a procedure 
of mathematical abstraction and a process of conscious 
deliberation. 
A calculation can be determined by a non-sentient entity 
following a series of steps to accomplish an end (such as 
an algorithm). Humans have created machines that can do 
this at scales and speeds far beyond our own individual 
capabilities. A judgement, however, requires a sentient 
being, imbued with consciousness and the capacity to 
A Calculation is Not a Judgement
Giles Lane
2020-01-26 & © Giles Lane
Published by Proboscis
gileslane.net
https://bkltr.it/3aLTgzd

16
to context and situation also shrugs responsibility, and 
provides an effective insulation against culpability. 
Witness the degeneration of our politicians and political 
system – how lies, deceit and incompetence have become 
normalised, even venerated, without meaningful 
consequence.
I perceive there to be a parallel between the political 
imposition of strict rules and the mechanistic fallacy of 
atomising everything into discrete parts without 
perceiving the crucial balance of relations between them. 
They both ignore the basic truth of life that, while 
everything is indeed made up of the same elementary 
particles, their unique composition into the infnite variety
of matter and life is absolutely particular. Local specifcity 
is a feature of lifees mutability – how everything is in 
constant fux and adaptation in relation to its local 
context and environment. Scale seems to be a crucial 
issue here – universal laws function well at the atomic 
(micro) level and at the cosmic (macro), but clearly not so 
unambiguously at the meso scales we inhabit as lived 
reality. There, diversity and locality are contingent on 
achieving any effective equilibrium.
Complex living systems just donet seem to obey laws and 
rules that are based on reductionist concepts. Perhaps at 
5
of living are being challenged everywhere by changes 
in natural forces we have clearly, recklessly, contributed 
to – possibly beyond our capability to re-balance, 
notwithstanding an irrevocable and devastating loss of 
biodiversity. I believe that the over-exploitation of the 
natural world, of other creatures and lifeforms has been 
facilitated by precisely the unfeeling calculation of systems 
based on abstracting life into discrete parts that can be 
separated from a complex whole and used indiscriminately
without repercussion. It is a brutal and destructive 
alienation that does not factor in to its calculation of 
proft and loss the consequences and costs of its atomistic
unravelling of mutual interdependence. It ignores the 
fundamental connectedness that unites all matter in the 
universe, the forces which bind all things together.
We see the results of this alienation across the planet in 
the systematic extraction of specifc resources causing 
catastrophic loss of entire environments and ecologies 
surrounding them. There is no doubt that this can only 
persist for so long, and that that timeframe is rapdily 
collapsing in on itself.
We also see this alienation in the human sphere when 
bureaucratic systems over-emphasise adherence to rules 
above consideration of individual, or even collective, 
circumstances. One of the most appalling examples in 
17
the extremes it is possible for static rules to operate 
seamlessly, but in the elastic middle we need fow and 
dynamism. As atoms themselves are held together by the 
forces, or relations, between electrons, protons and 
neutrons, so all of matter and reality are bound by the 
multifarious forces and relations that govern the natures 
of different entities. To overlook the reality of our 
relational existence and to reduce everything down to 
inert and unconnected bits is, inevitably, to be missing 
a key part of a whole equation – a series of calculations 
that will never completely add up. Connection, 
interdependence, reciprocities are the fundamental 
forces that bind and make whole the matter of life.
We will need all of humanityes diverse knowledges and 
skills, from poetry, art and music together with 
mathematics, physics and many others, to fnd the 
necessary paths to a fair future for all life on the planet. 
We shall need the ability to calculate and build machines 
that can help us sort and make sense of vast amounts 
of data, whilst simultaneously we must retain our 
independent, fuent, human capability to judge 
– soundly – what decisions are most appropriate for 
each circumstance we encounter and must respond to.
London, July 2019
4
environmental and ecological over-exploitation and 
destruction. In doing so their scale and speed disempower
and degrade the intrinsic agency of human beings in favour
of infexible and unfeeling systems. It is crucial to see that it
is a deliberate choice to quantify and to sort the world in 
this way, and that it is not an impartial effect of some 
immutable logic that cannot, itself, be challenged.
As Oscar Wilde might have framed the distinction, the 
difference is one of knowing “the price of everything and 
the value of nothing” (from The Picture of Dorian Gray). 
It is a trivial operation to calculate the price of something 
according to a formula of tangible inputs and costs;  
yet it is far more elusive to judge its value. Such a 
judgement demands a broader spectrum of parameters, 
such as context, emotion, culture and other intangibles. 
Our human fallibilities lead us to both extremes. 
Judgements, too, can be unsound. – infuenced by bias, 
or unfair prejudices or even untrustworthy motivations. 
Intention and ethos determine how and why a person will 
adopt a particular trajectory – as much as their adherence
to one method or another; one disciplinary process or 
another; one set of values or another.
The predicaments outlined above are, I believe, at the 
very root of the proliferating existential dilemmas which 
humans, indeed all life, now face. The stabilities of our ways

14
distrust. Thus it appears that consciousness is also a 
necessary factor in experiencing fairness and trust, 
just as I reckon it is for arriving at a judgement. And, 
since feeling is such an important aspect of both fairness 
and trust, it could be that these two conditions, like our 
human intelligence, are bound up not only in the mind 
and thinking, but are co-located and co-created in our 
embodied experience of knowing. Perhaps neither are 
at all suitable for programmatic calculation.
What then, drives some people persist in trying to 
automate trust and fairness in an effort to remove the 
human from the loop in deciding what is fair or 
trustworthy? It seems perverse to me to be using such 
technologies to replace the human, instead of defning 
alternatives that could enhance our understanding and 
judgement by doing what computers and systems do best 
– classify, sort and order huge quantities of information to 
reveal patterns that are not immediately obvious. The 
analysis and calculation of data could then inform human-
derived judgements that encompass broader contexts and
situations including mitigating factors and contradictory 
states not suited to binary classifcations. Better together, 
one might say.
The upshot of the successes of Deep Blue against eary 
Kasparov in 1997 and Alphaeo against Lee Seedol in 2016
7
experiencing as increasingly extreme climate impacts – 
is already confounding the most accurate models and 
projections that have been achieved so far, since none 
can reliably forecast the full range of interdependent, 
interwoven elemental forces and factors we have 
interrupted with our industry and massive emissions of 
carbon into the atmosphere over the past few centuries.
I sincerely doubt the wisdom of focusing our civilisationes 
faith too closely on systems that use automated, statistical 
calculation of probabilities to make future-facing decisions 
on our behalf, let alone in the here-and-now. It would itself
be a further profound disconnection from our very 
humanity to hope that such technologies will ‘savee us 
from the profound disconnection of the human from the 
more-than-human natural world. This has been gathering 
pace for hundreds of years, since at least the initial 
European colonisation of the Americas and the growth of 
modern industry and global capitalism. Our technologies 
are refections of our cultures and societies, not simply 
neutral, inevitable outcomes of rational enquiry and 
engineering. They arise out of our cultures, beliefs, 
behaviours – they are value-driven… the products of 
choices, whether intentional or unconscious.
Evidence is growing (as documented by ProPublica among 
others) that demonstrates how algorithmic decision-
15
has been to invigorate both chess and go with new 
approaches and strategies, enhancing the potential and 
pleasure of the process of playing. The successes of these 
systems have not diminished either game, but suggested 
new possibilities. And here there may be a lesson in 
determining the difference between the experience of a 
sentient player with consciousness for whom the playing 
itself may be the point, and a procedural system wholly 
focused on achieving a fnite goal: winning. By focussing on 
the objective of an end as the goal, those seeking to train 
“artifcial intelligences” might be missing the fundamental 
point – and value – of playing; that is, the sensations it 
provides a sentient being of being alive and of existing in 
relation to something other than themself. 
A continuity of consciousness.
A deeper question to be addressed is cui bono? Who 
ultimately benefts from the increasing automation of 
aspects of our society? Just as the Industrial Revolution 
and factory production reduced the independence 
and skills of many craftspeople, so too the automation 
of everyday life is removing ordinary people from 
participating in decision-making. It places the defnition 
of how parameters are set higher and higher within a 
social hierarchy increasingly isolated and removed from 
the experience of living among ordinary people. Such a 
rarefed extraction of authority without direct connection
6
recent years has been the terrible injustices and harms 
inficted on the Windrush eeneration by Theresa aay 
and the UK Home Offcees “Hostile environment” policy. 
Or the shocking percentages of automated administrative 
decisions in the benefts system being overturned on 
appeal. Or anecdotally from friends and family, in the 
number of long-established EU citizens resident in the UK
seemingly routinely denied “settled status” on their frst 
attempt using the governmentes automated system.
And these are just the most visible examples of intentional
applications of the technology of bureaucracy, and its 
component methods and tools, to harm the vulnerable. 
They are almost certainly intended more as a distraction, 
or sleight of hand, whilst other yet more egregious 
activities are kept in the shadows. It seems to me that 
much of this is being done as a climactic frenzy of 
industrial capitalism – to squeeze every last drop of 
advantage from a system that is so weighty with its 
own entropy that it cannot possibly endure indefnitely. 
Banking the last pennies to hedge against an uncertain 
future where, it is assumed, the wealthiest will command 
the most safety, luxury and authority.
However, I doubt this trajectory will go the way anyone 
currently anticipates. The speed of environmental and 
ecological transformation – which we are now 

12
The story is of a classic type that has parallels in the 
literatures and storytelling traditions of other cultures., 
like the tradition of Suf teaching stories. Such stories 
illustrate how, sometimes, there is no rational path to 
truth or a just decision but, instead, an irrational, counter-
intuitive approach can reveal it in unexpected ways. It is 
imaginative and transgressive, employing techniques 
familiar in creative, artistic practices – excessive, surreal 
and disturbing. These are not quantities but qualities of 
imagination. It may be perfectly possible to compose a 
fction or a piece of music or an artwork to order, by 
following rules and formulae (for instance the ‘police 
procedurale novel or many a three minute pop song). Yet 
something else is needed for it to become art or 
literature that transcends the skeleton of its construction 
and rises above hackneyed cliché and routine prosaicness. 
Our entire mode of existence and civilisation now hinges 
on dilemmas as, or even more, knotty and seemingly 
irreconcilable as the problem faced by Solomon. We are 
going to need the wisdom of irrational logics and 
unfettered imaginations to devise visionary, engaging and 
realistic ways to resolve them.
“Hard times are coming, when we’ll be wanting 
the voices of writers who can see alternatives to 
how we live now, can see through our fear-
stricken society and its obsessive technologies to 
9
Knowledge, Skill Acquisition & Competence
Stuart and Hubert Dreyfuse model of skill acquisition 
is a useful guide in discerning the distinction between 
a calculation and a judgement. We can trace a path from 
novice via advanced beginner, competent, profcient 
through to expert. The model describes how, in the early 
stages, the novice must learn the rules and understand 
how to use them. As their experience grows (and 
presumably confdence in their ability to apply the ‘righte 
skills), they rely less on formal analytical application of the 
rules and more on their intuitive knowledge of what will 
work best in the given situation.
“Dreyfus and Dreyfus’ essential point is to assert
that analytical thinking and intuition are not two
mutually conficting ways of understanding or of 
making judgements. Rather they are seen to be 
complementary factors which work together but
with growing importance centred on intuition 
when the skilled performer becomes more 
experienced. Highly experienced people seem 
to be able to recognise whole scenarios without 
decomposing them into elements or separate 
features.”
Mike Cooley, Architect or Bee? The Human Price 
of Technology (1980)
13
other ways of being, and even imagine real 
grounds for hope. We’ll need writers who can 
remember freedom – poets, visionaries – realists
of a larger reality.”
Ursula K. Le Guin, ‘Freedom’ in Words Are My 
Matter (2016)
Beyond aeasurement: 
the incalculable heart of humanity
Fairness and trust are both qualities or conditions of human
experience rather than fxed rules that can be applied 
indiscriminately. Neither are particularly amenable to 
formulaic measurement, indeed they are often critiqued 
precisely because they are almost impossible to quantify. 
In the context of automated algorithmic decision-making 
systems (e.g. in Artifcial Intelligence and aachine 
Learning) this lack of fxity and highly subjective nature 
is frequently alluded to. The lack of stable frames of 
reference for what is at any one time fair, is a feature 
of its contingent nature. Likewise with trust – what 
constitutes the nature of trust in any given situation is 
highly contingent and almost impossible to codify into 
a stable or transferable matrix of elements and factors.
Yet we instinctively know what feels fair or unfair, and 
what trust feels like, as equally, when it switches to 
8
making has a tendency to amplify existing biases leading to
exacerbated injustices and inequalities, as well as other 
pernicious effects. Instead of the promise of impartiality 
that has justifed an increasingly reliance on both 
bureaucracy and algorithmic systems, we have come to 
realise that they have all of our human fallibilities coded in,
but with the additional twin enhancements of speed and 
scale – rippling the effects out further and faster. Now 
would be an apposite time to check the headlong rush to 
automate how we manage our societies and everyday 
lives, especially as we must shift our economies and 
industries from extractive and destructive activities to 
ones which preserve and maintain life and ecologies. 
The two are inextricably linked.
“… some are already engaged in experiments 
that try to make the possibility of a future that 
isn’t barbaric, now. Those who have chosen to 
desert, to fee this “dirty” economic war, but who,
in “feeing, seek a weapon,” as Deleuee said. And
seeking, here, means, in the frst place, creating, 
creating a life “after economic growth,” a life 
that explores connections with new powers of 
acting, feeling, imagining, and thinking.”
Isabelle Stengers, In Catastrophic Times (2015)

