Workshop on Artificial Intelligence 2020 
Talk Abstract Submission 
 
 
Title: Neuromorphic Computing based on Oscillatory Neural Networks 
Speaker: Aida Todri-Sanial, LIRMM, University of Montpellier, CNRS, France 
 
Abstract: 
Neuro-inspired computing employs technologies that enable brain-inspired computing 
hardware for more efficient and adaptive intelligent systems. Mimicking the human brain and 
nervous system, these computing architectures are excellent candidates for solving complex 
and large-scale associative learning problems. In this talk, we will showcase a novel and 
alternative neuromorphic computing paradigm where information is encoded in the phase of 
coupled oscillating neurons or oscillatory neural networks. The VO2 metal-insulator transition 
devices emulate biological neurons and 2D MoS2 memristors emulate synapses.  
 
Current research efforts on neuromorphic computing are mainly focused on the various 
hardware implementation of synapses using memristors such as resistive random access 
memory (RRAM) technology, spin-based and ferroelectrics. But, several challenges hinder 
current memristive neuromorphic hardware from going mainstream due to latency (delay in 
accessing the device and charging/discharging wires), and density of synapse matrix allowed 
by the manufacturing process. In the framework of EU H2020 NeurONN project, we 
implement and explore energy-efficient neuromorphic computing based on oscillatory neural 
networks (ONN) [1] using metal-insulator-transition (MIT) for emulating “neurons” and 2D 
material memristors for emulating “synapses” to achieve a truly neuro-inspired computing 
paradigm for enabling AI at the edge [2-4]. 
 
In ONN, the principle of operations is “oscillation phase” rather than the charge-time 
dependent switching to emulate biological neurons. By describing neurons as oscillators, one 
can limit their oscillation amplitudes to small values to limit power consumption, as 
interconnects would only vary their voltage swings to a limited range. On the other hand, 
more conventional Spiking Neural Networks (SNN) or non-spiking Artificial Neural Networks 
(ANN), must use full voltage swings to communicate and compute. Therefore, ONNs have an 
unprecedented efficient way of drastically reducing power consumption for the same system 
complexity. A comparison of the computing in “time” vs “phase” and the architecture with 
energy efficient components of NeurONN is illustrated in Figure 1. 
 
In this talk, several ONN aspects will be covered from devices, architecture design to training 
algorithms in order to highlight the potential and novelty of ONN for energy efficient brain-
inspired computing. The talk is in line with the innovative themes of the Workshop on AI 2020 
on “Development of the foundation of AI”. 
 
 
Acknowledgement: 
This work is supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 
program, EU H2020 NEURONN (www.neuronn.eu) project under Grant No. 87150 
 

 
 
 
Figure 1. a) spiking neuron voltage amplitude used for encoding information such as in spiking 
neural networks. b) ONNs use a different paradigm by using phase to compute, rather than 
current or voltage. c) Illustration of ONN implementation with 5 oscillating neurons and 
resistive synaptic coupling, d) oscillating neuron is based on MIT VO2 devices, and e) synapse 
weights with 2D memristor (MoS2) devices. The fully-connected array uses only n(n-1)/2 
memristors compared to n2 as in other topologies such as SNN and ANN. 
 
 
 
References: 
[1] E. M. Izhikevich, Computing with Oscillators, Neural Networks, 2000. 
[2] E. Corti, A. Khanna, K. Niang, J. Robertson, K. Moselund, B. Gotsmann, S. Datta, S. Karg, 
Time-Delay Encoded Image Recognition in a Network of Resistively Coupled VO2 in Si 
Oscillators, Electron Device Letters, 2020. 
[3] E. Corti, B. Gotsmann, K. Moselund, A. Ionescu, J. Robertson, S. Karg, Scaled Resistively 
Coupled VO2 Oscillators for Neuromorphic Computing, Solid State Electronics, 2020. 
[4] Th. Jackson, S. Pagliarini, L. Pileggi, An Oscillatory Neural Network with Programmable 
Resistive Synapses in 28nm CMOS, IEEE ICRC, pp.118-124, 2018. 
Synapse array with 2D MoS2 memristors
Neurons (oscillators)
Pt
Pt
VO2
MIT VO2 Oscillators
ONN computation principle in “phase” 
rather than current or voltage.
ONN Implementation for 5 neurons
a)
b)
c)
e)
2D MoS2 memristor
MoS2
d)
Time
PHASE TO 
DIGITAL 
CONVERTER
OUTPUT
1
0
INPUT
Amplitude
INPUT
OUTPUT
INTEGRATION
1
0
Amplitude
Time
INTEGRATION
PHASE TO 
DIGITAL 
CONVERTER

