Acknowledgments
Back in , the Tel Aviv University’s Bulletin was still an actual printed
book. Flipping through it, I chanced upon an intriguing class: “Euclid’s
Elements,” taught by Professor Sabetai Unguru. I went in, very soon
realized I had much more to learn; I still do. Thank you, Sabetai.
To list the people to whom this book owes a debt would require a fully-
ﬂedged memoir. Let me just say that I had plenty of good luck in my
encounters since. Avoiding a long apparatus, this book provides instead
suggestions for further reading. Looking again through them all, I notice
how many of the names I cite are those of my teachers or of my peers. This
book emphasizes the role of the scientiﬁc network: the people you talk to
shape the scholarship you produce. I was formed as a scholar in the s,
and the network organized around the study of early science was, back
then, bursting with creative energy, with Geoﬀrey Lloyd as its philosopher-
king. I just list those of my friends that I cited in the Suggestions for
Further Reading (apologies to the many of you I have learned from in
other ways): Len Berggren, Alain Bernard, Alan Bowen, Christián
Carman, Karine Chemla, Jean Christianidis, Leo Corry, Seraﬁna
Cuomo, Daniella Dueck, Michael Fried, Jens Høyrup, Carl Huﬀman,
Alexander Jones, Henry Mendell, William Noel, Josiah Ober, Eleanor
Robson, Courtney Roby, Francesca Rochberg, Ken Saito, David Sedley,
Michalis Sialaros, Nathan Sidoli, Natalie Tchernetska, Nigel Wilson, Ido
Yavetz, and Leonid Zhmud. A particular thank-you to Christian Carman
and to Alexander Jones, who read and vastly improved an early version of
Chapter , and to Geoﬀrey Lloyd and Yuval Wigderson, who commented
insightfully on the entire manuscript. A particular sorrow is that one’s new
work can no longer be shared with Andrew Barker, Myles Burnyeat, and
Ian Mueller; I constantly remember David Fowler, the loveliest of friends.
I never met Wilbur Knorr. This book owes everything to his research.
In I stepped into his giant shoes in the department of Classics at
Stanford. This book would have been impossible without the generosity of
xv
Published online by Cambridge University Press

my department and of my deans. I wrote it during a sabbatical year at the
Center for Advanced Studies in Behavioral Sciences (CASBS), where I
beneﬁted from the idyllic site and from the delightful company of my
co-scholars of the last academic year before the pandemic, –.
Sixty years before, in the same place – a few studies away from my own –
Thomas Kuhn wrote his The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions. As I was
writing this book, I became more and more convinced that Kuhn was
completely wrong about ancient science. But then again, I came to
wonder, how would my own book fare? Scholars come and go; places
such as CASBS remain; scholarship progresses from one wrong book to the
next.
For this, we have publishers to thank. The profession of classics is lucky
to have Michael Sharp as the editor of Classics at Cambridge University
Press, bringing into being, with his assured touch, so much of the literature
on which we rely. Bethany Johnson, as content manager, deserves special
honor for steering so many books through the ravages and backlogs of the
pandemic. Special thanks to Kirsten Balayti, my copy-editor, and Amy
Carlow, my research assistant who helped with preparation of the index
and also discovered typos I am too ashamed to reveal. And now, thanks to
all of you, it is ﬁnally ready, a printed book. I can now hope for chance
encounters: future readers, chancing upon the book, ﬂipping through its
pages. Maybe, some of my readers might even decide to embark upon the
study of Greek mathematics. . . . Thank you, my readers.
xvi
Acknowledgments
Published online by Cambridge University Press

