45
Complexity and Analogy in Science: Theoretical, Methodological and Epistemological Aspects
Complexity, Reductionism, and Holism
in Science and Philosophy of Science
JÜRGEN MITTELSTRASS
There are concepts that belong to the basic terminology of science but
which are not used in everyday scientific work – such as the concepts of
natural law and causality. Such concepts touch on the epistemological foun-
dations of science, and thus transcend individual disciplines and presuppose
a particular interest, the interest in foundational questions of science, and
presumably also special skills and competence. Not everything that belongs
to these foundations is self-evident and not everything that is said about
them in philosophy of science is universally accepted – which in turn lies
in the fact that we are dealing with different theoretical approaches. Theory
meets theory, and this does not always go without conflict.
In the following, as an introduction to considerations of a theoretical,
methodological and epistemological nature, which especially deal with as-
pects of complex structures, I offer some brief explications of a conceptual
nature oriented towards the concepts of complexity, reduction and holism.
1. In a comprehensive presentation of the role that the concept of com-
plexity plays in the development of modern science we read: “Complexity
determines the spirit of twenty-first century science. The expansion of the
universe, the evolution of life, and the globalization of human economies and
societies all involve phase transitions of complex dynamical systems”.1 And
further: “The theory of nonlinear complex systems has become a successful
problem solving approach in the natural sciences – from laser physics, quantum
chaos, and meteorology to molecular modelling in chemistry and computer-
assisted simulations of cellular growth in biology. On the other hand, the social
sciences are recognizing that the main problems of mankind are global, com-
plex, nonlinear, and often random, too. Local changes in the ecological, eco-
nomic, or political system can cause a global crisis. Linear thinking and the
belief that the whole is only the sum of its parts are evidently obsolete”.2 In
1 K. Mainzer, Thinking in Complexity: The Computational Dynamics of Matter, Mind and
Mankind, 5th edition, Berlin and Heidelberg: Springer 2007, p. VII.
2 Ibid., p. 1.
 
Complexity and Analogy in Science  
Pontifical Academy of Sciences, Acta 22, Vatican City 2014  
www.pas.va/content/dam/accademia/pdf/acta22/acta22-mittelstrass.pdf 
 

46
Complexity and Analogy in Science: Theoretical, Methodological and Epistemological Aspects
JÜRGEN MITTELSTRASS
fact, complexity has become not only an important topic but also the key to
scientific explanations in all areas of science.
This does not necessarily mean that conceptual clarity has been achieved
in questions of complexity. For the concept of complexity displays different
(scientific) meanings depending on the area to which it is applied, even
while its basic meaning remains constant. Are the concepts used in different
disciplines similar, or may a phenomenon be, for instance, biologically com-
plex but physically not? Does the fact that some problems are in principle
unsolvable for reasons of complexity (due to limited time and computa-
tional power) pose a problem for scientific practice? Shall our practice just
ignore problems we cannot currently handle – or can science render ap-
parently complex systems in simple underlying theories? Furthermore, is
there a difference between the complex and the complicated such that some
complex systems are not actually complicated even though all complicated
systems are indeed complex. In general, again, complexity has become an
important area of research in many disciplines in the last decades. For in-
stance, the complexity and the ensuing unpredictability of weather systems
has been known for a long time. And theoretical tools to master complexity
have been developed in biology, where the apparent complexity of organ-
isms has been used to argue against evolutionary theory, as well as in eco-
nomics and social theory, where so-called “complexity theory” aims to help
us understand systems which appear unsystematic.
As to the distinction between complexity and complicatedness:3 The
greater the number of objects and relations of a system, the greater its com-
plexity. Complicatedness depends on the inhomogeneity of the object area.
There can thus be systems of high complexity but small complicatedness
(for example: organic molecules composed of numerous elements of few
different kinds) whereas high complicatedness as a rule leads to complexity
(for example: organisms). No wonder that the theory of complex dynamic
systems, in which cause-and-effect connections are non-linear (for instance
in the motion of more than two bodies under the influence of gravity), is
currently becoming ever more influential, especially because of its many
applications (another example is the prediction of developments in the
weather). This discipline closely joins newer mathematical methods such as
chaos theory to older methods from statistics and probability theory. 
3The following is taken from K. Lorenz, “komplex/Komplex”, in: J. Mittelstrass (Ed.),
Enzyklopaedie Philosophie und Wissenschaftstheorie, vol. IV, 2nd edition, Stuttgart and
Weimar: Metzler 2010, pp. 277-279.

47
Complexity and Analogy in Science: Theoretical, Methodological and Epistemological Aspects
COMPLEXITY, REDUCTIONISM, AND HOLISM IN SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE
In so far as the reduction of complexity is done in explanatory intent,
this is achieved especially by model building. Models serve to simplify com-
plex structures and to visualize abstract structures. Thus, astronomical models
(for instance, in the form of orreries) were viewed in the sense of the first
purpose (simplifying structures), and physical models (for instance in the
form of the atomic model) were viewed in the sense of the second purpose
(visualizing abstract, non-intuitive structures) and mechanical models (for
instance, in the form of corpuscular models) generally in the sense of both
purposes (describing visualizable situations that were nonetheless in need
of explanation by the basic concepts of space, time, mass and force). As a
rule, we should differentiate between scale models, analogue models and
theoretical models. Scale models are enlarged or miniature replicas of real
or imaginary objects, for instance, in the three-dimensional representation
of the DNA-molecule (“double helix”). Analogue models represent an ob-
ject in a structurally similar (homomorphic) other object, for instance, in
the form of the planetary model of the atom (in physics) or computer-
models of the brain in the philosophy of mind. Theoretical models consist
of a set of assumptions and equations with which the essential properties
of an object or system are to be grasped, for instance (in the intuitive case)
in the form of Niels Bohr’s atom-model or of billiard-ball models in the
kinetic theory of gases.
As a rule a complex state of affairs cannot be completely grasped, even
when models are applied. This is for instance the case where chance plays
a role. The Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics, that is, the
theory of microphysical phenomena, assumes an irreducible, ontological
contingency, that is, the existence of absolute chance in the physical world.
The assumption is not uncontroversial. For instance, David Bohm’s inter-
pretation of quantum mechanics suggests that the quantum world can in
fact be grasped with causal-deterministic vocabulary. From this, and from
the fact that Bohm’s interpretation and the Copenhagen interpretation of
quantum mechanics are empirically indistinguishable,4 it follows that it may
not be possible to find out whether there is really absolute chance in the
world or not. All arguments for and against seem here to be relative to a
physical theory and its interpretation. How are we supposed to know
whether – remembering Albert Einstein’s admonition that God does not
play dice – there is not the possibility of a deeper deterministic description
4 See J. Mittelstrass, Konstruktion und Deutung: Ueber Wissenschaft in einer Leonardo- und
Leibniz-Welt, Berlin: Humboldt University 2001, p. 18.

48
Complexity and Analogy in Science: Theoretical, Methodological and Epistemological Aspects
JÜRGEN MITTELSTRASS
that excludes accident while coping with complexity. Not only philosophy,
but natural science as well has its difficulties with chance and necessity.
Nothing is changed by the circumstance that complex relations cannot
be completely grasped. This can in turn be elucidated under the concept
of predictability: Even in a deterministic world there are limits to pre-
dictability.5 Two reasons can be given in support of this. First, deterministic
chaos. This refers to the strong dependence of a system’s states on the mag-
nitude of defined parameters. Since the magnitude of these parameters can
never been known, the prediction of system’s states is bound by uncertainty,
which translates into a range of different developments in chaotic systems.
Unpredictability as a result of chaos is not limited to complex systems,
rather, it can also occur in simple systems that only consist of a few elements.
For example, two coupled pendulums constitute a simple system, the rele-
vant laws of which have been known for centuries. But it has only recently
become clear that, within such an arrangement, a distinct range of initial
conditions – namely system stimulations of medium strength – there can
be chaotic and unpredictable oscillations. Second, the problem of a Laplace’s
demon. This label (credited to Emil Du Bois-Reymond)6 refers to a ficti-
tious superhuman intelligence, which – under the assumption of a stable,
closed and all-determined system typical for a mechanistic worldview –
knows of all initial conditions of all possible movements and thus can predict
the location of any particle for every point in time. Now, quantum me-
chanical systems – in contrast to relativistic physics, where differential equa-
tions describe deterministic systems with regards to their state variables –
are non-deterministic with regard to conjugate variables such as position
and momentum. Rather, they are statistical, i.e. incalculable even by
Laplace’s demon – an implication confirmed by recent developments in
physics. But whatever holds for a deterministic world also holds for a com-
plex world and its reductions.
2. With the concept of reduction or reductionism philosophy of science
denotes, on the one hand, an essential aspect of scientific theory formation
and, on the other, a procedure that describes the successful reduction of
5 See, in more detail, J. Mittelstrass, “Predictability, Determinism, and Emergence”,
in: W. Arber et al. (Eds.), Predictability in Science: Accuracy and Limitations, Vatican City: The
Pontifical Academy of Sciences 2008 (Pontificiae Academiae Scientiarum Acta 19), pp.
162-172.
6“Ueber die Grenzen des Naturerkennens” (1872), in: E. Du Bois-Reymond, Vortraege
ueber Philosophie und Gesellschaft (ed. S. Wollgast), Hamburg: Meiner 1974, pp. 56-57.

49
Complexity and Analogy in Science: Theoretical, Methodological and Epistemological Aspects
COMPLEXITY, REDUCTIONISM, AND HOLISM IN SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE
one theory to another. In general the concept of reduction involves tracing
back entities, concepts or theories to others. Reductions serve the goal of
unifying the scientific world picture through the use of a conceptual system
– and consequently ontology – as uniform as can be and the elimination
or replacement of philosophically or methodologically problematical con-
cepts (or the entities they refer to) by unproblematic concepts (ontological
reduction). Examples are the reduction of phenomenological thermody-
namics to statistical dynamics, the reduction of Mendelian genetics to mo-
lecular genetics and the ontological reduction of psychological processes to
physical processes via a theory reduction of psychology to neurophysiology. 
One expression of a reductionistic programme is so-called physicalism,
that is, the programme to express all (non-logical) expressions of a unified
scientific language in the language of physics. There are two versions: “The
strictest version of physicalism restricts all scientific theories to the terms
of currently accepted physics. This view demands, for example, that all
processes or objects can be assigned a particular quantum of energy. A
weaker variant of physicalism demands the completeness of the physics of
the time. This conception accordingly takes the historical change of physics
explicitly into account. This view of physicalism makes a comprehensive
claim for the validity of the theory of inorganic phenomena and asserts that
all entities (i.e., including biological and psychological ones) are physical.
A further weakening of the concept of physicalism results if only the natural
sciences of the time taken as a whole are set to be comprehensive and com-
plete. In particular, this includes the possibility that biology is not reducible
to the theory of inorganic phenomena, but must have recourse to special
regularities. In this form of physicalism (...) emergent terms and laws are
admissible in principle”.7
Now, a claim for derivability of the reduced theory from the reducing
theory presupposes that both are compatible with one another. But since
the reducing theory is designed to correct and improve the reduced theory,
this in turn presupposes that both are incompatible. That is, the formal and
informal conditions of reduction cannot be satisfied simultaneously; the
correction of T1’s laws by T2 precisely excludes their derivation.8This, again,
is the reason why Karl Popper rejects the idea of reducibility of theories to
7 M. Carrier and J. Mittelstrass, Mind, Brain, Behavior: The Mind-Body Problem and the
Philosophy of Psychology, Berlin and New York: Walter de Gruyter 1991, p. 172.
8 See again M. Carrier and J. Mittelstrass, op. cit., p. 43. Here too the proof that this
difficulty has been solved by applying Tarski’s concept of interpretability to the reduction

50
Complexity and Analogy in Science: Theoretical, Methodological and Epistemological Aspects
JÜRGEN MITTELSTRASS
one another and defends the incompatibility of successive theories. The
principle of a critical examination characterizing a logic of scientific dis-
covery requires, according to Popper’s concept of falsifiability and the asym-
metry of verification and falsification, a pluralism of theories so as to be
able to select a “successful” one. Progress among theories is due to the on-
going process of critical revision of existing theories from the perspective
of truth or at least verisimilitude. 
3. Compared to the approaches represented in the programme of reduc-
tion, analogies display a weak form of relationship between entities, concepts
or theories. Here the point is that this connection can be materially different
but formally the same. We should distinguish between structural and functional
analogies: “If the correspondence of particular relationships among the ele-
ments of a system with one another is reversibly unique to those among
elements of another system (without there needing to be a correspondence
between the elements themselves), we say that both systems agree partially
in their structure or that a ‘structural analogy’ holds between them. If one
grasps similarity as agreement of two systems in certain (not all) ‘characters’
in the sense of properties of their elements or element groups, then similar
systems agree also in the relationships between the corresponding elements
or element groups and are thus structurally analogous”.9 An example would
be again Bohr’s planetary model of the atom. A “functional analogy” be-
tween two systems on the other hand occurs if these are equally suited for
a particular purpose, that is, interchangeable for achieving that purpose. An
example here: the concept of force in physics and everyday life. Epistemo-
logically speaking, both cases are forms of similarity, that is, agreement of
two systems in some, but not necessarily all, characteristics. Analogue models
accordingly represent a system or an object in a structurally similar (homo-
morphic) or in a functionally similar system or object.
4. The line of thought pursued here in the case of the concepts com-
plexity, reduction and analogy lead in the philosophy of science to a position
that on the one hand turns against the reductionist programme and on the
other hand represents the attempt to do justice to the actual complexity of
scientific objects, concepts or theories in a different manner as well, namely
problem (A. Tarski, “A General Method in Proofs of Undecidability”, in: A. Tarski et al.,
Undecidable Theories, Amsterdam: North-Holland 1971, pp. 1-35).
9 Chr. Thiel, “Analogie”, in J. Mittelstrass (Ed.), Enzyklopaedie Philosophie und Wis-
senschaftstheorie, vol. I, 2nd edition, Stuttgart and Weimar: Metzler 2005, pp. 117-118.

51
Complexity and Analogy in Science: Theoretical, Methodological and Epistemological Aspects
COMPLEXITY, REDUCTIONISM, AND HOLISM IN SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE
in the sense of a unity to be regained, a holistic unity of disciplinary and
transdisciplinary explanations.10 Under the designation holism are to be un-
derstood methodological approaches to the explanation of conceptual or
empirical phenomena, that take their point of departure from a “holistic”
point of view. Conceptually or methodologically, the issue is in particular
the distinction between the part-whole relation and the element relation,
since wholes are understood as compositions of parts but not merely as the
sum of their parts. This is the case because the relations determining the
composition make the whole an independent unity, whose qualities cannot
be completely traced back to the qualities of the parts. The concept holism
was introduced in 1926 in a biological context.11 It also plays a role in the
interpretation of quantum theory, in social-scientific theory formation and
in the theory of confirmation. 
In biology the concept of holism designates the attempt, in opposition to
the particular positions of mechanism and vitalism, to derive all phenomena
of life from a holistic “metabiological principle”. According to this view bio-
logical processes can be adequately explained only if organisms are not grasped
as isolated natural bodies (as in physics), but are rather seen in structure and
function as standing in inseparable interaction with their own subsystems and
the environment. Depending on how this abstract principle is conceptualized,
it has either found general recognition in biology or been dismissed as incom-
patible with the biological facts. For the paleontologist Edgar Dacqué, for in-
stance, holism was a methodological part of a teleological conception of
evolution in which humankind, as the primeval form of life, included all the
developmental possibilities of the animal kingdom (the animal species appear
in this conception as dead ends in biological development).12 In physics the
appearance of so-called entangled states in quantum theory is often viewed as
a violation of the principle of separation and as the basis for an ontological holism.
This principle states that every physical system possesses its fundamental prop-
erties independent of other systems distinct from it. The exhibition of these
properties, but not their presence, can be influenced by their interactions with
other systems. In composite systems the state of the aggregate system results
from the states of the subsystems and their interactions.
In entangled states, such as described in the so-called Einstein-Podol-
10 I follow closely here my article “Holismus” in the Enzyklopaedie Philosophie und Wis-
senschaftstheorie, vol. III, 2nd edition, Stuttgart and Weimar: Metzler 2008, pp. 427-430.
11 J.C. Smuts, Holism and Evolution, London: Macmillan 1926, 3rd edition 1936.
12 E. Dacqué, Leben als Symbol: Metaphysik einer Entwicklungslehre, Munich and Berlin:
Oldenbourg 1928.

52
Complexity and Analogy in Science: Theoretical, Methodological and Epistemological Aspects
JÜRGEN MITTELSTRASS
sky-Rosen paradox, an aggregate system consisting, for instance, of two ini-
tially coupled and later separated particles, has constant properties – it is in
a pure state – although this does not hold for the subsystems. The aggregate
system exists in a well-defined state, whereas the subsystems do not possess
the correlated properties (such as spin and polarization) independently of
one another. The probability distribution for the appearance of particular
property values of the aggregate system cannot be calculated as the product
of such probability distributions for the subsystems. Accordingly the state
of the aggregate system does not supervene on the states of the sub-systems.
The holism of quantum theory is expressed in the violation of the principle
of separation, through which the whole is ascribed primacy before the parts.
In the philosophy of the social sciences methodological holism is the view
that social relations can only be interpreted and explained in terms of social
wholes. This holism is methodological insofar as it primarily refers to the
conditions of understanding. The counter-position is so-called method-
ological individualism, as advocated, for instance by Popper among others.
According to this individualism all social relations can be explained out of
the actions of individual persons and their interactions, which in turn can
be traced back to motives and beliefs and thus need not necessarily refer to
social wholes. Opposed to this position, advocates of holism such as Karl
Marx and Émile Durkheim postulate the impossibility of abstracting from
the influence of social institutions on the behaviour of individuals. Accord-
ing to Marx social conditions and their development can only be inter-
preted in categories of social “totalities” such as relations of production or
classes; for Durkheim institutions such as family or religious communities
act as social facts upon the individual.
While biological, quantum-physical and social-scientific elaborations of
holistic notions are supposed to serve the particular interpretative and ex-
planatory needs of partial areas of investigation, the so-called confirmation
holism of philosophy of science deals with the over-arching thesis that the-
ories can only be empirically evaluated as wholes. This form of holism arises
in the framework of a hypothetical-deductive conception of empirical test-
ing and confirmation, according to which the investigation of the tenability
of a hypothesis, not comprehensively testable by immediate observation, is
carried out by deriving empirically accessible consequences. If the conse-
quences turn out to be true, the hypothesis is taken to be empirically con-
firmed. However, Pierre Duhem pointed out that the derivation of
empirical consequences must have recourse to numerous other hypotheses,
for instance, those taken from background knowledge or those about the
function of the measuring instruments applied. Every successful test con-

53
Complexity and Analogy in Science: Theoretical, Methodological and Epistemological Aspects
COMPLEXITY, REDUCTIONISM, AND HOLISM IN SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE
firms not only the hypothesis under consideration, but also the entire group
of hypotheses used in the testing process. 
Similar arguments are made in philosophy of science in the framework
of so-called meaning holism or semantic holism. Here, the meaning of individ-
ual concepts or propositions results from their interactions with other lin-
guistic structures. They do not have meaning in isolation but only in the
context of comprehensive language systems. This holism arises out of con-
firmation holism when it is joined to the verificationist premise that the
conditions of empirical testing provide information on meaning. A further
ground is the realization that the meaning of scientific concepts is under-
stood only in the context of the corresponding scientific theory and cannot
be acquired by knowledge of the appropriate definitions alone. The mean-
ing of a concept like that of force can be clarified only by the role that it
plays in the system of the laws of mechanics. According to this context the-
ory of meaning a scientific concept acquires its specific content only
through its integration in theory. 
As an aside let me remark that holistic approaches of this kind lead to
the concept of emergence insofar as, both in the sense of the confirmation
holism and also in the sense of semantic holism, it is the system-properties
that give us information about the behaviour of the system. These properties
are in turn emergent. Emergence says again that it is impossible to use char-
acteristics of elements and the interrelations between these to describe char-
acteristics of ensembles or make predictions about them. The core element
of a strong emergence thesis is a non-derivability or non-explainability hy-
pothesis of the system characteristics shaped from the characteristics of the
system components. An emergent characteristic is non-derivable; its occur-
rence is in this sense unexpected and unpredictable. Weak emergence is lim-
ited to the difference of the characteristics of systems and system
components and is compatible with the theoretical explainability of the
system characteristics. Weak emergence in turn is essentially a phenomenon
of complexity. 
Here, too, our considerations return us to the concept of complexity,
which is, from the perspective of philosophy of science as well, the key con-
cept of the modern development of science and points to the future, pos-
sibly also to the limits, of scientific progress.

