THE GEOMETRY 
OF 
BINOCULAR SPACE PERCEPTION 
LsGRAND H. HARDY, M.D. 
GERTRUDE RAND, Ph.D. 
M. CATHERINE RITTLER, B.A. 
wtd 
ALBERT A. BUNK, PI..D. 
MoA«M««tlc«l Analyst 
PAUL BOEDER, Ph.D. 

THIS REPORT HAS BEEN DELIMITED 
AND CLEARED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE 
UNDER DOD DIRECTIVE 5200,20 AND 
NO RESTRICTIONS ARE IMPOSED UPON 
ITS USE AND DISCLOSURE, 
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A 
APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE; 
DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED, 

THE GEOMETRY 
BINOCULAR SPACE PERCEPTION 
fcy 
LEGRAND H. HARDY, M.D. 
GERTRUDE R*ND, Ph.D, 
M. CATHERINE RITTLER, B.A. 
and 
ALBERT A. BLANK, Ph.D. 
Mathematical Analyst 
PAUL BOEDER, Ph.D. 
Mathematical Consultant 
From the Knapp Memorial Laboratories, institute of Ophthalmology, 
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York 
'This work was supported by a contract bwtw«*»n the Office of Naval Research and Columbia University 

FOREWORD 
We think that this is an important report because here, for the first time, extensive experi- 
mental results and analytical details are presented which strongly support the Lüneburg Theory 
of the Geometry of Binocular Visual Space. 
This is a terminal report on research done under contract with the Office of Naval Research 
(N6onril7119; NR 143-638). The work is being terminated because of our inability to acquire 
and retain adequate personnel with the highly technical skills necessary for such work. A very 
high degree of mathematical analytical ability must be in constant and harmonious rapport with 
an equally high degree of laboratory experimental skills in order to carry out these investigations. 
In the untimely death of Rudolph Lüneburg we suffered an extremely severe loss. After a lapse 
of two years we were fortunate in acquiring through Professor Richard Courant one of Dr. Lune- 
burg's associates, Dr. Albert A. Blank, who has shown brilliance in his mathematical attack. 
All the new mathematical analysis herein described and most of the formulation of this report 
are due to his effcrts. 
Our mathematical consultant, Dr. Paul Boeder, has given much time and enthusiastic en- 
couragement to our working staff. Professor H.S.M. Coxeter, as a specialist in the non-euclidean 
geometries, contributed important suggestions which were partly carried out in the ancillary 
investigations of Dr. Charles Campbell who earned tb* D. Sc. degree for his part in this re- 
search. Dr. Bernard Altschuler and Dr. Anna Stein spent respectively one year and two years 
in the mathematical analyses during the early part of the study. The largest part of the actual 
experimentation   was   carried   out   by   Dr.   Gertrude   Rand   and   Miss   M.   Catherine   Rirtler. 
LEGRAND H. HARDY 
Principal Invesiigaior 

PREFACE 
This is a report of progress, theoretical and experimental, in the study of 
binocular space perception based on the theory of R. K. Lüneburg.   '   The ex- 
perimental evidence definitely supports Lüneburg's major conclusion that the dark- 
room visual space has a determinate non-euclidean metric or psychometric distance 
function which is a personal characteristic of the observer. In this report the 
metric has been developed in terms of coordinates closely related to, but different 
from those of Lüneburg. Much the same methods are used for determining the form of 
the metric as were suggested by Lüneburg. The theory gives an explanation of several 
well-known perceptual space phenomena such as the frontal geodesies, Blumenfeld al- 
leys, and size constancy. 
We have not attempted here to present a review of all our work of the past 
five years, but only that portion of it which, still appears relevant and cogent. It 
would be fruitless to describe all the false clues and blind alleys that as a rule 
accompany the formation of any new theory. On the other hand, we are conscious that 
there are many gaps in our testing program. We employed a very limited number of 
observers because so few were available for experimentation extending over so long 
a period. We did not investigate every open door because so many doors were open. 
The greatest setback to our research was the untimely loss of ouV beloved 
friend and colleague Dr. Rudolph K. Lüneburg. To Lüneburg we owe the basic concepts 
and formulation of the theory. His was t h«; guiding hand for more than half of our 
experimental <vork. To him we dedicate tina paper and hope that, this work may stand 
in his name. 

CONTENTS 
Page 
PART I.    THE MATHEMATICAL BASIS OF THE LÜNEBURG THEORY 
1. INTRODUCTION     1 
2. SPECIFICATION OF THE STIMULUS CONFIGURATION 
PHYSICAL COORDINATES    4 
3. THE METRIC NATURE OF VISUAL SPACE     7 
a Vi s'jd Orientation  7 
b. Perception of Distance  8 
c. Perception of Straightness  8 
d. The Psychometric Distance Function  8 
e. The Homogeneity of Visual Space  10 
f. Plane Trigonometry of the Visual Space  14 
4. RELATION OF VISUAL TO PHYSICAL SPACE   15 
a. The Iseikonic Transformations  16 
b. The Vieth-Müller Torus — Perceived Radial Distance  17 
c. Perceived Direction  19 
d. The Sensory Role of the Iseikonic Coordinates  19 
5. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS FOR DETERMINING r (I") and 
RELATED EXPERIMENTS  20 
a. Parallel and Distance Alleys.   20 
b. The Double Vieth-Müller Circles 25 
(i)    Three-Point Experiment 25 
(ii)   Four-Point Experiment     27 
c. The Equipartitioned Parallel Alleys 28 
d. Size Constancy — Relation of Perceived to Physical Size 31 
e. The Phenomenon of the Frontal Geodesies ?2 
6. SUMMARY 34 
7. CONCLUSION 34 
PART II.   THE EMPIRICAL SUPPORT OF THE LÜNEBURG THEORY 
1. SENSED RADIAL DISTANCE  36 
2. TESTS OF THE ISEIKONIC TRANSFORMATIONS ,. =, 39 
a   The Transformation 0'   • <fr + //,  y*   • •/ 
The Predicted Oblique Geodesies Experiment  39 
b.   The Transformation y*   = y + \,   <£?   = <b  40 
(i)    The Double Vieth-Müller Circles - 
Three Point Experiment  4") 
(ii)   The Equipartitioned Parallel Alleys  45 
3. DETERMINATION OF r(f) 48 
a. Parallel and Distance Alleys 
(The Blumenfeld Alleys)  48 
b. The Double Vieth-Müller Circie Experiments 53 
(i)    The Three-Point Experiment  53 
(ii)   The Four~Point Experiment  56 
c. The Equipartitioned Parallel Alleys  59 
d. The Persona! Characteristic r ( T)  60 
4. INSTRUMENTATION 63 
a. The Telestereoscope or "Giant's Eyes" Instrument   63 
b. The Poloroid Rack 65 
5. CONCL USIONS 67 

PART ! 
THE MATHEMATICAL BASIS OF THE LÜNEBURG THEORY 
1. INTRODUCTION * 
The qualities of form and localization are the basic materials of geometry 
and in formulating a theory of binocular space perception we attempt to establish 
the relations which exist between the perception of these qualities and the objec- 
tive forms and localizations of the physical world. 
This study seeks to demonstrate a correlation between the geometrical stimu- 
lus presented to an observer and the geometrically relevant part of the observer's 
response. Such visual phenomena as color and brightness, for example, are not con- 
sidered here. 
This discussion could be phrased in operational language, say in terms of 
stimulus  and response  or  input  and output  . Ine  stimulus  or  input 
consists of a physical situation to which the observer is exposed together with a 
set of instructions; the "response" or "output" is the consequent modification 
of the physical situation by the observer together with his relevant statements. 
The use here of terms such as the nouns: perception, appearance, impression; the 
verbs: to perceive, to sense, to appear; the adjectives: perceptual, subjective, 
sensed, perceived; and other terms of the same kind, may be considered operational- 
ly as a reference to their undefined use in the instructions or in the statement of 
the observer. For example, the statement that the observer "perceives" the point 
Po to be midway between P and P, on a straight line may be interpreted in either 
of two operational meanings: (a) the observer says, "I have the impression that P 
is midwöy between P, and P " ; or (b) in response to the instruction, "Adjust the 
position of the light Po until it appears to be midway between P. and P„ on a 
straight line" , the observer has placed a given physical light in a particular 
position. 
With this understanding, we shall freely employ the words "impression" , 
"perception" , etc. in this intuitive way without further clarification. 
We are concerned here only with one type of visual stimulus, important inso- 
far as geometrical properties are concerned. This stimulus is characterized as a 
»FOR HELPING US TO CLARIFY THE IDEAS OF THIS SECTION,  ALTHOUGH ONLY WE ARE RESPONSIBLE 
FOR THE FORM IN WHICH THEY ARE PRESENTED HERE, SE OWE THANKS TO PROF. C. H. GRAHAM OF 
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY AND THE LATE DR. W. BERRY OF ONR. 

distribution of luminous point* in definite orient?*ions and localizations with 
respect to the observer. In particular, for our study of binocular space percep- 
tion, a stimulus is considered to be defined if we give the position of the ob- 
server and the positions of the points which are effective in the stimulation of 
both eyes. Such a stimulus can be characterized numerically in terms of a suitable 
coordinate system. The total   stimulus  configuration  is the set of all points which 
are binocularly effective. Since this terminology is unwieldy we shall often refer 
simply to the stimulus  configuration  or the stimulus.   It is to be understood, how- 
ever, that both of these terms, wherever they occur, are meant to include all   ef- 
fective points. 
To measure his spatial perception, the observer is asked to modify an initial 
stimulus configuration so as to give himself a specified desired impression. The 
instruction is generally a request to set up a sensory situation which lends itself 
to description by a mathematical relation of equality^ For example, the observer may 
be presented with three light points Ql , Q2, Q3 arbitrarily located in his binocular 
field. He is then asked, without moving points Q and Q3. to adjust the position of 
the point Q, so as to give himself the impression of points Pj, P„, P„ placed in that 
order on a straight line. This perception of straightness and order is described by 
the equation 
(P,, P2) + (P2> P3) - (P,, P3) 
where, in general, for any pair of points P., P., the symbol (P., P.) denotes the 
sensed distance between the points P. and P.. 
By employing a sufficient variety and number of specific initial conditions up- 
on constructions of diverse kinds we may hope to establish statistically a functional** 
dependence of perception upon stimulus which may be considered a constant characteris- 
tic of the observer. In this way, given the mathematical description of the stimulus, 
it is possible to describe some constants of the observer's visual responses; that is, 
to give a mathematical description of the impressions of localization and form with 
respect to the observer's personal mental frame of reference - the observer's visual 
space. 
•WE SHALL ADHERE THROUGHOUT TO THE CONVENTION OF DESIGNATING A PHYSICAL POINT BY 4. TUE PERCEIVED 
POINT BY P. 
••THE WORD FUNCTION IS USED HERE IN THE MATHEMATICIAN'S SENSE AND IT MAY BE WELL TO REPEAT THE DEFINI- 
TION FOR THE NON-MATHEMATICAL READER: 
LET S AND T DENOTE TWO AGGREGATES (OR SETS OR CLASSES) CONSISTING Or ANY ELEMENTS WHATEVER. A (SINGLE- 
VALUED) FUNCTION DEFINED UPON THE SET S WITH VALUES IN THE SET T IS h  MEANS OF ASSOCIATING WITH EACH 
ELEMENT OF S A UNIQUE ELEMENT OF T. WE ALSO SAY THAT S IS MAPPED INTO T. A FUNCTION MAY ALSO BE CALLED 
A CORRESPONDENCE (TO EVERY ELEMENT OF S THERE CORRESPONDS A UNIQUE ELEMENT OF T). 

This characterization of the relations between spatial response and stimulus 
configuration will be given in terms of two mathematical functions: (1) a mapping 
function which define« the correspondence between points of the stimulus and points 
of the visual space, and (2) a metric which characterizes the internal geometry of 
the visual space. The constants of this geometry may vary from observer to observer, 
but repeated and varied experiments strongly indicate that its general character is 
that of the three-dimensional hyperbolic space of Lobachevski and Bolyai. 
A note should be added concerning both the conditions under which the experi- 
ments were performed and the method of observation used in viewing the stimulus con- 
figurations. All experiments were carried out in a darkroom, thus reducing monocular 
clues to a minimum. The intensities of the points of light were adjusted to appear 
equal to the observer but so low that there was no perceptible surrounding illumina- 
tion. Thfi observer's head was fixed in a headrest and he viewed a static configura- 
tion (perception of motion is not considered). The observations were made binocularly 
and always by allowing the eyes to vary fixation at will over the entire range of 
the pnysical configuration until a stable perception of the geometry of the situation 
was achieved. 
Work has been done by other investigators on perceptions arrived at by keeping 
the eyes in constant fixation on a single point. It is impossible to state a priori 
what relationship, if any, exists between visual space as determined by the "fixed 
eyes" condition and visual space as determined by using freely roving eyes. However, 
it seems reasonable to suppose that the fixed eyes condition, owing to the very limit- 
ed field of distinct vision, would permit only the discovery of local properties of 
visual space. It is not unlikely that a theory obtained under the fixed eyes condition 
could be completely subsumed in Lüneburg's theory as a theory of th^ local properties 
of visual space. On the other hand it is highly probable that the use of the restric- 
tion of constant fixation would prevent an understanding of the phenomena associated 
with the free use of the eyes.* 
* INTHIS CONNECTION IT MAY BE WELL TO MENTION THAT CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS CITED IN OGLE  AND IN FRY5, 
ARE MADE WITH THE EYES IN CONSTANT FIXATION. ThESE AUTHORS APPARENTLY BELIEVE THAT THEIR RESULTS ARE IN 
CONTRADICTION TO THE LÜNEBURG THEORY. SUCH A CONCLUSION IS NOT WARRANTED BECAUSE OF THE DIFFERENCE IN 
CONDITIONS. NEITHER AUTHOR HAS CONSIDERED THE POSSIBILITY THAT HIS RESULTS COULD BE CONNECTED TO THE 
LÜNEBURG THEORY THROUGH LOCAL PROPERTIES AND NEITHER HAS ATTEMPTED TO ACCOUNT FOR THE PHEN0MRN4 ASSOCIA- 
TED SITH THE FREE USE OF THE EYES. 

SPECIFICATION OF THE STIMULUS CONFIGURATION 
PHYSICAL COORDINATES 
In order to give a numerical characterization of a stimulus configuration, 
its points are located by referring them to a suitable coordinate system,- carte- 
sian, polar or other. The observer's head is 
assumed to be fixed in normal eiect position. 
The observer's eyes are assumed to be located 
at points, the rotation centers of the eyes.* 
A cartesian system is chosen with the origin 
placed at the point midway between the rotation 
centers. The y-axis runs laterally through the 
rotation centers and is oriented positively to 
«*-)(  the left. The unit of length is fixed by setting 
the eyes at ± 1 along the y-axis. The x-axis is 
taken positive in the frontal direction of the 
median plane. The upward vertical direction is 
assigned to the z-axis (fig. 1). In this frame- 
work we can assign cartesian coordinates (x, y,z) 
to any point 0 in physical space, and so deter- 
mine its position relative to the observer. 
A coordinate system better adapted to our 
purpose is the bipolar system. Let Q be a physi- 
cal point anywhere in space and let R denote the 
right eye and L the left eye (fig. 2). The angle 
which the plane QLR makes with the horizontal is 
called the ele.ation  6  of the point Q. The angle 
subtended at 0 by the two eyes is called the bi- 
polar parallax y of 0- To completely specify the 
position of Q we now define a third coordinate,<p, 
the bipolar   latitude.   Let x be the axis in the 
plane of elevation QLR formed by intersection with 
the median .plane (fig.3). Consider the circle 
through the three points Q, L, R and let A and B 
denote the forward and rearward intersections res- 
pectively of the elevated axis x with the circle. 
The bipolar latitude is given by <p  = ^ ALQ = i  ARQ 
= 3 ABO. The bipolar   coordinates  of Q are the 
FIG. 1. CARTESIAN COORDINATE SYSTEM FOR 
PHYSICAL SPACE. L AND R REPRESENT CGNTEP.S 
OF ROTATION OF LEFT AND RIliHT EYES. 
b'v yc^ 
FIG.2.BIPOLAR PARALLAX AND ELEVATION FOR 
POINT " IN THE MEDIAN PLANE. 
THt' CONSIDERATIONS BEHIND THIS CHOICE AS OPPOSED TO THAT OF THE NODAL POINTS ARE STATED IN PART II 
SECTION 1. 

above-defined angles: 
(1) 
y=iRQL 
0= iABQ 
e = * x o x 
(bipolar parallax) 
(bipolar latitude) 
(elevation) 
When the eyes are fixed upon the point 0» the angle y  approximates the angle 
of convergence of the visual axes and the angle q>  approximates the average of 
the inclinations of the two visual axes with respect to the median plane (See 
Part II, Section 1). For this reason the coordinate y will often be called the 
convergence. The angle <p  will sometimes be called the bipolar azimuth. 
V * 
FIG. 3. BIPOLAR PARALLAX AND LATITUDE 
AS ANGLES IN THE PLANE OP ELEVATION OP 
POINT Q. 
The bipolar coordinates are related to the cartesian coordinates through 
the transformation equations 
2 */x2 + z2 
x = oos 20 +  cos y    CQS Q 
sin y 
(2)  y - 
sin 20 
sin y 
tan 7 = 
tan 2<p  = 
x2+y2 + z2-l 
2y Vx2 + z2~ 
x2+ z2- y2+ 1 
cos: 20 + cos y 
z * sin 6 
sin y 
tan 6 »   

6 
Since most of the investigations have been done in the horizontal plane, we shall 
generally use only the relations for the horizontal plane 
cos 20 * cos y 2x 
x , tan y  = 
(3) 
sin y x2 + y2 
si n 20 
sin y x - y 
tan ZCP = ,   , 
x2 - v2 + 1 
Unless units of length are definitely specified for the cartesian coordinates 
x,y it is tc be understood that the unit of length is half the mterpupillary dis- 
tance of the observer. Similarly, unless it is definitely specified that 0 and y  are 
measured in degrees it is to be understood that the angles are given in radian measure. 
In many situations it will be useful to «mpioy the approximation.«» 
2 cos 0 
tan 0 = y/ y  =   
which  are  very  good  for  sufficiently   large  distances   from  the observer. 
The   locus  of   all   points   in   the  horizontal   plane  which  have   the   same  value  of y 
as Q is the  circle passing  through  Q and the  two  eves.   This  circle  is  known  as  the 
Vieth-Muller  Circle through Q and we   shall   often  abbreviate  it   as VMC.   The  locus of 
points 0 =  constant  is  a hyperbola with the  asymptote   tan 0 = y/„.   In  the  approxima- 
tion   (3a)   we  are  replacing  the hyperbola 0 »  constant  by  its   asymptote  and  the VMC 
through Q by  a circle passing through Q and tangent  to  the y  -   axis  at  the  origin. 
It  is easily   seen that  the   fractional   errors made  in  this   approximation  are negligible 
for most purposes.   In  fact,   the  estimates 
(3b) _Aj£ <   Jj and A^    <     _?_ 
0 d yd2 
where A 0 and A y  are the errors and d > 4 is the distance from the origin, serve very 
well to show th~\, the approximations are sufficiently accurate for most practical work. 
A set cf coordinates, which we shall call the iseikonic  coordinates,   particularly 
useful in analyzing binocular space perception, may easily be defined in terms of the 
bipolar coordinates. Let y^be the least, value of y  attributable to any point of the 
stimulus. If we draw VMC's through all the stimulus points, yo  will be the value of y 
on the outermost VMC. Let 0o and 9    be values associated with suitable directions of 
reference. To a point having the bipolar coordinates (y,   0, 8)  we associate iseikonic 
coordinates, 

(4) *   «   4> - 4> 
8    =    0 . 6 
o 
o 
These   rnordinates will   generally have  to  be   specified   anew  for  each  changr«» of 
stimulus. 
3.  TH~ METRIC NATURE OF VISUAL SPACE 
The mathematical characterization of the visual space is founded upon a set of 
observations in conjunction with a limited number of mathematical assumptions of con- 
siderable heuristic appeal. From these fundamentals it is possible to achieve by de- 
.!.._..-•-.- T 1 >_ ~1 1_ _U ..__.: _»•: _f tU„ 4--.. -f ,.4 —,i  ..  
auttlTC    Ulu^cso    *-Äil&«3i;ui. G£     o     aXiffiJÄG     uuaiavbCliiiflbluu    v/X     uic    g^lfiild»iy     wx      »-t o t-i m      upu^v-. 
In fact, he presented strong evidence that the visual space is a metric space, finite- 
ly compact, convex and homogeneous. Our further work supports this conclusion. 
3a. Visual Orientation 
One of the curious facts of binocular perception is that the observer is not 
ordinarily aware of any bipolarity. Sensed distances from the observer are treated as 
though viewed from a point center of reference. This situation is described by placing 
the origin of visual coordinates at this "egocenter" of the observer. 
The observer is, however, aware of the orientations lateral, vertical and front- 
al. In the visual spece w~ may then take three subjective planes of orientation per- 
pendicular to these axes - the ser.sed median, horizontal and frcntai planes through 
the origin. The axes in the visual space are the intersections of the three principal 
subjective planes. Let (£,17, £) be coordinates chosen to represent these subjective 
orientations. The origin £  = 77 = £ = 0 represents the subjective center of observation. 
The £ - axis is positive in the frontal direction; the 77 - axis, in the direction left; 
the £ - axis, in the direction vertically upwards. The subjective horizontal, median 
and frontal planes are given by the respective equations, £=0, 77=0, £~®- 
The positional orientation of the observer is generally such that he brings the 
subjective planes into the proper orientation with respect to objective physical space. 

This coordination between the visual and proprioceptive senses is not absolute, 
however. It may easily be disarranged in in airplane or sea-going vessel. We shall 
see, in fact, that the assumption of the customary correspondence between objec- 
tive and subjective orientations is not necessary for our theory. 
3b.  Perception of Distance 
A configuration consisting of isolated points Qj, Q2, Q3  is sensed 
as a distribution of points P., P„, P„,   in a three-dimensional continuum. 
An observer obtains rather definite impressions cf the distance oi the points from 
one another and from the observational center. The sizes of these sensed distances 
may readiiy be compared. Thus if (Pj, Pj ) denotes the sensed distance between any 
two points P. and P., we find for any two pairs of points P., P2 and P3, P4 that 
relations of inequality such as 
(P,, P2) > (P3, P4)  or  (P1( P2) < (P3, P4) 
are easily perceived. The sensed relations of equality and inequality are quite 
stable for a given observer. In other words, the inequality signs are determined to 
a high degree of correlation by the physical coordinates of the stimulating points 
0,. Q2, %,  Q4. 
3c.  Perception of Straightness 
A sense of alignment is one of the strong characteristics of visual percep- 
tion. We quickly perceive whether or not three points lie on a straight line. Fur- 
thermore, physical points can be arranged so as to result in the perception of a 
straight line for every orientation and position in the visual space. Given an 
arbitrary pair of points, it is possible to arrange others along a curve which 
will be perceived as the extended straight line joining the points. Perhaps it 
would be well to emphasize that the perception of straightness may arise from phy- 
sical curves* which are not physically straight but actually have marked curva- 
ture. (See Section 5e) 
3d.  The Psychometric Distance Function 
The observations 3b and 3c are a strong indication that the visual space is 
a mathematical metric space. This means that we can assign positive numerical values 
«THE  WORD  CURVE  AS   USED   HERE   IS  TAKEN   IN  THE  TECHNICAL   MATHEMATICAL   SENSE.    A   CURVE   IS  A   ONE-DIMEN- 
SIONAL  CONTINUOUS   MANIFOLD.   THUS  A   STRAIGHT   LINE   IS   A   KIND   OF   CURVE.    IT   HAS   ZERO  CURVATURE  EVERYWHERE. 

to sensed distances so that the numbers satisfy inequalities in agreement with the 
perceived relations of sensed distances. Such a coordination of a number D (Pj, P2) 
to the sensed distance between a pair of points Pj, P2 is called a distance function 
or metric if it satisfies the following conditions: 
(a) D (P, P) = 0.  A perceived point has zero distance from itself. 
(b) D (Pj, P2) = D (P2, Px) > 0, if Pj/ P2.  To each perceived pair of distinct 
points; there is assigned a positive value of distance independent of the order in 
which the points are considered. 
(c) D (Pj, P2) + D (P2, P3) > D (P1( P3) for any three points P., P2, P3. We shall 
say in particular that three points are on a straight   line  if and only if the equality 
relationship holds. 
Whot) we s*»y that the function D (Pj, P2) corresponds to sensed distance we mean that 
it must satisfy the further conditiors: 
(d) If Pj, P2 and P3, P4 are any two pairs of perceived points, then 
D (Pj, r2,    z    u   vr3, r4, 
according to whether the sensed distances are correspondingly related, 
(Pi- P2)   ?  P3. V' 
(e) If Pj, P2, P3 are perceived as being arranged in that order on a straight line, 
then 
D (Pj, P2) + D (P2, P3> = D (Pj, P3), 
and conversely. 
A function satisfying conditions (a) to (e) is called a psychometric distance 
function  or simply a metric  for visual space. Our problem can be reduced to the deter- 
mination of such a function in the terms of the physical coordinates of the stimula- 
ting point*. Oiiite clearly, the physical distance relations -among the stimulating 
points will not describe a metric for visual space. Although physical distance satis- 
fies (a) to (c) it can not satisfy (d) or (e) since, for one thing, the physically 
straight lines are not generally the same as the visually straight lines. To keep 
these distinctions clear, the curves in physical space which are perceived as straight 
will be called visual  geodesies  or siroly geodesies. 
The function D (Pj, P2) is not completely determinate, for if D (Pj, ?2) satis- 
fies conditions (a) to (e) so does the function C • D (P,, P2) where C is any posi- 
tive constant whatever. Yet, under certain general mathematical assumptions, this can 

10 
be proved to be the only indeterminacy possible. These assumptions are: 
(f)     The visual space is finitely  compact. 
E/et; bounded infinite sequence of points has a limit point; i.e. 
for every infinite sequence cf points P  (v = 1, 2, 3, ) 
satisfying the condition D (P , P ) < M for some point Po and 
positive constant M, there exists a subsequence Pv  (k * 1, 2, 3 
) and a point P of the visual space such that D (P , P^ ) — 0. 
(6)     The visual space is convex. 
Between every pair of points Pj, P2 (Pj / P2), there is a point P3 
on the straight segment joining Pj to P,; i.e., there exists a point 
P satisfying 
D (Pj, P3) + D (P3, P2) = D (Pr P2). 
The proof that, under these assumptions, the metric is completely determinate to 
within a constant factor i= given in Lüneburg'. 
Although the assumptions (f), (g) can not be verified by experiment since 
the proof would require infinitely many tests, they do coincide with our customary 
convictions about visual perception. 
Since a distance function may be determined exactly to within a constant fac- 
tor, it follows for a given stimulus, that the proportions of distance are unique. 
In other words, the ratio D (P., P9) / D (P., P.) of two sensed distances is a uni- 
quely determined function of the four stimulating points in question and does not 
depend upon the particular distance function we use. In this way the metric esta- 
blishes a fixed relationship between the objective physical stimulus and the sub- 
jective perception. This relation is a function of no other variables than the 
coordinates of the stimulus. Any parameters in this relationship which are not 
physical coordinates must be constant factors of the observer, characterizing his 
visual reactions to external stimuli. 
3e. The Homogeneity of Visual Space* 
The visual space has two properties which are familiar from common experience 
but have not been treated experimentally. For this reason these properties are 
stated here as hypotheses. The first of these properties is: 
(h)  The visual space is locally euclidean. 
*F0R A FAIRLY COMPLETE ACCOUNT OF THE MATHEMATICAL KNOWLEDGE IN THIS SECTION. SEE BUSEMANN8 

In other words, the euclidean laws hold to any desired degree of approximation 
in sufficiently small regions of space. The earti., considered as a spherical 
surface, is a familiar example of a space having this kind of property. In sur- 
veying a small area it suffices Lo use the euclidean laws of ordinary trigono- 
metry, but for navigating over great distances only spherical trigonometry will 
do. The locally euclidean property of visual space explains why we may notice no 
distortion in viewing small geometrical diagrams frontally. The property (h), 
together witli the properties of finite compactness and convexity, forms a ne- 
cessary and sufficient condition that the space be riemannian. 
The second property which we postulate is that sensorially plane surfaces 
exist in ar.y gi*en orientation and localization. The visual perception of plane- 
ness is such that the visual geodesic connecting any two points of a sensory 
plane does not anywhere depart from that plane. Any three physical stimulus 
points can be imbedded in one surface, and only one, which gives the impression 
of planeness. All the statements concerning the nature of the visual planes can 
be summarized in one: 
(i)   The visual space is a desarguesian geometry. 
From the propositions (a) to (i) it can be proved that the visual space is 
homogeneous. The   binocular  visual   space   is  one of  the  riemannian  spaces  of con- 
siani  gaussian  curvature. 
A mathematical consequence of the homogeneity of visual space is that the 
metric must be one of three simpJe kinds. For the (£, 77, £) coordinate system 
used by Lüneburg, the psychometric distance function D = D(Pj, P2) is given by 
the formula: 
2 
<5>       (-K) 
. , n-K)/2 _DI 
1/ smh L 2    cJ 
(f - <5 )2  +  (T) - T) )2 + ' r   -   r    *2 
(i •£ PS) (i+^2
2) 
F(Plf ? 
V D \ 
where (^,, ^ , ^t)  and (^2'7'2,^2^ are tne coordinates of P. and P_ respectively 
and where pi     = £.  + 77.  + ^2   (i = 1.2)* The constant K may be interpreted as 
the generalized gaussian curvature of the space. The constant C is the arbitrary 
constant factor of indeterminacy in the metric. If K is allowed to approach zero 
from either side, the formula (5) becomes 
(5a) D 
— =  F (P1# P2) (K = 0) 

12 
and the relation obtained is simply the familiar euclidean metric. If K is posi- 
tive, the formula (5) is usually written more conventionally as 
2      TK'' D 
! 4 , 
(5b)       7< s^ LY —\ -      F (Pj. P2) <K>0) 
The metric (5b) is that of elliptic geometry. The two-dimensional case is familiar 
to us as the geometry on the suriace of a sphere. 
Negative K gives us the hyperbolic geometry of Lobachevski and Bolyai. The 
evidence of our experimental studies indicates repeatedly and in a variety of ways 
that the geometry of visual space is, in fact, just this hyperbolic geometry. 
If we interpret (£, r/, £,) as cartesian coordinates we can map visual space 
in a euclidean space. Visual distances could not be represented correctly by dis- 
tances on the map unless the metric were euclidean, since the three metric» are 
clearly not proportional. In fact, we know that in making a map of the earth (el - 
lintic case) on a euclidean sheet of paner we cannot avoid distorting distances. 
The map described by the (£,   rj,   £) coordinates does, however, have one clear ad- 
vantage,-it is con formal..This means that perceived angles »ill be exactly repre- 
sented by angles on the map. As a matter of convenience in formulation we prefer 
to use an equivalent set of coordinates, polar coordinates (r,(p,?y~; in visual 
space. 
With Lüneburg, we set 
(fi) £,   - p  cos <p cos \T 
T) - p  sin <p 
£ = p  cos (S sin V~ 
However, we replace p    in th.? hyperbolic case by 
(7) P - ~K7/
2    tanh 1" <
K < o) 
For the euclidean and elliptic cases we set 
(7a) p -  r (K . Q) 
2      r 
(7b) p  =-—/ tan — (K > 0 
K/2     2 
The radial coordinate r is to be interpreted as a quantity measuring sensed dis- 
tance from the observer. It is never to be taken as an absolute of sensation, but 
only as a correct description of relative distance when taken together with other 
v-ilues. In any case, all points perceived as having the same distance from the 

observer must be assigned the same value of r. 
The equation r = constant represents a sphere about the egocenter. The coordinate 
V" simply represents the perceived angle of elevation from the subjective horizon- 
tal. Thus on the sphere r = constant, the curves •ft" = constant represent meridans; 
of longitude passing through poles on the left and right of the egocenter. In the 
same way, the curves Cp = constant represent parallels of latitude on the visual 
sphere, ihe visual sphere r = constant can be conceived in this way as the earth 
with its axis oriented horizontally. By employing the coordinate transformations 
(6), (7), we obtain the hyperbolic metric in teri"s of the visual polar coordinates 
in the form 
D 
(8)        cosh  = cosh Tj  cosh r2 - sinh rx  sinh r2 f (^fU^j di$~z)• ^ < ^ 
whe r e 
f  fyl'fyzi $v %)   = cos   ^*fa~ 9fl)  ~    cos <ft cos ^fa   t   1 " cos  (^\ ~^)   1 
for the euclidean  and elliptic cases we have 
and 
(8b)      cos—. = cos Tj cos r2+ sin rl   sin r2 f (<f i^G>a > «i^j &~z  ), (K > 0) 
It will be seen that equations (8) and (8b) may be transformed into each other 
by replacing the sensed radial distance r with its imaginary counterpart ir. Two- 
dimensional hyperbolic space might in this way be interpreted as the geometry on the 
surface of a sphere of "imaginary radius" .* 
It is weli-known that there is an absolute measure of length in elliptic geo- 
metry. In the two-dimensional case, for example, it is possible to represent the el- 
liptic geometry isometrically on the surface of a sphere. The radius jf the mapping 
sphere may then be used as an absolute measure of length. If the radius of curvature 
in this representation is taken as unity, then we must take C = 1 in (8b). By the 
analogy cited above, it is possible to specify an absolute measure in the hyperbolic 
geometry, too. Gauss remarked that he wished the physical world were not euclidean 
for then there would be a priori   an absolute measure of length.** We shall, by ana- 
logy with the elliptic case, take C = 1 in (8). However, it should be remembered that 
this particular metric for visual space is only one choice out of a possible one- 
parameter infinity. 
* THIS IS NOT TO BE CONSTRUED AS HAVING ANY SIGNIFICANCE DEEPER THAN THAT IMPLIED BY THE SUBSTITUTION 
OP ir FOR . IN <8b). 
**GAUSS, LETTER TO F. A.TAURINUS (1824): "ICH HABE DAHER WOHL ZUWEILEN IN SCHERZ DEN WUNSCH GEAUSSERT, 
DAS DIE EUKLIDISCHE GEOMETRIE NICHT DIE WAHRE WARE. WEIL WIR DANN EIN ABSOLUTES MAASS A PRIORI HABEN 
WURDEN. " 
(SEE ENGSL P. AND STACKEL, P., THEORIE DER PARALLELLINIEN. LEIPZIG. 1895. FOR ENTIRE LETTER). 

14 
3f.  Plane Trigonometry of the Visual Space* 
If we let 7?" = 0 in the formulas (8) and consider the metric relations be- 
tween the sides and angles of triangles, we shall compile a  set of useful relations 
which may be used to measure the visual space just as we use trigonometry to measure 
the physical world. Let the scale factor C in (8) be unity. Denote by a, b, c the 
perceived lengths of the sides of a triangle and let A, B, C denote the perceived 
sizes of the opposite vertex angles. By employing the metric (8) it is possible to 
derive the analog to the law of cosines for the hyperbolic case: 
(9)    cosh c = cosh a cosh b - sinh a sinh b cos C 
The corresponding rules for the euclidean and elliptic cases are 
2ab cos 
(K < 0) 
(K = 0) 
(X > 0). 
(9a)    c"     =  a'  + b'    • 
and 
(9b)    cos c  = cos a cos b + sin a sin b cos C 
The "Pythagorean theorem" for hyperbolic right triangles is obtained by set- 
ting C = 90° in (9): 
vtO)   cosh c = cosh a cosh b (K <- 0) 
and in the two other cases we have 
(10a)  c2  = a2  +  b2 (K = 0) 
(10b)   cos c = cos a cos b (K > 0) 
In fact, we may set down the usual laws for the angle functions of right triangles 
in all three geometries: 
K < 0 
K = 0 
K•> 0 
ill) 
(12) 
(13) 
(14) 
(15) 
cos 
sin A = 
tan A = 
tanh b 
tanh c 
sinh a 
sinh c 
tanh a 
sinh b 
-£°*4-s cosh a 
sin B 
cot A cot B •= cosh 
_b_ 
c 
a 
c 
a 
b 
1 
tan b 
tan c 
sin a 
sin c 
tan a 
n b 
si 
cos a 
cos c 
For small triangles it is easy to see that the hyperbolic and elliptic rules both 
approach the euclidean one. 
* THE READER IS REFERRED TO C0XETER9 AND CARSLAt10 

15 
The law of sines in hyperbolic trigonometry is especially simple: 
(16)        sinh a        sinh b     sinh c 
sin A        sin B 
For the other geometries we have 
(16a) a b 
sin 
si 
in B 
si 
in C 
si 
in C 
(K < 0) 
(K = 0) 
(16b) 
sin a 
sin A 
sin 
1 b 
lin B 
sin c 
sin C 
(K > 0) 
RELATION OF VISUAL TO PHYSICAL SPACE 
At the Dartmouth Eye Institute, Ames succeeded empirically in constructing a 
sequence of distorted rooms which could hard- 
ly be distinguished from a given rectangular 
room with respect to binocular vision. At 
first Lüneburg suggested that the construc- 
tion of these rooms could be mathematically 
derived from the rectangular original by em- 
ploying a certain kind of transformation which 
he called an iseikonic  transformation (Fig. 4). 
This transformation was determined by the as- 
sumption that the rotatory motion of the eyes 
in looking from point to point of a configura- 
tion was the sole determining factor in the 
perception of the relative positions of the 
points.* Subsequently, he discarded this notion 
in favor of the idea that the fixation angles 
themselves, rather than only the changes in 
fixation angles, were significant in binocular 
perceptions. The distorted rooms could then be 
FIG. 4. BINOCULARLY INDISTINGUISHABLE       accounted for by translatory displacements in 
CONFIGURATIONS, 
the hyperbolic visual space. In «ach case he obtained a one-parameter family of dis- 
torted rioms which would account for the characteristic shape of the Ames constructions 
(See Lüneburg11). 
*WHETHER   IT  IS  THE SEQUENCE  OF  RETINAL   IMAGES,   OR  THE   MUSCULAR  ACTION   OR  BOTH TOGETHER WHICH   INFORM US 
IN THIS WAY.   IS   IRRELEVANT  HERE. 

16 
The two hypotheses do give measurable differences and it would be possible to dis- 
cover by experiment which is correct. However, experimental evidence obtained in 
other ways has led us to utilize the earlier point of view. 
4a.  The iseikonic Transformations 
According to Lüneburg's earlier hypothesis, if the bipolar coordinates of all 
points in a given stimulus were changed by constant amounts K,   /J.,   V  by means of the 
transformation 
y'  - y + K 
(17) <P'  = <f> + M 
e' = e + v 
then, to any one observer, the new stimulating configuration would yield the same per- 
ceptions as the original configuration. In particular the Ames rooms could be con- 
structed by employing the special transformations 
y'   = y  + k 
(17a) 4>'  = 4> 
6'  = 6 
One reason Lüneburg gave for discarding this hypothesis was the fact that two 
segments having the same disparities Ay, A <p,   A 0  between their endpoints are not ne- 
cessarily perceived as having equal lengths. However, this msses the fact that in this 
case the two segments are being compared with each other in the same stimulus configu- 
ration. It is when we transform the entire stimulus into another and tne entire stimulus 
presented is either the original or the transformed one but not both together, that we 
may say the perceptions arising from the new are the same as those arising from the old. 
Aside from the evidence of the Ames constructions, we shall be able to give quan- 
titative verification of the relation of the iseikonic transformations to perception. 
The data are given in Part II Section 2 in the studies on the Oblique Geodesies, the 
Double Vieth-Miiller Circles and the Equipartitioned Parallel Alleys. 
The modification of our ideas presented here consists entirely of introducing in- 
to the theory Lüneburg's earlier conception of the role of the iseikonic transforma- 
tions in visual space perception. What has been changed is simply the idea of the v.ay 
physical space is mapped into visual space. Lüneburg's conception of the internal struc- 

ture of visual   space is  left unaltered,   and in  fact  we use   the  same   sort  of method 
in measuring within the visual   space.   Three hypotheses Hj ,   H2,   H3   are  added  subse- 
quently in connection with  the  change  in  the mapping but,   in  any  case,   these  ire 
collateral  hypotheses,   not   at  all   essential  to the main  argument  of  the  theory. 
17 
4b.     The Vieth-Miiller Torus-Perceived Radial  Distance 
It will   be recalled that  a Vieth-MüTler Circle  (VMC)   is one  of the circles 
y - constant  in the horizontal   plane   and  is  a circle passing through the eyes.   The 
Vieth-Müller Torus  is  the  three-dimensional   surface obtained by  rotating this cir- 
cle about the  axis through  the eyes.   It  looks  a bit   like  an   apple with  the eyes  at 
the bottom of the  indentations  at either  end  (Figure  5).   Lüneburg observed  that   a 
set of points  arranged  in  the horizontal 
plane  so  as  to give  the perception of  a 
circle of points   at   the  same   fixed dis- 
tance   from  the  observer,    approximates 
fairly well   an  arc of   a Vieth-Miiller  cir- 
cle.   Subsequent  experiments  have  shown 
that  this observation  is  substantially 
true.   Consistent   deviations  seem  to exist, 
but  there  is  insufficient  statistical 
evidence  to warrant  replacing y by   a more 
complicated coordinate. 
PIG. 5     SEGMENT  OF A  VIETH-MULLER  TORUS 
Ch the basis of this evidence Lüneburg expressed the hypothesis, 
M "l A Vieth-Miiller Torus  is perceived  as   a  sphere with   the 
observer  at   its center. 
In mathematical   language,   the hypothesis  asserts  that   the  toruses y =  constant  in 
physical   space are mapped  as  spheres  in  the visual   space.   It  is possible  that  this 
hypothesis may have to be modified.   For example,   the well-known observation  that  the 
zenith of  the night  sky  appears  to  be closer  than the horizon   (although  such  an ob- 
servation may not be  absolutely  free  from  intellectual   clues)   indicates  that  the 
hypothesis  is worth  re-examining.* 
Cf.    LÜNEBURG"  p.   633. 

18 
Since most of the work for this study has been done in the horizontal plane 
we snail leave this point as subject to investigation by further experiment. 
A convenient hypothesis for what follows, although not absolutely essential 
to the theory, is 
H„ Among all the points of a given stimulus configuration 
those which have the same y  are perceived as being equi- 
distant from the observer. 
It may seem superfluous to make this farther assumption of the role of the VMG. 
Nonetheless, the idea that the perception of equal depth will not be affected by 
adding other stimulus points at random distances is not an a priori  certainty. 
From the hypothesis H, we see that the perceived radial distances for a 
given stimulus and its iseikonic equivalents depend only on the differences in y 
among the points of the stimulus. In particular, if yo  is the value associated 
with the greatest perceived distance in the stimulus, the value of radial distance 
for any other point with coordinate y will depend only on y -  yo.     For stimuli 
which are not connected by iseikonic transformation we state the "hypothesis of 
the limiting sphere", 
IL The perceived ratio of radial distance for any point of 
a stimulus to that of the point of perceived greatest 
radial distance depends only on the difference in con- 
vergence between the two points, independently of  the 
stimulus. 
The name of the hypothesis stems from the fact that it is equivalent to the asser- 
tion that the farthermost point in every stimulus is mapped onto a limiting sphere 
r • coin  the visual space, where on  is a personal constant independent of the stimu- 
lus. 
The hypothesis H, is in accord with the fact that in all observations and ex- 
perience the visual space appears to be finite. There is nothing in our perceptions 
corresponding to the ideas of "infinitely far away" or "infinitely large" . This 
hypothesis is given some support by certain experimental observations of equipartition- 
ed alleys, and by the fact that the computed values of OJ for different kinds of ex- 
periment are in approximate agreement (Part IT, Sec. 3). 

19 
4c.  Perceived Direction 
Two points Q. and Q2 will lead to the perception of two points P, , P2 in the 
same direction at different distances only if their angular coordinates 0  and <p 
are the same. Thus the hyperbolas in physical space, determined by the equations 
6  -  constant, <p -  constant, arc capped into radial lines, u      -  constant, <f 
constant, of visual space. Equal changes in <p  and 6  art  arceived as equal changes 
in Cp     and Ü"   . Since, the physical and visual orientations of the principal 
planes will generally be in agreement, we may, when this orientation is preserved, 
set <b   = <fi,   $~      =6.     However, it is sufficient for our purposes to state that 
perceived differences in <b   and iT  in looking from point to point of a configura- 
tion are equal to the physical differences in <p  and 0. 
4cl.  The Sensory Role of the Iseikonic Coordinates 
Front the preceding rcmarhr. it is quite plain that thp iseikonic coordinates 
r  =   y - yn 
(18) 
lfc       =      0  -   <p o 
©   =   e - e 
are highly  suitable  for  the  description of perceptual  phenomena  in  the  visual   space. 
In the first place they  are  invariant  under  iseikonic  transformation  as  are  the per- 
ceived metric  relationships  among the points of a  configuration.   If y    is  the  co- 
ordinate of the  farthest  sensed point  and <fio  and 6    are  suitable directions of  re- 
ference,   we may set 
r   =    r(D 
(19) <f>   =    <t> 
•d~=   9 
The  function  r   (D   is  a constant  characteristic of the observer.   In particular,   so 
is the special  value 
(19a) co    =     r   (0) 
Under the assumptions of the foregoing analysis we have,reduced the problem of deter- 
mining the coordination between visual and physical space to the determination of the 

20 
single function r = r (D. The function r (D is a personal characteristic (i.e., a 
constant such as Lüneburg predicated) of the observer. If our assumptions are cor- 
rect, a complete description of the observer's binocular visual space can be supplied 
nnrc rh*» function r (P) is determined. 
5.  EXPERIMENTAL METHODS FOR DETERMINING r (T) 
AND RELATED EXPERIMENTS 
The rules of trigonometry given in Section 3f may be used to measure the visual 
space. In Part II we shall discuss several relevant experiments which have been per- 
formed in this laboratory, together with a detailed account of the technics, appara- 
tus and results obtained. In the present section only a general description ox vari- 
ous experiments related to the theory will be presented. 
Convenience has led us to restrict our work to the use of stimulus configura- 
tions in the horizontal plane, 8=0. Although it would be desirable to complete the 
evidence by performing experiments in all three dimensions, there is some foundation, 
in theory, for the hope that conclusions based on results obtained in the horizontal 
plane may have validity also for the three-dimensional case. 
As a matter of consistent notation, points of the stimulus configuration will 
be denoted by the letters Qj, Q2, Q3 and the corresponding perceived points 
by the letters Pj, P2, P3. . . . 
5a. Parallel and Distance Alleys 
The most striking evidence that visual space is non-euclidean lies in the dis- 
tinction in visual perception between apparently parallel straight, lines and curves 
of apparent equidistance. This difference was first reported by Blumenfeld12. The 
experiment is quite simple. Two lights are fixed at the points Q.  = (%, <fi.)   and 
Qj~ • ("Xj, • <p1),   equidistant from the observer and symmetric to the median. Other 
lights are then introduced successively in pairs 0   at predesignated stations ap- 
proaching the observer. The observer is asked to adjust the pair 0^" according to two 
different sets of instructions:* 
•For this nxperlmerT . also for those discussed in sections 5b apd 5c, the complete instruction is 
given in Part II. 

21 
"(a)  Adjust the lights Q^*, Qg1, Q,,1 unLxi 
the two rows of lights appear to be straight, 
parallel to each other and parallel to the 
"(b)  With only the fixed lights Qj1 left on, set 
the pair Q ~ to appear symmetric to the median 
and to have the same apparent separation as the 
two fixed lights". 
The result, of experiment (a) is called a parallel  alley:   of experiment (b), 
a distance  alley.   If the geometry were euclidean, the two instructions should 
lead to the same result. We should 
~X- 
Qi + 
(b)(a) 
--0- 
(a)(b) 
-o- 
R 
obtain only one pair of curves. 
These curves would be symmetric to 
the median, would have the appear- 
ance of being straight, parallel to 
each other and the median, and would 
be equidistant throughout their lengths. 
This is not, in fact, the case. For all 
observers who appear to understand the 
instructions* the curves (a) and (b) 
are quite different from each other. If 
the curves (b) are illuminated for the 
observer after their pairwise construc- 
tion, they appear to be neither parallel 
nor straight. For these observers the 
parallel alleys fall nearer to the me- 
dian than the distance alleys. (Fig. 6). 
FIG. 6. BLUMENFELD ALLEYS: (a) PARALLEL ALLEY; 
(b) DISTANCE ALLEY. 
For iseikonic coordinates in these experiments we take F 
and $ = (p. 
y - y. 
In the visual space, Lüneburg characterizes the parallel alleys as the visual 
geodesies which are sensed as being perpendicular to the subjective frontal plane 
(Fig. 7). The equation for sensed straight lines satisfying this requirement is sim- 
ply obtained. Let Pj* • (rt,   ± <fx ).  We have r% = at,   <f ±   " <pl.   Let P = (r,<f ) be 
a variable point on the alley through Pj and let Y denote the radial distance of the 
intercept of the alley with the T?-axis. From the right-triangle formula (11) we obtaii 
*FOR AN APPRECIATION OP THE DIFFICULTY KSRE. SEE HARDY, RAND, RITTLER13 

22 
PIG.7.   REPRESENTATION  OF   *   PARALLEL 
ALLEY   IN  VISUAL COORDINATES. 
in  the  hyperbolic   case 
.ft 
cos (• 2- <f 
sin   <p 
tanh Y 
tanh  r 
The constant tanh Y is related to the coordinates of the fixed point by tanh Y 
= sin ^ tanh a). The equation of the parallel alley in hyperbolic geometry is 
therefore 
(20) tanh  r       sin <£    =       tanh  a>    sin Co. (K < 0) 
For  the other  two geometries  the  same method gives 
(20a) 
(20b) 
r si n <2>     =    co    sin G>. 
tan  r  sin (p   =     tan to sin(ö. 
(K = 0) 
(K > 0) 
The distance  alleys,   on  the other hand,   may  be  characterized  as  the  loci 
of constant  perceived distance  d   from the median   (Fig.   8.)   For  a variable point 

23 
n. 
PIG. 8. REPRESENTATION Of A DISTANCE 
ALLEY IN VISUAL COORDINATES. 
P - (r, (p ) on the left-hand alley, we obtain from (12) sin G - sinh d / sinh r 
in the hyperbolic case. From the condition that the alley go through P = {co, <f^ ) 
we find 
(21) sinh r sin <p -  sinh co sin G?v 
For the other two cases the equations for the distance alleys are 
(2la) 
(21b) 
r si 
in (p - 
CO  s 5in (p^ 
sin r 
si 
in Q> 
sin co   si n(p3 
(K < 0). 
(K = 0) 
(K > 0) 
In the euclidean case, as we know, the 
parallel and distance alleys are the same 
and this geometry does not account for the 
experimental observation. Now, if we let 
(pp be the angular coordinate on the paral- 
lel alley and Co^   be that on the distance 
alley for a given value of r = co   (Fig. 9), 
we find from (20) and (21), 
(K<0) 
sin 
tanh r sin<f sinh r sin<f>d 
Cf,  •  =   
tanh co sinh co 
and 
 TI 
(K>0) 
tan r sin (p sin r sin<pd 
tan co 
sin co 
PIG. 9.   REPRESENTATION  SHOWING 0 AND  0. 
POR  A   GIVEN  VALUE   OF  r. p a 

24 
Now,   since  r < a>,   the above equation for the hyparh^lic case yields 
(22) smCpp       cosh r 
sin (öj       cosh £> 
(K < 0) 
This implies that Cr>n < Co^ smA the parallel  alley must be inside the distance alley.   For 
the elliptic case on the other hand we find 
sin<fp       cos r 
sin 6»^       cos co 
Consequently, <fP > ^Pd.  an(^ tne parallel   alley lies outside the distance alley. 
(K > 0) 
Clearly,   the hyperbolic case  is  the only one   that  can fit   this experimental evidence. 
We shall   find that other experimental  tests of the question lead to the same conclusion. 
For this  reason we shall  no longer follow this parallel presentation of the three cases, 
and we shall employ only the hyperbolic geometry.  The reader will   find it not difficult to 
carry out the  analogous reasoning for the other cases if he wishes to do so. 
The ?»iley experiments may be used not only as  a means of indicating the hyperbolic 
character of the geometry,   but also to calculate the  function r (  T ).  Consider the VMC 
corresponding to  *; given value of I"
1 (y   is already specified) and  let r be the perceived 
radial distance corresponding to T.  The point  (r, CP,^) on the distance alleys satisfies 
equation  (21)   and,   hence, 
.  ,2 .   , 2     sin2<fi 
sinn r = sinh co sin29d 
The coordinates  (r, G^)   are related to the coordinates of the point  (r, fyp) on the 
parallel   alley by means of the equation (22)   which yields the relation 
cosh2r -  1 + sinh2r = cosh2cj - *"        . 
sin   <pd 
By eliminating sinh r from the two equations and setting sinh cu - cosh co - 1 we obtain an 
equation  for co: 
(23)                             ,2             -iin"(cA   - sin2Gi           ccs2(ni - cos2£}j 
cosh a;    =    — T :    =     Li .Hä- 
sin Gp - sin2(pi           cos2<2>i - cos2<Bp 
Having determined the value of co from equation (23),   the values of r  for other values of T 
may be determine^  from equation (20)  or (21)  by taking points on the respective alleys. 

25 
5b.    The Double Vieth-Mu'ller Circles 
Experiments utilizing points of light set on two Vieth-Miiller circles of different 
bipolar parallax were described by Lüneburg . 
(i)   Toe Three-Point Experiment.    This experiment has given most uniform results in 
favor of the hypotheses that the visual  space is hyperbolic.  Lüneburg has shown  alsc that 
the experimental results lend  further support to the hypothesis of constant curvature. 
(TO,0O) 
(TO,0l) 
PIQ. 10. PHYSICAL ARRANGEMENT IN THREE- 
POINT DVMC EXPERIMENT. 
Consider the two VMC's associated with 
two given values yo <   yv  of the bipolar 
parallax.  Let Q0    =    (yo,  cpo)  and Q, = 
(yo,  <£j)   be two points movable on the outer 
circle y   •    yo and let Q2    =    (7i( <£2) be a 
freely adjustable point on the circle y • y, 
(Fig.   10).  The observer is  asked to leave Qo 
and Qj fixed and to adjust the point Q, so 
that  for the correSDondinff
1 nerceivprl points 
P0,  Pj,  P2 the sensed distance from Pj to PQ 
equals the sensed distance  from PQ to P,. 
As convenient  and appropriate iseikonic 
coordinates for this experiment we  take 
r   =   y - yo   and     $ =   0 - 4>0 
The visual coordinates (r, <f>) are related to 
these by r = r ( T ) , <f =^ <t>. Thus, with the 
understanding that co • r  (0)   ,   the visual 
coordinates of the points are defined by 
Pe -    (co, 0)  . Pl - (^(fc)   ,  P2    -    (r, «fa ) 
where tfi    •    <pl - cpQ , <p a    =    <p2 - cpo    and    r    =    r (yl - yo),     (See Fig.   11). 
From the condition 
L> (P0 , Px)     - o (P0 ,  P2)    -    d 
and with the use of the cosine law, equation (9),   we obtain 
cosh2d   •   cos\\2co- sinh2&>  cos <fi =cosh   r   cosh  a)-sinh r sinh co cos <p> 
wh ence 
cos Cp j 
sinh r    cos 
sinh co £a f cosh co - cosh co cosh r 
sinh2o; 

26 
FIG.    11.   REPRESENTATION  OF THE  SENSORY 
SITUATION   IN  THE THREE-POINT  DVMC 
EXPERIMENT. 
II      l,I*C       CWU( *-      ^*-jc»fc*wxO»»      puts 
inh  r 
m     = 
b    = cosh co - cosh a) cosh r 
(24) 
sinh  co 
Y    =    cos <p ^ 
sinh2w 
X    =    cos C, • 
The quantities m and b are clearly constants depending only on the value T   =    /,  - yo 
and nut the particular values Cp ^ and<p2 .  Thus,   if we repeat the experiment  for different 
values of Co i     =    <pl - <£>0 and determine the corresponding values of Qfx    =   $2  ~ ^o • 
the plot of cosCöj  as ordinate against cos&j as abscissa will  in theory be a straight line, 
(25) 
Y    =    mX    +    b . 
It is an experimental   fact that tliis graph is very nearly linear.  Lüneburg      has shown 
that if this result holds for each pair of Vieth-Mviller Circles,   ther. the space has constant 
curvature. 
The values of m and b are easily determined  from the plotted graph.   The value of co may 
then be  found by eliminating r from the equations  for m and b.  Thus 
sinh2r    =    m sinh2w    =    cosh2r - 1 
b2sinh4o; 
rosh2r = cosh2o) - 2b sinh^x) + cosh2ct> 

27 
Combining these equations and setting"      cosh OJ = sinh co + 1  ,   we get 
sinh *co 
1 + m2sinh2co =  1 + (i - 2b)s:inh2co + b2 
cosh2co 
whence. 
and 
„ sinh^co . „ 1 
m2 - 1 - 2b + b< — ' 1 - 2b +b2 (1 -z~) 
cosh co cosh to 
(26) - b2 
cosh'co 
(1 - b)2 - m2 
Having determined a> in this  fashion,   the value of r is easily found from the equation 
(24)   for m. 
It is clear that the quantity on the  left in (25) must be greater than  1 if CO is to 
be a real  quantity.  The fact that this is experimentally true is further evidence that the 
yeometry is hypezooli1:.   it can be  seen that the geometry is hyperbolic,   euclidean,  or 
elliptic,   according to whether m    is greater than,   equal  to,  or less than  l-2b. 
(ii)   The Four-Point Experiment.    The three-point method is found to be somewhat 
insensitive since the values of X and Y in equation (25)   are plotted upon points much 
nearer to each other than to the intercept of  the line  (see Part II,   rig.   25).   It follows 
that the intercept b,   depends  rather critically on the determination of the slope m.   In 
order to surmount this difficulty,  Lüneburg      suggested a method of determining m by 
the use of four points. 
Let Qj    •    (y0,  </>j)  and Q2    •    (yo,  <£,,)  be two points fixed on the circle y   =   yo 
and let Q_    «    (%,  c/^)   and Q,    »    (^j,  <p.)  be two other points which slide on the circle 
y • y..  Let Pj   ,  P,  ,  Pj  ,   P.  be the corresponding sensed points.  The observer is asked to 
equate the sensed distance D (P3  ,  P.)  to D (Pj  ,  P2)- 
Setting r • r (y2 - 7j),   as before,   and using 
A,     =   cb2 - 0, 
\   "   £, - <A, 
(Fig.   12)  we obtain uy the cosine law: 
cosh2co - sinh2co cosAj    •    cosh2r - sinh*r    cosA2 
whence, 
sinh2co (1 - cosAj)  = sinh2r (1 - cosA2) 
and 
„    sinh r    1 - cos A, 
,n  " —. : o  =  * 
sinh co    1 - cos A 2 

2S 
PI«.    12.   REP8£SEHT*TI«]K W TOE SHSKSÜST 
SlffCWHW  IBS THE HM3& «^ÜST B«»F ESPERISüä:" 
From I - cosÄ   =    2 sin   J£A we obtaii»,  finally 
C2T& in. 
sn 
sin 
sinh at sin $&&_ 
This value off m may then be used for a letter determination of b in (25). 
From the values, off re and b *e may then calculate the value off m from (26). Once we 
obtain the value of £*.< experimentally we need no longer use the three-point experiment,  but 
by repeated use of the four-point experiment with differing values oi T   =    y_ - y.  , 
se can calculate r I. T ) from (27). 
5c    n»e Equip&.rtitio»ed Parallel Alleys 
This experiment is significant in that the calculation of perceived distance r is 
altogether independent of any of the hypotheses «uojncerning the rote of y in the perception 
of distance. It has potential use, therefore, as a test of the degree of validity of these 
hypotheses. 
The observer is asked to arrange six lights,  three on each side of the median,  so as 
to form a parallel alley as in Section 5a. Let the six lights he designated by ttr- symbols 
Ql    Ä C>i  ..*^
:t)     (i * 1,  2,   3,).  Let us suppose that y, > J2 > y3. The two lights Q^* are 
fixed in position. "(Ire lights Q,    ,  are restricted to motion en the VMC y   -   y. . The 

lights Qj* are fr*-ei^ movable is the horizontal plane (Fig-   13). 
The observer adjusts the lights Q,    and Q.-1 sa that the corresponding sensed lights P, 
and P* appear to be lined ?s> with P3* in 
- a parallel  alley.   line iignts V*^ ®r« then 
further adjusted so that the observer perceives 
the points P2    as feeing exactly midway in dis- 
tance between P.    and P« «  *hea this has beea 
done we say the alley has been equipartitiaried, 
or siinply partitioned,   and we refer to the 
points Q2" as the partition points. 
For this experiment the appropriate 
iseikonic coordinates are 
r   •   "f - %    and • • $\ 
The equation of the parallel  alleys,   as we 
have already seen,  is 
{*§)  tans r    sin<f *    tanh m   sin (^3 •    canh Y 
where Y is the radial distance from the origin 
of the point P0 on the alley at <f   -    ^/2 (Fig. 14). 
-O- 
L 
R 
FT8.   13.   PBISICAL.  ÜOA.«(SSHEJtT  0?  Ai 
BQDXPMtllTIONES FAÄILLEL .«.LEI 
(»} 
Set Xj = D (P^.Pj),   (i  =  1,   2,   3).   From the right-triangle law (13)  we have 
sinhY 
tan <f j 
t anhX. ,  Ci - 1.  2.  3). 
Since P, is perceived as being midway between PB and P3 we have 
(»a) \    -   MIX, + X.J. 
By employing (29) and (29a) together we find: 
2tanhXq 
2teshX. 2 sinhY taSa tanhX.  * tanhX,        sinhY (tan<p3 + tante, 3 
tanh23L -     1     «—5 g- - tanh (X. + X, ) - *— ^- — 7^- 
^      1 + tanh^      tan^G, + sinhn i       i        1 + tanhXi taodd^      tan^tam^j + sinhn 
1 + tanh^ 
Using this equati^u we determine Y by 
(3») 
Wie re 
sinhnf    =    tan.2 G * r 2 - (s - T) " 
H_(S + T) - 2ST 
Ote) 
tan<^a 
t an (J • 
tan<^3 
The value of Y is determined,   therefore,  only from the measured values of &  The values 

JO 
FIG.   14.   BEPStESSSITATIO» OF IM,  SgSSOffii 
SItm*TIOR OSSUSffiSSmDDilG TO HS.   13.. 
of r are obtained from C28)   and again only the values of «£> are involved.  In particular we nave 
tanh Y 
(30b» 
tanh sä = 
sin (p 3 
Clearly,   the  assunption r = r (PS does not enter in the design of the experimesit in any way. 
Since perceived distance as measured by this experiment is independent of any hypotheses 
concerning the aatare of sraised eqoi distance,  particularly Hj , ILj and H^ „   it may b»» used to 
test the validity off these assumptions. To do this in adequate detail vould require in excess 
off MKS experiments per observer. 
The equri partitioned alleys also give evidence that the space is hyperbolic. This is the 
consequence of the fact that the quantity on the right in (30) is found experimentally to be 
positive.   If it were zero or negative we would take the result to mean that the geometry is 
eoclidean or elliptic in the respective cases.  It is easy to see that this condition anounts 
to saying 
< 
K    *   O 
> 
•CCJ 
to »hether   Meat ^j * cotGjl    =   cot<pa. 

31 
:"»d,    Size Constancy "- Relation of Perceived to Physical Size 
The phenomenon of size constancy has received a great, deal of attention im the literature 
(see C H. Graham15 for bibliography). The title alludes to the fact that the sizes of physical 
objects are not jjwdged in proportion to the sizes of the retinal images but  are generally sees» 
note nearly in their correct physical relationships,   in the performance of must test* of size 
constancy,  clues such as perspective,  the presence of familiar objects of know» size,   and other 
extraneous means of forming size judgments hsnae generally been present.  The study of the purely 
binocular basis for these judgments is another matter.  In the experiment described here,   size 
comparisons are made in the darkroom and care is taken to prevent extraneous information from, 
reaching the observer. 
The obs**r**?r is  asked  fjn make the  same sort of judgment  as m the  four-point experiment 
Section 5b (ii). The points Qj    are fixed symmetrically to the median at (y,, ±&),  and the 
observer sets the points Q„    at some closer distance to give the impression of being symmetric 
to the median with D iPl    ,  Pj~)     "   D (P2    , P2~). Let us swppose that the points Q2    are 
located at (y«t   i$j). For iseikonic coordinates use use 
The right-triangle law (13) gives the relation 
(31) sinh ra tan <yj_     =    sinh r2 tan6a 
wheire ra ,  r2 are the perceived radial distances of midpoints of the respective segments 
Px+ Pa"    and "P2+ P2~    «Tig.  15). 
Yf 
Using the  apcroxinaticm 'taci&   -     we obtain the ratio of the tw» physical  sizes from 
2 
(31)   as 
(32) y2 
y.    sinh r. 
 ~    _    *i    *»**•*• «j 
*i >*2    sinh r2 
If the size of the retinal irn^gse were the effective criterion,   the ratio of the sizes wald 
Vi T2 
The departure from this ratio may be considered am indication of the effectiveness of oar 
dep»th perception in judging the relative sizes of objects. 
If the $ angles are sufficiently small we may use the approximations r1 '*• &s and 
"*" ~(y» ~ >•# to obtain 
<32a) y2 7,sinh as 
•/, >2sinh ra 

32 
n 
PIG. 15. REPRESENTATION OP THE SENSORY 
SITUATION IN MAKING A SIZE MATCH. 
It should be stressed that the size-constancy relationship will depend upon the position 
of the distant reference object. 
If we employ small values of cp we may use (32a) to determine r (D once we know the 
value of ox   If we do not restrict cp in this way we should use equation (21) for the distance 
alleys instead. 
Some results obtained in our laboratory do give evidence of size constancy, even for 
darkroom observation (C. J. Campbell16). The size constancy data alone cannot be utilized to 
demonstrate the curvature of visual space. However if the size constancy experiment were 
considered an equidistant alley and compared with a corresponding parallel alley, ther the 
results could be used to determine the nature of the space in the manner of Section 5a. 
Se.  ine phenomenon of the Frontal Geodesies 
To Helmholtz 7 we attribute the observation that the physically straights lines do not 
appear straight at all distances. Qirves which do give the impression of straightness are not 
physically straight but are cor.cnve toward the observer at near distances and convex at 

33 
far (Fig. 16). For some intermediate distance the frontal geodesic will be straight in the 
vicinity of :.he median. Although this phenomenon is not Y«ry useful in computing r (D it is 
an example of the kind of observation which may 
be given a quantitative description by means of 
the theory. 
X 
y- 
-o- 
FIG. 16. COMPARISON OF FRONTAL GEODESICS 
SET AT DIFFERENT DISTANCES. 
COS 0  - 
The equation of the frontal geodesies is 
easily written. Let us suppose we are dealing 
with the geodesic segment between the points 
Qo = (yo,    '
LCt>0) -  AS iseikonic coordinates we 
take 
The equation is then obtained from (11) 
(33)  tanh r ( F )  cos <p   ~    tanh co    cos cpu. 
It may be of some interest to determine 
the distance of the straight frontal geodesic; 
i.e., the physical abscissa for which the frontal 
geodesic is physically straight. From the ap- 
proximation (3a) we have for sufficiently small 
values of y 
2 cos2 <p 
x =  
7 
From (33),   we have for the  frontal geodesies 
tanh co 
Eliminating cos2<£ we find 
y tanh2r    • 
2  tanh co coscfi 
cos cpo, 
If x is the distance of the straight geodesic, the term on the right is a constant in the 
neighborhood of the median. Hence, differentiating with respect to T, we obtain 
tanh2 r + 2y 
tanh r dr 
dT 
= "0. 
cosh r 
Setting y -— for the point on the median we obtain 
x 
(34) 
x = - 
8 
sinn 2r 
dr 
dT 

34 
where r, is the perceived distance of th« point on the median and the derivative is taken at 
r m r,. If we approximate rl  by a> we obtain 
8   ( dr\ 
\  i r = o 
Formula (34a) will be valid if the angle <p0  is not too large. 
Having determined the function r (T) within experimental error, we shall be able to 
predict roughly the distance of the straight geodesic by (34a). Conversely, if we determine 
the position of the straight geodesic, we shall be able to reinforce our statistical knowledge 
of the function r (T) at the value f • 0 by determining the derivative in (34a). 
6. SUMMARY 
Lüneburg's theory of binocular visual space rests upon the mathematical assumption that 
the visual space is a finitely compact and convex metric space [Section 3d (a) to (g) ]. This 
statement means hardly anything more than the fact that observers are capable of making visual 
comparisons of length. Other assumptions (e.g. that the space is desarguesian and riemannian) 
lead to the ccuclusion that the geometry of visual space is one of the three simple geometries 
of constant gaussian curvatur2, either hyperbolic, euclidean or elliptic. Of the three al- 
ternatives, our experiments consistently support the first. The laws of the hyperbolic 
geometry of öoiyai and Lobachevski, therefore, most probably operate in the visual space. 
If we designate coordinates r, <f  , $  in the visual space corresponding respectively to 
radial distance, azimuth angle and angle of elevation we find that these quantities can be 
related to the physical coordinates of the stimulus configuration by means oi" the equations 
r = r ( D 
(p = (J> 
# - e 
where T , <t , 0    are so-called iseikonic coordinates.    To characterize an individual's 
response *"o geometrical  spatial stimuli we have then only to determine the one function 
r   (r ).  This is a feasible experimental project and several  technics for effecting this 
determination are discussed.   The description of three of these technics and the data derived 
from their use are given in Part II,   Section 3. 
7. CONCLUSION 
Experimental evidence has given reason for a modification of sori.e factors in the Lüneburg 
theory by postulating a different mapping of physical into visual space. This modification, 
again, should not be considered as the final word in this matter, but only as an approximation 

35 
which is to be tested and improved by further experiment. Scattered throughout the discussion 
are suggestions as to possible fruitf.;] courses of future experiment and more will occur to a 
reflective reader. Yet, even as it stands now, tSe theory is able to give a good qualitative 
(and to a considerable extent, quantitative) account of many of the geometrical phenomena of 
bmcculsr s^ace nerce
r,tiori; 
For its precise quantitative evaluation the theory must wait upon the detailed statisti- 
cal evidence of a great many future experiments. Whatever the outcome of such an elaborate 
statistical study, it is felt that this kind of abstract geometrical approach will prove 
useful. The theory is held to be important as much (if not more) for its methods as for any 
specific results. 
It should not be supposed that this modification in the analysis constitutes in any way 
a refutation of Lüneburg' s ideas. Lüneburg always recognized that his suggested parameters 
were at best a working basis for experimental investigation. The same may be said for the 
modification, and we hope it will be possible for investigators to carry on with the extensive 
experimentation necessary to completely confirm the Lüneburg theory. 

36 
PART I I 
THE EMPIRICAL SUPPORT OF THE LÜNEBURG THEORY 
In the first part of this report it was shown how it is possible to  formulate a theory of 
binocular visual   space in systematic fashion by logical deduction from the stated set of postu- 
lates.   Some of th^se postulates are intuitively derived from our experience and can never be 
completely tested by experiment. Others which might  feasibly be tested in the laboratory could 
not be explored in the time available for our program.  Direct evidence was sought for certain 
hypothese such as the one concerning the perceptual  role of the Vieth-Muller Circles (VMC), 
7 • constant,   (Part I,   Section 4,  H2).   In the main,  however,   the tests of the theory have been 
bcsed not so m'icl. upon the direct attack of its basic postulates as upon an investigation of 
their consequences. The test of the theory is whether it works» 
The Lüneburg theory does seem to work,  - not perfectly with impeccable precision but well 
enough to be very .significant.   In one consistent account ehe theory succeeds in giving a des- 
cription of a number of well-known binocular, spatial phenomena which might,   at first thought, 
appear to have no relation to each other.   It also gives us a way of determining a quantitative 
relation between the visual  and physical  spaces.  Although the quantitative aspects of the 
theory have not yet been placed upon a statistically firm footing,   significant numerical re- 
suits have been obtained.   Further,   the development of the theory is such that any consistent 
experimental deviation from an expected result can be utilized directly in definite ways to 
improve the theory. 
In the following we shall  see what light the experiments shed on the theory. 
I. SENSED RADIAL DISTANCE 
In Part I,  Section 4b,   the Vieth-MCller Circles (VMC),  y = constant,   A, e ascribed the 
property of being perceived as loci of equal radial distance from the observer.  To test this 
hypothesis,   fifteen lights were  set up in the horizontal  plane  adjustable along the 4> - Lines, 
0 = 0°,   ±5°,   ±10°,  +15°    ±35° (Fig.   17). Thelight on the median, 4> - 0°,  was fixed 
and the observer was asked to adjust the remaining lights according to the instruction: 
''The median light is fixed. Adjust the position of the other lights by having 
them moved toward you or away from you until you have the impression that, together 
with the median light,   the  lights   form a circle about you with yourself at the center." 

37 
FIG.   17.   SENSED RADIAL EQUI- 
DISTANCE EXPERIMENT.   PHYSICAL 
ARRANGEMENT OF THE  LIGHTS. 
In the limited number of experiments performed on several observers the lights do not al- 
ways seem to fall on a VMC but, more generally, on a slightly flatter curve. The result of a 
sample experiment showing this type of deviation is given in Fig. 18. The effect decreases 
slightly with increasing distance. Occasionally an experimental setting actually fell inside 
the VMC Since the experimental curve was close enough to the VMC in general to satisfy us 
with regard to use of the circle y • constant as a first approximation, we did not pursue an 
extended course of experiments on this question. Furthermore there is a possibility that the 
flattening of the VMC may be attributable to experimental and theoretical factors such as 
the following: 
(a)  In the experimental situation, the lights were placed on a horizontal table covered 
with a sheet of coordinate paper so that their positions could be marked. Ordinarily, a great 
deal of attention was paid to keeping the illumination of the surroundings sufficiently low 
that the observer had no idea of the position of the lights with respect to the room. However, 
in this case with fifteen lights, although very dim, placed above a light reflecting surface, 
it is conceivable that the observer was able to obtain some shadowy impression of his sur- 
roundings and so would modify his setting of the liphts to tend slightly toward the circle of 
equal physical distance. 

38 
xcm 
200 
173 
150 
12 5 
OBSERVER   G.R. 
+ E x peri menta! 
Setting 
* Vieth-Müller Circle' 
 • , / ./ 
FIG.    18. SENSED  RADIAL  EftUI- 
DISTANCE EXPERIMENT.   TYPICAL 
SAMPLE SETTING.   FLOTTED POINTS 
REPRESENT  BILATERAL   AVERAGE. 
Z5 
SO 
73 
z^cra 
(b)    The visual   axis of the eye actually makes  an angle with the optic axis at the an- 
terior nodal  point of approximately 5° temporally.   If we define y as the angle of convergence 
of the visual  axes,   the angle should presumably be measured with respect  to the  anterior nodal 
points.   Since the position of the nodal points with respect to the head changes as  the eyes 
shift  fixation,   this choice of coordinate  is not as convenient  as that based on rotation cen- 
ters of the eyes,  The use of the nodal points instead of the rotation centers does give a 
flatter curve than the VMC,   but the effect predicted on this basis does not seem to be as 
great  as the empirically determined flattening.  The nodal points shift in the eye with accom- 
modation also.   Due to the drift of the nodal points in accommodation,   the flattening sliould 
be most marked for the nearer VMC.  rbwever;   the contribution of accommodation to this effect 
is minute and,   although such an effect is  found,   it is quite likely attributable to the factor 
mentioned in  (a). 
If we were to make consistent use of the nodal points in defining the bipolar coordinates 
in three dimensions,   it would be necessary to use Listing's Law to give the bipolar coordinates 
in terms of  fixed physical coordinates.   Since our experiments were conducted in the horizontal 
plane only,   we have not felt the use of the nodal  points instead of the centers of rotation 
would give sufficient  advantage to justify the inconvenience. 
For the purposes of the theory it is irrelevant whether or not we take the ocular mechan- 
ism into account in characterizing the loci of apparent equidistance.   It TOuld be sufficient to 
determine these loci experimentally and then to devise mathematically a suitable parametric 
representation  for the experimental  curves. 

2. TESTS OF THE ISEIKONIC TRANSFORMATIONS 
In this section we .shall exhibit a consi-. able amount of evidence to show that binocular 
spatial relations are invariant under the iseikonic transformations (Part I, Section 4a). In 
other words, the perceptions of strajghtness, relative distance, form, etc. among the points 
of a stimulus configuration are not altered by changing the bipolar coordinates (y   <pt  8) 
for each point of the configuration by fixed constant amounts. Since we have restricted our- 
selves to work in the horizontal plane, 9    • 0, we shall consider only special transforma- 
.  •    .   .        r   J.L .     r 
Muiio   ui    nie   lunil 
y'   •   y + \ 
(35) 
dy    •   d> + fj, 
A transformation of this kind may be subdivided into two separate transformations,   one 
of the  form 
y    •   y + \ 
(36) 
and the other of the form 
(37) y    =   r 
4?   •   <p + ß 
It will,   therefore,  be sufficient to treat each of the two special transformations sep- 
arately rather than to work with the more general kind in which neither \ nor ju vanish. 
2a.     The Transformation 0'  » d> + fi ,  y
% » y 
In this transformation the <fi coordinates of the points of the stimulus configuration are 
are  all changed by the same constant amount.  The value of y for each point is left  fixed. Now, 
if binocular metric relationships are not changed by altering the stimulus in this manner, 
then the perception of straightness of line should not be altered.   To test the special isei- 
konic transformation (37)   the observer was  first asked to arrange a set of lights so that they 
appear to lie on a straight line between two pre-set fixed lights symmetrically disposed about 
the median;   i.e.,   to form a frontal geodesic.  Then the fixed lights were re-set by changing 
the 4> angles equally while not altering the values of-y,   and the observer was asked to repeat 
the experiment for the new setting of the fixed lights;   i.e.,   to form an oblique geodesic.   If 
the observer placed the lights for the new setting to correspond to the old one  through equa- 
tion (37),   the hypothesis of the iseiko-iic transformation would be verified for this special 
case.   This procedure was called the Predicted Oblique Geodesies Experiment. 
In the laboratory,   nine lights Qn were placed so as to be adjustable along the 0-lines, 

40 
4>n  = 5n°, (n = 0. ±1, ±2, ±3, ±4). The fixed lights at 4> = +20° mere pre-set symmetrically 
to the median at x = 330 cm. The observer adjusted the remaining lights according to the 
specific instruction: 
''The two end lights are fixed. Adjust the remaining lights by having them moved 
toward you or away from you until they appear to lie o;: a straight line between the 
end points. 
The experiment was repeated several times under these conditions. With the mean of the 
repeated settings taken as the basis for computation, the total stimulus configuration was 
subjected to the transformation (37) with u  = + 10°. The point Q  = (y , cß   )  of the original 
configuration was then transformed into the point Q'n = {yn ,  <Pn  + 10°). This transformation 
replaced the original configuration with another stretching from 0'+4 at c/> = + 30° to Q'-4 at 
rp = - 10°. For lack of space we could utilize for experiment only the part of the configuration 
stretching from Q'+2 at + 20° to Q'_4 at - 10°. Fixing two lights at Q'_4 and Q' r2  the experi- 
ment was repeated using the same instructions and with the lights piaced at 5° intervals be- 
tween - 10 and + 20 , A similar series of observations was obtained also for \J.  = -10°. 
In Fig. 19 we compare the results of these settings for five observers with the predic- 
tions on»the basis of the iseikonic transformation (37). The data are given in tabular form 
in Table I. 
In general, the agreement between prediction and experiment is good. Wherever there is a 
marked deviation r.f r.h« «setting frwi iht ^redictioii there is also a marked asymmetry. For ob- 
servers who exhibit this asymmetry we might reasonably assume that the two eyes do not play 
equal roles in binocular vision.. The interesting problem of generalizing the theory for such 
observers is left open. 
'fhis experiment was actually designed to test a somewhat different hypothesis. For the 
present purpose it would have been desirable not to alter the number of points in the stimulus 
configuration so that the original and transformed configurations might be complete images of 
each other under iseikonic transformation. However, it is felt that the conditions were ade- 
quate to bring out the point in question. 
2D. The Transformation y" = y + K , <p'  = <£. 
The two experiments described in this section were not designed originally to test the 
invariance of binocular metric relationships under the transformation (36). They were to be 
used for the determination of the functional connection between the visual radial coordinate r 
and the convergence angle y.   However, because of the manner in which the experiments were 

15* 10 
OBSERVER   CJ.C. 
J  1 J u-j L-L. 
100 90 
.JO -100 
Fig. 19.    Frontal  and  Oblique Geodesies.   Solid lines show 
experimental settings.   Dotted  lines show prediction 
of obliqje settings computed from frontal sellings. 
100 50 
-so -too u cm. 

42 
fXBIZ I 
Test of the iaeikonic tranaforaatlon 0  5 0^    ,r    • T (Predicted Oblique 
Qeod'Jslca Experiment).   Average aettinge of x In centimeters for each value of 0 
fey a fronts gaodaeie and tno oblique geodealca «hen the total itSa«!
1« configu- 
ration nas subjected to the tranaformatlcn 0' Z 0 ± 10° •   Values In Italics are 
thoae predicted on the baaia of the laelxonic transformation, conputed fron the 
settings of the frontal geodesic* 
Geodesic 
Mo* of 
experiments 
Setting of x for 0  values of 
20" 
15°   10° 
-5° 
-10 •if      -20° 
Frontal 10 
Oblique 
Predicted 
Experimental $ 
Oblique 
Predicted 
Experimental    $ 
Observer 0*R* 
330.0 320.0 315.? 313.5 313.2 313.8 317.2 322.1 330.0 
2&I 2&h ffi'7 313.8 303.6 
55215 JJE& JTHG 
287.6   295*0   303.8 313.8 327.1 ?i*2.7 362.1 
2873 2953  jou.c $S5F 3273 35370" ^~ 
.0   288.8 
288.8 
rnwbai 
Oblique 
predicted 
Experimental k 
Oblique 
Predicted 
Bxperim&ntal k 
Obaerrer M.C.R. 
330.0   335.1   31*0.5   3U3.6   31*5.3   3l*H.3   3U3.0   339.?   330.0 
512. 
.1    31*3.6 
3   30*3 
9   323jj 
310.0   32JU1   33k^9   31*U.3   353.6   360.8   362^1 
3167c" 321*75 3373 3557*7 3531?  3553  36273 
Frontal 5 
Oblique 
Predicted 
Experimental 7 
Oblique 
Predicted 
Experimental    7 
Frontal 10 
Obliqus 
Predicted 
Experimental 5 
Oblique 
Predicted 
Experimental     5 
Fiontal 10 
Oblique 
Predicted 
Experimental k 
Oblique 
Predicted 
Experimental k 
Observer UH.E. 
330.0   335.1*   33Ö.6   3iü.7 3ui.o 31*1*7   335.6   335.C   33ö.O 
362.5   356.8 31*9.1 31*1.7   331.3   321.2   30S.1; 
W*5 3573 3523 3*737? 3333 32573 3553 
„308.3   321 2   331.3   31*1.7 31*9.2 356.8   362.5 
*350 35!?;? 332T7   5U2T21 351.1 3373  362.? 
Observer C.J.C. 
330.0   335.7   31*0.0   3h2.8 3U3.8 31*2.5   339.7   335.5   330*0 
S2.5.   357.1 350.6 3M.1 
35877 35377 
gsjl   3l»2.5   350,3 
577? 31*773 5553 
309.6    322.3    333.fr    3_j*2.5    350.; 
309.Ö   j<s**.u    337 
Obaerrer A.A.?. 
330.0   331.6   333*1)   33U.9   335.3   335.1   331.2   332.6   330.0 
sJ   «Ü&I   g^«?   33U.9   325i2   315.0   30Ü.3 
?I5 35879 35575 3323 32375 31577 35573 
303.6   311**9   325.2 
3533 31577 
si   3l*h.6 
35375 
.8    362.J 
In this case the end light was incorrectly set. 

43 
executed, they provide good tests of the stated invariance under the special transformation 
y    -   y + k 
All the experimental results exhibited in this section were obtained by the use of special 
stereoscopic devices. The instrumentation will be discussed in Section 4. 
For each type of experiment, however, some results were also obtained with lights viewed 
without this instrumentation, - that is, with lights viewed directly. The range of conditions 
that could be investigated in this way was limited by the available laboratory space, but the 
results were not notably differrnt from those obtained with the stereoscopic devices. 
2b (i) The Double Vieth-Miillcr circles. Three-Point Experiment. 
This experiment is the same as that described in Part I, Section 5b (i). .The teleBtereoscopic 
device to be described in Section 4 was used. The observer is shown three lights Q0 , Q, , Q~. 
The lights Q0 and Q. are placed en the VMC /' = >'j, with Q0 on the meuiun. Tne light Q2 is 
restricted to move on the VMC y " y2  with y2 > y, (see Part I, Fig. 10). The observer is 
asked to make a setting according to the specific instructions: 
third can be moved.'' (This light and its range of motion are demonstrated.) ''Direct 
the experimenter to adjust this light so that the distance between it and the middle 
light appears to be the same as the distance between the pair of fixed lights. Allow 
the eyes to roam freely both ways over the spatial interval between each pair of 
lights. Be sure to fixate on each light in turn and to sweep the eyes across the in- 
terval between each pair of lights until you are satisfied that the two distances ap- 
pear to you to be the same.'' 
A series of these experiments was undertaken with values of y.  ranging from zero to .07 
and y2  u y,  + .01. In each case settings were taken for the same fixed sequence of values of 
</>!, the azimuth angle associated with Ql •   If the hypothesis of the iseikonic transformations 
is correct, the values of the azimuth angle 4>2  of Q2 associated with a given <pj should exhibit 
no marked trend as yt  increases but rather should fall randomly in the neighborhood of some 
central value. That this is actually the case may be seen from Table II and Fig. 20 which 
present the results of an extended series of observations for two observers. 
The entire experimental series was performed twice and each entry in the table gives the 
mean value of <+>2  f°r *-'ne fcwo series. The value of <t>2  in each series was computed as the 
average of three or four experimental settings. Each entry in the table thus represents at 
least six experimental observations. 

TABIE II 
Test of the iseikonic transformation T «T + A/ ,0=0       (Three-Point Double 
Veith-Miiller Circle Experiment) Average settings of 02 for different values of 
T and 0 , when T "".01.  "0, and 02 are expressed in radians. 
Value of 02 for different values of T, and 0, 
XT- 
Average 
•00 
•01 
.02 
.03 
•Cl* 
.05 
.06 
.07 
value of 02 
Observer G. R. 
•1226 
.01*1*3 
•ol*o5 
•0i*2l* 
.01*36 
.0316 
.0332 
•cUoo 
•cl*oo 
• C39)i 
.Has 
•0629 
•0600 
•0620 
.0696 
.01*58 
.051*8 
.051*8 
.0583 
.0585 
.1583 
.0719 
•0796 
.0791* 
.0892 
.0629 
.0768 
.0721 
•C800 
•0765 
.173U 
.0985 
•0965 
.1025 
•105U 
.0827 
.0919 
.0858 
.1008 
•C955 
•187U 
.1130 
.1177 
.1116 
•1186 
.0931 
.!C5i* 
*10?U 
•1110 
.11.00 
• 2003 
•1301 
=1311 
•1283 
.1211* 
.1167 
.1211 
.3226 
•1238 
.1257 
*212$ 
.11*28 
.1536 
.11*88 
.1508 
.131*6 
.11*70 
.11*12 
.1372 
.11*1*5 
Observer Ü.C.P. 
•1226 
•G«58 
.0551 
.0332 
.0387 
.01*12 
.C37U 
.01-21* 
.Cl*9li 
.01*29 
.11*15 
.0661* 
•0693 
.0520 
•C533 
•0587 
.0562 
•0578 
•C603 
.0592 
.1583 
.0790 
•C803 
.0625 
.0675 
.C790 
•0690 
.0739 
.0617 
.0716 
.1731* 
«1002 
.09UU 
.CÖ03 
.0831 
.0922 
.0872 
•0855 
•c8oo 
.0879 
•187U 
.1167 
*X*A-v 
.1002 
.0970 
.1061 
.101*9 
.10% 
.0851 
.1033 
.2003 
.1270 
*1275 
.1032 
.1175 
.121*6 
.1326 
.1213 
.1175 
.1211* 
.212$ 
.11421* 
.lii35 
.1561* 
.11*03 
.11*1*5 
.1510 
.3i*uT 
.1326 
FIB. 20     Thrt«-Po»*t DVMC   Eio«ciiv.«nl.     Giitff»«.  ol   jLfOf 
• och voiui  0? 9t and r    »rh»n r *  01. 

45, 
2b (ii) The Equipartitioned Parallel Alleys. 
This experiment is the same as that discussed in part I, Section 5c. The polaroid rack to be 
described in Section 4 was used. Six lights, Q  , (n = 1, 2, 3) are set out in two rows of 
three on either side of the median (see Fart I, Fig. 13). The lights Q 3 and Q~3 are fixed 
symmetrically to the median at the respective points (y3, 03) and (73,~<^3). The lights 
0 j and Q~ are restricted to move on a line x = Xj. The remaining pair Q 2 and Q 2 may 
be moved freely in the two dimensions of the horizontal plane. A seventh light is placed 
on the median in line with Q 3 and Q~3 to aid the observer in establishing his orientation. 
The observer is asked to set the two rows of three lights in a parallel alley and then to 
set the middle light in each row exactly half way between the near and far lights. His 
specific instructions are these: 
"The three distant lights are fixed. We shall call the central one the median light. 
(1) Arrange the two rows of three lights on the right and left of the 
median so that they appear to you straight and parallel. Make sure tr.Pt 
(a) the two lines of lights have the same direction and that this 
direction appears parallel to that in which the medi m  lights lies; 
(b) the two lines appear to you perpendicular to the frontal plane, 
ana 
(c) the two lines appear to neither converge nor diverge in the 
distance. (Avoid the effect given by railroad tracks.) 
(2) In each line of lights place the light intermediate between the near 
and far lights so that it appears exactly half way between the two.'' 
Some observers have difficulty in making a distinction between sensory parallelism and 
the impression given by physically parallel lines which most would agree is not one of sensory 
parallelism (e.g., the impressiou given by railroad tracks.) 
In Table III and Fig. 21 we give the results of an experimental series for three ob- 
servers. The value of <pz  was fixed with tan <£3 = .1000. Four values of V- «ere used in equal 
steps ranging from about -.02 to +.02. The value of Fj = y    -  y3 was approximately .039. 
Four settings of the equipartitioned parallel alley were made by each observer for each 
choice of y3.   For each y3 , the mean of the four settings was taken and averaged again on the 
left and right. The values of tan <£ and P for the average settings are presented in Table III 
and Fig. 21. It is clear from the data that tan 4> does not show variation with y, and depends 

TABDä IXC 
Test of the iseikonic transformation T :T+X j 0 Z0 (Bqui- 
partltioned Parallel Alley Experiment). Values of tan 0a, tan 0, , 
P2 and T, for different positions of T3 , «hen tan 0£   r .1000. 
Observer u.R. 
*3   = -.01318 
T3 = -.00528 
r3 = .00792 
V = .02112 
tan02 
tnc0, 
r, 
.1161 
•160U 
.00593 
.03928 
•H5U 
.1617 
•00#2 
•03906 
.1169 
.1583 
•OOU97 
•C3891 
*1121 
.11*51 
•oo<85 
.03892 
Observer M.C.R. 
Ts = -.01766 T3 = -.001*1*6 T3 = .00875 T3 = .02195 
tan 02 
tan Pi 
r, 
.1188 
.151*9 
.00777 
.03931 
•1155 
•11*80 
•0071*5 
.03920 
Observer C.J.C, 
•1192 
•15U5 
.00781 
.03895 
•111*2 
.U*95 
•00620 
•03886 
T3 = -•0l8lj8 
r5 = -.00528          r5 = .00792 
T3 = .02312 
tan 02 
tan0 | 
r, 
«1127 
•3itf5 
.00681* 
•03906 
.1119 
.31*15 
.00678 
.03926 
.1156 
•1531 
.00685 
•03898 
.1133 
.3J*97 
•OO802 
.03887 

ton0 
03SERVER    G. R. 
.20 
.10 
.05 
is*' 
+ T, * 
01 .02 .03 .04 
-.0i848 
-.00528 
.00752 
.02112 
tan0 
V 
OBSERVER 
M.C.R. 
20 - 
.15 
^+S""^~~ 
__^S 
.(0- 
•  T,  =  -01766 
.05 
• 
• 
A  T    =   -.004 46 
'3 
a <-j-    =   .00875 
+ T     =  .02(95 
3 
1 
.01 
.02 
.03 
.04 
Fia. 21. Equipartitioned Parallel Alley Experi- 
ment. Plot of tan 0 against f for four 
values of T3 , when tan 03= .1000 

48 
only upon P.   In this experiment also the assumption about the iseikonic transformations is 
confirmed for the special transformation (36)  by the clear agreement among the data obtained 
under differing initial conditions. 
3.    DETERMINATION   OF   r   ( r ) 
In Part I, Section 4, we showed how it was possible to describe an individual's visual 
metric space in terms of a single function r ( T ). It then becomes a matter of considerable 
importance to obtain a good estimate of the values of this function. Ihe first three experi- 
mental technics given in Part I, Section 5, were used for this determination. Since in each of 
these experiments small variations in an observer's settings may result in considerable dif- 
ferences in the values of the function, hunan variability becomes an important factor to 
consider. 
The responses required of the observer were unusual and difficult. A tendency for the 
settings to drift, in one direction was now and then noted, particularly when a new type of 
observation was initiated, but the settings soon stabilized. Random variation from day to day 
was also noted. Time did not permit us to study this factor in any detail. Ch the whole, con- 
sidering what was required of _he observer, we were surprised at the consistency of his set- 
tings. In a series of observations in which the effect of a progressive modification in the 
conditions was to be measured, we learned that a presentation of the individual experiments 
in random order resulted in a more stable; picture of the effect to be measured and minimized 
any directional trend due to practice. 
We realize that to obtain a meaningful estimate of a given individual's typical binocu- 
lar spatial response it would probably be necessary to conduct a detailed statistical study 
with each experimental technic. Despite the fact that time did not permit us to make such an 
extended series of observations, the function r ( T ) emerges more clearly than might be ex- 
pected. In general character, r is a monotonically decreasing function with a monotonically 
increasing slope. The values of the function for the two observers who have been able to 
complete the whole series of tests appear to be determined to within one part in five. Fur- 
thermore, individual differences are  brought out. For one of these observers the values of 
r (T) are consistently somewhat higher lh<ui for those of the other. A greater r (D may be 
interpreted as a greater absolute curvature of visual space. This greater curvature is not to 
be interpreted as a disadvantage. According to Lunebuig18, the greater the curvature of one's 
visual space, the more nearly will sensory matches of size approach a physical match. 
3a. Parallel and Distance Alleys (Tne Blumenfeld Alleys) 
In this experiment twenty lights wire placed in two rows of ten on either side of the 

• 
median. "Hie lights were arranged pairwise at each side of the median, both lights of a pair 
being freely and independently movable along a line x • constant. The ten chosen values of 
x arc given in ia*_>ic IV. Ins lärtheät distant liguts were iixcu «M, X — juL» cm., y • oo  cm. 
Tni» observer was aslfAH to set the lights in ? r>sr?-llel sllev sud then in a distance alley 
according to instructions which were in general similar io those used by Blumenfeld. They 
are as follows: 
"This is an experiment dealing with space perception. We know one does not. 
always perceive objects in space where they actually are in physical space, or to 
be cf their actual physical sizef We want to measure some of these differences. 
"In the first experiment we shall show you some small lights which wt: shall 
arrange under your direction so that when you look down between them they appear 
to you to form straight, parallel lines of light. We wish you to think not of where 
the lights actually are, but merely of how yoc sense them. When they are all ar- 
ranged, we want you to be able to say that these straight lines of lights as you 
see them could never, if extended, meet at any distance in front of you or at any 
distance behind you; that, is, that they form walls that appear to you as parallel 
walls that appear neither to converge nor to diverge" 
To familiarize th'i observer with the observation, a trial run utilizing only 
stations 1, 3, 5 and 8 was made, no measurements being taken of this trial. The 
instructions continued: 
"In the second experiment we shall give you two pairs of lights ut a time. 
The position of one pair will be fixed. We want you to direct us to move the lights 
of the other pair so that the lateral distance between them appears to you the same 
as that between the first pair. We want you to make an immediate, instantaneous 
judgment of wh'.ther the distance between the lights of the second pair is greater 
or smaller than or equal to that between the first pair. Do not think in terms of 
physical units of distance between the lights, for example, inches or centimeters. 
Just direct us in adjusting them until you immediately sense the two pairs of 
lights as being the same distance apart.'' 
Again a trial run utilizing only stations 1 and 3, 1 and 5, and 1 and 8 was 
made, again without measurements. After these preliminary observations, the experi- 
ment continued with the formation of the complete parallel and distance alleys in 
that sequence. The usual procedure was to give a second trial of each alley on the 
same day and to repeat the series on a second Hay. 
The data given in fable IV and Fig. 22 for two observers represent the average of three 
such settings, averaged again on the left and right. 
49 

50 
TABI£ IV 
Blumenfeld Parallel and Distance Alleys. Average setting of y for 
each value of x. Values of x and y are expressed in centimeters« 
Observer G.R. 
Parallel 
Distance 
yd 
50 
9*95 
23.75 
65 
10.65 
23.05 
83 
ru55 
23.90 
108 
12.90 
2U.25 
139 
1U.55 
23.85 
180 
16.6* 
22.95 
232 
19.35 
23.75 
300 
23.35 
26.10 
387 
28.85 
29.95 
500 
35.00 
35.00 
Observer M.C.R. 
Parallel 
7 
P 
13.85 
lli.liO 
i5.Itf 
16.75 
18.10 
19,?5 
21.h$ 
2U.U0 
28.8C 
35.00 
Distance 
20.60 
21.50 
21.80 
21.25 
21.05 
22.65 
2h.50 
27.10 
29.10 
35.X 
For each point of the setting the values of y and <p "*"ere confuted from the  formulas 
COS20 
tajKp   =    y/x /    -    p  
X 
(cf.   equation [3a] )   where p represents  the distance between the rotation centers of the ob- 
server's eyes.*        Letting Kyy,  0j)  denote  the bipolar coordinates of the most distant point, 
we  then calculated S = sin2^  - sin2<£,   for each point of the distance  alley,  T = sin2<£    - 
sin  ft,   for each point of the parallel  alley and plotted S and T separately against V - y - y.. 
An example of such  a plot is given in Fig.   23.  A curve was  then drawn between the points of 
the plot,   and values  for S and T were taken from the curve at V = .02,   .03,   ... The ratio 
S/T was calculated for each value of V. The average value of the ratio weighted with respect 
• THIS ÄAS F3'iA2«.ISHED APPROXIMATELY BY MEASURiiV- THE INTERPUPILLARY DISTANCE. 

•u 
y cm. 
500 
400 
300 
200 
J00 
OBSERVER    M.C.R. 
OBSERVER   G. R 
O     PARALLEL  ALLEY 
•     DISTANCE   ALLEY 
L. 
-O 
R. 
•O- 
30 20 10 0 !0 
nr\ 
30 
xcm. 
Fig.22.  B'umenfeld Parallel and  Distance Aiieys. 

52 
SJ 
.10 
.05 
ÜD o c r\ vun M/ 
f*\       5«r«l Ifl!     r. I I a vi 
•   Distance  alley 
&&£—- 
FIG.   23.   BLUMENFELD  PARALLEL  AND 
DISTANCE  ALLEYS.   PLOTS OP  S  AND  T 
AGAINST r. 
.05 
.10 
to r was. then determined.* Tue value of co was found from this  average by using the formula (23) 
cosh2oj    -    S/T 
From the value of w the function r (T) was then determined for each point of the setting by 
using the relation (20) 
sin <f>j 
tanh r = tanh co 
sin (p. 
for the points of the parallel alley; and the relation (21) 
sinh r • sinh co    _ 
sin 4>x 
sin 0d • 
for the points of the distance alley. The values of r (T) found by this method are presented 
*   WEIGHTED  AVERAGE     = 
S£lr 
T 
2 r 

53 
TABIS V 
Twenty values of r (V ) computed from the results of the 
Blumenfeld Parallel and Distance Alley Experiment» 
Observer G. R. 
Parallel Alley 
r r 
Distance Alley 
r r 
*33U 
•L12 
.h$2 
.590 
.693 
•e33 
.986 
1.126 
1.238 
1.1470 
•C917 
.C7U7 
.0585 
.Oli3? 
•C320 
•C222 
•008U 
.0037 
«0000 
.329 
.M8 
•U99 
.617 
.772 
.975 
1.H5 
1.280 
1,381 
T.li70 
Observer M«  C« R. 
Parallel Alley 
r r 
»13.0$ 
.0832 
•C629 
-rii5? 
•C328 
.0225 
.01)47 
.0085 
.0037 
.0000 
in Table V for two observers. The graphic representation of r plotted against F is displayed 
in Fig. 28 where these results are compared with those of other experiments. 
.1103 
.08I4J 
.C6U2 
.Cli69 
.0338 
.0233 
.0152 
.0088 
.0038 
.0000 
.19U 
.2U0 
.238 
.316 
.I1I8 
.517 
.625 
*7Ul 
•8I*U 
.931 
a)  = -931 
Distance Alley 
r r 
,1005 
.0790 
.0617 
.OI46O 
.0331* 
.0231 
.0151 
*G08o 
.0038 
•0000 
.236 
.290 
.3-/6 
.1465 
.568 
•662 
.75? 
.880 
.931 
3b.     The Double Vieth-Muller Circle Experiments 
The Ebuble Vieth-Muller Qrcle experiments were performed with the lights viewed directly; 
i.e.,   without the tcieostereoscopic device.  The theoretical  background for these experiments 
is given in Part I,   Sections  5b (i)   and 5b (ii). 
Both the three-point and four-point experiments were performed for the  four values of 
r = y2 - yj •  .005,   .01,   .02r   .04.  The convergence angle y.  was fixed throughout at .025 for 
observer G.R.   and .026 for M. C.R.   At any sitting,   a mixed order of F  and <p values was pre- 
sented to the observer. 
3b (i)    The Three-Point Experiment.    The observei was given the same instructions for the 
experiment as described in Section 2b (i).  For ease in computation a slightly different technic 
was used. The lights Q0 = (yx ,  O)   and Q2 = (y2  , <p2 )  were  left  fixed and the light Qj    = 
(yt  ,  </>j) ""»s moved on the circle y = y, ,   to satisfy the instruction of Section 2b (i).   Set- 
tings of Qj were taken for five positions of Q2 at 4>2 = 5°,   10°.   15°,   20° and 25°.  At least 
three settings were taken for each position of Q2  at  a given time.  The entire series of experi- 
ments  for the  four values of T was performed twice. 

54 
TABUS VI 
Three-Point Double Vieth-Muiler Circle Experiment» 
Average values of X s   cos 0, „ for given vaiies of X I cos 02 and P   • 
Observer G.Rs 
Avei-age values of T for given values of X and T 
T, * -C25 
X 
r 
.005 
.01 
.02 
»CU 
*9962 
•98U8 
•9659 
.9063 
ID 
u 
*>= 
©9892 
.9778 
•960U 
.93&U 
.9012 
.9613 
»0315 
.9928 
.9799 
.9702 
.cine 
.8992 
•9002 
.06u0 
.931* 
• •-/./»• 
.9511» 
.9389 
_ 00-50 
.8859 
.8995 
•06U3 
.9638 
.8812 
•6836 
.8811 
ft*.flrt 
.e566 
.3U86 
*5U05 
.8891 
Observer M.C.R. 
— .«.cw 
m 2 
b = 
*8Utf 
.1L86 
.9933 
.7737 
.2102 
.9839 
.6135 
.3378 
•9513 
Average values or T for given values of X and T 
X^\, 
.0052 
•OIOU 
•C208 
.Chl6 
.9962 
.9899 
e9839 
.9U85 
.8908 
.981*8 
.9799 
.9706 
.9U22 
.88U0 
.9659 
-9653 
*9562 
.9306 
•wu£ 
.9397 
.91-12 
•9367 
.9133 
.8688 
.9063 
.915U 
•9120 
.89L8 
.8561; 
.3668 
.5239 
.8907 

55 
X 
If) 
O) 
O 
if) 
0) 
if) 
CM 
O 
o 
o 
m 
•--) 
CM 
en 
<7) 
o o 
en 
If) 
co 
o 
in 
CD 
c 
c 
2   8 
X 
0) 
5   t> 
a.    o 
0) 
a. 
x 
LJ 
CJ 
> a 
en o 
c 
a> 
a> 
a> 
ja 
o   .<= 
i  .1 
a> 
CVJ 

'   " 
1 
so 
The values of Y = cos <fcx  w^re determined for each of the values oi X s con 02  (se-3 equa- 
tion   [24l )   at a g   -en value of F,   and then Y was plotted against X.   In Table VI and Fig.  24 
we show the average result of the entire experimental  series for the  four values of T.  These 
results clearly exhibit the linear dependence of Y upon X for a given value p£ F.   As Lüneburg 
demonstrated,   this linearity is evidence  for the homogeneity of the geometry*   In other \scrds, 
the geometry must be one of the three types of constant curvature. 
Using the representation of the line in the slope intercept  form 
Y    =    mX + b 
we find that the three-point experiment is not sensitive with respect to the value of m and 
hence large variations in the calculated values of b will occur  from time to time (Fig.   25). 
1 
.7 3 
OBSERVER   G.R 
r = .o 
o -May IS52 
• =June  1952 
.30 
.23 
.50 
.?5 
1.0* 
FIG.   25 THREE-POINT DVMC  EAPKKIMENT.   PLOT  EXHIBITING 
INSENSITIVITY  OP  EXPERIMENT   IN  DETERMINING u  AND  b. 
Since the value of Y0  at X 
(0„  = 0)  is found to be stable,   the 
value of m is taken from the four-point 
experiment   [see Fart I,   Section 5b 
(ii) ]   and b is determined from this 
value of m by the relation 
(38) b    =    YQ - m. 
3u (ii).  The Four-Point Experi- 
ment.  Four lights were presented to 
the observer. Two lights Q+1 = (y., <£j) 
and Q_j = (y, , <£_j) were placed on the 
VMC y  = y.  symmetrically to the median. 
The other lights Q+2 = (y2 , <£>„) and 
Q_2 = (y2 > 0-2^ *ere restricted to 
motion along a smaller VMC y - y2  (see 
Fig. 26). The lights Q±2 on the inner 
circle were left fixed and the observer 
was asked to set the lights Qj.( on the 
outer circle according to the specific 
instructions: 
''Four lights are presented 
to you. Two of them are fixed in 
position and the other two can be 
moved." (These lights and their 
range of motion are demonstrated.) ''Direct the experimenter to adjust these lights so 

57 
that the distance between them appears to ycu to be the same as the distance between 
the pair of fixed lights.  Allow the eyes to roam freely both ways over the spatial 
interval between each pair of lights.   Be sure to  fixate on each light in turn and to 
sweep the eyes across the interval  between each pair of lights until you are satisfied 
that the two distances  appear to you to be the same." 
Settings of Q+1  = {yl ,  <$>{)   and Q-j =  (/, ,   <£_,)  were taken for five positions of Q+2 and 
and Q_2 en the VMC J = 72 symmetric to the median with differences in azimuth A2  =  10°.   30°. 
50° (Fie.   26).   At least three settings were taken at   a £iven time for each position of Q±?. 
The entire series of experiments 
for the four values of V was per- 
formed twice. 
r-ri 
The values of Y = sin /4A { 
were determined for each of the 
values of X = sin !4A0  at a given 
value of P,   and then Y was plot- 
ted against X.   From equation (27) 
m = Y/X 
the slope m was computed from 
„..v. L;   ..^e..—ie ........ in- 
spect to X, 
(39) m=--- 
The value of Y for each value 
of X is given in Table VII  for 
each value of F,   and the data 
are also plotted in Fig,   27, 
Taking the value of m from 
(39)   and the value of b from 
(38),  the value ofu for T = 0 
was obtained from formula (26) 
b 
FIG.   26.   PHYSICAL,  ARRANGEMENT   IN   FOUR-POINT  DVHC 
SXPHUKENT. 
o) = arc cosn 
[(1-b)2  -m2]* 
The values of t were ihei» computed according to formula '27) 
r    =    arc sinh (m sinh OJ) . 
The values r are given in Table VIII and plotted in Fig. 28 where they are compared with those 
obtained in other experiments. 

53 
'S    < 
m 
-I«M 
o> 
c 
c 
*- 
</> 
X 
c 
3 
fc 
> 
V 
ö. 
V 
Ul 
y 
O 
k. 
2 
o 
ä -» 
c 
<3 
o 
Q. 
r. 
i— 
3 
O 
1Ä 
•o c 
U- 
> 
u 
r- 
C\J 

59 
TA3IS VII 
Four-Point Double Vieiih-Jiüller Circle Experiment f 
Average values of x =    sin 1/2 A for given values of X z sin l/2 A2 and I  , 
Observer G»S» 
Average values of 1 for given values of X and I
-1 
T. s .025 
•0872 
*258S 
•U226 
m 
»oo5 
•0685 
.1972 
•-JO50 
•7U25 
•01 
.02 
.060I1 
.1805 
.2660 
.6596 
.033li 
•12U9 
.1887 
J*5l5 
•ok 
.0160 
.0562 
.1353 
.3220 
Observer M.G.R. 
T. = »026 
Average values of T for given values of X and r 
.0052 
•OlOU 
.0208 
•0Ul6 
.0872 
.2588 
•'x226 
m - 
.0809 
.2339 
.3291 
•3Uii2 
.07U9 
•1923 
.2858 
.7193 
.0732 
.1755 
.2231 
.6137 
.0390 
.1176 
.1586 
•Jaoo 
3c.     The Equipartitioned Parallel  Alleys 
This experiment  is  chat of 2b  (ii).  The mean values of ^  and T2,   tan <£,  and tan cp2  for 
the four positions of ?3  were taken from Table III   and the values of r computed from these data. 
Hence the values of  r given here  represent  sixteen experimental   settings. 
To compute the values of r we  first determine the values of S = tan 4>2 I tan $\  an(^ 
T • tar. <£o / tan #„.   For each of the experimental points r is then computed  frc~  formula (28)    as 
!    tanh Y 
r-     =    arc  tanh | • 
|    sin cp. 

60 
TABI£ VIII 
Five values of r ( P ) computed from the results of the 
Double Vieth-Muller Circle Experiments. 
observer G»JU 
,0000 
.0050 
•3100 
•0200 
•31*00 
to 
T. = .025 
1.1*8 
1.22 
1.13 
0c8U 
0.63 
Observer M*S«R» 
P 
•0000 
.0052 
.0101; 
•0208 
•3106 
T, = .026 
.95* 
•*3 
.73 
.63 
•Ul4 
Value o£   CO 
where we use formula (30)   for V 
sinh Y    •    tan 0, 
L 
2 - (S • T) 
(S • T)  - 2 S.F.' 
The results of these computations are given in Table IX.   In Fig.  28 the results of this 
experimental  series ai« compared with those obtained from the Blumenfeld Alleys and the 
Double Vieth-Müller Circle Experiment.-,  for the two observers who completed the  full  series 
of experiments. 
3d.     The Personal Characteristic,   r ( F ), 
If it be  assumed that  an individual's metrization of spsce is constant over long periods 
of life,   then by determining the  function r (F)   #e are able to give a useful  and signifi- 
cant description of his space sense.  This function  r (IP) may be thought of as a personal 
characteristic of the individual   which describes  his spatial   responses   for r'ueless vision in 
the same sense that his color matrix describes his responses to color mixtures. 
With respect  to  th#»  function  r (F)  we have sought  to answer the  following questions: 
(a) What  are its obvious characteristics? 
(b) How well  do  the values obtained from different kinds of experiments 
agree with each other? 

2 
u  Ul 
o 
c 
13 
CO 
o > 
Ui u 
U   O 
g 
15   ffl 
g i 
CO o 
m 
r- 
o 
o 
o 
m 
O 
o 
g 
I  
• t 
&   « 
-*S-+- 

62 
TABIE IX 
Three values of r ( P ) computed from the results of 
the Sq*iipartitioned Faxallwi £/J.ey Sxperiment 
Observer 0» EU 
r r 
.00000 1*3706 
•00562 1.0153 
•039ÖU      Q*bhh$ 
Observer M.C.R. 
•OOOOO       1.0308 
.00731       0.7993 
.03908       0.5676 
Value of 00 
(c) Are there measurable differences between individuals? 
A partial answer to these questions may he obtained from a perusal of Fig. 28 which sum- 
marizes the results of Tables V, VIII and IX. 
(a) The function r (D is a decreasing function and convex downward. 
(b) The results of the three different experimental technics employed here 
do show a measure of agreement in the values of r (F). Whether or not 
the differences lie within the range of variability of the observer for 
any given experiment is a problem for further investigation and statis- 
tical analysis. 
(c) Individual differences have been found. The function r (F) for observer 
G.R. is consistently larger than for observer M.C.R. 
Another problem that has occupied our attention is that of determining a uniform way of 
interpolating a curve between the experimentally found values of the function, so that r (T) 
may be specified in terms of a limited number of real constants. To attempt a solution of this 
problem for di normal individuals is probabiy premature since it would require the testing of 
many more observers. Within the range of variability of the two observers employed here, how- 
ever, the function r (T) can be represented adequately in tne form 

CO 
l + a r 
For observer G.R.   we have approximately co -  1,48  ,   a = 33,2;   for observer M.CR. , 
co =  1.00  ,   a = 37.2 . 
4. INSTRUMENTATION 
In describing the geometry of binocular visual space we are concerned here not with 
thresholds and acuities, but with observations in the largn where the eyes rove over exten- 
sive regions of space. For the present purpose we are interested in the response to gross 
stimuli rather than to the barely perceptible. The range of convergence and azimuch supplied 
by single light points in the laboratory is by no means an adequate domain for testing the 
range of the binocular responses to gross stimuli. Not only is it desirable to test with dis- 
tant obi^cts and at large angles of azimuth, but it is instructive to extend the range of ob- 
servation as far as possible, even into the region of divergence. Such requirements can only 
be met by the use of special stereoscopic devices^ 
Since the use of a stereoscopic device of either of the types described here upsets the 
normal relationship between accommodation and convergence it is necessary to show that accom- 
modation is a negligible or minor factor in binocular responses of the kind measured here. 
Campbell 6 in his study of size constancy phenomena in clueless vision was able to demonstrate 
that the substitution of stimuli formed by his stereoscopic device for single physical light 
points resulted in no appreciable change in the observer's settings. Further, he was able to 
commingle stimuli of the two kinds, again without appreciable change in the responses of the 
observer. We have used Campbell's demonstration as adequate justification for the use of our 
devices.* 
4a.  The Telestereoscope or ' 'Giant' s Eyes'' Instrument. 
This device is based on a mirror arrangement. A right-angled first surface mirror is 
placed symmetrically with respect to the median, apex toward observer (Fig. 2^). Two mirrors 
are set symmetrically to the median so that the extension of the plane of each of the mirrors 
meets the extension away from the apex of the corresponding side of the right-angled mirror. 
The angle of intersection is denoted by c»^ 
Let Q be a physical light viewed through ehe instrument. Let Q be the position of the 
•ON THE OTHER HAND. WE HAVE NOT USED STIMULUS POINTS CLOSER THAN 50cm. SO THAT THE RANGE OF ACCOMMODATION 
IS NOT EXTREMELY LARGE. 

64 
FIG. 29. THE TELESTEREOSCOPIC OR 
' *GI ANT' S EYES' ' INSTRUMENT. 
binocular image of Q (i.e., the point at which the visual axes must cross to throw the separate 
images of Q on the respective ioveae of the two eyes).   Now consider the path of a ray of light 
from 0 to the fovea of the right eye at 11. Proceeding from R to Q we see first that the ray 
which reaches R from its side of the 90° mirror must have been inflected from » ray directed 
through the image R of R in the mirror. Similarly, the ray directed through R' mu-L iwvc !«ten 
reflected at the side mirror from a r*y directed through the image R of R' in that mirror, L$y 
ayawstry '.ve determine *ne corresponding points L and L. for the '.eft eye. 
Thus, to determine the position oi Q from that of Q we trace the rays to the two eyes and 
extend tl:•*> terminal segnents at the eyes to their poir^ of intersection. Thus, for the right 
eye, we draw Q R and find its intersection I with the side mirror. We then draw IR' and deter- 
mine the intersection J with the right face of the 90° mirror. The point Q will then He on the 
extension of JR. 

65 
For algebraic convenience we use bipolar coordinates y , 4> with respect to the points 
L, R (the ''Giant's Eyes") to specify the position of Q, and ordinary bipolar coordinates 
y ,  <p  to give the position of Q. These coordinates are related to each other by the equations 
y   e y - 4o< 
The ''Giant's Eyes" instrument was used in the Double VMC experiments of Section 2b (i). 
«lb. Tfce Polaroid Rack 
In this instrument two lights QL and G^ are presented separately by means of polaroids to 
the left and right eyes, respectively. This is interpreted in the sane way as a physical light 
Dlaced at the point Q where the visual axes crrss when the right eye fixes Q„ and the left eye 
fixes Q^  (cf. Canpbell16). The rack consists cf a set <_•! bars placed on iines x = constant. 
Each pair of lights QR and Q^ which are to be fused in the above manner is placed on a block 
so that the two may slide along a bar together as a unit. The separation of the two lights 
of a pair is adjustable by means of a thumbscrew. Polaroids are mounted before the lights and 
the eyes so that each pair of lights gives only one image to each eye (Fig. 30). 
Let the cartesian coordinates for the two lights of a pair be given by Q„ - (X, YR), 
0L • (X, YL). The iine OQ passes through the point Q* = (X, Y) half way between QR and Q^ 
where 
Y = >/2(YR +YL). 
The separation of Q^ and Q^ is 
S " \-\ 
The cartesian coordinates (x, y) öf Q are givsn fay 
(40) x 
J£ X 
p + s 
PY 
p + S 
where p is the interpupillary distance of the observer.   From equation (40)  approximate formulas 

56 
ii i iiiiiiiiiiii 
FIG.   30.   SCHEMATIC  REPRESENTATION  OF   THE PRINCIPLE 
OF  THE  POLAROID  RACK. 
for  the  bipolar coordinates   (y ,   <p)  of 0 are  easily obtained 
tan 0   =    Y/X 
(P + S)  cos2 <b 
y   = . 
The polaroid rack was  used in  the settings of the equipartitioned parallel   allevs Sections 
2b (ii)   and 3c. 
No account was taken of the slight errors due to  a 2.5 mm.   thickness of giass covering 
the poiarnids before  the eyes.   Similarly,   although all observes  with the exception of A. A.B. 
wore glasses,   the deviations due  »:o refracting elements wer>_ wot  Laken into account.   To avoid 
entering  into such considerations   it would be desirable to  employ emmetrcpic  observers. 

67 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
The experimental work presented here is direct evidence that Luneberg's approach to bi- 
nocular vision is at once sensible and fe^ible. In fact this evidence strongly supports 
Lüneburg's major conclusions: 
(a) The binocular visual space is a determinate metric space with constant characteris- 
tics for a given observer. 
(b) By experiment, it is possible to determin» the metric of an observer's visual space 
and so to completely characterize the geometry of his binocular visual sen;>e. 
(c) The metric is that of riemannian space of constant negative curvature, the so-called 
hyperbolic space. 
In particular, the experiments show that in all likelihood, the metric of visual space 
may be written in terms of special coordinates attached to the stimulus configuration; i.e., 
the iseikonic coordinates, f, 3>, 0. The problem of determining the metric for a given ob- 
server is then reduced tc the problem of determining the one function r (T). 
The function i (T) is to be thought of as a sensory characteristic of the cbserver which 
describes his geometric visual sense, much as an individual's <. lor matrix describes his sense 
of hue and saturation. The determination of norms for the function might therefore be useful, 
especially with regard to our understanding of deviant or abnormal binocular function. As yet 
it is too early to make predictions concerning the eventual usefulness (clinically or otherwise) 
of the theory. A great deal of work to set up standards muut first be undertaken. Yet some 
practical results will undoubtedly follow from the increased understanding we already have. For 
example, it may be suggested that parallel rows of guide lights be set up along all airplane 
runways at e  uniform standard separation of the rows and at a uniform standard spacing of the 
lights, so J\at a pilot landing at night can rely on facing the same situation each time he 
lands at zny  field And on any runway. If this were carried into national or international stan- 
dard patterns, it might do much to reduce hazards of visual landings - particularly at strange 
airports. 
Perhaps similar standards would prove useful in other applications where space judgments 
must be made in a situation providing reduced clues; e.g., it might lead to a consideration and 
solution of the problem of integrating the magnification of all binocular viewing instruments 
If the interpupiilary distance of a 6X binocular, for example, were optically magnified by the 
same factor of 6, the relative changes in convergence required in using the instrument should 
lead to a more realistic appraisal, by the observer, of frontal distances involved in the 
field cf view. 

«* 
REFERENCES 
1. R. K. Lüneburg, 
2. R. K. Lüneburg, 
3. R K. Lüneburg, 
4. K. N. Ogle, 
5. G. A. Fry, 
6. G. A. Fry, 
7. R. K. Lüneburg, 
8. H. Busemann, 
9. H. S. M. Goxeter, 
10. rL S. Carslaw, 
13. R. K. Lüneburg, 
12. W.   ßlunenfeld, 
13, L.  H.  Hardy, 
G.   Rand and 
M.  C.   Rittler, 
)4. R.   K.   Luneb-jrg, 
15. C   ii.   Graham, 
16. C.   J,   Campbell, 
17. ILL.F.  Itelmholtz, 
Mathematical Analysis of Binocular Vision (Princeton Univ.   Press, 
Princeton, N.  J.,   1947). 
Metric Methods   in binocular Visual Perception,  Studies and Essays, 
Courant Anniversary Volume  (Inttrscience Publishers,   Inc.,   New Yorkv 
1948). 
''The metric of binocular visual   space,"   J.  Opt,   Sor,   Am. 40,   627 
(1950). 
Researches   in binocular  Vision    (W.   B.   Saunders Co.,   Philadelphia, 
Pa.   1950). 
''Visual  perception of space,''   An.   J.  Optometry,   27,   531  (1950). 
"Comments  on Lüneburg's  analysis of binocular vision,"   An.   J.   Op- 
tometry, 29,   3 (1952). 
See Reference 3,   p.   630. 
Metric Methods  in Finsler Spaces  and  in  the Foundations oj Geometry 
(Princetot. Urdv.   Press,   Princeton,  N.   J.,   1942). 
Non-Euclidean Geometry (Univ.  of Toronto Press,  Toronto,   Can.,   1947). 
The Elements of Non-Euclidean Plane Geometry and Trigonometry 
(Longmans Green & Co.,   London,   1916). 
See Reference  1,   pp.   17,   89. 
' 'Lnterruciiungcn über die scheinbare Grosse ir Sehraume', Z.   Psychol. 
u,   Physiol.   d.   Sinnesorg. 65 (Abt.   1),   241 (1913). 
'Investigation of visual  space.   The Blunenfeld  alleys,''   Aich. 
Cpht.hal.   (Chicago) 45.   53 (1951). 
See Reference 3,   p.   638. 
'Visual   perception".   In 3.  S.  Stevens,   Handbook of Experimental 
Psychology,  868  (John Wiley & Sons,   Inc.,   New York,   1951). 
An Experimental Investigation of  the Size Constancy Phenomenon. 
Col.  linjv.   Thesis  (1952). 
Physiological Optics,  Edited by.].  P.   C,   Southall,  Rochester,  N.  Y., 
Opt.   Soc.  Am.   (1925)  vol.  3,   p,   318. 
18.     R.  K.   Lüneburg, See Reference 1,   p..   104 and Reference 3,  p.   633. 

