Informat'ion
Technolooies
and the Futu, re of
Land Warfare
i:r" -w A 
I
1, 
Wil

The research described in this report was sponsored by the United
States Army under Contract No. MDA903-91-C-0006
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Nichiporuk, Brian, 1966-
Information technologies and the future of land warfare / Brian
Nichiporuk, Carl. H. Builder.
p. cm
"MR-560-A."
"Prepared for the United States Army."
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-8330-2316-0 (alk. paper)
1. United States. Army. 
2. Military art and science-United
States-Forecasting. 
3. Information technology-United States.
I. Builder, Carl H. II. United States. Army. 
III. Title.
UA25.N53 
1995
355.4'0973'0112-dc2O
95-41141
CIP
RAND is a nonprofit institution that helps improve public policy through
research and analysis. RAND's publications do not necessarily reflect the
opinions or policies of its research sponsors.
Cover Design: Alisha Pitts
© Copyright 1995 RAND
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by
any electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or
information storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from
RAND.
Published 1995 by RAND
1700 Main Street, P.O. Box 2138, Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
RAND URL: http://www.rand.org/
To order RAND documents or to obtain additional information, contact
Distribution Services: Telephone: (310) 451-7002;
Fax: (310) 451-6915; Internet: order@rand.or

.000. laam a
.008.1a960124s1995 
cauab 
b 
0000engd
.010. la95041141
.020. la0833023160 (alk. paper)
.027. IaRAND/MR-560-A
.037. lalc$15.00
.040. laCStmoRIcCStmoR
.043. lan-us---
.050. 001aUA251b.N53 1995
.100. 1 laNichiporuk, Brian.lw
.245. 1O0aInformation technologies and the future of land warfare /IcBrian
Nichiporuk, Carl H. Builder.
.260. laSanta Monica, CA :IbRAND,IcI995.
.300. laxiii, 87 p. :lbill., maps ;1c23 cm.
.500. laAnnotated briefing.
.504. lalncludes bibliographical references (p. 85-87).
.506. 1 laUNCLASS[FTED
.520. laMuch of the future of land warfare will be shaped by the rapidly
expanding information technologies. In December 1993, RAND convened 18
researchers with expertise in the information sciences and military
operations to brainstorm on the ways that fast-growing communications and
computational capabilities might change the nature of conflicts, the Armys
missions, the way the Army organizes, and especially its concepts of
operations. The researchers generally agreed that the nature of conflict
is changing not so much because of technological and demographic shifts of
power. The causes, participants, and objectives in conflicts are being
transformed by the information technologies faster and more fundamentally
than the weapons are. The report concludes with six new concepts for Army
organization and operations. They span a broad range of issues: from the
primary role of the soldier on the battlefield to how the Total Army might
be organized for its disparate missions. All six concepts would imply
significant changes in Army doctrine, training, organization, and
equipment.
.536. laArmy;IbMDA903-91-C-0006;IdRCN 741X
.580. laSupersedes RAND/DRR-659-A.
.610. 10laUnited States.IbArmy.
.650. OlaMilitary art and sciencelzUnited StateslxForecasting.
.650. Olalnformation technologyizUnited States.
.653. laGround warfare
.695. 1 IaArmy.
.695. 1 laWarfare.
.695. 1 lalnformation systems.
.700. 1 laBuilder, Carl H.Iw
.710. 2 laArroyo Center.IbForce Development and Technology Program.iw
.710. 1 laUnited States.ibArmy.
.787. laIrRAND/DRR-659-A
.980. laDefense and Technology Planning
.981. IaArmy Research
.982. 1a3
.984. la19960122;Ib19960122
.986. 1a19960122
.991. IaForce Development and Technology
.992. 1a9601
.993. IaDTIC
.596. lal 23

Information
Technologies
andthe Future of
Land Warfare
Brian Nichiporuk
Carl H. Builder
Prepared for the
United States Army
Approved for public release;
distribution unlimited
RAND
Arroyo Center
V -I C Q jh L-T7 7,'TCZT1- 
,.

PREFACE
This report documents and expands on the principal findings of a
two-day RAND workshop conceived and sponsored by TRADOC, the
Army's Training and Doctrine Command, to explore the potential
impacts of the rapidly expanding information technologies upon the
future of land warfare. It describes changes in the information tech-
nologies, speculates on their implications for the Army's environ-
ment, and explores new concepts for Army operations and organiza-
tions. The report should be of interest to Army leaders, to developers
of Army doctrine and systems, and, more generally, to military ana-
lysts and planners.
This report is a product of research being done in a quick-response
project for TRADOC. The research was conducted in the Force
Development and Technology Program of RAND's Arroyo Center, a
federally funded research and development center sponsored by the
United States Army.
iii

CONTENTS
Preface ......................................... 
iii
Figures ......................................... 
vii
Sum m ary ....................................... 
ix
Acknowledgm ents ................................. 
xiii
Chapter One
INTRODUCTION ............................... 
.
Chapter Two
THE NATURE OF THE REVOLUTION ............... 
7
Historical Trends ............................... 
8
Integrated Circuits ............................ 
9
Computing Power and Cost ..................... 
11
Softw are ................................... 
13
Fiber Optics ................................. 
14
Future Trends ................................. 
15
Other Trends and Considerations .................. 
19
Chapter Three
SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS ....................... 
25
A Weakening of Hierarchies ....................... 
27
Facilitating Transnational Enterprises ............... 
32
Eroding National Sovereignty ..................... 
35
Transformation of Commercial Organizations ......... 
38
Chapter Four
LAND WARFARE IMPLICATIONS .................. 
47
More Than Applying Technology ................... 
48
V

vi 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
Shedding Middle Layers ......................... 
52
W ho Is the Enemy? ............................. 
54
A Spreading Mission Spectrum .................... 
56
W ar as Theater ................................ 
59
Chapter Five
OPERATIONAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL CONCEPTS ... 
63
Soldiers as Sensors ............................. 
64
Information Carousel ........................... 
68
Agile Defense/Lodgment ......................... 
71
Network Arm y ................................ 
73
Franchised Combat Units ........................ 
75
An Army of Armies ............................. 
77
Chapter Six
AFTERTHOUGHTS ............................. 
81
Whither Constabularies? ......................... 
81
Som e W arnings ................................ 
82
Bibliography ..................................... 
85

FIGURES
1. TRADOC Workshop Participants ................ 
3
2. Transistors per Chip ......................... 
10
3. Computing Power per Unit Cost ................ 
12
4. Trends in Micro- and Minicomputer Processing
Pow er .................................... 
13
5. Trends in Fiber Optics ........................ 
16
6. Projecting Computer Power/Cost to 2030 ......... 
17
7. Trends in Communications Capacities ........... 
18
8. International Connectivity on Networks .......... 
20
9. Evolution of the Internet ...................... 
21
10. The Growing Proportion of Information Workers
in the U.S. Economy ......................... 
31
11. The Rising Cost of Labor ...................... 
41
12. The Shamrock Organization ................... 
43
13. Battlefield Transformations .................... 
49
14. A Swedish Defense Concept .................... 
53
15. Soldiers as Sensors .......................... 
65
16. Information Carousel ........................ 
68
17. Agile Defense/Lodgment ...................... 
72
18. Network Army .............................. 
74
19. Franchised Combat Units ..................... 
76
20. An Army of Armies .......................... 
78
vii

SUMMARY
On December 7, 1993, RAND convened 18 researchers with expertise
in the information sciences and military operations to "brainstorm"'
on the ways that fast-growing communications and computational
capabilities might change the nature of conflicts, the Army's mis-
sions, the way it organizes, and especially its concepts of operations.
The workshop began with four prepared briefings by invited experts
who speculated on
"* The technical dimensions of the information revolution (Antho-
ny C. Hearn),
"• How that revolution is shifting political, economic, and military
power in the world (Carl H. Builder),
"• The responses of commercial organizations to these changes
(Paul J. Bracken), and
"* The changing nature of the battlefield (Sam B. Gardiner).
Following these introductory briefings, the workshop participants
devoted a half day to discussing the broad implications of these
changes for conflict, land warfare, and the U.S. Army. They spent the
following day speculating about concepts that might be appropriate
for the Army as it adapts to and exploits the changing environment
'As used here, the verb "brainstorm" means to elicit and record ideas in a collegial
seminar setting, without immediate criticism or analysis, in order to encourage specu-
lative and imaginative thinking about future possibilities. The noun "brainstorm," as a
process, presumes that one uninhibited idea, when exposed to the mind of another,
may trigger still another idea-in a sort of chain reaction or "storm" of ideas.
ix

x 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
and as it works through its Force XXI experimentation process.
Dozens of ideas and their variations or applications were brain-
stormed and discussed; all were exposed to expert opinion, but none
were analyzed in any detail. The authors then extracted what they
thought were the most significant and representative of these con-
cepts for exposition here.
It should be noted that this report is about the effects of the informa-
tion technologies upon future land warfare rather than about "in-
formation warfare" per se. Whereas information warfare is a disci-
pline concerned mainly with technical C31 and command deception
issues such as computer viruses and electronic jamming/spoofing,
this study has to do with some broader impacts and implications of
the ongoing information revolution.
The findings of the workshop reported here are of three different
kinds:
"* Synopses of the four invited introductory briefings,
• 
Highlights from the workshop participants' observations about
the changing nature of conflicts and of the Army's missions, and
" 
Sketches of six concepts for Army organization or operations that
the participants thought might become feasible because of the
rapidly expanding information technologies and capabilities.
The four introductory briefings painted a picture of sustained growth
in communications and computational capabilities per unit cost
over the next several decades, compounding at the rate of about 40
percent per year. These extraordinary changes are dramatically
altering the sources of wealth and power on a global scale, implying
significant changes in the roles of nations, the nature of conflicts,
and the tasking of military forces. Commercial enterprises, after a
century of following the hierarchical military models for orga-
nization, are now diverging toward much more distributed, special-
ized, and flexible structures. Future battlefields may reflect many of
the structural changes that are now becoming evident in the
information-dominated commercial markets.
The workshop participants generally agreed that the nature of con-
flict is changing not so much because of technological changes in the

Summary 
xi
means of warfare as because of technical, demographic, and geopo-
litical shifts of power. Technical shifts of power are here defined as
power shifts that significantly increase the independent technical
capabilities of political actors that were heretofore very weak in
comparison to more traditional actors and institutions. The causes,
participants, and objectives in conflicts are being transformed by the
information technologies more rapidly and fundamentally than the
weapons are. One of the more intriguing observations in the work-
shop was that warfare in the information era has come to resemble
improvisational theater on a world stage, where major policy shifts
can result from a single good or bad scene.
All six concepts for Army organization or operations advanced by the
workshop are rooted in currently observable changes associated with
the information technologies. The concepts span a broad range of
issues-from the primary role of the soldier on the battlefield to how
the total Army might be organized for its disparate missions:
" 
Soldiers as Sensors-the idea that soldiers may be more valuable
on the battlefield as sensors than as weapons.
" 
Information Carousel-the idea that information on the battle-
field may be treated as a commodity available to all upon de-
mand and one to which all can contribute.
"* Agile Defense/Lodgment-the idea that the holding of territory
may be less important than its selective use in time and space for
battle.
"* Network Army-the idea that the Army may not need to physi-
cally move many of its resources in order to bring them to bear
on the battlefield.
" 
Franchised Combat Units-the idea that communications per-
mit the efficient organization of smaller, more numerous and
autonomous units, each with a span of control defined by its
maximum weapons range.
" 
An Army of Armies-the idea that the changing tasks of the Army
may call for differently organized, trained, and equipped units
rather than "one soldier fits all" tasking.

xii 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
None of these ideas were examined in detail. The purpose of the
workshop was to speculate, not analyze. It is apparent, however, that
all six concepts would imply significant changes for Army doctrine,
training, organization, or equipment.
The report concludes with some workshop observations on the rela-
tionships between the information technologies and the Army in a
rapidly changing world. In particular, the information technologies
may be shifting many of America's national security problems out of
our current defense planning paradigm-one that has long empha-
sized the ability to fight and win large conventional wars that take
place over clear issues of sovereignty and in which the enemy is an
established nation-state.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to express their deepest thanks to those peo-
ple who made the existence of this report possible. Ken Horn, the
Director of the Arroyo Center's Force Development and Technology
Program, was an enthusiastic supporter of this study from its incep-
tion. Our sponsor, Dr. Paul Berenson, Scientific Advisor to the Com-
manding General of the U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command
(TRADOC), supplied key guidance as the project workshop was being
planned and actively encouraged us to document the workshop
findings in a published report. RAND colleagues Bruce Bennett and
Alan Vick wrote extremely insightful technical reviews. Barbara
Kenny helped prepare the final version of the draft manuscript and
Nikki Shacldett edited that manuscript with great care and skill.
xiii

Chapter One
INTRODUCTION
The rapid development of the information technologies is changing
the world in many ways. It is fundamentally altering distributions of
political, economic, and military power. It is revolutionizing corpo-
rations and the ways that they organize and conduct their business.
It is creating almost seamless global markets for capital and com-
modities. And, across all of these domains, there is evidence that the
profound increases in the availability and utility of information are
weakening the traditional hierarchical forms upon which the civi-
lized world has long depended for governance, business, commerce,
and social order.
The effect of these changes on the nature of conflict, warfare, and
military institutions is the subject of much current speculation but
little certainty because for most military institutions-unlike busi-
ness and social enterprises-their endeavors, conflict and war, are
sporadic rather than continuous. Military forces for the 21st century
must be designed today for conflicts and wars that have not yet
been-and may never be-fought; and they must be designed to be
effective in environments that are still unfolding and obscure.
Hence, the responses of military institutions to revolutionary
changes in the information technologies are more likely to be driven
by anticipatory planning and analysis than by actual combat experi-
ence.
In the fall of 1993, the U.S. Army's Training and Doctrine Command
(TRADOC) suggested that RAND's Arroyo Center might conduct one
or more workshops to explore some of the effects of information
technologies on the future of land warfare. Implicitly, TRADOC

2 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
sought new organizational and operational concepts for land warfare
that might be lurking unseen or unheard by the Army in other minds
now fully seized by the information revolution-in business organi-
zations and the information sciences. Such new concepts, if found,
might expand and inform the Army's development of Force XXI, an
initiative aimed at anticipating the Army's needs-in organization,
doctrine, and equipment-for the 21st century.
Dr. Paul Berenson of TRADOC pursued these goals with RAND in the
last quarter of 1993. His concept for the workshops was one or more
RAND-led brainstorming1 seminars to explore how the Army might
exploit the information technologies, especially those that might
"* revolutionize land warfare,
"* insure a warfighting edge, and
"* lead to new operational concepts for major regional contingen-
cies (MRCs) and low-intensity conflict (LIC) conditions.
Early proposals called for participants from TRADOC, RAND, and
commercial enterprises to insure cross-fertilization of pertinent ex-
periences and concepts. However, the schedule for Force XXI docu-
mentation did not allow sufficient time to coordinate participants
from several different communities, so it was agreed that the initial
workshop would be conducted within the RAND community of re-
searchers and consultants, but with the broadest possible participa-
tion from relevant disciplines.
The participants in the workshop were the 18 RAND staff and consul-
tants listed in Figure 1. They included information, political, physi-
cal, and management scientists and military operators, technolo-
gists, planners, and analysts-each discipline represented by at least
two participants. 2
1For a definition of the term "brainstorm" as it is used here, see footnote 1 in the
summary to this report, p. ix.
2Approximately half the participants had the benefit of prior experience in RAND
workshops exploring advanced technology applications for the Advanced Research
Projects Agency (ARPA). Two of the participants had served as U.S. Army officers; two
came from outside universities; three are well-recognized experts on information
warfare; one is the editor of the journal The Information Society; another is RAND's
Resident Scholar (a chair) on information sciences; and at least a third of the
participants have reputations as published futurists.

Introduction 
3
RAND MR560-1
Robert H. Anderson 
Kenneth P. Horn
Steven C. Bankes 
Richard D. Hundley
Paul J. Bracken 
Gaylord K. Huth
Carl H. Builder 
Leland Joe
Edison M. Cesar 
Iris M. Kameny
Bruce W. Don 
Brian Nichiporuk
Sam B. Gardiner 
William D. O'Malley
Elwyn D. Harris 
David F. Ronfeldt
Anthony C. Hearn 
Randall Steeb
Figure 1-TRADOC Workshop Participants
The explicit objectives presented to the workshop participants at the
outset were twofold:
" 
Gain a better understanding of the military implications of the
emerging information technologies-especially those that might
revolutionize land warfare.
" 
Identify new operational concepts that might be made feasible
for the Army by the emerging information technologies-for
both MRCs and LIC conditions-with particular attention to
such aspects as weapons mixes in combat units, operational and
tactical doctrine, organizational structures, and battle manage-
ment.
The workshop, under the title "Information Technologies and the
Future of Land Warfare," was conducted on December 7 and 8, 1993,
at RAND, Santa Monica, in four half-day sessions:
" 
An introductory session in which four orientation or stage-
setting briefings (described below) were offered to the partici-
pants.
" 
A discussion of the Army's changing environment, intended to
elicit and expand the participants' concepts of warfare.

4 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
" 
A first brainstorming session on those operational and organiza-
tional concepts judged appropriate to major regional contin-
gencies.
" 
A second brainstorming session on those operational and orga-
nizational concepts judged appropriate to low-intensity con-
flicts.
The four introductory briefings were intended to set the stage for the
workshop, orient the participants to the workshop subjects, and
stimulate their thinking. In the order of their presentation, the
briefings were by
" 
Anthony C. Hearn, RAND's Resident Scholar on the information
sciences, who described the technical dimensions of the infor-
mation revolution.
" 
Carl H. Builder, from RAND's International Policy department,
who outlined how the information revolution is transforming po-
litical, economic, social, and military structures.
" 
Paul J. Bracken, from the Yale School of Management, who ex-
plained how the information revolution is changing the organi-
zation of business and commerce.
" 
Sam B. Gardiner, lecturer on military history and strategy at the
National Defense University, who speculated on how the infor-
mation revolution might change the battlefield.
The workshop was videotaped so that both the discussions and the
chalkboards could be preserved and reviewed for the preparation of
a summary briefing and this report. The briefing was presented to
the TRADOC Force XXI planners on January 4, 1994, and to the
Commanding General of TRADOC on February 3, 1994. This report
is the final documentation of the workshop, but it goes somewhat
beyond both the workshop and its briefing by providing additional
detail and background thought to be appropriate to the workshop
subject of "Information Technologies and the Future of Land War-
fare. "
The report is composed of five chapters following this introduction.
The first two chapters develop the subjects addressed in the first
three introductory briefings provided for the workshop participants:

Introduction 
5
Chapter Two, "The Nature of the Revolution," offers an overview of
the spectacular growth in computing and communications. Chapter
Three, "Societal Implications," looks at the ways in which the infor-
mation revolution is changing global distributions of power and
reshaping the modern corporation.
The last three chapters are devoted to subjects developed through
the workshop discussions: Chapter Four, "Land Warfare Implica-
tions," discusses the impact of advances in the information tech-
nologies on the nature of future battlefields. Chapter Five, "Oper-
ational and Organizational Concepts," presents six operational and
organizational concepts that the authors believe to be both signifi-
cant and representative of the many ideas considered during the
workshop. Chapter Six, "Afterthoughts," offers some general obser-
vations that probably lie beyond the charter of the workshop but
were nevertheless stimulated by its discussions and are deemed wor-
thy of the Army's consideration.

Chapter Two
THE NATURE OF THE REVOLUTION
The information revolution and its consequences for America's fu-
ture are among the most discussed topics in public policy circles
today. The most important technology policy initiative put forth by
the Clinton Administration is the National Information Infrastruc-
ture (NII) or "information superhighway" program, which envisions
the use of telephone lines, cable systems, and high-speed data net-
works to create an integrated information net that can be accessed
by most elements of U.S. society. ' While the exact architecture of the
Nil has yet to be defined, the program represents a bold initiative by
the government to facilitate the harnessing of computing, com-
munications, and information-access technologies in a bid to en-
hance the competitiveness of the U.S. economy.
Quite apart from the NII, the information revolution is having a pro-
found effect on most aspects of American life. It is changing em-
ployment patterns, export flows, and the composition of private-
sector investment. It is also drastically altering American homes,
workplaces, and leisure and entertainment habits. Most pertinently,
at least from the standpoint of this report, it is changing the nature of
the conflicts that Americans will have to fight in the future and the
ways in which they will be fought.
The term "information revolution" is not an exaggeration of what is
happening today in the field of information technology. The rapid
growth of computing, communications, and information-access
technologies over the past three to four decades, and the likelihood
1See Business Week, "The Information Revolution," Special Issue, 1994, p. 32.
7

8 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
that these technologies will continue such growth patterns for at
least two more decades, indeed constitute a revolution in human
affairs. This revolution has already reshaped both civilian life and
military operations, but expert opinion indicates that the most mo-
mentous transformations in both these sectors are yet to come.
This chapter, based in part upon the introductory briefings given to
the workshop participants, provides a broad overview of the physical
nature of the information revolution by sketching the most salient
past and future trends in the technologies driving it. Three topics are
taken up: The first is the nature and magnitude of the growth in in-
formation technologies over the past half-century. The second is the
likely growth for the foreseeable future. The third is a brief summary
of the emerging technologies viewed as most promising by informa-
tion scientists.
HISTORICAL TRENDS
Although there were some important developments in the informa-
tion technologies before World War II, the foundation for today's
information revolution came in 1947 with the invention of the tran-
sistor by J. Bardeen, W. H. Brattain, and W. Shockley. The transistor
paved the way for solid-state integrated circuits and thence for mod-
ern electronic devices and telecommunications. Eleven years after
the transistor's invention, the Bell Laboratories were able to produce
the first fully transistorized digital computer. In the 1960s, transistor
technology was married with space technology as the first active
communications satellites were launched. The threshold to the cur-
rent phase of the information revolution was crossed with large-scale
integrated circuitry in the form of the microprocessor at Intel in 1971,
just one year after the development of the dynamic random access
memory (DRAM) chip. 2 Many secondary measures of the informa-
tion revolution-such as the sudden rise in the production of
information-related devices-can be traced to the mass production
and availability of inexpensive microchips in the mid- 1970s.
In this brief passage from electromechanical relays and vacuum
tubes as switching devices for communications and computers to the
2Ibid., p. 60.

The Nature of the Revolution 
9
microchip, four developments stand out as technical drivers of the
information revolution: integrated circuits, computational power
and cost, software, and fiber optics.
Integrated Circuits
The development of integrated circuits on silicon substrates or chips
has probably been the single most important factor in the informa-
tion revolution so far.3 The primary measure of progress in the field
of integrated circuits (ICs) is how many components (or transistors)
can be fitted onto a single silicon chip. Figure 2 shows the exponen-
tial increase in the number of transistors that could be placed on a
single chip between 1970 and the early 1990s for both memory and
microprocessor chips. Extrapolating from the past two decades sug-
gests that chips with about 100 million transistors should be avail-
able by the turn of the century.
The extrapolations seem to be supported by the most recent chip
developments: The Intel 486TM chip introduced in 1989 had 1.2 mil-
lion transistors; the PentiumTM chip introduced in 1993 had 3.1 mil-
lion. Intel's P6TM microprocessor, just being introduced at the time
of this report, has 5.6 million transistors in its central processing unit
and 15.5 million in its associated memory cache. 4 Both of these
numbers for memory and microprocessors fall nicely on the log-
linear extrapolations of Figure 2.
Yet another metric for the density of components on silicon chips is
the decrease in the width of the lines being drawn on the silicon
substrate-such lines being the basis for solid-state devices and their
connections. Here too, progress has been dramatic: In 1971, at the
time of the microprocessor's introduction, engineers were able to lay
3The United States is currently a net importer of semiconductors. In 1992, it had a
semiconductor trade deficit of $3.8 billion. The largest sources of semiconductor
imports are the East Asian newly industrialized nations (NICs) and Japan. The largest
markets for U.S. exports are the East Asian NICs, Canada, and Mexico. The North
American semiconductor market is the largest in the world, with sales of $27.77 billion
expected in 1994. This represents 32.8 percent of the world total. All the above data
are from U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Industrial Outlook 1994, Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, January 1994, pp. 15-16.
4Tom R. Halfhill, "Intel's P6," BYTE, Vol. 20, No. 4, April 1995, pp. 42-58.

10 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
RANDMR560-2
109
108 
0 Microprocessors 
!_
S107 -
" 106 -48T
1--
105 -806
1970 
1980 
1990 
2000
SOURCE: John L. Petersen, The Road to 2015: Profiles of the Future,
Carte Madera, CA: Waite Group Press, 1994, p. 30.
Data source: Regis-McKenna Company.
Figure 2--Transistors per Chip
down lines 6.5 microns wide on a silicon chip. By 1993, lines as nar-
row as one-half micron wide were being drawn.5 Obviously, the de-
crease in line width makes it possible to place more transistors or
other solid-state devices on a given chip. Researchers at IBM have
recently claimed the world's smallest transistor--an experimental
metal- oxide semiconductor field-effect device--with dimensions
measured in terms of one-thousandth of a micron.6
The implications of the development and mass production of inte-
grated circuits have been profound. As the number of components
per chip has risen, so too have the speed and versatility of integrated
5See John S. Mayo, "The Evolution of Information Technologies," in Bruce R. Guile
(ed.), Information Technologies and Social Transformation, Washington, D.C.: Na-
tional Academy Press, 1985, p. 12, and Business Week, "The Information Revolution,"
p. 60.
6John L. Petersen, The Road to 2015: Profiles of the Future, Corte Madera, CA: Waite
Group Press, 1994, p. 29.

The Nature of the Revolution 
11
circuits; but the cost of digital systems has also dropped dramati-
cally, facilitating the spread of computers and digital devices
throughout the workplace into new roles, such as office automation.
Business operations that depended upon bulky mainframe comput-
ers in the 1970s could, by the mid-1980s, be accomplished instead
through flexible networks of micro- and minicomputers. Signifi-
cantly for the future, IC technology is not expected to push up
against its physical limits for some time yet. Optical integrated cir-
cuits, possibly 1,000 times faster than silicon ICs, have been pro-
jected to appear as soon as the turn of the century.7
Computing Power and Cost
As integrated circuits become faster and more dense, computing
power (typically measured in the number of operations or instruc-
tions executed per second) increases and costs decrease, making
computing increasingly accessible. Figure 3 illustrates this accelerat-
ing trend graphically in terms of how many bits per second a 1987
dollar could buy across the 20th century. During the age of mechan-
ical and electromechanical computers-from 1900 to the 1940s-the
amount of computing power that could be purchased for a constant
dollar was increasing sevenfold every decade. During the age of
electronic computers-from the 1940s to the 1970s-this rate had
jumped to a sixteenfold increase every decade. Now the rate appears
to be on an even higher slope, perhaps as high as a 4,000-fold in-
crease in a decade. Even if this projection is optimistic-if we are
witnessing a familiar "S" curve growth pattern near its maximum rate
of change 8-it would seem safe to suggest that computer power per
unit cost is doubling at least every two years and should continue to
do so into the next century.
Perhaps the most important point of this figure is that the phenome-
nal growth of computer power/cost associated with the information
revolution is not a phenomenon associated with the recent technol-
ogy of the 1980s and 1990s. Rather, it is rooted in a remarkably
steady 40-year trend in electronic computing that began to make a
7Ibid., p. 30.
8See Theodore Modis, Predictions, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1992, for historical
"S" curve patterns in the evolution of technologies.

12 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
0 Microprocessor 
RANDMR560-3
109 
0 Integrated circuit 
o
U Microchip 
Slope = 4000x per decade
106 -
Transistor
0 Vacuum tube
0 ýE 
0Relay
E 0 
103 
A Mechanical
0l) oo
a00
•s 
1 
OAA
o 0-
0--c 
A 
Slope 
16x per decade
0) CCt'C 
A1
E~ 
0) 
A0
1 0-6e 
Slope =7x per decade
10-9 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I
1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020
SOURCE: John L. Petersen, The Road to 2015: Profiles of the Future,
Corte Madera, CA: Waite Group Press, 1994, p. 3 1.
Data source: ARPA.
Figure 3-Computing Power per Unit Cost
widespread difference only in the mid-1970s, when computing
power/cost for personal computers crossed the threshold of about
100 bits/second/dollar. At that point, personal computers became
practical in terms of both their capability and cost. Whereas very few
people in 1950-1970 had the opportunity to see computing power
influence their lives, many millions can now see how the growth of
computing power and decreasing computer cost have had an im-
pact, as microcomputers and personal workstations proliferate in
both the office and the home.9
9See the following selections from Tom Forester (ed.), The Information Technology
Revolution, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1985: Sherry Turkle, "The Psychology of
Personal Computers," pp. 182-201; Jack Nilles, "Teleworking from Home," pp. 202-
208; Seymour Papert, "Computers for Children," pp. 229-241; Vincent E. Giuliano,
"The Mechanization of Office Work," pp. 298-311; and A. Richard Immel, "The
Automated Office: Myth Versus Reality," pp. 312-321.

The Nature of the Revolution 
13
Figure 4 illustrates how micro- and minicomputer processing
power-expressed in millions of instructions per second (MIPS)-
has expanded since the introduction of the Intel 8086 microproces-
sor in 1978. In six generations of microprocessors, performance has
increased by over 750 times in 17 years-a growth rate of nearly 50
percent per year. And these extraordinary improvements do not
reflect the even greater increases in computational capabilities now
becoming available through the use of complexes of single-chip
computers in new types of architectures (e.g., parallel processing)
and networks (e.g., the emulation of neural networks).
Software
As impressive as the growth in computing capacity may be, it is not
where most of the excitement of the information revolution is to be
found. The hardware devices of the information revolution-com-
puters, facsimile machines, video and audio recorders and players,
copiers, satellites, etc.-have become the familiar and expected
RANDMR560-4
250 
250+
Since 1978, Intel's x86 processors have
steadily increased in performance. Although
200 -
Dhrystone MIPS are no longer considered a
U) 
good measure of CPU performance, they are
C. 
the only benchmarks that span all six x86
2 
150 -
generations.
a)
Co 
112
Uo
2ý 
100
50
20
0 
0.33 
1. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1
8086 
286 
386 
486 
Pentium 
P6
1978 
1982 
1985 
1989 
1993 
1995
SOURCE: Based on an illustration in Tom R. Halfhill, "Intel's P6," BYTE, Vol.
20, No. 4, April 1995, p. 48. Copyright © by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.
Used by permission.
Figure 4-Trends in Micro- and Minicomputer Processing Power

14 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
background for new ways to access, exploit, manage, move, display,
and store information. For the most part, the hardware devices are
not new in their principles-most are more than 40 years old-they
have only become more widely available and more capable because
of the microchip. The truly revolutionary aspect of the information
revolution-the transforming development-is to be found in the
rapidly burgeoning software industry and its products. 10
Software, not hardware, has been recognized for some time as the
bottleneck of the information revolution. The production of software
in the early decades of electronic computing was limited because of
the kind of software required-systems-control software, as opposed
to applications software-and because of the programming de-
mands-applications require thousands and even millions of lines of
programming code. The systems-control software made the ma-
chines work efficiently internally, but it did little to make the ma-
chines more accessible to nonprogrammers; the applications soft-
ware required to make the machines accessible could (and did)
consume large numbers of expensive programmers.
Now, however, the software logjam is beginning to break. More of
the needed systems-control software is in place, more programmers
are available for the development of applications software, and better
tools-such as object-oriented programming and genetic algo-
rithms-are becoming available to aid programmers and to improve
their products. Software, as opposed to hardware production, is
proving to be the big and profitable business of the information revo-
lution. It is perhaps worth noting that the wealthiest individual in
the United States is a software baron, a mirror of our times, just as
the industrial and land barons flourished when industry or land
dominated the development of the U.S. economy in earlier times.
Fiber Optics
Glass fibers have become the natural communications complement
to the microchip. As electronic circuits and components-for com-
t 0Cursory examination of any computer catalog or store for retail sales to consumers
will quickly reveal that most of the goods for sale are in the category of software, not
hardware.

The Nature of the Revolution 
15
puters and communications-were transferred to silicon, then inte-
grated and miniaturized, switching speeds and frequencies rose
faster than the capacities of wire or radio links. Glass fibers carrying
pulses of light rather than electrons offer the ideal medium for high-
bandwidth transmissions over long distances. Indeed, fiber optic
transmission lines have become effective competitors to satellite
communications, despite the obvious global access advantages of
satellites, mainly because of the enormous bandwidth of light pulses
in glass fibers, but also because of their shorter, more direct links."
Three developments in fiber optics technology have been responsi-
ble for its rapid exploitation by the communications industry:12
"• Producing high-purity and high-strength glass fibers,
"• Optimizing the mode of light wave propagation in fibers, and
"• Determining and exploiting the wavelengths (or frequencies)
that minimize fiber transmission losses.
These developments have led to ever-increasing communications
capacities per fiber and increasing distances between signal ampli-
fiers. Figure 5 shows these trends in terms of the product of capacity
(gigabits per second) and distance (kilometers). Over the last two
decades, this capacity-distance product has been following a trend
line that was doubling each year-by stair-stepping on new tech-
nologies for fibers, detectors, and amplifiers.
Although fiber optics have provided the largest surge in high-quality,
long-distance communications capabilities, improvements in radio
transmissions are coming by exploiting extremely high frequencies.
FUTURE TRENDS
Almost all the trends just described in computation and communi-
cations capacities should continue for at least the next two decades.
IiMany communications satellites are in stationary orbits above the Earth, making the
links between two ground stations a minimum of about 44,000 miles and introducing
a noticeable delay in two-way voice transmissions. A fiber optic link between those
same two stations is significantly shorter and offers a much greater bandwidth.
12Mayo, "The Evolution of Information Technologies," p. 15.

16 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
RANDMR560-5
A Optical amplifiers
0 Coherent detection
2 
104 
A 1.5 gm SF laser
a E 
0 1.3 gm SM fiber
a-• 
103 _ 
0.8 gm MM fiber
.T x
AA
S(D 
102 -
."•
Q_ 
102
.00
-.
101 
Doubles
every year
1970 
1975 
1980 
1985 
1990 
1995
SOURCE: W. Press et al., JASON Global Grid Study, briefing JSR-92-1 00,
July 1992.
Figure 5-Trends in Fiber Optics
Where physical limits loom to block these trends, a look into the lab-
oratories suggests that new media and processes will be opening the
way to even higher limits or potentials. Thus there should be no
significant slowdown in the growth of the information technologies
for the foreseeable future. Indeed, it now seems likely that the ca-
pacities for computing and communications may not slow until they
begin to saturate their markets, perhaps sometime toward the mid-
dle of the 21st century. 13
A portrait of the future can be painted by projections of computing
power, communications backbone capacity, and international con-
nectivity. Figure 6 is an extension of Figure 3. It projects growth
rates in computing power between now and the year 2030, suggest-
13This would follow the patterns observed by Modis in Predictions, for the evolution of
prior transport and communications developments.

The Nature of the Revolution 
17
RAND MR560-6
Six-orders-of-magnitude increase
C- 
109
o 
projected by 2030
4 
106
•"X 
(projection)
103 
o Gallium arsenide
integrated circuit
0 Microprocessor
A Integrated circuit
: 
A Hybrid chip
-- 0 
• 
Transistor
3 no' 
•13 
*Vacuumtube
S106 
03 Electro-mech
" 
10 
U Mechanical
E 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I
0 
10-91
0 
190 0  
1920 
1940 
1960 
1980 
2000 
2020
SOURCE: Hans Moravec, Mind Children: The Future of Robot and
Human Intelligence, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988.
Figure 6-Projecting Computer Power/Cost to 2030
ing that the world will witness a six-orders-of-magnitude increase in
computing power over 40 years. The introduction of the gallium ar-
senide integrated circuit is expected to be an important path into this
projected future. Six orders of magnitude is equivalent to the growth
in computing experienced since the very first electronic computers
of the 1950s. For a more vivid comparison: six orders of magnitude
worth of processing power is greater than the difference between the
capacity of a bee's brain and that of a human being.
The trends in communications capacities reveal a remarkably similar
picture, as shown in Figure 7. The rates of change for both comput-
ing power and communications capacity are following similar
slopes-about 40 percent per year, or doubling every two years-be-
cause the speed of switching is a common factor to the growth of
both. Rapid change is commonplace today, but the rate and dura-
tion of change in computing power and communications capacity

18 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
RAND MR560-7
106
Available
105 -- 
backbone
"o104 --
oo 
3.4 Gb/s
n 
1.7 Gb/s
"6, 103 
-
a 
417 Mb/s
a) 
Subscriber
2 
102 -
90 Mb/s 
services
45 Mb/s
101
10 o
1970 
1980 
1990 
2000 
2010
Figure 7--Trends in Communications Capacities
may be without equals in other human activities. For example, the
widely apprehended changes in human population, depredations of
the environment, or the AIDS pandemnic do not match the steady
rates of change in computing and communications throughout the
last half of the 20th century. Indeed, if one asked what on earth is
changing most rapidly--now and into the foreseeable future--it
would be computing and communications.
The "available backbone" of Figure 7 refers to the capacity of the
communication trunks, which typically carry about 100 times more
traffic than any single subscriber is likely to demand for service.
Thus, the projected trends indicate that the available communica-
tions backbone or "supply" provided by the most advanced technol-
ogy will continue to grow at an extraordinary rate and that the limit-
ing factor will be the "demand"--the ability of users to absorb what is
offered.
The future should also see a continuation of the extraordinary in-
creases in international connectivity via global computer- communi-
cations networks. Figure 8 shows four levels of international con-

The Nature of the Revolution 
19
nectivity-Internet, Bitnet, electronic mail (e-mail) service, and
none-available by country.14 Most of the world now has access to
the Internet. The obvious "holes" are in Africa and the Middle East,
where the connectivity may be limited in capability or nonexistent.
The explosive growth of subscribers to the Internet is chronicled in
Figure 9, which shows the three phases of its evolution-first as the
experimental ARPANet, then during a transition to commercial
services, and then to a global network in the 1990s. Over the span of
30 years since its inception, the network has an average growth rate
of over 70 percent per year. The volatility of growth is illustrated by
the report that the subscribers on the Internet doubled during a six-
month period in 1993.15 If that exceptional rate were to continue
through the end of the decade, the current access of millions would
become billions. That growth rate will necessarily subside in the 21st
century, for the numbers of subscribers would quickly exceed the
world's population.
The political implications of this increasing connectivity are signifi-
cant. It is now feasible for special interest groups to organize, plan,
and coordinate activities from multiple locations around the world.
Transnational "grass roots" movements can now develop and oper-
ate with an ease unimaginable only a few years ago. Unfortunately,
this connectivity is also available to transnational terrorist organiza-
tions and crime syndicates. One consequence will be the creation of
"distributed" threats and conflicts that may diffuse across national
boundaries and originate in special interests independent of any na-
tional government.
OTHER TRENDS AND CONSIDERATIONS
In addition to these principal trends driving the information revolu-
tion, there are some others worth mentioning here. Overall, comput-
ing and communications devices are becoming lighter and smaller,
14The latest edition of this graphic is available from the Internet Society, accessible on
the Internet at the society's home page, located at http://www.isoc.org/.
15petersen, in The Road to 2015, p. 37, asserts that the net "was growing at the rate of
over 25 percent per month. At that rate (which of course cannot continue), every
person in the world would be connected by 1997." Emphasis in the original.

20 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
z
00
C)
v0
E 
w 0
0
)
> 
.5(iw)
CU 0))
U)0
0)
U)0
CL
'0,
0) C . ) I
V-0
0

The Nature of the Revolution 
21
0
C\I
(D
U)
co 
02 
a 
0)
0 
a
z 
t 
Z30 a) 
Z5
02 
-.- 
-W 
_c 
_ 
o
LL. 
> 
-
, 
0,
z 
z 
-
-.
.
-
IU1 
f-"
qllccl< 
02 
.....-- 
-
0) 
0
-
,-- 
0.
04 
0) 
C)
Ž
Sco 
CL'
0 
0 
C0 
CL
0 
0c 
0 
0) 
O
0 
_0
s 
o 
CC 
02
~0 
)0------
I2 
C-02
02 
0) 
O
U) 
Q) 
LD 
~
Q) 
ca 
0 
2
t2 
.2 
0
0) 
0)
0) 
a) 
0 ----------- -------- - - - - - -- - I
02
02
o 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
-~
0 
8 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0~
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0 
0 
Z D
0ý 
0 
, 
0
0 
U-
SISOql jjlOul

22 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
and they are consuming less power. This is making them more prac-
tical for use in mobile operations, both commercial and military.
In the commercial world, design and development cycles for new
information technology products are noticeably shortening-with
new devices going from concept to the store shelf in months-in
order to saturate markets before imitations or competing devices can
be produced in quantity. This trend stands in contrast to special-
purpose military information systems for which-because of greater
demands for reliability, durability, performance, and documenta-
tion-development cycles are destined to be longer than those of
their nearest commercial counterparts. As a consequence, military
information devices can end up being further behind the state of the
art, more expensive, and therefore available in lesser quantities than
those of their commercial equivalents. The expedient purchase of
commercial hand-held Global Positioning System navigators during
Operation Desert Shield is a celebrated example of the military
turning to commercial products to maximize its exploitation of in-
formation from a military satellite system. In the future we should
expect to see similar examples with portable computers and com-
munications devices. More importantly, this trend suggests that
potential enemies almost anywhere in the world may be able to re-
sort to commercial information devices and thereby gain competi-
tive or even superior capabilities.
Another important trend is that the computing and communications
market, like many others, is now a global market. With enough
money, virtually any group can obtain state-of-the-art computing
and communications technology-if not from one nation or sup-
plier, then from many others. One implication of the emergence of
the global market for computing and communications is that the
U.S. military's comparative advantage over future opponents is less
likely to come from superior hardware than it is from more advanced
software and operational and organizational concepts.
The information revolution will most likely continue at its current
rate for at least twenty more years. During that period, the pace of
developments for advanced societies will be increasingly set by the
demand side of the equation, as opposed to the past dominance of
the supply side. That is to say, the ability to design new concepts for

The Nature of the Revolution 
23
uses and users to exploit the available technology will be more of a
barrier than the growth of the enabling technologies themselves.
It is quite possible that new breakthroughs could accelerate the in-
formation revolution beyond the trends projected above. One pos-
sibility is emerging from a field within the computer sciences com-
monly referred to as "artificial life." Some researchers believe that
programming might be revolutionized through the use of "genetic
algorithms" that can, like genes in an organism, be selectively "bred"
to combine superior software elements to create new and innovative
types of programs automatically and rapidly.16 
In the field of
communications, some see similar promise in the coming of a new
switching technology called Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM),
which divides information into 53-byte packages, codes them, and
sends them out at very high speeds-up to 20 gigabits per second. 17
From the technology trends alone-even before we take up their
implications for political, economic, social, and military enter-
prises-it is apparent that the information revolution is not mis-
named: The changes are enormous in scale, breadth, and duration.
They are certain to introduce profound structural changes in almost
all human endeavors. And they will just as certainly remind us of Ja-
cob Bronowski's warning about the nature-indeed the very defini-
tion-of revolutions: ' 8
From its earliest beginnings, when it was still dependent on water
power, the Industrial Revolution was terribly cruel to those whose
lives and livelihood it overturned. Revolutions are-it is in their
nature, because by definition revolutions move too fast for those
whom they strike.
Like all revolutions, the information revolution will produce excesses
and victims. During its ascendant phase, it has been trumpeted by
its heralds and condemned by its skeptics. After its peak and assimi-
lation in the first quarter of the 21st century, it will disappoint some
16Business Week, "The Information Revolution," pp. 64, 68.
17Ibid, pp. 72-73.
1 8jacob Bronowski, The Ascent of Man, Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1973,
p. 286.

24 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
and be blamed for disasters. 19 But the enthusiasts and detractors will
neither make nor break the flood of changes that are now trans-
forming the world before our eyes. As was true in the Industrial
Revolution or the Renaissance, the quality of the changes may be rel-
ative or subjective; but the magnitude and scope of change will be
undeniable.
The pace of change will vary throughout the world and by groups. It
is evident from Figure 8 that the connectivity of the worldwide net-
work is much less in Africa and the Middle East than in North Amer-
ica and Europe. Some groups, for cultural or religious reasons, may
have a greater reluctance than others to use modern computing and
communications. Some groups may find themselves economically
unable to acquire the latest electronic devices and software. So the
information revolution may be an uneven phenomenon across the
globe or across the country. And in that unevenness may lie addi-
tional stresses upon societies-whether they are "surfing on the net"
or are left behind, by choice or not.
19For phenomena to be found on the leading and trailing edges of revolutions, see
Carl H. Builder, Patterns in American Intellectual Frontiers, Santa Monica, CA: RAND,
N-2917-A, 1990, particularly pp. 20-23.

Chapter Three
SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS
The societal implications of the information revolution are both per-
vasive and profound. Prior revolutions-industrial, political, and
social-may justly claim the same, but none before have conveyed
power so widely or quickly downward to individuals, not just to a
new set of elites. Political revolutions have sometimes diffused
power more widely-as in the American Revolution-but most often
they have transferred power from one elite to another. The revolu-
tionary changes introduced through gunpowder diffused power from
the castled and armored knight to a larger cadre of cannoneers and
musketeers, but the transfer of power was from one very small elite
to a somewhat larger elite. The information revolution is remarkable
in part because it is diffusing the power of almost unlimited infor-
mation to any and all who seek it. Not all may seek or elect to exploit
the emerging abundance of information, but it is there for the taking,
and the power it conveys depends only upon the creativity, imagina-
tion, and boldness of the individual. Never before in human history
have so many had such easy access to so much potential power for so
many diverse purposes.
This chapter sketches some of the major societal implications of the
information revolution-changes in geopolitics and commerce that
are largely due to the development of the information technologies.
Not all of these implications are certain or irreversible, since they
have not yet played out, and not all can be laid entirely at the
doorstep of the revolution; but most observers do foresee major
changes in social structures, commerce, and the international sys-
tem.
25

26 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
The union of computers and telecommunications is making vast
amounts of information available to large numbers of people who
simply did not have such access even a decade ago. Access to over-
flowing information storerooms by groups, peoples, and organiza-
tions around the globe is facilitated by four characteristics of infor-
mation that set it apart from physical commodities:I
" 
Information is not resource-hungry; it can often be exploited to
conserve the use of physical resources.
" 
Information is easily transportable; it moves around the world on
the wings of energy too small to be sensed without instruments.
* 
Information is diffusive; it leaks like a universal solvent despite
great and continuing efforts to contain or restrict its spread.
" 
Information is shareable wealth; it seldom costs and often profits
an individual to share information with one or many others.
In comparison to most industrial processes and their products, the
dissemination of information requires negligible energy or other
physical resources. Modern telecommunications make the transport
of information a trivial matter-as we can see daily in the seamless
operation of global equity and currency markets. Information, by
human nature and by its own, tends to "leak" more readily than
physical commodities. Monopolizing a physical resource is easier
than monopolizing even a niche in the global information market;
and as physical commodities find global markets-such as oil-the
possession of physical resources counts for less and market informa-
tion counts for more.2
The diffusion of power downward to individuals through the rapid
spread of information on a worldwide basis is having three first-
order effects. It is
'Harlan Cleveland, "The Twilight of Hierarchy: Speculations on the Global Informa-
tion Society," in Guile (ed.), Information Technologies and Social Transformation, pp.
56-59.
2See Peter Schwartz, The Art of the Long View, New York: Doubleday/Currency, 1991,
pp. 47-60, for his story of the anticipation of a global oil market by Royal Dutch Shell.
Shell realized, before the event, that dealing in a global oil market through information
could be more profitable than extracting the oil. When the global market emerged and
eroded the power of OPEC, Shell was ready with its trading plans and arrangements.

Societal Implications 
27
"* weakening traditional hierarchical structures,
"* facilitating many types of transnational enterprises, and
"* eroding some traditional prerogatives of national sovereignty.
Each of these first-order effects is developed further below.
A WEAKENING OF HIERARCHIES
Hierarchical organizations have been a salient characteristic of hu-
man civilization; they are the basis upon which most authority,
power, and command and control have been exercised for millen-
nia.3 But the information revolution is weakening these structures
through two different processes:
" 
The shift from relative poverty to abundance in information per-
mits individuals to bypass hierarchies that have-deliberately or
inadvertently-controlled or limited information.
" 
Alternative human organizational forms-based mainly on the
network-have proved more effective and efficient for transact-
ing information than hierarchies. In information-intensive en-
terprises, hierarchical organizations may not be competitive with
networks.
An example of the first process, bypassing, is to be found in the
breakdown of the nuclear family in the information era. Before the
flood of information through television, children acquired most of
their information through hierarchical structures in the family,
church, and school. Their parents, clerics, and teachers could con-
trol what children saw, read, or heard. Television short-circuited
those controls. If some parents were determined to control access to
that attractive and compelling medium in their own homes, they
could not control it in the homes of others.
3The authors are indebted to RAND colleague David Ronfeldt for his insights into the
relationships between different kinds of human organizations and the transactions at
which they excel. The hierarchy has proven itself throughout human history to be the
superior organizational form for the transaction of authority, power, and command
and control. Tribes, markets, and networks excel at distinct kinds of transactions.

28 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
Businesses, particularly those at the cutting edge of the information-
intensive enterprises-computing, entertainment, and brokering-
found that their networked employees could and would bypass their
hierarchical business organizational structures. The tools of the
trade-networked computers or other information devices, like fax
machines-enabled employees to jump over divisional and eche-
loned barriers to get the information they needed to do their jobs,
without the paper trail so characteristic of bureaucratic hierarchies.
An example of the second process, competitiveness in information-
intensive enterprises, is to be found in the computer industry itself.
Self-networked teams have proved superior to hierarchical business
structures in developing new software and hardware. 4 The Holly-
wood film industry and the Nashville music industry-both
quintessential information enterprises-have always been organized
more as networks than as hierarchies. But the assaults upon hierar-
chies-whether in the form of bypassing or competitiveness-are
bound up with the nature of the information revolution, which is
empowering individuals with uncontrolled and uncontrollable in-
formation and increasingly shifting the content of enterprises from
physical to informational commodities.
During the industrial era, 5 commercial organizations learned to
adopt the hierarchical structure of the military as the most efficient
way to organize individuals and allocate resources to control their
markets. 6 With economies built mainly on the conversion of physical
resources such as coal, steel, and petroleum to physical products,
commercial industries dealt constantly with scarcity, bulk, limited
substitutability, high transportation costs, and the risks of hoarding.
Hierarchical institutions, with clear lines of authority and stark dis-
tinctions between superior and subordinate, were better suited than
4See, for example, Tracy Kidder, The Soul of a New Machine, Boston: Little, Brown,
1981.
5For the United States, the industrial era began in the foundries and machine shops of
New England in the 1850s and lasted until the middle of the 20th century, when
rampant industrialism was foreclosed by labor, tax, and antitrust laws. On the Euro-
pean continent, the industrial era came somewhat earlier and lasted longer.
6 Bracken briefing to the workshop on December 7, 1993, and Michael Hammer and
James Champy, Reengineering the Corporation: A Manifesto for Business Revolution,
New York: Harper Business, 1993.

Societal Implications 
29
family or collegial relationships for ensuring economic growth and
market equilibrium. 7 And since most labor during the industrial era
was performed through repetitive operations-conducted according
to rigid standard operating procedures-hierarchical organizations
were both logical and efficient. 8 The hierarchy thus became the
preferred form of organization not only for militaries, but also for
businesses, civil service bureaucracies, political parties, and the
media.
Today, as the wealth production in the most advanced economies is
increasingly derived from information rather than physical re-
sources, hierarchical business institutions are becoming relatively
less competitive. In the United States in the year 2000, as much as 66
percent of the work force will be working in information-related
areas.9 Where they are organized according to hierarchical princi-
ples, they will find themselves and their companies less competitive
than those adopting more network-like structures. Not only will
hierarchically organized businesses find that their organizations no
longer reflect their actual processes, they will find much of their
structure to be a burden rather than an asset to productivity and
competitiveness.
Throughout the developed world, many traditional hierarchies will
be weakened as a result of the information revolution. Both the abil-
ity and the need to filter information before it reaches the individual
are declining in most parts of the world. In addition to large corpo-
rate hierarchies, one can expect social institutions, the established
media, and many parts of governments and militaries to be af-
fected. 10 These other hierarchical institutions are not immune to the
forces behind the information-driven changes now so evidently
transforming commercial organizations.
7See Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., and Herman Daems, Managerial Hierarchies: Compara-
tive Perspectives on the Rise of the Modern Industrial Enterprise, Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press, 1980, and Max Weber, The Theory of Social and Economic
Organization, Talcott Parsons (ed.), A. M. Henderson and Talcott Parsons (trans.),
New York: Oxford University Press, 1947.
8For an organization theory perspective on this issue, see James G. March and Herbert
A. Simon, Organizations, New York: Wiley, 1958.
9Cleveland, "The Twilight of Hierarchy," p. 57.
l0Ibid., pp. 55-79.

30 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
There are two structural reasons why power is shifting away from
traditional hierarchies and toward individuals. First, the information
processing and filtering roles performed by many levels within tradi-
tional hierarchies have become obsolete. The advent of the global
media and networks has greatly reduced the value added by multiple
layers of information processing between the individual and the
source of information.1" Individuals can now sort through reams of
unprocessed information and make their own assessments and de-
cisions about its worth. Hierarchies need no longer serve as the ex-
clusive conduit of information to the individual.
Second is the changing nature of the work force in advanced
economies. As shown in Figure 10, information workers have out-
numbered manual workers in the U.S. economy since the mid-
1970s-the threshold of the most recent phase of the information
revolution. Information workers generally do not need the structure
or control provided by traditional hierarchical organizations, since
their jobs require them to innovate and adapt on a daily basis. 12
Indeed, they operate most efficiently when they are given the auton-
omy to attack problems with their own independent approaches.
Traditional hierarchies were designed to manage manual workers
who mostly followed standard operating procedures each and every
day. As the proportion of these workers drops in most national
economies, the power and presence of traditional hierarchies will
decline.
More and more human transactions in the developed world will be
centered on the efficient exchange of information and commodities,
and those will rely more on networks and markets than on hierar-
chies. The preferred commercial organizations of the future are
likely to be those with comparatively few management or "control"
layers and in which production employees operate in autonomous
"llHammer and Champy, Reengineering the Corporation. Also see Robert G. Eccles
and Richard L. Nolan, "A Framework for the Design of the Emerging Global Organiza-
tional Structure," in Stephen P. Bradley et al. (eds.), Globalization, Technology, and
Competition: The Fusion of Computers and Telecommunications in the 1990s, Boston:
Harvard Business School Press, 1992.
12For a discussion of how computers are creating new organizational possibilities, see
James D. Berkley and Nitin Nohria, "The Virtual Organization: 
Bureaucracy,
Technology, and the Implosion of Control," Harvard Business School Working Paper
92-033, 1992.

Societal Implications 
31
RAND MR560-10
60
S- Manual laborers
-ý5 
50
0
40 
Information workers
40
30
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 
85 
90
Year
SOURCE: Theodore Modis, Predictions, New York: Simon & Schuster,
1992, p. 257.
Figure 10-The Growing Proportion of Information Workers
in the U.S. Economy
multidisciplinary teams.13 More of their workers will need to inno-
vate on a daily basis. Managers in such organizations will manage
more through motivation, exhortation, and incentive rather than
solely through authority, mandates, and directives. The previous
statements notwithstanding, hierarchies will not disappear, because
social order will always require human transactions having to do
with authority, power, and command and control. Indeed, in most
fields of human endeavor, organizations will probably tend to evolve
into hierarchy/network hybrids in which certain key functions will
continue to be carried out in a hierarchical fashion. But in a break
from the past, the network "component" of these hybrids will be
significant.
The survival of hierarchical forms in many organizations will be due
to the fact that management and administration are about more than
13SeeBusiness Week, "The Horizontal Corporation," December 20, 1993, pp. 76-81.

32 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
just information flow. They also have to do with ensuring that bud-
gets are adhered to, employees follow certain standards of conduct,
timelines are met, clients are kept apprised of the firm's activities,
the capital stock is kept up to date, and accurate market analysis
occurs. At least some of these tasks will need to be carried out in a
hierarchical manner.
In general, it seems plausible to make the argument that functions
that are time urgent and require reactive behavior will tend to be
executed by groups that are relatively hierarchical in nature, while
those that are less time urgent and allow for proactive behavior will
be relatively more networked. For example, in armies one would ex-
pect the fire support function to stay hierarchical. This is because its
command-and-control arrangement must be capable of responding
rapidly to complicated and ever-changing lists of different classes of
targets. On the other hand, echelon above division (EAD) combat
service support (CSS) functions may well turn out to be organized
more as networks, because there is somewhat less time urgency in-
volved and commanders can be a bit more proactive. They can de-
cide for themselves, for example, which units ought to have priority
for depot repair service before a major offensive begins. These ex-
amples are only general illustrations, but they serve to demonstrate
that hierarchies will never be entirely swept away.
One final cautionary note is in order. The shift from hierarchies to
hybrids (and in some cases to pure networks) will occur at an uneven
rate around the world because of cultural/developmental factors. In
the nations of North America, Western Europe, and Northeast Asia,
the change is taking place fairly rapidly. But in areas like the former
Soviet Union and the Middle East/Persian Gulf, for example, the shift
may take considerably longer (and in some countries it may never
occur). 
It is difficult to imagine the Iranian, Iraqi, Russian, or
Ukrainian militaries adopting networked forms of command and
control in the near future.
FACILITATING TRANSNATIONAL ENTERPRISES
Some observers proclaim that the information revolution is creating
a borderless world in which transnational activities will proceed

Societal Implications 
33
without friction.1 4 Although this assessment is probably extreme, it
is true that the development of information technologies is facilitat-
ing all sorts of transnational enterprises that heretofore have been
limited by communications and information. Perhaps the starkest
example is to be found in the growth in the size and power of the
global foreign-exchange markets.
Before the 1970s, national central banks had substantial control over
the prices of most major goods through their ability to manipulate
interest rates and intervene in foreign currency markets. By the
1990s, however, the advanced state of computing and telecommuni-
cations technology had shifted some of the power from national cen-
tral banks to the global currency market, which now trades over $1
trillion worth of currency per day.1 5 The global currency market has
become something of an independent actor on the world stage,
sometimes forcing national governments to adjust their financial and
monetary policies to prevent currency devaluation. Transnational
networks of this magnitude could not exist before the world reached
the current levels of reliable, near-instant, and almost limitless in-
formational connectivity.
The feasibility of transnational activity allows large firms to disperse
their operations across the globe. A maker of personal computers
can, for example, now place its manufacturing plant in Europe, its fi-
nance division in the United States, and its marketing staff in the Far
East. Such an arrangement would put it at no disadvantage com-
pared to a competitor with all its operations in one city. Moreover,
the dispersed enterprise can take advantage of talent, tax codes, and
labor and physical resources that may vary from one part of the globe
to another. This facility for global dispersal makes it easier for large
corporations to avoid tariffs, unfavorable tax laws, and excessive reg-
ulation in certain countries by simply moving facilities to more ap-
pealing business environments. Strategic partnering between large
14The best example of this school of thought is found in Kenichi Ohmae, The Border-
less World: Power and Strategy in the Interlinked Economy, New York: Harper
Business, 1990.
15Gregory J. Millman, The Vandals' Crown: How Rebel Currency Traders Overthrew the
World's Central Banks, New York: Free Press, 1995, p. xi.

34 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
firms, especially in high-tech industries, is yet another consequence
of the increasing ease of transnational activities. 16
Unfortunately, the increased feasibility of transnational enterprises
has a dark side as well. Transnational terrorism and organized crime
are both facilitated by transnational communications networks and
global markets for commodities. 17 New kinds of illicit associations
are made possible-between traditional political guerrilla or terrorist
groups on the one side and religious fundamentalist groups and or-
ganized crime syndicates on the other. For example, there is evi-
dence of at least one of the ethnic factions in the Yugoslav civil war
(the Muslims) becoming involved with drug-smuggling operations.
Even more disturbing are the reports that the Italian and Russian
Mafias may be organizing international networks to sell weapons-
grade nuclear materials from the former Soviet Union to the highest
bidder. 18
The issues of possible future transnational terrorism and organized
crime point up the fact that there is indeed a "downside" to the in-
formation revolution. Along with the numerous benefits it has
spawned there are substantial risks. The large, interdependent
computer networks that now control many important public infra-
structures (air traffic control systems, financial market records, en-
ergy grids, telecommunications networks) could be vulnerable to
sudden, catastrophic failures that would not have been possible one
or two decades ago. Such failures need not even be the result of foul
play. While the greatest threat of "info catastrophes" will probably
come from the deliberate attacks of terrorists, one must not discount
the possibility that natural disasters (such as a large earthquake) or
simple human error could generate such events. In today's world,
there is less time available to prevent the occurrence of such disas-
ters once an initial mistake or disruption has damaged part of an in-
terdependent network system.
16Ohmae, The Borderless World, pp. 114-136.
17Graham H. Turbiville, Jr., "Operations Other Than War: Organized Crime Dimen-
sion," MilitaryReview, January 1994, pp. 35-47.
18Seymour M. Hersh, "The Wild East," The Atlantic Monthly, June 1994, pp. 35-47.

Societal Implications 
35
In addition to the greater opportunities created for nefarious trans-
national enterprises and info catastrophes, there is also the more
general concern about increasing social instability in some nations
as a result of the information revolution. As power diffuses down-
ward to individuals, it is possible that the weakening of traditional
lines of authority and traditional hierarchies will create systemic
pressures toward a period of global instability, one in which the dif-
ferent types of political actors in the international system grope their
way toward an understanding of their place in the coming order.
ERODING NATIONAL SOVEREIGNTY
The traditional powers of the nation-state will suffer somewhat as a
result of the information revolution. It is very likely that the nation-
state will remain the most powerful actor in international events for
the foreseeable future. However, nation-states will increasingly find
their powers curtailed by the availability of information to those who
reside both within and outside their borders; and those powers that
remain will increasingly have to contend with nonstate actors who
are acquiring power through the availability of information. Typi-
cally, hierarchical institutions become the victims of abundant
information, while networks thrive on it. Since so many of the insti-
tutions of the nation-state are hierarchical and so many of the
transnational organizations are networked, the net flow of power to-
day tends to be out of the nation-state and into nonstate actors.
Nation-states still have the advantages of the disproportionate con-
centration of power they built up over the past three centuries, as
well as the inherent "neatness" of the international political order
they can produce. Only tomorrow will reveal how far this shift in
power will go, who the principal challengers to the nation-state will
be, and, indeed, what may be the fate of the nation-state.
The areas in which national governments now have considerably less
control than they did before the information revolution include
"* Currencies and their valuation
"* Markets and prices
"* Businesses and their regulation

36 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
" 
Borders and the movements of people and commodities across
them
" 
Information available to their publics
Currencies are now traded on global markets that can ignore what
national governments may say about their value. The important
commodity and product markets have gone global; they are no
longer heavily subject to the policies of national governments or
even cartels of national governments. Only where the sources of
commodities are extremely limited in the world-such as the sources
for diamonds-can national governments or cartels succeed in con-
trolling prices. Even though much of the world's oil flows out of the
Persian Gulf, there are enough other global sources at only
marginally higher costs to keep Persian Gulf producers from exercis-
ing much control over prices. In a global market, other producers,
standing idle, will come on line with small changes in prices.
Multinational corporations are free to move operations from one site
to another, depending upon where they find favorable situations for
their operations. Production plants are increasingly in excess,
standing by for more favorable circumstances to reinstitute produc-
tion. If Brazil, say, threatens to increase taxes on a certain produc-
tion plant, the multinational corporation may remind the Brazilian
government that the company has an idle plant in Spain where the
production can be quickly transferred, at the invitation of the Span-
ish government offering favorable terms. In effect, the multinational
corporations can play off national governments in seeking favorable
conditions, with the governments bidding against each other in or-
der to solve their unemployment problems and, hence, ensure their
own political survival.
Borders have become porous: The Italians find themselves trying to
keep the Albanians from coming across the Adriatic after watching
"la dolce vita" on Italian television. The French look with concern
across the Mediterranean to North Africa, where masses threaten to
quietly invade their shores. The United States struggles to stem the
tide of people who would leave their prospects in Mexico, Central
America, and the Caribbean for the opportunities they perceive to
the north. Information is driving these tides. More and more people

Societal Implications 
37
know what is going on in the world and how the rest of the world
lives, and they have decided to vote with their feet.
The rise of international television news networks (such as CNN and
BBC), fax machines, and global computer networks makes govern-
ments less able to control the dissemination of information, even
though many have shown that they would if they could. Regimes
that depended on information control to maintain their legitimacy
are being swept away by the disenchantment of newly aware and
mobilized polities. The very rapid, almost catalytic collapse of the
Soviet bloc in 1989-1991 is testament to the inability of most totali-
tarian regimes to both retain their political control and become a
part of the global economy. 19 Today, the information revolution
permits "information control" regimes to survive only on the side-
lines of the international system. Iraq, North Korea, and Cuba still
maintain national policies of information control, but these states
are relegated to the margins of the current world economy and may
not outlive their current leaderships.
Nonstate actors both "above" and "below" the nation-state in geo-
graphical scope are now exercising influence on national govern-
ments. Many of the world's environmental and social problems have
passed beyond the scope of the nation-state. The world increasingly
looks to transnational or supranational organizations 20 to solve
problems that have roots in the actions or failures of national gov-
ernments. At the same time, the inability of most governments to
control the dissemination of information means that subnational
political groupings can use information "to exert power against their
governments, societies, and institutions." 21 This power is reflected in
the growing numbers of ethnic conflicts around the globe-some of
which are attributed to the collapse of totalitarian regimes of the
19Carl H. Builder and Steven C. Bankes, "Technology Propels European Political
Change," IEEE Technology and Society Magazine, Vol. 11, No. 3, Fall 1992, pp. 10-17.
2 0As used here, a transnational organization is one that operates across and largely
independent of nations; a supranational organization is one that derives its powers
through and from a group of nations. By these definitions, Amnesty International is
transnational, and the United Nations is supranational.
21Gladys D. Ganley, "Power to the People via Personal Electronic Media," The Wash-
ington Quarterly, Spring 1991.

38 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
Cold War, 22 which themselves were victims of the information revo-
lution.
Although it is common to project the future enemies and threats to
the nation-states as other nation-states, the future could well be one
in which the principal threats to the established nation-states are
subnational and transnational groups that seek nation-state status
(or at least substantial autonomy) for themselves. This is certainly
the pattern evident in most of the current conflicts around the
world-in the persistent violence of Kurdistan, Kashmir, Chechnya,
and Bosnia.
It is not yet clear whether the supranational forces tending toward a
more orderly world or the subnational forces tending toward a more
chaotic world will be favored in the first half of the 21st century.
There is some evidence that the process of diffusing power favors the
subnationals. The supranationals are acquiring power from the
nation-states only to the degree it is granted by them. The reluctance
of the nation-states to grant power to the supranationals is evident in
the bumpy roads to the formation of the European Economic Union
and the military capabilities of the United Nations. On the other
hand, subnational groups tend not to wait for the granting of such
powers: Quebec or the Kurds will not; they would seize power for
themselves at the expense of the nation-state.
TRANSFORMATION OF COMMERCIAL ORGANIZATIONS
The business world is perhaps the most transparent laboratory of the
information revolution. Driven by the imperatives of economic
competitiveness rather than the preservation of political power, free
from the paralysis of contending special interest groups, large corpo-
rations are reshaping themselves to take advantage of the opportu-
nities presented by the growth in information technologies-even as
those technologies threaten the power of hierarchical bureaucratic
structures elsewhere.
2 2William A. Stofft and Gary L. Guertner, Ethnic Conflict: Implications for the Army of
the Future, Carlisle Barracks, PA: U.S. Army War College, March 14, 1994.

Societal Implications 
39
Despite the devotion of many articles in current business journals to
organizational changes attending the information revolution, change
in U.S. corporate structures is not new and did not suddenly start in
the 1970s. For a century, from about 1870 to 1970, U.S. business un-
derwent a major transformation, typically from the family-owned
single plant serving and dominating a local market to the stock-
holder-owned complex of plants and divisions serving, shaping, and
competing for national markets. The constant during this century of
change was the dominant corporate objective of controlling the mar-
ket, first local, and later national. If markets could be controlled-
created, shaped, or dominated-profits would follow. The natural
organizational structure for this objective of control, proven by the
military, was the hierarchy. 23
Throughout the century of change that preceded the information
revolution, the hierarchical organization in U.S. business spread and
deepened. As businesses and their markets grew in size and com-
plexity, more specialized training and more detailed standard op-
erating procedures (SOPs) were required for increasing levels of
management. Hierarchical management structures became taller
and required more SOPs, and corporations trained cadres of special-
ized professional managers. The result was an increasing number of
middle managers who mostly controlled and processed the flows of
information between production workers and senior executives. The
earliest information technology, electronic data processing, became
available in the 1950s and 1960s and was used mostly to expand the
spans of control in the traditional corporate bureaucracies.
After the mid-1970s, most major U.S. corporations (as well as some
foreign firms) began to view information technologies differently.
The new business environment was largely defined or characterized
by four developments:
Global markets emerged that could not be controlled by a na-
tionally oriented business. Increased international competition
(especially from Japan) forced many large U.S. companies to look
for innovations as a way of insuring their survival. The margin
2 3Bracken briefing to the workshop on December 7,1993.

40 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
for error in markets like automobiles and semiconductors shrank
substantially as international competition increased.
" 
The evolving social environments in many of the advanced
countries of the Northern Hemisphere, with their increased tol-
erance for less capable and dependable workers (evidenced in
drug use, crime, and a decline in the quality of public education),
required business leaders to reconsider the nature and depend-
ability of their labor pool.
" 
The increased accessibility of information technology through
the workstation, microcomputer, and office automation offered
new opportunities for reorganizing business processes and their
use of labor.
" 
As shown in Figure 11, the relative cost of labor began to rise in
comparison to the cost of capital.
In response to these new realities of the 1980s, Western commercial
organizations began to rethink their mode of operations more deeply
than they had since the late 19th century. Large firms have become
more flexible and less layered, and they rely on smaller but more so-
phisticated blue-collar work forces. Layers of middle management
have been eliminated, making firms less vertical in nature. In many
companies, process has been placed ahead of function in corporate
values. The main organizational unit in a traditional corporation
used to be functional departments, e.g., finance or marketing. To-
day, innovative firms are restructuring their organizations around
process, i.e., combining all of the functions required to produce a
single product-design, development, production, and marketing.
The structure of these firms is centered on multidisciplinary
(multifunctional) product teams that handle all aspects of a single
product, from product conception to closeout. Such teams are ap-
parently responding more rapidly to market changes than are tradi-
tional hierarchical and functional corporate structures.
Before the full flowering of the information revolution and the global-
ization of markets, most U.S. corporations saw diversification as a
safety net for market uncertainties and changes as they sought to
control their business environments. Healthy divisions in diversified
firms could "carry" divisions with weak markets; divisions could
provide crossover support to their siblings for needed expertise or

Societal Implications 
41
RANDMR560-11
500
Ratio of total labor compensation costs
400 
per unit of output to the blended cost
of debt and equity financing
300 
.
200
100 :
Index:
1982 
100
0 
• 
l~l 
1111 
1 
I~l~l 
rll 
1111 
,111, 
1 
iiit~l
1980 
81 
82 
83 
84 
85 
86 
87 
88 
89 
90 
91 
92 
93
SOURCE: Business Week, "The Information Revolution 1994," May 18,1994,
p. 107. Data from Regional Financial Associates.
Figure 11--The Rising Cost of Labor
commodities. So long as the objective was controlling national mar-
kets under national laws, diversification was worth its costs in coor-
dination and excess capacity.
But global markets intensified competition and removed the rules
that permitted control of markets. The result is a return to focused
business practices, including the concept of core competencies. The
shortened design and product cycles made possible by computer-
aided design and automated production make it imperative for firms
to master a few key areas. Fierce competition means there is no time
to diffuse energy and human capital by trying to absorb new busi-
nesses on a regular basis. Many contemporary business consultants
now argue that the most important function of modern managers is
to identify and cultivate a firm's core competencies.
The role of the business manager has also been transformed by the
information revolution. Managers used to, almost exclusively, tell
workers what to do and how to do it. Management by directive was
the norm, and the directive was usually based on established stan-

42 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
dard operating procedures. But the proliferation of advanced infor-
mation systems, the reduction in product cycles, and increased
competition have made management by directive unsuitable in
many situations in many industries. Now, as workers become fewer,
more specialized, and more sophisticated, the manager's role has
come to include the frequent use of facilitation instead of directive.
It is now often the case that the manager's most important duty is to
ensure that workers have the tools, resources, and autonomy to do
their jobs properly. Managers still need to exercise their authority by
directive for certain purposes, such as ensuring compliance with new
regulations or guidelines, but this model of management is no longer
applicable in all contexts.
With all of these changes in markets, the availability of information,
and the roles of managers and workers, it is not surprising that new
organizational forms have come into vogue. Much experimentation
is evident. The "flattening" of hierarchical management structures is
only a reactive response; the search for a replacement for the hierar-
chy-in theory and practice-is a hotly debated business issue. New
organizational concepts have sprouted, with flamboyant names like
the "pizza pie" (clusters of units like pepperoni on a pizza), "shooting
stars" (new product units flying off from the parent to their own des-
tinies), and "shamrock" (for the leaf-like arrangement of contributing
elements) .24
One of these new concepts, the shamrock organization, whatever its
merits may be in practice, is worthy of further discussion here (as it
was during the workshop) because it vividly illustrates some of the
fundamental changes in business, commerce, and society described
above. The shamrock organization, shown in Figure 12, derives its
name from the arrangement of its three major components like the
leaves of the shamrock. 25 The center leaf is the relatively small core
of permanent professional employees who make the company what
it is and will be. The right leaf is the contingent work force, who are
temporary employees hired or contracted for production or other
functions of the company, only as they may be needed. The left leaf
24See Business Week, "The Horizontal Corporation."
2 5The description of the shamrock organization provided here is derived from the
Bracken briefing to the workshop on December 7, 1993.

Societal Implications 
43
RAND MR560-12
Professieonal
employees
ContrctorsContingent
E otatr 
work force
A divestiture of responsibilities for people?
Figure 12-The Shamrock Organization
is the contractor-suppliers, who have a longstanding, symbiotic, and
intimate relationship with the company.
Today's information revolution has decreased the value of many
types of employees to corporate leaders. Moreover, government
regulations have increased the burdens of hiring, firing, and main-
taining employees on the payroll. The shamrock organization seeks
to create a leaner, more efficient corporation by removing many
types of nonessential, unskilled, and seasonal jobs from the perma-
nent payroll. The permanent workers-both blue- and white-collar
employees-are those the company knows it will always want and
will be able to employ productively, even as products and markets
change.
Temporary workers become much more numerous as positions re-
garded as nonessential (e.g., routine maintenance or clerical work) or
subject to fluctuation (production-related) are farmed out to "temps"
who must look elsewhere for their benefits and job security. If these
benefits and security are not provided by other firms that supply the
temporary employees, then that burden may fall upon the govern-

44 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
ment. This arrangement also tends to cut the temporary employees
off from access to career development and promotions within the
company-the common path for many unskilled workers to the de-
velopment of skills and to the achievement of middle class economic
status. In this sense, the shamrock organization allows companies to
shrug off the social burdens they had accepted before the informa-
tion revolution and global markets-when they were controlling
their national markets with the cooperation of national govern-
ments. This is a striking example of how globalization and informa-
tion have broken a century-old bond between business and the state
in U.S. commerce.
The wealth-generation activities of the corporation come to be per-
formed by a small group of information managers and skilled pro-
duction workers (the professional core). The contractors are those
who enjoy a semipermanent relationship with the company in pro-
viding goods and services in ways that are most beneficial to the
company's purposes-not necessarily at the lowest price. An exam-
ple of the symbiotic relationship between company and contractors
is provided by the supplier of batteries to a Japanese automobile
manufacturer: The battery supplier may not supply batteries at the
lowest price, but the supplier carries each battery on its own inven-
tory costs until it is actually installed on a car on the production
line-which means that batteries in the storage racks at the produc-
tion plant are the property and inventory cost of the supplier. If pro-
duction should halt, the inventory burden of the batteries is carried
by the contractor-supplier. 26 Thus, the contractor shares in the
production risks of the company and has every incentive to keep in-
ventory costs to a minimum, while the company has an obligation to
treat the contractor as a partner in the mutually beneficial sharing of
information.
Although the shamrock organizational concept is only one of several
ideas currently being advanced for the future of the corporation, its
emphasis on reducing the permanent payroll of employees to a
minimum skilled core in order to reduce fixed costs is not an
2 6Another example of this practice is provided by the wily Henry Ford, who insisted
that his battery supplier provide batteries in specifically dimensioned wooden crates.
The supplier subsequently learned that Ford was knocking down the boxes and using
the wood, without further cutting, as floorboards for his Model T automobiles.

Societal Implications 
45
anachronism. The information revolution has had the effect of en-
abling fewer workers to produce more and has also reduced the value
of many manual-labor positions. 27 The political, economic, and
social consequences of this clear trend for large sections of the U.S.
labor force are likely to be enormous and mostly unhappy.
2 7An example of the devaluing of labor by computers is provided by the use of hand-
held computers by car rental firms for returning vehicles: The parking lot monitor
needs only to key in the car's mileage and the contract number; the computer pro-
vides the rest of the information and prints out the billing receipt. This is a case where
the computer degrades the skills required of the parking lot monitor to a few hours of
instruction and eliminates the need for a counter check-in attendant.

Chapter Four
LAND WARFARE IMPLICATIONS
Before turning to the principal workshop task-identifying new
operational and organizational concepts for the U.S. Army evolving
from the revolution in information technologies-the workshop par-
ticipants spent some time discussing how the revolution might
change the Army's "business": the changes in the nature of warfare,
particularly land warfare, and in the roles of the Army and its client,
the U.S. government, as they relate to conflicts. The observations
produced by these discussions in the workshop were somewhat dis-
parate in nature, but some overlapping themes were discernible:
" 
The context-the world and the American society-in which the
Army will confront conflicts and warfare is likely to change as a
result of the information revolution even more than the U.S.
Army or the technology it brings to bear. The larger changes
being wrought in the context and nature of warfare by the revo-
lution in information technologies will require more than tech-
nological responses by the U.S. Army.
" 
To take advantage of the opportunities being afforded by the new
age of information abundance, the Army will need to alter its
organizational and operational modes of behavior. The infor-
mation revolution is changing warfare most profoundly not
through the introduction of new weapons but through the emer-
gence of new modes of conflict.
" 
The opponents of the future will present challenges because the
new geopolitical environment is fostering types of contingencies
and opponents for which the U.S. Army may not be doctrinally
prepared. Some of these types of contingencies may be similar
47

48 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
to those we have not handled well in the past (e.g., Vietnam-type
insurgencies).
The Army cannot afford to focus its doctrinal thought, over the
long run, on the standard MRC scenarios for Korea and South-
west Asia that now serve as the basis for U.S. defense planning.
While these standard scenarios may (or may not) be an appro-
priate benchmark for force planning over the next couple of
years, the long-term tests that will be the most stressful for the
U.S. Army will be those involving warfare under novel circum-
stances and against new types of actors-circumstances and ac-
tors that have been made possible by the information revolution.
These themes are developed in greater detail, separately, below.
MORE THAN APPLYING TECHNOLOGY
The advances in the information technologies are only a few of many
variables influencing the future of war, and that influence may ap-
pear less on the battlefield than in the transformation of societies
and why and how they become antagonists. Perhaps the more im-
portant variable to consider on the battlefield is not the use of the
new technology, but the facilitation by technology of asymmetric
doctrines and strategies for U.S. opponents.
Although information technology will be an increasingly important
element in military science, it is only one of several working to shape
the battlefields of the future, as shown in Figure 13.1 For example,
the increasing precision and range of modern weapons, when cou-
pled with continuing improvements in sensors and information pro-
cessing, will certainly be among the foremost factors considered by
American military planners as they define the future battlefield and
the weapons and doctrine they need. But those factors may not be
the ones to dominate outcomes in future conflicts if the U.S. Army
finds itself fighting mostly against enemies who pursue asymmetric
objectives and employ asymmetric doctrines.
1This argument is found in Sam Gardiner, "Planning for the Next Quarter Century:
What in the World Is an Air Force to Do?" unpublished paper, March 1993.

Land Warfare Implications 
49
RAND MR560-##
* Information technologies are but one source of the many changes
- We ignore the others at our peril
* Potential reactions to U.S. military capabilities
- Parallel: improved PGMs (fight fire with fire)
- Direct: better air defenses (fight fire with water)
- Passive: dispersion (remove the fuel for the fire)
- Asymmetrical: special operations (Smokey Bear)
* Asymmetries in objectives and doctrines may count for more than
technological advantages
- Most potent when combined with selective, opportunistic
exploitations of technology
Figure 13-Battlefield Transformations
U.S. military planners will not see the true measure of an opponent
by looking first or last at the opposing technological capabilities.
This is a trap into which the U.S. military has fallen on several occa-
sions in the past (the Vietnam War being only the most glaring ex-
ample). More important than technological comparisons are poten-
tial asymmetries in doctrine and objectives. This may be especially
true in the aftermath of Desert Storm, where all the world-enemies
and allies alike-took careful note of how the United States used its
military power. Most potential U.S. opponents around the world
now realize that it would be futile to challenge the American military
with regular forces on a conventional battlefield, and if they haven't
already, they will almost certainly devise plans for matching their
particular areas of strength against areas of perceived U.S. weak-
ness-as they may have perceived it in Bosnia or Somalia.
Opponents who have unorthodox doctrines or unconventional ob-
jectives will be more difficult to deal with than adversaries who op-
erate in a conventional Western military mindset. To cite an obvious

50 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
example, the United States faced more vexing problems in its mili-
tary efforts to unseat General Aidid in Mogadishu than it did in
crushing the Iraqi military during Desert Storm.2 The Iraqi military
was technologically far more sophisticated than Aidid's militia was.
However, while the Iraqis followed orthodox Soviet military doctrine
(which the U.S. Army understood very well), Aidid and his supporters
did not seek battlefield victory or defense in the traditional sense.
Instead, they aimed at
" 
embarrassing the United States and the United Nations politi-
cally through the international media,
" 
employing guerrilla tactics in a densely populated urban area
and using unarmed crowds to shield their militia from attack by
U.S. forces,
" 
exploiting the weaknesses of the opposing multilateral force that
were created by widely varying capabilities and modes of opera-
tion, and
" 
acting more quickly than the cumbersome command structure
of their opponents and using Somali civilian employees at UN
and U.S. facilities as sources of intelligence.
Adversaries with asymmetric doctrines and objectives could be even
more formidable in the future if they are able selectively to employ
"niche" technologies to complement their operations.3 
Cellular
telephones come to mind. There was some concern about their use
in the Los Angeles riots of 1992 to coordinate looting operations.
When cellular telephones exploit satellites rather than terrestrial an-
tennas (e.g., as proposed by Motorola), they will become more diffi-
cult to counter and more widely available where there is no equiva-
lent surface infrastructure (i.e., local ground antennas). Taken to the
extreme, one could imagine a situation in which a subnational,
2American efforts to hunt down and capture Aidid climaxed in the bloody Mogadishu
battle involving the Army Rangers on October 3-4, 1993. A brief account of this
engagement is presented in "Firefight From Hell," Newsweek, October 18, 1993, pp.
39-43.
3A "niche" technology is defined here as one for which the user need not develop a
broad technology base in order to exploit an available, state-of-the-art technology on
the battlefield. The effective use of the Stinger missile by Afghan rebels is an example.

Land Warfare Implications 
51
network-organized opponent with lightweight, portable communi-
cations devices was able to "get inside" the decision-time cycle of
U.S. Army forces in a certain engagement and respond to breaking
events faster than the local U.S. commander could. Selected biologi-
cal weapons, accurate theater ballistic missiles, and Global Position-
ing System (GPS) receivers are additional examples of the types of
niche technologies that a cunning opponent could use as part of an
asymmetric military response to U.S. operations.
As a way of energizing their thinking about asymmetrical responses
to U.S. military capabilities, the workshop participants were invited
to consider four fundamentally different responses by an opponent,
as listed below. 4
"Parallel reactions are those in which the opponent tries to obtain
weapons comparable in kind and quality to those of the adver-
sary. In a parallel counter to U.S. tactical fighter strength, for
example, an opponent would try to procure state-of-the-art air
superiority fighters armed with sophisticated air-to-air missiles.
This is the type of response for which the U.S. military prepared
itself in the Cold War; it is now one of the least worrisome be-
cause there are no adversaries on the horizon who could mount
across-the-board "parallel" challenges to the U.S. military.
" 
Direct responses are those in which the opponent moves to ac-
quire weapons that are intended to be the most effective and ef-
ficient counters to the adversary's strength, not necessarily in
kind or quality. A direct counter to U.S. tactical fighter strength
might be the procurement of a state-of-the-art surface-to-air
missile (SAM) network to deny U.S. military forces the use of the
air.
" 
Passive responses are those in which the opponents move to
make their target set less vulnerable to the adversary's weapons.
This might be done through dispersion, hardening, mobility, de-
ception, and concealment. The passive option may be attractive
to U.S. opponents in the future because of the demonstrated ca-
pabilities of precision-guided weapons in the Gulf War. Few
4Sam Gardiner, "The Character of the Future Battlefield and the Role of Information,"
briefing delivered at RAND, Santa Monica, on December 7, 1993.

52 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
could fail to observe the stark difference between the U.S. capa-
bilities for precisely striking buildings or bridges and those for
finding and attacking mobile SCUD launchers.
Asymmetrical responses are those in which the opponent moves
to shift the foci of a conflict to areas of comparative advantage.
Terrorist attacks or even nuclear strikes against several major
U.S. air bases in the theater of operations are obvious examples
of an asymmetric response. Here the enemy would use weapons
or tactics to neutralize U.S. power without directly engaging that
power on the terms for which it was designed.
SHEDDING MIDDLE LAYERS
Since militaries are in the "business" of transacting power, a hierar-
chical organizational scheme will almost certainly remain the domi-
nant management structure in militaries everywhere, despite the
information revolution. But this does not mean that military hierar-
chical structures are immune from being bypassed or becoming un-
competitive in their present form as the effects of the information
revolution take hold. The high vertical hierarchies so characteristic
of militaries may have to be abridged; in some activities or functions,
hierarchies may have to tolerate networks in order to exploit or re-
main "competitive" in the information age.
The ever-increasing power of communications and information pro-
cessing, when coupled with the battlefield computer networks,
makes it feasible for very small units (say, battalion size and below)
to communicate directly with theater headquarters. As in businesses
with an abundance of information at all levels, there is now less value
added and substantial time lost as certain types of information pass
through middle echelons and standard operating procedures on
their way from small front-line units to higher headquarters. 5 The
implications are that, over the long term, middle levels of command
5Air defense of the battlefield is an example of a function that has, for some time, been
vulnerable to the time lost in passing information through successive command
layers. The "uncompetitive" nature of the command arrangements for air defense has
escaped rectification only because it has not been tested in battle and shown to be
unworkable.

Land Warfare Implications 
53
may shrink somewhat in size and functions, and smaller units may
operate more freely and autonomously on the battlefield.
An extreme illustration of these possibilities is to be seen in the
Swedish military's "cell concept" for deployment and employment of
its forces for defense. Although the cell concept is only that-a pro-
posed concept and not an implemented organization of Swedish
forces-and although it is proposed for defensive operations only,
the idea illustrates just how much modern communications and in-
formation systems could change military organizations. The concept
is illustrated as an overlay on a map of Sweden in Figure 14.6
The Swedes are in the process of developing an experimental military
doctrine around the cell concept. It presumes the use of small au-
tonomous units, roughly of battalion size, equipped with multi-
purpose and air defense missiles and backed up by vertical/short
RAND MR560-14
Cell Structure
Kolen
Mts. 
Packet radio
0 
100 
• 
Output antenna
0 
100
Ume 
0 
32 high-tech commandos
o 
B16 
multitarget missiles
, 0 
8 close ground-to-air missiles
0 
Gulf of 
4 long-range ground-to-air missiles
L 
otkeaDummy 
platoons
Vanern
"o 
Gotland 
VSTOL Aircraft
ake 
9Island
Va ter 
6 to 8 multitarget missiles
Baltic 
2 to 4 air-to-air missiles
SSea
Figure 14-A Swedish Defense Concept
6This figure was presented in Sam Gardiner's briefing "The Character of the Future
Battlefield and the Role of Information," December 7, 1993.

54 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
takeoff and landing (VSTOL) aircraft. Each cell is responsible for de-
fending a fixed geographic area. These units would not fight in a
coordinated linear fashion, but instead would use surprise, decep-
tion, and favorable terrain to engage an attacking enemy at a time
and place of the defender's choosing. Information technology en-
ables each cell to keep abreast of the direction of the theater cam-
paign and to determine what it must do to positively influence that
campaign. The concept would seem to be a direct military transla-
tion of several new commercial business practices cited in the previ-
ous chapter as consequences of the information revolution. The
Swedes are able to contemplate such a concept because of (1) chan-
nelized terrain and (2) a potential opponent (Russia) having lots of
heavy armor/mechanized forces with long supply trains that would
be vulnerable to hit-and-run attacks by small, autonomous com-
mando teams.
The applicability of the concept to U.S. military operations is prob-
lematical at best. The Swedish concept is designed for use by a state
that plans to be on the defensive and has no hope of outright victory
over a superior foe (in this case, Russia). The Swedish idea is well
suited to a deterrence-through-punishment strategy with a force de-
signed to inflict as much pain as possible upon the enemy before it is
itself ultimately defeated. At most, the concept shows how far mili-
tary organizations might be driven by technology and circumstances
toward the structures and operating philosophies now being adopted
by business organizations in response to the information revolution.
The workshop participants referred often to the concept, not because
of its merits for U.S. defense planning, but because it reflected a
possible future for several of the world's armies.
WHO IS THE ENEMY?
It is not likely that the end of the Cold War and the rapid expansion
of communications and computational capabilities are unrelated.
The sudden collapse of the closed communist regimes may have
been one of many consequences of the information revolution; those
regimes simply could not compete with expanding Western
economies and remain closed. And if they did not remain closed-
and doing so was a daunting task at best in a world flooding with in-
formation-then their leaderships could not retain their power.

Land Warfare Implications 
55
World markets proved to be much more efficient in the transaction
of commodities than closed hierarchical systems.
Before the threshold to the latest phase of the information revolution
was crossed in the mid-1970s, facilitating global markets, it was not
at all clear that the closed, centrally controlled economies of the
communist world were inferior to the free-market economies of the
West. Some in the West feared that central control could lead to
more efficient or effective use of resources, particularly for military
uses. It took the emergence of global markets to demonstrate that
free markets would bury hierarchical structures in the race for the ef-
ficient distribution of commodities and the expansion of economies.
And, ultimately, the ability to support healthy militaries depended
upon healthy economies.
This transformation of the world by interrelated developments-the
collapse of closed societies, the abundance of information, and the
globalization of economies-will doubtlessly change the nature of
conflict. The collapse of the closed societies has unleashed sup-
pressed ethnic conflicts. Abundant information and global markets
have facilitated the proliferation of weaponry and grievances. But
more importantly, all these developments have transformed the ends
or purposes of war.
The wars of colonial and industrial nations have typically been about
the taking of land and its resources or plants and their workers.
World War II and the Persian Gulf War were such wars. Germany in-
vaded Poland for Lebensraum; Japan invaded Southeast Asia for its
rubber and oil resources; Iraq sought the territory and resources, first
of Iran and then of Kuwait. As the Soviets defeated Germany, they
sought German factories and workers as their prize. The United
States has defined its policies and military to fight such wars of ag-
gression and, for the most part, has fought them successfully.
But new kinds of conflicts are emerging that are not about these tra-
ditional ends or purposes, and American policies and its military
have fared less well in them. More conflicts are about externally im-
posed divisions of societies (Palestine, Korea, Vietnam, and Kurdis-
tan), self-determination (Algeria and Afghanistan), and ethnic
grievances (in the former Yugoslavia and Caucasus). For the most
part, the intervening or imposing nation-states have not been suc-

56 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
cessful in quelling or resolving these conflicts. This is not to say that
traditional types of wars between nation-states over territory or re-
sources are obsolete, only that new types of conflict are emerging as
the norm, and they will test the capabilities of those military organi-
zations configured mainly to wage traditional types of war.
The abundance of information has revealed new geopolitical fault
lines and instabilities and has empowered new political actors who
hitherto had enjoyed little influence on the world stage. Interna-
tional connectivity-in communications, commerce, and trans-
port-has facilitated the proliferation of modern weapon systems.
Proliferation is occurring with both conventional weaponry and
weapons of mass destruction.7 It is easy for buyers and sellers to
connect in the global market.
The principal effect of these trends is the empowerment of nonstate
actors in international conflict. As modern weapons become easily
obtainable and the traditional nation-state advantages of sovereign
territory and industrial capital decline somewhat in their impor-
tance, nonstate actors will gain the capability to engage nation-states
in conflict with some hope of winning their less traditional objec-
tives. Nonstate actors have the advantage of being able to compose
themselves in the form of "distributed, multilocated" threats to
nation-states. By assuming a transnational quality, nonstate actors
will be hard to "fix and destroy." Their lack of a territorial base will
make them elusive opponents-difficult to threaten and almost im-
possible to deter in a conventional sense. Some of these realities can
already be seen in the current activities of international terrorists,
separatist movements, and organized crime syndicates.
A SPREADING MISSION SPECTRUM
The spectrum of missions the U.S. Army will be called upon to per-
form in the future will broaden. The workshop participants believed
that although the information revolution may not eliminate the need
7For a now somewhat dated look at nuclear weapons proliferation, see Leonard S.
Spector and Jacqueline R. Smith, Nuclear Ambitions: The Spread of Nuclear Weapons,
1989-90, Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1990. For a broader look at the proliferation
problem, see Brad Roberts, "From Nonproliferation to Antiproliferation," Interna-
tional Security, Vol. 18, No. 1, Summer 1993, pp. 139-173.

Land Warfare Implications 
57
for the U.S. Army to fight and win MRCs, it will also thrust new mis-
sions upon the Army, vexing missions that could force the Army to
change parts of its organization and concepts. A forcing function in
the widening spectrum of missions comes from the information
revolution-the increasing capability of the global media to cover
events in remote areas of the world in near real time. A large public
audience in the United States and the West has easy access to
graphic images of suffering in parts of the developing world undergo-
ing political turmoil and/or humanitarian disaster. The impact of
natural disasters-floods, earthquakes, and famines-as well as the
humanitarian consequences of failed nation-states, communal vio-
lence, and warlords are now plainly evident for the world to see. U.S.
policymakers can be forced by political pressures from an increas-
ingly diverse and informed public to take action in response to tele-
vision images.8
The power of media images to generate military missions has a major
implication for the future of the U.S. Army's structural balance be-
tween combat and supporting elements. Since World War II, the
American military has thought of itself as being in the force projec-
tion "business." Force projection has always required supporting
infrastructures to be projected as well, but the image and focus was
on force projection as the sharp point of the spear rather than infra-
structure projection. Indeed, military power projection has become
almost synonymous with force projection, when in fact power pro-
jection has always depended upon being able to project both forces
and infrastructures. 9 The growing sector of the mission spectrum-
disaster and humanitarian assistance, peace making, keeping, and
enforcement-requires more infrastructure than force projection.
Even the force projection requirements for such missions are more
likely to be in the form of constabulary rather than combat duties.
8There is a growing literature on the different types of "nonstandard conflict" arising
in the developing world and the former Soviet bloc. Some examples of this literature
are Lawrence Freedman, "Weak States and the West," The Economist, September 11,
1993, pp. 38-40; Gerald B. Helman and Steven R. Ratner, "Saving Failed States," For-
eign Policy, No. 89, Winter 1992-93, pp. 3-20; and Stofft and Guertner, Ethnic Conflict,
op. cit.
9For example, the projection of military forces onto the European continent in the
Normandy invasion of World War II required a prior, enormous projection and
buildup of infrastructures in England.

58 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
Some infrastructure projection missions-like those for domestic
disasters-will occur in fairly orderly environments, but even more
will take place overseas in anarchical venues where nothing con-
structive can be accomplished until civil order is restored. Order
restoration requires Army forces to control local violence, keeping it
below some threshold of acceptability. In many cases, it will not be
practical to try to eradicate all civil violence, since the forces or mea-
sures required to do so will be beyond the tolerance of a watching
American public. Violence control or suppression for the Army will
increasingly come to resemble the work of many big-city police de-
partments in the United States. These departments are often un-
dermanned and cannot hope to eliminate all violence in their juris-
dictions, and therefore they focus their energies upon the more
limited goal of violence reduction and containment to acceptable
levels.
This kind of mission, which seems likely to increase rather than
shrink in the future (this statement would seem to be justified by the
recent surge in U.S. Army infrastructure projection operations, e.g.,
support engineers building roads in Somalia, water purification units
deployed to Rwanda, and civil affairs teams supervising rural devel-
opment in Haiti), poses a serious challenge to Army values as they
have evolved since World War II. Throughout the Cold War-and
especially during the last two decades-the Army has sought to in-
culcate all its people with the "warrior ethic," in the belief that the
primary mission of the U.S. Army is to fight and win large conven-
tional wars. Thus, as infrastructure projection missions become
more salient, the Army faces two troubling challenges:
" 
Structural: Whether the supporting units required for infrastruc-
ture projection, which have traditionally been sized by the needs
of the combat forces, will in the future have to be sized by the
changing demands of the mission spectrum.
" 
Values: Whether the focus of the Army will remain on its readi-
ness to fight and win wars and the warrior ethic or shift toward a
broader conception of military service and an ethic of military
professionalism in many roles.

Land Warfare Implications 
59
WAR AS THEATER
After the first day of the workshop, one of the participants1 ° offered a
metaphor for warfare in the information age:
War in the future may take on many of the characteristics of impro -
visational theater. The military will find itself on a stage with other
actors, before a watching world and domestic audience, without a
shared script, and little control over the other actors or the audience
reactions.
Although any metaphor can be taken too far, this one struck the
workshop participants as being particularly apt for capturing the
coming environment and rich in its implications for the future. Ter-
rorism has long been recognized as theater more than warfare: acts
of terrorism are aimed at their effect upon an audience more than its
victims. That the information revolution could be causing warfare to
trend toward theater seemed to be a new and interesting idea to pur-
sue.
The metaphor was not proposed as another call for the U.S. military
to be more aware of public relations as a dimension of war; the Pen-
tagon and the Army clearly understand that message. In Desert
Shield/Desert Storm, the U.S. military was quite aware of the impor-
tance of public relations to the conduct of its effort in the Persian
Gulf. Rather, the metaphor suggests that planning and scripting mil-
itary operations in the future will become increasingly more difficult
and problematical than they were in the Persian Gulf War. Even
there, the metaphor could be seen in the abrupt policy changes when
that war changed from "good theater" (bombs going precisely down
building airshafts) to "bad theater" (bombs penetrating a bunker that
also sheltered civilians and the so-called highway of death leading
out of Kuwait City).
The metaphor may be most pertinent to ground forces because they
are involved in the forms of conflict that are likely to remain the most
accessible to the news media, and which tend to be more intimate,
1 0Steven C. Bankes, a RAND information scientist and author on the implications of
the information revolution.

60 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
human, and graphic than the engagements of air and naval forces.
Modern telecommunications links make it likely that all American
ground combat actions-whether large-scale operations like Desert
Storm or small squad-sized fire-fights as in Mogadishu-will be tele-
vised globally in real time. Events may force commanders to act ex-
temporaneously to prevent a situation from becoming "bad theater"
that could quickly turn the Army's "audience" (the American polity)
against the mission. In Somalia, Americans watched "good theater"
(soldiers feeding children) turn into "bad theater" (an American body
being dragged through the street). Bad theater produces policy
changes by audience demand.
The war in Vietnam evokes the metaphor. The North Vietnamese
may have appreciated their improvisational theater role better than
their adversaries. The Tet Offensive in Saigon in 1968 was an exam-
ple of "bad theater" for the U.S. Army. The images of the U.S. Em-
bassy being stormed by Viet Cong sappers after almost three years of
intense Army operations in South Vietnam shocked audiences at
home. Whatever the facts of the offensive or the balance of forces,
the American audience expected a different scene; the pictures said
that the reports of American successes could not be trusted.
Throughout the war, the Army's inability to respond to events by de-
parting from its "prepared script" of attrition warfare contributed to
American disenchantment and eventual withdrawal from that con-
flict. Today, the information revolution has created a larger audience
for each of the Army's performances; it also gives the Army less time
than ever before to adapt its script to avoid an unfavorable scene.
As modern conflict acquires many of the characteristics of improvi-
sational theater, the U.S. Army will need to learn how to adapt the
script rapidly. This does not imply that censorship of the media is
necessary or desirable, only that the Army should realize that the
media images emanating from a given combat action may be more
important than the action's outcome. Adaptability, not scripting, is
the key to success in improvisational theater. The workshop partici-
pants agreed that the level of "script adaptability" embedded in Army
plans will increasingly be the predictor of success or failure for its
military operations.
The improvisational theater metaphor assumes a special importance
when the Army must engage a nonstate actor. Aggressive nation-

Land Warfare Implications 
61
states, like Iraq, are easily cast as villains. But nonstate actors pursu-
ing nonstate objectives, such as self-determination, may not be so
easily typecast. Then there is the risk that sympathizers will work
through the news media to cast the military intervenors as the vil-
lains. The enormous relative power of the United States automati-
cally inclines audiences to be critical of its actions; it is easily made
into a villain for many in the world audience. This kind of "casting"
by the partisans in a conflict playing to an audience is all too evident
in Bosnia. And since the audience is increasingly diverse in its ori-
gins and affiliations, even within the U.S. public, the chances that
any combatant will find an audience are increasing. To be made the
villain in the play is almost certainly to be made the loser.
Finally, the improvisational theater metaphor offers a chilling warn-
ing for the Army if it is called once again onto the stage in large-scale
domestic disorders that exceed the resources of local law en-
forcement and National Guards. In the information age, such a con-
tingency will be a "command performance" for the Army under the
intense scrutiny of the American public. It will be a media event,
where every good and bad scene will reverberate within the society
and its military. It will be a performance above all performances in
which the Army will want to be proud of its restraint and control, of
its competence and good sense, and of its training and preparedness.
"Bad scenes" coming out of a domestic disorder could severely dam-
age both the Army as an institution and American society as a whole.
It is the theater to which the Army least wants to be invited, but the
one by which it might be most quickly and severely judged by an
American audience.

Chapter Five
OPERATIONAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL CONCEPTS
The workshop participants considered several dozen operational and
organizational concepts that they thought were
"• Different from the Army's current concepts,
"• Stimulated or facilitated by the information revolution, and
"• Of sufficient merit to note and discuss.
Of those, the authors have selected six that they judged to be repre-
sentative of the ideas raised in the workshop, distinct from one
another, and worthy of presentation in the summary briefing of the
workshop to TRADOC and in this report.
Although the workshop sessions were specifically organized to look
for operational and organizational concepts appropriate to both
MRCs and LIC operations, those distinctions were not helpful to the
discussions. The participants found that their thinking was neither
facilitated nor constrained by consciously addressing levels of con-
flict. Instead, in brainstorming fashion, they used one concept or
problem to stimulate consideration of another. Similarly, although
the participants were encouraged to look for concepts at the opera-
tional and tactical levels, most of their thinking remained above the
tactical level-at the strategic and operational levels. That higher
level of conception was probably an artifact of the limited tactical
experience and academic orientation of most of the workshop partic-
ipants.
The six operational and organizational concepts presented in this re-
port are
63

64 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
"* Soldiers as Sensors,
"* Information Carousel,
"* Agile Defense/Lodgment,
"* Network Army,
"* Franchised Combat Units, and
"• An Army of Armies.
These six concepts are representative of operational and organiza-
tional concepts, both pure and mixed. Two of the concepts (Soldiers
as Sensors, Agile Defense/Lodgment) are purely operational con-
cepts; they deal exclusively with different ways of using forces. Two
(Network Army, An Army of Armies) are principally organizational
concepts; they are about new ways of structuring future forces. And
two are hybrids of operational and organizational changes: one
(Information Carousel) is a different organizational concept for in-
formation that requires changes in operational command and con-
trol, and the other (Franchised Combat Units) is a different opera-
tional concept that requires changes in organization. Collectively,
they cover the spectrum of the ideas pursued in the workshop.
None of the concepts were examined in any detail by the workshop
participants; the emphasis was on identification and rationale, not
on feasibility or effectiveness. If it was not obvious to the partici-
pants, the proponent for an idea was asked to explain what that con-
cept had to do with the information revolution-a challenge that
tended to suppress "pet" ideas for improving the Army that had little
or nothing to do with the subject of the workshop. Each of the six
concepts described below is expressly rooted in developments of the
information revolution-either in new capabilities or in new patterns
of enterprise.
SOLDIERS AS SENSORS
The "soldiers as sensors" idea arises from the observation that a gap
is opening between the rapidly developing computing and commu-
nications technologies on one hand and sensor technologies on the
other. Computer and communications capacities are doubling

Operational and Organizational Concepts 
65
RAND MR560-##
Roots in the information technologies
- Continuing exponential growth in computing and communications
capacities
- Relatively slower growth in sensing capabilities
* Concept
- A soldier on the battlefield may become more valuable as a
sensor than as a source of firepower
- Long-range firepower can be centrally controlled but targeted
through distributed soldier-sensors
* Implications
- Organizational: small units, lightly armed?
Sensors are the bottleneck, not communications
Figure 15-Soldiers as Sensors
about every two years; sensor capacities-in numbers or bandwidth
or sensitivities-are increasing, but not at such a high rate. If these
trends continue, which seems likely, then sensors, not communica-
tions or computing, will be the bottleneck on information from the
battlefield.
The best broad-bandwidth sensor on the battlefield may be the sol-
dier, not a coupled electronic device.1 The soldier has eyes, ears, and
a nose as sensors that can be intelligently and autonomously directed
toward battlefield events of interest to the soldier (for survival) and to
higher echelons (for battle management). Aided by augmenting
devices, like low-light-level optics, the soldier can, with the human
brain, provide the preprocessing of information needed to di-
1A coupled electronic device here refers to a physically responsive device coupled to
an electronic signal generator. The device might respond to received light, acoustic,
chemical, or heat energy, but its output would be an electronic signal for subsequent
processing and interpretation. A microphone and a video camera are coupled elec-
tronic devices, as the term is used here.

66 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
rect and focus for the acquisition of battlefield information. It may
be a long time, if ever, before the broad-band sensor technology in
practical systems can match those of the augmented soldier.
Since firepower on the battlefield comes increasingly from long-
range systems that can be centrally controlled and precisely targeted,
firepower provided directly from the soldier may become less impor-
tant than the information the soldier can provide to higher levels that
can allocate and target the firepower. At the limit, one can imagine
the principal role of the soldier on the battlefield as a sensor-a
source of information-rather than a shooter. Distributed firepower
may become less efficient than centrally controlled firepower be-
cause distributed firepower, by its very distribution, may not be at
the right place and time; whereas centrally controlled firepower,
supported by distributed soldiers as sensors, can be brought to bear
in its entirety at the right place and time as judged by the highest
levels of command in the battle. 2
The implications of soldiers as sensors are several: As sensors, their
principal mission would be to provide information, not to engage the
enemy. That implies that units should avoid detection and contact,
if possible; that, in turn, implies smaller, more lightly armed units.
Rather than carrying firepower designed to engage and defeat an en-
emy, their arms might be oriented toward self-defense and escape.
Their main equipment would be augmenting devices for their senses
(e.g., optical enhancers, navigation receivers) and stealthy commu-
nications to relay their acquired information. But the information
they would relay to higher echelons might be only a small fraction of
what they observe, because one of the greatest values of the soldier
as sensor is the soldier's ability to discern what is pertinent. Where
2An idea that is perhaps somewhat similar to "Soldiers as Sensors" is found in Kenneth
B. Watman and Daniel P. Raymer, Airpower in U.S. Light Combat Operations, Santa
Monica, CA: RAND, MR-457-AF, 1994. The authors of this report propose to reduce
U.S. infantry casualties in light contingencies by shifting U.S. tactics away from close
combat with enemy infantry. This would be done by linking U.S. infantry closely to a
new airborne fire support system. U.S. infantry would use a target acquisition system
capable of calculating the GPS coordinates of enemy infantry during fire-fights and
then feeding those coordinates to circling transport aircraft outfitted with 350-pound
glide bombs equipped with GPS guidance receivers. The transport aircraft would then
deliver their glide bombs directly upon the enemy units.

Operational and Organizational Concepts 
67
automated sensors provide a flood of information-little of which
may be pertinent-soldiers can preprocess what they relay.
There is an analog for this preprocessing in the human eye: The eye
does not send on all the information it receives to the brain. The
retina of the eye consists of not only sensors but enormous numbers
of interconnected preprocessing cells that reduce the information
received to information that is pertinent to human functioning, such
as edges or movement. 3 The brain does not have to deal with the full
flood of information coming into the eye, but only with pertinent
information processed through the retina. Similarly, with the soldier
as a sensor, higher headquarters do not have to cull through the full
flood of information available to the soldier, only the pertinent in-
formation processed by the soldier.
Detecting and locating the enemy is a challenging tactical mission
for the Army. In Desert Storm, this problem was manageable be-
cause the desert terrain was favorable for detection of the enemy at a
distance from the air and the ground. But in forested, hilly terrain
like that in Bosnia, in canopied jungle as in Vietnam, or in urban ar-
eas like Mogadishu, finding the enemy, especially when he operates
in small units, is difficult at a distance. Once the enemy is spotted,
precision-guided weaponry makes successful attack much more
likely. While the adage "To be seen on the battlefield is to be killed"
may be an oversimplification, it is not far off the future mark when
one observes the advances in military technology that are and can be
made available to the U.S. Army.
Soldiers as sensors would force a doctrinal emphasis on the areas of
military technology (mobile communications and deep fires) where
the U.S. Army enjoys advantages over all likely enemies. Simultane-
ously, it would move Army doctrine away from close combat in in-
fantry meeting engagements, where most American technological
advantages are nullified and the heaviest U.S. casualties can be sus-
tained.
3See Hans Moravec, Mind Children: The Future of Robot and Human Intelligence,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988.

68 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
INFORMATION CAROUSEL
This concept was stimulated by the nature and use of the global
computer networks, particularly the Internet. These networks are
providing access to anyone with a computer, a telephone line, and
software for network entry. The network does not discriminate
among its users by nationality, race, sex, or age; anyone may access
its riches (and its trash) in information and add one's own. The in-
formation that resides on the network can be read by all and "pulled
down" into one's computer for storage or further use by anyone who
chooses to do so. Any individual can "post" a message to any other
individual on the net by address, or can broadcast a message to any
and all interested by posting a message to hundreds of public places
on the net where others may go to read information posted there on
a particular subject.
A seeker of information can post a question on appropriate elec-
tronic "bulletin boards" throughout the network. Hundreds, perhaps
thousands or, eventually, millions, may see the question, and those
with answers or advice may elect to respond. The responses can be
RAND MR560-##
* Roots in the information technologies
- Near-universal access to the networks
- Networks as a living encyclopedia
- Software to navigate in a sea of information
* Concept
-
A network carousel of battlefield information
-
All units (field and HQ) upload the carousel with location, status,
intelligence, directives, per doctrine
- All units pull down only needed info
* Implications
- Security: reliance upon technical advantages?
- Chain of command: foreshortened?
The edge is in the management of information
Figure 16-Information Carousel

Operational and Organizational Concepts 
69
surprising: A question may stimulate answers ranging from replies
by world experts on the subject to nonsense and insults. The recipi-
ent may have to sort through the range, but the information available
in those responses can be the best and latest in the world-for free
and with astonishing speed. Some who "surf" on the Internet have
observed that it is rapidly becoming the world's best living encyclo-
pedia of information because of the knowledge resident in the minds
who monitor and contribute to the net. A printed, published ency-
clopedia may present the views of one expert; the network can pre-
sent several. The printed words become dated over months and
years; the network words may be the latest available knowledge only
hours or minutes old.
But practical questions arise:
Q. How does one know what information is correct on the net-
works?
A. The same way that humans have always had to sort through in-
formation-good and bad-long before the information revolu-
tion: by comparing the information received against other in-
formation, by checking with experts.
Q. How does one find the needed answer in this overwhelming sea
of information?
A. Through software that is increasingly intelligent and resourceful
as the searcher's agent-what some have called "know-bots"-
software that will locate, sort, and retrieve the desired informa-
tion if it is available on the net.
Q. How does one avoid being deluged by a sea of responses when
there is so much information available?
A. In the same way that one conducts a library search: By starting
with a selective search and broadening its parameters until the
amount of information acquired meets one's needs.
With modern communications and computer technology, it has be-
come possible to put all the real-time data on location and status for
every American military unit in theater into a network automatically.
Software exists that will allow users to "pull down" only the data they
seek or are "open" to receive. Network architecture could enable a

70 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
theater commander to create a "living encyclopedia" of current loca-
tion and status information for all friendly (and conceivably also for
many enemy) units in the theater. The important question for the
Army is not the technical feasibility of creating such a network, but
who should be granted access to it-a hierarchical issue, not a net-
work issue.
In the information carousel concept, all who could use or contribute
information to the net would have access. The metaphor is a
carousel of information-very much like the rotating clip wheel be-
tween the kitchen and dining room in a restaurant, where orders for
the kitchen can be put up and pulled down. The effectiveness of the
Internet and the richness and currency of its information suggest
that universal access is its strength, not its weakness. But near-
universal access for the Army may be troubling for several reasons:
" 
It runs counter to traditional Army hierarchical command and
control concepts, where information is increasingly aggregated
and filtered as it proceeds up the chain of command. The infor-
mation carousel implies that, in principle, the private on the bat-
tlefield may enjoy the same access to information on the network
as the theater commander.
" 
It relies on information pull rather than push. Instead of pushing
selected information downward to the troops (i.e., telling them
only what they "need" to know), they may have access to the in-
formation they think they need or want. One potential problem
that may arise here is "battlefield distraction," where small unit
commanders may be tempted to spend too much time watching
events unfold around their unit rather than focusing on their
own specific sector.
" 
The information on the net might be compromised (i.e., read or
tainted) with near-universal access. The enemy might be able to
know what the theater commander knows or implant deceptive
information on the net.
The workshop participants worked their way through each of these
potential concerns and concluded that the potential benefits of
"information carousel" outweighed the potential costs. They recog-
nized that near-universal access to information was a major depar-

Operational and Organizational Concepts 
71
ture for the Army, but such departures will have to be confronted as
the information revolution works its way through traditional hierar-
chically organized institutions. Information pull rather than push is
a powerful distinction in dealing with the flood of information, and
failure to exploit that principle could put the Army at a disadvantage
with those who do.4 The potential battlefield distraction problem is
certainly worthy of note, but there is no reason to believe that it
could not be avoided by rigorous training programs that instruct
small unit commanders in methods of filtering out unnecessary in-
formation that they might sometimes pull down from the net, so that
they can retain focus on their immediate sector of operations. Al-
though the workshop participants were divided on the risks of secu-
rity compromises, there was a view that encryption technology and
the Army's superior ability to exploit the information on the carousel
were sufficient edges.
AGILE DEFENSE/LODGMENT
One of the more noticeable trends in international business today is
agility-the growing ability of multinational corporations to rapidly
shift production, investments, and personnel from one country to
another in response to changes in tax codes, interest rates, inflation,
etc. This new ability to operate flexibly across borders is enabled by
the growth in the information technologies.
A parallel concept for the Army was called agile defense, or lodg-
ment, in the workshop. It assumes that the Army can configure itself
to be agile and effective in forced-entry scenarios where the available
U.S. ground forces are outnumbered and too small to form a solid
line of defense or an integrated lodgment. It is an effort to compen-
sate for very low force-to-space ratios without having to resort to a
defensive line consisting of scattered strongpoints. The essence of
the concept is the presumption that superior information systems
4 Observers at the National Training Center cited battlefield situations where forces
were defeated because their information was pushed rather than pulled. Pushed
warnings came too late, whereas the warning information would have been posted
and available to the forces if it could have been pulled down without intervening
command layers.

72 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
RAND MR560-##
"* Roots in the information technologies
- Communications and automation permit more flexible financing,
marketing, and production options for rapidly changing
circumstances
"* Concept
- When denied the option of overwhelming force, use geography
and superior C31 for expanded choices in applying fires and strikes
- Locate fire and strike forces back, in sanctuaries
"* Implications
- Equipment: UAVs, mines, NLOS-like, stealth?
- Doctrinal: especially for light, early-entry forces?
Using technology to enable new tactics
Figure 17-Agile Defense/Lodgment
will allow the Army to fight flexibly-to engage the enemy only at fa-
vorable places and at favorable times.5 As the post-Cold War era
moves forward, the Army may be forced to consider more flexible
and agile concepts for MRCs, where the United States is likely to find
itself projecting its military power over long distances into the
theater of operations.
The agile defense or lodgment concept could involve a number of
tactics, such as:
Initially keeping as much distance as possible between U.S.
forces and the enemy, while keeping the enemy in range of the
Army's deep fire systems.
5Ideas similar to this can be found in Richard L. Kugler, NATO's Future Conventional
Defense Strategy in Central Europe: Theater Employment Doctrine for the Post-Cold
War Era, Santa Monica, CA: RAND, R-4084-A, 1992, chs. 3 and 5.

Operational and Organizational Concepts 
73
0 
Fighting a "shoot and scoot" standoff battle in the early days of a
war, with the intent of inflicting heavy losses before disengaging
and moving to another location.
0 
Employing large numbers of non-line-of-sight (NLOS) anti-
armor missiles, stealthy light combat vehicles, and advanced
mines, such as the wide-area mine (WAM) system.
Once a critical mass of heavy ground forces was established in the-
ater, agility could take other forms. The Army could supplement its
initial standoff tactics with the periodic use of mobile strike forces lo-
cated in sanctuaries in the rear of the battle area. After having com-
pleted a rapid counterattack, these mobile forces would not attempt
to hold any territory, instead returning to their rear area sanctuaries
until the next opportunity appeared. Improvements in the U.S. abil-
ity to track and target large armored units (e.g., with the JSTARS air-
borne side-looking radar system) should make linear fronts or inte-
grated positions unnecessary for American heavy forces in armored
warfare. If the location of enemy armor can be known with some ac-
curacy, as seems increasingly likely, American heavy forces could be
kept back out of the range of most enemy firepower until the mo-
ment when they could be used to greatest effect. When an opportu-
nity for a counterattack appeared, these forces could be brought to
bear quickly to press their attack.
NETWORK ARMY
Another emerging practice in the business world (enabled by infor-
mation technology) has been called "infinite, instant partnering." It
refers to how increasing amounts of business information are being
transacted between an infinite number of partners, any two of whom
may partner instantly and for only an instant, to trade needed
information. After their transaction, they may never partner again,
but they go on to partner with others, trading other information they
need. Geography and distances count for little. Their connectivity in
almost infinite seas of information and potential partners is essential
to the process. Distributed commercial enterprises operating on this
basis are at no disadvantage with respect to companies that have all

74 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
RAND MR560-##
* Roots in the information technologies
- Communications permit distributed enterprises
- Geography and location count for less
- Rise of "infinite, instant partnering"
* Concept
- Minimum functions located in the combat theater
- Draw upon entire Army for support as needed
- Send the problems (mostly about information) to the experts, don't
bring the experts to the problem
* Implications
- Mobility: reduced transport requirements?
- Organizational: more fixed-site specialization?
Mobility is the Army's most costly burden
Figure 18-Network Army
their units located in the same region. Indeed, as described in Chap-
ter Three, they may even be in a better position to react rapidly to
changes in the global markets.
The notion of infinite, instant partnering can be translated to the
concept of a network army. It would be an army networked electron-
ically so that its many components, elements, units, and functions
could engage in infinite, instant partnering, regardless of their loca-
tion. It could allow the Army to be much more economical in what it
projects forward into the theater of operations. For example, a net-
work army could deploy only its essential functions to an overseas
theater and leave at home many of its C31, logistics support, intelli-
gence, and medical functions.6 Many headquarters, support, and
sustainment issues can be solved by experts working in CONUS, pro-
6Fiber optics and lasers will permit intricate surgery to be performed remotely through
telecommunications links anywhere in the world-by the best surgeons in the world.
Field hospitals will need only provide the surgical environment and general surgical
skills; many of the Army's top medical specialists can stay at home where they can be
available to hospitals worldwide.

Operational and Organizational Concepts 
75
vided they are connected electronically and made easily accessible to
each other. The concept is more than expanding communications; it
is about allowing and facilitating individuals to partner freely and
quickly to solve their problems.
An obvious advantage of a network army is that it reduces the strain
on strategic lift; it makes available more space on limited airlift and
sealift assets for the movement of combat forces. Mobility, both
strategic and within the theater, is arguably the Army's greatest bur-
den. Strategic mobility is a burden for the Army because it is pro-
vided by the other services and is, therefore, likely always to be less
than the Army needs. Theater mobility is a burden because the Army
spends more to develop, acquire, and maintain its vehicles for the-
ater mobility than on any other capability. Anything the Army could
do to reduce this burden-by needing less strategic lift or by needing
less theater mobility-should be helpful in a time of reduced budgets
for all of the American military services.
There is a basing implication lurking in the concept of a network
army: For the U.S. Army, it could facilitate permanent CONUS bas-
ing for many units and capabilities that would not need to move for-
ward to the theater, but could instead remain at home to support the
theater operations through electronic nets. These fixed centers
would be nodes of expertise or knowledge that could rapidly connect
with their overseas and other CONUS-based partners. For example,
it might be advantageous to concentrate specialized medical exper-
tise at one site, intelligence functions at another, and vehicle spare
parts management at still another. This type of arrangement could
make for more stable basing for many supporting units and func-
tions. Although such stability would run counter to the Army's tradi-
tion of moving its people regularly for career development, it could
also be a money-saver at a time when funding is short.
FRANCHISED COMBAT UNITS
The flattening of organizations by removing management layers and
increasing managers' spans of control is but one of many of the in-
formation revolution's accepted consequences for businesses. Fran-
chised businesses are not new, but the efficient organization of fran-

76 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
RAND MR560-##
Roots in the information technologies
- Communications and automation now permit a broader span of
control across fewer levels
- Global headquarters and local franchises
* Concept
- Restructure the Army around smaller, self-contained combat units
associable with a generic territorial franchise
- Franchise scope set by unit's weapon ranges?
* Implications
- Organizational: only two levels: HQ and field?
- Doctrinal: combined arms at a lower level?
McDonald's goes to war?
Figure 19-Franchised Combat Units
chises has been facilitated by enhanced communications. 7 Instead
of management through geographically bound layers-local, re-
gional, state, national-individual franchises can be managed di-
rectly from an international headquarters. A single point of man-
agement, aided by information systems, can manage the needs of
hundreds or even thousands of franchises. The franchises may be
supplied by regional suppliers, because of the costs of transporting
perishable goods, but the regional suppliers can also be managed di-
rectly from an international headquarters that is automatically moni-
toring franchise consumption and inventories.
In the commercial world, the prototypical example of franchising is
the McDonald's chain of fast food restaurants. McDonald's consists
of a central corporate headquarters and a large number of franchises
7And computers, as any visit to a McDonald's will reveal. Drink dispensers are com-
puter controlled, so that the server need only place the cup and press the button-a
computer will take care of the proper filling. One can speculate that it won't be long
before even the server's movement of the cup will be taken over by computer-con-
trolled robotic operations. The same can be said for the french fryers.

Operational and Organizational Concepts 
77
scattered around the globe. Each franchise has a similar concept of
operations for each type of prospective contingency, but each is self-
contained and has a fairly well-defined territorial area of responsi-
bility. Intermediate layers of organization tend to be "overhead" and
are kept to a minimum.
Translation of these information-driven developments to military
concepts suggests that combat units might operate as franchises-a
territorial franchise based upon the unit's radius of autonomous ac-
tion. The concept might draw upon many of the same themes of the
Swedish defensive cell concept described earlier, except that the
franchises might be designed and employed for offensive as well as
defensive operations.
For franchised combat units, the scope of a franchise would be set by
the unit's weapons ranges. The franchise units would be combined
arms packages, each including increments of armor, attack helicop-
ters, mechanized infantry, tube artillery, engineers, air defense ar-
tillery, and support units. Unlike the Swedish cell units, these fran-
chised units would be capable of deep offensive operations over long
distances. Long-range missiles might, like suppliers for fast-food
franchisers, be centrally controlled by the single franchise head-
quarters.
This concept might be most appropriate for situations where the U.S.
Army finds itself in a large rural theater of operations, fighting against
a widely dispersed opponent with medium to low technological ca-
pability. Indeed, the war in Vietnam might be a very good historical
foil against which the concept of franchised combat units could be
examined in greater detail. Figuring out how to do better in that kind
of war could still be a good investment in the future-given that the
United States would still probably have problems dealing with an
insurgency-like conflict.
AN ARMY OF ARMIES
As the information revolution facilitated global markets, many busi-
nesses have evolved into niche enterprises. Niche enterprises focus
on one core competency and become so proficient at it that their
services or goods are in demand throughout the entire global mar-
ketplace. Niche enterprises survive much as ecological niches in a

78 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
RAND MR560-##
Roots in the information technologies
- Communications and automation encourage specialized
enterprises that fill niches
- An emphasis on core competencies
* Concept
- Restructure the Army around several rather than one core
competency
- Several cooperative armies -
for land combat, infrastructure
projection, and constabulary
* Implications
- Organizational: elevate priority resolutions?
- Doctrinal: new doctrinal fields?
Several armies with equal voices right to the top
Figure 20-An Army of Armies
hostile environment by making themselves more valuable to their
clients than vulnerable to their competitors.
As its scope of missions widens, the U.S. Army cannot hope to be the
best military service at all things-even on the ground. If the Army
makes its core competency the fighting and winning of the nation's
wars, then it must accept that it may not be as proficient at other
missions that are almost certain to come to its doorstep. That trade-
off may be acceptable to the Army, but it may not be to all those
whom the Army serves, and who may expect the Army to be more
proficient at the more likely and frequently assigned tasks in opera-
tions short of war.8 The ideas of core competencies and niche en-
terprises in the business world naturally evoke the concept of an
8 Operations short of war is the terminology used in Title X of the U.S. Code, which sets
forth the responsibilities of the military services. Different terminology-military
operations other than war, or MOOTW-has become common, but the term written
into the law governing the American military's basic responsibilities for war, mobi-
lization, and operations short of war would seem to be adequate.

Operational and Organizational Concepts 
79
army of armies-an army composed of niche armies, each with a
distinctive core competency.
As an example of the concept, one army could be designed for con-
ventional land combat, another for infrastructure projection
(required both to support land combat and for relief missions), and
yet a third for constabulary functions (frequently required for the af-
termath of combat, for relief missions, and for peacekeeping). Each
of these new "armies" would have its own support force structure.
The principal advantage sought in this example is a greater Army
proficiency and readiness for missions in the area of operations short
of war. Instead of trying to reconcile warfighting, humanitarian as-
sistance, and peacekeeping ethics in a single army, each of the three
armies in this example would be free to develop its own doctrine,
ethic, and core competency. The difference might be more than im-
proved proficiency in several missions; it also might mean less con-
fusion for soldiers about their identities and purposes when assigned
to a broadening mission spectrum.
There are obvious risks to such a radical restructuring of the Army.
An army of armies would create internal competition for funds and
perhaps even for its leadership-harkening back to days when engi-
neers or even medical personnel were candidates for the Army chief
of staff. For the dominant faction of the Army, an army of armies
would signal a dilution of its stature and a rise in the stature of other
factions. The dominant faction would be expected to resist such a
change in its fortunes and to succeed in that resistance. So, an army
of armies is not a concept that is likely to "fly" in today's Army; but
then neither would niche enterprises have appealed to the
conglomerates of the business world before the information
revolution and global markets. An army of armies may be a concept
whose time has yet to come. Unfortunately, as too many businesses
have learned, when the time does come, it may be too late to change.

Chapter Six
AFTERTHOUGHTS
Several themes evolved during the workshop discussions that did not
respond directly to the workshop objectives. They are collected here
as afterthoughts-ideas or issues that the workshop participants
thought were too important to be left out of the record. In effect,
they represent the unsolicited advice of the participants that may not
be welcomed by the workshop sponsors, but cannot in good con-
science be withheld.
WHITHER CONSTABULARIES?
Constabulary forces are formally defined as "an armed police force
organized on military lines but distinct from the regular army."1 As
the U.S. Army is called upon over the long term to become increas-
ingly involved in restoring civil order, disaster relief, stabilizing so-
cieties, and peace operations, it may find that its military police units
are too small to handle the demands for constabulary functions.
Constabulary forces are not new to the U.S. Army: Its role in the
American West during the last half of the 19th century was that of a
constabulary. Early in this century, in the wake of the Spanish-
American War, the Army's Philippine Constabulary played a key role
in the pacification of the Philippines. After World War II, the Army
established a special constabulary force to maintain order in its oc-
cupation zone in Germany. If the restoration and maintenance of
' T his definition is from Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, Springfield, MA:
Merriam-Webster Inc., 1990.
81

82 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
civil order evolves into a primary mission for the U.S. Army, the res-
urrection of the constabulary idea may be warranted.
Workshop participants identified four ways in which the Army could
foster the establishment of constabulary capabilities:
" 
Set up constabularies made up of locals in other countries
through the use of Army training missions. Before this could
happen, however, U.S. law would have to be changed, because it
currently prohibits the Army from such activity.
" 
Embedding constabulary capabilities within its own active duty
force structure. This is akin to the "army of armies" concept, the
merits and disadvantages of which have already been outlined.
" 
Encourage the development of a U.S. constabulary outside of the
Army that could be used for operations abroad. Although this
option might be the path of least resistance for the Army, over
the long run, an independent constabulary force could become a
competitor to the Regular Army for funds and skilled personnel.
" 
Convert portions of the Army Reserve and National Guard into a
constabulary force. One shortcoming present here is that this
might force the U.S. President to order a partial mobilization of
the reserve component every time the nation becomes involved
in an operation other than war.
SOME WARNINGS
As the Army embraces information technologies and confronts a po-
tential revolution in military affairs (i.e., the concomitant shifts in
concepts and doctrine along with new technologies and hardware),
there may be a significant risk of missing the forest for the trees.
There may be an understandable tendency to focus on what these
changes mean for the Army rather than how they are changing the
Army's environment. For example, much of the current military ef-
forts to adapt to the information revolution center on exploiting the
technologies for
"* the improvement of current operations,
"• current concepts of warfare, and

Afterthoughts 
83
• 
current clients and their objectives.
Although all of these are changing and will change through the in-
formation technologies, changes in the last aspect may be more fun-
damental and neglected. The Army's attention to concepts of mili-
tary operations and warfare could lead it to be blindsided by even
greater changes in its clients (the American public and the U.S. gov-
ernment) and their objectives. The information revolution could
change the nature of war more than the nature of operations, and it
is likely to change American society more than it will the Army.
The information revolution is changing the nature of international
conflict. Even though the revolution is a technological one, the
changes it will bring to warfare will not be mostly in the form of new
technology. Instead, it is altering the actors on the stage, the audi-
ence that can watch, and, hence, the objectives of conflict. Nonstate
actors are seeing their relative strength on the international stage in-
crease. They will certainly not be able to militarily challenge nation-
states on an equal footing, but they also will not challenge a nation-
state in the same way that another nation-state would. The most
common threats to nation-states in the future may not be other
nation-states, and their challenges are not likely to come in the form
of regular, conventional military forces.
The information revolution is shaping a world in which more and
more of the contingencies that will confront the U.S. Army will not be
conventional wars. An increasing number of Army operations will
have to do with infrastructure projection and violence suppression
rather than with deterrence and warfighting. If the Army fixes itself
too firmly on fighting and winning the nation's conventional wars as
a way to husband its scarce resources, it may find that its market-
like that of the mainframe computer makers-is narrowing. Perhaps
the Army's best chance for a successful future in the information age
lies in new organizational and operational concepts that respond to a
new and different world, rather than in new technology for an old
world. This is not to denigrate force modernization, but a focus on
adapting technology as the principal answer to the Army's problems
will miss the nature and immensity of the challenges. Doctrine is the
Army's best vehicle to encourage new organizational and operational
concepts that will be responsive to a future world whose only cer-
tainty is change.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Berkley, James, D., and Nitin Nohria, "The Virtual Organization:
Bureaucracy, Technology, and the Implosion of Control," Harvard
Business School Working Paper 92-033, 1992.
Bradley, Stephen P. (ed.), Globalization, Technology, and Competi-
tion: The Fusion of Computers and Telecommunications in the
1990s, Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1992.
Bronowski, Jacob, The Ascent of Man, Boston: Little, Brown and
Company, 1973.
Builder, Carl H., Patterns in American Intellectual Frontiers, Santa
Monica, CA: RAND, N-2917-A, 1990.
Builder, Carl H., and Steven C. Bankes, "Technology Propels Euro-
pean Political Change," IEEE Technology and Society Magazine,
Vol. 11, No. 3, Fall 1992, pp. 10-17.
Business Week, "The Horizontal Corporation," December 20, 1993,
pp. 76-81.
Business Week, "The Information Revolution," Special Issue, 1994.
Chandler, Alfred D., Jr., and Herman Daems, Managerial Hierarchies:
Comparative Perspectives on the Rise of the Modern Industrial En-
terprise, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1980.
Forester, Tom (ed.), The Information Technology Revolution, Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 1985.
85

86 
Information Technologies and the Future of Land Warfare
Freedman, Lawrence, "Weak States and the West," The Economist,
September 11, 1993, pp. 38-40.
Hammer, Michael, and James Champy, Reengineering the Corpora-
tion: A Manifesto for Business Revolution, New York: Harper Busi-
ness, 1993.
Helman, Gerald B., and Steven R. Ratner, "Saving Failed States," For-
eign Policy, No. 89, Winter 1992-93, pp. 3-20.
Hersh, Seymour M., "The Wild East," The Atlantic Monthly, June
1994, pp. 61-86.
Ganley, Gladys D., "Power to the People via Personal Electronic Me-
dia," The Washington Quarterly, Spring 1991.
Gardiner, Sam, "Planning for the Next Quarter Century: What in the
World Is an Air Force to Do?" unpublished paper, March 1993.
Guile, Bruce. R. (ed.), Information Technologies and Social Transfor-
mation, Washington D.C.: National Academy Press, 1985.
Kidder, Tracy, The Soul of a New Machine, Boston: Little, Brown,
1981.
Kugler, Richard S., NATO's Future Conventional Defense Strategy in
Central Europe: Theater Employment Doctrine for the Post-Cold
War Era, Santa Monica, CA: RAND, R-4084-A, 1992.
March, James G., and Herbert A. Simon, Organizations, New York:
Wiley, 1958.
Millman, Gregory J., The Vandals' Crown: How Rebel Currency
Traders Overthrew the World's Central Banks, New York: 
Free
Press, 1995.
Modis, Theodore, Predictions, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1992.
Moravec, Hans, Mind Children: The Future of Robot and Human In-
telligence, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988.
Newsweek, "Firefight From Hell," October 18, 1993, pp. 39-43.
Ohmae, Kenichi, The Borderless World: Power and Strategy in the
Interlinked Economy, NewYork: Harper Business, 1990.

Bibliography 
87
Petersen, John L., The Road to 2015: Profiles of the Future, Corte
Madera, CA: Waite Group Press, 1994.
Press, W., et al., JASON Global Grid Study, briefing no. JSR-92-100,
July 1992.
Roberts, Brad, "From Nonproliferation to Antiproliferation," Inter-
national Security, Vol. 18, No. 1, Summer 1993, pp. 139-173.
Schwartz, Peter, The Art of the Long View, New York: Doubleday/
Currency, 1991.
Spector, Leonard S., and Jacqueline R. Smith, Nuclear Ambitions:
The Spread of Nuclear Weapons, 1989-1990, Boulder, CO: West-
view Press, 1990.
Stofft, William A., and Gary L. Guertner, Ethnic Conflict: Implications
for the Army of the Future, Carlisle Barracks, PA: U.S. Army War
College, 1994.
Toffler, Alvin, Powershift: Knowledge, Wealth, and Violence at the
Edge of the 21st Century, New York: Bantam Books, 1990.
Turbiville, Graham H., Jr., "Operations Other Than War: Organized
Crime Dimension," Military Review, January 1994, pp. 35-47.
U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Industrial Outlook 1994, Wash-
ington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, January 1994.
Watman, Kenneth B., and Daniel P. Raymer, Airpower in U.S. Light
Combat Operations, Santa Monica, CA: RAND, MR-457-AF, 1994.
Weber, Max, The Theory of Social and Economic Organization, Tal-
cott Parsons (ed.), A. M. Henderson and Talcott Parsons (trans.),
New York: Oxford University Press, 1947.

