ADLERIAN THEORY  1 
 
   
   
AAAdddllleeerrriiiaaannn   TTThhheeeooorrryyy   
Aarin Bell 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             

2 
 
Alfred Adler, the founder of the Adlerian (or Individual) Theory once said, 
“Every individual represents a unity of personality and the individual then fashions that 
unity.  The individual is thus both the picture and the artist.  Therefore if one can change 
one’s concept of self, they can change the picture being painted.”  Adlerian Theory is a 
cognitive, goal-oriented, social psychology, which is based on a humanist model of man.  
There are six concepts that make up the Adlerian theory, among them are striving for 
success or superiority, subjective perception, unity and self-consistency, social interest, 
style of life, and creative power.   
The first tenet of the Adlerian Theory is striving for success or superiority, which 
essentially means that the one dynamic force behind people’s behavior is striving for 
success or superiority.  Adler believed that because people are born with small and 
therefore inferior bodies, they feel inferior and attempt to overcome the feelings through 
their natural tendency to move toward completion of what Adler calls a “final goal.”  
This striving force can take one of two routes for people: personal gain (superiority) or 
community benefit (success).  According to Adler, an individual striving for personal 
gain is considered unhealthy as they have little or no concern for other people and are 
therefore considered “useless” in society, whereas an individual striving for the success 
of all humanity would be considered healthy as they do so naturally.    
Adler’s second tenet of the Adlerian Theory is subjective perception, which is the 
belief that an individuals subjective perceptions shape their behavior and personality.  As 
mention previously, Adler believed people strive for superiority or success to compensate 
for feelings of inferiority, but the manner in which they strive is not shaped by reality but 
rather by their subjective perceptions of reality, that is by their fictions, or expectations of 
the future.  (Adler: Individual Psychology, pg. 73)  In other words, a person’s fictions can 
become reality and in some cases become many people’s realities.  Adler’s ideas on 
factionalism originated from the book The Philosophy of “As If” where the author 
believed that fictions are ideas that have no real existence, yet they influence people as if 
they really existed. One example of this could be: “Men are superior to women.”  Even 
though we can say this statement is false, many men and women believe it to be true and 
live by it. What is meant by this is that perception is only an interpretation of sensory 
assumptions and these interpretations can differ wildly between individuals.  Another 

3 
 
example of this is if a college student’s record player was stolen.  He could call the police 
and describe the lost record player as “brown”.  The record player might not ever be 
found because it was actually “red” because the student did not know that he was 
colorblind. Adler’s factionalism is consistent with his teleological view of motivation.  
Adler believed that people are motivated by present perceptions of the future and as 
fictions, these perceptions need not be conscious or understood.  He believed that each 
person strives to become more perfect and this is their master motive.   
Adler’s third tenet of the Adlerian Theory is the unity and self-consistency of 
personality, which suggests each person is unique and indivisible and that the notion of 
inconsistent behavior does not exist.  Thus, the whole individual strives in a self-
consistent way towards a single goal, and all separate actions and functions can be 
understood as parts of this goal.  (Psychodynamic Theories, pg. 74) The disturbance of 
one part of the body cannot be viewed in isolation, as it affects the entire body; Adler 
referred to this as “Organ Dialect.”  Through Organ Dialect, a person’s body could speak 
their individual opinion through movement or action, rather than through speech.  One 
example of organ dialect is the case of a very obedient boy who wet the bed at night to 
send a message that he does not wish to obey parental wishes.  His behavior is “really a 
creative expression, for the child is speaking with his bladder instead of his mouth” 
(Adler: Individual Psychology, pg. 75).   
Adler’s fourth tenet of the Adlerian Theory is the value of all human activity must 
be seen from the viewpoint of social interest.  Social interest comes from the German 
word “Germeinschaftgefuhl,” which means “community feeling.”  An individual’s life 
style in terms of their community can either be “useful” or “useless.”  A “useful” person 
has a social interest in the community around them whereas a “useless” person does not 
and is only concerned with ones self.  Most individuals have the potential of social 
interest, as it is a natural condition of the human species, which is why we live in groups 
for most if not all of our lives.  Social interest is formed through the relationship between 
mother and child during early infancy and continues to develop through early childhood 
because of continued parental relationships.   
Adler’s fifth tenant is a self-consistent personality structure develops into a 
person’s style of life.  The style of life refers to the flavor of a person’s life, which 

4 
 
includes a person’s goal, self-concept, feelings for others, and attitudes towards the 
world.  Adler believed the style of one’s life is the product of interaction of heredity, 
environment, and a person’s creative power.  Adler described the style of life as “the 
separate notes of a composition are meaningless without the entire melody, but the 
melody takes on added significance when we recognize the composer’s style or unique 
manner of expression.”  Again, an individual that leads a healthy or “useful” life has a 
style of life that is complex, enriched and changing while an individual that leads an 
unhealthy or “useless” life is inflexible and dull in their actions.        
Creative Power is Adler’s final tenet.  Creative power is ones style of life, which 
is molded by an individual’s creative power.  Adler believed that people are much more 
than a product of their environment and heredity, and that creative power places the 
responsibility for the individual’s personality into his or her own hands.  Adler used “the 
law of the low doorway” analogy to describe creative power: if you are trying to walk 
through a doorway four feet high, you have two basic choices.  First, you can use your 
creative power to bend down as you approach the doorways, thereby successfully solving 
the problem.  This is the manner in which the psychologically healthy individual solves 
most of life’s problems.  Conversely, if you bump your head and fall back, you must still 
solve the problem correctly or continue bumping your head.  Neurotics often choose to 
bump their head on the realities of life.  When approaching the low doorway, you are 
neither compelled to stoop nor forced to bump your head.  You have a creative power 
that permits you to follow either course.   
 The theory behind change in Adlerian theory is based on changing the client’s 
beliefs by reorienting the client’s view of situations and relationships.  A holistic 
approach is taken in order to assess the client to the best of the therapist’s ability and 
form a relationship based on mutual trust between the therapist and the client.  Once 
those things are accomplished, the reeducation can begin.  “The main aim of therapy is to 
develop the client’s sense of belonging and to assist in the adaption of behaviors and 
processes by increasing the client’s self-awareness and challenging and modifying his or 
her fundamental premise, life goals, and basic concepts.”  (Theravive, 2012).    
Alder was ahead of his time in respect to social equality and the cultural 
considerations.  “Adlerian counseling takes into account to social and cultural values of 

5 
 
minority groups, such as social embeddings, integration of family members, and 
spirituality into the counseling process.”  (Bornsheuer, & Polonyi, 2011).  Though the 
Adlerian Theory typically fits cross-cultural situations, there can be limitations based on 
the client’s experience and how deeply rooted their cultural beliefs are.  According to a 
review done by Arciniega and Newton (1995) using 11 racial and ethnic considerations, 
the Adlerian theory rated positively on 7 of the 11 considerations, partially addressed 
three others, and did not address one at all.  Additionally, Martin Luther King Jr. 
referenced Adler’s work in one of his best-known speeches, “The Drum Major Instinct.”  
In doing so, Dr. King gave credit for the way this noted psychoanalyst explains the 
process that enables people to successfully move beyond a pervasive sense of inferiority 
and dependence to an increased and healthy sense of personal distinction and self-worth 
when opportunities are available for them to do so.  (Theories of Counseling and 
Psychotherapy:  A Multicultural Perspective, pg. 151) 
 
There are 4 phases in applying the Adlerian Theory.  Phase 1 requires establishing 
a relationship by working collaboratively with the client by being involved, supportive 
and caring.  Phase 2 requires subjective and objective interviews to fully understand the 
individual’s dynamics.  It is also beneficial to understand the individual’s family 
constellation.  Phase 3 helps the client understand motivation their life, understand how 
they are contributing to their problem, and making adjustments to correct the situation.  
The last phase, phase 4 helps the client by reorienting.  (Classical Adlerian Theory & 
Practice) 
 
 
Due to Adler’s lack of organization, much of his writing and work originally was 
hard to follow.  Since his death, more research has been done to support the effectiveness 
of the theory and because of that, the Adlerian Theory has evolved in many ways.  
Because the theory requires time to build relationships and trust, it has limited use for 
clients seeking immediate solutions to their problems and does not allow time for 
understanding the clients “life style.”   
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
 
 
Bibliography 
 
1.  Adler Graduate School.  Alfred Adler: Theory and Application.  Retrieved from: 
http://www.alfredadler.edu/about/theory 
 
2.  Adlerian Psychology: An Overview Of Theory and Practice.  Retrieved from: 
http://appraisercentral.com/research/Adlerian%20Psychotherapy%20An%20Overview%
20Of%20Theory%20And%20Practice.htm 
 
3.  Theravive. Adlerian Analysis and Framework.  Retrieved from: 
http://www.theravive.com/research/Adlerian_Analysis_and_Framework 
 
4.  Adler: Individual Psychology.  Retrieved from: http://highered.mcgraw-
hill.com/sites/dl/free/0073382701/600511/feist7_sample_ch03.pdf 
 
5.  Alfred Adler Institutes of San Francisco & Northwestern Washing: Classical Alderian 
Theory & Practice.  Retrieved from: http://www.adlerian.us/theoprac.htm 

