Adier's Legacy: Past, Present, and Future
Henry T. Stein
Abstract
This essay is adapted from the keynote address delivered as the Heinz L. and
Rowena R. Ansbacher Memorial Address in May 2007 at the 55th annual conven-
tion of the North Americari Society of Adierian Psychology in Vancouver, BC. The
speaker critiques the current directions of Adierian counseling and explores the ba-
sic tenets of Classical Adierian Depth Psychotherapy.
For two reasons I'm here today: Bob Armstrong and Frik Mansager.
However, my wife Laurie doesn't think I should be presenting here tonight,
and by the time I'm finished, you may agree with her. Now that I have been
invited to speak my mind candidly, 1 will.
Individual Psychology is in jeopardy because it has drifted progressively
further away from Adier's original ideas and style of treatment. The future
of Individual Psychology lies in going back to Adier's original writing and
style of treatment in order to promote his legacy as a leading force in depth
psychotherapy.
At the heart of Individual Psychology is Adier's belief that everything can
be different: We all can change. Not merely change a symptom, modify our
behavior, or acknowledge our mistakes, but change our core personality.
Accomplishing this fundamental personality change is the essence of depth
psychotherapy, which goes far beyond modifying behavior to redefining
how people see themselves, others, and the world. Other depth psycho-
therapies attempt varying degrees of personality change, but Adler gives us
the unique tools to do it better than anyone else.
Psychotherapy at this level is an intuitive, complex, intellectually and
emotionally demanding art. Adler meets this challenge with a cosmically
coherent philosophy of life, integrates his theory of human development
with a vision of optimal functioning, and then shows us how to diagnose
individuals in difficulty and how to treat them. Unlike many other theorists,
Adler offers clear guidelines on what constitutes cure, or optimal mental
health. His road map of psychotherapy has a definite destination.
But what if therapists have not reached that destination themselves,
have not achieved the core personality changes that might be necessary
The journal of Individual Psychology, Vol. 64, No. 1, Spring 2008
O2008 by the University of Texas Press, P.O. Box 7819, Austin, TX 78713-7819
Editorial office located in the College of Education at Georgia State University.

Adier's Legacy 5
to align their world view with Adier's? How can they hope to guide clients
to that awareness? Changes of this depth cannot be achieved by merely
hearing a list of our basic mistakes read by a therapist. The practice of a
"lifestyle procedure" or "doing a lifestyle" is often less than helpful, or even
damaging to discouraged clients or students. This "by-the-numbers" short-
cut does not do justice to what Adierian psychotherapy was designed to
achieve. Classical Adierian Depth Psychotherapy requires therapists to be
constantly creative, inventing new strategies to fit each client's uniqueness.
This treatment style cannot be systematized into a series of techniques or
procedures.
Necessity for Congruence
Other therapeutic approaches may allow clinicians to use strategies
without considering the influence of their character on the process. But
Adierian therapy and treatment goals are based on a philosophy of life. If
we do not personally accept and embody that philosophy, the message we
give to clients and students is not congruent. We do not "practice what we
preach." This lack of congruence can be confusing and misleading to clients
and students.
To be an Adierian is first and foremost to be congruent. Adier's genius
lies in his holistic vision of the congruence of the smallest expressive gesture
with the overall direction of our lives; of the interconnected ness of our past,
present, and future with the cosmos; and of the psychic price we pay for
ignoring the reality of social living. To be congruent means to use Adier's
approach as he did—gently, creatively, and with constant encouragement—
for the client's benefit. Adier's demeanor was most often described as that
of a gentle grandmother. The way he was, the way he presented himself,
embodied his principles.
Importance of a Study-Analysis
How well do our Adierian instructors and clinicians today know these
principles and accurately embody them? How many of us have completed
the personal study-analysis required to understand Adierian psychotherapy
in our bones and to correct the inevitable mistakes we all have in our think-
ing, so we can model optimal functioning for our clients? Too often, I have
seen and heard of clinicians and instructors using their limited knowledge
of Adierian ideas to enhance their own prestige: to perform, at best, and
to belittle or diminish, at worst. Without a thorough study-analysis with a

6 
Henry T. Stein
congruent, experienced mentor, we are easily trapped by our own lifestyle.
How can therapists who have not overcome their own lifestyle help clients
overcome theirs?
Dissolving the Lifestyle
Thus, the importance of congruence and a study-analysis leads me to
the issue of dissolving the lifestyle. In The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred
Adler (see Appendix), again and again, Adler refers to the limitations of an
individual's habitual mistake pattern, known as a lifestyle. Because we all
make judgments based on the inherently faulty perceptions of childhood,
we all have a pattern of mistakes to some degree. But to what degree? The
answer is crucial. A minimal level of mistaken thinking is not a lifestyle be-
cause it does not interfere with our ability to perform the main tasks of life:
friendship, occupation, and intimacy. A lifestyle is a pattern so strongly per-
vasive, so marked by dichotomized thinking, that it becomes a self-created
enclosure from which we feel we cannot escape. Within that self-perpetu-
ating enclosure, we may have serious difficulties in life, or we may make
significant difficulties for others. The more narrow the enclosure, the stricter
the dichotomies of thought, and the further away we get from common
sense into the dead end of private logic.
The lifestyle is built on private logic. Private logic cannot merely be
modified; it must be dissolved in order for us to join the community of com-
mon sense or logic. Adler never read clients a list of their mistakes. Again
and again, in The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler, he uses the con-
cept of mistaken thinking as a therapeutic tool to help him understand his
clients' behaviors, then encourage them in a new direction, and ultimately
help them to let go of their lifestyle so they can step out of their self-imposed
enclosure and live creatively. In his writing, Adler illustrates that only by dis-
solving the restrictive, repetitive lifestyles which hold them forever in place,
can individuals move in a different direction—not a specific, compensatory
destination, but a general direction reflecting their personal sensitivities, in-
spired by Gemeinschaftsgefühl and creative power. Not only can a style of
life be dissolved, but it must be dissolved for individuals to change. How
many Adierian therapists today are promoting that level of change? Are we
teaching our students this skill?
Finally, but most important, the organic unity of Adierian psychotherapy
reflects the organizing influence of the fictional final goal. This imagined
Third Act, this visceral, instantaneous combining of our past and present in
order to envision our psychic future, illustrates our creative power. An un-
derstanding of the dynamics of the fictional final goal and lifestyle separates

Adier's Legacy 7
Individual Psychology from other theories and philosophies. The ability to
help clients dissolve a lifestyle and redirect their fictional final goal into a
universal value constitutes Adierian depth psychotherapy. Abraham Maslovk'
offers us helpful clues about vi/hat mentally healthy individuals, guided by
one of the universal values, look like. We need to encourage more Adle-
rians to learn the unique art of depth psychotherapy, a process that can
change the direction of people's lives, that reaches their mind, heart, and
soul, that frees them to live creatively and become their best selves. Adler
offers us inspiration and the tools necessary to achieve the valuable cause
he promotes.
As Adierians, v^e do not need other theories, fast-food therapies, or
quick-fix workshops. We need to go deeper into Adler himself, by studying
and discussing his original writings, and finding a congruent mentor to help
us overcome our self-imposed limitations.
A Personal lourney to Adler: Early Influences
Personally, I came to the training of depth psychotherapists by a cir-
cuitous, but in hindsight, thoroughly integrated route. Initially, I wanted to
be an architect. 1 began my undergraduate study of architecture at Cooper
Union in New York City. There, I was first exposed to the work of Frank
Lloyd Wright. Intuitively, 1 was attracted to his concept of "organic archi-
tecture." The artistic relationship of the parts to the whole was a compelling
idea as well as a persistent theme in my later interests and studies.
In 1953, induction into the Army interrupted my studies but led to a dis-
covery of the theater while I was stationed at Fort Knox, Kentucky. A transfer
to the Presidio of San Francisco put me in closer contact with a wider the-
ater community during the rest of my military service. After my discharge in
1955, I majored in theater arts at San Francisco State University, first earning
a B.A. degree. As a graduate student, I focused on becoming a stage director
and became deeply interested in finding better ways to help actors under-
stand and portray fictional characters.
Like most other aspiring actors and directors, I read Constantin Stan-
islavski's (1936, 1949) An Actor Prepares and Building a Character. His idea
of a character's "super-objective" resonated with Wright's concept of or-
ganic architecture, echoing the relationship of the parts to the whole. I also
read Michael Chekhov's (1953, 1963) To the Actor and To the Director and
Playwright, and I was inspired by his image of a character's "psychologi-
cal gesture," a simplified prototype of internal motivation. The idea that a
character's thoughts, feelings, and actions could be unified by a single goal
as well as an image fascinated me.

8 Henry T. Stein
Sensing that the field of psychology might provide some deep insights
into fictional character, I browsed the library for other sources. First, I read
some of Freud's writings, but I found them too obscure and complicated for
application in the theater. Then I read a number of Jung's works, finding them
instructive but often too obscure or archaeological. Finally, I discovered
Adler's (1931) What Life Could Mean to You. I immediately recognized his
artistic intuition and the conceptual similarities among Wright, Stanislavski,
and Adler's unity of personality, reflecting the same part-to-whole dynamics.
During the 1950s to the 1970s, my experience in the theater community
of San Francisco was reminiscent of Adler's contact with circus performers.
The actors, directors, designers, playwrights, and stage technicians showed
me a wide diversity of creative people and ways of living. Many were
friendly and cooperative, some were dominant and hostile, others were
frustrated and unhappy, but most struggled and sacrificed for something be-
yond themselves: producing a stage play.
On a small scale, a theater company generates a sense of community,
dedicated to a common purpose, united by a shared artistic sensibility.
While working as a director and manager of a theater company is satisfying
and challenging, producing a play often ignites stressful conflicts. Keeping
a team focused, productive, and creative requires leadership, tact, and in-
ventiveness. I began to realize that deeper psychological insight into the
members of my theater company would be a useful asset. 1 wanted to meet
and talk to an Adierian.
Consequently, in the early 1970s, to enrich my personal and profes-
sional life, I contacted NASAP, asking for names of all Adierians in the San
Francisco Bay Area. They sent me the names of three people, whom I vis-
ited. The first two were bright, friendly, and eager to help. However, the
third, Sophia deVries, was exceptionally articulate, warm, and gracious. I
felt immediately welcomed,, comfortable, and eager to get to know her. She
had studied with Alfred Adler, Carl Jung, August Eichorn, Ludwig Klages,
and Maria Montessori. She did her study-analysis with Lydia Sicher and
received her case supervision from Alexander Müller. She seemed to em-
body an inspiring congruence in her character, as Adler had described in
his writing, combining deep connection, abundant generosity, and an artis-
tic sensibility. We first took a brief tour of her small but beautifully designed
home in the Oakland hills, surrounded by lovely gardens and enlivened by
several cats and dogs. I recall talking to her for several hours, then asking for
a recommendation of how to study Individual Psychology. She suggested a
study-analysis wherein I would read a series of Adler's books to study the
theory and then, in a weekly meeting, discuss with her each idea and its ap-
plication to my personal and professional life. Eventually, I studied with her
for over twenty years.

Adler^s Legacy 9
A short time later, Sophia introduced me to Anthony Brück, who had also
studied with Adler and was influenced by the writings of Erwin Wexberg.
Feeling an immediate affinity for Anthony's warmth, kindness, gentleness,
and humor, I quickly realized I could learn a great deal from him as well.
With Sophia and Anthony, 1 experienced two different Adlerians who shared
a common philosophy of living that was clearly evident in their character.
1 recall one of Anthony's early comments: "In many systems of psychology,
you can learn a lot of ideas and strategies, but at the end of the training, you
can stay the same person you were when you started. If you want to become
a real Adierian, you might have to become a different person." In time, I
gradually understood the accuracy of his observation. Meanwhile, Anthony
introduced me to his many unpublished manuscripts. The highlights of his
writings are a series of graphic charts diagramming Adierian ideas; a hand-
book on Adierian brief therapy, including 20 brilliant case illustrations; and
a book documenting his work as an Adierian psychologist in the schools
of Costa Rica. Fluent in five languages, he traveled widely, doing therapy
with adults and teaching Adierian concepts to children in elementary and
secondary school.,
Under Sophia's guidance, I read all of Adier's writings I could find,
discovering that many of them were still not translated into English. I also
read what 1 could find by Erwin Wexberg, Fritz Kunkel, Alfred Farau, Beran
Wolfe, Carl Furtmüller, Rudolf Dreikurs, and other Adierian authors, mostly
in the Adierian journals. At this point, I applied what I was learning to myself
and my work as a theater director and manager. As I yearned to go deeper,
Sophia suggested that I learn German so I could read the untranslated mate-
rial. I tried, but could not imagine investing the time necessary to achieve a
sufficient level of scholarly understanding. One day, as we discussed Adier's
(1927) The Neurotic Constitution, she expressed frustration about the poor,
incomplete 1927 translation. Her comment planted an unconscious seed
about the need for new translations.
My work with actors, helping them interpret fictional characters, as well
as my ability to manage a sizable group of theater artists, benefited greatly
from my weekly work with Sophia. At one point, I managed four theater
companies in San Francisco. However, over a period of several years, I
found myself reading more books about Adierian psychology than about the
theater. Two events accelerated a coming transition: I took a training course
in psychodrama, and I met another therapist, Joseph Potts.
In stage directing, one major task is translating fictional, internal,
psychological movement into visible, physical stage movement. In the psy-
chodrama work, I began to see that the visible, physical movement could
be translated back into internal, psychological movement. At Sophia's rec-
ommendation, I participated in a three-day group-therapy marathon with

10 Henry T. stein
Joseph Potts. The dramatic changes that I savi' him achieve with people in-
spired me to reconsider my career focus. I began to imagine the creative
possibilities of using Adierian insight to understand and help real people
solve their problems, rather than portraying fictional characters and drama-
tizing their conflict.
I went back to school to study psychology, maintaining my weekly
study with Sophia. This combination of academic study and practical Ad-
ierian training enriched my learning experience. Sophia also invited me to
sit in on a weekly therapy group she conducted. Afterward, we discussed
the psychological dynamics. The depth and clarity of her insights into cli-
ents' movements and goals dazzled me. In a few years, I completed my
personal study-analysis, continuing to discuss all my cases with her for more
than twenty years. Most of these discussions were tape-recorded and later
transcribed (about 400 hours). Over the years, we attended workshops and
lectures by many psychotherapists, including Victor FrankI, Virginia Satir,
and Adierians at NASAP conferences. Eventually, Sophia encouraged me to
teach others what she had learned from Alfred Adler, Alexander Müller, and
Lydia Sicher and then taught me. She also encouraged me to study the work
of Abraham Maslow as an enrichment of Adler's vision of optimal develop-
ment. To teach others, 1 needed a wider and deeper theoretical base.
Evolution of The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler
The best compensation I could imagine for not having studied with
Adler, or for not being able to read all his work in the original German, was
to translate as much of it as possible into English. As I researched what was
available, I became aware of the existence of unpublished manuscripts by
Alfred Adler, Alexander Müller, Anthony Brück, Lydia Sicher, Alexander
Neuer, Ferdinand Birnbaum, and other early Adierians. Coincidentally,
more than fifteen years ago, a young literary agent made a proposal to
NASAP to begin translating Adler's works. He wanted a subsidy of about
$50,000 a year to manage the project. His proposal was denied. I began to
consider what it might take to accomplish this project in my spare time with-
out substantial financial support. Although many of Adler's popular books
were available in English, the prospect of being able to read most of his
clinical writings in English was irresistible. The work of Heinz and Rowena
Ansbacher (1956, 1978, 1979), translations of The Individual Psychology
of Alfred Adler, Superiority and Social Interest, and Cooperation Between
the Sexes, provided an inspiring springboard for enlarging the treasury of
Adler's writings in English. Over a two-year period, with the use of several
university libraries, the assistance of a professional librarian in Washington,
DC, who provided me with access to the Library of Congress, and the help

Adier's Legacy 11
of contacts in Germany and Holland, I pulled together every book, article,
and manuscript I could find. Much of it had never been published or even
translated.
In the next year, I searched for affordable translators who could produce
the literal translations I wanted. Although Sophia had already translated a
half-dozen articles, I could not find any other experienced Adierian cli-
nicians willing to take on the formidable task ahead. Eventually, I found
. two gems: Gerald Liebenau, from Washington, DC, and Cees Koen from
Holland. Excellent translators, they were not trained Adierians, so I initially
had them study a number of Adier's books to gain a feel for his ideas and
style. Eor several years, we were fortunate to have Kurt Adler also reading
and commenting on many of the drafts. His participation helped us refine
our grasp of his father's ideas.
Eive years ago, after she retired from teaching high school English, my
wife Laurie started editing our literal translations for readability. Remarkably,
she transformed many of Adier's rich and complex but awkward sentences
into clear, tight, readable text without losing his depth of meaning. Fifteen
years after we started, we produced twelve volumes of The Collected Clini-
cal Works of Alfred Adler (see Appendix). Although we had some modest
financial assistance from NASAP and a few other sources at the beginning,
Laurie and 1 agreed to fund most of the cost ourselves. In the near future,
we plan to publish additional works by Adler as well as the collected works
of Alexander Müller, Anthony Brück, and other early Adierians. Several of
my associates, Martha Edwards, Dyanne Pienkowski, and Jim Wolf, have
contributed significantly to the editing and refinement of these, works in
progress.
After being trained by Sophia, attending NASAP conferences for many
years, watching video demonstrations, and reading many Adierian publica-
tions, I concluded that what I was trained to do differed from "mainstream"
or "contemporary" Adierian practice. I coined the phrase "Classical Adie-
rian Depth Psychotherapy" to clarify the roots, the style, and the vision of
this approach. I wanted to emphasize the necessity for returning to Adier's
own clinical writings, in their entirety.
Heinz and Rowena Ansbacher provided us with a remarkable series of
books that edit and reorganize Adier's ideas into logical categories that are
convenient and easier to study. However, for advanced students or clini-
cians who want to understand Adler fully and deeply, reading his complete
articles is necessary. We have published The Collected Clinical Works of
Alfred Adler primarily for these advanced students and clinicians. When
other Adierian writers attempt to simplify Adier's complex ideas, they un-
fortunately often sacrifice his subtlety, nuance, and depth. Consequently,
"classical" suggests a return to Adier's original writings in order to build a
solid conceptual foundation based on his unique complexity.

12 Henry T. Stein
In her 90s Sophia still reread Adler's clinical works. She taught me that
an ongoing study of Adler yields progressive levels of depth in understand-
ing. Over the years, although I have read the work of many contemporary
authors in the field of psychology, only Adler draws me back, again and
again. 1 am convinced that to gain both the skill of lifestyle analysis as well
as the artistry of creative treatment, therapists have to absorb Adler's ideas
deeply into the marrow of their bones. If they are unable or unwilling to do
this, they should probably choose a different theoretical approach. I am also.
convinced that the feelings associated with his ideas cannot be absorbed
merely by reading. These feelings can come only from contact with a person
who congruently represents them.
Furthermore, we cannot learn Adler's warm, gentle, creative style of
psychotherapy from his writing, although the many transcribed dialogues
between him and clients do give a clear flavor of it. Nor do I believe that
anyone can learn how to do effective depth psychotherapy from a book or
in a classroom. The art of depth psychotherapy must be witnessed and expe-
rienced personally in the context of a one-to-one relationship. I trusted that
Sophia deVries, who studied with Adler, and was trained by Lydia Sicher and
Alexander Müller, accurately represented Adler's style of psychotherapy.
This lineage defines the style of Classical Adierian Depth Psychotherapy.
She possessed a warmth, gentleness, and creativity that offered her clients
and students a trustworthy experience of complete congruence. Moreover,
her mastery of the Socratic Method added a depth of equality and respect to
her work.
The Adier-Maslow Vision
Adler's vision of Gemeinschaftsgefühl presents a far-reaching ideal for
the evolution of society. He encourages us to overcome our difficulties, de-
velop ourselves, and improve life around us. He challenges us to go beyond
adapting to our current levels of culture. We can fulfill this vision only if
the members of the community are motivated to pursue healthy personal
ideals. Howard Gardner (1999), who theorized multiple intelligences, re-
cently added "existentialist intelligence" to his list. He described it as our
ability to relate to the entire cosmos and to conceive of our place within that
structure. This concept includes contemplating the meaning of life and our
relationship to ever-widening circles of other people.
As we think about ultimate issues in life, inevitably, ideals emerge.
Abraham Maslow (1970, 1971) clarified many personal, interpersonal, and
community ideals with his description of self-actualization. (1 prefer to use
the term "self-other-task-actualization" to avoid the mistaken implication of

Adler's Legacy 13
egocentricity.) He differentiated between the dynamics of deficiency and
growth motivation and described the potential inspirational power of "uni-
versal values: truth, beauty, goodness, justice, wholeness, etc."
Adler provides us with the theory and principles of practice for deep
personality change. He gives us the best set of therapeutic tools, not only
to relieve mental and emotional suffering, but also to re-ignite the creative
power of individuals and harness that power for the improvement of society.
Classical Adierian Depth Psychotherapy combines Adler and Maslow. Using
a twelve-stage model, it targets deep personality change through a dissolving
of the lifestyle and fictional final goal. It challenges therapists to explore this
path personally, so that they can guide clients or students in this direction.
Our distance training students come from all over the world. A few have
graduated from other Adierian institutes. Many are experienced licensed
professionals with extensive backgrounds in Freudian, jungian, or Family
Systems therapy. Unlike most other programs, however, the personal, one-
to-one relationship lies at the heart of our training. The deeper meaning
and feeling of Adler's philosophy can best be communicated only in this
long-term, mentor-oriented relationship. In weekly telephone discussions,
we explore a student's response to recorded seminars and reading, which
includes a wide range of published books, clinical journal articles, and
unpublished manuscripts by Alfred Adler, Alexander Müller, Lydia Sicher,
and other classical Adierians. Comments and questions cover all aspects
of theory and practice, including case illustrations. Once a year all current
students and many senior, certified associates come together for a three-day
experiential workshop. Participants bring personal and professional issues
to work on within the group. Pre-workshop and post-workshop individual
sessions sharpen preparation and debrief the experience.
Ongoins Research and Development
Working weekly with Sophia, I took about ten years to develop sufficient
insight to teach what I learned from her. Following her lead, I constantly ex-
plore new, promising innovations by others in many fields to enhance the
art and teaching of Adierian psychotherapy. The following sources have
provided continuing stimulation for adapting models and techniques that
maintain congruence with Adler's core theory and philosophy. Both Lydia
Sicher (Davidson, 1991) and Alexander Müller (1966, 1967, 1968, 1992)
predicted that Adler's theory would eventually provide a conceptual center
uniting a host of other disciplines.
The Socratic Method. Sophia made the Socratic Method look easy.
With deceptive simplicity, she drilled deeply into clients' private logic.

14 Henry T. Stein
leading them respectfully to a liberating common sense. Much of that skill
was influenced by Alexander Müller. After studying and analyzing hundreds
of her demonstrations of therapeutic technique, I was able to appreciate the
structure and dynamics of what she did. Subsequently, I also explored the
contributions of others who wrote about the Socratic Method in the fields
of psychology, philosophy, law, and education. One factor is clear. Many
variations of the Socratic Method are used for a range of different purposes.
The classical Adierian adaptation of the Socratic Method differs in style and
purpose from its use in other fields and other psychological approaches,
which I elaborate on in my paper (1991), "Adler and Socrates: Similarities
and Differences."
The Creative Process. Sophia constantly emphasized the need for cre-
ativity in the practice of psychotherapy. Critical of attempts to simplify and
systematize Adierian therapy, she referred to these shortcuts as "painting
by the numbers." Her work with clients or when consulting on cases was
always inventive, matching the uniqueness of individuals with creatively
unique strategies for helping them. Realizing that Adler was truly a thera-
peutic artist, I began my continuous study of the creative process. Starting
with the seminal work of Graham Wallas (1949) on the stages of creativity,
journeying into the arts and sciences, and eventually bridging to the work
of Maslow, I sought to demystify the creative aspect of psychotherapy, so
that my students could understand the dynamics of thinking and feeling that
yield artistically unique, therapeutic insights and strategies.
Concept and Mind-Mapping. 
Anthony Brück (1975,1976,1977,1978)
developed a series of graphic images that he used with students and clients
to illustrate Adler's ideas. Stimulated by Anthony's contribution, I have ex-
plored the use of mind maps and concept maps to help students understand
the relationship of content to structure. I have also found that flow-charting
software provides a useful medium for creating clear, readable, dynamic
genograms. Robert Horn's (1998) seminal work on information design and
visual language has provided valuable guidance.
Brain Functioning. Various authors have written about hemispheric
lateralization, describing and speculating about left-brain, right-brain, and
whole-brain functioning. I find these theories fascinating, but I get a little
skeptical about "dividing" functions in light of Adler's assumptions about
unity and purpose. More compelling to me is the vision of a hologramic
brain, as described by Karl Pribram (1991 ), wherein each small part reflects a
fuzzy replica of the whole. Paul MacLean's idea of functional down-shifting,
under perceived threat, from the cerebral cortex to the limbic system, or
the reptilian brain, offers an intriguing, speculative image. A lesser-known
model, "feeling tone theory," was developed by physicist Paul La Violette
(1979) and psychiatrist William Gray (n.d., 1979). They hypothesize that

Adier's Legacy 15
thoughts and feelings cannot be separated and that feelings organize think-
ing. Their hypothesis helped me understand why some therapists could
express ideas like Gemeinschaftsgefühl with a feeling that did not fit. This
idea suggested the possibility that the early learning of a concept from an
incongruent teacher or therapist might be encoded, mistakenly and uncon-
sciously, with the wrong feeling, if the source is contradictory.
Eideticlmagery. Internal images can often evoke strong feel ings. Akhter
Ahsen (1977), a psychiatrist from India, developed a series of diagnostic
and therapeutic strategies based on eidetic imagery that can often reveal
useful unconscious material or facilitate emotional changé. As diagnostic
and therapeutic affective techniques, these eidetic images can be combined
with cognitive and behavioral methods to support emotional breakthroughs
and promote therapeutic growth.
Missing Developmental Experience. Many years ago, Sophia intro-
duced me to her friend, Robin Gordon, a psychologist who had worked
with Robert Postel in Chicago. Together, they developed a therapeutic ap-
proach called "Primary Relationship Therapy." Their work concentrated on
adults who had been severely neglected as children. In a systematic way,
they "re-parented" the adult clients, simulating the early nurturing experi-
ences those clients apparently never had. Although their highly systematized
approach did not appeal to me, the spirit and purpose of their ideas took
root. Eventually, I designed opportunities for certain clients to "fill in" a
range of "missing developmental experiences." I find that some clients,
even after substantial encouragement and insight, can still feel stuck, as if
they are not yet ready to grow up fully—as if some emotional vitamin is
still missing. Depending on the clients' accessibility, role-playing, guided
imagery, or narration may provide the belated "substitute experience" that
keeps them hesitant to move in a new direction (Stein & Edwards, n.d.). 1
prefer to do missing experience work in the context of an all-day, nine-hour,
marathon therapy group. This approach permits longer preparation and
debriefing time for participants as well as broader opportunities for role-
playing.
Comprehensive Lifestyle Analysis. The art of comprehensive lifestyle
analysis is not easy to teach. We use all of Adier's theoretical constructs, in-
cluding original feelings of inferiority; compensatory, fictional final goal;
antithetical scheme of apperception; private logic; depreciation tendency;
and the lifestyle. The most difficult and least understood aspect of this
process is interpreting psychological movement. Although Adler mentions
"looking at a client's movement" repeatedly in his writings, he does not of-
fer many clues on how to do it. Consequently, we spend a good deal of time
on this topic. However, students can become overwhelmed with the abun-
dance of information normally presented in a case. To help organize this

16 Henry T. Stein
information, I developed a series of structures to enable thorough analysis
and synthesis. 1 was reassured to discover that the procedures I use for ap-
proaching lifestyle analysis are remarkably similar to the sociological
research methods of Strauss and Corbin's (1998) qualitative analysis and
Glaser and Strauss's (1967) grounded theory. A host of valuable tools
emerged for gathering and organizing information, coding it for simplification,
recording comments and guesses, looking for patterns of similarity and con-
trast, abstracting meta-patterns from basic patterns, and moving to higher
levels of abstraction. I also discovered a useful software program that facili-
tates the processes of guessing, analysis, and synthesis.
Stimulating the Creative Process in Children. Early exposure to fertile
materials and inspirational guidance are sorely missing from much of early
childhood education. Largely prompted by Norman Brosterman's Inventing
Kindergarten (1997), I explored the work of Friedrich Froebel (e.g., 1887),
whose background in crystallography led him to create his kindergarten ma-
terials. Brosterman theorized that the Froebel kindergartens in Europe, with
their focus on nature and geometry, also may have contributed significantly
to the development of modern art and architecture in the twentieth century.
With its emphasis on holism, connectedness, and a gentle, Socratic style of
questioning, the Froebel method may have influenced Adler in his child-
hood. 1 recently corresponded with a professor of chemistry who believes
that an early study of crystallography would inspire many young children to-
day to consider science as a career. Jeane Rubin's (2002) Intimate Triangle:
Architecture of Crystals, Frank Lloyd Wright, and the Froehel Kindergarten
offers additional insight into the potential impact of Froebel's educational
theory and materials.
Use of the Internet to Disseminate Information. Since 1995, I have
experimented with various Internet capabilities to spread information about
Classical Adierian Depth Psychology all over the world. My web site offers
free articles, photographs, diagrams, and videos about theory, philosophy,
and practice, attracting over a million visitors in the past twelve years. It
now draws about 600 visits a day, about 200,000 visits a year. I send peri-
odic e-mail notices regarding new web site material to 5,000 recipients in
90 countries. Three discussion forums that I moderate have answered thou-
sands of questions (mostly for students who have psychology assignments
due on Monday). A year ago, I started a web log, offering Adierian inter-
pretations of news stories, magazine articles, and selections from Mankoff's
(2004) The Complete Cartoons of the New Yorker. I have conducted chat
rooms and video conferences, inviting people to discuss Individual Psychol-
ogy with each other. This electronic outreach has enabled me to connect
with many people in remote areas who do not have a local Adierian re-
source and who hunger for knowledge about depth psychotherapy.

Adler's Legacy 17
The Future of Individual Psychology:
Classical Adierian Depth Psychotherapy
For decades, an unfortunate, general perception in the mental health
community has been that Individual Psychology is superficial. Sadly, too
many well-meaning attempts to simplify Adler have resulted in diluting or
distorting his ideas.
In a 2005 journal article titled "Preserving our Humanity as Therapists,"
Nancy McWilliams (2005), president of the Division of Psychoanalysis of
the American Psychological Association, describes an increasing tendency
in the mental health field toward short-terrn symptom relief. The terms
"mental" and "emotional" health have been replaced by the term "be-
havioral health," implying the reduction of the therapist from a healer to
a technician. However, she states, "There is emerging empirical evidence
that long-term and intensive therapies are more effective—and probably
more cost effective—than the brief interventions favored by managed care
companies." She urges psychotherapists to take the initiative to ensure the
survival of a "humane, sophisticated psychotherapy."
Instead of permitting corporate-oriented managed care interests to re-
strict the future of psychotherapy to brief symptom relief, we can lead the
way for a future that does not merely yield a high return on economic in-
vestment but rather invests in the psychological welfare of mankind. In this
respect, Adler's Individual Psychology is the most socially responsible of all
psychotherapies, offering the widest radius of benefits to humanity.
Alexander Müller (1966, 1967, 1968, 1992), one of Adler's associ-
ates, said, "The central issue in Adierian Psychology is creative power."
Although he considered the feeling of inferiority an important influence, he
believed that creative power was central to the formation of a lifestyle and
fictional final goal. The force that allows us to let go ofthat lifestyle and goal
and pursue a new direction is also creative power. This precious creative
power needs to be nurtured throughout our lives. Ideally, this nurturing be-
gins with an astute, sensitive parent in early childhood, and continues with
an inspiring teacher through the formative years in school. For many, the
last opportunity to re-ignite this spark may come in the process of depth
psychotherapy.
Abraham Maslow (1970, 1971) clearly states that living creatively does
not grow out of techniques we might learn in a workshop or from a book;
rather, it results from overcoming self-imposed limitations through depth
psychotherapy. Classical Adierian Depth Psychotherapy can unleash this
creative power by dissolving the lifestyle and fictional final goal, as Adler
did. It can inspiré individuals to adopt a new direction based on universal
values, articulated by Adler and Maslow.

18 Henry T. Stein
Albert Einstein (1954) considered a connectedness to universal truth the
highest expression of being human. As Adierians, we bear the responsibil-
ity of keeping alive the art of Classical Adierian Depth Psychotherapy in
order to help as many people as possible connect to universal truth, thereby
unleashing their creative power for the welfare of mankind. My part is to
continue training depth psychotherapists, I hope that I have inspired at least
a few of you to join me.
References
Adler, A, (1927), The neurotic constitution: Outline of a comparative in-
dividualistic psychology and psychotherapy (B, Glueck & J, E, Lind, Trans,),
New York: Moffat, Yard, (Original work published 1912)
Adler, A. (1931), What life could mean to you (A, Porter, Ed,), Boston:
Little, Brown,
Adler, A, (1936), Se/ec(ec//ectures and papers (Unpublished manuscript),
Bellingham: Alfred Adler Institute of Northwestern Washington Archives,
Ahsen, A, (1977), Psycheye. New York: Brandon House,
Ansbacher, H, L,, & Ansbacher, R, R, (Eds,), (1956), The Individual Psy-
chology of Alfred Adler. New York: Basic Books,
Ansbacher, H, L,, & Ansbacher, R, R, (Eds,), (1978), Cooperation be-
tween the sexes. Garden City, NY: Anchor Books,
Ansbacher, H, L,, & Ansbacher, R, R, (Eds,), (1979), Superiority and so-
cial interest. New York: W, W, Norton & Company,
Brosterman, N, (1997), Inventing kindergarten. New York: Harry N,
Abrams, Inc,
Brück, A, (1975), Twenty lives (Unpublished manuscript), Bellingham:
Alfred Adler Institute of Northwestern Washington Archives,
Brück, A, (1976), Visibilized Adierian psychology (UnpubWshed man-
uscript), Bellingham: Alfred Adler Institute of Northwestern Washington
Archives,
Brück, A, (1977), Principles of Adierian brief therapy (Unpublished
manuscript), Bellingham: Alfred Adler Institute of Northwestern Washington
Archives,
Brück, A, (1978), The work of an Adierian psychologist in the schools
(Unpublished manuscript), Bellingham: Alfred Adler Institute of Northwest-
ern Washington Archives,
Brück, A, (1979), Selected lectures and papers (Unpublished manu-
script), Bellingham: Alfred Adler Institute of Northwestern Washington
Archives,
Chekhov, M, (1953), To the actor. New York: Harper and Brothers,

Adier's Legacy 19
Chekhov, M. (1963). To the director and playwright. New York: Harper
& Row.
Davidson, A. (Ed.) (1991 ). The collected works of Lydia Sicher: An Adie-
rian perspective. Ft. Bragg, CA: QED Press.
Einstein, A. (1954). Ideas and opinions. New York: Random House.
Ereud, S., Strachey, J., & Gay, P. (1989). An outline of Psychoanalysis.
New York: W. W. Norton.
Eroebel, E. (1887). The education of man. New York: D. Appleton.
Gardner, H. (1999). Intelligence reframed: Multiple intelligences for the
21st century. New York: Basic Books.
Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory. New
York: Aldine.
Gray, W. (n.d.). The collected papers of William Gray (Unpublished
manuscripts). Bellingham, WA: Alfred Adler Institute of Northwestern Wash-
ington Archives.
Gray, W. (1979). Understanding creative thought processes. Man-
Environment Systems, 9, 314.
Horn, R. (1998). Visual language: Clobal communication for the 21st
century. Bainbridge Island, WA: MacroVU, Inc.
La Violette, P (1979). Thoughts about thoughts about thoughts: The emo-
tional perceptive cycle theory. Man-Environment Systems, 9, 15-47.
MacLean, P. D. (1990). The triune brain in evolution: Role in paleocer-
ebral functions. New York: Plenum Press.
Mankoff, R. (Ed.). (2004). The complete cartoons of the New Yorker.
New York: Black Dog & Leventhal Publishers.
Maslow, A. H. (1970). Motivation and personality. New York: Harper &
Row.
Maslow, A. H. (1971). The farther reaches of human nature. New York:
The Viking Press.
McWilliams, N. (2005). Preserving our humanity as therapists. Psycho-
therapy: Theory Research, Practice, Training, 42(2), 139-151.
Müller, A. (1966). Alfred Adier's Individual Psychology (Unpublished
manuscript). Bellingham: Alfred Adler Institute of Northwestern Washington
Archives.
Müller, A. (1967). Principles of Individual Psychology (Unpublished
manuscript). Bellingham: Alfred Adler Institute of Northwestern Washington
Archives.
Müller, A. (1968). Selected lectures and papers (l^npuhWshed manuscript).
Bellingham: Alfred Adler Institute of Northwestern Washington Archives.
Müller, A. (1992). You shall be a blessing. San Francisco: Classical Ad-
ierian Translation Project.
Pribram, K. H. (1991). Brain and perception: Holonomy and structure in
figurai processing. New Jersey: Lawrence Eribaum Associates.

20 Henry T. Stein
Rubin, J. S. (2002). Intímate triangle: Architecture of crystals, Frank
Lloyd Wright, and the Froebel kindergarten. Huntsville, AL: Pplycrystal Book
Service.
Stanislavski, C. (1936). An actor prepares. New York: Routledge Theatre
Arts Books.
Stanislavski, C. (1949). Building a character. New York: Theatre Arts
Books.
Stein, H. T. (1991). Adler and Socrates: Similarities and differences. Indi-
vidual Psychology: The Journal of Adierian Theory, Research & Practice, 47,
241-246.
Stein, H. T, & Edwards, M. E. (n.d.). Providing the missing developmen-
tal experience in Classical Adierian psychotherapy. Retrieved September 20,
2007, from http://ourworld.compuserve.com/homepages/hstein/provid.htm
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research (2nd ed.).
London:Sage.
Wallas, G. (1949). The art of thought. London: Richard Clay & Co., Ltd.
Appendix
The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler, edited by H. T Stein.
Bellingham, WA: Classical Adierian Translation Project.
Volume 1 (2002). The neurotic character.
Volume 2 (2002). Journal articles, 1898-1909; A study of organ infe-
riority 1907.
Volume 3 (2003). Journal articles, 1910-1913.
Volume 4 (2003). Journal articles, 1914-1920.
Volume 5 (2004). Journal articles, 1921-1926.
Volume 6 (2004). Journal articles, 1927-1931.
Volume 7 (2005). Journal articles, 1931-1937.
Volume 8 (2005). Lectures to physicians and medical students (Medical
course at urban hospital; Post-graduate lectures at Long Island College of
Medicine).
Volume 9 (2005). Case histories (Problems of neurosis; The case of
Mrs. A; The case of Miss R).
Volume 10 (2005). Case readings & demonstrations (Theproblem child;
The pattern of life).
Volume 11 (2006). Education for prevention (Individual Psychology in
the schools; The education of children).
Volume 12 (2006). The general system of Individual Psychology (Over-
view and summary of classical Adierian theory & current practice).


