
 Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles 
and polymers 

 The Textile Institute and Woodhead Publishing 
 The Textile Institute is a unique organisation in textiles, clothing and foot-
wear. Incorporated in England by a Royal Charter granted in 1925, the 
Institute has individual and corporate members in over 90 countries. The 
aim of the Institute is to facilitate learning, recognise achievement, reward 
excellence and disseminate information within the global textiles, clothing 
and footwear industries. 
 Historically, The Textile Institute has published books of interest to its 
members and the textile industry. To maintain this policy, the Institute has 
entered into partnership with Woodhead Publishing Limited to ensure that 
Institute members and the textile industry continue to have access to high 
calibre titles on textile science and technology. 
 Most Woodhead titles on textiles are now published in collaboration with 
The Textile Institute. Through this arrangement, the Institute provides an 
Editorial Board which advises Woodhead on appropriate titles for future 
publication and suggests possible editors and authors for these books. Each 
book published under this arrangement carries the Institute’s logo. 
 Woodhead books published in collaboration with The Textile Institute are 
offered to Textile Institute members at a substantial discount. These books, 
together with those published by The Textile Institute that are still in print, 
are offered on the Elsevier web site at:  http://store.elsevier.com/ . Textile 
Institute books still in print are also available directly from the Institute’s 
web site at:  www.textileinstitutebooks.com . 
 A list of Woodhead books on textiles science and technology, most of which 
have been published in collaboration with The Textile Institute, can be found 
towards the end of the contents pages. 
 
    

Woodhead Publishing Series in Textiles: Number 150 
 Advances in ﬁ lament 
yarn spinning of 
textiles and polymers 
 Edited by
Dong  Zhang 
amsterdam • boston • cambridge • heidelberg • london 
new york • oxford • paris • san diego 
san francisco • singapore • sydney • tokyo
Woodhead Publishing is an imprint of Elsevier

 Published by Woodhead Publishing Limited in association with The Textile Institute 
 Woodhead Publishing is an imprint of Elsevier 
 80 High Street, Sawston, Cambridge, CB22 3HJ, UK 
 225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA 02451, USA 
 Langford Lane, Kidlington, OX5 1GB, UK
Copyright © 2014 Woodhead Publishing Limited. All rights reserved
 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted 
in any form or by any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise 
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science & Technology Rights
Department in Oxford, UK: phone (+44) (0) 1865 843830; fax (+44) (0) 1865 853333;
email: permissions@elsevier.com. Alternatively you can submit your request online by 
visiting the Elsevier web site at http://elsevier.com/locate/permissions, and selecting 
Obtaining permission to use Elsevier material.
Notice
No responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons or 
property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or 
operation of any methods, products, instructions or ideas contained in the material herein.
Because of rapid advances in the medical sciences, in particular, independent verifi cation 
of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made.  
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data 
 A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
 Library of Congress Control Number: 2013955406 
 ISBN 978-0-85709-499-5 (print) 
 ISBN 978-0-85709-917-4 (online) 
 Typeset by Newgen Knowledge Works Pvt Ltd, India 
 
Printed and bound in the United Kingdom 
For information on all Woodhead Publishing publications
visit our website at http://store.elsevier.com/ 

v
 Contents  
 Contributor contact details 
 ix 
 Woodhead Publishing Series in Textiles 
 xi 
 Introduction 
 xvii 
 Part I 
 General issues  
 1 
 1 
 Synthetic polymer ﬁ bers and their processing 
requirements 
  3 
 G. Bhat and V. Kandagor, The University of Tennessee, USA 
 1.1 
 Introduction 
 3 
 1.2 
 Chemistry of fi ber-forming polymers 
 6 
 1.3 
 Polymerization processes 
 14 
 1.4 
 Infl uence of chemical structure on the physical properties 
of chemicals and fi bers 
 17 
 1.5 
 Effects of molecular weight on fi ber spinnability, structure 
and properties 
 18 
 1.6 
 Flow properties of polymers 
 19 
 1.7 
 Principles of solidifi cation during fi ber formation 
 21 
 1.8 
 Fiber formation techniques 
 22 
 1.9 
 Post-fi ber formation treatments 
 26 
 1.10 
 Current trends 
 26 
 1.11 
 Conclusion 
 26 
 1.12 
 References 
 27 
 2 
 Understanding the behaviour of synthetic polymer 
ﬁ bres during spinning  
  31 
 E. Devaux, Ecole Nationale Sup é rieure des Arts 
et Industries Textiles (ENSAIT), and Centre Europ é en des 
Textiles Innovants (CETI), France 
 2.1 
 Introduction 
 31 
 2.2 
 Molten state rheology of thermoplastic polymers 
 32 

vi   Contents
 2.3 
 Polymer behaviour during cooling and resulting fi bre 
structure 
 35 
 2.4 
 Polymer behaviour during fi lament spinning 
 39 
 2.5 
 The die swell phenomenon 
 41 
 2.6 
 Drawing of polymers: changes in morphology and 
properties of fi laments 
 44 
 2.7 
 References 
 45 
 3 
 Technologies for the manufacture of synthetic 
polymer ﬁ bers  
 48 
 J. Hagewood, J Hagewood LLC, USA 
 3.1 
 Introduction 
 48 
 3.2 
 Textile fi lament and bulk continuous fi ber (BCF) spinning 
 50 
 3.3 
 Staple fi ber spinning 
 52 
 3.4 
 Industrial fi ber spinning equipment 
 54 
 3.5 
 Monofi lament fi ber equipment 
 55 
 3.6 
 Bicomponent fi ber equipment 
 58 
 3.7 
 Spunbond lines 
 61 
 3.8 
 Melt blown processes 
 65 
 3.9 
 Solvent spinning lines 
 66 
 3.10 
 Hollow fi ber membranes 
 67 
 3.11 
 Gel spinning 
 69 
 3.12 
 Nano-fi ber spinning 
 69 
 3.13 
 Conclusion 
 70 
 3.14 
 References 
 70 
 Part II   Spinning techniques 
 73 
 4 
 Melt spinning of synthetic polymeric ﬁ laments  
  75 
 A. Rawal and S. Mukhopadhyay, Indian Institute of 
Technology Delhi, India 
 4.1 
 Introduction 
 75 
 4.2 
 Fundamentals of melt spinning 
 76 
 4.3 
 Modeling of polymer fl ows in melt spinning 
 79 
 4.4 
 Filament interaction with the environment in melt spinning 
 84 
 4.5 
 Limitations of melt spinning 
 88 
 4.6 
 Developments in melt spinning 
 88 
 4.7 
 Future trends 
 95 
 4.8 
 Conclusion 
 95 
 4.9 
 Sources of further information and advice 
 96 
 4.10 
 References 
 96 

Contents   vii
 5 
 Gel spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers  
  100 
 C. J. Kuo and W. L. Lan, National Taiwan University of 
Science and Technology, Taiwan 
 5.1 
 Introduction 
 100 
 5.2 
 Factors affecting the spinning of polymers: entanglement 
 101 
 5.3 
 Factors affecting fi bre strength 
 102 
 5.4 
 Gel spinning technologies 
 103 
 5.5 
 Types of fi bres produced using gel spinning 
 105 
 5.6 
 Factors affecting gel spinning 
 106 
 5.7 
 Gel spun textile products 
 109 
 5.8 
 Conclusion and future trends 
 110 
 5.9 
 References 
 112 
 6 
 Bi-component and bi-constituent spinning of synthetic 
polymer ﬁ bres  
 113 
 S. Mukhopadhyay, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
India 
 6.1 
 Introduction 
 113 
 6.2 
 Classifi cation of bi-component fi bres 
 114 
 6.3 
 Spinning technologies 
 116 
 6.4 
 Factors affecting bi-component and bi-constituent spinning 
 120 
 6.5 
 Applications of bi-component fi bres 
 124 
 6.6 
 Future trends 
 126 
 6.7 
 References 
 126 
 7 
 Electrospinning, processing and characterization of 
polymer-based nano-composite ﬁ bers  
  128 
 Q. Q. Ni, X. D. Jin, H. Xia and F. Liu, Shinshu University, 
Japan 
 7.1 
 Introduction 
 128 
 7.2 
 Principles of electrospinning 
 129 
 7.3 
 Electrospinning technology 
 130 
 7.4 
 Electrospinning of nanofi bers 
 132 
 7.5 
 Properties of electrospun nanofi bers 
 134 
 7.6 
 Conclusion 
 145 
 7.7 
 References 
 145 
 8 
 Integrated composite spinning (ICS)   
  149 
 W. Oxenham, North Carolina State University, USA 
 8.1 
 Introduction 
 149 
 8.2 
 The background and history of integrated composite 
spinning (ICS) 
 150 

viii   Contents
 8.3 
 The development of ICS technology 
 153 
 8.4 
 The impact of material selection and processing parameters 
on ICS yarn properties 
 160 
 8.5 
 Commercialization of the process 
 166 
 8.6 
 Assessing the advantages and disadvantages of ICS 
technology 
 168 
 8.7 
 Future trends 
 169 
 8.8 
 Conclusion 
 170 
 8.9 
 References 
 171 
 9 
 Wet spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers  
  174 
 B. Ozipek and H. Karakas, Istanbul Technical University, 
Turkey 
 9.1 
 Introduction 
 174 
 9.2 
 Principles of wet spinning 
 174 
 9.3 
 Types of fi bers used 
 177 
 9.4 
 Fiber properties 
 182 
 9.5 
 Factors affecting wet spinning 
 183 
 9.6 
 Applications and future trends 
 184 
 9.7 
 References 
 185 
 10  
 Dry spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers  
  187 
 Y. Imura, New Jersey Institute of Technology, USA, 
R. M. C. Hogan, Omni Tech International, USA and 
M. Jaffe, New Jersey Institute of Technology, USA 
 10.1 
 Introduction 
 187 
 10.2 
 The dry spinning process 
 189 
 10.3 
 Characteristics of dry spun fi bers 
 190 
 10.4 
 Variables in dry spinning 
 191 
 10.5 
 Dry spinning of acrylic fi bres 
 193 
 10.6 
 Dry spinning of cellulose acetate and triacetate 
 196 
 10.7 
 Dry spinning of other fi bers: polybenzimidazole (PBI), 
spandex and polyvinyl chloride (PVC) 
 199 
 10.8 
 Conclusion and future trends 
 201 
 10.9 
 References 
 201 
 Index 
 203 
 

ix
Contributor contact details  
 (* = main contact) 
Editor 
 D.  Zhang 
 Textile Research Associates 
 105 Shenandoah Street 
 Clarksville, TN 37043 
 USA 
 E-mail: dzhang@charter.net; 
dzhang@textileresearch.org
http://www.t1extileresearch.org/ 
 Chapter 1 
 V.  Kandagor and  G.  Bhat* 
 Department of Material Science 
and Engineering 
 University of Tennessee 
 Knoxville, TN 37996, USA 
 E-mail: gbhat@utk.edu 
 Chapter 2 
 E.  Devaux 
 Ecole Nationale Sup é rieure des 
Arts et Industries Textiles 
(ENSAIT) 
 Laboratoire de G é nie et Mat é riaux 
Textiles (GEMTEX) 
 2, all é e Louise et Victor Champier 
 BP 30329 
 59056 Roubaix Cedex 01, France 
 and 
 Centre Europ é en des Textiles 
Innovants (CETI) 
 41, rue des M é tissages 
 CS 40303 
 59335 Tourcoing, France 
 E-mail: eric.devaux@ensait.fr 
 Chapter 3 
 J.  Hagewood 
 J Hagewood LLC 
 209 Connors Cir 
 Cary, NC 27511, USA 
 E-mail: john@jhagewood.com 
 Chapter 4 
 A.  Rawal* and  S.  Mukhopadhyay 
 Department of Textile Technology 
 Indian Institute of Technology 
Delhi 
 Hauz Khas 
 New Delhi 110016, India 
 E-mail: amitrawal77@hotmail.com 

x   Contributor contact details
 Chapter 5 
 C. J.  Kuo* and  W. L.  Lan 
 Department of Materials Science 
and Engineering 
 National Taiwan University of 
Science and Technology 
 43, Sec. 4, Keelung Rd. 
 Da’an Dist. 
 Taipei City 106, Taiwan 
 E-mail: jeffreykuo@mail.ntust.edu.tw 
 Chapter 6 
 S.  Mukhopadhyay 
 Department of Textile Technology 
 Indian Institute of Technology 
Delhi 
 Hauz Khas 
 New Delhi 110016, India 
 E-mail: samrat@textile.iitd.ac.in 
 Chapter 7 
 Q. Q.  Ni*,  X. D.  Jin ,  H.  Xia 
and  F.  Liu 
 Faculty of Textile Science and 
Technology 
 Shinshu University 
 Ueda 386-8567, Japan 
 E-mail: niqq@shinshu-u.ac.jp 
 Chapter 8 
 W.  Oxenham 
 College of Textiles 
 North Carolina State University 
 2401 Research Drive 
 Raleigh, NC 27695-8301, USA 
 E-mail: william_oxenham@ncsu.
edu 
 Chapter 9 
 B.  Ozipek* and  H.  Karakas 
 Istanbul Technical University 
 Faculty of Textile Technologies and 
Design 
 Inonu Cad. No: 65 
 Gumussuyu/Taksim 
 Istanbul, 34437, Turkey 
 E-mail: ozipek@itu.edu.tr 
 Chapter 10 
 Y.  Imura and  M.  Jaffe 
 Department of Biomedical 
Engineering 
 New Jersey Institute of Technology 
 University Heights 
 Newark, NJ 07102-1982, USA 
 E-mail: jaffe@njit.edu 
 R.M.C. Hogan 
 Omni Tech International
USA
 
 

xi
Woodhead Publishing Series in Textiles  
 1  Watson’s textile design and colour Seventh edition 
 
Edited by Z. Grosicki 
 2  Watson’s advanced textile design 
 
Edited by Z. Grosicki 
 3  Weaving Second edition 
 
P. R. Lord and M. H. Mohamed 
 4  Handbook of textile fi bres Volume 1: Natural fi bres 
 
J. Gordon Cook 
 5  Handbook of textile fi bres Volume 2: Man-made fi bres 
 
J. Gordon Cook 
 6  Recycling textile and plastic waste 
 
Edited by A. R. Horrocks 
 7  New fi bers Second edition 
 
T. Hongu and G. O. Phillips 
 8  Atlas of fi bre fracture and damage to textiles Second edition 
 
J. W. S. Hearle, B. Lomas and W. D. Cooke 
 9  Ecotextile ‘98 
 
Edited by A. R. Horrocks 
 10  Physical testing of textiles 
 
B. P. Saville 
 11  Geometric symmetry in patterns and tilings 
 
C. E. Horne 
 12  Handbook of technical textiles 
 
Edited by A. R. Horrocks and S. C. Anand 
 13  Textiles in automotive engineering 
 
W. Fung and J. M. Hardcastle 
 14  Handbook of textile design 
 
J. Wilson 
 15  High-performance fi bres 
 
Edited by J. W. S. Hearle 
 16  Knitting technology Third edition 
 
D. J. Spencer 
 17  Medical textiles 
 
Edited by S. C. Anand 
 18  Regenerated cellulose fi bres 
 
Edited by C. Woodings 
 19  Silk, mohair, cashmere and other luxury fi bres 
 
Edited by R. R. Franck 
 20  Smart fi bres, fabrics and clothing 
 
Edited by X. M. Tao 
 21  Yarn texturing technology 
 
J. W. S. Hearle, L. Hollick and D. K. Wilson 

xii   Woodhead Publishing Series in Textiles
 22  Encyclopedia of textile fi nishing 
 
H-K. Rouette 
 23  Coated and laminated textiles 
 
W. Fung 
 24  Fancy yarns 
 
R. H. Gong and R. M. Wright 
 25  Wool: Science and technology 
 
Edited by W. S. Simpson and G. Crawshaw 
 26  Dictionary of textile fi nishing 
 
H-K. Rouette 
 27  Environmental impact of textiles 
 
K. Slater 
 28  Handbook of yarn production 
 
P. R. Lord 
 29  Textile processing with enzymes 
 
Edited by A. Cavaco-Paulo and G. G ü bitz 
 30  The China and Hong Kong denim industry 
 
Y. Li, L. Yao and K. W. Yeung 
 31  The World Trade Organization and international denim trading 
 
Y. Li, Y. Shen, L. Yao and E. Newton 
 32  Chemical fi nishing of textiles 
 
W. D. Schindler and P. J. Hauser 
 33  Clothing appearance and fi t 
 
J. Fan, W. Yu and L. Hunter 
 34  Handbook of fi bre rope technology 
 
H. A. McKenna, J. W. S. Hearle and N. O’Hear 
 35  Structure and mechanics of woven fabrics 
 
J. Hu 
 36  Synthetic fi bres: nylon, polyester, acrylic, polyolefi n 
 
Edited by J. E. McIntyre 
 37  Woollen and worsted woven fabric design 
 
E. G. Gilligan 
 38  Analytical electrochemistry in textiles 
 
P. Westbroek, G. Priniotakis and P. Kiekens 
 39  Bast and other plant fi bres 
 
R. R. Franck 
 40  Chemical testing of textiles 
 
Edited by Q. Fan 
 41  Design and manufacture of textile composites 
 
Edited by A. C. Long 
 42  Effect of mechanical and physical properties on fabric hand 
 
Edited by H. M. Behery 
 43  New millennium fi bers 
 
T. Hongu, M. Takigami and G. O. Phillips 
 44  Textiles for protection 
 
Edited by R. A. Scott 
 45  Textiles in sport 
 
Edited by R. Shishoo 
 46  Wearable electronics and photonics 
 
Edited by X. M. Tao 
 47  Biodegradable and sustainable fi bres 
 
Edited by R. S. Blackburn 
 48  Medical textiles and biomaterials for healthcare 
 
Edited by S. C. Anand, M. Miraftab, S. Rajendran and J. F. Kennedy 

Woodhead Publishing Series in Textiles   xiii
 49  Total colour management in textiles 
 
Edited by J. Xin 
 50  Recycling in textiles 
 
Edited by Y. Wang 
 51  Clothing biosensory engineering 
 
Y. Li and A. S. W. Wong 
 52  Biomechanical engineering of textiles and clothing 
 
Edited by Y. Li and D. X-Q. Dai 
 53  Digital printing of textiles 
 
Edited by H. Ujiie 
 54  Intelligent textiles and clothing 
 
Edited by H. R. Mattila 
 55  Innovation and technology of women’s intimate apparel 
 
W. Yu, J. Fan, S. C. Harlock and S. P. Ng 
 56  Thermal and moisture transport in fi brous materials 
 
Edited by N. Pan and P. Gibson 
 57  Geosynthetics in civil engineering 
 
Edited by R. W. Sarsby 
 58  Handbook of nonwovens 
 
Edited by S. Russell 
 59  Cotton: Science and technology 
 
Edited by S. Gordon and Y-L. Hsieh 
 60  Ecotextiles 
 
Edited by M. Miraftab and A. R. Horrocks 
 61  Composite forming technologies 
 
Edited by A. C. Long 
 62  Plasma technology for textiles 
 
Edited by R. Shishoo 
 63  Smart textiles for medicine and healthcare 
 
Edited by L. Van Langenhove 
 64  Sizing in clothing 
 
Edited by S. Ashdown 
 65  Shape memory polymers and textiles 
 
J. Hu 
 66  Environmental aspects of textile dyeing 
 
Edited by R. Christie 
 67  Nanofi bers and nanotechnology in textiles 
 
Edited by P. Brown and K. Stevens 
 68  Physical properties of textile fi bres Fourth edition 
 
W. E. Morton and J. W. S. Hearle 
 69  Advances in apparel production 
 
Edited by C. Fairhurst 
 70  Advances in fi re retardant materials 
 
Edited by A. R. Horrocks and D. Price 
 71  Polyesters and polyamides 
 
Edited by B. L. Deopura, R. Alagirusamy, M. Joshi and B. S. Gupta 
 72  Advances in wool technology 
 
Edited by N. A. G. Johnson and I. Russell 
 73  Military textiles 
 
Edited by E. Wilusz 
 74  3D fi brous assemblies: Properties, applications and modelling of three-dimensional textile 
structures 
 
J. Hu 

xiv   Woodhead Publishing Series in Textiles
 75  Medical and healthcare textiles 
 
Edited by S. C. Anand, J. F. Kennedy, M. Miraftab and S. Rajendran 
 76  Fabric testing 
 
Edited by J. Hu 
 77  Biologically inspired textiles 
 
Edited by A. Abbott and M. Ellison 
 78  Friction in textile materials 
 
Edited by B. S. Gupta 
 79  Textile advances in the automotive industry 
 
Edited by R. Shishoo 
 80  Structure and mechanics of textile fi bre assemblies 
 
Edited by P. Schwartz 
 81  Engineering textiles: Integrating the design and manufacture of textile products 
 
Edited by Y. E. El-Mogahzy 
 82  Polyolefi n fi bres: Industrial and medical applications 
 
Edited by S. C. O. Ugbolue 
 83  Smart clothes and wearable technology 
 
Edited by J. McCann and D. Bryson 
 84  Identifi cation of textile fi bres 
 
Edited by M. Houck 
 85  Advanced textiles for wound care 
 
Edited by S. Rajendran 
 86  Fatigue failure of textile fi bres 
 
Edited by M. Miraftab 
 87  Advances in carpet technology 
 
Edited by K. Goswami 
 88  Handbook of textile fi bre structure Volume 1 and Volume 2 
 
Edited by S. J. Eichhorn, J. W. S. Hearle, M. Jaffe and T. Kikutani 
 89  Advances in knitting technology 
 
Edited by K-F. Au 
 90  Smart textile coatings and laminates 
 
Edited by W. C. Smith 
 91  Handbook of tensile properties of textile and technical fi bres 
 
Edited by A. R. Bunsell 
 92  Interior textiles: Design and developments 
 
Edited by T. Rowe 
 93  Textiles for cold weather apparel 
 
Edited by J. T. Williams 
 94  Modelling and predicting textile behaviour 
 
Edited by X. Chen 
 95  Textiles, polymers and composites for buildings 
 
Edited by G. Pohl 
 96  Engineering apparel fabrics and garments 
 
J. Fan and L. Hunter 
 97  Surface modifi cation of textiles 
 
Edited by Q. Wei 
 98  Sustainable textiles 
 
Edited by R. S. Blackburn 
 99  Advances in yarn spinning technology 
 
Edited by C. A. Lawrence 
 100  Handbook of medical textiles 
 
Edited by V. T. Bartels 
 101  Technical textile yarns 
 
Edited by R. Alagirusamy and A. Das 

Woodhead Publishing Series in Textiles   xv
 102  Applications of nonwovens in technical textiles 
 
Edited by R. A. Chapman 
 103  Colour measurement: Principles, advances and industrial applications 
 
Edited by M. L. Gulrajani 
 104  Fibrous and composite materials for civil engineering applications 
 
Edited by R. Fangueiro 
 105  New product development in textiles: Innovation and production 
 
Edited by L.Horne 
 106  Improving comfort in clothing 
 
Edited by G. Song 
 107  Advances in textile biotechnology 
 
Edited by V. A. Nierstrasz and A. Cavaco-Paulo 
 108  Textiles for hygiene and infection control 
 
Edited by B. McCarthy 
 109  Nanofunctional textiles 
 
Edited by Y. Li 
 110  Joining textiles: Principles and applications 
 
Edited by I. Jones and G. Stylios 
 111  Soft computing in textile engineering 
 
Edited by A. Majumdar 
 112  Textile design 
 
Edited by A. Briggs-Goode and K. Townsend 
 113  Biotextiles as medical implants 
 
Edited by M. W. King, B. S. Gupta and R. Guidoin 
 114  Textile thermal bioengineering 
 
Edited by Y. Li 
 115  Woven textile structure 
 
B. K. Behera and P. K. Hari 
 116  Handbook of textile and industrial dyeing. Volume 1: Principles, processes and types of 
dyes 
 
Edited by M. Clark 
 117  Handbook of textile and industrial dyeing. Volume 2: Applications of dyes 
 
Edited by M. Clark 
 118  Handbook of natural fi bres. Volume 1: Types, properties and factors affecting breeding 
and cultivation 
 
Edited by  R. Koz ł owski 
 119  Handbook of natural fi bres. Volume 2: Processing and applications 
 
Edited by  R. Koz ł owski 
 120  Functional textiles for improved performance, protection and health 
 
Edited by N. Pan and G. Sun 
 121  Computer technology for textiles and apparel 
 
Edited by J. Hu 
 122  Advances in military textiles and personal equipment 
 
Edited by E. Sparks 
 123  Specialist yarn and fabric structures 
 
Edited by R. H. Gong 
 124  Handbook of sustainable textile production 
 
M. I. Tobler-Rohr 
 125  Woven textiles: Principles, developments and applications 
 
Edited by K. Gandhi 
 126  Textiles and fashion: Materials design and technology 
 
Edited by R. Sinclair 
 127  Industrial cutting of textile materials 
 
I. Vi ļ umsone-Nemes 

xvi   Woodhead Publishing Series in Textiles
 128  Colour design: Theories and applications 
 
Edited by J. Best 
 129  False twist textured yarns 
 
C. Atkinson 
 130  Modelling, simulation and control of the dyeing process 
 
R. Shamey and X. Zhao 
 131  Process control in textile manufacturing 
 
Edited by A. Majumdar, A. Das, R. Alagirusamy and V. K. Kothari 
 132  Understanding and improving the durability of textiles 
 
Edited by P. A. Annis 
 133  Smart textiles for protection 
 
Edited by R. A. Chapman 
 134  Functional nanofi bers and applications 
 
Edited by Q. Wei 
 135  The global textile and clothing industry : Technological advances and future challenges 
 
Edited by R. Shishoo 
 136  Simulation in textile technology: Theory and applications 
 
Edited by D. Veit 
 137  Pattern cutting for clothing using CAD: How to use Lectra Modaris pattern cutting 
software 
 
M. Stott 
 138  Advances in the dyeing and fi nishing of technical textiles 
 
M. L. Gulrajani 
 139  Multidisciplinary know-how for smart textiles developers 
 
Edited by T. Kirstein 
 140  Handbook of fi re resistant textiles 
 
Edited by F. Selcen Kilinc 
 141  Handbook of footwear design and manufacture 
 
Edited by A. Luximon 
 142  Textile-led design for the active ageing population 
 
Edited by J. McCann and D. Bryson 
 143  Optimizing decision making in the apparel supply chain using artifi cial intelligence (AI): 
From production to retail 
 
W. K. Wong, Z. X. Guo and S. Y. S. Leung 
 144  Mechanisms of fl at weaving technology 
 
V. V. Choogin, P. Bandara and E. V. Chepelyuk 
 145  Innovative jacquard textile design using digital technologies 
 
F. Ng and J. Zhou 
 146  Advances in shape memory polymers 
 
J. Hu 
 147  Design of clothing manufacturing processes: A systematic approach to planning, schedul-
ing and control 
 
J. Gersak 
 148  Anthropometry, apparel sizing and design 
 
D. Gupta and N. Zakaria 
 149  Silk: Processing, properties and applications 
 
K. Murugesh Babu 
 150  Advances in fi lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers 
 
D. Zhang 
 151  Designing apparel for consumers: The impact of body shape and size 
 
M.-E. Faust and S. Carrier 

xvii
 Introduction  
  The use of fi bres is one of the most important inventions of human history. 
From earliest times, people have planted cotton and ramie from which to 
extract fi bres for clothing as a substitute for animal skins, though the quality 
was often crude and unrefi ned. The Chinese extracted silk to produce high-
quality apparel. The invention of rayon in 1903 triggered a revolution which 
led to the fi rst synthetic fi bre in 1935, so setting in train the rapid develop-
ment of the synthetic fi bre industry. To date, the most commonly used spin-
ning methods include, but are not limited to, melt spinning, dry spinning and 
wet spinning, with nanofi bre technologies emerging more recently. 
 The history of man-made fi bres dates back to the 19th century, and has 
evolved over the years into a complex fi eld of technology. During the past 
50 years, the need for an understanding of the fundamental theory of fi bre 
formation, combined with a market-driven requirement for fi brous mate-
rials, has increased interest and attracted attention from scientists, thus  
enhancing knowledge of these materials. 
 The inherent qualities of natural fi bre-forming materials have limited 
their useful applications. Silk, cotton and wool have been in use for thou-
sands of years, but their inherent defi ciencies (for example, the tendency of 
cotton to wrinkle, the delicacy required in handling silk, and the shrinking 
characteristics of wool) limited their application, and the lifetime of such 
products was therefore short. 
 In 1903 rayon, the fi rst manufactured fi bre, was developed. Advances in 
the understanding of fi bre chemistry for many applications had begun to 
emerge. By 1950, over 50 different types of man-made polymeric fi bres had 
been produced. This historic advance in fi bre technology was preceded by 
the modifi cation of naturally occurring polymers, enabled by advancing 
understanding of the background chemistry and physics of polymers. 
 Since the discovery of natural silk, technology has sought to imitate nature 
whilst also attempting to produce artifi cial and synthetic materials with 
properties similar to those of the natural textile. The exceptional mechani-
cal and handling characteristics of natural silk have remained the reference 
points in this fi eld. The synthetic fi bre invented and patented in 1884 by 
Bernigaud de Chardonnet, often called ‘artifi cial silk’, is considered to be the 
fi rst signifi cant result in the development of man-made fi bres. Development 

xviii   Introduction
of such materials followed the appearance of plastics at the beginning of 
the twentieth century and the work done by Hermann Standinger in under-
standing the macromolecular structure of polymers. Polyamide 6.6 fi bre 
(nylon) developed by DuPont de Nemours in 1938 revolutionised clothing 
manufacture, as well being used for military applications. The functional 
characteristics of this fi bre closely resemble those of silk. It has exceptional 
strength, fl exibility and lightness and was the fi rst in a long series of syn-
thetic fi bres whose properties continued to diversify with progress in mac-
romolecular chemistry. 
 There are three principal methods of producing polymeric fi bres: melt 
spinning, wet spinning, and dry spinning. Although there are several meth-
ods of fi lament production, melt spinning is the preferred method, and is 
one of the most economical, mainly due to the simplicity of the process, 
which does not require solvents. Most commercial synthetic fi bres are pro-
duced from crystalline polymers by the melt spinning process. For polymers 
without a stable melt phase, it is necessary to spin the fi bre from solution. 
Dry spinning uses a highly volatile solvent (with a high vapour pressure), so 
the fi bre forms during spinning by solvent evaporation. Wet spinning is used 
only if the potential polymer solvents are of low volatility. The fi bre must 
be spun in a non-solvent bath to remove the spinning solvent and coagulate 
the fi bre. 
 As requirements for the performance offered by fi bre products increases, 
the development of reinforced fi bre has become a key focus. In the US dur-
ing the 1970s, DuPont successfully developed an aramid with strength above 
17.6cN/dex, leading to the development of high-strength fi bres. The main 
types of high-strength fi bres include PPTA fi bre, UHMWHP fi bre, and car-
bon fi bre. 
 As the demands made on fi bre product performance increased, many spe-
cial spinning methods were researched and developed. Methods including 
gel spinning, electrostatic spinning, and integrate composite spinning have 
been applied in industrial production. Gel spinning has been widely used for 
the production of fi bres with high strength and high mechanical properties. 
Bi-component fi bres are a class of poly-blend fi bres, manufactured by spe-
cial spinning techniques, the aim of which is to overcome the limitations of 
conventional single-component spinning. The blending of polymers for spe-
cialised spinning improves processing and properties for specifi c end uses. 
 Electro-spinning is a relatively simple and inexpensive method for pro-
ducing fi bres with diameters in the nanometer range. In recent years, many 
different kinds of polymer nano-fi bres have been produced by this technol-
ogy. While electrospinning technology is simple, it has a high potential for 
applications using nano materials. Nano-composite fi bres are fabricated by 
electrospinning technology. These fi bres are expected to be multi-functional 
and are based on the selection of particles and polymers which may have 

Introduction   xix
a high potential in engineering applications such as sensing and electroac-
tive actuators. The development of bi-functionality nanocomposite fi bres 
is therefore a challenge for the wider application of nanofi bres. However, 
the production rate for electro-spinning is relatively low when compared to 
other spinning methods. 
 Integrated Composite Spinning (ICS) is based on the concept of combin-
ing fi lament yarns with staple fi bres to produce a composite yarn. It differs 
from other yarn formation systems in being designed to integrate a staple 
fi bre component into semi-molten polymer. The concept has aroused con-
siderable interest due to its high production speed when compared to other 
staple spinning processes. The potential applications for such a system are 
mainly technical, performance, and medical textiles. 
 Today, synthetic fi bres are ubiquitous. They surround us in clothing, bed-
ding and home furnishings. They are also found in applications such as dust 
covers for use under sofas and beds, air and liquid fi ltrations, sound absorb-
ers in car doors, insulation materials in buildings, and as fi llings in pillows 
and cushions. They are primary materials in diapers, cleaning wipes and 
many window treatments. They are used in dental brushes and fl oss, and 
for stitching and bandaging wounds. Many surgical procedures would not 
be possible without the use of biodegradable synthetic fi bre sutures which 
hydrolyse and dissolve in the body. These fi bres are often used as reinforce-
ment materials in plastic parts, automobile tyres, and even in concrete. Much 
of modern life depends upon our understanding, production and use of syn-
thetic fi bres. 
 Dr Dong Zhang 
 May, 2013 
 

This page intentionally left blank

 Part I 
 General issues 

This page intentionally left blank

© 2014 Woodhead Publishing Limited
3
 1 
 Synthetic polymer fibers and their 
processing requirements  
 G.  BHAT and  V.  KANDAGOR , 
 The University of Tennessee, USA 
 DOI : 10.1533/9780857099174.1.3 
 Abstract : In order to understand the structure and properties of the 
desired polymer products, we should have a comprehensive knowledge 
of the process optimization conditions and materials characteristics. The 
fundamentals that determine the structure and properties of polymeric 
fi bers include the composition, the molecular structure of the polymer, 
and morphological features such as crystallinity and orientation. 
Understanding these factors will be the key to determining correctly the 
manufacturing process from polymerization to fi ber spinning, drawing, 
and post treatment of manufactured fi bers. The inherent qualities of 
existing natural fi ber-forming materials, their limitations and applications, 
are also discussed. 
 Key words : polymerization, fi ber spinnability, rheology, natural fi bers, 
synthetic fi bers, high performance fi bers. 
 1.1 
 Introduction 
 The history of man-made fi bers dates back to the nineteenth century and has 
evolved to become one of the most widely-researched fi elds of technology. 
During the past 50 years, the need to understand the fundamental theory 
of fi ber formation, combined with the demand for high quality fi bers, has 
attracted the attention of many polymer scientists. For thousands of years, 
silk, cotton, and wool had been successfully used as textiles, but some draw-
backs, for example the tendency of cotton to wrinkle, the delicate handling 
of silk, and the shrinking characteristics of wool, limited their application. 
But in 1903, rayon, the fi rst manufactured fi ber, was developed. Advances 
in the understanding of fi ber chemistry across a wide spread of applications 
began to emerge. By 1950, over 50 different types of man-made polymeric 
fi bers had been produced. This historic advance in fi ber technology was pre-
ceded by the modifi cation of naturally occurring polymers. An advancing 
and deepening understanding of the background chemistry and physics of 

4   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
polymers has enabled the manipulation of polymers, making possible end 
products driven by consumer needs. 1 
 In order to understand the relationship between processing conditions 
and the characteristic properties of desired polymer products, a compre-
hensive knowledge of optimal conditions and material characteristics is 
necessary. This can be achieved only by understanding the fundamentals of 
polymers and polymer technology. The fundamentals determining the struc-
ture and properties of polymeric fi bers include the composition, the molecu-
lar structure of the polymer, and morphological features such as crystallinity 
and orientation. An understanding of these factors is the key to  determining 
the manufacturing process from synthesis of the monomer to polymeriza-
tion, fi ber spinning, and drawing through to the fi nal product. 
 1.1.1   Types of ﬁ ber 
 Fibers are materials with a very high aspect ratio, or elongated continuous 
structures, similar to the lengths of thread and varying in diameter from 
millimeters to nanometers. Most of the commonly used fi bers, whether 
natural or synthetic, tend to be polymeric in nature. Fiber-forming poly-
mers can be categorized as synthetic and natural fi bers, and commodity 
and specialty fi bers. Polymers are macromolecular and in their simplest 
form consist of basic chemical structural units that are identical and linked 
together by well-defi ned bonds. The specifi c type of bond is particularly 
important in determining the molecular structure and architecture of the 
polymer. In polymer structure, the number of repeating units in a chain, 
or the molecular weight of the polymer, is very important in determining 
its characteristics and applications. The molecular weight of a fi ber-form-
ing polymer is not monodispersed, but is rather an average of the molec-
ular weights of the chains that exist in a polymer sample. The molecular 
weight of the sample is an important property of the polymer, because it 
determines the tensile strength and infl uences the physical properties of 
the material. 
 Natural and synthetic fi bers 
 Natural fi bers originate in geological processes, plants, or animals, and are 
generally degradable, mainly as a function of time and the environmen-
tal conditions to which they are subjected. Synthetic fi bers are made from 
materials that are chemically synthesized and may sometimes imitate natu-
ral products. Following World War II, global advances in technology enabled 
the fabrication of materials equal in strength, appearance, and other char-
acteristics to natural materials. They were also lower in cost. Synthetic fi bers 

Synthetic polymer ﬁ bers and their processing requirements   5
can be made from polymers, metals, carbon, silicon carbide, fi berglass, and 
minerals. This book focuses mainly on polymeric fi bers. 
 The majority of fi ber-forming polymers, like common plastics, are based 
on petrochemical sources . Polymeric fi bers can be produced from the fol-
lowing materials: polyamide nylon, polyethylene terephthalate (PET) or 
polybutylene terephthalate (PBT) polyesters, phenol-formaldehyde (PF), 
polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), and polyolefi ns (poly-
propylene (PP) and polyethylene (PE) ) among others. Because of the dif-
ferent chemical structures of fi ber-forming polymers, their applications vary 
widely according to the temperature and chemical conditions which they 
can withstand. For example, polyethylene melts into a viscous liquid at tem-
peratures equal to or less than that of a domestic dryer and therefore its 
application in a product that will require normal laundering is not possible. 
However, its fi bers can be used in making disposable non-woven products. 2 
 Commodity, specialty, and engineered fi bers 
 Most nylons, polyesters and polypropylenes are commodity fi bers and have 
the required properties for apparel and upholstery applications. Specialty 
polymer fi bers are made from plastic materials and have unique characteris-
tics, such as ultra-high strength, electrical conductivity, electro-fl uorescence, 
high thermal stability, higher chemical resistance, and fl ame retardancy. PE, 
for instance, a polymer commonly used in the manufacture of disposable 
shopping bags and refuse bags, is a cheap, low friction coeffi cient poly-
mer, and is considered a commodity plastic. Medium-density polyethylene 
(MDPE) is used for underground gas and water pipes; ultra-high molecular 
weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) is an engineering plastic used extensively 
for glide rails in industrial equipment and for the low friction sockets in 
implanted hip joints. It is also used to produce Spectra® or Dyneema®, the 
fi ber having the highest specifi c strength. 
 Another industrial application of this material is the fabrication of 
composite materials consisting of two or more macroscopic phases. Steel-
reinforced concrete is one example, and another is the plastic casing used 
for television sets and cell-phones. This plastic casing is usually of com-
posite materials consisting of a thermoplastic matrix such as acrylonitrile-
 butadiene-styrene (ABS) to which calcium carbonate chalk, talc, glass fi bers, 
or carbon fi bers have been added to enhance strength, bulk, or electro-static 
dispersion. These additions may be referred to as reinforcing fi bers or dis-
persants, depending on their purpose. 
 It should be noted here that the dividing line between the various types 
of plastics is not based on the materials, but rather on their properties and 
applications. 

6   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 1.2  
  Chemistry of fiber-forming polymers 
 To manufacture useful products from polymers, it is necessary to shape them. 
This can be achieved by changing the characteristics of a polymer from hard 
to soft. The two kinds of polymers mainly applied in manufacturing are ther-
moplastics and thermosets. Thermoplastics, which can easily be melted by 
subjecting them to the right combination of heat and pressure without nec-
essarily changing the chemical structure, are the most widely used polymers 
for fi ber products. Thermoplastics consist of individual polymer chains that 
are connected to each other physically rather than chemically. When heated, 
these chains slide past each other, causing the polymer to become rubbery, 
eventually causing a fl ow that enables easier processing. Examples include 
polyethylene for making milk containers and grocery bags, and polyvinyl 
chloride for making house wall sidings. 
 Thermosets consist of interconnected chains with a fi xed position rela-
tive to each other. These polymers disintegrate into char when subjected 
to heat because they cannot fl ow. Examples of thermosets include epoxy 
resins, Bakelite, and vulcanized rubber, where the individual polymers are 
chemically interconnected. The chemical crosslinks prevent reorganization 
of the polymer when subjected to heat, and break only when the thermal 
energy exceeds the bonding energy between the crosslinks, thus causing dis-
integration and charring at higher temperatures. 
 1.2.1   Polymerization 
 Polymerization is the process of converting a starting chemical, called the 
monomer, to a long chain molecule, the polymer, which is the basic struc-
ture of almost all fi bers. The polymerization process will differ according 
to the chemical composition/structure of the starting monomer. Figure 1.1 
below shows the different kinds of polymerization reactions. 3–5  It is obvious 
that there are many choices, and selection of the polymerization process 
depends on several factors. Some of these aspects are discussed in the fol-
lowing sections. 
 1.2.2   Addition polymerization 
 Addition polymers, also referred to as chain growth polymers, are normally 
formed by a chain addition reaction process. When an adjacent monomer 
molecule reacts with an active site of the monomer, chain addition is said 
to have occurred. Here, the active site is considered the reactive end of the 
polymer or monomer, which participates in the polymerization process. A 
schematic representation of a typical chain addition mechanism is shown in 
Fig. 1.2. 

Synthetic polymer ﬁ bers and their processing requirements   7
Polymerization reaction types
Condensation/
step growth
Addition/free-radical chain
Nonlinear
Ring
Linear
Homopolymer
Living
Ionic
Cationic
Anionic
Bulk
Solution
Random
Uniform
Copolymerization
Chiral
Head–
tail
Stereopolymerization/
coordination polymerization
Head–
head
Atactic
Syndiotactic
Isotactic
Block
Graft
Emulsion
Suspension
Solid
Homogenous Heterogenous
 1.1  Polymerization reactions. 
A
B
R
A
B·
A
B
+
A
B
+
+
R·
R
R
A
A
A
B
B
B·
A
B
B·
A
 1.2  Schematics of a typical chain addition mechanism. 

8   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 Commodity polymers, which are typically found in most consumer prod-
ucts, are usually formed by chain growth. These include polyethylene, poly-
styrene, and polypropylene. Polymerization in chain growth begins with a 
reaction between a monomer and a reactive species, which results in the 
formation of an active site. This chain growth polymerization occurs via 
four mechanisms: anionic, cationic, free radical, and coordination polymeri-
zation. These are the most common synthesis mechanisms for the formation 
of commodity polymers. The details are beyond the scope of this chapter, 
and can be found elsewhere. 6 
 In addition to polymerization, the desired fi nal product may be obtained 
through three principal steps: (1) initiation: how a polymerization reaction 
is started; (2) propagation: the polymerization is kept going by the ongo-
ing addition of new monomers to the reactive end; and (3) termination: 
the means used to stop the reaction. The quality and characteristics of the 
desired polymer and the choice of the necessary monomer for the reaction 
process often dictate the choice of the polymerization path. In knowing and 
understanding the system and the components used in the polymerization 
process, it is possible to produce a polymer of required molecular weight 
and molecular weight distribution for specifi c products. 
 1.2.3   Condensation polymerization 
 Polycondensation is the term used to describe polymers formed as a result 
of reactions involving the condensation of organic materials in which small 
molecules are split out. In condensation polymerization, molecules of mono-
mer and/or lower molecular weight polymers chemically combine, produc-
ing longer chains that are much higher in molecular weight. The polymers 
usually formed by this mechanism have two functional groups, where func-
tionality is defi ned as the average number of reacting groups per reacting 
molecule. The kinetics of polycondensation is usually affected by the forma-
tion of a lower molecular component generated during the polycondensa-
tion reaction. The molecular component will have a concentration and mass 
that negatively affects the reaction mechanism. The remedy is to perform 
the reaction at a higher temperature and to maintain a deep vacuum, which 
will effi ciently and effectively remove the by-products generated during the 
reaction, thereby favoring the production of higher molecular weight poly-
mer. Polymers typically formed by the polycondensation reaction mecha-
nism include polyesters, nylons, and polyurethanes. 7 
 1.2.4   Polymers for specialty and high performance ﬁ bers 
 High performance polymers are slowly replacing traditional materials 
because of their strength-to-weight ratios and other economic advantages 

Synthetic polymer ﬁ bers and their processing requirements   9
over aluminum or other metals. Polymers used in military applications and 
the aviation and automobile industries are designed to resist a wider range 
of thermal, chemical, and physical stress. The orientation of the fi bers or 
polymers for this kind of application is such that it will exhibit superior 
strength and stiffness to polymers used in conventional applications. The 
success in developing high performance polymer fi bers lies in a deeper 
understanding of non-crystalline polymer matrix. 8 
 Glass fi bers have been commercially manufactured since the 1930s and 
have found relevant application in insulation, fi re-resistant fabrics, and rein-
forcement for fi berglass composites such as bathtub enclosures and boats. 
Carbon fi bers are most widely used in military applications, especially for 
aircraft and other armored applications, because they can be engineered 
for strength and stiffness, with varied electrical conductivity, thermal, and 
chemical properties. These factors are determined by the orientation of the 
layered carbon planes. 9 
 Organic fi bers are generally characterized by high modulus and tensile 
strength. They are used in textiles, aerospace, mechanical, biomedical, geo-
textile, and electrical applications because of their performance in high 
thermal environments and stability over a wide range of chemical environ-
ments when compared to other conventional fi bers. These specialty organic 
fi bers generally possess one or more of the following properties: excellent 
fi re resistance, suitable chemical resistance, higher thermal resistance, wear 
resistance, increased modulus and strength, and very low density. These 
polymers typically have an aromatic or cyclic structure, and most of them 
are produced by polycondensation type reactions. 10,11 
 1.2.5  Liquid crystalline/rigid rod polymers 
 Liquid crystal polymers (LCPs), also known as mesophases, were initially 
traced in low molar mass compounds over a century ago. LCPs gained 
recognition in the technological fi eld because of their unique electro-opti-
cal properties. Macromolecule LCPs consist of highly ordered oriented 
polymer chains that introduce crystal-like orientation in the liquid phases. 
Although the orientation can be very subtle on the local scale, time-
averaged fl uids are anisotropic and therefore uniquely different from the 
same attributes that exist in ordinary anisotropic fl uids. Figures 1.3 and 1.4 
below give a schematic representation of the difference between the melt 
of a conventional random coil polymer (top) and that of a liquid crystal-
line polymer. 12  
 LCPs have recently become increasingly popular in specialty and high 
performance applications, and are categorized into two types depending 
on the principal means of achieving fl uidity. Lyotropic LCPs originate from 
the action of a solvent and are therefore multicomponent polymer solvent 

10   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
Director
Mer
Semi-
    flexible
Chain
Isotropic
 1.3  Schematics difference between the melt of a conventional random 
coil polymer (top) and that of a liquid crystalline polymer. 
COOH
P41 :
P41Boba :
y/(x + y) = 0
y/(x + y) = 0.05
OMe
O
O
O
O
Me
Me3Si
SiMe3
Si
Si
O
O
O
Me
x
y
 1.4  Structure of a liquid crystalline polymer ( Source : Copied with 
permission from the author Polymers 2012,  4 (1), 448–462). 

Synthetic polymer ﬁ bers and their processing requirements   11
systems. Thermotropic LCPs demonstrate anisotropy in the melt and may 
be single or multicomponent polymer melts. 
 The properties of LCPs are uniquely dependent on their fi nal physical 
forms and the mode of processing. Conventional polymers have been pro-
cessed by the extrusion of the polymer melt into a stream of evaporating 
gaseous streams, also known as dry spinning, or by precipitation into liquid 
medium, which is referred to as wet spinning. 
 Compared to ultra-high strength conventional polymers, the temperature 
stability of LCPs is a defi ning characteristic that makes them effective in 
many applications. Like other organic polymers, they are characterized by 
very low densities when compared to inorganic materials such as glass and 
metals. This means that the tensile strength-to-mass ratios are very favor-
able for composite applications, and they can therefore be used in aerospace 
applications. 13 
 1.2.6  High strength, high modulus ﬁ bers 
 There is an increasing demand for high temperature fi bers, especially in mil-
itary and aerospace applications where operation in high temperature envi-
ronments for an extended period of time is critical. Experimental data have 
shown that incorporating aromatic segments during polymer production 
signifi cantly increases the thermal stability and melt temperatures of poly-
mers. Most of the synthetic high temperature stable and high strength aro-
matic fi bers are categorized into aromatic polyimides, aromatic polyamides, 
aromatic polybenzimidazoles, and polybenzimidazolimides. Their structures 
are shown in Fig. 1.5 below. 
CH3
CH3
C
O
O
n
n
S
O
O
N
N
C
(a)
(b)
(c)
C
NH
NH
R
N
H
C
O
O
N
H
 1.5  Chemical structure of (a) aromatic polyimides, (b) aromatic 
polyamides, and (c) aromatic polybenzimidazoles. 

12   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 In order to differentiate them from aliphatic polyamides, aromatic poly-
amides are designated by the generic name ‘aramid’. They include three 
categories based on their composition: aliphatic–aromatic, aromatic–het-
erocyclic, and wholly aromatic. It has been shown that there is no signifi cant 
difference in the thermal stability and fi ber properties of the four classes of 
high temperature synthetic fi bers. It is only when they decompose in a nitro-
gen environment that a difference in the thermal properties can be observed 
in the increasing order of polyamides, polyimides, polybenzimidazoles, and 
polybenzimidazolimides, as shown in Table 1.1. 14,15 
 The term ‘high performance,’ when used in describing fi bers, refers to 
certain acceptable levels of performance under extraordinary conditions 
involving temperature, hostile environments, high tensile or compressive 
exposure, electrical conductivity, or dimensional stability. Since the 1970s, 
advances in materials engineering technology have led to the develop-
ment of new synthetic fi bers with high strength, high thermal stability, 
high modulus, chemical and solvent resistance, and low-weight proper-
ties. This opens up opportunities in various markets for high performance 
applications, especially in military, aerospace and several other tech-
nological applications. Market penetration for these high performance 
fi bers is increasing exponentially, although volumes are still relatively 
low. The market is characterized by high prices and complex production 
processes. 
 Biopolymers 
 Polymers from renewable sources offer an alternative solution for maintain-
ing sustainable economic development that will also attract and promote 
emerging ecologically friendly technologies. Although not all biopolymers 
are biodegradable, development and innovation in polymers from bio-
based materials offers a solution for waste disposal problems. In addition, 
 Table 1.1   Fiber properties of the four classes of high temperature 
synthetic ﬁ bers under decomposition in a nitrogen environment 
 Polymer type 
 Fiber properties 
 
 TGA decomposition 
temperature ( ° C) 
 Tenacity 
(gpd) 
 Elongation 
(%) 
 Air 
 Nitrogen 
 Aromatic polyamides 
 5.5 
 15 
 425–450 
 450–470 
 Polyimides 
 7 
 13 
 450–500 
 500–535 
 Polybenzimidazoles 
 5 
 15 
 300 
 600 
 Polybenzimidazolimides  4.5 
 4 
 600 
 600 
 TGA: thermo-gravimetric analysis 

Synthetic polymer ﬁ bers and their processing requirements   13
biological degradability, a drastic reduction in carbon dioxide released into 
the atmosphere, and increased utilization of agricultural sources for the pro-
duction of biopolymers will help to reduce concern over the detrimental 
effect of plastics on the environment. Biodegradable materials are defi ned 
as those which degrade through the action of naturally occurring micro-
organisms, such as bacteria and fungi, over a period of time. Bio-plastics 
comprise both biodegradable plastics and bio-based plastics. The source 
of biopolymers is mainly living organisms, and examples include cellulose, 
starch, chitin, proteins, peptides, and DNA. Most natural biofi bers are used 
as reinforcement by being embedded in another polymeric matrix system 
that is intended to hold the fi bers together, thus providing stability for the 
required shape in the composite structure. This can transmit the shear forces 
between mechanically high quality fi bers and protect them when subjected 
to extreme force and vibration. 16,17 
 The properties of natural origin polymers can also be chemically or 
physically modifi ed to allow them to be processed as thermoplastic resins. 
Polymers from starch and cellulose, for example, may be processed using 
adjuvants such as water and glycerol. Polylactic acid (PLA), manufac-
tured from completely renewable sources, may be processed into linear 
aliphatic polyesters and its polymer matrix is compostable. This makes 
PLA useful in different fi ber applications and in packaging, due to its 
transparency and resistance to water. These properties derive from PLA 
being made from corn and sugars, which are a 100% renewable source. 
The formation of PLA is through direct condensation of lactic acid or 
by cyclic intermediate dimer, a process allowing the removal of water by 
condensation and by using solvents at high temperature in high vacuum 
environments. 18  
 The properties and characteristics of PLA fi bers are very similar to those 
of many other thermoplastic fi bers, especially those of polyester. At room 
temperature, the polymer is stiff. The glass transition temperature is in the 
range of 55–65 ° C. These characteristics and other unique properties, com-
bined with ease of processing, and the fact that PLA can be sourced from 
renewable products, make it an attractive and acceptable option in several 
commercial applications. For example, PLA has recently been used for mak-
ing ski jackets, because of a lower specifi c gravity and higher resilience than 
natural fi bers, thus making the fabric light with a padded  feeling. The poten-
tial of PLA extends further than just developing high performance fi bers for 
different applications. It is also a sustainable product, with reduced nega-
tive environmental effects than are caused by non-biodegradable polymers. 
Another polymer currently being developed and marketed by Avantium is 
the 2,5-Furandi carboxylic acid (FDCA)-based polyester. Although it is in 
an early stage of its development, this polymer is likely to become another 
substitute for PET in bottles, fi bers, etc. 19–21 

14   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 1.3  
  Polymerization processes 
 Polymerization is a chemical process in which two or more monomers are 
combined to form a large repetitive polymer molecule. The polymerization 
process or path is determined by the required characteristics and applica-
tion of the end product. If the resulting polymer has more than one mol-
ecule in the chain, it is usually referred to as a copolymer. Polymers such 
as PVC, which consist of repeating long chains of the same monomers, are 
known as homopolymers. Since the polymerization process can be exother-
mic in nature, it can result in a hazardous polymerization, which may cause 
an explosion if the process begins prematurely. Natural polymerization is 
also known to occur when enzymes polymerase to form nucleic acids, car-
bohydrates, and proteins. 
 1.3.1   Criteria for determining the polymerization process 
 The industrial scale polymerization process is determined by a combination 
of many factors, both technical and non-technical. A clear understanding of 
constraints and objectives is needed to choose the right polymerization path. 
A manufacturer will, for example, determine production rate and the spe-
cifi c chemical and physical properties of the end product. This will determine 
the molecular weight and molecular weight distribution, copolymer composi-
tion and distribution, morphology, particle size distribution, and other factors 
that will then be used to choose the polymerization process for the desired 
characteristics. Although polymers are not necessarily sold on the basis of the 
manufacturing process and structural characteristics, but rather on the end 
user needs, there remains the challenge of relating the structural features to 
the properties of the polymer and the polymerization process. The toxicity of 
the monomers, as well as the fl ammability of the solvents and other reactants 
and catalysts necessary for the initiation of polymerization, will also determine 
the choice of the polymerization process. A clear understanding and choice 
of the polymerization path will offer the manufacturing industry considerable 
benefi ts both in direct and indirect costs. It should be noted that while most 
initial processes are carried out in a laboratory setting before being imple-
mented commercially, the environment in which industrial scale polymeriza-
tion is carried out is such that there will naturally be a considerable degree of 
difference, which will translate into the fi nal product variability. 22  
 1.3.2   Bulk polymerization 
 Bulk polymerization, which may also be referred to as mass polymerization, 
involves a monomer and an initiator as the main components, without a 

Synthetic polymer ﬁ bers and their processing requirements   15
solvent. The polymerization conforms to the fi xed shape of the reaction ves-
sel when solidifi cation occurs. The real challenge concerns the dissipation of 
the heat produced by polymerization. Bulk polymerization is advantageous 
in the production of cast-molded products such as polystyrene scintillators. 
Research has shown that to improve the polymerization rate, the monomer 
should be distilled prior to the reaction and, where this is impracticable, 
the product should be rinsed with an appropriate solution. Figure 1.6 below 
shows the schematics of the Kneader reactor concept, which is ideally suited 
for bulk polymerization. 23,24 
 1.3.3  Emulsion polymerization 
 Emulsion polymerization systems consist of water, up to 3% of surfactants 
and a free-radical generator soluble in water, rather than being monomer-
soluble. The rate of emulsion polymerization is faster than that of the bulk of 
polymerization, assuming the same monomer is used under the same ther-
mal conditions. The monomer is gradually introduced into the system from 
the start of the process. The average molecular weight of products obtained 
by emulsion polymerization is greater and the particle size is usually in the 
order of a 0.05–0.15  μ m. The end product is in the form of emulsion in water, 
not a fi lterable suspension. In bulk polymerization by this process, recovery 
may be done through freezing, heating, or adding salt or acid, but the coagu-
lants, surfactants and the initiators will normally remain as impurities in the 
fi nal product. 25 
CM
CM
Monomer(s)
Initiator(s)
Catalysts
Inhibitor
Stripping medium
Reactants
Stripping medium
LIST CONTI
Polymerization reactor
LIST CONTI
devolatilizer
Final polymer
Vacuum
Condensate
Overpressure
Atmospheric
vacuum
Condensate
or reflux
 1.6  Kneader reactor concept for bulk polymerization ( Source : Adapted 
from Bartke and Diener). 71 

16   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 1.3.4   Solution polymerization 
 In this process, the polymerization reaction occurs in a solvent medium that 
is carefully chosen according to the chemical compatibility of the reacting 
monomers. Several disadvantages associated with bulk polymerization are 
resolved by this method. Solution polymerization makes homogeneous poly-
merization possible, particularly where both the polymer and the monomer 
are soluble in the solvent. It is also an excellent way of dissipating the reac-
tion heat, reducing shrinkage, and minimizing side reactions in systems that 
are highly viscous. In ionic polymerization, the solvent medium can posi-
tively infl uence the stereoregularity of the fi nal product. The solvent to be 
used in solution polymerization should therefore be carefully identifi ed so 
that its boiling point corresponds to that of the monomer and to the tem-
peratures at which the initiator will decompose. In the industrial production 
of protective coatings, it is often desirable for the solvent to remain in the 
paint, and therefore solution polymerization is the process of choice as a 
strong-polymer interaction is advantageous. Figure 1.7 shows the general 
schematics of solution polymerization. 
 1.3.5   Aqueous suspension and irradiation polymerization 
 In this polymerization path, the monomer droplets are suspended in an 
aqueous medium and are constantly stirred. Because the monomer droplets 
are in a water medium, the heat is easily dissipated, making this process 
comparable to bulk polymerization  in situ . 
Initiator
Solvent
Monomer
Cooling fluid
Cooling fluid
Effluent
 1.7  General schematics of solution polymerization ( Source : Adapted 
with permission from Chemical Engineering Journal Volume  143 , 
Issues 1–3). 

Synthetic polymer ﬁ bers and their processing requirements   17
 Irradiation polymerization is a complex process in which a photo initiator 
(PI) (usually UV light or electron beam ) is used to start the polymerization 
process. The PI absorbs the incident light in order to generate the ions or 
reactive radicals which result in polymerization. 
 1.4 
 Influence of chemical structure on the physical 
properties of chemicals and fibers 
 The general properties of either man-made or naturally occurring polymeric 
materials are substantially different from those synthesized from metallic or 
ceramic materials. Polymers have a large molecular weight, which clearly 
distinguishes them from other materials in which repeated molecules are 
connected in a different manner from those of the polymer molecule. 26 
 Individual polymer characteristics are usually dependent on and defi ned 
by the molecular chain architecture, which is dependent on the rotational 
freedom of atoms around a single bond. This unique aspect of a polymer 
can be manipulated to obtain the characteristics required for a specifi c 
application. Bulky atoms, for example, will greatly reduce the mobility 
between chain elements because the degree of fl exibility of the polymer is 
reduced — a parameter associated with the transition temperature. 27–29  
 It is a fundamental property of polymeric materials that the chemical 
bonds must be broken and restructured to change the confi guration of a 
particular polymer. In fi ber-forming polymers, this is the means by which 
the desired fi ber or fabric qualities, e.g., tensile strength, and stiffness, are 
tuned. Fibers from polymers are made by spinning or drawing, and cer-
tain molecular weight conditions have to be met to achieve predetermined 
fi ber properties. The higher the interchange cohesive forces, for example, 
the lower the molecular weight at which satisfactory fi ber properties are 
achieved, as these are determined by the molecular weight distribution of 
a system. 30–34  
 Intermediates present during the polymerization process affect the for-
mation of linear polymers. The chemical structure of the intermediates may 
cause reactions which, over time, will lead to the loss of the intended reac-
tive groups that are important in diminishing chain growth during the poly-
merization process. These side reactions will also cause chain branching, 
which may result in cross-linking and the formation of gelled polymers that 
cannot be spun. 
 Polymers can exist in the crystalline and amorphous regions, and the crys-
tallinity of polymeric fi bers is one of the most important aspects of polymer 
science. Crystallinity is a measure of the percentage of crystalline regions 
in the polymer with respect to amorphous region. Figure 1.8 is a schematic 
representation of polymer chains in the crystalline and amorphous regions. 

18   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
Most commodity fi bers have crystallinity values between 20% and 60%, 
and crystallinity and molecular orientation together determine the physical 
properties of the fi bers. High strength and high modulus fi bers tend to have 
high crystallinity values, in the range of 90%. 
 The melting point is the temperature at which a crystallite structure is 
no longer stable and may be regarded as a measure of the tendency of a 
polymer to crystallize. The arrangement of the molecules in the structure 
will play a great role in determining the melting point of a semi-crystalline 
substance, and therefore once the crystalline structure of large polymeric 
materials is reached, it is possible to understand the effect of the chemical 
structure on the melting point. If the polymer does not have any crystallin-
ity, then the fi ber does not show a melting transition but only a glass transi-
tion temperature ( T  g  ) which corresponds to the change from a brittle glassy 
to a soft rubbery state. 35,36 
 The development of fi ber structure is the result of several technical oper-
ations including spinning, drawing and heat setting. Each process plays an 
important role in determining the behavior of the polymer during the next 
step, thus affecting the fi nal structure and quality of the fi ber. Molecular 
orientation, which is the extension of macromolecules and other structural 
units along the fi ber axis, determines the tensile strength, sorption of sol-
vents, modulus, optical behaviors, etc. 37–39 
 1.5  
  Effects of molecular weight on fiber spinnability, 
structure and properties 
 The molecular weight of a polymer has a signifi cant effect on its spinnability. 
The word does not have a precise meaning in relation to fi ber technology, 
 1.8  Crystalline and amorphous region of a polymer. 

Synthetic polymer ﬁ bers and their processing requirements   19
although it often means ‘fi ber forming,’ and the defi nition includes the phys-
ical and chemical aspects of fi ber formation from fl uid threads without 
breakage. This means that the range of fl ow characteristics of the polymer 
in liquid form is such that no breakage occurs during the spinning process. 
The spinning process is important because the spinning parameters deter-
mine the elongational fl ow and therefore have a direct effect on the fi nal 
characteristics of the fi bers. 40–43 
 Melt spinning has been used for many years in the polymer industry 
because it provides an effective means of combining two or more mate-
rials to produce fi bers. Multicomponent fi bers are made in this way, and 
each component material plays an important role in determining the end 
characteristics of the fi nal product. The molecular weight of each individual 
material is therefore signifi cant because the chemical and physical inter-
action between them is partially guided by the available quantities, which 
are directly linked to the molecular weight. A more complex phenomenon 
occurs when the different materials form phases during the process of fi ber 
formation. Manipulating the pre-spinning conditions of a polymer or poly-
mer composite can alter the fi ber morphology as well as its mechanical and 
chemical structure. Other factors infl uencing fi ber properties include time, 
temperature dependent molecular motion, crystallization, length and length-
distribution of the molecules, and various intermolecular interactions. 44–47 
 In dry spinning, the solution containing the polymer is forced through a 
fi ne jet, followed by evaporation of the solvent, which results in the forma-
tion of fi ber. Dry spinning can therefore be considered a process of structure 
formation in a bi-component system involving polymer and solvent. This 
makes analysis of the dry spinning process more complex than that of melt 
spinning. It is treated as a single component system involving only the poly-
mer because the evaporation rate of the solvent at the boundary between 
the two phases may not be easily defi ned. In wet spinning, a solution of poly-
mer is forced through a nozzle into a non-solvent for the polymer. Here, the 
mass transfer for both the solvent and the polymer is considered. This makes 
the process analysis even more complex than that of dry spinning. 48–51 
 1.6 
 Flow properties of polymers 
 The fl ow characteristics of a polymer largely determine the type of machin-
ery used for extrusion and infl uence the choice of the process and processing 
conditions. The rheological and thermal properties of a polymer determine 
the fl ow characteristics and are discussed here. The rheological properties 
defi ne the manner in which a material will deform when certain stresses 
are applied, a characteristic that is important in the plasticizing zone and 
the die-forming regions of the process. In a bulk process, the fl ow proper-
ties of the material are directly linked to the transport behaviors, which are 

20   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
determined by the coeffi cient of friction, the size and shape of the particles, 
and the density. In polymeric melts, the shape of the molecules will in effect 
dictate the dynamic behaviors and rheological characteristics. It is therefore 
of the greatest importance to understand these fl ow parameters, particularly 
for the purpose of synthesizing new fi ber-forming polymers for industrial 
and commercial applications. 52–54 
 Rheology is generally defi ned as the study of fl ow. Polymer rheology is 
the scientifi c study of how polymeric fl uids deform when subjected to exter-
nal stresses. When synthesizing a polymer for a particular application, an 
understanding of the extruder environment in which that polymer will be 
used is the key to determining the properties of the polymer, so that its 
response matches the predetermined environment. The chemical and molec-
ular structure of polymer melts will generally have specifi c effects on the 
dynamic behaviors and properties of the polymer rheology. It is therefore 
possible to engineer an end product that fi ts the predetermined application 
by manipulating the molecular composition of the polymer. Understanding 
the molecular structure of polymers can also provide an insight into the 
visco-elastic properties of polymer melt. This is essentially an understanding 
of how polymer energy is dissipated in the form of heat during deformation, 
and how the elastic nature of the polymer will store this energy and use it to 
restore the polymer to its pre-deformed condition. Such materials are said 
to have ‘memory.’ 29,55 
 The elastic nature of polymeric materials may be attributed largely to the 
long chain molecules, which cause entanglements to occur at the molecu-
lar level, forming a network through Brownian motion that has a greater 
effect at elevated temperatures. During deformation, a polymer will alter its 
molecular confi guration and, at the end of the deformation, will return to 
equilibrium due to Brownian motion. 56,57 
 Because of their signifi cance both in theory and practice, the rheologi-
cal properties of solutions and melts of fi ber-forming polymers have been 
extensively studied over the years. Several research groups and industries 
have pointed out that varying the viscosity of a fi ber-forming polymer 
through the manipulation of the chemical and production parameters (such 
as the degree of polymerization compared with the resulting fi ber structure) 
has proved that fi ber structure and characteristics are greatly infl uenced by 
rheological properties. However, it remains diffi cult to formulate constitu-
tive characteristic equations that can be precisely used to describe the con-
nection between viscosities, shear stress and shear rate. 54,58 
 In melt blowing, for example, surface tension-driven instabilities have 
been observed both in laboratories and in industrial processes when fi ner 
fi bers are generated. These create droplets that are dispersed in the fi ber 
mat. Systematic research has proved that altering the rheological properties 
of the polymer suppresses, and in some cases eliminates, their stability. 59 

Synthetic polymer ﬁ bers and their processing requirements   21
 Shear thinning behavior, in which viscosity varies inversely with respect to 
shear rate, is one of the most remarkable properties of polymeric materials. 
When the shear rate, i.e., the rate of extrusion through a die is increased, the 
viscosity will decrease because molecular disentanglement and alignments 
of the polymer chains will occur. Figure 1.9 shows the shear thinning behav-
ior of polymers. The higher the shear rate, the greater the force required to 
push the polymer melt through a die. 60  The qualities of fi bers formed from 
different types of polymers are determined by the rheological features of 
the polymer during processing, and the computation of such processes will 
take into consideration the shear rate to optimize the process. Rheology 
measurements can be used for characterization and determination of mate-
rial processability and can also be used as input data for computer simula-
tions. This is because the rheology of a material is more sensitive to the 
structural aspects of the materials, such as branching and molecular weight 
tail, and is also a fast method compared to many other options of polymer 
liquid characterization. 
 1.7 
 Principles of solidification during fiber formation 
 The formation of fi bers from both natural and synthetic polymers is achieved 
through the transformation of a polymer fl uid, either molten or dissolved in 
a solvent, into solid fi laments. The chemical process for the formation of dif-
ferent kind of fi bers for varied applications differs, but the principle of solid-
ifi cation from liquid to solid remains the same. The rate of solidifi cation of 
a polymer melt or solution is an important factor which determines the rate 
of production and the properties of the resulting fi bers. It is a  phenomenon 
that has been validated by different research groups in laboratories and 
industry. 61 
Newtonian
Shear thinning
(Pseudoplastic)
Shear rate
Viscosity
 1.9  Shear thinning characteristics of polymer. 60 

22   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 For solidifi cation to occur in a polymer melt, there must be a heat trans-
fer process. This can be done in a controlled environment where a specifi c 
shaping and stabilization of the fi ber is expected. The rate of solidifi cation is 
determined by the rate of heat transfer, but the thermal conductivity char-
acteristics of the polymer may generate a larger thermal gradient within the 
product, causing varied polymer structure within the fi ber and signifi cant 
change in their physical and chemical structure. The choice of the shaping 
process and equipment used can also affect the solidifi cation process. The 
rheological properties of the polymer, in infl uencing the choice of shaping 
process, will therefore indirectly affect the solidifi cation process. In polymer 
reactions which occur in solvents, the solidifi cation of the polymer into a 
desired fi ber structure will be determined by the rate of evaporation of the 
solvents. 
 1.8  
  Fiber formation techniques 
 Rapid advances in the synthetic fi ber industry during the 1940s led to an 
increase in melt spinning technology in order to improve productivity and 
control the quality of the end products. In melt spinning, fi ber diameter may 
be precisely predicted based on the temperature and tension of the run-
ning fi laments if the spinning conditions and rheological properties of the 
polymer are defi ned and maintained during the spinning process. Such pre-
dictions, however, will assume that no crystallization occurs during the spin-
ning process. In cases where crystallization does occur, several parameters 
must be considered if an accurate mathematical simulation is to be done: 
the molecular orientation that results from the elongational melt fl ow, the 
infl uence of molecular orientation on the crystallization kinetics, signifi cant 
change in the rheological properties, and the kinetics of the non-isothermal 
crystallization. There are several spinning techniques, each tailored to work 
with different kinds of polymer and/or the desired fi ber end products. 
 1.8.1   Melt spinning 
 The melt spinning process has been in use since the late 1950s. The polymer 
melt is extruded and drawn at speeds of 1000–6000 m/min. Lower spinning 
speeds result in an undrawn yarn, which is then further drawn and heat-
treated. At higher spinning speeds, the fi ber is partially or fully drawn, and 
can be texturized, drawn further, or used as spun yarn. PET and nylons are 
examples of such polymeric fi bers processed using melt spinning. The result-
ing fi ber structure is a function of the spinning speed, the drawing mecha-
nism, heat setting conditions etc. The stress–strain behavior of the material is 
also a function of the spinning speed, because the polymer chains orient and 

Synthetic polymer ﬁ bers and their processing requirements   23
crystallize and the fi ber structure develops as the spinning speed increases. 
Reproducible experimental results by several research groups have shown 
that the molecular orientation improves much more than crystallinity with 
the spinning speed. However, the crystallite size will increase with spinning 
speed. 62 
 In high speed spinning, the spinning tension is a function of inertial force 
and air resistance. However, it is generally agreed that the structural for-
mation is defi ned mainly by inertial force and that air resistance may be 
ignored in speeds over 8000 m/min. But researchers have also reported that 
air resistance could infl uence the formation of the structure of fi ne fi laments 
at spinning speeds between 4000 and 5000 m/min. The mechanical proper-
ties of the resultant fi bers can be improved by heat-treatment of fi bers in the 
spinline. Fibers have also demonstrated improved properties when cooled 
in the spinline instead of undergoing heat-treatment. Quenching immedi-
ately after necking results in highly oriented amorphous yarns. Cooling can 
also give precise control of the temperature of the cooling agent. In general, 
ultra-high-speed spinning has the potential to produce fi bers with improved 
performance properties, and further development is needed to achieve high 
effi ciency and high quality fi bers. 
 1.8.2  Solution spinning 
 Signifi cant developments have recently been made in the fi ber solution spin-
ning process due to increased understanding of theoretical spinning tech-
nology, especially in acrylic fi bers. Solution spinning technology is primarily 
based on spinning a solution or suspension that precipitates or coagulates 
to form a solid fi ber as an end product. Solution spinning is categorized into 
two methods: dry spinning and wet spinning. In dry spinning, the polymeric 
solution solidifi es when evaporation of the solvent occurs. Wet spinning 
can be further divided into three classifi cations, based on physiochemical 
principles. In the liquid crystal process, lyotropic polymer liquid crystalline 
solution is solidifi ed through the formation of a solid crystalline region in 
a solution. The gelation mechanism solidifi es the polymer solution through 
formation of intermolecular bonds in the solutions. In the phase separation 
process, polymer rich and polymer lean phases are part of the solution. 63 
 1.8.3  Highly aesthetic ﬁ ber spinning 
 Fibers with unique sensual characteristics, such as color, appearance, 
feel, bulkiness and texture, are commonly referred to as aesthetic fi bers. 
Aesthetic fi bers are highly fashionable and expensive, and their production 
process and advanced technology are also costly. Materials that may require 

24   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
specialized fi nishing are processed in this manner. For example, the addition 
of inorganic materials in the mixed-spinning process increases the specifi c 
gravity of a fi ber and improves the drapability of the fabrics. This can be var-
ied by weight percentage of the additive, depending on the desired quality. 
Addition of these organic polymers or a composite may be done between 
the polymerization and spinning processes. 64 
 1.8.4   Anisotropic ﬁ ber spinning 
 High strength fi bers made from anisotropic polymers are more diffi cult to 
synthesize because of the technical process required to form an anisotropic 
solution from the solid polymer. Aromatic polymers such as polyimides and 
heterocyclics, for example, are characterized by extended chain conforma-
tion and are known to form anisotropic solutions or melts that have liq-
uid crystal behavior at the correct solution temperature and composition. 
During the fi ber formation process, the liquid crystal domain in the polymer 
melt will undergo orientation as a result of the infl uence from the shear and 
elongation fl ow. When cooled, these anisotropic polymers also exhibit phase 
transition, forming highly crystalline solids. Fiber spinning of anisotropic 
polymers will therefore result in highly crystalline and oriented fi bers with 
high strength and modulus. Anisotropic polymers are classifi ed into two 
types: lyotropic, in which solutions respond to different solvent types and 
concentrations in a varying manner, and thermotropic polymers, in which 
melts respond to temperature changes by behaving like liquid crystals. In a 
molten or solution state, anisotropic polymers display mesomorphic behav-
ior similar to low molecular weight liquids, but differ in having have higher 
molecular weights. 65 
 1.8.5   Thermotropic liquid-liquid crystal polymer spinning 
 Fibers with very high strength and modulus can be fabricated from poly-
mers that have a molecular structure in which the chains are packed 
in small cross-sectional areas with strong bonds and low elongation. 
However, some of these aromatic polymers have melting points that are 
higher than their decomposition temperatures due to the rigidity of their 
molecules. It is therefore impossible to process them in thermotropic liq-
uid crystal form. 
 It has been shown that this can be overcome by a slow introduction of 
fl exible alkyl groups into the main chain, by introducing substituents into 
the individual aromatic ring in the main chain, by co-polymerization of more 
than one rigid molecule, or by the introduction of non-molecular structures. 

Synthetic polymer ﬁ bers and their processing requirements   25
Combinations of these techniques have been shown to provide a means of 
creating thermotropic LCPs that can be injection-molded or melt-spun. The 
chemical structures of thermotropic LCP fi bers are varied and based on 
the original polymer material characteristics and conditions. The choice of 
synthesis process is therefore the key to achieving the desired end product 
characteristics and qualities. The current challenge, however, in the spinning 
of thermotropic LCPs is to improve cost effectiveness through performance 
process optimization. 
 1.8.6  Gel spinning 
 Hiroshi  et al . have defi ned the gel spinning process as a method of achiev-
ing high strength fi bers through an intermediate gel-like state. In gel 
spinning, the most important feature of the polymer is the degree of poly-
merization. Polymers with an average molecular weight above 600 000 
g/mol are effectively processed by this technique. Although gel spinning 
is a relatively long-standing process, in its current adaptation, polymer 
of an extremely high molecular weight is dissolved in a solvent at low 
concentrations of about 1–2 percentage of polymer by weight, making a 
highly viscous solution. The solution is then dry- or wet-spun to a fi ber 
that retains most of the solvent and is actually a gel of polymer and sol-
vent. 66,67  The gel spun fi ber is further drawn with the removal of the sol-
vent to produce a very highly oriented and ordered structure with high 
strength and modulus.  
 1.8.7  Spinning of ultra-ﬁ ne ﬁ bers and optical ﬁ bers 
 Any fi ber that is less than 0.7 denier is referred to as ultra-fi ne fi ber. These 
fi bers can be processed by signifi cantly reducing the polymer output at the 
spinneret while drawing it with a large draw ratio. Currently, ultra-thin con-
tinuous fi laments may be produced by various methods including direct 
spinning, conjugate spinning and multi-layer type spinning. Ultra-fi ne fi bers 
can be produced by methods that include melt blowing, electrospinning, 
fl ash spinning, polymer-blend spinning, and centrifugal spinning. Softness, 
fl exibility, smoothness, fi ne textile structures, micro-pockets in fi bers, quick 
stress relief, low resistance to bending and many other properties character-
ize ultra-fi ne fi bers. These qualities are defi nitive in determining combinato-
rial processing techniques. 68–70 
 An optical fi ber is composed of a core made from a light transmitting 
material which is transparent and has a very low refractive index. Depending 
on the application of such fi bers, the choice of the spinning method is based 
on the polymer material used. 71 

26   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 1.9  
  Post-fiber formation treatments 
 The reasons for post-fi ber formation treatments are many and varied. Fiber 
treatment may involve drawing, twisting, texturing, coating, further thermal 
treatment, chemical, or combinatorial processes. Growing environmental 
concerns may require fi bers to be treated to minimize toxic emissions. Fibers 
for some applications may require reinforcement, which can be achieved by 
chemical or thermal treatments. The need to prolong the lifetime of fi bers 
for certain applications will also call for post formation treatments. Fibers 
designed for biological implants applications, for example, should be treated 
to minimize side effect reactions with the body, and its lifetime should be 
such that it can remain functional during the life of the person or animal. 
Other processes can be determined and infl uenced by aesthetic modifi ca-
tion for desired qualities. 
 1.10 
 Current trends 
 The consumer market-driven demand for improved products has led to 
a growth in production techniques for a variety of materials. There is an 
increase in the applications of polymeric fi bers, the limited capabilities of 
naturally occurring fi bers having caused a growth in research into man-
made fi bers which can be engineered for specifi c applications. The reliabil-
ity of polymeric fi bers is infl uencing applications in several areas, including 
the biomedical, aviation, and automobile industries. The need for materials 
with nanocomposite structures and high performance standards has driven 
research in both laboratory and industry. Another area that has attracted 
attention in the past decade and remains of interest is that of submicron 
and nanofi bers. Several polymers and processing techniques continue to be 
investigated. 
 1.11  
 Conclusion 
 The demand for man-made polymers and polymeric fi bers is growing 
due to the fl exibility of processing, which allows a material with specifi c 
mechanical, electrical, optical, and chemical features to be tailored to fi t 
a specifi c application. This has led to an increase in research to fi nd more 
source polymers. However, the growth in man-made polymers has raised 
environmental and health issues. Research and developmental activity 
has increased in the development of biopolymers to meet the current and 
future demand for sustainability. There is also a need to develop process-
ing equipment for the production of fi bers in the nanometer range. The 
future of polymer production appears to be interesting and commercially 
sustainable.  

Synthetic polymer ﬁ bers and their processing requirements   27
 1.12  References 
 1. 
 Goodman, I. (1968),  Synthetic Fibre-Forming Polymers , London: Royal Institute 
of Chemistry. 4, 79 p. 
 2. 
 Salamone, J.C. (1999),  Concise Polymeric Materials Encyclopedia , Boca Raton: 
CRC Press. 1706 p. 
  3.   
 Grineviciute, D. Stankute, R. and Gutauskas, M. (2010), Infl uence of new fi bre-
forming polymers structure on garment hand parameters . Materials Science-
Medziagotyra .  16 (2): pp. 144–147. 
 4. 
 Shepelev, A.V. (2009), Physical chemistry of fi bre-forming polymers trans-
formation of emission brightness in polymer fi bres.  Fibre Chemistry .  41 (6): 
pp. 377–378. 
 5. 
 Druzhinina, T.V., Abronin, I.A. and Bikkullova, A.R. (2006), Quantum-chemical 
calculation of the energy characteristics of graft polymerization of methyl 
methacrylate to fi bre-forming polymers.  Fibre Chemistry .  38 (3): pp. 196–199. 
 6. 
 Peacock, A.J. and Calhoun, A.R. (2006),  Polymer Chemistry : Properties and 
Applications , Munich, Cincinnati, Ohio: Hanser Gardner Publications. xix, 
397 p. 
  7.   
 Anon (2010), Polymer science and technology editorial . Polimeros-Ciencia E 
Tecnologia .  20 : pp. E1–E1. 
  8.   
 Mikheev, Y.A., Guseva, L.N. and Zaikov, G.E. (1997), Characteristic features of 
heterophase macromolecular chain reactions involving antioxidants in a non-
crystalline polymer matrix . Uspekhi Khimii .  66 (1): pp. 3–30. 
 9. 
 Jing, J-.H., Huang Y.-D. and Liu, L. (2011), Formation of fi bre-bundle/matrix 
interlayer in carbon/carbon composites . Journal of Inorganic Materials .  26 (12): 
pp. 1309–1313. 
  10.    Baker, D.A., Gallego, N.C. and Baker, F.S. (2012), On the characterization and 
spinning of an organic-purifi ed lignin toward the manufacture of low-cost car-
bon fi bre . Journal of Applied Polymer Science .  124 (1): pp. 227–234. 
  11.   
 Hearle, J.W.S. and Textile Institute (Manchester England) (2001),  High-
Performance Fibres , Boca Raton Cambridge, England: CRC Press, Woodhead 
Publishing Limited. xi, 329 p. 12. Polymers, C.o.L.C. and Board, N.M.A. (1990), 
 Liquid Crystalline Polymers , Atlanta, GA: The National Academic Press. 
  13.    Muth, M.A., Carrasco-Orozco, M. and Thelakkat, M. (2011), Liquid-crystalline 
perylene diester polymers with tunable charge-carrier mobility . Advanced 
Functional Materials .  21 (23): pp. 4510–4518. 
  14.    Goto, T., Maeda, M. and Hibi, S. (1989), High-strength and high toughness 
aromatic polyamide fi bre. I. Preparation and properties of block poly(para-
phenylene and 4,4′-diphenyl ether terephthalamide) fi bre . Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science .  37 (4): pp. 867–875. 
  15.    Preston, J. (1981), High-strength high modulus fi bres from aromatic poly-
mers . Abstracts of Papers of the American Chemical Society .  181 (Mar): 
pp. 81–CHED. 
 16.  Riedel, U. and Nickel, J. (1999), Natural fi bre-reinforced biopolymers as con-
struction materials – new discoveries . Angewandte Makromolekulare Chemie . 
 272 : pp. 34–40. 
  17.   
 Mohanty, A.K., Misra, M. and Drzal, L.T. (2005),  Natural Fibres, Biopolymers, 
and Biocomposites , Boca Raton, FL: Taylor and Francis. 875 p. 

28   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 18.  Klemm, D. Heublein, B. and Fink H.P. (2005), Cellulose: Fascinating biopoly-
mer and sustainable raw material . Angewandte Chemie-International Edition . 
 44 (22): pp. 3358–3393. 
  19.    Agamuthu, P. and Faizura, P.N. (2005), Biodegradability of degradable plastic 
waste . Waste Management and Research .  23 (2): pp. 95–100. 
  20.    Tokiwa, Y. Calabia B.P. and Ugwu, C.U. (2009), Biodegradability of plastics . 
International Journal of Molecular Sciences .  10 (9): pp. 3722–3742. 
  21.   
 Hoidy, W.H., Al-Mulla, E.A.J. and Al-Janabi, K.W. (2010), Mechanical and 
thermal properties of PLLA/PCL modifi ed clay nanocomposites . Journal of 
Polymers and the Environment .  18 (4): pp. 608–616. 
  22.    Berry, G.C. (1983), Principles of polymer systems – Rodriguez, F . Journal of the 
American Chemical Society .  105 (11): pp. 3746–3746. 
 23.  Sandler, S.R. and Karo, W. (1974),  Polymer Syntheses. Organic Chemistry A 
Series of Monographs , New York: Academic Press. 
  24.    Bartke, M. and Diener, A. (2012), Reactor for solvent-free polymer process-
ing at CPP Chemical Plants and Processes [http://www.cpp-net.com/process_
engineering/-/article/32218883/37074576/Reactor-for-solvent-free-polymer-
processing/art_co_INSTANCE_0000/maximized/]. 
 25.  Albright, L.F. (1985),  Processes for Major Addition-Type Plastics and Their 
Monomers , Huntington, N.Y.: R.E. Krieger Pub. Co. 
  26.    Halverson, J.D. Grest G.S. and Grosberg, A.Y. (2012), Rheology of ring polymer 
melts: from linear contaminants to ring-linear blends . Physical Review Letters . 
 108 (3): 038301. 
  27.   
 Ahn, S.K., Deshmukh, P. and Kasi, R.M. (2010), Shape memory behavior of 
side-chain liquid crystalline polymer networks triggered by dual transition tem-
peratures . Macromolecules .  43 (17): pp. 7330–7340. 
  28.    Couchman, P.R. and Karasz, F.E. (1977), Some domain-size effects in poly-
mer transitions . Journal of Polymer Science Part C-Polymer Symposium .  63 (1): 
pp. 271–280. 
  29.    Peiffer, D.G. (1978), Degrees of freedom of polymeric molecules and their effect 
on physical-properties . Journal of Macromolecular Science-Physics .  B15 (4): 
pp. 595–611. 
  30.    Kim, A. and Musfeldt, J.L. (1998), Understanding chemical structure 
physical property relationships in polymers through molecular modeling 
and thermal analysis techniques . Journal of Chemical Education .  75 (7): 
pp. 893–896. 
  31.   
 Hill, R. (1949), Some aspects of polymer constitution and fi bre properties . 
Chemistry and Industry. (27): pp. 443–443. 
  32.    Hill, R. and Walker, E.E. (1948), Polymer constitution and fi bre properties . 
Journal of Polymer Science .  3 (5): pp. 609–630. 
 33.  Mandelkern, L. (1981), Polymer principles in the teaching of undergraduate 
physical-chemistry . Abstracts of Papers of the American Chemical Society . 
 181 (MAR): pp. 10–CHED. 
 34.  Flory, P.J. (1953),  Principles of Polymer Chemistry. The George Fisher Baker 
non-resident lectureship in chemistry at Cornell University , Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press. 672 p. 
  35.    Ball, P. (1995), Polymer science. Gourmet macromolecules . Nature .  377 (6545): 
pp. 101–102. 
  36.    Cheng, S.Z. (2007), Materials science: polymer crystals downsized . Nature . 
 448 (7157): pp. 1006–1007. 

Synthetic polymer ﬁ bers and their processing requirements   29
 37. 
 Marcincin, A. (2002), Modifi cation of fi bre-forming polymers by additives . 
Progress in Polymer Science .  27 (5): pp. 853–913. 
  38.    Jana, R.N., Kumar, A. and Im, C. (2009), Molecular orientation of polyurethane 
based liquid crystal polymers by corona poling . Journal of Macromolecular 
Science Part a-Pure and Applied Chemistry .  46 (10): pp. 1001–1006. 
  39.    Patel, P.D. and Bogue, D.C. (1981), The effect of molecular-orientation on the 
mechanical-properties of fi bre-fi lled amorphous polymers . Journal of Rheology . 
 25 (4): pp. 461–462. 
  40.    Tsai, J.S. and Lin, C.H. (1991), The effect of molecular-weight on the cross-sec-
tion and properties of polyacrylonitrile precursor and resulting carbon-fi bre . 
Journal of Applied Polymer Science .  42 (11): pp. 3045–3050. 
  41.   
 Tan, L.J., Chen, H. and Pan, D. (2008), Investigating the spinnability in the dry-
jet wet spinning of PAN precursor fi bre . Journal of Applied Polymer Science . 
 110 (4): pp. 1997–2000. 
 42. 
 Dutta, A. and Nadkarni, V.M. (1984),  Identifying critical process variables in 
poly(ethylene-terephthalate) melt spinning. Textile Research Journal .  54 (1): 
pp. 35–42. 
 43.  Samuels, R.J. (1974),  Structured Polymer Properties: The Identifi cation, 
Interpretation, and Application of Crystalline Polymer Structure , New York: 
Wiley. xi, 251 p. 
  44.    Zeng, J., Chen, J. and Wang, Y. (2008), Development of relatively selective, 
chemically and mechanically robust solid-phase microextraction fi bres based 
on methacrylic acid-trimethylolpropane trimethacrylate co-polymers . Journal 
of Chromatography. A .  1208 (1–2): pp. 34–41. 
  45.    Buck, M.E. and Lynn, D.M. (2010), Functionalization of fi bres using azlac-
tone-containing polymers: layer-by-layer fabrication of reactive thin fi lms on 
the surfaces of hair and cellulose-based materials . ACS Applied Materials and 
Interfaces .  2 (5): pp. 1421–1429. 
  46.    Salem, D. (2001), Future view of structure formation in polymeric fi bres . Sen-I 
Gakkaishi .  57 (1): pp. P31–P31. 
 47. 
 Baltussen, J.J.M. (2005), Polymeric and inorganic fi bres.  Advances in Polymer 
Science , Berlin, New York: Springer. vi, 168 p. 
  48.    Wu, Q., Chen, N. and Li, L. (2012), Structure evolution of melt-spun poly(vinyl 
alcohol) fi bres during hot-drawing . Journal of Applied Polymer Science .  124 (1): 
pp. 421–428. 
  49.    Monobe, K. (April 1979), Fundamental approach for fi bre formation of crys-
talline polymers . Abstracts of Papers of the American Chemical Society , 
pp. 124–124. 
  50.    Lotze, G., Stephani, G., L ö ser, W. and Fieldler, H. (1991), Fundamentals of fi bre 
formation during melt extraction . Materials Science and Engineering a-Struc-
tural Materials Properties Microstructure and Processing .  133 : pp. 680–683. 
 51. 
 Remmler, T.(1999), Flow properties of polymer melts . Kunststoffe-Plast Europe . 
 89 (5): pp. 126–128. 
  52.    Acierno, D., Bianchi, E., Ciferri, A., Tealdi, A., Torre, R. and Valenti, B. (1976), 
Bulk properties of synthetic polymer-inorganic salt systems .3. Flow behavior 
and glass-transition of salted polycaproamide . Journal of Polymer Science Part 
C-Polymer Symposium . (54): pp. 259–269. 
  53.    Horio, M., Fujii, T. and Onogi, S. (1964), Rheological properties of polyethylene 
melts – effects of temperature + blending . Journal of Physical Chemistry .  68 (4): 
pp. 778–783. 

30   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
  54.    Jabbarzadeh, A., Atkinson, J.D. and Tanner, R.I. (2003) Effect of molecular 
shape on rheological properties in molecular dynamics simulation of star, H, 
comb, and linear polymer melts . Macromolecules .  36 (13): pp. 5020–5031. 
  55.    Shenoy, A.V. and Saini, D.R. (1996), Thermoplastic melt rheology and process-
ing.  Plastics Engineering , New York: Marcel Dekker. ix, 459 p. 
  56.    Sato, N., Sugiura, K and Ito, S. (1997), Molecular motion in polymer monolayers 
at the air/water interface. A time-resolved study of fl uorescence depolarization . 
Langmuir .  13 (21): pp. 5685–5690. 
  57.   
 Cerf, R. (1977), Structure dependent hydrodynamic properties and Brownian-
motion of polymeric molecules . Journal De Physique .  38 (4): pp. 357–376. 
 58.  Lelievre, J.C. (1987),  An introduction to rheology. Biorheology .  24 (4): 
pp. 415–415. 
  59.    Gillgren, T., Alven, T. and Stading, M. (2010), Impact of melt rheology on zein 
foam properties . Journal of Materials Science .  45 (21): pp. 5762–5768. 
  60.    Dupuis, D. (2009), Textile processes: the importance of rheology . Mecanique 
and Industries .  10 (1): pp. 21–25. 
  61.   
 Mercader, C., Lucas, A. and Derre, A. (2010), Kinetics of fi bre solidifi cation. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America.  107 (43): pp. 18331–18335. 
  62.    Liang, J.-Z., Zhong, L. and Wang, K. (2012), Analysis of melt spinning master-
curves of low density polyethylene . Journal of Applied Polymer Science .  125 (3): 
pp. 2202–2206. 
  63.    Zhang, X.F., Min, B.G. and Kumar, S. (2003), Solution spinning and character-
ization of poly(vinyl alcohol)/soybean protein blend fi bres . Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science .  90 (3): pp. 716–721. 
  64.    Wallace, G.G., Campbell, T.E. and Innis, P.C. (2007), Putting function into fash-
ion: Organic conducting polymer fi bres and textiles . Fibres and Polymers .  8 (2): 
pp. 135–142. 
  65.    Calvert, P. (1987), Introduction to physical polymer science – Sperling, LH . 
Nature .  326 (6109): pp. 216–216. 
 66.  Ohta, Y. (2004), Structural development of ultra-high strength polyethylene 
fi bre during gel-spinning process . Sen-I Gakkaishi .  60 (9): pp. P451–P455. 
  67.   
 Yi, D.K., Yoo, S.J. and Kim, D.Y. (2002), Spin-on-based fabrication of titania 
nanowires using a sol-gel process . Nano Letters .  2 (10): pp. 1101–1104. 
  68.    Igoshi, T., Tomisawa, N. and Hori, Y. (2011), Polyester polymer alloy as a high-
performance membrane, in A.K.H.Y.A.C.M.M. Saito, Ed.,  High-Performance 
Membrane Dialyzers ,. pp. 148–155. 
  69.    Narisawa, I., Kuriyama, T. and Schemer, B. (1996), Design and control of mor-
phology for high performance polymer alloys . Macromolecular Symposia .  101 : 
pp. 273–280. 
  70.    Takeichi, T., Saito, Y. and Agag, T. (2008), High-performance polymer alloys of 
polybenzoxazine and bismaleimide . Polymer .  49 (5): pp. 1173–1179. 
  71.   
 Assemat, E., Dargent, D. and Picozzi, A. (2011), Polarization control in spun 
and telecommunication optical fi bres . Optics Letters .  36 (20): pp. 4038–4040. 
 

© 2014 Woodhead Publishing Limited
31
 2 
 Understanding the behaviour of synthetic 
polymer fibres during spinning  
 E.  DEVAUX ,  Ecole Nationale Sup é rieure des 
Arts et Industries Textiles (ENSAIT), and 
Centre Europ é en des Textiles Innovants (CETI), France 
 DOI : 10.1533/9780857099174.1.31 
 Abstract: The spinning of synthetic polymers is a fi eld of plasturgy, where 
the main objective is to process materials with a particular directionality. 
This macromolecular orientation determines the end products’ functional 
characteristics and mechanical behaviour. Thermoplastic macromolecules 
have a natural tendency towards relaxation and isotropic spherulitic 
crystallization. As such, it is necessary to adapt the spinning parameters 
with the aim of maximizing chain orientation. The principal problem 
of spinning is adapting the polymer viscosity in the molten state or 
in solution in order to disentangle the macromolecular chains. As the 
viscosity depends directly on the molecular weight of the material, 
it is necessary to fi nd an adequate compromise between the desired 
mechanical behaviour and the rheological properties of the polymer. 
Most thermoplastic polymers have a strong tendency to crystallize during 
cooling. This phenomenon generally results in an isotropic arrangement of 
the macromolecules and must be controlled to ensure orientation in the 
fi bre direction. The relaxation of the macromolecular chains at the exit 
of the dies causes a die swell phenomenon, which must also be treated to 
optimize the fi nal properties of the yarns. 
 Key words : thermoplastic polymer rheology, crystallization, 
macromolecular superstructures, extrusion, die swell, drawing. 
 2.1 
 Introduction 
 Since the discovery of the qualities of natural silk around 3000 BC, mankind 
has tried to imitate nature by producing synthetic materials with similar prop-
erties to this material. The exceptional mechanical and handling properties 
of natural silk were and remain an absolute reference in the fi eld of fi bres. 
The ‘artifi cial silk’ patented in 1884 by French Bernigaudde Chardonnet 
is often seen as the fi rst signifi cant development in man-made fi bres. With 
the appearance of plastics at the beginning of the twentieth century, and 
the studies undertaken on the macromolecular structure of polymers by 

32   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 
Hermann Staudinger, there has been an increasing development of these 
materials for numerous applications, including textiles. Polyamide 6.6 fi bre 
(nylon), developed by Du Pont de Nemours in 1938, was a revolution in 
clothing and military uses. This fi bre, the functional characteristics of which 
are rather close to silk, has exceptional tenacity, fl exibility and lightness. 
With the progress of macromolecular chemistry at that time, it was the fi rst 
of a long series of diverse synthetic fi bres. 
 With rare exceptions, man-made fi bres are obtained from thermoplastic 
polymers. These materials, generally formed as a result of the condensa-
tion of monomers, are made from long linear or slightly ramifi ed macromo-
lecular chains. These confi gurations give to polymeric material plasticity at 
relatively low temperatures, making it possible to process it in a simple man-
ner. Thermoplastic polymers have seen signifi cant development in recent 
decades because the property of liquefying at temperature yields the poten-
tial for recycling. 
 In a fi rst approximation, the processing of synthetic fi bres consists in 
bringing the polymer to a liquid state (by melting or solubilization in a 
suitable solvent), to pass it through an adapted die, and then to stretch it 
while it is in the rubbery state. The material is fi nally cooled, or the sol-
vent is eliminated, before the fi bres are wound. The objective of drawing is 
to optimize the orientation of the macromolecules in the direction of the 
material fl ow, which in turn optimizes the fi nal properties of the yarn. From 
the point of view of the fundamental characteristics of polymers, it is the 
viscosity and rheology (in the liquid or solid state), which control the work-
ability of the fi bre.  
 2.2 
 Molten state rheology of thermoplastic 
polymers 
 For any processing technology of a thermoplastic polymeric material (injec-
tion moulding, calendering, extrusion-blowing, compression moulding, spin-
ning, etc.), it is the material fl ow which defi nes the suitability of the method 
considered. For simple fl uids, viscosity remains the most important parame-
ter in understanding the behaviour of the liquid. The rheology of polymers 
is, however, more complex because of their non-ideal behaviours compared 
to conventional liquids. Besides viscosity, molten polymers, or polymers in 
solution, also have elasticity and relaxation characteristics which strongly 
infl uence their behaviour in the processing tools. 
 The rheological properties of a polymer depend mainly on chemical 
structure and molecular weight, as well as temperature. The possible pres-
ence of additives and their concentration is also a key parameter relating to 
the rheological behaviour of a polymer. Viscosity   η  (expressed in Pa.s) for 
an ideal liquid is independent of the shear rate. During fl ow, such a liquid 

Understanding the behaviour of synthetic polymer ﬁ bres   33
follows Newton’s law, which expresses the relationship between the shear 
stress  γ and the gradient rate of deformation d
d
γ
t . 
 
 σ
η γ
σ
d
dt
 
 [2.1] 
 Experimentally, Newton’s law is generally followed only by gases and by 
simple liquids in laminar fl ow. It is only at a very low deformation rate and 
shear stress that solutions of macromolecules, molten polymers, emulsions 
and suspensions, display approximately Newtonian behaviour. 
 At higher shear rates, three types of deviations are observable when 
compared to ideal Newtonian fl ow (see Fig. 2.1).The fi rst kind of devia-
tion relates to the existence of a fl ow threshold (yield point). In the case 
of a Bingham fl uid, fl ow occurs only when the yield stress is exceeded. The 
second type of deviation is shear thickening, observed where the viscos-
ity increases with shear rate. This is the case for a dilating fl uid, behav-
iour which is seldom apparent in polymers. Last, where viscosity decreases 
with increase in shear rate, fl uxing is observed and such fl uids are usu-
ally referred to as pseudoplastic fl uids. This last phenomenon is a general 
characteristic of thermoplastic polymers. Flow effects may also be time 
dependent. Where viscosity does not depend only on the shear rate, but 
also on the duration of the applied stress, fl uids are thixotropic. Polymers 
in a molten state thus behave as pseudoplastic fl uids having thixotropic 
characteristics.  
σ
dt
dγ
Bingham liquid
Pseudoplastic liquid
Newtonian liquid
Dilatant liquid
2.1  Different kinds of deviations compared to the Newtonian ﬂ ow as a 
function of the shearing rate. 

34   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 
 At increased mechanical stress, molten plastics are characterized by 
a decrease in viscosity. This reduction in viscosity when d
d
γ
t  increases can 
be explained only by the fact that increasing mechanical stresses gradually 
destroy the structured organization of the molten polymer. In applications 
such as spinning, where the liquid polymer is constrained to cross a die, the 
shear rate is not constant but varies in the capillary. There is thus a maxi-
mum shear rate localized at the walls of the holes, while at the centre of the 
capillary, it is virtually non-existent (see Fig. 2.2). 
 Polymer viscosity is affected by several factors, such as temperature, 
pressure, shear rate, molecular weight and the presence of additives. Flow 
occurs in the molten state when the macromolecular chains slip over each 
other. The ease of this movement depends on the mobility of the polymeric 
chains, the intermolecular forces and the sequences ensuring the material 
cohesion. For a constant shear rate, viscosity decreases with an increase of 
temperature, and this effect increases with increasing shear rate. In most 
transformation processes, the fl ow of polymers in the molten state results 
from intense shearing; thus the dependencies of temperature and apparent 
viscosity have considerable practical importance. Newtonian viscosity, an 
intrinsic rheological parameter of the material, is related to macromolecular 
characteristics such as the glass transition temperature, average molecular 
weight, weight distribution, and the connection of side chains. The energy 
of activation for a polymer to fl ow in the liquid state increases when the 
size of the lateral groups increases, and/or when the macromolecular chains 
are more rigid (see Table 2.1). For very low shear rates, the macromolecu-
lar entanglements have time to slip and be destroyed before they impact 
the orientation of the macromolecules. For higher shear rates, however, the 
segments between entanglements are oriented before the entanglements 
disappear. At very high shear rates, the amount of entanglement becomes 
dt
dγ
–R
R
0
 2.2  Shearing rate proﬁ les in a spinning capillary. 

Understanding the behaviour of synthetic polymer ﬁ bres   35
negligible and apparent viscosity reaches a relatively low value, indepen-
dent of the shear rate. 
 Taking into account the very strong shear rates associated with the spin-
ning of a polymer through dies, understanding of the rheological behaviour 
of the material to control the processing parameters is of critical impor-
tance. As each polymer has its own rheological characteristics, it is necessary 
to fi nely adjust the processing parameters to optimize the fi nal properties of 
the yarn. Shear rates, which have a direct impact on the production speed of 
the yarns, are also extremely important since they appreciably modify the 
viscoelastic properties of the liquid polymer. 
 2.3 
 Polymer behaviour during cooling and 
resulting fibre structure 
 With rare exceptions, thermoplastic polymers are electrically and thermally 
insulating. This has a direct impact on the processing parameters and the 
dimensional stability of the end product. During spinning, the material 
very quickly passes from a liquid to a solid state (by cooling, coagulation or 
solvent evaporation), and the control of the evacuation of calories is very 
important for the fi nal product quality. According to the chemical nature 
of the polymer considered, there may be a natural tendency to crystallize, 
i.e. to organize constitutive macromolecules. The crystallization behaviour 
of a polymer depends on many factors and particularly on the thermo-
mechanical processing conditions. Unlike small molecule crystals, where 
the structural variety is mainly located at the level of the elementary lat-
tice, polymers have four levels of organization: confi guration of the chain, 
chain conformation and organization of the chains in the elementary lattice, 
lamellar structure related to chains folding, and organization of these lamel-
lar structures in larger entities (spherulites, for example). 
 Confi guration is defi nitively determined by the arrangement of the chem-
ical groups, and can be modifi ed for a given polymer only by breakage of the 
chemical bonds. The conformation of the chains is controlled by interactions 
 Table 2.1  Energy of activation to promote a polymer ﬂ owing in the liquid 
state 
 Polymer 
 Energy of activation E (kJ/g.mol) 
 Polyethylene (high density) 
 6.3–7.0 
 Polyethylene (low density) 
 11.7 
 Polypropylene 
 9.0–10.0 
 Polyethylene terephthalate 
 19.0 
 Polystyrene 
 25.0 
 Polycarbonate 
 26.0–30.0 

36   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 
at short distance between close non-dependent atoms. The regular repeti-
tion of these conformations involves the formation of helicoidal structures. 
From 10 to 30 nm, crystalline lamellae with low thickness are alternated 
with the residual amorphous phase. At larger scales, the lamellae are orga-
nized at long distance to yield morphologies such as spherulites (see Figs 
2.3 and 2.4). 
 During the cooling of a semi-crystalline thermoplastic polymer, the 
macromolecules are organized around a germ of nucleation. At a partic-
ular temperature of thermodynamic balance between crystal and liquid 
(Tm ° ), the molar free enthalpies are equal in the solid and liquid phases. 
Crystallization is theoretically possible as soon as the solid free enthalpy 
 2.3  Spherulitic superstructure in a polypropylene ﬁ lm.  
 2.4  Spatial distribution of crystalline lamellae in a spherulite. 

Understanding the behaviour of synthetic polymer ﬁ bres   37
becomes lower than that of the liquid phase, i.e. below the melting point of 
the material. Organized zones called nuclei are created, with a characteristic 
variation of free enthalpy  Δ G . For a critical volume of nuclei, the probability 
of growth becomes higher than that of reduction. This occurs where germs 
are supercritical, or active. Germination is homogeneous when the active 
germs appear spontaneously in the super cooled liquid phase, but is hetero-
geneous when the cores are formed on the surface of foreign particles. In 
the latter case, it is the presence of nucleating agents incorporated into the 
polymer, or the introduction of functional additives, which cause the nucle-
ation. Crystallization itself is a natural evolution of germination (Lauritzen 
and Hoffman, 1960; Frank and Tosi, 1961; Gornick and Hoffman, 1966). 
 In standard conditions of cooling, crystalline growth takes place in the 
shape of spherulites. This kind of superstructure has fundamental isotropic 
properties because the growth takes place in three dimensions (see Fig. 2.4), 
whereas lamellar structures grow in a radial manner away from the cen-
tral core. In certain cases (in particular for polyethylene), the crystalline 
lamellae can turn around their growth axis, according to the macromolec-
ular architecture and to the crystallization conditions (see Fig. 2.5) (Keller 
and Kolnaar, 1997). The spherulites size is related to the number of nucle-
ation sites existing in the material, which mainly depends on the cooling 
kinetics, the presence of nucleating agents, and on the type of germination. 
In a spinning application, taking this behaviour into account is very impor-
tant because the objective is to obtain a strongly anisotropic structure in 
order to optimize the mechanical properties of the yarn. The orientation of 
an isotropic polymer in the solid state consists in aligning the polymer mac-
romolecules parallel to the direction of the main mechanical stress, leading 
to a material with a higher degree of anisotropy due to the chain orienta-
tion (Ajji and Dumoulin, 2006). It is well established that the mechanical 
behaviour of the oriented material, and particularly the strength and stiff-
ness, increases in the molecular orientation direction (Amornsakchai and 
Songtipya, 2002; Francesco and Duckett, 2004). In most cases, the classical 
model of drawing proposed by Peterlin (Peterlin, 1971) for crystalline poly-
mers is considered valid (Ziabicki  et al ., 2004; Schoene  et al ., 2005). 
 During the spinning process, the polymer is subjected to an intense fl ow 
and to strong shear stresses, which can appreciably modify crystallization 
behaviour. The various studies available show an acceleration of crystalliza-
tion under fl ow (Somani  et al ., 2000). During shear tests carried out before 
the isothermal crystallization of polypropylene , Lagasse and Maxwell (1976) 
highlighted the existence of a critical shear rate, beyond which the induction 
time decreases when the shear rate increases, the time before crystallization 
decreases under these conditions.  However, certain studies (Vleeshouwers 
and Meijer, 1996) show that the use of the induction time as a parameter for 
the measurement of crystallization acceleration is not necessarily relevant. 

38   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 
Considering the work on various polypropylenes, it is observed that the 
polymer reaches its maximum crystallization rate more quickly where the 
induction time is longest. 
 Increase of nuclei numbers is one of the major consequences of crystal-
lization below the yield stress. The zones subjected to the greatest shear 
forces in injected products, for instance, have morphological structures of 
smaller size than those of the other zones (Kalay and Bevis, 1997). When the 
stresses are very low and do not promote a suffi cient stretching of the mac-
romolecular chains, there can be a macroscopic orientation due to the align-
ment of the lamellae plans in the direction of the fl ow. The largest dimension 
of the lamellae is also aligned to the fl ow direction. Where the shear rate is 
increased, the deformation involves an anisotropic growth of the lamellae. 
The chain elongation in the melt favours the growth of the lamellae in the 
direction perpendicular to the fl ow, giving rise to spherulites with ellipsoidal 
shapes, whose main axes are perpendicular to the direction of the fl ow. 
 In recent years, numerous studies have dealt with the incorporation of 
nanofi llers in polymeric materials to improve certain functional proper-
ties. In most of these cases, mechanical properties improve signifi cantly. The 
addition of nanoparticles in a polymer promotes spherulitic crystallization, 
which may favour the isotropy of the material. A subsequent drawing is 
then generally necessary to give a satisfactory orientation of the crystal-
line lamellae (Fujimori  et al ., 2008; Solarski  et al ., 2008; Vargas  et al ., 2010; 
Murariu  et al ., 2011). 
a
b
c
a
c
b
 2.5  Representation of crystalline lamellae in polyethylene (Keller and 
Kolnaar, 1997). 

Understanding the behaviour of synthetic polymer ﬁ bres   39
 In the case of very high yield stress, as in the spinning process, morphol-
ogy is of the fi bril type. If the stresses decrease, there will be less fi brillae and 
they will be more distant from each other. The polymer in between these 
fi brillae can then crystallize, while taking the fi brillae as germs, and forming 
parallel lamellae between them. This kind of structure, known as a ‘shish-
kebab’, presents a molecular orientation aligned to the direction of the fl ow. 
Nagasawa  et al . (1973) proposed a model whereby the growth of the lamel-
lae begins with an epitaxial alignment of the crystalline axis compared to 
the axis of the core fi brillae. Hosier  et al . (1995) observed an increase in the 
diameter of the shish-kebabs and a reduction in the longitudinal distance 
between the lamellae with an increase in the deformation rate. At defor-
mation rates similar to those observed during spinning, the lamellae are 
plane and normal to the fi brillae, whereas at lower rates, they are inclined 
and have an S or C shape perpendicular to the growth direction. This kind 
of superstructure is of great importance during spinning, since most of the 
macromolecular chains must be oriented in the fl ow direction, and lamellae 
perpendicular to the fl ow contribute only slightly to the mechanical resis-
tance of the fi lament. 
 2.4 
 Polymer behaviour during filament spinning 
 As molten polymers, or those in solution, are constrained to cross dies whose 
diameter is roughly a few hundred microns, it is necessary to adjust viscosi-
ties very precisely. The latter must be as low as possible in order to limit the 
pressures at the exit of the extrusion device. There exist several strategies 
to obtain a melt or a solution with adequate viscosity. For example, it is pos-
sible to decrease the molecular weight of the polymer, which appreciably 
increases the fl uidity of the liquid material. However, this reduction in the 
molecular weight has important consequences for the fi nal properties of 
the yarn, and in particular on its mechanical behaviour. The addition of a 
plasticizer makes it possible to decrease the thermal transitions of the poly-
mer and increase its fl uidity. Consequently, however, a signifi cant deterio-
ration in properties results, limiting the amount of plasticizer which may be 
incorporated. The processing temperature of the polymer is also a relevant 
parameter in decreasing its viscosity. Increase in temperature allows for the 
possibility of adjusting in a very precise way the viscosity of the mixture. It 
must not, however, exceed the thermal degradation limit of the material. It 
is easier to use this parameter to control viscosity with non-polar polymers 
(polypropylene, polyethylene) than with polar thermoplastics such as poly-
amide or polyester. 
 Determination of the extrusion and processing temperatures of a ther-
moplastic polymer is rather complex because the thermal effect is often 
regarded as not very important for bringing the polymer to the liquid 

40   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 
state. The material is subjected to extremely high shear stresses, which 
strongly contribute to its plasticization and to its transition to the liquid 
state. Moreover, it should be noted that polymers generally have very low 
thermal conductivities. The low diffusivity of the material combined with 
its high viscosity tends to make the mechanical action dominate the ther-
mal contribution. In single-screw extrusion, for instance, it is usual to con-
sider the Brinkman number, Br, in order to defi ne the relationship between 
the mechanical energy and the thermal contribution necessary to bring the 
polymer to a liquid state. 
 
 Br
Mechanical energy
Thermal energy
=
 
 [2.2] 
 Formally, this ratio can be expressed by the following equation: 
 
 Br =
(
)
η
λ(
VF
V 2
 
 [2.3] 
 where  η  represents the polymer viscosity (expressed in Pa.s),  V  F   is the screw 
linear velocity at the external top of the screw (in ms  − 1 ),   λ  is the thermal con-
ductivity of the polymer (in Wm  − 1 ° C  − 1 ),  T  F  is the temperature of the sleeve 
( ° C), and T is the average temperature of the polymer ( ° C). 
 If we consider an extruder with a screw of diameter 80 mm, running at a 
speed of 60 turns per minute, mixing a thermoplastic polymer of viscosity 
10 3  Pa.s and thermal conductivity 0.2 Wm  − 1 ° C  − 1 , and with a difference of 
30 ° C between the temperature of the sleeve and that of polymer, we then 
obtain a value of 10.5 for the Brinkman number. This high value confi rms 
that the major part of the energy provided to the system in bringing the 
material to the liquid state is of mechanical origin. The combination of the 
mechanical and thermal contributions then results in an increase in the tem-
perature of the polymer during its processing. If this temperature is too high, 
the material evolves by thermal degradation. The generation of free radicals 
can also sometimes result in a disordered reticulation of the material, modi-
fying its viscosity and the fi nal properties of the yarn. The apparent viscosity 
can also become too low when the material crosses the dies, which disturbs 
the fl ow of molten polymer. If on the other hand the processing temperature 
is too low, extrusion becomes diffi cult, with fl ow irregularities and breakages 
of the fi laments. 
 In order to limit the diffi culties in fi nding an adequate compromise 
between the viscosity of the liquid polymer and preventing degradation, it is 
possible to accelerate the fl ow while applying intense pressures in the tools. 

Understanding the behaviour of synthetic polymer ﬁ bres   41
The pressures in the fi ltration systems and in the dies would then not be 
too high because the limits of mechanical resistance of the spinning system 
are likely to be reached. These pressures should, however, not be too low 
because they then give rise to a poor distribution of the polymer at the dies 
exit, and an irregularity in the quality of the multifi laments. In the industrial 
exploitation of a spinning process, requirements for regularity of the prod-
uct are high (in particular in the case of continuous fi laments), and several 
millions kilometres of yarns must be processed without breakage. 
 2.5 
 The die swell phenomenon 
 The optimization of the functional properties of a synthetic yarn (in partic-
ular from the point of view of its mechanical behaviour) requires maximum 
orientation of the macromolecules in the direction of fl ow. This objective 
can be diffi cult to achieve because of the generally pseudoplastic behaviour 
of such liquids. The dies which the polymers cross typically have the shape 
of a funnel (see Fig. 2.6). When the macromolecules are brought into liquid 
state in the system, they will undergo stresses because of the irregularity of 
the die’s diameter. Under the action of the pressures at the exit of the extru-
sion device, the polymer will cross successively three zones in the die (see 
Fig. 2.6). The advance of the macromolecules from Zone I towards Zone II 
shows that the fl ow rate will increase because the section of the capillary 
Zone I
Zone II
Zone III
 2.6  Typical evolution of the geometry in a capillary die. 

42   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 
decreases appreciably. The material fl ow being constant and the polymer 
being incompressible, this last is subjected to a side compression and an 
elongational stress. The macromolecules will thus tend to disentangle and 
become oriented to the fl ow direction. The pseudoplastic viscosity of the 
polymer will then decrease. When the liquid material reaches Zone III, i.e. 
the opening of the die hole, the macromolecules will be released to minimize 
their entropy. A strong tendency to return to the state of a ball is observed. 
A bulb is then formed below the die hole, known as the phenomenon of 
die swell. In these conditions, the extrudate has a diameter larger than that 
of the die. This very important phenomenon was fi rst observed by Barusin 
1893, but was more correctly analysed by Merrington in 1943 (Merrington, 
1943). The Barus effect is defi ned by the following relation: 
 
 B
D
D
=
0
 
 [2.4] 
 where  D  represents the diameter of the extrudate  and  D 0  the diameter of 
the die. This ratio of swelling  B  generally lies between 1 and 4, but can reach 
much higher values in the case of polymer alloys. As an example, Fig. 2.7 
shows the aspect at the exit of a die (melt spinning) of a mixture of poly-
lactide and polycaprolactone. The dies used in this case have a diameter of 
400 microns, whereas the extrudate obtained shows a diameter of several 
millimetres. The ratio of swelling depends on several parameters, such as the 
residence time of the polymer in the stressed zone (Zone II), the length of 
the capillary, the molecular weight of the polymer, and the temperature in 
the die. Swelling can occur immediately after the exit of the die if the fl ow is 
relatively slow, or be shifted if the extrudate runs out at higher speed. 
 2.7  Die swell phenomenon for a polylactide/polycaprolactone alloy. 

Understanding the behaviour of synthetic polymer ﬁ bres   43
 The measurement of swelling must be undertaken in a very delicate man-
ner because of the stress relaxation after extrusion. Some time is necessary 
for the swelling to be maximized. Time (or the corresponding distance to the 
exit of the die) depends on the extrusion speed and on the relaxation time 
of the liquid polymer. Moreover, the tensions applied on the extrudate and 
its own weight are likely to modify the value of  D . It is the same with regard 
to the temperature of the extrudate which, without special precautions, will 
undergo a strong cooling at the exit of the die. 
 The length  L of the die in Zone II has also a very important infl uence on 
the swelling phenomenon at the exit of the die. Let us consider for exam-
ple two extrusion experiments carried out with two dies of same diameters 
 D 0 , but different lengths  L  and 2 L . If the pressure exerted on each die is 
adjusted so that the same fl ow  Q  is obtained, we observe the production of 
rods with a diameter lower for the case of capillary length 2 L . The Barus 
ratio thus decreases as the length of the die increases. The reduction of  B 
with  L (or L
R
) can be explained by the material relaxation in the channel of 
the die where this is suffi ciently long. In practice, extreme cases are chosen 
by defi ning  B 0  as the limit of the Barus ratio when L
R
 tends towards zero, 
and  B  ∞  when it tends towards the infi nite. 
 The fl ow rate in the capillary is another parameter which conditions swell-
ing at the exit of the die. The Barus number in fact increases with the shear 
2
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
5
10
Shear rate on the die wall γ (sec–1)
Barus effect
Approximate appearance
of the melt rupture
50
100
400
145°C
160°C
175°C
190°C
205°C
220°C
2.8  Evolution of the Barus number as a function of the shearing rate at 
the exit of a spinning die. 

44   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 
rate   γ  up to a breaking value, at which point certain fl ow defects appear (see 
Fig. 2.8). At this breaking value of   γ ,  B  passes through a maximum and then 
strongly decreases. This threshold, often called the ‘rupture of melting’ can 
be characterized by small irregularities on the extrude at surface (rough-
ness, shark skin, etc.), by corrugated or helicoidal deformations, or by per-
iodic deformations or breakage. 
 2.6 
 Drawing of polymers: changes in morphology 
and properties of filaments 
 At the die exit, and particularly in the case of melt spinning, the polymer 
is at a higher temperature than its melting point. Simultaneous with the 
swelling phenomenon at the die exit, the material is gradually brought 
back to room temperature. As the temperature decreases, the apparent 
viscosity of the polymer increases. Under the action of the tensile force, 
the polymer fl ow is refi ned and the fi lament diameter decreases until 
reaching its fi nal value. This deformation occurs between the die and a 
point where the material reaches its glass transition temperature  T  g  , i.e. 
between a liquid and a rubbery state. Below this critical temperature, the 
polymer reaches a glassy state where it is comparable to a non-deform-
able material. 
 Between the molten state and the end of the rubbery state, the polymeric 
fi lament undergoes a very strong tension which compensates (at least par-
tially) the Barus effect. At the exit of the die, the macromolecules relax 
and lose the orientation acquired in the capillaries. Under the action of 
the increasing tension, the molecules are aligned and oriented in the fl ow 
direction. As the temperature continues to decrease, it eventually becomes 
equal to  T  g  . The macromolecules cannot any more be relaxed, and the orga-
nization acquired previously is fi xed. In certain zones of the fi lament, seg-
ments of macromolecules will be well aligned. In others, macromolecular 
entanglements persist. The state of organization will depend on the spin-
ning conditions (cooling temperature profi le, tensile speed, etc.).The yarns 
resulting from the spinning process thus do not show the characteristics 
of macromolecular orientation and crystallinity suffi cient to obtain all the 
required properties. An operation of drawing is then required, which con-
sists in applying a longitudinal deformation in a temperature range between 
the glass transition temperature of the polymer and a maximal temperature 
above which the orientation given to the yarn cannot be memorized any 
more. It is theoretically impossible to carry out fast deformations in a homo-
geneous way below  T  g  . The usual temperatures for the drawing of polyeth-
ylene terephthalate, for instance, lie between 80 ° C and 100 ° C, whereas they 
are between 50 ° C and 100 ° C for polyamide 6.6. 

Understanding the behaviour of synthetic polymer ﬁ bres   45
 The drawing ratio generally lies between 2 and 4. This ratio can go up to 
6 in the case of certain high performance fi bres. Drawing is accompanied by 
a self-heating phenomenon, which can cause a temperature rise beyond the 
glass transition temperature without external heating of the yarn (in par-
ticular for polyamide 6.6). The phenomenon of striction also occurs which 
is generally fi xed and located on a metallic part of the drawing device. The 
identifi cation of the striction point should not be confused with the appear-
ance of a constriction point obtained during the cold drawing of a static 
specimen. In a dynamic industrial drawing, the striction point is imposed by 
a mechanical device which constitutes the point of application of the draw-
ing force where the temperature of the yarn reaches the glass transition 
temperature. The modulus decreases strongly and the striction occurs. 
 The macromolecular orientation and the crystallization which occur dur-
ing drawing are still insuffi cient to lower the thermal contraction suffi ciently. 
A supplement to crystallization is obtained through heat treatment, possi-
bly accompanied by relaxation, which is carried out on the drawing device 
itself. This results in a disorientation of the amorphous phases, the macro-
molecules tending to return to the shapes of disorientated balls which are 
thermodynamically more stable. This complementary heat treatment is typ-
ically carried out between 130 ° C and 180 ° C for polyethyleneterephthalate, 
and between 150 ° C and 190 ° C for polyamide 6.6. 
 In recent decades, new generations of fi bres have appeared, for instance, 
ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE). The main interest 
in such materials lies is the fact that their mechanical properties are greatly 
increased. The major diffi culty for the fi bre processing of these polymers 
comes as a result of their very high viscosity in the molten state, which limits 
their processability by conventional methods. Due to this, important efforts 
have been undertaken using, for instance, gel-spun hot-drawing technolo-
gies. As macromolecular entanglements play an important role in the sub-
sequent extension of the chains during drawing, it is necessary to dissolve 
the polymer in an appropriate solvent to favour their disentanglement. 
Drawing then promotes the slippage of the macromolecular chains, and 
drawing ratios of up to 60 or more may be reached (Pennings and Smook, 
1984; Penning  et al ., 1991). 
 2.7 
 References 
 Ajji A and Dumoulin M M (2006), ‘Very high modulus high-density polyethylene 
and high-modulus polypropylene obtained by solid-state roll drawing’,  J Appl 
Polym Sci ,  102 , 3391–3399. 
 Amornsakchai T and Songtipya P (2002), ‘On the infl uence of molecular weight and 
crystallisation condition on the development of defect in highly drawn polyeth-
ylene’,  Polymer ,  43 , 4231–4236. 

46   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 
 Francesco A D and Duckett R A (2004), ‘Effects of orientation on mechanical prop-
erties of uniaxially oriented polystyrene fi lms’,  Polymer ,  45 , 8005–8011. 
 Frank F and Tosi M (1961), ‘On the theory of polymer crystallization’,  Proc Roy Soc , 
 263 , 323–339. 
 Fujimori A, Ninomiya N and Masuko T (2008), ‘Structure and mechanical properties 
in drawn poly (L-lactide/clay) hybrid fi lms’,  Polym Adv Technol ,  19 , 1735–1744. 
 Gornick F and Hoffman J D (1966), ‘Nucleation in polymers’,  Ind Eng Chem ,  58 , 
41–53. 
 Hosier I L, Bassett D C and Moneva I T (1995), ‘On the morphology of polyethylene 
crystallized from a sheared melt’,  Polymer ,  36 , 4197–4202. 
 Kalay G and Bevis M J (1997), ‘The effect of shear controlled orientation in injection 
moulding on the mechanical properties of an aliphatic polyketone’,  J Polym Sci 
Polym Phys ,  35 , 365–291. 
 Keller A and Kolnaar J W H (1997), ‘Flow-induced orientation and structure for-
mation’, in  Materials Science and Technology, A Comprehensive Study , 18, 
Weinheim: VCH, Chapter 4, 189–268. 
 Lagasse R R and Maxwell B (1976), ‘Experimental study of kinetics of polymer crys-
tallization during shear-fl ow’,  Polym Eng Sci ,  16 , 189–199. 
 Lauritzen J I and Hoffman J D (1960), ‘Theory of formation of polymer crystals with 
folded chains in dilute solution’,  J Res Natl Bur Stand ,  64A , 73–101. 
 Merrington A C (1943), ‘Flow of viscoelastic materials in capillaries’,  Nature , 152, 
663. 
 Murariu M, Doumbia A S, Bonnaud L, Dechief A L, Paint Y, Ferreira M, Campagne 
C, Devaux E and Dubois P (2011), ‘High performance polylactide/ZnO nano-
composites designed for fi lms and fi bers with special end-use properties’, 
 Biomacromolecules ,  12 , 1762–1771. 
 Nagasawa T, Matsumura T and Hoshino S (1973), ‘Film forming process of crystal-
line polymer. 2. Microstructure’,  Appl Polym Symp ,  20 , 295–313. 
 Penning J P, Dijkstra D J and Pennings A J (1991), ‘Tensile force at break of gel-
spun/hot-drawn ultrahigh molecular weight polyethylene fi bres’,  J Mater Sci , 
 26 , 4721–4726. 
 Pennings A J and Smook J (1984), ‘Mechanical properties of ultra-high molecular 
weight polyethylene fi ber in relation to structural changes and chain scissoring 
upon spinning and hot-drawing’  J Mater Sci ,  19 , 3443–3450. 
 Peterlin A (1971), ‘Molecular model of drawing polyethylene and polypropylene’,  J 
Mater Sci ,  6 , 490–508. 
 Schoene A, Ziabicki A and Jarecki L (2005), ‘Transient uniaxial orientation of fl exi-
ble polymer chains in a wide range of elongation’,  Polymer ,  46 , 3927–3935. 
 Solarski S, Ferreira M, Devaux E, Fontaine G, Bachelet P, Bourbigot S, Delobel R, 
Coszach P, Murariu M, Da Silva Ferreira A, Alexandre M, Degee P and Dubois 
P (2008), ‘Designing polylactide/clay nanocomposites for textile applications: 
effect of processing conditions, spinning and characterization’,  J Appl Polym 
Sci ,  109 , 841–851. 
 Somani R H, Hsiao B S, Nogales A, Srinivas S, Tsou A H, Sics I, Balta-Calleja F J and 
Ezquerra T A (2000), ‘Structure development during shear fl ow-induced crys-
tallization of i-PP: in situ small-angle x-ray scattering study’,  Macromolecules , 
 33 , 9385–9394. 

Understanding the behaviour of synthetic polymer ﬁ bres   47
 Vargas A F, Orozco V H, Rault F, Giraud S, Devaux E and Lopez B L (2010), 
‘Infl uence of fi ber-like nanofi llers on the rheological, mechanical, thermal and 
fi re properties of polypropylene: an application to multifi lament yarn’,  Compos 
Part A: Appl S ,  41 , 1797–1806. 
 Vleeshouwers S and Meijer H E H (1996), ‘A rheological study of shear induced 
crystallization’,  Rheol Acta ,  35 , 391–399. 
 Ziabicki A, Jarecki L and Schoene A (2004), ‘Transient biaxial orientation of fl ex-
ible polymer chains in a wide range of deformation conditions’,  Polymer ,  45 , 
5735–5742. 
 

© 2014 Woodhead Publishing Limited
48
 3 
 Technologies for the manufacture of 
synthetic polymer fibers  
 J.  HAGEWOOD ,  J Hagewood LLC, USA 
 DOI : 10.1533/9780857099174.1.48 
 Abstract: From the fi rst commercial beginnings of the fi ber industry 
in the early twentieth century until today, the spinning of synthetic 
fi bers has undergone remarkable changes. The early use of synthetic 
fi bers in apparel has exploded into thousands of end products, from 
apparel to composite structures in aircraft to biodegradable sutures and 
beyond. Although the same basic principle of pushing a polymer melt 
or solution through a small hole to form a linear stream of material 
that is solidifi ed and drawn into a fi ber is the same today as it was in 
the beginning, the spinning speeds, polymers and types of processes 
have changed. The engineering and design of the equipment used to 
produce synthetic fi bers is based on a delicate compromise between 
scientifi c understanding of polymers and fi ber spinning processes, end-
use requirements, and economics. Presently, there are two somewhat 
opposite trends driving fi ber-producing equipment design and supply. 
One trend is focused on reducing the manufacturing cost of well-defi ned 
commodity fi ber products such as polyester fi lament and staple. The 
other trend is focused on specialty fi bers with unique properties that 
require new polymers and processes to meet the ever-changing demands 
of the marketplace. Examples of each of these trends are reviewed and 
discussed. 
 Key words: synthetic fi bers, fi ber extrusion, fi ber melt spinning equipment, 
fi ber solution spinning processes. 
 3.1 
 Introduction 
 Synthetic fi bers are ubiquitous in modern day life. They literally surround us 
in our clothing, bedding, and home furnishings. They are also hidden in dust 
covers under sofas and beds, as fi lters in our heating and air conditioning 
systems, sound absorbers in our car doors, and stuffed in pillows and cush-
ions. They are the primary ingredients in diapers for our children, wipes for 
cleaning, and many window treatments. They brush and fl oss our teeth and 

Technologies for the manufacture of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   49
are used to stitch and bandage our wounds. Many surgical procedures would 
not be possible without the use of biodegradable synthetic fi ber sutures that 
hydrolyze and dissolve in the body. Fibers are often used as reinforcement 
materials in plastic parts, automobile tires, and even concrete. In many ways, 
life in the twenty-fi rst century is based on our understanding, production 
and use of synthetic fi bers. 
 The engineering and design of the equipment used to produce synthetic 
fi bers is based on a delicate compromise between a scientifi c understanding 
of polymers and spinning processes, end-use requirements, and economics. 
Most large fi ber production plants are built by a relatively small number 
of engineering companies and equipment manufacturers based in Western 
Europe and Japan. As the installed capacity has moved to Asia, particu-
larly China, these companies have also moved much of their engineering 
staff and production to Asia, to better compete with rapidly growing Asian 
competitors. 
 Presently, there are two somewhat opposite trends driving fi ber-producing 
equipment design and supply. One trend is focused on reducing the manufactur-
ing cost of well-defi ned commodity fi ber products such as polyester fi lament 
and staple. This trend has resulted in ever larger spinning plants connected 
to continuous polymerization (CP) systems and ever faster spinning speeds. 
Today, a typical new fi ber plant will have an annual capacity of over 500 000 
metric tons (some are much larger), and can have fi lament winding speeds up 
to 8000 m per min for continuous fi lament yarns (Engelhart, 2011). The other 
trend is focused on specialty fi bers with unique properties that require new 
polymers and processes to meet the ever-changing demands of the market-
place. This equipment is much smaller, slower and generally custom built. It is 
often built in-house by the fi ber producer or end user. Obviously, it is impos-
sible to describe all the equipment and processes used today to manufacture 
synthetic fi bers. 
 In general, fi ber spinning is divided into one of two processes: melt spin-
ning where the polymer can be heated to a melt state without damage and 
extruded into fi bers and quenched; and solvent spinning where the polymer 
is dissolved into a solvent to make a spinnable dope that is extruded into 
fi bers, after which the solvent is removed. There are many variations on these 
two basic processes (in particular there are many types of solvent spinning 
processes). Examples of melt spun fi bers include polyester, nylon, and poly-
propylene. Examples of solvent spun fi bers include Kevlar®, Lycra®, rayon, 
and Lyocell®. Some polymers such as polyethylene are both melt spun and 
solvent spun, such as in the Tyvex® and Spectra® processes (Salem, 2001). 
What follows is only a sampling of the better-known commercial equipment 
and machinery used in this gigantic industry. 

50   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 3.2 
 Textile filament and bulk continuous 
fiber (BCF) spinning 
 Filament spinning processes used to produce continuous fi bers resulted 
in the largest percent age of synthetic fi bers manufactured in 2010. These 
fi bers were consumed primarily in textile and home furnishing applications, 
and amounted to 20.8 Mt (Engelhart, 2011). Although the largest portion 
of fi bers spun by these techniques is polyester; nylons, polypropylene, and 
other polymers can also be spun this way. The larger lines are usually fed by 
a CP and may be part of a larger complex that supports the production of 
staple, continuous fi lament and polymer pellet production from the same 
polymerization unit. When the fi ber is going to be used without the addition 
of bulking in some fashion, a single-step spin-draw operation is generally 
used. If the fi ber is required to be bulked to meet certain end-use require-
ments, both single-step and two-step processes are available. 
 In the single-step unbulked process, the polymer is extruded through indi-
vidual packs arranged in rows in a container referred to as a spin beam, 
which is often heated by a vapor phase liquid such as phenol/phenol. Each 
pack contains fi ltration media and a spinneret with a small number of holes. 
Typically the number of holes is between 30 and 100, although spinnerets 
with both smaller and larger numbers of holes are used. Each hole creates a 
fi lament, and the fi laments from each pack are collected together into fi nal 
threadlines as they pass through a quench zone cooled by air. If there are 
eight packs in a row, eight threadlines will be created, which will either be 
drawn by heated rolls or spun at very high speeds (greater than 5500 m per 
min) to produce a fi ber with low elongation and high tenacity so that further 
drawing is not needed before use. The fi laments are then consolidated by 
interlacing with high pressure air before being transferred to a winder with 
one threadline being wound per tube or package. Winders today can wind up 
to 16 or more packages at a time (Oerlikon Textile GMBH and CO., 2011). 
Recent innovations in this area have seen increases in the number of fi la-
ments per threadline, which have led to the production of smaller tex per fi l-
ament fi bers and higher winding speeds, which have eliminated the need for 
mechanical drawing of the fi bers. Oerlikon Barmag has recently introduced 
a new high speed winder called WINGS, which also integrates fi ber drawing 
and interlace with the winder (Fig. 3.1) (Susanne Beyer, February 2010). 
Other past innovations include larger package sizes, increases in number of 
packages per winder, and automatic doffi ng and handling equipment. 
 Often continuous fi lament fi bers require some type of bulk or twist before 
they can be used in textile applications. This is accomplished in carpet yarns 
generally produced from nylon 6, nylon 66 or polypropylene by using a BCF 
machine (Oerlikon Textile GMBH and CO., 2011). These lines are similar 
to the one-step fi ber lines described above, except that the spinning speed 

Technologies for the manufacture of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   51
is much slower and the fi ber tex is much higher. Most of these machines 
are also extruder fed. The fi lament shape is usually trilobal. Because of the 
lower spinning speed, the fi bers are spun as unoriented fi laments in the fi rst 
step and are then drawn mechanically using heated godets. The fi bers then 
pass to a stuffer box or bulker while they are being heated by steam. The 
bulked fi bers are then transferred to a cooling drum where they are relaxed 
before being drawn off, transferred to a winder, and wound on packages 
under low tension. There have been few major technical changes in this 
operation in recent years. The process speeds have increased slightly and the 
number of ends per position and ends on a winder have also increased. Two 
major trends have been in the use of polyolefi n polymers to make carpet 
yarns, and movement of the production of these fi bers from traditional fi ber 
producers to in-house production at carpet manufacturers such as Shaw and 
Mohawk. 
 Most bulked continuous fi lament fi bers are produced for apparel applica-
tions and are processed using a two-step method. In the fi rst step the fi bers 
are spun as straight fl at yarns at speeds between 3500 and 5500 m per min, 
which results in a fi ber that is only partially oriented but fully crystallized. 
The fi bers in this stage are extremely stable and can be stored for years with-
out degrading; however, they are still not fully drawn. This fi nal operation 
 3.1  Photograph of Barmag WINGS winder. 

52   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
is later completed in a second step using a draw twist machine (Fig. 3.2). As 
named, this operation includes a drawing step, typically 1.6 ×  for polyester, 
to complete the fi ber orientation resulting in fi bers with a fi nal elongation 
to break in the range of 25–35%. Hundreds of thread lines are processed 
together on a single machine, which typically operates at a speed between 
600 and 1200 m per min. Drawing takes place in a heated chamber between 
two sets of rollers operating at different speeds. After drawing, the yarn 
is passed through a twisting unit composed of multiple ceramic or plastic 
disks. The twist in the yarn builds up through the twist unit until a point at 
which the twist reverses itself and afterwards is heat-set in a second heated 
chamber. Because of the reversing twist produced in the yarn, this type of 
bulking is called false twist texturing. This process adds approximately 15% 
additional bulk in the yarn and helps to increase the cover in a fabric and 
create a softer and dryer hand. 
 3.3 
 Staple fiber spinning 
 The second largest volume of synthetic fi bers produced annually in the 
world today is polyester staple fi ber (PSF). The process and general design 
of the equipment used to produce these fi bers have changed little since the 
early 1950s, when this process was fi rst introduced to industry. What has 
changed dramatically is the size and location of the lines. PR China alone 
now accounts for 62% of all PSF production (Engelhart, 2011). The second 
largest producer is India; however, it accounts for only 3% of the worldwide 
production. Many new PSF lines being installed have capacities greater 
than 300 t per day as compared to the original lines, which had capacities 
more in the range of 10 t per day. This has resulted in a large decrease in 
 3.2  Photograph of Barmag_eFK false twist texturing machine. 

Technologies for the manufacture of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   53
the manufacturing conversion cost between the polymer ingredients and 
fi nal baled cut staple. Another change is the consolidation and elimination 
of equipment suppliers, especially in the West. Presently, the only major 
Western supplier of large PSF lines is Oerlikon Neumag headquartered in 
Austria (Oerlikon Textile GMBH and CO., 2011). There are a number of sup-
pliers in China, including Gangying Industry, JiangyinSelen Chemical Fibre 
Equipment, and Beijing Chonglee Machinery and Engineering, Company, 
to mention a few (Zhangjiagang Gangying Industry CO. LTD., 2011). 
 Polyester (or other fi bers such as nylon or polypropylene) staple fi bers 
can be produced by either a one-step process or a two-step process. The 
process steps are the same in both cases; however, the fi ber spinning speed 
is lower in a one-step process and the fi ber is drawn, crimped and heat-set in 
one continuous machine. These one-step lines generally have smaller capac-
ities and are often fed by extruders. They are mostly used for specialty fi bers, 
such as bicomponents and non-apparel end uses and nonwovens. 
 The larger lines all use a two-step process. A drawing of an older style 
small line of this type is shown below in Fig. 3.3 (Hills, Inc., 2011). The line 
shown is extruder fed from polymer chips and is bicomponent; however, 
most new lines of this type today are homopolymer polyester fed from a CP 
unit. The polymer is pumped, metered, and fi ltered from the CP unit to large 
round spinnerets that contain hundreds of thousands of holes in an annular 
ring pattern. The fi laments are quenched from the inside out so that they are 
spread apart while being cooled. This is one of the newer equipment inno-
vations that have led to the ability to build larger capacity lines. The fi bers 
are oiled and then collected by turning rolls into tow, which is collected in 
containers. The fi laments at this point generally have a dtex between 2 and 
10 and will later be drawn as a tow from 2 to 6 ×  to reach the fi nal fi lament 
diameter. The fi ber spinning speeds of these lines range between 600 and 
1800 m per min. Again, the newer lines tend to run at the higher speeds 
versus the older lines, which often had cross fl ow quench and rectangular 
spinnerets. 
 The next piece of equipment in the two-step process is a staple draw 
machine. The tows from multiple containers are collected together and fed 
across cantilevered rolls into the machine where it is fi rst drawn. Drawing 
takes place either between heated rolls or in a large water bath that is 
heated. In the larger lines these rolls may be over a meter in length. In the 
water draw systems used in the older lines, the drawing tended to be more 
even; however, the speed of water drawing is limited, which has led to the 
use of electrically heated rolls in the newer units. After drawing, the fi bers 
are crimped by passing the tow band through a heated gear unit. The fi bers 
are then collected on a moving open metal belt and heat-set in a large closed 
oven. For the fi nal steps, the crimped fi bers are cut and transferred by air 
to a baler unit, where they are pressed and wrapped into bales (DM and 

54   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
E Corporation, 2011). Typical fi ber cut lengths range from 3 to 6 cm. This 
length is easily adjusted by changing out the cutter head. The fi nal bales are 
transferred by tow trucks or automatic handling devices to a warehouse to 
await shipment (Anon., 2011). 
 3.4 
 Industrial fiber spinning equipment 
 In the past few years the volume of fi bers produced in North America and 
Europe for industrial end uses has exceeded that produced for other uses, 
such as apparel. Synthetic yarns for industrial end use have different require-
ments from those used for apparel and home furnishings. These fi bers are 
continuous in length and generally have high tenacity, high modulus, and 
low shrinkage as compared to textile fi bers for apparel. The other major 
difference is that these fi bers are generally higher in both fi lament and yarn 
tex. As such, the spinning process, although similar to a single-step process 
for fi lament fi bers, does have a number of differences. For large volume end 
uses such as tire cords, the processing line may be fed by a CP unit. For 
small markets, the lines are often extruder fed. The primary polymers used 
to make these fi bers are polyester, nylon 6, nylon 66, and polypropylene. 
The molecular weight, and thus viscosity, of the polymers used for industrial 
fi bers is generally higher (Hans A. Krassig, 1984) than for those used for 
apparel and other textile applications. 
 Another difference found in these lines is the size of the packs. The spin-
neret capillaries are larger. The quench units are also much longer, and often 
include delayed quenching. The spinning speed is traditionally lower, with 
a range from 1000 to 2000 m per min. These three differences are required 
to allow the fi bers to cool and be extended over the longer residence time 
 3.3  Drawing of a Hills bicomponent staple spinning line. 

Technologies for the manufacture of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   55
dictated by larger fi lament sizes and higher molecular weight polymers. 
After spinning and quenching, the fi bers go through multiple stages of draw 
and relaxation while being heated above the glass temperature of the poly-
mer. The most common process uses two stages of draw and one stage of 
relaxation at a high enough temperature to initiate crystallization. 
 The fi bers are interlaced and generally wound on packages at speeds 
from 2500 to 3500 m per min. Because of the high tex of these yarns, doffi ng 
or removal of the packages from the winder occurs frequently. Little has 
changed in this process or the equipment used during the past few years 
(Nakajima, 2000). 
 3.5 
 Monofilament fiber equipment 
 Monofi lament extrusion is a process used to make continuous strands of 
polymeric material for a variety of consumer and industrial products. Both 
one and two polymer systems called co-extrusion or bicomponent extrusion 
are widely used. Synthetic monofi lament fi bers are produced by extruding 
a melted polymer through small spinneret holes. This process is well known 
and is broadly applied in industry. The preparation, melting, and extrusion 
of the polymer are similar to those used for fi lm blowing, die casting, and 
various fi ber spinning processes. However, for higher tex fi bers (diameters 
of >100 microns) the fi ber processing is unique and is similar to slit fi lm fi ber 
processing (Hans A. Krassig, 1984). In the case of low tex monofi laments, 
the fi ber processing steps are similar to the production of standard indus-
trial multi-fi lament fi bers. 
 Monofi lament fi bers are found in many applications. Some applications 
are easily seen and recognized; however, in most cases the casual observer 
will not be aware of the use of a monofi lament fi ber in a product. Three 
of the most obvious applications for monofi lament fi bers are fi shing line, 
‘weed-eater’ string, and toothbrush bristles. Fishing line is generally made 
from polypropylene because of its low density that allows the string to fl oat 
in the water. ‘Weed-eater’ string and toothbrush bristles are generally made 
from nylon. Co-extruded products can be found in all of these applications. 
 Most thermoplastic polymers can and are used to make monofi lament 
fi bers. The most common material is high molecular weight polypropylene 
because of its low cost, ease of extrusion, and high linear strength when 
extruded and drawn into a fi ber. The extrusion temperature for this mate-
rial is generally in the range of 190 ° C, although higher temperatures can be 
used to lower the melt viscosity. Nylon 6, Nylon 66, Nylon 612, and various 
nylon copolymers are used in selective monofi lament applications. Because 
of the relatively high cost of nylon polymers, they are used only where a 
required property, such as dyeability, high modulus, or high abrasion and 
fi brillation resistance is required. Nylons have higher melting points than 

56   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
polypropylene and are generally extruded at temperatures in the range of 
260 ° C. The crystalline melting temperature of these polymers is around 
230 ° C, and they have a glass transition temperature in the range of 70 ° C. 
 The process begins with melting of the polymer using a standard extruder. 
Single barrier fl ight screws with a Maddox mixer on the end are generally 
used, although twin screw extruders are also used. The melting process is 
mostly accomplished by shear heating from the turning of the screw. Multiple 
temperature-controlled zones are placed along the length of the extruder. In 
monofi lament fi ber spinning, the extrusion process is controlled by a pres-
sure transducer at the exit of the extruder that is used to control the speed of 
the extruder screw to give fairly constant pressure of the melted polymer at 
the entrance to a metering pump. 
 Because high pressures and even fi ber diameters are generally required 
for monofi lament fi ber spinning, a metering pump is placed between the 
extruder exit and the spin die. A typical pressure at the exit of the extruder 
is 7000 kPa (1000 psi) to 21 000 kPa (3000 psi), which is used to feed the 
inlet to the metering pump. 
 The polymer metering or gear pump is used to increase the pressure in 
the melt stream to the level needed to force the polymers at a constant vol-
umetric rate through fi ltration media and the spinneret. Since the pressure 
across the fi lter media changes as the fi lter is used, the exit pressure from the 
melt pumps will vary; however, the fl ow rate must remain constant if the fi la-
ments are to have a consistent diameter. High pressure across the spinning 
holes is one of the keys to fi ber properties and affects the molecular orien-
tation and diameter of the fi lament. This process starts with high shearing of 
the polymer through the spinneret. 
 A standard gear pump can have one or more exit streams as needed. 
Each stream has a constant volumetric output based on the rotational speed 
(RPM) of the gears. The gear pump is driven by an AC motor with inverter 
or vector drive speed control. The exit pressure from a metering pump in a 
typical spinning process will range from approximately 7000 kPa (1000 psi) 
to 25 000 kPa (3500 psi). Once the pressure reaches 25 000 kPa (3500 psi), 
the process is typically shut down and the fi lter media replaced. 
 The last device in the extrusion process is the spin head. The spin head 
consists of a pump block, heating device, and spin packs. The metered poly-
mer from the extruder fl ows to the metering pump and into the spin pack. A 
heated housing surrounds the pump block, metering pump, and spin pack to 
maintain all the equipment that comes into contact with the polymer at the 
desired temperature required for proper extrusion of the polymer. 
 The spin pack contains fi lter media such as screens or shattered 
metal, which is used to fi lter the polymer before it goes to the spinneret 
(Reifenhauser GMBH and CO., 2011). The spinneret contains one or more 
holes of precise diameter and length to spin the polymer and form a fi ber 

Technologies for the manufacture of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   57
with the right diameter. Since the fi laments will be drawn in a further pro-
cess, the diameter of the fi bers at this point is not the same as the fi nal diam-
eter. For monofi lament fi bers, the extrusion speeds typically range from 50 
to 500 m per min. 
 Once the fi laments have been extruded, they must be cooled or quenched. 
For large diameter fi laments (>100 microns) this is usually done in a water 
bath. When small diameter monofi lament fi bers are extruded, they can also 
be quenched in air chambers. The speed of the rolls in the water bath is a 
function of the fi ber diameter, and the larger the diameter of the mono-
fi lament, the lower is the speed of extrusion. A typical spinning speed for 
large monofi laments is in the range of 30–100 m per min. If a large number 
of fi laments are spun from a pack, there may be several rows of spin holes 
which are slightly staggered so that the fi laments come together on the fi rst 
roll in the water bath in a band or sheet of individual threadlines. From the 
fi rst roll, the fi laments travel to the second roll and exit the water bath. An 
air knife at the exit of the water bath is usually used to strip as much water 
as possible from the fi bers before entering the draw stage. 
 The monofi laments after extrusion and quenching are still highly unori-
ented and need to be stretched in order to get the high strength (tenacity) 
required for most applications. The entire process is shown in Fig. 3.4. A 
comb guide is used to align the fi laments through a series of rolls going at 
the same speed as the rolls in the water bath. The fi laments then go through 
a hot air oven that heats the fi laments to the point where they can be easily 
drawn or stretched. A second series of rolls is used at the exit of the oven to 
increase the speed of the fi laments by 4–7 times. In most cases, two ovens 
and three sets of rolls are used for drawing. Each set of rolls is controlled by 
an inverter that controls the draw rates for different products. 
 After stretching, most polymers need to be heated to a temperature that 
will crystallize or heat-stabilize the fi laments. This needs to be done under 
a different tension and at a higher temperature than used in the draw step. 
Therefore, after exiting the draw rolls the fi laments travel through a fi nal 
heat oven and exit into a fi nal set of rolls. These rolls generally are run at a 
slightly lower (1–5%) speed than the draw rolls. This reduces the tension in 
the yarn as the heat setting occurs. The fi nal properties of the fi laments are 
now complete. 
 3.4  Drawing of a typical monoﬁ lament ﬁ ber spinning line. 

58   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 The last step in the monofi lament extrusion process is the winding of the 
fi laments on individual tubes or spools. The winders can be arranged in a 
single bank or in multiple rows. The speed of the winders is individually 
controlled by a tension feedback device on each winder through which the 
fi lament passes. In most cases the winder spools are changed manually when 
the spools become full. Automatic transfer winders are available in the mar-
ket, but due to the low processing speed of most monofi lament lines, their 
cost may not be justifi ed. After winding, the fi laments are tested for proper-
ties and packaged for shipping to the customer. 
 3.6 
 Bicomponent fiber equipment 
 Bicomponent fi bers have been a small but rapidly growing market for over 
40 years. The growth rate has typically been over twice that of fi bers in gen-
eral and the sales price of the fi bers has also been approximately twice the 
sales price of similar homopolymer fi bers. All of the melt spinning processes 
described earlier can be modifi ed to spin bicomponent fi bers. All that is 
needed is two sources of polymer, such as two extruders, separate piping 
generally with individual heating controls, and bicomponent packs. The 
rest of the equipment and process, whether staple or fi lament, are similar. 
The largest manufacturers of bicomponent packs are Hills in the United 
States and Kasen in Japan (Kasen Nozzle Mfg. Co. Ltd, 2011). The inter-
nal components of the pack have been the major design element contrib-
uting to success in this area. The two polymers enter the pack in at least 
two different locations and are fi ltered separately before entering a series 
of channels that carry each polymer to the back entrance of the spinneret 
capillary, where they are combined into one unmixed polymer stream in 
each individual spinning hole before being extruded. There have been many 
signifi cant developments in recent years in bicomponent pack designs. The 
major development has been the use of etched stacked plates to create the 
polymer channels in the packs. This has led to smaller packs with higher 
hole densities, larger number of segments and islands or splits in the fi bers, 
and shorter residence times in the packs, which allows some temperature 
separation in the polymers during processing. 
 Bicomponent fi bers can be divided into several different categories as 
shown in the chart in Fig. 3.5. These variants are discussed as follows (Hills, 
Inc., 2011). 
 3.6.1   Sheath and core products 
 A fi rst type of sheath/core is self-bonding fi bers consisting of a low melt-
ing temperature sheath and a higher melting temperature core. Common 

Technologies for the manufacture of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   59
sheath/core combinations in such applications include PE/PP, PE/PET, 
Co-PET/PET, and PP/PET. These products are used in 100% form, as well 
as in blends with homopolymer fi laments. Staple fi ber applications of these 
products in nonwovens are one of today’s largest commercial uses of bicom-
ponent fi bers. 
 A second type of sheath/core is fi lled fi bers consisting of a core polymer 
produced from recycled material, conductive material or other material that 
is covered by a sheath that possesses desired esthetics or other properties. A 
third type of sheath/core is a sheath polymer containing expensive additives 
or other attributes primarily useful on the surface of fi laments. 
 3.6.2  Side-by-side products 
 Side-by-side products are usually used as self-bulking fi bers. Self-bulking is 
created by two polymers within a fi lament having a different strain level or 
shrinkage propensity. Higher processing speeds, reduced equipment invest-
ment, more bulk, improved hand, enhanced aesthetics, and elimination of 
downstream processes are among the advantages seen with this technology. 
Side-by-side self-bulking fi bers are now in fairly common use as stuffi ng in 
pillow cases, sleeping bags, and similar applications. 
Family
50/50
50/50
20/80
Trilobal
Segmented pie
Islands-in-a-sea
Stripped
Colors
Deniers, components, cross-sections
Bicomponent/
homofilament
Cross
Mixed
viscosity
ABA
Trilobal
or others
Conductive
Mixed 
viscosity
20/80
Eccentric
Trilobal
Conductive
Bicomponent fibers
Variants
Core
and
sheath
Side 
by
side
Tipped
Micro-
denier
Mixed
fibers
 3.5  Hills chart of bicomponent ﬁ ber types. ( Source : © HILLS, Inc., USA.) 

60   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 3.6.3   Tipped yarns 
 These fi bers are used to produce special aesthetics, bonding, or other prop-
erties. One commercial application for this technology is in the production 
of capillary fi lters such as ‘felt’ tipped ink pens using a melt blowing type of 
process. 
 3.6.4   Microﬁ ber products 
 Microfi bers are produced by bicomponent techniques in which the fi bers 
are either split apart, or one of the two components is dissolved or melted 
away. This technique has long been used to produce much smaller fi bers 
than possible with homopolymer spinning, and is the technology behind 
such products as Ultrasuede® and similar fabrics (Kuraray CO. LTD, 
2011).  
 3.6.5   Mixed ﬁ ber products 
 If a fi ber producer owns equipment with two polymer capabilities, it is also 
economical to produce various types of mixed fi ber products. The ability 
to control the level of mix from very light, to total, to random, is easily 
selected and managed. Examples of some commercial applications include 
the following:
 Color mixes to produce the desired aesthetics. 
  Size and cross-section mixes to produce higher bulk or other desired 
aesthetics. 
  Mixes of homopolymer fi laments with bicomponents at varying levels 
to control certain fabric properties such as bonding strength. Some 
useful results can also be obtained by mixing of bicomponent cross-
sections to obtain specifi c fi ber or fabric properties. 
 It is very diffi cult to defi ne the exact worldwide production capacity for 
bicomponent fi bers. Most machines are extruder fed, and many machines 
in Asia were made locally and are not always successful in making good 
products. Also, many machines that have bicomponent capability are used to 
run standard homopolymer products. However, it is estimated that approxi-
mately 2–3% of worldwide synthetic fi ber production equipment has bicom-
ponent capacity. Of this capacity, approximately 23% for fi lament yarns, 31% 
for staple yarns, and 46% for spunbond. Approximately 75% of bicompo-
nent fi bers go to a nonwoven end use. 

Technologies for the manufacture of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   61
 Staple bicomponent fi ber capacity is fairly equally distributed through-
out North American, Europe, and Asia. The lines are small as compared 
to standard staple lines. Two major products are produced. One is sheath/
core fi bers with a low melt sheath that is used for binder fi bers in carded, 
thermally bonded nonwovens. The other product is side-by-side fi bers (usu-
ally polyester and co-polyester) that are self-crimping and used for fi berfi ll. 
Production is approximately equal between these two products. 
 By far, the largest and fastest growing capacity for bicomponent fi bers is 
in the area of spunbonds. There are approximately 50 such lines worldwide. 
About a third of these are pilot lines for product development, a third is 
older lines, and a third is modern curtain spinning lines with draw aspira-
tors. It is estimated that 15–20% of all spunbond capacity worldwide has 
bicomponent capability. Much of this capability is not presently being used 
to make bicomponent products; however, intense activity to develop new 
bicomponent products is reported and is refl ected in patent applications. 
The increase in bicomponent spunbond capacity is continuing at a rate of 
over 10% per year. This increase is fueled by both new lines and retrofi tting 
of older lines. As new bicomponent products are developed, this activity is 
expected to increase rather than decrease or stay level. It is estimated that 
within a few years over half of all new spunbond machines installed will 
have bicomponent capabilities (Wilkie, August 2009). 
 3.7 
 Spunbond lines 
 Spunbond processes and fabrics have been commercial for over 40 years. 
The processes, fabrics, and markets are quite varied. The best known spun-
bond fabrics and markets are cover stock for diapers and feminine hygiene 
products. However, spunbond fabrics are also found in carpet backing, geo-
textiles, furniture dust covers, carriers for fabric softeners, and a host of other 
industrial and consumer applications. The key to most of these markets has 
been a low cost covering material with suffi cient tensile and opacity prop-
erties to fi t the application. The latest market trend is towards pre-wetted 
wipes for cleaning and similar uses. The product needs for this fabric include 
short term abrasion resistance and ability to hold solvents. 
 As the new century began, we saw new beginnings in spunbond processes 
and products. New techniques are being developed to improve uniformity 
and barrier properties of spunbond fabrics to allow spunbond to compete 
successfully with carded thermal bonded nonwovens. Fabrics from new 
polymers and polymer combinations are poised to enter the market. Tactile 
as well as tensile properties are being improved to the point where even 
apparel applications may be considered as a future market (Anon., 2011). 
Several of these trends are described in the following paragraphs. 

62   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 3.7.1   Lower tex ﬁ bers 
 One approach to making spunbond fabrics with better cover and unifor-
mity is to spin lower tex fi bers. This has been an ongoing and gradual trend 
as spinning processes and polymers have improved with time. However, 
the recent use of high pressure draw jets has resulted in a distinct reduction 
in spunbond fi ber tex without a resulting decrease in production. The key 
to this technology is high fi lament velocities. With the slot draw process, 
fi ber dtex as low as 0.7 with polypropylene and 0.5 with polyester have 
been achieved. Fiber exit velocities are as high as 4500 m per min with 
polypropylene and 6000 m per min with polyester. High spinning speed 
allows the fi bers to become fully oriented and crystallized, which results in 
excellent shrinkage properties as well as achieving low tex. This results in 
spunbond fabrics with good heat stability as well as good cover and unifor-
mity. A schematic of a typical high pressure slot draw jet process is shown 
in Fig. 3.6.      
 One of the interesting features in the use of slot draw jets is the result-
ing compactness of the spunbond line. The main diffi culty in obtaining high 
fi ber speeds is air drag. This is overcome with the draw jet concept by using a 
short quench chamber and by locating the draw jet directly below the quench 
chamber. This reduces the distance between the spinbeam and the belt to 
one to two meters. The downside of this technology is that cross-machine 
fi ber properties and fabric uniformity must be built into the machine from 
the beginning as there are only a few process parameters to adjust that affect 
Polymer hopper
Extruder
Extruder drive
Forming belt
Edge guide
Guide roll
Spin pack
Polymer hopper
Pump
Quench air
Extruder
Extruder drive
Attenuation
Compaction roll
Winder
Calender
Filter
 3.6  Drawing of the bicomponent spunbond process. 

Technologies for the manufacture of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   63
fi ber laydown, as compared to the older gun draw process in which the exit 
of the fi bers from the gun had multiple location adjustment possibilities. 
 3.7.2  Bicomponent ﬁ bers 
 A rapidly growing development in spunbond processes is the use of bicom-
ponent fi ber technology. This trend is based on Hills, Inc. bicomponent spin-
ning technology, which has been used for staple and fi lament spinning for 
many years (Wilkie, August 2009). Commercial implementation has been 
ongoing for over 10 years. This includes both new lines and retrofi tting of 
older lines. This area continues to be very active with new lines that include 
at least one bicomponent beam for a spunbond nonwoven line being ordered 
worldwide approximately every 2 months. 
 There are several advantages in spinning sheath/core bicomponent fi bers 
for spunbond fabrics. The fi rst is that use of a lower melt temperature poly-
mer on the sheath allows the bonder to run at a lower temperature and a 
higher speed. This increases the line speed and reduces manufacturing cost. 
The second advantage is that the bonding temperature does not affect the 
orientation of the core polymer. This results in higher fi ber orientation and 
therefore higher fabric strength. A third advantage is that special effects such 
as softness and hydrophilicity can be imparted to the fabric from the sheath 
polymer without affecting other fabric properties that would be affected if 
the fabric were formed from fi bers made totally with the sheath polymers. A 
further advantage is that high cost additives can be mixed in with only the 
sheath polymer, thereby greatly reducing the cost that would be incurred if 
the additive were put in a homopolymer fi ber. 
 Other types of bicomponent fi bers that split, such as segmented pies, are 
also being developed for spunbond fabrics. Once the splitting occurs in the 
fi ber or in the fabric, the fi ber dtex can be as low as 0.1 in spunbond and the 
tactile property of the fabric approaches that of conventional woven and 
knitted goods made from low dtex fi bers. Much of this work is aimed at the 
apparel market, polishing cloth, and artifi cial leathers. The latest technol-
ogy in this area is the use of a dissolvable polymer such as Exceval® that 
washes out with hot water leaving only tiny fi brils from the dissolved fi la-
ment (Kuraray CO. LTD, 2011). 
 3.7.3  New polymers 
 The activity level to develop new polymers for fi ber spinning is at an all-
time high. This seems incompatible with the present low selling price of 
polyester and polypropylene, but many major chemical companies continue 
to look for polymers for special niche markets. Among these polymers are 

64   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
many varieties of co-polyesters, co-nylons, melt spinnable elastomerics, PLA, 
Polytrimethylene terephthalate(PTT), and others. When spun into a spun-
bond fabric these polymers, either in a bicomponent sheath or homopolymer 
fi ber, can bring new and exciting properties to the spunbond world. Some of 
the most interesting of these new products are stretchable fabrics.  
 3.7.4   Hydroentangling 
 Hydroentangling, which can be described as needling a nonwoven fabric 
with very high pressure water jets, has been used as a process to produce 
fabrics since the 1960s. The process is also known as spunlace because of the 
physical appearance of some of the fabrics produced. The process is highly 
versatile and is particularly used by PGI to produce a line of lightweight 
open structure fabrics under the trade name Miratec® and by DuPont to 
produce barrier fabrics for medical uses under the trade name of Sontara®. 
Generally, the process starts with staple fi bers that allow a variety of both 
natural and synthetic fi bers to be used. Recently, there has been increased 
activity to apply hydroentangling directly to spunbond fabrics rather than 
using a carded staple fi ber product. One such development in this area that 
uses bicomponent fi bers resulted in the commercial product Evalon® by 
Freudenberg. 
 3.7.5   Open vs closed systems 
 When using a slot draw jet in a spunbond line there are two basic approaches 
to accelerate the fi bers during spinning. One approach is to use high pres-
sure in the drawjet to create a supersonic air fl ow in the throat of the ven-
tura of the draw jet. This type of process uses a large quantity of air, and 
the area between the draw jet and the laydown table is open, which allows 
excess air to escape into the room. Filament velocities up to 10 000 m per 
min have been reported when the draw jet is moved close to the spinneret 
to reduce the air drag on the fi bers. The negative side of this process is the 
diffi culty in balancing air fl ow in the spinning area and maintaining good 
uniformity in the fabric. 
 The other approach is to use a closed slot draw system. The best example 
of this is in Reifenhauser lines. In this approach the system is essentially 
sealed or closed from the spinneret to the laydown table. Flow through 
the slot comes from the quench above and the low pressure created by the 
vacuum box below the belt. This system generally results in fabrics with 
excellent uniformity once the air fl ows are balanced correctly. However, 
the fi lament velocities that can be obtained are much less than with the 
open system.  

Technologies for the manufacture of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   65
 3.7.6  Reicoﬁ l 4 
 A new Reicofi l 4 spunbond line was introduced at Index 2002 in Geneva 
(Fi-Tech, Inc., 2011). The Reicofi l 4 machine is a closed system; however, the 
obtainable velocities were increased to approach those of a closed system 
(Reifenhauser GMBH and CO., 2011). The hole density in the spinneret 
was also increased and bicomponent capabilities were added. The results of 
the higher hole density and higher fi lament speeds was a 50% increase in 
throughput per meter of beam length. Alternately, the fabric producer can 
keep the throughput the same and go to lower fi lament tex to produce softer 
and more uniform fabrics. 
 3.8 
 Melt blown processes 
 The melt blown process (Fig. 3.7) is a one-step process that converts poly-
mer resin into low diameter fi ber nonwoven web or tow (Andreas Desch, 
February 2011). The melt blown process, and its variants, is the only large- 
scale commercial process that is presently being used to directly produce 
melt spun fi bers with diameters in the submicron range without splitting 
or chemically dissolving away polymer. It is a nonwovens operation that 
directly creates fabrics of various widths and thicknesses on large rolls. 
The products are mainly used in fi ltration applications, barrier fabrics, 
oil absorption mats, and battery separators. It is a rapidly growing busi-
ness segment due to a large increase in the demand for better fi ltration 
and membrane medium. The major polymers used in the process are low 
molecular weight olefi ns.      
 The key to the melt blowing process is the spin head. The basic principle is 
the extrusion of low viscosity polymer melt through a single row of very fi ne 
holes placed close together in the order of 1000–4000 holes per m. These 
Hot air
Cooling air
Collector
Fiber stream
Cooling air
Polymer feed
Hot air
 3.7  Schematic of the melt blowing process. 

66   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
holes are usually drilled or made by fusing together two plates that contain 
etched channels. High velocity hot air is blown at the exit of the holes from 
both sides of the row of holes at an angle. This air keeps the molten polymer 
hot and attenuates the molten polymer into a fi ne fi ber. At the same time 
a fl utter is developed in the air stream that causes the fi bers to fl ap rapidly 
back and forth as they are cooled by ambient air becoming entrained in the 
process. Finally the fi bers are collected on a screen belt or drum. 
 The fi bers produced by this method are generally very weak with low 
tenacity and modulus. One reason is that low molecular weight (low viscos-
ity) polymer is required to make the process work well. The other factor is 
that the hot air keeps the polymer in the melt state as it is being attenuated, 
which is necessary because of the rapid acceleration of the polymer as it 
exits the spin hole. This results in low axial molecular orientation in the fi ber 
as it is being formed. 
 There are several issues that infl uence the melt blown process which are 
different from other major fi ber spinning processes. The fi rst is the design 
of the extruder screw which is commonly manufactured specifi cally for the 
low densities and low viscosities associated with the polymers used in the 
process. The polymer must also be fi ltered to a greater level than required 
in most other fi ber spinning processes. Hot compressed air controlled to 
an exacting temperature must be provided to the process and the angle of 
insertion and volume (air gap) of the air must be controlled precisely over 
the length of the spin head. The use of a single row of holes greatly restricts 
the fi ber mass output of the process per meter of web width. This results in 
production and cost issues. Several attempts with limited results have been 
made to design heads that solve this issue and still produce low diameter 
fi laments. 
 3.9 
 Solvent spinning lines 
 Solvent spinning is typically used when the polymer being spun into fi bers 
has a decomposition point near or below the melting point of the mate-
rial. There are also cases such as polyethylene where a solvent is used in 
a melt spinnable polymer to spin high molecular weight polymers such as 
Spectra® or to get other desirable properties such as in Tyvek®. The fi rst 
commercially successful synthetic fi ber was rayon which was spun from cel-
lulosic based dopes. Today, even though apparel synthetic fi bers are mostly 
melt spun, there are many successful solvent spun fi bers in production. They 
are generally used in higher end applications where their unique proper-
ties justify a higher price. Some of the more common of these fi bers are 
Kevlar®, Lycra®, Nomex®, acrylics for carbon fi ber processing, Lyocell®, 
and cellulose acetates. The overall processes used to spin each of these fi bers 
is as various as the fi bers themselves. 

Technologies for the manufacture of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   67
 There are two common elements in spinning solvent spun fi bers. One 
is the mixing of the polymer with a solvent in a reactor or large mixer. 
The solvent component can be as high as 95% of the dope and as low as 
5%. Generally, the dope is heated and fed to the spinneret using a meter-
ing pump identical to those used in melt spinning. Sometimes the dope 
is fed directly to the metering pump by pressure, but occasionally the 
dope is fed from an extruder to the metering pump. The other common 
element in all solvent fi ber spinning is the extraction of the solvent. This 
begins to take place immediately after the fi bers leave the spinneret. In 
a process called dry spinning this extraction is accomplished in a heated 
chamber where the solvent is fl ashed off and removed (an example of 
this is cellulose acetate). In a process called wet spinning, the spun dope 
in the form of a fi ber is pulled through a series of water baths or other 
solvents. Drawing of the fi bers is usually done before all of the solvent has 
been completely removed. These types of operations have been applied 
to many different processes including nonwovens, fi lament spinning and 
staple production. 
 Although solvent spinning allows us to manufacture fi bers with prop-
erties that cannot be obtained with commercial melt spinning processes, 
there are several drawbacks to using this process. One such issue is that the 
removal of a solvent from a dope spun into a fi ber takes time. This results in 
a much lower speed of fi ber spinning. Typically, the spin speed in a solvent 
spun operation is an order of magnitude lower than that achieved in melt 
spinning. The equipment is also much more complex. Both of these factors 
directly impact the cost of capital and labor per unit of fi ber manufactured 
resulting in a higher manufacturing cost. The second issue is the solvent 
itself. Because of the volume and cost of the solvent which must be used, but 
which does not become a part of the fi ber, a sophisticated solvent recovery 
system is required. Solvents as a rule are also not environmentally friendly. 
Any chemical that dissolves polymers is going to be an issue when it comes 
to its effect on machinery and people. As a result, with the exception of 
acrylic fi bers used for carbon fi ber production, most cellulosic and acrylic 
based fi ber spinning is no longer practiced in the US. 
 3.10  Hollow fiber membranes 
 Hollow fi ber membranes are generally solvent spun and as such can be 
considered a sub-group of solvent spinning. Major polymers used in these 
processes are polysulfone, Polyvinylidene difl ouride(PVDF) and polyether-
sulfone. The major applications are hemodialysis, water purifi cation, and air 
separation. This is a huge business that has been growing at over 10% per 
annum for many years. Although the product usage in annual tons is very 
small, the end-use revenue is in billions (Anon., 2011). 

68   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 A hollow fi ber membrane is a fi ber with an external diameter between 
200 microns and 2 mm. The fi ber is hollow in the middle with a continuous 
and tightly controlled open area. Unlike tubing, the side wall of the fi ber is 
porous and generally contains large pores near the center open area that 
gradually become smaller as you reach the outside of the fi ber. In some 
cases this pore structure is reversed. In either case there is a thin separation 
layer from 25 to 100 nm thick on either the outside or inside of the fi ber 
against the open core that is a semi-permeable membrane through which 
diffuse takes place in the fi nal product usage. It is the size and distribution 
of these pores in the separation layer that are critical to the use of the mem-
brane. The pores characteristics are controlled primarily by the chemistry 
of the dope and the processing conditions used to manufacture the fi ber. 
As an example, in hemodialysis blood is passed through the middle of the 
membrane and the pores in the separation layer allow only blood particles 
with a size below the diameter of the pores to pass through the membrane 
wall. By using a fl uid medium on the outside of the membrane that contains 
additives that match the concentrations of blood particles smaller than the 
pore diameter, these particles can also be blocked resulting in an extremely 
selective system that mostly separates only waste products from the blood 
during dialysis. 
 Membrane spinning begins with dope preparation. Unlike standard sol-
vent spinning, the dope usually contains several ingredients including poly-
mer, solvent, and other additives. In a generalized process, the polymer 
concentration is between 20% and 30 % and the dope viscosity is between 
1000 and 10 000 poise at room temperature. The dope is heated to some-
where between 50 and 100 ° C and fed from a pressurized supply tank to 
a standard metering pump or pumps. Most processing lines spin multiple 
threadlines with an individually metered dope steam to each spinneret hole. 
The processing speeds are between 5 and 75 m per min and there is no draw 
in the process once the fi ber has completed its initial draw down between 
the spinneret and the coagulation tank. The spin hole contains a small tube 
through which a lumen fl uid consisting of water, solvent, or a mixture of the 
two is metered. From the spinneret the membrane drops through a short 
air gap and into a coagulation tank where the solvent and dope rapidly 
separate. The fi ber is then passed through successive rinsing tanks, dried, 
and wound on a spoke winder. The winder reel has a distance between the 
spokes slightly longer than the fi ber length needed to fi ll a module. After 
the required number of fi bers has been collected, the fi bers are switched to 
another reel, and the fi rst reel is removed. The fi bers are then cut between 
the spokes. The resulting bundles of fi bers are placed in a circular module 
and the ends potted. The potted ends are later cut across to expose the open 
cores of the fi bers and end caps are placed on the module, which is now 
ready for use. 

Technologies for the manufacture of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   69
 3.11 
 Gel spinning 
 Recent development of a type of solution spinning called gel spinning has 
resulted in commercialization of several high performance polyethylene 
fi bers most notably Spectra® and Dyneema®. These fi bers have tenacities 
approaching that of Kevlar® (3 GPa) but with lower modulus and much 
lower melting temperature. The process uses an ultra-high molar linear 
polyethylene (UHMWPE) that is dissolved in solvent. The ratio of solvent 
to polymer is generally in the 1–5% range. This dope is metered from the 
mixing unit through a multi-hole spinneret and into an extrusion tank usu-
ally fi lled with water. As the dope is cooled and solvent is extracted, gel-like 
fi laments are formed in a type of network arrangement. These as-spun fi la-
ments, still containing large amounts of solvents, are then transferred to an 
oven and very slowly drawn up to 50 ×  or more. The resulting fi bers are then 
wound on packages (Salem, 2001). The equipment and machinery used for 
manufacturing these products has to date been built in-house by the fi ber 
producers and is a closely guarded secret. 
 3.12  Nano-fiber spinning 
 There has been a lot of recent interest in developing research and commer-
cial processes and equipment to directly spin fi bers with diameters below 
100 nm. Most of this work has involved a process called electro-spinning, 
and has taken place in various universities around the world. Although 
some researchers have reported success using melt spun polymers, most of 
this work has involved a form of solution spinning where the polymer is fi rst 
dissolved in a solvent with a fairly high ratio of solvent to polymer, gener-
ally 90–70%. The major characteristic of this type of spinning is that a glass 
tube containing a small opening at one end is used as the spinneret and a 
high electric fi eld (30–50 kV) is created between the dope in the spinneret 
and the collector. The collector is usually a roll of previously formed non-
woven fabric (either melt blown or spunbond) that is slowly moved across a 
metal plate used to create the electric fi eld. The tiny fi bers formed are then 
collected on the fabric and can be used as a high fl ux/high capture fi ltration 
medium. 
 The fi bers exit the spinneret in a spiral motion as they move through space 
toward the collector, which is somewhat analogous to what we see in melt 
blowing. The diameters of the fi bers generally vary along their length. The 
fi bers are also very weak since the drawing operation is accomplished under 
low stress and occurs while the fi ber is highly solvated, and so little molec-
ular orientation is achieved. However, the biggest issues with this process 
are the extremely low production rates and solvent collection and recovery. 
Despite these issues, at least two large fi ltration companies have developed 

70   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
commercial operations using electro-spinning in the production of high end 
fi lters for air purifi cation and personnel protection devices. 
 To overcome the low production rates possible with a single spinneret, 
Elmarco in Europe has commercialized a line of electro-spinning units 
where the dope is placed in a pan containing a rotating cylinder with multi-
ple spikes. The small fi laments are extracted via the electric fi eld from dope 
collected on the spikes and they collect on a fabric slowly moved across a 
metal plate located above the dope pan. (Elmarco, 2009). There have also 
been numerous attempts to develop similar processes to produce nano-
fi bers with high production rates. Most of these processes involve modifi ca-
tions of the melt blowing process or combination of electro-spinning and 
melt blowing. 
 3.13  Conclusion 
 Synthetic fi bers, beginning with rayon in apparel, have expanded into multi-
ple fi ber types and products found throughout our lives. The processes and 
techniques used to produce these fi bers have also changed dramatically dur-
ing the past 70 years. Fiber manufacturing equipment and processes con-
tinue to change to both reduce the cost of fi bers and to introduce newer 
fi bers with specialized properties. 
 3.14  References 
 Andreas Desch, F. R. (February 2011). Dienes and rieter OFT Develop new nanofi -
ber spinning installations.  International Fiber Journal ,  25 (1), 38–39. 
 Anon. (2011). Nonwovens Industry. (Online) Available at:  www.nonwovens-industry.
com . 
 Anon. (2011). Marketing Technology Service, Inc. (Online) Available at:  www. 
marketingtechnologyservice.com . 
 Anon. (2011). Textile World. (Online) Available at:  www.textileworld.com . 
 Anon. (2011). Filtration + separation. (Online) Available at:  www.fi ltsep.com . 
 Anon., (2011). Filtration news. (Online) Available at:  www.fi ltnews.com . 
 Beijing Chonglee Machinery Engineering Co., Ltd. (2011). Staple and fi lament spin-
ning lines. (Online) Available at:  www.ctamp.com.cn . 
 DM and E Corporation. (2011). Cutters for staple fi ber lines. (Online) Available at: 
 www.dmcutter.com . 
 Elmarco (2009). Nanospider equipment. s.l.:s.n. 
 Engelhart, A. W. (2011).  The Fiber Year Gmbh,  Speicher, Switzerland: Oerlikon 
Textile. 
 Fi-Tech, Inc. (2011). North American representative of for equipment manufactur-
ers. (Online) Available at:  www.fi -tech.com . 
 Hans A. Krassig, J. L. H. F. M. (1984).  Fiber Technology.  New York: Marcel Dekker, 
INC. 

Technologies for the manufacture of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   71
 Hills, Inc. (2011). Bi-component spinning lines of all types. (Online) Available at: 
 www.hillsinc.net . 
 Jutter Stehr, M. R. (February 2011). Barmag ‘e-save’ label offer energy savings and 
more.  International Fiber Journal ,  25 (1), 34–36. 
 Kasen Nozzle Mfg. CO. LTD. (2011). Bi-component pack manufacturer. (Online) 
Available at:  www.kasen.co.jp . 
 Kuraray CO. LTD. (2011). Microfi ber fabric producer. (Online) Available at:  http://
www.kuraray.co.jp . 
 Nakajima, P. T. (2000).  Advanced Fiber Spinning Technology . Cambridge, England: 
Woodhead Publishing Limited. 
 Oerlikon Textile GMBH and CO. (2011). Filament spinning line and draw twist tex-
turing units. (Online) Available at:  http://www.barmag.oerlikontextile.com . 
 Oerlikon Textile GMBH and CO. (2011). Staple fi ber and BCF Lines. (Online) 
Available at:  http://www.neumag.oerlikontextile.com . 
 Reifenhauser GMBH and CO. (2011). Major producer of spunbond and melt blow-
ing equipment. (Online) Available at:  http://www.reifenhauser.com . 
 Salem, D. R. (2001).  Structure Formation in Polymeric Fiber . Munich: Hanser 
Publishers. 
 Susanne Beyer, O. B. (February 2010). WINGS – The Oerlikon Barmag concept that 
revolutionized POY spinning plants.  International Fiber Journal ,  25 (1)20–21. 
 Wilkie, A. E. (August 2009). Advanced nonwovens equipment and technology from 
hills.  International Fiber Journal ,  24 (4), 20–23. 
 Zhangjiagang Gangying Industry Co. Ltd. (2011). Staple and fi lament spinning lines. 
(Online) Available at:  www.gangying.com . 
 

This page intentionally left blank

 Part II 
 Spinning techniques 

This page intentionally left blank

© 2014 Woodhead Publishing Limited
75
 4 
 Melt spinning of synthetic polymeric 
filaments  
 A.  RAWAL and  S.  MUKHOPADHYAY , 
 Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India 
 DOI : 10.1533/9780857099174.2.75 
 Abstract: Melt spinning is among the most widely used methods 
for producing polymeric fi laments. A range of polymers, namely 
poly(ethylene terephthalate), polyurethanes, polyolefi nes and polyamides, 
are generally melt spun. This chapter discusses the fundamentals of melt 
spinning, modeling of polymeric fl ows inside the screw and the spinneret, 
interaction of melt-spun fi laments with the environment, and the 
limitations of melt spinning. Some recent developments and future trends 
pertaining to melt spinning are also discussed. 
 Key words: extruder, fi lament, polymeric fl uid, melt spinning, spinneret. 
 4.1 
 Introduction 
 Melt spinning is one of the most popular methods for manufacturing poly-
meric fi laments. While there are several methods available for fi lament 
production, melt spinning is the most economical approach due to the 
absence of solvents and the simplicity of the process. In melt spinning, the 
polymer pellets or granules are fed into an extruder consisting of a screw 
for melting by means of heat, and then the polymer melt is pumped through 
a spinneret under pressure. The extruded polymer is then quenched with 
cold air and the molten mass is solidifi ed into fi laments. The spun fi laments 
lack adequate strength for industrial applications. Hence melt spinning is 
generally followed by the mechanical drawing of the extruded fi lament 
resulting in alignment of molecular orientations along the fi lament axis. 
This results in improved physical and mechanical characteristics. The 
mechanical drawing of fi laments consists of many fold elongations of the 
fi laments (starting from 2 × ), which can be achieved directly after spin-
ning or carried out separately with undrawn extruded polymer as an input 
material. Polymers such as poly(ethylene terephthalate), polyurethanes, 
polyolefi nes and polyamides are generally melt spun. For a basic review 
of melt spinning, the reader is referred to Ziabicki (1976), Fourn é (1999), 
and Beyreuther and Brunig (2007). We discuss some of the important 

76   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
principles, limitations, and recent developments involved in the formation 
of fi laments through melt spinning.  
 4.2 
 Fundamentals of melt spinning 
 A typical melt spinning process requires a constant mass fl ow rate of mol-
ten polymer, which is maintained by a metering or a spinning pump gen-
erally positioned inside the spinning head, as shown in Fig. 4.1. The molten 
polymer is channeled into a number of individual capillary holes or slots 
of defi ned shapes and sizes present inside the spinneret. Each orifi ce is 
responsible for individual fi laments. Subsequently, the long continuous fi la-
ments extruded through the spinneret orifi ces are cooled-off, solidifi ed, and 
collected on a winder. The take-up speed is kept higher than the average 
Polymer
pellets
Screw
Hopper
cooling
jacket
Spinning
chamber
Hopper
Thermocouples
Barrel
Screen
pack
Adapter
heater
Breaker
plate
Spinning
head
Spinneret
Filaments
Spin finish
applicator
Winder
 4.1   A typical melt spinning process. 

Melt spinning of synthetic polymeric ﬁ laments   77
extrusion speed or throughput rate at the spinneret, and the ratio of take-up 
speed ( v  f  ) to average extrusion speed ( v 0 ) is defi ned by the draw down ratio 
(DDR). Hence, 
 
 DDR = v
v
f
0
 
 [4.1] 
 In order to improve their structure and mechanical properties, the drawing 
of the fi laments can further be carried out in a single- or two-stage process 
between take-up of the as-spun fi ber and the fi nal winding roller. Ideally, the 
fi lament formation in terms of  spinnability  requires the following conditions 
(Beyreuther and Brunig, 2007). 
 Attenuation and acceleration of the fi laments (DDR > 1) 
• 
 Production of continuous fi laments with no fi lament breakage 
• 
  Steady-state conditions, i.e. fi laments with uniform properties along the 
• 
length 
 In general, the spinnability of the polymeric melt is determined by the 
maximum possible DDR for a given polymer. As indicated above, steady-
state conditions are a prerequisite for fi lament formation through the melt 
spinning route. These steady-state conditions are fundamentally depen-
dent on the physical balance equations of mass, energy, and momentum as 
discussed below (Ziabicki, 1967; Beyreuther and Brunig, 2007). 
 4.2.1  Mass balance 
 The mass balance equation states that there is no mass exchange taking 
place between the fi lament and the environment. Mass conservation is 
expressed in Equation [4.2] where  Q  is the mass throughput rate,  A the 
fi lament cross-sectional area, ρ the polymeric density, and  v  the axial fi la-
ment velocity:  
 
 Q
Av =
Avρ
constant  
 [4.2] 
 In the fi eld of textiles, the product of fi lament cross-sectional area and its 
density is defi ned in terms of fi neness ( T  t  ). The diameter of the fi lament ( D ) 
can be related to its fi neness as shown below. 
 
 D
TtT
t
=11 3.
ρ
for
i
TtT n dtex  
 [4.3] 

78   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 or
for
indenier
D
TtT
t
= 9 44
ρ
 
 [4.4] 
 where  D  is the fi lament diameter ( μ m) and ρ the polymer density 
(g/cm 3 ). 
 Ziabicki (1967) has characterized the process variables by means of a 
continuity equation in terms of  primary ,  secondary , and  resulting variables. 
Primary variables are the parameters that affect fi lament structure and its 
properties in addition to the process conditions of the melt spinning pro-
cess. Secondary variables are obtained from the primary variables using the 
continuity Equation [4.2]. Resulting variables are determined by primary 
variables and the dynamics of fi lament formation process. 
 4.2.2   Energy balance 
 The energy balance equation represents the changes in temperature profi le 
of the fi lament from the point of exiting the capillary holes to the points of 
solidifi cation and take-up. Assuming a simple case of heat convection, the 
heat balance of any given volume element between  x  and  x + dx  is given by 
the temperature gradient of the fi lament as shown below (Ziabicki, 1967; 
Beyreuther and Brunig, 2007). 
 
 d
d
air
air
T
x
T
Ta
Nu Qcp
= (
)
T
−(
πλ
 
 [4.5] 
 where  T air  is the temperature of the surrounding air,  c  p   the specifi c heat 
capacity of the polymer,  Nu the Nusselt number, and 
ai
λ
r the heat conduc-
tivity of air. 
 4.2.3   Momentum balance 
 The momentum balance equation reveals the forces acting on the fi lament 
formed in a melt spinning process. The magnitudes of these forces play an 
important role in determining the structural development, specifi cally the 
structural arrangement of the polymeric chains. The force balance for a 
defi ned cross-section of the spinning line at distance  x  from the spinneret is 
shown below (Ziabicki, 1967). 
 
 F
x
F
x
F
x
F
x
F
x
F
x
te
F n
R
x
F heo
i
x
n
s
x
F urf
aero
g
x
F rav
( )=
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
+
x
+ F
)
−
x
+ F
)
 
 [4.6] 

Melt spinning of synthetic polymeric ﬁ laments   79
 where  F ten  is the external tensile force,  F grav ,  F in ,  F surf ,  F aero , and  F Rheo  are the 
gravitational, inertial, surface tension, skin-friction, and rheological forces, 
respectively. 
 Details of the computation of the above forces are given in Ziabicki 
(1967) and Beyreuther and Brunig (2007). 
 The above equations have formed the basis for simulation of fi lament 
formation and have been extensively used and modifi ed by many research 
groups (Beyreuther and Brunig, 2007). Furthermore, in order to understand 
the melt spinning process and the structural and the mechanical behavior of 
extruded fi laments, it is imperative to understand models of polymer fl ows 
inside the screw and the spinneret. 
 4.3 
 Modeling of polymer flows in melt spinning 
 In general, polymer fl ow can be classifi ed into two categories: tangential 
and axial (Rawal, 2002; Worth, 1979). Tangential fl ow is generated either by 
rotational motion of the cylinders relative to one another or as a result of 
the applied pressure gradient. Axial fl ow occurs when one of the cylinders 
moves longitudinally relative to the other, but can also be generated as a 
result of the pressure gradient. These fl ows can be combined together at dif-
ferent polymer processing stages. 
 4.3.1  Modeling of polymer ﬂ ow inside the screw 
 In a melt spinning process, the two different types of polymer fl ow start to 
develop as soon as the polymer pellets or granules come into contact with 
the screw. Initially, tangential fl ow is developed due to the rotation of the 
screw but axial fl ow may also occur due to the pressure difference across 
the duct, or when the polymer fl ow comes into contact with the screw helix 
(Tadmor and Gogos, 1979). 
 Various theoretical models have been proposed to study polymer fl ow 
inside the screw for purposes of screw design. The fi rst fl ow theory was 
given by Rowell and Finlayson (1922, 1928), in which the screw fl ights were 
assumed to be stationary and the barrel had the same velocity as that of 
the screw tip. Experimental results have shown that these assumptions are 
incorrect (Choo,  et al ., 1980). Therefore, Campbell  et al . (1992) designed a 
special screw extruder to study the drag fl ow. Here, the screw extruder, the 
barrel, screw core, and screw fl ights were rotated separately or in pairs. It 
was observed that the fl ow generated by the rotation of the screw was dif-
ferent from that obtained by rotating the screw fl ights. Hence, in real extrud-
ers, where the screw is rotating and the barrel is stationary, these boundary 
conditions need to be considered. Li and Hsieh (1996) have formed models 
for both drag and pressure fl ow by considering these boundary conditions. 

80   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
The new analytical models yielded encouraging results; however, the mod-
els were valid only for Newtonian fl uids, and as such cannot be used for real 
polymeric fl uids (which are primarily non-Newtonian). 
 An alternative numerical approach was used to compute the fl ow of poly-
mer inside the screw extruder (Middleman, 1965). The technique is based 
on the assumption that the polymer fl ow is a combination of drag and pres-
sure fl ow in a straight rectangular duct. The assumptions behind this model 
are based on the well-known parallel plate analogy (Tadmor and Gogos, 
1979) where the relative motions of the barrel and the screw fl ights are 
considered parallel. There are two motions for the fl ow of polymer when it 
passes through the screw, a circular motion which occurs as a result of the 
rotation of the screw, and a helical motion produced by the combined effect 
of the stationary barrel and the moving screw fl ight. 
 Booy (1963) has considered the effects of curvature and helicity of the 
screw and derived a model known as the  curved channel model . This model 
was further generalized by Yu and Hu (1998) to calculate the velocity pro-
fi le and fl ow rates. The results were compared with the parallel plate mod-
els and found to be very similar in drag and pressure fl ows. However, these 
models were more accurate in the case of deeper screw channels such as 
twin-screw extruders or some special single-screw extruders. The details 
of modeling of polymer fl ows in various stages of the screw are given by 
Tadmor and Gogos (1979).  
 4.3.2   Modeling of polymer ﬂ ow inside the spinneret 
 After passing through the screw, the molten polymer fl ows into the cap-
illary holes or slots of the spinneret, where it is pushed into a small duct 
to achieve the desired shape and size as determined by the spinneret. In 
general, the hole or slot shapes may be classifi ed in two categories: circular 
and non-circular. In the case of circular shapes (Bird, 1977) the equations 
of motion involving non-Newtonian fl ows can be solved by assuming poly-
meric fl ows as power law fl uids. The fl ow rates of such fl uids are shown in 
Equation [4.7]. 
 
 Q
R
P
P
R
mL
O
L
P
n
=
(
)
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
πR3
1
1
3
n
2
 
 [4.7] 
 where  Q  is the volumetric fl ow rate,  R  the radius of slot, PO
P  the entrance 
pressure, PL
P  the exit pressure,  L  the depth of slot, and  m  and  n  are power 
law constants. 

Melt spinning of synthetic polymeric ﬁ laments   81
 For non-circular shapes, the equations of motion may result in non-
linear partial differential equations, which are diffi cult to solve analyt-
ically. Therefore, approximate methods such as the variational method 
(Kantorovich and Krylov, 1958) are generally used for solving non-
Newtonian fl ow problems. Schechter (1961) used the application of the 
variational method to solve the non-linear partial differential equations 
of pressure drop and fl ow rate of the polymer for non-circular shapes 
such as a rectangle or square. Moreover, Mitsuishi and Aoyagi (1969 
1973) used similar methods for other non-circular shapes such as an 
isosceles triangle. The results were based on the Sutterby model (1966), 
which incorporates a viscosity function based on the rheological con-
stants. Flow curves with pressure drop and fl ow rate for both circular and 
non-circular shapes were generated and the results were compared with 
the power law model. 
 Arai and Toyoda (1970) formed a mathematical model to compute the 
wall shear stresses in a rectangular spinneret shape using a power law: 
 
 AB
A
B
P
A
B
B
A
B
B
A
A
B
x
A
B
w
A
+
+
B A
+
Δ
=
( )
∫
∫
y
y
A
w
∫
∫
( )
2 ∫
( )
0
2
0
2
τw
∫
y
y
w (y
w ( )
d
x
w ( )
∫τw
∫
y
 
 [4.8] 
 where  A, B, L  are width, height, and length of the rectangular slot respec-
tively, ΔP is the pressure loss within a length  L  due to the viscosity resistance 
of the fl owing liquid, τw
τ
x( ) and τw
τ
y( ) are the shear stresses close to the wall 
surfaces at y
B 2 and x
A 2 respectively. 
 When a molten polymer fl ows into the small channel of the spinneret 
slot from a larger channel, a convergence is formed by the contraction of 
the channel cross-section, and relative elongation along with shear defor-
mation are thus produced. Because of the small length of the slot, stresses 
due to deformation are not completely relaxed before the melt leaves the 
slot. This results in extrudate swell as demonstrated by measuring the cross-
sectional area of extrudate, which is greater than that of the respective slot 
size through which it is extruded, a phenomenon known as die swell (see 
Fig. 4.2). The die swell ratio is the ratio of the area of the extrudate to the 
area of the die, and normally it is 1–2.5, although in extreme cases it can be 
as high as 8 (Ziabicki and Kedzierska, 1960). 
 The fi rst die swell theory was presented by Tanner (1970) to compute the 
die swell ratio for given material properties. The die swell ratio was calculated 
for a very long die (length-to-diameter ratio approaching infi nity) and was 
formulated using the normal stress difference and shear stress at the wall.  

82   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 
 D
d
N
=
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎦
⎧
⎨⎪⎧
⎨
⎩⎪
⎨
⎩
⎫
⎬⎪⎫
⎬
⎭⎪
⎬
⎭
∫1
⎢
2∫
2
1
2
0
1
1 6
+
τ
ξ ξ
ξ
 
 [4.9] 
 where ξ ≡
′
2r
d
 
 N 1  is the normal stress difference, τ the shear stress at the wall, ′r  
the radial distance,  d  the spinneret diameter, and  D  the extrudate 
diameter. 
 Subsequent work took into account the velocity and shear fi eld adjust-
ments at the end of a die (Nickell  et al ., 1974). White and Roman (1976) 
developed a modifi ed formulation of Tanner’s theory where the melt recov-
ers from Poiseuille fl ow in a tube into a state of uniaxial tension. These the-
ories have been validated by Vlachopoulos  et al . (1972). However, the die 
swell theory was also studied using macroscopic mass and momentum bal-
ances given by Metzner and others (Metzner  et al ., 1961; Graessley  et al ., 
1970), where the balance on the fl uid between the capillary exit and fl ow 
downstream formed a relationship with the die swell. The fi rst normal stress 
difference is shown in Equation [4.10]. 
Spinneret
slot diameter
Fully developed
velocity profile
Extrudate
diameter
 4.2  Polymeric ﬂ uid ﬂ ows emerging from the spinneret slot illustrating 
the die swell effect. 

Melt spinning of synthetic polymeric ﬁ laments   83
P
P
D
n
V
D
n
n
D
D
n
R L
o
e
11
P
22
0
2
0
2
2
D
64
8
1 3
1
n
2
1
n
+
P
n
R L
22
P
0
+
n
o
−
(
)
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
(
)
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
,
ρD
1
8
(
)
⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
⎧
⎨⎪⎧
⎨
⎩⎪
⎨
⎩
⎫
⎬⎪⎫
⎬
⎭⎪
⎬
⎭
+ dlog
dlog
D D
V D
o
e
D
o
 
[4.10] 
 where P
P
R L
11
P
22
P
(
) ,  is the primary normal stress difference, Do the tube 
diameter, De the extrudate diameter,  V  the average velocity of the fl uid,  n 
the power law constant, and ρ the melt density. 
 The above equation is valid only in cases where the Reynolds number 
(which signifi es the extent of turbulence in the fl uid fl ow) is high. Therefore, 
a modifi ed Metzner theory was proposed by incorporating an assumption 
that the pressure at the center-line is non-zero, which is valid for polymeric 
melts (Mori and Funatsu, 1973). 
 Die swell has also been related to the process parameters and fl ow condi-
tions. For a given rate of shear, the die swell decreases as the length-to-diam-
eter ratio of the fl ow channel increases (Arai and Aoyam, 1963; Bagley  et al ., 
1963; Buchdahl  et al ., 1951). Die swell also decreases rapidly with an increase 
of length-to-depth ratio (L/D) of the slot as the polymer molecules are relaxed 
in a longer slot, with the result that the die swell value is lower than expected 
(Mori and Funatsu, 1973). It has been observed that as L/D approaches 20, 
the die swell becomes constant. This can be attributed to full development of 
the polymer fl ow. Moreover, the die swell is higher in square-shaped dies than 
circular dies (Mayer  et al ., 1997). While in square-shaped slots the swelling 
takes place equally in both directions (i.e. depth and width), the swelling of 
fi lament produced from circular slots takes place only around the circumfer-
ence. Therefore, on attenuation under a defi ned take-up speed, the fi lament 
area reduces from both directions equally, resulting in a minimum fi lament 
cross-sectional area (Rawal, 2002; Rawal and Davies, 2005; Rawal and Davies, 
2006). Die swell can also increase with an increase in the screw speed for a 
single-screw extruder (Rejon and Alvarez, 1987). Furthermore, the die swell 
increases with the molecular weight, especially for linear polymers, which are 
less compact than long chain branched molecules (Racin and Bogue, 1979). 
 Die swell has also been investigated using models that are widely used for 
rubber-like solids. The analogy between polymer melt elasticity and rubber elas-
ticity is based on the fact that both have long molecular chains (Treloar, 1958). 
 The most widely used equation to calculate die swell is shown in Equation 
[4.11] (Tanner, 1970). 
 
 χ= ⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
1
1
2
2
1 6
+
SR
 
 [4.11] 
 where χ is the die swell and SR the recoverable shear strain. 

84   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 The above die swell model is based on the assumption that the polymer 
fl uid behaves similarly to a rubber-like solid. However, it is diffi cult to mea-
sure recoverable shear strain under general conditions. 
 Wong and Liang (1997) formed a relationship between melt flow 
index and die swell ratio using a power law. However, this approach 
requires information related to the shear stress and shear rates of 
polymers. 
 Numerical techniques such as fi nite element and fi nite difference meth-
ods have also been used for predicting the die swell (Duda and Vrentas, 
1972; Richardson, 1970; Tanner  et al ., 1975; Chang  et al ., 1979). 
 Chin and Shyu (1988) have predicted die swell of polymers based on the 
assumption that polymeric fl uids obey Criminate–Ericksen–Filbty (CEF) 
equation. They obtained an equation for die swell that depends on the pro-
cessing conditions and thus helps to choose such for the required die swell. 
Similarly, Mitsoulis (1999) used the streamline fi nite element method to 
compute the die swell using different slot cross-sections such as circular, 
square, and cross-shaped sections. The fl uid models used were Newtonian, 
viscoplastic (Bingham), and second order fl uid. In addition to the fi nite 
element methods, the fi nite volume method has also produced very good 
results (Xue  et al ., 1995). 
 Die swell is an important parameter for the design of slots used in poly-
mer processing operations. For non-circular slot geometries the extrudate 
changes not only in dimension, but in shape as well. Predicting the die swell 
accurately is of great importance in designing the size and shape of the slot. 
However, the complexity of viscoelastic fl uid models and the diffi culties 
imposed by boundary conditions further intensifi es the problem of die swell 
prediction, even for the simplest slot geometries. Therefore, the problem of 
die swell is still under investigation and is an active area of research, espe-
cially for slot geometries with non-circular cross-section. 
 In the past, surface tension was observed as a major factor responsible 
for the fi lament cross-sectional shape (Ziabicki, 1967; Takarada  et al ., 2001; 
Rawal and Davies, 2005; Rawal and Davies, 2006). However, an increase in 
the cooling rate along with a higher viscosity of the melt can signifi cantly 
reduce the deviation of the fi lament shapes from their corresponding slot 
geometries. 
 4.4 
 Filament interaction with the environment 
in melt spinning 
 As mentioned in Section 4.2, the energy balance equation dictates the devel-
opment of the fi lament temperature from the point of emergence from the 
capillary holes to the points of solidifi cation and take-up. This transition of 

Melt spinning of synthetic polymeric ﬁ laments   85
molten polymer to the solidifi cation of the fi lament is essentially related to 
heat transfer from the surface of the fi lament to the ambient medium, i.e. 
air in a typical melt spinning process. Hence, the non-dimensional constant, 
Nusselt number, (defi ned as the ratio of convective to conductive heat 
transfer coeffi cients) has been introduced in the energy balance equation. 
Generally, three heat transfer mechanisms from the fi lament surface to 
the surrounding medium can occur: radiation, free convection, and forced 
convection. In a melt spinning process, the contributions from radiation 
and free convection are negligible (Ziabicki, 1967; Beyreuther and Brunig, 
2007). Filament cooling in a melt spinning process is primarily related to 
forced convective heat transfer. The heat transfer equations for forced con-
vection are based on the empirical data found for stationary fi laments in 
a moving medium rather than for axially moving fi laments in a stationary 
medium (Ziabicki, 1967). Nevertheless, Kase and Matsuo (1965) have for-
mulated an empirical relationship for the Nusselt number for forced con-
vection (Nuf) including the effect of cross-fl ow of the cooling medium, as 
shown in Equation [4.12].  
 
 Nu
a
f
c
= (
)
b
 
 [4.12] 
 where a= 0 42, b= 64, c= 0 167
.
, and ReParr and RePerp are Reynolds numbers 
related to parallel and cross air fl ow, respectively. 
 Using Equation [4.5], the Nusselt number can be recalculated by accu-
rately determining the fi lament temperature along with the fi lament diam-
eter and/or its velocity assuming that crystallization has not occurred. Most 
publications do not describe the effect of quenching cross air fl ow on the 
air friction coeffi cient. This may be because the air fl ow perpendicular to 
the fi lament axis changes the axial symmetric boundary layer surrounding 
the fi lament and leads to an additional momentum fl ux (Beyreuther and 
Brunig, 2007). More recently, it was demonstrated that in a high-speed melt 
spinning process, the axial air fl ow is more important than the cross air fl ow, 
while maintaining the same freeze-point stress and residual drawability 
(Sumesh  et al ., 2010). It was also observed that replacing cross by axial air 
fl ow can increase productivity by 32%. However, in the case of cross air 
fl ow, a strong quenching air profi le can cause a high cooling rate, which can 
lead to a short fi lament formation zone. On the other hand, increasing the 
quenching air fl ow results in a higher air friction coeffi cient (Beyreuther and 
Brunig, 2007). This indicates that the total air friction force and the resulting 
fi lament stress at the solidifi cation point can increase or decrease with an 
increase in quenching air fl ow, and the resulting properties of the fi laments 
under each condition may differ. 

86   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 The fi lament interaction with the environment in multifi lament spinning 
is not same as that in monofi lament spinning. In multifi lament spinning, the 
boundary conditions vary with the fi lament location within the fi lament 
bundle. Initially, there is tendency for hot fi laments to dissipate heat to the 
quenching air thus increasing the overall temperature of the surrounding 
environment. Moreover, the transverse component of air velocity is signifi -
cantly reduced as the air fl ow tends to follow the axial direction of the run-
ning fi laments. The cross-fl ow of air also has a tendency to disturb the axial 
air fl ow, and the boundary layers of the individual fi laments may overlap, 
resulting in the vanishing of friction forces for the individual fi laments at the 
converging point. Thus, the multifi lament spinning process can be treated 
as a two-phase system in which the fi laments are embedded in the envi-
ronmental matrix (Ziabicki  et al ., 1998). The general conditions of heat and 
momentum, however, need to be satisfi ed at the boundary layers of these 
two phases. 
 Recently, a complex two-phase model of melt spinning has been pro-
posed, which has accounted for effects such as crystallization and necking as 
well as with the environmental conditions, namely, air drag, inertia, gravity, 
and surface tension (Dhadwal, 2011). There were a number of challenges in  
such a complex model, ranging from selecting an appropriate initial guess 
value to solving highly diffi cult equations. 
 The multifi lament melt spinning process is not limited to fi lament produc-
tion; its principle has formed the basis of a spunbonding nonwoven process. 
The major difference between the fi lament and spunbonded nonwoven pro-
duction is that in the latter process the fi lament take-up is not realized using 
godets or a winder but is achieved instead by means of air friction, as shown 
in Fig. 4.3 (Jeon, 2001). Here, the take-up speed due to air drag is not known 
from the beginning, and the higher the velocity of the axial air stream the 
higher the velocity of the fi lament due to the higher friction and drag forces 
transferred to it. Hence, at constant throughput rate, higher fi lament veloc-
ity reduces the fi lament diameter. The fi lament velocity, diameter and other 
related properties are dependent on the component of air drag transferred 
to the fi lament and the contribution of other forces, including rheological, 
inertial, and gravitational. 
 The principles of the melt spinning process have been explored for other 
nonwoven processes, such as the melt blown process. Here, the polymer is 
extruded through a spinneret consisting of several slots, and streams of hot 
air rapidly attenuate the extruded polymeric fl uid into fi ne fi bers as shown 
in Fig. 4.4 (Bhat and Malkan, 2007). Subsequently, the attenuated fi bers 
are blown by high velocity air onto a collector conveyor, self-bonding 
the fi ne fi bers. Recently, theories pertaining to the formation of polymer 
jets in a melt blown process have been proposed revealing that bending 

Melt spinning of synthetic polymeric ﬁ laments   87
Regular
Extruder
Aspirator
Air in
Air and filament out
Conveyor belt
Suction
Spinneret
Extruder
Low melting polyester
 4.3  Schematic diagram of spunbonding process (Jeon, 2001). 
High-velocity
air (primary)
Cooling air
(secondary)
Collector
Fiber 
stream
Air knife
Cooling air
(secondary)
Polymer feed
High-
velocity air
(primary)
Air angle
Air gap
 4.4   Web formation in a melt blown process (Bhat and Malkan, 2007). 

88   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
perturbations of the polymer melt jets are triggered by the presence of 
surrounding turbulent eddies, and enhanced by the drag force acting on 
the jets (Yarin  et al ., 2010). These theories have also been extended for 
melt blown consisting of multiple jets (Yarin  et al ., 2011). However, simu-
lation of polymer fl ows inside the slots of the spinneret of the melt blown 
is yet to be achieved.  
 4.5 
 Limitations of melt spinning 
 The limits of the melt spinning process need to be considered for devel-
oping fi laments with extremely low or high diameters. For coarser fi la-
ments, the highest possible mass throughput rate per hole of the spinneret 
is required while maintaining the lowest possible take-up velocity. Higher 
mass throughput rate per hole requires a longer distance to the solidifi -
cation point. Moreover, the fi lament needs to be cooled down below the 
solidifi cation temperature before it comes into contact with the godet or 
winder; otherwise fi bers may stick to the godet or each other. Polymeric 
fl uid extruded at a very high throughput rate can exhibit rough or highly 
irregular surfaces and can even break up into individual fragments, a phe-
nomenon known as  melt fracture  (Ziabicki, 1967). In some cases, air quench-
ing has been replaced by a water quenching method, which has been found 
to be a useful technique for producing signifi cantly coarser fi laments. 
 Filaments with low diameters after drawing can be produced by keep-
ing the minimum possible throughput rate, maximum possible take-up 
velocity and a high draw ratio. Increasing the take-up velocity increases 
the fi lament orientation, whereas a decrease in the mass throughput 
rate decreases the fi lament diameter. The increase in the fi lament ori-
entation is not signifi cant. However, higher take-up velocity results in a 
higher spin line stress and, as polymeric fl uids are viscoelastic in nature, 
this can lead to fi lament breakages due to brittle cohesive fracture. It has 
been observed that a reduction of throughput rate is more effective than 
increasing the take-up velocity for obtaining fi ner fi laments (Beyreuther 
and Brunig, 2007). Hence, the physical limits of the melt spinning process 
are dictated by an increase in take-up velocity and/or a decrease in the 
throughput rate.  
 4.6 
 Developments in melt spinning 
 Melt spinning is not limited to the production of conventional polymeric fi l-
aments; various developments in terms of type of fi laments, structure–prop-
erty relationships, introduction of nano materials, and advances in process 
characterization have evolved in the last few years. Some of these develop-
ments are briefl y discussed below. 

Melt spinning of synthetic polymeric ﬁ laments   89
 4.6.1  Structure development in composite ﬁ laments 
 Structure developments in melt spinning have been researched extensively, 
although most work has been carried out on homopolymers (Lu and Spruiell, 
1987; Jinan C,  et al , 1989; Choi and White, 2000). Rwei (2000) experimented 
with blends of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polyethylene naph-
thalate (PEN). The polymers were melt spun with a high-speed winding 
process in a single-screw extruder combined with a spinning setup. The fi la-
ments had a single melting point and glass transition temperature, which 
indicated excellent compatibility in both the amorphous and crystalline 
phases. Birefringence and wide-angle X-ray measurements indicated that 
compounding PEN into PET suppressed stress-induced orientation and 
decreased stress-induced crystallization in the fi laments. It was observed 
that the addition of PEN to PET relaxes the formation of skin-core struc-
tures for as-spun fi laments and reduces the occurrence of broken fi laments. 
Interestingly, although the addition of PEN reduced levels of crystallinity, it 
did not affect the tenacity and shrinkage of the compounded fi laments. The 
elongation of the fi laments could be reduced by 30–40%, eliminating the 
need for further drawing. PEN has a rigid backbone, and the results might 
be due to decreased crystallinity. Adding PEN to PET improves PETs spin-
nability during high-speed spinning. 
 Kim and Kim (2006) used poly(ethylene 2,6-naphthalate) (PEN) and 
poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) as composite fi laments reinforced 
with a thermotropic liquid crystal polymer (TLCP) and used a melt blend-
ing and spinning process to synthesize high performance fi laments with 
improved processability. The researchers observed an increase in the bire-
fringence and density of the TLCP/PEN/PET composite fi laments with 
the spinning speed and attributed this observation to enhancement of 
the molecular orientation and effective packing between chains in the 
composite fi laments. The annealing process resulted in the formation of 
a more ordered and perfect crystalline structure in addition to higher 
crystallinity. These composite fi laments had enhanced mechanical proper-
ties. The increase in the crystallite size and the degree of chain extension 
with increasing spinning speed resulted in a gradual increment of the long 
period for the composite fi laments.  
 4.6.2  Incorporation of nanotubes in melt spinning 
 Hooshmand  et al . (2011) blended polypropylene/polyamide with carbon 
nanotubes (CNTs) and melt spun to as-spun and drawn fi laments. Thermal 
analysis showed that increasing the polyamide content decreased the degree 
of crystallinity in the blends. Characterization of the fi laments demonstrated 

90   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
that both conductivity and tensile strength were improved by increasing the 
amount of polyamide in the blends as well as the melt blending tempera-
ture. This work involved the preparation of compounded PP/COPA 9 (low 
melting point co-polymer of polyamide) blends containing 5% CNTs and 
subsequent melt spinning into monofi laments. Thermal analysis proved 
that the CNTs increased both the crystallization temperature and the ther-
mal stability of the blends as compared to neat materials. In addition, use 
of a higher temperature in the melt blending process and the addition of 
1% compatibilizer enhanced the conductivity and tensile strength of the 
fi laments. The authors ascribed this observation to the formation of a more 
homogenous structure. The same improvement was observed by increasing 
the amount of COPA in blends. The researchers achieved the highest con-
ductivity with the sample consisting 30% PP–65% COPA–5% CNTs with 1 
phr (parts/100 rubber) compatibilizer prepared at 240 ° C. It was not possible 
to increase the amount of COPA to higher than 65% in the composite. A 
comparison between as-spun fi laments and drawn fi laments showed that 
although the mechanical properties were improved by drawing, the electri-
cal conductivity was decreased by several orders of magnitude. The authors 
showed that by drawing the fi laments, the distance between the nanotubes 
increased and the percolated network was destroyed. The maximum con-
ductivity and lowest percolation threshold for composite fi laments occur 
when the fi llers orient randomly, resulting in closer carbon nanotubes in the 
fi lament structure. 
 P ö tschke  et al . (2010) manufactured poly(lactic acid) (PLA)/multi-
walled carbon nanotube (MWNT) composite fi laments through melt 
spinning with different take-up velocities to obtain electrically conduc-
tive fi laments. The researchers spun the fi laments using a self-constructed 
piston-type spinning device, where the granular composite material was 
melted in a heated cylinder and pressed through a single hole die of 0.6 mm 
in diameter by a piston. The design of the system is illustrated in Fig. 4.5 
(P ö tschke P  et al ., 2010).  
 The volume throughput was controlled by an adjustable piston speed 
and was kept constant at 0.755 cm 3 /min. The melt-spun monofi laments 
were collected on a winder. The take-up velocity was set to 20, 50, and 
100 m/min. The researchers found that the liquid sensing properties of 
the fi laments were strongly infl uenced by both the MWNT content and 
the take-up velocity. Both yielded decreased relative resistance changes. 
It is interesting to note that multi-walled carbon nanotubes had reason-
ably good macroscopic dispersion and distribution within the PLA as 
evidenced by the microscopy image shown in Fig. 4.6 (P ö tschke P  et al ., 
2010).  

Melt spinning of synthetic polymeric ﬁ laments   91
Heater
Stamp
Melt
1
1
Single hole die
(d = 0.6 mm)
Fiber
Winder
+
1 m
 4.5  Piston-type spinning device for production of monoﬁ laments 
(P ö tschke P  et al ., 2010) 
 4.6  Light transmission microscopy image of a PLA ﬁ ber with 3.0 wt.% 
MWNT (as extruded) illustrating the high degree of macroscopic 
MWNT dispersion (P ö tschke P  et al ., 2010). 

92   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 TEM images as shown in Fig. 4.7 (P ö tschke P  et al ., 2010) indicated that 
MWNT are strongly oriented in the fi lament direction due to the spinning 
process. The extruded fi laments with low MWNT concentration (2 wt.%) 
and low DDR (extruded) seem to be most suitable for use as sensor fi la-
ments in textiles applied in tanks. 
 In a study conducted by Anand  et al . (2010), poly(ethylene terephthalate)-
single-walled carbon nanotube (PET-SWNT) nanocomposite fi laments were 
prepared through melt spinning and drawing. The researchers found that the 
nanotubes, in addition to acting as effective nucleating agents for PET melt 
crystallization, also provided signifi cant reinforcement to the PET fi laments. 
Tenacity and initial modulus of the composite fi lament with 1 wt.% SWNTs 
were, respectively, 1.8 times and 3.2 times higher as compared to those of 
the pristine PET fi lament prepared under identical conditions. When the 
draw ratio was increased, the tenacity and the modulus of the fi laments fur-
ther increased, indicating that drawing induced orientation of the polymer 
molecules and SWNTs. It should be noted that the thermal stability of the 
fi laments was not signifi cantly affected by the presence of the SWNTs at low 
concentrations. 
 4.7  TEM images of PLA ﬁ ber containing 3.0 wt.% MWNT, melt spun 
with take-up velocity of 50 m/min (arrow indicates ﬁ ber axis) (P ö tschke 
P  et al ., 2010). 

Melt spinning of synthetic polymeric ﬁ laments   93
 4.6.3  Structure–property relationship in syndiotactic 
polypropylene 
 The crystallization behavior of syndiotactic polypropylene (sPP) was inves-
tigated during melt spinning by Sura  et al . (2001). It was found that its behav-
ior was substantially different from that of most other linear polymers. The 
anisotropic stress fi eld in the process led invariably to extension as well as 
alignment (orientation) of the chains in the melt, both of which contrib-
uted to a dramatic enhancement in the rate of crystallization. However, the 
authors commented that the primary structure of the sPP chain in its most 
preferred crystal form comprised a ‘coiled helical,’ sequence. Stress-induced 
chain extension can lead to conformational sequences not favorable for 
crystallization in this form. As a consequence, process conditions that gen-
erate higher stress levels can cause a diminution in the rate of crystallization 
of this polymer. Such conformation-related aspects of oriented crystalliza-
tion of sPP have been analyzed in terms of the structure and properties of 
melt-spun fi laments, produced over a range of spinning speeds. 
 4.6.4   Advance process characterization in melt spinning 
 Liang and Zhong (2010) measured the elongational properties of low 
density polyethylene (LDPE) melt using a melt spinning technique. The 
relationship between temperature and melt strength, as well as between 
extensional viscosity and drawability, were investigated with respect to 
extensional strain rate, temperature and extrusion velocity. The researchers 
found that melt strength decreased with a rise in temperature. A low melt 
extensional viscosity might be benefi cial to improve the melt drawability. 
With an increase of extensional strain rate, the extensional stress increased 
while the melt extension viscosity has reduced. Both the melt extensional 
stress and viscosity dropped with a rise of temperature. 
 The effect of fl uid viscoelasticity on the draw resonance dynamics of melt 
spinning was investigated by Lee  et al . (2001) using the White–Metzner and 
Phan-Thien–Tanner fl uid models dealing with the effects of spinline cooling 
on the same draw resonance. The researchers found that the effects of fl uid 
viscoelasticity on spinning stability can be classifi ed into two diametrically 
different types: for extension-thickening fl uids an increase in viscoelasticity 
increases tension, decreases tension sensitivity and, thus, stabilizes the spin-
ning, whereas for extension-thinning fl uids it decreases tension, increases 
tension sensitivity and, thus, destabilizes the spinning. 
 In the work by Wu  et al . (2000), high molecular weight poly(ethylene-2,6-
naphthalate)(PEN) was melt spun at take-up velocities between 0.9 and 10 

94   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
km/min. With increasing take-up speed, a steady trend towards higher as-
spun fi lament orientation and crystallinity was observed, accompanied by 
improved physical properties. The wide-angle X-ray diffraction (WAXD) 
patterns of the as-spun fi laments prepared at a velocity range higher than 
1.5 km/min indicate that these samples all possessed a crystalline structure. 
At a relatively low take-up velocity, in the range from 1.5 to 4 km/min, a high 
level of molecular orientation in both crystalline and amorphous regions 
was observed. This may be attributed to the high spinning stress gener-
ated by the high molecular weight polymer used. In the high take-up speed 
region of 5–10 km/min, the molecular orientation becomes saturated. The 
highest initial modulus of the as-spun PEN fi laments obtained in this region 
reached 200 g/den. It is interesting to note that the researchers used mate-
rials of different molecular weights. The higher molecular weight sample 
(a)
2.6 m
3.2 m
3.8 m
4.4 m
IV = 0.82
0.65
0.55
0.52
(b)
4
8
12
16
20
24
2θ (°)
28
32
36
40
Intensity
 4.8  Equatorial X-ray diffraction proﬁ les of as-spun PEN ﬁ bers as a 
function of: (a) threadline length; (b) molecular weight of polymer (Wu 
 et al ., 2000). Here IV represents intrinsic viscosity. 

Melt spinning of synthetic polymeric ﬁ laments   95
developed higher orientation and crystallization, resulting in well-resolved 
X-ray diffraction curves (see Fig. 4.8, Wu  et al ., 2000) and higher values of 
birefringence, density, and mechanical properties. 
 In the experimental and theoretical studies of PET melt spinning, it has 
been found that in the range of high velocities, the inertial stress related 
with the winding speed plays an important role in the formation of fi la-
ment structure. In the range of lower velocities, threadline tension is more 
controlled by the rheological forces. The researchers observed that higher 
spinning speed generates a higher inertial force, resulting in a signifi cant 
increase in the threadline tension, and ultimately in high birefringence. 
At same take-up speed, the rheological drag was enhanced by the use of 
high molecular weight PEN. The enhanced rheological drag also induced 
an increased threadline tension, which is considered an important factor in 
explaining the well-developed structures formed in fi lament samples wound 
at quite low speed. 
 4.7 
 Future trends 
 Current developments are focused on obtaining nano- or submicron-fi la-
ments using a melt-electrospinning technique. This technique requires the 
generation of a strong electric fi eld between the polymeric melt within the 
extruder and a metallic collecting device. The principle is similar to that of 
electrospinning of fi laments from solution; however, the forces needed to 
create a reduction in diameter to the nanometer level are of great interest. 
Furthermore, utilization of new polymers and multicomponent spinning, spe-
cifi cally bicomponent systems, are expected to grow in the future. Spinning 
of new polymers would present new challenges, and further developments 
are envisaged in the fi eld of post spinning operations such as quenching 
and drawing. Improvement of the fi lament quality at high spinning speeds, 
integration of quality assurance devices with the fast production speeds, and 
ensuring stability in spinning of fi ner fi laments are some of the research 
challenges for the years ahead. 
 4.8 
 Conclusion 
 Melt spinning is among the most versatile and commonly used methods 
for producing polymeric fi laments. The fundamentals of melt spinning, 
modeling of polymeric fl ows inside the screw and the spinneret, inter-
action of melt-spun fi laments with the environment, and the limitations 
of melt spinning have been critically discussed. In addition, some of the 
recent developments and future trends pertaining to melt spinning have 
been analyzed.  

96   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 4.9 
 Sources of further information and advice 
 Ziabicki A and Jarecki L (1985),  High-Speed Fiber Spinning , New York, 
Interscience. 
 Tucker, C L (1989),  Fundamentals of Computer Modeling for Polymer Processing , 
Munich, Carl Hanser Verlag. 
 Salem, D R (2001),  Structure Formation in Polymeric Fibers, Munich , Carl Hanser 
Verlag. 
 Nakajima, T (1994),  Advanced Fiber Spinning Technology , Cambridge, Woodhead 
Publishing Limited. 
 McIntyre, J E (2005),  Synthetic Fibres: Nylon, Polyester, Acrylic, Polyolefi n , 
Cambridge, Woodhead Publishing Limited. 
 Deopura B L, Alagirusamy R, Joshi M, Gupta B (2008),  Polyesters and Polyamides , 
Cambridge, Woodhead Publishing Limited. 
 4.10  References 
 Anand K A, Jose T S, Agarwal U S, Sreekumar T V, Banwari B and Joseph R (2010), 
‘PET-SWNT nanocomposite fi bers through melt spinning’,  International Journal 
of Polymeric Materials ,  59 , 438–449. 
 Arai T and Aoyam H (1963), ‘Die wall restriction on elastic shear deformation in vis-
coelastic fl ow of polymer melt’,  Transactions of Society of Rheology ,   7 , 333–355. 
 Arai T and Toyoda H (1970), ‘Viscoelastic fl ow through a rectangular duct’,  
Proceedings of 5th International Rheological Congress , Kyoto, 7–11 October 
1968, 461–470. 
 Bagley E B, Storey S H and West D C (1963), ‘Post extrusion swelling of polyethyl-
ene’,  Journal of Applied Polymer Science ,  7 , 1661–1672. 
 Beyreuther R and Brunig H (2007),  Dynamics of Fiber Formation and Processing , 
Berlin Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag. 
 Bhat G S, Malkan S R (2007), ‘Polymer-laid web formation’, in Russell S J (ed.), 
 Handbook of Nonwovens , Cambridge, Woodhead Publishing Limited. 
 Bird B R (1977),  Dynamics of Polymeric Liquids , New York, John Wiley and Sons. 
 Booy M L (1963), ‘Infl uence of channel curvature on fl ow, pressure distribution and 
power requirement of screw pumps and melt extruders’,  SPE Transactions ,  3 , 
176–185. 
 Buchdahl R, Nielson L E and Merz E H (1951), ‘Rheology of thermoplastics. II. 
Recoverable and nonrecoverable deformations of polystyrene between 90 ° C 
and 240 ° C, as a function of molecular weight’,  Journal of Polymer Science ,  6 , 
403–422. 
 Campbell G A, Sweeney P A and Felton J N (1992), ‘Experimental investigation 
of the drag fl ow in extruder analysis’  Polymer Engineering and Science ,  32 , 
1765–1770. 
 Chang P W, Patten T W and Finlayson B A (1979), ‘Collocation and galerkin fi nite 
element methods for viscoelastic fl uid fl ow—I.: Description of method and 
problems with fi xed geometry’,  Computers and Fluids ,  7 , 267–283. 
 Chin W Y and Shyu G D (1988), ‘Die swell from capillary die and slit die: A theoret-
ical study’,  Journal of Applied Polymer Science ,  35 , 847–862. 
 Choi D and White J L (2000), ‘Structure development in melt spinning syndiotac-
tic polypropylene and comparison to isotactic polypropylene’,  International 
Polymer Processing , 2000/04,  15 , 398–405. 

Melt spinning of synthetic polymeric ﬁ laments   97
 Choo K P, Neelakantan N R and Pittman J F T (1980), ‘Experimental deep-chan-
nel velocity profi les and operating characteristics for a single-screw extruder’, 
 Polymer Engineering Science ,  20 , 349–356. 
 Dhadwal R (2011), ‘Numerical simulation of a two-phase melt spinning model’, 
 Applied Mathematical Modelling ,  35 , 2959–2971. 
 Duda J L and Vrentas J S (1972), ‘Pressure losses in non-Newtonian entrance fl ows’, 
 The Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering ,  50 , 671–674. 
 Fourn é F (1999),  Synthetic Fibers: Machines and Equipment, Manufacture, Properties , 
Munich, Carl Hanser Verlag. 
 Graessley W W, Glasscock S D and Crawley R L (1970) ‘Die swell in molten poly-
mers’,  Transactions of Society of Rheology ,  14 , 519–544. 
 Hooshmand S, Soroudi A and Skrifvars M (2011), ‘Electro-conductive compos-
ite fi bers by melt spinning of polypropylene/polyamide/carbon nanotubes’, 
 Synthetic Metals ,  161 , 1731–1737. 
 Jeon B S (2001), ‘Theoretical orientation density function of spunbonded nonwoven 
fabric’,  Textile Research Journal ,  71 , 509–513. 
 Jinan C, Kikutani T, Takaku A and Shimizu J (1989), ‘Nonisothermal orientation-
induced crystallization in melt spinning of polypropylene’,  Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science ,  37 , 2083–2097. 
 Kantorovich L V and Krylov V I (1958),  Approximate Methods of Analysis , New 
York, Interscience. 
 Kase S and Matsuo T (1965), ‘Studies on melt spinning-I, Fundamental equations on 
the dynamics of melt spinning’,  Journal of Polymer Science ,  A3 , 2541–2554. 
 Kim J Y and Kim S H, (2006), ‘Structure and property relationship of thermotropic 
liquid crystal polymer and polyester composite fi bers’,  Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science ,  99 , 2211–2219. 
 Lee J S, Jung H W, Kim S H and Hyun J C (2001), ‘Effect of fl uid viscoelasticity 
on the draw resonance dynamics of melt spinning’,  Journal of Non-Newtonian 
Fluid Mechanics ,  99 , 159–166. 
 Li Y and Hsieh F (1996), ‘Modelling of fl ow in a single screw extruder’,  Journal of 
Food Engineering ,  27 , 353–373. 
 Liang J Z and Zhong L (2010), ‘Elongational properties of low density polyethylene 
using meltspinning technique’,  Polymer Testing ,  29 , 972–976. 
 Lu F M and Spruiell J E (1987), ‘The infl uence of resin characteristics on the high 
speed melt spinning of isotactic polypropylene I: Effect of molecular weight 
and its distribution on structure and mechanical properties of as-spun fi la-
ments’,  Journal of Applied Polymer Science ,  34 , 1521–1539. 
 Mayer H J, Stiehl C and Roeder E (1997), ‘Applying the fi nite-element method to 
determine the die swell phenomenon during the extrusion of glass rods with non-
circular cross-sections’,  Journal of Materials Processing Technology ,  70 , 145–150. 
 Metzner A B, Houghten W T, Sailor R A and White J L (1961), ‘A method for the 
measurement of normal stresses in simple shearing fl ow’,  Transactions of Society 
of Rheology ,  5 , 133–147. 
 Middleman S (1965), ‘Flow of polymer fl uids in rectangular ducts’,  Transactions of 
Society of Rheology ,  9 , 83–93. 
 Mitsoulis E, (1999), ‘Three-dimensional non-Newtonian computations of extrudate 
swell with the fi nite element method’,  Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics 
and Engineering ,  180 , 333–344. 
 Mitsuishi N and Aoyagi Y (1969), ‘Non-Newtonian fl ow in non-circular ducts’, 
 Chemical Engineering Science ,  24 , 309–319. 

98   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 Mitsuishi N and Aoyagi Y (1973), ‘Non-Newtonian fl ow in eccentric annulus ’ ,  Journal 
of Chemical Engineering ,  6 , 402–408. 
 Mori and Funatsu (1973), ‘On die swell in molten polymer’,  Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science ,  20 , 209–220. 
 Nickell R E, Tanner R I and Caswell B (1974), ‘The solution of viscous incompress-
ible jet and free-surface fl ows using fi nite-element methods’,  Journal of Fluid 
Mechanics ,  65 , 189–206. 
 P ö tschke P, Andres T, Villmow T, Pegel S, Br ü nig H, Kobashi K, Fischer D and 
H ä ussler L (2010), ‘Liquid sensing properties of fi bers prepared by melt 
spinning from poly(lactic acid) containing multi-walled carbon nanotubes’, 
 Composites Science and Technology ,  70 , 343–349. 
 Racin R and Bogue D C (1979), ‘Molecular weight effects in die swell and in shear 
rheology’,  Journal of Rheology ,  23 , 263–280. 
 Rawal A (2002), ‘Generation of an expert system for the optimisation of net -
extrusion processes’, Ph.D Thesis, The University of Bolton ( formerly Bolton 
Institute), Bolton, UK. 
 Rawal A and Davies P J (2005), ‘Expert system for the optimisation of melt extruded 
net structures’,  Plastics, Rubber and Composites ,  34 , 47–53. 
 Rawal A and Davies P J (2006), ‘Empirical Modelling of Filament Area in Melt 
Extruded Net Structures’,  Indian Journal of Fiber and Textile Research ,  31 , 
241–247. 
 Rejon A and Alvarez C (1987), ‘Mechanical and fl ow properties of high density poly-
ethylene/low density polyethylene’,  Polymer Engineering Science ,  27 ,640–646. 
 Richardson S (1970), ‘The die swell phenomenon’,  Rheologica Acta ,  9 , 193–199. 
 Rowell H S and Finlayson D (1922), ‘Screw viscosity pumps’,  Engineering ,  114 , 
606–607. 
 Rowell H S and Finlayson D (1928), ‘Screw viscosity pumps’,  Engineering ,  126 , 
249–387. 
 Rwei S P (2000), ‘Modifi cation of PET in high-speed melt spinning by blending with 
PEN’,  Polymer Engineering and Science ,  40 , 191–200. 
 Schechter R S (1961) ‘On the steady fl ow of a non-Newtonian fl uid in cylinder ducts’, 
 AIChE Journal ,  7 , 445–448. 
 Sumesh P T, Mathur T P and Agarwal U S (2010), ‘Simulation of polyester melt spin-
ning with axial quench for increasing productivity’,  Journal of Applied Polymer 
Science ,  116 , 2541–2547. 
 Sura R K, Desai P and Abhiraman A S (2001), ‘Oriented crystallization in fi ber for-
mation: Inferences from the structure and properties of melt spun syndiotactic 
polypropylene fi laments’,  Journal of Applied Polymer Science ,  81 , 2305–2317. 
 Sutterby J L (1966), ‘Laminar converging fl ow of dilute polymer solutions in conical 
sections: Part I. Viscosity data, new viscosity model, tube fl ow solution’, AIChE 
 Journal ,  12 , 63–68. 
 Tadmor Z and Gogos C G (1979),  Principles of Polymer Processing , New York, John 
Wiley and Sons Inc. 
 Takarada W, Ito H, Kikutani T and Okui N (2001) ‘Studies on high-speed melt spin-
ning of noncircular cross-section fi bers I: Structural analysis of as-spun fi bers’, 
 Journal of Applied Polymer Science ,  80 , 1575–1581. 
 Tanner R I (1970), ‘A theory of die-swell’,  Journal of Polymer Science ,  8 , 2067–2078. 

Melt spinning of synthetic polymeric ﬁ laments   99
 Tanner R I, Nickell R E and Bilger R W (1975), ‘Finite element methods for the 
solution of some incompressible non-Newtonian fl uid mechanics problems 
with free surfaces’,  Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 
 6 , 155–174. 
 Treloar L R G (1958),  The Physics of Rubber Elasticity , Oxford, Clarendon Press. 
 Vlachopoulos J, Horie M and Lidorikis S (1972), ‘An evaluation of expressions pre-
dicting die swell’,  Transactions of Society of Rheology ,  16 , 669–685. 
 White J L and Roman J F (1976), ‘Extrudate swell during the melt spinning of 
fi bers—infl uence of rheological properties and take-up force’,  Journal of 
Applied Polymer Science ,  20 , 1005–1023. 
 Wong A C Y and Liang J Z (1997), ‘Relationship between die swell ratio and melt 
fl ow index’,  Chemical Engineering Science , 52, 3219–3221. 
 Worth R A (1979), ‘Accuracy of parallel – plate analogy for representation of viscous 
fl ow between cylinders’,  Journal of Applied Polymer Sciences ,  24 , 319–328. 
 Wu G, Li Q and Cuculo J A (2000), ‘Fiber structure and properties of poly(ethylene-
2,6-naphthalate) obtained by high-speed melt spinning’,  Polymer ,  41 , 
8139–8150. 
 Xue S C, Phan-Thien N and Tanner R I (1995), ‘Numerical study of secondary fl ows 
of viscoelastic fl uid in straight pipes by an implicit fi nite volume method’, 
 Journal of Non-Newtonian Fluids Mechanics ,  59 , 191–213. 
 Yarin A L, Sinha-Ray S and Pourdeyhimi B (2010), ‘Meltblowing: II-linear and 
nonlinear waves on viscoelastic polymer jets’,  Journal of Applied Physics ,  108 , 
034913-1-034913-10. 
 Yarin A L, Sinha-Ray S and Pourdeyhimi B (2011), ‘Meltblowing: Multiple polymer 
jets and fi ber-size distribution and lay-down patterns’,  Polymer ,  52 , 2929–2938. 
 Yu Q and Hu G H (1998), ‘Development of a helical coordinate system and its 
applications to analysis of polymer fl ow in screw extruders. Part II: A helical 
channel model for single screw extruders’,  Polymer Engineering and Science , 
 38 , 819–830. 
 Ziabicki A and Kedzierska K (1960), ‘Mechanical aspects of fi ber spinning process 
in molten polymers Part II. Stream broadening after the exit from the channel 
of spinneret’,  Kolloid Zeitschrift ,  171 , 111–119. 
 Ziabicki A (1967), ‘Physical fundamentals of the fi ber spinning process’ and 
‘Principles of melt spinning’, in Mark H F, Atlas S M and Cernia E,  Man-Made 
Fibers Science and Technology Volume  1, Interscience Publishers, John Wiley 
Sons, Inc. 
 Ziabicki A (1976),  Fundamentals of Fiber Formation , New York, Interscience. 
 Ziabicki A, Jarecki L and Wasiak A (1998), ‘Dynamic modelling of melt spinning’, 
 Computational and Theoretical Polymer Science ,  8 , 143–157. 
 

© 2014 Woodhead Publishing Limited
100
 5 
 Gel spinning of synthetic polymer fibres  
 C. J.  KUO  and  W. L.  LAN ,  National Taiwan 
University of Science and Technology, Taiwan 
 DOI : 10.1533/9780857099174.2.100 
 Abstract: With increasing requirements for better performance of fi bre 
products, the development of reinforced fi bre has become a key issue. 
Gel spinning technology is one of the major production methods for 
high-strength and high-mechanical-property fi bres. Gel spinning, also 
known as semi-melt spinning, is a method that prepares high-strength 
and high-elastic modules fi bre in the gel state. After the extrusion of 
the polymer solution or plasticised gel from the spinnerets, it is cooled 
in solvent or water before being stretched into gel fi bre by ultra-high 
extension. Gel spinning can promote the polymer of fi bre’s molecular 
weight, degree of orientation, crystallinity and fi bre density effectively, 
and that contributes to increasing the fi bre’s strength and modules. In the 
near future, gel spinning will be able to produce many more special fi bres 
with excellent properties. 
 Key words: gel spinning, high magnifi cation stretching, high-strength fi bre. 
 5.1 
 Introduction 
 Fibre is one of the most important inventions in human history. In early 
times, people planted cotton and ramie to extract fi bre for making clothing 
to replace the use of leather, even though its quality was often crude and 
unrefi ned. The Chinese extracted silk to improve the quality of their cloth-
ing; however, the material was very expensive. The invention of rayon at the 
end of the nineteenth century triggered an upsurge in fi bre development. In 
1935, the fi rst synthetic fi bre was invented and its products were offi cially 
marketed in 1940, promoting the rapid development of the fi bre industry. 
To date, the most commonly used spinning methods are melt spinning, dry 
spinning, and wet spinning. 
 With increasing requirement for better performance of fi bre products, 
the development of reinforced fi bre has become a key issue. In the 1970s, 
DuPont of the US successfully developed the aramid fi bre, with a strength 
about 17 cN/dtex, thus leading to high-strength fi bre development. The 
main types of high-strength fi bres include para-aramid (PPTA) fi bre, 

Gel spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bres   101
UHMWPE fi bre and carbon fi bre. A comparison of fi bre strength and 
modulus is shown in Table 5.1. 1,2  
 However, with rising demands on fi bre product performance, many special 
spinning methods have been researched and developed. Methods including 
gel spinning, electrostatic spinning and integrate composite spinning have 
been applied in industrial production. Gel spinning has been widely applied 
in the production of high-strength fi bres and those with high mechanical 
properties. 3,4 The fi rst patent of gel spinning emerged in the 1950s, but since 
the molecular weight of the raw material used at that time was too low, 
the obtained fi bre did not have the expected strength and mechanical prop-
erties. As a result, there was no further development. Ten years later, the 
development of carbon fi bre of suffi ciently high strength and high mechan-
ical property has put gel spinning in the spotlight once again. Gel spinning 
technology has been continuously upgraded and improved, and its range of 
application has extended from the PE of low molecular weight to raw mate-
rials of high molecular weight, such as polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), polyacrylo-
nitrile (PAN) and ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE). 
Gel spinning technology has become one of the major production methods 
of high-strength and high-mechanical-property fi bres. 
 5.2 
 Factors affecting the spinning 
of polymers: entanglement 
 Entanglement refers to the reticular or spherical structure formed by the 
cross-linking points produced in the polymer chain, or in between polymer 
chains, making the polymer chains unable to move normally and thus affect-
ing the nature of the polymer. The measurement of entanglement is gen-
erally determined by the viscosity of the polymer fl uid or the modulus of 
complete non-crystalline polymer. 
 Entanglement has a signifi cant impact on the rheological behaviour 
and mechanical properties of the polymer. Observed from the perspec-
tive of polymer melt viscosity, when the shear rate is at zero the polymer 
viscosity is proportional to the molecular weight of the polymer. When 
 Table 5.1   A comparison of ﬁ bre strength and modulus 
 Fibre type 
 Strength 
(cN/dtex) 
 Modulus 
(cN/dtex) 
 Process 
method 
 Commodity 
description 
 PPTA ﬁ bre 
 16–24.5 
 355–880 
 Crystal 
spinning 
 Kevlar®, Twaron ®  
UHMWPE ﬁ bre 
 26.5–35 
 885–1760 
 Gel spinning 
 Dyneema®, Spectra® 
 Carbon ﬁ bre 
 13.5–35 
 1060–1675 
 Wet spinning 
 Torayca ® 
 Source : Shen, 1979 and Yasuda, 1994. 

102   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
the molecular weight exceeds a certain level, the viscosity is proportional 
to the 3.4th power of the molecular weight as shown in Equations [5.1] 
and [5.2]:  
 
 η0
η ∝M (
)
M
Mc  
 [5.1] 
 
 η0
η
3 4
∝M 3 4 (
)
M
Mc  
 [5.2] 
 where  M  c   is the critical entanglement molecular weight, which is generally 
in the range of 10 000–20 000. When the molecular weight exceeds  M  c  , the 
viscosity increases signifi cantly. Thus, it proves the existence and impact of 
entanglement on the physical properties of the polymer molecule. 
 Polymer chain entanglement has a signifi cant effect on the processing of 
polymer fi bre. According to rubber elasticity theory, the maximum stretch 
ratio of polymer fi bre (  λ max ) and the number of statistical links of the poly-
mer chain cross-linking points are in the relationship shown in Equation 
[5.3]. When the number of statistical links is greater, the amount of stretch 
after fi bre processing will be greater. In the ideal state, when the polymer 
chains are completely parallel in arrangement, the amount of stretch will be 
infi nite, and the fi bre strength will accordingly be infi nite. Hence, if the num-
ber of polymer entanglements can be effectively reduced, the polymer fi bre 
strength will be considerably improved. 
 
 λmax =
NC  
 [5.3] 
 5.3 
 Factors affecting fibre strength 
 Like cement and reinforced steel bars, for the preparation of high-strength 
polymer fi bre the internal structure of the fi bre is important. The prepara-
tion of high-strength polymer is now discussed from different perspectives, 
including the polymer molecular weight, degree of orientation, crystallinity, 
fi bre density and processing method. 
 5.3.1   Molecular weight 
 Molecular weight is one of the most important considerations for prepar-
ing high-strength fi bre. Rising molecular weight can effectively reduce the 
defects at the molecular chain ends to enhance fi bre strength. Rising molec-
ular weight can also improve the maximum stretch ratio, and further affect 
the molecular phase smoothness and crystallinity. However, rising molecular 

Gel spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bres   103
weight relatively raises the polymer melt or solution viscosity to reduce the 
spinnability of the fi bre. 
 5.3.2  Degree of orientation and crystallinity 
 The degree of orientation and crystallinity of the polymer can directly affect 
polymer fi bre strength. A good degree of orientation and crystallinity can 
enable the molecules to bear greater stress. The high degree of orientation 
of polymer structure is related to the molecular composition or the char-
acteristics of medium solution. Different molecular or solution composi-
tions will result in different adaptive structural patterns. In addition to the 
selection of molecule and solution, special processing methods, such as the 
sudden cooling of melt fi bre, fi bre ultra-magnifi cation stretching and multi-
segment stretching of the fi bre, can improve the degree of orientation and 
crystallinity. 
 5.3.3  Fibre density and processing methods 
 Fibre density directly affects its strength. Polymer molecular weight, solu-
tion concentration, fi bre processing methods and fi bre stretching affect fi bre 
density directly. Melt spinning without solution can theoretically achieve the 
maximum density of the fi bre. However, given the need to ensure spinnabil-
ity of the fi bre, the melt spinning process generally uses polymers of lower 
molecular weight, which does not produce high-strength fi bres. The dry 
spinning method also obtains a similar fi bre density; however, the stretching 
effects are not signifi cant. Limited by the problem of swell, the wet spinning 
method does not produce high-strength fi bre. 
 The liquid-crystal spinning method can also be used to produce high-
strength fi bre. However, the molecules need to be rigid-chain polymers that 
can be made into liquid solution. The gel spinning method may solve the 
polymer entanglement problem and improve the spinnability of polymer of 
higher molecular weight. Coupled with ultra-magnifi cation stretching, the 
molecular degree of orientation and crystallinity can be increased to effec-
tively improve the fi bre strength. Therefore, gel spinning is one of the major 
processing methods for making high-strength fi bres. 
 5.4 
 Gel spinning technologies 
 Gel spinning, also known as semi-melt spinning, is a method that prepares 
high-strength and high-elastic module fi bre in the gel state. After the extru-
sion of the polymer solution or plasticised gel from the spinnerets, it is 
cooled in solvent or water before being stretched into gel fi bre by ultra-high 

104   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
extension. During the process of cooling, the polymer solution will grad-
ually lose the mobility of the solution, which is known as the gelation of 
polymers. During the process of gelation, the solution’s viscosity will grad-
ually rise. Until the formation of gel, the viscosity will become infi nite. As 
the new forming fi bre contains a large amount of solvent, and is in the gel 
state, it requires ultra-drawing to produce the ultra-high-strength and high-
modulus fi bre. Gel spinning causes relatively ideal structures for ordinary 
fl exible-chain polymers (e.g. PE, PAN and PVA) to produce high-strength 
and high-modulus fi bre. 5 
 The general gel spinning process can be divided into the following four 
steps:
   1.     Dissolution: the dissolution of polymer in solvent. The molecular chains 
of the solid polymers may be entangled, and the entanglements will affect 
the molecular chain stretching. The dissolution of polymers in solvent 
can disentangle these entanglements to aid the gel fi bre stretching.  
  2.     Spinning and formation: extruding the solvent from the spinnerets by 
gear pump, and cooling it rapidly by air or water. The rapid cooling pro-
cess can lead to the formation of crystals and retain the disentangled 
state of polymers to aid the formation of high-strength and high-elastic-
modulus fi bre. 
 3.  Remove solvent: the most commonly used methods to remove solvent 
in gel spinning include the natural drying method and the use of extract-
ant, which mainly aims to remove the solvent residuals in gel fi bre. The 
extractant can displace the gel fi bre solvent based on diffusion and pen-
etration principles. In gel spinning, the selection of solvent and extract-
ant directly affect the stretching stability, and is key to the gel spinning 
method. 
 4.  Stretching: the high magnifi cation stretching of the gel fi bre. High mag-
nifi cation stretching can change the folded polymer molecular chains to 
straight chains, and improve polymer crystallinity and orientation. This 
is a unique feature of gel spinning, and is the key to enhancing gel fi bre 
performance. 
 Using solvent and high magnifi cation stretching, the gel spinning process 
can produce gel fi bre of high strength and high Young’s modulus. The pro-
cess is simple and similar to the wet and dry spinning processes, with the 
following differences:
   1.     Raw materials of high molecular weight: the raw materials are mainly 
polymers of high molecular weight. Polymers of high molecular weight 

Gel spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bres   105
can withstand high magnifi cation stretching, and help improve fi bre 
strength and other mechanical properties. The rising molecular weight 
can reduce defects in fi bre structure caused by the chain polymer end 
group to enhance fi bre strength. 
  2.     Dilute solution: the diluted solution can reduce gel viscosity, improve 
gel fi bre spinning capability, and be conducive to the disentangle-
ment of high polymer chains to enhance fi bre strength and mechanical 
properties.  
  3.     High magnifi cation stretching: as stated above, the high magnifi cation 
stretching of fi bre is a unique feature of the gel spinning process. The 
high magnifi cation stretching can change the folded polymer molec-
ular chains to straight chains, and improve polymer crystallinity and 
orientation, which is an incomparable advantage over other spinning 
methods.     
 5.5 
 Types of fibres produced using gel spinning 
 Gel spinning is usually applied in the processing of high molecular weight 
or ultra-high molecular weight polymers. The entanglement of long chain 
polymers is fully stretched by appropriate solvent and temperature. After 
spinning, high magnifi cation stretching can further stretch the polymer 
molecular chain to get the high strength of the fi bre. Gel spinning is most 
widely applied in production of UHMWPE, PVA and PAN, as illustrated 
respectively below. 
 5.5.1  UHMWPE ﬁ bre 
 UHMWPE uses molecules of high molecular weight as the raw material, 
because increasing molecular weight can reduce the number of end groups 
and subsequent end group defects of the molecular chain to improve fi bre 
strength. At present, the gel spinning of UHMWPE uses solvents including 
paraffi n oil, decalin and paraffi n. 6,7 Decalin has the best dissolution effect; 
however, it cannot be mass-produced due to its high price. At present, a 
mixture of kerosene and emulsifying oil is usually used as the solvent. The 
most commonly used extractants are trichloro-trifl uoro-ethane, decane, 
gasoline, and the high effi ciency dragging oil smoke. Stretching UHMWPE 
fi bres uses the high magnifi cation stretching method to straighten the folded 
molecular chain to the largest extent to enhance UHMWPE’s mechanical 
properties. UHMWPE fi bre has many excellent mechanical properties and 
high energy absorption value, and thus is usually used in producing helmets, 
impact plates and bullet-proof vests. 

106   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 5.5.2   PVA ﬁ bre 
 PVA fi bre has good heat resistance and adhesion with rubber as well as 
excellent mechanical properties. Using the gel spinning method to prepare 
high-strength and high-mechanical-property fi bres has become an integral 
part of the development of PVA products. PVA gel spinning is not easy. 
The spinning requires special technologies and methods, such as a low tem-
perature coagulation bath, a two-stage reduction of tension extraction dry-
ing, and high tensile heat setting in order to produce a PVA fi bre of high 
strength and high modulus. 8  In applications, PVA fi bre is often used as the 
raw material for nylon. 
 5.5.3   PAN ﬁ bre 
 PAN fi bre gel spinning process usually uses acrylonitrile homopolymer or 
copolymer of high molecular weight as the raw material. Gel spinning is 
conducted by 15 wt.% dilute solution. The solvents include NaScN water 
solution, DMF, DMSO, DMAC, and   δ -butyrolactone, and ultra-high magni-
fi cation stretching of gel fi bre is implemented. The PAN fi bre obtained from 
the gel spinning process has few defects and high orientation with mechan-
ical properties measurable to aromatic polyamide fi bre. Regarding thermal 
stability, PAN fi bre is worse than aromatic polyamide fi bre, carbon fi bre, 
and glass fi bre, but is considerably better than PE fi bre. The strength is not 
affected in environments above 130 ° C. 9  Moreover, PAN fi bre has excellent 
anti-alkaline properties and light fastness. 
 5.6 
 Factors affecting gel spinning 
 Many factors affect gel spinning processing. The product’s spinning property, 
stability and quality are subject to factors such as polymer type, molecular 
weight, solvent type, solvent concentration, laddering rate, spinning temper-
ature, extractant type, stretching temperature, stretching rate, and stretching 
magnifi cation, as summarised in Fig. 5.1 
   1.     Molecule type: molecule type determines the use of the product. The 
type of molecule chosen for the gel spinning process is usually polymers 
of chain thermo-plasticity, and commonly used gel spinning molecules 
include UHMWPE, PVA and PAN. 
  2.     Molecular weight: the polymer molecular weight determines the fi bre 
strength and modulus after gel spinning. The molecular weight directly 
affects the length of the molecular chain. Usually, longer molecular 
chains will have higher fi bre strength and modulus. 

Gel spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bres   107
  3.     Solvent type: selection of solvent is highly important to gel spinning. The 
dissolution rate of polymers directly affects the spinning property and 
stability of the gel fi bre. 
 4.  Solution concentration: solution concentration directly affects the max-
imum stretching magnifi cation of the gel fi bre; however, the impact is 
usually subject to the molecule type. Taking PAN as an example, PAN 
gel spinning usually occurs at low concentration. The lower concentra-
tion can lead to higher maximum stretching magnifi cation of the gel 
fi bre and higher fi bre modulus. 
  5.     Ladder speed: in general, higher ladder speed can result in better fi bre 
extensibility. However, excessively high ladder speed often leads to 
excessive shearing rate between the fl uid and the wall of the fl ow chan-
nel. As a result, the molecular chain alleviating speed cannot keep up 
with the spinning speed to increase surface stress and internal defects of 
fi bre. In addition, in the high stretching magnifi cation of polymers, exces-
sively high ladder speed can cause slippage between fi brillar and micro-
fi brillar to lead to plastic deformation of the fi brillar inside the fi bre. As 
a result, under the external force, the fi brillar will be torn along the axial 
direction of the microfi brillar to reduce the fi bre strength. Hence, appro-
priate ladder speed is an important factor that affects the quality of gel 
spinning products. 
  6.     Spinning temperature: in theory, a higher spinning temperature will 
make the dissolution of the spinning solution more even. However, 
Quality
Molecule
Solvent
Spinning
Extraction
Stretching
Molecule type
Molecular weight
Solvent type
Solvent concentration
Laddering speed
Spinning temperature
Stretching 
temperature
Stretching
magnification 
 5.1  Factors affecting gel spinning. 

108   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
relatively high temperature can easily lead to the thermal cracking of 
the fi bre and reduce the viscosity of the spinning solution. Hence, the 
entanglements of the molecular chains will be reduced, and the arrange-
ments will be loosened to increase the fi bre defects. In general, the gel 
spinning temperature is around the polymer single crystal dissolution 
temperature, resulting in better extension effects. Appropriate spinning 
temperature is also an important factor that affects the quality of gel 
spinning products. 
 7.  Extraction: extraction of gel fi bre plays an important role in gel spinning. 
Appropriate extractant can reduce the impact of the solvent residuals on 
the stretching of the gel. 
  8.     Stretching temperature: the gel spinning stretching temperature directly 
affects the maximum gel stretching magnifi cation, and indirectly affects 
the modulus of the gel fi bre. The rising temperature of gel spinning 
stretching can promote the mobility in between single molecular chains 
to improve the extensibility of the gel fi bre until reaching the melting 
point of the polymer. Hence, the setting of the stretching temperature is 
usually slightly below the melting point. 
 9.  Stretching magnifi cation: from the perspective of fi bre internal crys-
tallinity, orientation and crystal morphology, under low-magnifi cation 
extension of polymer gel, the crystals will gradually change into microfi -
brillar with a sharp increase in orientation and gradually rising strength 
and crystallinity. When the stretching magnifi cation gradually increases, 
the growth of orientation tends to slow down while the strength and 
growth rate of the crystals also reduces. When it reaches half of the max-
imum stretching magnifi cation, spot defects occur on the surface of the 
gel fi bre. The fi bre’s internal orientation, strength and crystallisation 
growth become even slower. When the stretching magnifi cation grad-
ually increases, the molecular chains become gradually intense and the 
fi bre internal crystallisation starts to change to make the arrangement 
of microfi brillar denser. The rising single monoclinic crystal percentage 
can also increase the number of molecular chains in the unit area, and 
the fi bre strength and modulus will be enhanced to the limit. 10 When 
the stretching magnifi cation reaches the maximum, the crystallisation 
is damaged and will break the fi bre. It can be confi rmed by molecular 
internal morphology that the axial extension of gel fi bre can get to the 
state of high strength and high modulus in case of high stretching magni-
fi cation. Hence, stretching magnifi cation is the most important factor in 
the gel spinning fi bre processing process. 
 Many factors affect the gel spinning process. The gel fi bre can obtain the 
high strength and high modulus only by properly adjusting these factors. 

Gel spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bres   109
 5.7 
 Gel spun textile products 
 Gel spinning fi bre is applied in high strength and high tensile fabrics, includ-
ing bullet-proof vests, belts, gloves and sportswear. The most popular gel 
spinning fi bre, UHMWPE, can be used to manufacture safety protective 
equipment, high-tension ropes, fi shing nets and sports leisure goods as out-
lined below. 
 5.7.1  Safety protective equipment 
 UHMWPE composite fi bre has excellent impact resistance performance. 
It ranks top among composite materials in impact shock absorption, being 
three times that of carbon fi bre and 2.5 times that of aramid. 11,12  Hence, it 
is suitable for making helmets, body armour, and bullet-proof armour. The 
composite material of UHMWPE and resin has a light and thin structure 
with high impact durability and high tensile strength as well as mechanical 
properties far beyond traditional glass fi bre-enhanced composite materials. 
 The composite material of UHMWPE and resin has been compared with 
the fi bre Kevlar, of the highest strength. In testing of bullet-proof clothing, 
the composite material of UHMWPE and resin in different fi bre stacking 
and woven patterns can have the same bullet-proof effects as the composite 
material of Kevlar fi bre. Since UHMWPE fi bre has a non-polar crystalline 
arrangement, it has better durability than Kevlar fi bre. Regarding long-term 
use, the bullet-proof functionality of the composite material of UHMWPE 
fi bre is far better than that of the composite material of Kevlar fi bre. It is 
believed that UHMWPE fi bre composite material has more development 
potential than Kevlar fi bre composite material for future applications of ten-
sile strength and bullet-proof function. In the body armour market, Kevlar 
accounts for 48%, while Spectra, which is made from UHMWPE fi bre, 
accounts for 32%. It is believed that the tensile strength and bullet-proof 
applications of UHMWPE fi bre composites have the prospect of exceeding 
Kevlar fi bre composites in the future. 
 5.7.2  High tensile ropes 
 UHMWPE fi bre is characterised by high strength, high modulus, wear 
resistance, light fastness and corrosion-resistance. It is suitable for making 
high-strength ropes, such as cables, ship class ropes and machinery ropes. 
Compared with the ropes made by aramid, the UHMWPE fi bre rope is half 
the weight and stronger by 10%, with a radius of only 90% of the aramid 
rope. In addition, the UHMWPE fi bre density is maintained under water, 
and its breaking strength in water is great, making it suitable for ropes in 

110   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
regular contact with water, such as ropes used on oil tankers, in marine engi-
neering and for anchors. 
 5.7.3   Fishing nets 
 At present, fi shing nets are mostly made of PE. Under the same strength, 
fi shing nets made of UHMWPE are only half the weight of PE fi shing nets, 
and hence can effectively reduce the energy consumption of the fi shing boat 
and improve the speed of the trawl. Therefore, it is suitable for deep-sea 
fi shing. 
 5.7.4   Sports and leisure goods 
 UHMWPE fi bre has good strength and specifi c rigidity with toughness and 
abrasion resistance. It can be used to make rackets, surfboards and snow-
boards. For its fl exibility and light weight, it can be compared with carbon 
fi bre. 
 5.7.5   Composite materials 
 UHMWPE can be coupled with PBA-type to improve the resin or coupled 
with PBA-type acrylic to improve unsaturated polyester composite material 
in order to enhance the mechanical strength of the original material. Among 
the synthetic material of PBA-type improved resin and UHMWPE fi bres, 
the PBA-type of polyester has the best mechanical strength improvement 
effects in terms of tension strength, durability strength, bending strength and 
shearing strength. The improvement is up to 40%, as compared with orig-
inal resin material. 13  The synthetic material of PBA-type acrylic improved 
unsaturated polyesters and UHMWPE fi bre can improve impact durability, 
and reduce the volume shrinkage due to the addition of the PBA-type in 
the unsaturated polyester. Moreover, with the rising content of PBA-type 
acrylic, it can improve the functionality and application value of the syn-
thetic material of the unsaturated polyester resin and UHMWPE fi bre. 
 The fi bre surface of UHMWPE can be processed by treatment of plasma 
and chemical etching to achieve surface roughness in order to form better 
interface adhesion of the synthetic material after surface improvement for 
high tensile strength. 
 5.8 
 Conclusion and future trends 
 There have been many studies and patents concerning gel spinning. Won-
Ill Cha  et al. 14  used methanol as a solvent and coagulant, and a mixture of 

Gel spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bres   111
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and water (80/20) to prepare PVA fi bre. They 
found that the PVA fi bre prepared under this gel spinning condition could 
be elongated to 45 times draw ratio, the highest tensile strength attained 2.8 
GPa, and the highest Young’s modulus attained 64 GPa. Masayosi Suzuki 
 et al. 15  prepared atactic and syndiotactic-rich poly(vinyl alcohol) compound 
fi bres by gel spinning. The fi bre amorphous parts as a consequence of the 
diffi culty of drawing were considered to form the voids and cracks, which 
had a banded structure. Xiefei Zhanga  et al. 16  made single wall carbon nano-
tubes (SWNT), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and 
water, in a homogeneous dispersion which was prepared by spinning. As a 
result, the compound fi bre achieved less crystallinity. Shuiping Liu  et al . 17 
developed a new gel spinning method that was employed to prepare poly-
acrylonitrile (PAN) fi bres. This method achieved a more compact structure, 
fewer voids and better mechanical properties after a three-stage drawing. 
 In terms of patents, Schellekens Ronald Michael Ale  et al . developed a 
process for the preparation of polyvinyl alcohol articles of high strength 
and modulus (EP0212757, 1987); Roger Y. Leung prepared silicon carbox-
ide fi bres from gel spinning cyclosiloxane polymer precursors (US5629249, 
1988); Eric H. M. Hogenboom  et al.  developed a process for manufactur-
ing stretched rope by gel spinning (US5176862, 1991); Sang Heon Kim  et al. 
used gel spinning moulding techniques to prepare porous polymer scaffold 
for tissue engineering (US20070009570, 2006); Joseph Arnold Paul Maria 
J.A.P.M Simmelink  et al.  developed a new process for spinning UHMWPE 
(US20100268331, 2008); Joseph Arnold Paul Maria Simmelink developed a 
new polyethylene fi bre by gel spinning (US20110207907, 2009); and Kenneth 
C. Harding  et al.  used a gel spinning process to manufacture high-modulus 
ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene tape (US8206810, 2011). 
 There are many organic high polymers. The successful development of 
gel spinning has been realised in UHMWPE, PVA, PAN and cellulose ester. 
The products are mainly made of UHMWPE fi bre. UHMWPE fi bre has low 
density, good mechanical performance, good conductivity, impact durability, 
light fastness and anti-chemical erosion. However, the low melting point 
and durability of creeping change are the most apparent defects in appli-
cation. Thus, using the gel spinning method to successfully produce high-
mechanical-property nylon or PET fi bre will be a great step forward in the 
spinning fi eld. In short, gel spinning is a unique spinning method with great 
advantages for producing high-strength and high-modulus fi bres. 
 Overall, the key points concerning the future development of gel spinning 
are as follows: (1) extension of the molecular chain; (2) reduction of end 
groups as far as possible; and (3) disentanglement of parts of the molecular 
chain to separate the entangled molecules to help extension and improve 
the stretching magnifi cation, as well as to achieve molecular arrangements 
that can be easily stretched. The equipment for gel spinning is not complex 

112   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
and the technology is relatively simple, and thus it has very wide applica-
tion prospects. In the near future, gel spinning will be able to produce many 
more special fi bres with excellent properties. 
 5.9 
 References 
 1. 
 Shen S.Y. (1979),  Advanced Polymer Materials 
  2.   
 Yasuda H., Ban K. and Ohta Y. (1994),  Advanced Fibre Spinning Technology , 
vol. 25, Woodhead Publishing Limited, 172–186. 
 3. 
 Murase Y. and Nagai A. (1994),  Advanced Fibre Spinning Technology , vol. 40, 
Woodhead Publishing Limited, 25–64. 
 4. 
 Nakagawa J. (1994),  Advanced Fibre Spinning Technology , vol. 12, Woodhead 
Publishing Limited, 160–171. 
 5. 
 Kunugi T. (1998), J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 67, 1993. 
 6. 
 Bastiaansen C.W.M. (1992),  Polymer ,  33 (8), 1649–1652. 
 7. 
 Kunugi T., Kawasumi T. and Ito T. (1990),  J. Appl. Polym. Sci. ,  40 , 2101. 
 8. 
 Bastiaansen C.W.M. (1990),  J. Appl. Polym. Sci. ,  28 , 1475. 
 9. 
 Waddon A.J. and Keller A. (1990),  J. Appl. Polym. Sci., Polym. Phys Edn. ,  28 , 
1063. 
 10.  Smith Jr K.J. (1990),  Polymer. Eng. Sci .,  30 , 437. 
  11.   
 Qian R., Wu L., Shen D., Napper D.H. and Mann R.A. (1993),  Macromolecules , 
 26 , 2950–2953. 
 12.  Penning J.P. (1993),  Polym. Bull .,  31 (2), 242–248. 
 13.  Smith P., Lemstra P.J. and Booij H.C. (1981),  J. Appl. Polym. Sci. ,  19 , 877. 
 14.  Cha W., Hyon S.H. and Ikada Y. (1994),  Polym. Phys. ,  8 , 297. 
  15.    Suzuki M., Tanigami T., Matsuzawa S. and Yamaura K. (1970),  J. Appl. Polym. 
Sci. ,  8 , 1970–1977. 
  16.    Zhang X., Liu T., Sreekumar T.V., Kumar S., Hu X. and Smith K. (2004),  Polym. 
Sci ,  8 , 8801. 
 17.  Liu S., Tan L., Pan D. and Chen Y. (2011),  Polym. Sci ,  5 , 453. 
 

© 2014 Woodhead Publishing Limited
113
 6 
 Bi-component and bi-constituent 
spinning of synthetic polymer fibres  
 S.  MUKHOPADHYAY ,  Indian Institute of Technology 
Delhi, India 
 DOI : 10.1533/9780857099174.2.113 
 Abstract : Bi-component melt-spinning has been widely applied to 
produce functional and novel fi bres such as hollow fi bres, electrically 
conductive fi bres, etc. This chapter details the extrusion of bi-component 
fi bres and discusses issues affecting the structure-property of the fi bres 
during the spinning process, interfacial interaction parameters and 
compatibility of the polymers to be chosen for sheath-core spinning. 
It also details the application areas of bi-component fi bres and future 
directions of research in this fi eld. 
 Key words : fi lament, extrusion, bi-component spinning, bi-component, bi-
constituent, fi bres, synthetic. 
 6.1 
 Introduction 
 Bi-component fi bres are a class of polyblend fi bres, manufactured by special 
spinning techniques. The objective of spinning such fi bres is to overcome 
certain limitations encountered during conventional single component 
spinning. The principal purpose of blending polymers for such specialised 
spinning is to achieve improved processing and properties for particular 
end uses. The American Society of Testing Materials (ASTM) defi nes a bi-
component fi bre as ‘a fi bre composed of two physically and/or chemically 
distinct polymeric components in continuous, longitudinal contact within 
the fi bre’. In keeping with US regulations (1997), the offi cial term for a fi bre 
manufactured from two or more components is  bi-constituent, although 
the more common terms  bi-component ,  cofi late  or  cospun  are used in both 
Europe and the USA, while the term  conjugate fi bres is used in Asia. 
 Dupont introduced the fi rst commercial bi-component application in the 
mid 1960s. This was a side-by-side hosiery yarn called ‘cantrese’ and was 

114   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
made from two nylon polymers which, on retraction, formed a highly coiled 
elastic fi bre. In the 1970s, various bi-component fi bres began to be pro-
duced in Asia, notably in Japan. Highly complex and apparently expensive 
spin packs were used in the manufacturing process. These techniques were 
found to be technically unsatisfactory and excessively expensive. Later, in 
1989, a novel approach was developed using thin fl at plates with holes and 
grooves to route the polymers. This process was very fl exible and quite cost-
effective. 
 Bi-component fi bres can be made from two variants of the same generic 
fi bre (two types of polyester (PES), polyethylene terephthalate (PET), 
copolyester (coPES), polyacrylonitrile (PAN), polyamide (PA), polyethyl-
ene (PE) and polypropylene (PP)). The fi bres can also be made from two 
different polymer compositions, e.g. PET/PA, PA/Spandex, etc. Different 
types of polymers, such as polyester, polyamides, polystyrene, polyurethane, 
polyolefi nes, polylactic acid, co-polyamides and soluble co-polyesters, have 
been used to spin bi-component fi bres. 
 6.2 
 Classification of bi-component fibres 
 Bi-component fi bres can be classifi ed into three types:
 1)  Side-by-side (S/S ): where each polymer is divided along the length into 
two or more distinct regions of the cross-section. 
 2)  Core sheath type (C/S):  In this type of fi bre one of the components 
is completely surrounded by another component. Core sheath type 
fi bres can be self-bonding (e.g. two components with varying melting 
points with the lower melting point polymer on the sheath), surface tai-
lored fi bres (e.g. sheath containing expensive additives) or fi lled fi bres 
(e.g. a core of recycled material covered by a sheath with the desired 
properties). 
 3)  Matrix fi bril (M/F)  polyblend type: where many fi ne fi brils of one poly-
mer are dispersed randomly in size and location but with axial alignment 
in a matrix of another component. 
  Fibres produced by the third type are referred by Richeson and Spruiell   
• 
1 
as bi-constituent, while the term ‘bi-component’ is applied only to fi bres 
of the fi rst and second categories. There are many variants of bi-compo-
nent fi bres with varying phases (in terms of quantity and location) and 
tailored interfaces. Bi-component fi bre spinning comes under the con-
cept of blend spinning and has been well detailed by Salem. 2 Depending 
on the choice of constituents, they can be either compatible or non-
compatible. The fi rst category results in a homogenous single phase 
solution, and the spinning resembles the spinning of single component 

Bi-component and bi-constituent spinning   115
homopolymers. Incompatibility between the polymers results in phase 
separation. The control of morphology becomes more challenging, and 
further research fi ndings will be subsequently discussed to demonstrate 
the complexity. An excellent review of cross-sections of the different bi-
component fi bres has been carried out by Hills Inc. 3  Structure-wise, the 
bi-component fi bres have undergone signifi cant development and, as 
an extension to the basic structures, can have interesting cross-sections 
(Fig. 6.1) such as: 
 Citrus, wedge, or segmented-pie; 
• 
 Hollow or non-hollow; 
• 
 Regularly round cross-section; and/or 
• 
  Irregularly non-round cross-section, including fl at ribbon, multilobal, tri-
• 
angle, paralleled strip, etc. 
 Every type of fi bre has specialist end uses. Side-by-side fi bres and eccen-
tric core/sheath fi bres possess the often desired property of self-crimping. 
Drawing or heating the sides of such fi bres causes the fi bre to wrap itself 
into a helical confi guration, the intensity of which will be a function of 
the thermal behaviour of the materials used and their arrangement. The 
Side-by-side 
Eccentric sheath/core
Citrus
Island-in-the-sea     
Segmented pie
Segmented circle 
Segmented ribbon
Trilobal sheath/core    
Trilobal side-by-side
Part A Part B
Sheath
Core
 6.1  Cross-sectional conformations of different types of bi-component 
ﬁ bres  

116   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
core/sheath fi bres are able to retain individual properties of each compo-
nent. C/S fi bres with polypropylene sheath around a nylon core may poten-
tially produce a fi bre with the wear resistance of nylon and display the stain 
resistance of polypropylene. In the melt-blown industry, sheath-core fi bres 
are used as a thermobonding fi bre. A strong bond must be made between 
the two materials to prevent fi bre splitting. For an interesting analysis of 
splitting of various fi bres, including segmented ribbon, the reader can refer 
to an article by John Hagewood. 4 A fi bre made of chemically different spe-
cies will require a specialist scheme to enhance the strength of the interface. 
The islands-in-the-sea fi bres are one of the most common methods used for 
high effi ciency fi ltration. The splitting of the fi bres is carried out by thermal, 
mechanical or chemical means. Trilobal fi bres are used for speciality fi ltra-
tion purposes. 
 6.3 
 Spinning technologies 
 The fi rst bi-component fi bres were spun by Dupont in 1960; a side-by-side 
fi bre made from two types of polyamide fi bres with different retraction. 5 
However, the initial manufacturing process involved complex and expen-
sive spinning and was technically and economically unsatisfactory. Extensive 
research by such companies as Hills Inc. and Enca Inc. has resulted in a 
modifi ed design of the spinning system using thin fl at plates with grooves 
and holes to conduct the polymer, and thus the process became fl exible and 
effective. The basic system consists of two feeding systems, two polymers to 
the spin packs and a distribution system to meter both polymers to the die. 
The feed systems may vary and are generally a combination of:
 1.  Two continuous polymerisation processes. 
 2.  Two extruders. 
 3.  A combination of (1) and (2). 
 An excellent review of developments can be found in the study carried out 
by Fitzgerald  et al . 6  The earliest ‘synthetic’ bi-component fi bres were spun 
from viscose by Sisson and Morehead. 7  The process involved extruding two 
different component solutions (or dopes) through the same spinneret hole 
(Fig. 6.2). The two components A and B are fed to a single spinneret hole 
split by a knife edge or septum which channels the two components into a 
side-by-side or bilateral arrangement. This same principle can be applied 
to multi-ring/multi-knife edge arrangements and to non-circular arrays of 
holes and knife edges. 
 Figure 6.3 illustrates a spinneret design for preparing sheath-core con-
jugate fi bre. One of the component streams is fed through a narrow tube 
while the second component stream supplying the sheath is fed around this 

Bi-component and bi-constituent spinning   117
narrow tube, and the combined stream is emitted from a single hole. The 
combined material which emerges is coagulated in a sheath-core arrange-
ment. The eccentricity of the sheath-core necessary for crimp development 
is ensured in two ways. Firstly, normal variability in coagulation conditions is 
suffi cient to ensure crimping. Secondly, a misalignment of the centre of the 
spinneret hole and the tube results in eccentricity. For sheath-core spinning 
of bi-component fi bre, separate provision has to be made for merging the 
component streams at each spinneret hole. 
 Figure 6.4 illustrates the concept of a ‘pipe-in-pipe’ mixing element. One 
of the component streams envelops the other at the end of the tube of the 
+
Hopper A
Extruder A
Extruder B
Polymer A
Polymer B
Polymer B
Filament
Winder
Gear - pump A
Gear - pump B
Hopper B
Spinning head
 6.2  Schematic of bi-component spinning. (After Reference 4.) 
Spinneret
Fibre
Sheath
Core
B
A
 6.3  Core conjugate spinning. (After Reference 4.) 

118   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
inner stream. The resultant stream contains in cross-section the individual 
streams in concentric circles. Streams can be further added by consecu-
tive mixing elements to provide merged dope streams of concentric layers 
of the two components. The relative amount of material in each stream 
is determined by the volumetric rate at which each successive stream is 
pumped.      
B
A
A
B
A
 6.4  Pipe-in-pipe mixing element. (After Reference 4.) 
27
Melter
Pump
Pump
Melter
43
53
47
45
49
61
57
71
59
58
60
72
Filaments
62
58
50
54
46
44
48
42
B
A
57
 6.5  Schematic diagram of bi-component spinning. (After US Pat. 
3381074.) 

Bi-component and bi-constituent spinning   119
 It is interesting to note the developments in the spinning designs of 
 bi-component spinning. One of the fi rst patents in bi-component spinning 
went to Okamoto from the US Pat. No. 3531368. 8  As seen in Fig. 6.5, the melt-
ers 41 and 42 are for two different polymers through metering pumps 61 and 
68. Transfer pipes 57 and 59 transfer dual streams from the left hand pump to 
the spinneret assembly, from where the bi-component fi bres are extruded.  
 In sheath-core type bi-component spinning, Okamoto incorporated an 
improvement in US Pat. No. 3692423 9  by changing the converging angle of 
the funnel-shaped space from  θ to 75 ° (Fig. 6.6). 
 Conduit 24 supplies the sea constituent polymeric liquid, whereas the 
island component is supplied through conduit 25. Chamber 27 distributes 
the island constituent polymeric liquid into the spinneret 23. The chamber 
26 is fl uid tight and separated from chamber 27 by annular packing 28. The 
converging angle of 75 °  is effective for gradually decreasing the diameter 
and uniformly uniting the composite streams in a stabilised condition. There 
have been several further improvements in spinneret design. One signifi cant 
development was by Moriki and Ogasawara, 10  who came up with a notewor-
thy improvement in the spinneret design. The main problem encountered 
with earlier spinnerets concerned the control of viscosity for the islands 
and sea components. It was found in many cases that the island compo-
nent fused with the sea component. The new design allowed the constituent 
streams, substantially engrafted in a sea constituent, to fl ow in such a man-
ner that they were uniformly distributed and separated from each other in 
a cross-sectional view.  
24
22 25
27
25
24
28
33
20
34
38
37
36
23
39
21
40
26
29
35
30
31
32
 6.6  The spinneret assembly for islands-in-sea spinning. (After US Pat. 
No. 3692423.) 

120   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 6.4 
 Factors affecting bi-component 
and bi-constituent spinning 
 Choice of polymers is a highly crucial factor in bi-component spinning. If 
the viscosities of the polymers are close, a continuous phase would exist. The 
morphology would strongly depend on the relative amounts of each phase 
and the relative viscosity of the two polymers. It has been observed that 
when polymers have varying viscosity, the lower viscosity polymer tends to 
encapsulate the one with a higher viscosity. This is extremely important for 
sheath-core spinning where, in the fi nal fi bre, the sheath is of lower viscosity 
polymer and the core has a higher viscosity. Final diameter of fi brils, in case 
of matrix fi bril type bi-constituent fi bres, can be achieved through the con-
trol of particle size of the discontinuous phase, the amount of spin draw, and 
post spinning parameters. Some of the most important parameters, along 
with the relevant research, are outlined below. 
 6.4.1   Viscosity and structure development 
 Large viscosity differences between the two materials can also affect the 
spinnability of the fi bre as it exits the spinneret. Differences in viscosity and 
position in the capillary lead to differing velocities for the two materials. 
As the two polymers traverse the capillary, they will spontaneously rear-
range themselves until the confi guration that produces the least amount 
of resistance to fl ow is obtained. Material of lower viscosity will move to 
regions of greater shear, near the walls, leading to the encapsulation effect. 
The properties of such fi bres also depend on the structure of individual 
components. Kikutani  et al . 11  have shown that the orientation and crystal-
linity of each component in a bi-component system can be different from 
the single components. The polyester core of the PP/PET sheath/core fi bres 
has better crystallinity than the single components. With polypropylene, a 
lower density remains in the sheath and has a much lower orientation and 
a smectic structure, even at high take-up speeds. Simulation carried out by 
the researchers suggested that solidifi cation stress in the polyester compo-
nent increased, while the PP component decreased. This difference has been 
suggested as a result of the difference in activation energy of elongational 
viscosity of the two polymers. 
 In another work by Shi  et al. 12  sheath-core type poly(butylene terephthal-
ate)/poly(butylene adipate-co-terephthalate) (PBT/PBAT) bi-component 
fi bres were produced by extruding the melts of PBT (intrinsic viscosity of 
0.88 dL/g) as the sheath and PBAT (melt volume fl ow rate of 3–6 mL/10 
min) as the core, using two different extrusion systems. The co-axially com-
bined polymer melts were extruded through an annular-type spinneret at a 

Bi-component and bi-constituent spinning   121
temperature of 260 ° C, and the mass fl ow rate was controlled at 3 g/min for 
each component. When comparing the development of crystal structure of 
the individual components in PBT/PBAT bi-component spinning with that 
of the corresponding single component spinning, WAXD patterns of the 
as-spun fi bres prepared at 3 km/min showed sharper diffraction spots of 
PBT in PBT/ PBAT fi bres than the diffraction arches of PBT in single com-
ponent fi bres. Compared with respective single component fi bres, in PBT/
PBAT fi bres, the molecular orientation and crystalline structure develop-
ment of the PBT component were greatly enhanced, whereas the molecular 
orientation of the PBAT component was greatly suppressed. 
 It is interesting to note that the authors had reported an improved spin-
nability of PBT/PBAT fi bres compared with the single component spinnings 
of PBT and PBAT. The enhanced structure of the PBT component led to 
an improvement in both thermal property and tensile strength, suggesting 
that it is an effective way to promote the structure development of PBT 
through bi-component spinning with PBAT. The PBAT component was 
found to have nearly non-oriented structure in both crystalline and amor-
phous phases, which is a desirable feature for denier-decreasing treatment 
in fabric applications. 
 The authors clarifi ed mutual interaction using numerical simulation between 
the two polymer melts during bi-component spinning. If two polymers (A and 
B) have a difference in activation energy of elongational viscosity or solidifi -
cation temperature or initial elongational viscosity, then one of the polymers 
undergoes concentrated thinning behaviour near the spinneret compared 
to the other component in their respective single component spinnings. The 
authors further clarifi ed that in bi-component spinning, the thinning curve 
of the spinning line should be in-between the thinning curves of their single 
component spinnings. Compared with single component spinning, the higher 
shearing component will experience higher stress near the solidifi cation point 
in the spinline due to a larger strain rate, and thereby enhanced structure 
development. In the case of PBT/PBAT fi bres, the PBT component under-
went solidifi cation at the point where PBAT was still in the melt state, and 
thereby PBAT underwent orientation relaxation and remained close to the 
random state. PBAT remained tacky along the spinline and made the fi lament 
diffi cult to be taken up when it was arranged in sheath part. Non-oriented 
crystal structure of PBAT was speculated to be formed off spinline as its glass 
transition temperature (~  − 30 ° C) is much lower than room temperature.  
 6.4.2  Interfacial interaction 
 Research by Ahmed 13  focused on a combination of poly(butylene 
succinate/L-lactate) (PBSL) and poly(butylene terephthalate) (PBT) as 

122   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
the biodegradable and non-degradable polymers. For conjugate fi bres with 
PET as the core, the interaction between the core and sheath was very 
strong because of the interfacial reaction of the polymers during melt-
spinning. This strong interfacial interaction has a profound effect on the 
physical and mechanical properties of the conjugate fi bres. During drawing 
and annealing of the conjugate fi bres, the PET core fi lament gains a higher 
crystallinity compared with the single PET fi bre, while the sheath polymers 
retain an amorphous state. The authors demonstrated that both alkali and 
enzymatic hydrolyses are effective for decreasing the denier of the poly-
ester conjugate fi bre. It was interesting that conjugate fi bres had much 
higher strength and elastic limits than the single PET fi bres, indicating that 
stress was homogeneously applied to the core fi lament in both conjugate 
fi bres. Covering the PET core fi lament with the PBSL or PLLA sheath 
reinforces the core fi lament, probably because the stress concentration can 
be reduced by the elasticity of the sheaths. On reaching the yielding point, 
the stress–strain curve of the PET–PBSL fi bre reveals a uniformity of stress 
up to 20% in strain, and from this point, the stress starts to increase linearly. 
This was also due to the highly elastic nature of the PBSL sheath. Stress of 
the PET/PLLA fi bre increases steadily beyond the yielding point because 
of the stiffness of PLLA. The cross-sectional area of both fi bres showed 
no signifi cant interface dividing the core and sheath, indicating excellent 
adhesion between the two.  
 6.4.3   Compatibility of polymers for sheath-core spinning 
 In research conducted on the sheath-core type bi-component spinning 14 
of various combinations of polymers such as poly(ethylene terephthalate) 
(PET)/polypropylene, PET/polyethylene, PET/polystyrene, high and low 
molecular weight PETs, etc., it was found that the thermal and stress histo-
ries experienced by the two polymers coextruded to form a single fi lament 
are signifi cantly different in comparison with the corresponding single com-
ponent spinning. The relative differences in the inherent polymer character-
istics, such as solidifi cation temperature, activation energy of elongational 
viscosity, and the initial viscosity, are found to be some of the major factors 
infl uencing the mutual interaction between the component polymers. When 
two polymers with the above-mentioned differences in their properties are 
coextruded to form a single fi lament, the elongational stress development, 
and therefore the orientation and orientation-induced crystallisation devel-
opment in the component that has higher solidifi cation temperature, higher 
activation energy, and higher initial viscosity, was found to be enhanced. 
Mechanisms for these mutual interactions were clarifi ed by investigat-
ing the spinline dynamics of the bi-component spinning through on-line 

Bi-component and bi-constituent spinning   123
measurements and process simulations. These studies led to the conclusion 
that, by selecting a suitable combination of polymers with different inherent 
properties mentioned above, it was possible to design the spinline dynamics 
and therefore structure development of the individual component in high-
speed bi-component spinning. 
 In a study by Bosak  et al. 15 the core polymer was polypropylene and the 
sheath material consisted of immiscible blends of two polymers. Polystyrene 
(Styron 484, designated as PS) and two polyamide-6 polymers (BS-400 and 
BS-700, designated as PA6) were used as the dispersed particles in the blend 
that was used as the sheath. Polyethylene (Affi nity SM 1300 PE) was used 
as the continuous phase in the sheath for all results reported here. We also 
conducted preliminary studies using PP as the matrix phase in the sheath. 
However, the PP matrix containing PS inclusions could not be spun into 
fi bres at any of the drawing speeds, and could be spun at the lowest speed 
for the PA6 inclusions. Consequently, the researchers did not investigate PP 
further as the matrix material for blends used as the sheath. Fibres made of 
pure polypropylene were used as control specimens. 
 When used as the sheath component in a bi-component fi bre, immiscible 
polymer blends produce an irregular surface. The extent of surface irregular-
ities was affected by the microstructure of the dispersed phase,  i.e., fi brillar 
PA6 as opposed to ellipsoidal PS. The microstructure also affected the ten-
sile properties of the bi-component fi bres. The static coeffi cient of friction 
was not affected by the nature of the dispersed phase, but was affected by the 
sheath matrix polymer (PE vs PP). As fi bre surface irregularities increased, 
mechanical properties decreased. Bi-component fi bres with PS had greatly 
increased surface irregularities compared to the control fi bres, but also dis-
played lower strength and strain-to-failure. In contrast, bi-component fi bres 
containing PA6 dispersed phase had slightly decreased strength but signifi -
cantly higher strain-to-failure, but these fi bres provide only a minor increase 
in surface roughness. The study illustrated the range and combination of 
surface properties that can be generated by using incompatible blends as 
the sheath material in bi-component fi bres. 
 6.4.4  Post spinning conditions 
 In a work by Tae  et al. 16  the effect of process conditions on crimp contrac-
tion in the side-by-side bi-component spinning and drawing of PET and 
modifi ed PET was studied. Draw ratio, heat-set temperature and draw-
ing temperature were the main effective process variables. The difference 
in shrinkage between two polymers was found to be the main cause of 
crimp contraction. Difference in elongation affected crimp contraction in 
the effect of draw ratio. Although the authors reported no dimensional 

124   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
change with heat-set temperature and drawing temperature, they had an 
infl uence on the crimp contractions. Maximum crimp contraction was 42% 
at a draw ratio of 3.1, heat-set temperature of 125 ° C, and drawing tem-
perature of 80 ° C. 
 In another work by Tae  et al . 17  the effects of process conditions on crimp 
contraction in the side-by-side bi-component spinning and drawing of two 
PTTs of different viscosities were studied. PTTs with IVs of 1.02 and 0.92 
were selected to make a latent crimp yarn. The draw ratio, heat-set tem-
perature, and portion of PTT-H were the main effective process variables. 
An analysis of the effect of spinning and drawing conditions on the crimp 
contraction showed that draw ratio was the most critical variable in con-
trolling it. Increasing the draw ratio caused a difference in the shrinkage 
between the two parts of PTT and caused self-crimping of the fi bres. The 
obtainable maximum crimp contraction was about 50% at a draw ratio of 
1.4 and a heat-set temperature of 200 ° C. Although there was no dimen-
sional change with the heat-set temperature and portion of PTT-H, they 
had an infl uence on the crimp contraction. As the heat-set temperature and 
portion of PTT-H increased, the crimp contraction of the latent crimp yarn 
also increased.   
 6.5 
 Applications of bi-component fibres 
 The advantage of bi-component fi bres lies in their enhanced functionality. 
The fundamental sheath/core cross-section is useful in many applications 
demanding engineering polymers. In such structures, the fi bre’s core can 
be prepared with a suitable low cost polymer to deliver all of the bene-
fi t of the more expensive polymer at a material cost well below that of a 
fi bre made from an expensive surface polymer alone. Side-by-side bi-com-
ponent fi bres have self-crimping properties 18  and rely on the difference in 
shrinkage between the two polymers. During the fabric formation process, 
if the fi bres are not physically constrained, shrinkage can be induced by the 
application of heat. Since the two polymers shrink at different rates, the 
material behaves like a bimetallic strip and resultant shrinkage occurs. 19 
Freudenberg’s Evolon fabric uses segmented-pie or side-by-side bi-compo-
nent fi bres, which are formed and then fed directly to a hydroentangling 
unit where bonding and splitting occur simultaneously. The smallest diam-
eter fi bres, achieved through the sea-island process of bi-component spin-
ning, are smaller in diameter when compared to the split spinning process. 
Different cross-sections, and various bi-component geometries including 
eccentric sheath core, were some of them, and even using polymers of vary-
ing molecular weight 20  and different forms of the same polymer. In some 
of the bi-component fi bres, elastomeric material is used to achieve the self-

Bi-component and bi-constituent spinning   125
crimping properties. Fibres manufactured from two different melting points 
are used for point-bonded non-wovens. Based on structure, the applications 
have been detailed by Jeffrey Dugan. 21 
 The applications of bi-component fi bres are many, including:
 1.  Increased dyeability 
 2.  Decreased fl ammability 
 3.  Improved hand and lustre 
 4.  Improved water absorption 
 5.  Increased light and heat stability 
 6.  Manufacture of microfi bres 
 7.  Fibres for ion exchange and separation applications 
 8.  Improved strength and elastic recovery. 
 With new research, new application areas have emerged. In a study by Shim 
 et al ., 22  a number of photoluminescent sheath/core bi-component fi bres 
were produced by an interesting process. Fine phosphor particles compris-
ing an alkaline earth metal aluminate activated by europium with a free-
fl ow agent were mixed and compounded to produce a polymer pellet with 
concentrated phosphor. The mixture of the phosphorescent polymer pellet 
and the same polymer without phosphorescent pigment was extruded as 
the core component. The concentration of photoluminescent pigment in the 
core was achieved by varying the ratio of the prepared phosphorescent and 
non-phosphorescent polymer pellet. Resultant bi-component fi bres had a 
photoluminescent core with varied pigment concentration and a non-pho-
toluminescent sheath as no phosphorescent polymer pellet was used in the 
sheath component. It was observed that the presence of photoluminescent 
pigment changes the tone of the core component, making it appear darker 
than the sheath. Distinction between the core and the sheath was not obvi-
ous with fi bres having a low concentration of photoluminescent pigment in 
the core component. At 5% core pigment concentration, boundaries of the 
core/sheath were hardly seen, since the sheath and the core polymers were 
identical. The only difference, it was noted, was the presence of black dots 
representing concentrated photoluminescent pigments in the cross-section 
of the core. At 10% core pigment concentration, the core was observed to 
be slightly darker than the sheath. In nylon and PET fi bres with 30% core 
pigment concentration, a distinct boundary between the sheath and the core 
layers was revealed, and the core component looks much darker since it 
contains a high concentration of photoluminescent pigment. The tenacity 
and Young’s modulus of the individual fi bres showed that higher loading 
of the photoluminescent pigments in the core component did not affect the 
tensile properties of the samples. 

126   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 6.6 
 Future trends 
 Bi-component melt-spinning has been widely applied to produce func-
tional and novel fi bres such as hollow fi bres, electrically conductive fi bres, 
micro/nanofi bres and thermal bonding fi bres, to name a few. Research on 
biodegradable polymers has resulted in fabrics woven by sheath-core type 
bi-component fi bres being composed of PBT and biodegradable polymers 
such as poly (L-lactide), poly(butylene succinate) and poly(butylene suc-
cinate-co-L-lactide), etc. The main merit of such fabrics is that, with the 
presence of biodegradable components, denier-decreasing treatment can be 
conducted in an environment friendly way. Accordingly, PBAT/PBT fi bres 
are also expected to be applied in these woven fabrics, as they are not only 
environment friendly but also stretchable. 
 Recently, tricomponent spinning systems have been developed to coex-
trude three different polymers into each fi bre. Interestingly, some bi-compo-
nent cross-sections have been utilised in spunbond fabrics, in which fi laments 
are extruded directly into a non-woven web without forming fi bres as an 
intermediate product. The precision of polymer control to form the cross-
section will continue to advance. After persistent research, Hills has been 
able to produce spin packs capable of stuffi ng hundreds of islands into each 
fi bre cross-section, which enables the production of submicron microfi bres. 
The future thus lies in further reduction of the ultimate denier of the fi bres, 
improved spinning processes with more control, and exploration of more 
interesting applications for bi-component fi bres with varying polymers and 
processes. 
 6.7 
 References 
  1.    G. C. Richeson and J. E. Spruiell (1990), Preparation, structure, and properties 
of copolyester-ether elastic fi laments,  J. Appl. Polym. Sci. ,  41 , 845. 
 2.  D. R. Salem (2001),  Structure Formation in Polymeric Fibers , Carl Hanser 
Verlag, Munchen. 
 3.  http://www.hillsinc.net/bicointro.shtml (accessed 9 February 2012). 
 4.  http://www.hillsinc.net/splitting.shtml (accessed 9 February 2012). 
  5.    E. A. Tippets (1967), Fiber engineering to meet end use requirement,  Textile 
Res. J., 37, 524–533 
 6.  W. E. Fitzgerald and J. P. Knudsen (June 1967), Mixed-stream spinning of 
bicomponent fi bers,  Textile Res. J. ,  37 (6), 447–453, Conventional Bicomponent 
Spinning. 
  7.    W. A. Sisson and F. F. Morehead (1953), The skin effect in crimped rayon,  Textile 
Res. J. ,  23 , 152–157. 
  8.    M. Okamoto, K. Watanabe, Y. Nukushina and T. Aizawa (1970), Synthetic fi la-
ments and the like, US Pat. No. 3,531,368 (to Toyo Rayon Inc), 29 September 
1970. 

Bi-component and bi-constituent spinning   127
  9.    M. Okamoto, K. Ashida, K. Watanabe and S. Taniguchi (1972), Apparatus 
for spinning synthetic islands-in-a-sea type composite fi laments, US Pat. No. 
3,692,423 (to Toray Industries, Inc., Tokyo, Japan), 19 September 1972. 
  10.    Y. O. Moriki and M. Ogasawara (1984), Spinneret for production of composite 
fi laments, US Pat. No. 4,445,833 (to Toray Industries, Inc.,Tokyo, Japan), 1 May 
1984. 
  11.   
 T. Kitukani, J. Radhakrishnan, S. Arikawa, A. Takaku, N. Okui, X. Jin, F. Niwa and 
Y. Kudo (1996), High-speed melt spinning of bicomponent fi bers: Mechanism 
of fi ber structure development in poly(ethylene terephthalate)/polypropylene 
system,  J. Appl. Polym. Sci .,  62 , 1913–1924. 
  12.    X. Q. Shi, H. Ito and T. Kikutani (2006), Structure development and properties 
of high-speed melt spun poly (butylene terephthalate/ poly (butylene adipate-
co-terephthalate) bicomponent fi bers,  Polymer ,  47 , 611–616. 
  13.    A. El-Salmawy and Y. Kimura (2001), Structure and properties of bicomponent 
core-sheath fi bers from poly (ethylene terephthalate) and biodegradable ali-
phatic polyesters,  Textile Res. J. ,  71 , 145. 
 14.  J. Radhakrishnan, H. Ito, T. Kikutani and N. Okui (January 1999), Enhancement 
of fi ber structure formation of a liquid crystalline copolyester via ultra-high 
speed bicomponent spinning with poly (ethylene terephthalate),  Polym. Eng. 
Sci. ,  39 (1), 89–98. 
  15.    D. R. Bosak, A. A. Ogale and J. Van Dun (2005), Bicomponent fi bers derived 
from immiscible polymer blends,  Textile Res. J .,  75 , 50. 
  16.    T. H. Oh (2006a), Melt spinning and drawing process of PET side-by-side 
bicomponent fi bers,  J. Appl. Polym. Sci. ,  101 , 1362–1367. 
  17.    T. H. Oh (2006b), Effects of spinning and drawing conditions on the crimp cor-
rection of side-by side poly (trimethylene terephthalate) bicomponent fi ber,  J. 
Appl. Polym. Sci. ,  102 , 1322–1327. 
  18.    M. Okamoto (1973), Spontaneously crimping synthetic composite fi lament and 
process of manufacturing the same, US Patent 3718534, to Toray Industries, 
Inc., Tokyo, Japan, 27 February 1973. 
 19.  http://www.textileworld.com/Articles/2010/July/July_August_issue/Features/
Specialty_Markets_Bicomponent_Fibers.html (accessed 9 December 2011). 
  20.    V. Nadkarni (2004), Self-crimping multicomponent polymer fi bers and corre-
sponding methods of manufacture, US Patent 6811873, Hills Incorporated, 2 
Nov 2004. 
  21.   
 R. D. Harris, J. P. Parker and C. L. King (1988), BASF Corporation, US Patent 
4732809, 22 Mar 1988. 
  22.    E. Shim, B. Pourdeyhimi and T. J. Little (2004), Luminescence and mechanical 
properties of photoluminescent core bicomponent fi bers,  Textile Res. J. ,  74 , 982, 
Materials and fi ber cross sections. 
 

© 2014 Woodhead Publishing Limited
128
 7 
 Electrospinning, processing and 
characterization of polymer-based 
nano-composite fibers  
 Q. Q.  NI ,  X. D.  JIN ,  H.  XIA and   F.  LIU , 
 Shinshu University, Japan 
 DOI : 10.1533/9780857099174.2.128 
 Abstract : Electrospinning is a relatively simple and inexpensive method 
to produce fi bers with diameters in the nanometer range. In recent 
years, many different kinds of polymer nanofi bers have been fabricated 
by electrospinning technology, including nano-composite fi bers. The 
challenges of developing multifunctional nano-composite fi bers are 
reviewed in this chapter. CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles with a particle size of 
about 10–25 nm were synthesized using a simple hydrothermal process. 
CoFe 2 O 4 /PAN (polyacrylonitrile) nanofi bers with various CoFe 2 O 4 
loadings were prepared by electrospinning, and the fi ber diameter 
was controlled to a distribution of between 200 and 400 nm. Then, 
PAN nano-composite fi bers containing carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and 
CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles were fabricated by electrospinning. The presence 
of CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles and CNTs in the PAN matrix was confi rmed 
by X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns, Raman spectra, SEM, and TEM 
observation. As a multifunctional material, the nano-composite fi bers 
achieved both EMI SE and magnetic performance for the developed 
PAN/CNT-CoFe 2 O 4 fi bers. This performance can be accurately tailored by 
adjusting CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticle loading. 
 Key words : electrospinning, magnetic nanoparticle, carbon nanotube, 
PAN, EMI SE. 
 7.1 
 Introduction 
 Electrospinning is a relatively simple and inexpensive method to produce 
fi bers with diameters in the nanometer range. 1–4  In recent years, many dif-
ferent kinds of polymer nanofi bers have been fabricated by electrospinning 
technology, including nano-composite fi bers. Nano-composite fi bers need 
to be multifunctional with engineering applications in such areas as sensing, 
electroactive actuators, etc. The challenges of developing multifunctional 
nano-composite fi bers are reviewed in this chapter. 5 

Electrospinning and characterization of nano-composite ﬁ bers   129
 7.2 
 Principles of electrospinning 
 In an electrospinning system, a high electrostatic voltage is passed through 
a drop of polymer solution held by its surface tension at the end of a cap-
illary, as shown in Fig. 7.1. The surface of the liquid is distorted into a con-
ical shape, known as the Taylor cone. Once the voltage exceeds a critical 
value, the electrostatic force overcomes the solution surface tension, and a 
stable liquid jet is ejected from the cone tip.The solvent evaporates as the 
jet travels through the air, leaving behind ultrafi ne polymeric fi bers that 
collect on an electrically grounded target. The jet often follows a bending 
or a spiral track, resulting from the interaction between the external elec-
tric fi eld and the surface charge of the jet. The bending instability of jets 
not only results in the electrospinning jet being elongated up to ultrafi ne 
fi bers, but also leads to the formation of randomly deposited nonwoven 
electrospun fi ber mats. 6–8  
 Electrospun mats have a larger specifi c surface area and smaller pore 
size compared to commercial nonwoven fabrics. They are of interest in a 
wide variety of applications, including semi-permeable membranes, nano-
composites, fi lters, protective clothing and biomedical applications such as 
wound dressings, tissue engineering scaffolds, and drug delivery systems. 9–12 
Recently, unidirectional-like nanofi ber mats fabricated by control collector 
speed were reported and a high mechanical property was obtained. 13 
Pressure gauge
Pump
Solution
HV
0–50 kV
Ground
electrode
Taylor cone
Substrate
 7.1  Set-up for electrospinning from polymer solutions. 

130   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 In electrospinning technology, the control of fi ber diameter is the key. The 
diameter of fi bers formed during electrospinning is infl uenced by:
 System parameters: 
• 
   –  Polymer properties, such as the molecular weight, structure and poly-
dispersity of the polymer, and melting and glass transition points. 
 –  Solution properties, such as solvency, volatility, viscosity, conductivity, 
surface tension, and the presence of other additives. 
 Process parameters: 
• 
   –  Ambient parameters, such as solution temperature, humidity, atmo-
sphere, and air velocity in the electrospinning chamber. 
  –  Equipment parameters including voltage, fi eld strength, electrode 
distance and arrangement, fl ow rate, delivery volume, and needle 
diameter. 
 The formation of fi bers in the electrospinning process is also infl uenced by 
surface tension derived from the applied electrical charge to the polymer. 
 A further advantage of electrospinning, compared to conventional solvent 
spinning, is that water can be used as a solvent. Water-soluble fi bers have 
to be cross-linked, e.g. by thermal or by chemical cross-linking. 14,15,16 These 
advantages result in the application potential of nanofi bers in broad fi elds 
such as separation, adsorption, fi ltration, catalysis, fi ber reinforced com-
posites, tissue engineering, wound dressings, drug delivery systems, sensors, 
cleaning tissues, and protective textiles among others. 14,16–20,22–24 Nanofi bers 
can be spun from polymer solutions or from polymer melts. Larrondo and 
Manley 25–27  were the fi rst to carry out and report on melt electrospinning 
experiments. Working with polyethylene (PE) and polypropylene (PP) in 
the early 1980s , they successfully formed fi bers with diameters in the tens 
of microns range. Electrospinning from polymer melts has the advantage 
of not requiring the solvents which, in other processes, would have to be 
removed by evaporation. However, the melting temperature of the poly-
mers is an important factor in determining whether the procedure can be 
used to produce nanofi bers. 
 7.3 
 Electrospinning technology 
 A typical electrospinning equipment has three components: a high voltage 
source, a spinneret (or nozzle), and a collector (as shown in Fig. 7.2). The 
polymer solution or melt is applied in a syringe equipped with a piston and 
a stainless steel capillary serving as electrode, and pushed through by a 
pump with a defi ned fl ow rate. The spinneret is connected to a high voltage 
source that applies a high voltage to the polymer. This results in the forma-
tion of a polymer drop at the end of the spinneret. When a higher voltage 

Electrospinning and characterization of nano-composite ﬁ bers   131
is applied, the drop changes its shape and turns into a conical form (Taylor 
cone) (Figs 7.1 and 7.2). 25–27,28,29  At a defi ned voltage, the surface tension of 
the polymer cone at the tip of the spinneret starts to elongate and stretch, 
so that a charged jet is formed. The jet moves in loops, bending and whip-
ping toward the electrode with opposite polarity or to the grounded target 
(Fig. 7.2).      
 Recent experiments have demonstrated that the rapidly whipping fl uid 
jet is an essential mechanism of electrospinning. 30,31  Different collection sys-
tems are known. 32  Typically, in producing nonwoven mats, metal plates are 
used in counter electrodes and in collection systems for the nanofi bers or 
nano-webs. In some special applications, additional grounded collectors are 
necessary. 
 Electrospinning can be used to produce novel fi bers with diameters 
between 100 nm and 10  μ m. As the solvent evaporates, the polymer mol-
ecules can come together, either by a phase separation through a spinodal 
reaction or through classic nucleation and growth of the crystalline phase. 33 
As a result, the structure in the polymer deposited on the collector may 
form a totally amorphous or a semicrystalline spherulitic or textured fi brillar 
structure. In electrospinning, jets are stretched along their axes by the exter-
nal electrical fi eld and are elongated further by the repulsive force between 
charges on adjacent segments. The resulting area reduction rate and asso-
ciated high longitudinal strain rate imply that the macromolecules in the 
fi bers should be stretched and axially oriented. 34  It is generally recognized 
that electrospinning may lower the degree of crystallinity in the polymer. 35–37 
The exact reasons for this behavior are not clear. It has been suggested that 
the development of structure in electrospinning occurs much more rapidly 
than other processes, and this kinetic effect may result in lower crystallin-
ity. 37  A high degree of orientation may also be observed in the fi brils. The 
degree of orientation of the molecules in the amorphous regions is directly 
proportional to the amount of extensional fl ow. In summary, electrospinning 
is a novel technique that can be used to produce nano-scale porous struc-
tures with a variety of morphologies. The fi ber size and distribution, and 
Taylor cone
Jet
Capillary
Nanofibers
 7.2  Taylor cone in electrospinning process. 

132   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
the  inter-fi ber spacing (i.e. porosity) and distribution, can be varied signifi -
cantly by controlling the process parameters. Drugs and growth factors can 
be incorporated easily into the structure for biomedical applications. 
 7.4 
 Electrospinning of nanofibers 
 One-dimensional (1-D) nano-composite fi bers (i.e. long fi bers with a 
nano-scale diameter) have attracted considerable attention, owing to 
their potential applications in sensors, 38–40  as antibacterial materials, 41,42 in 
gas separation, 43–45  in lithium-ion batteries, 46,47  and as photocatalysts. 48,49 
Electrospinning technology has proved to be a simple, effi cient, and versa-
tile way to fabricate nano-composite fi bers. 50 
 A number of novel electrospun nano-composite fi bers have been researched 
and developed. Chen  et al . 51  describe polyimide nanofi ber membranes con-
taining multi-walled carbon nanotubes (CNT) with high strength and tough-
ness that were fabricated using electrospinning. Strongly photoluminescent 
electrospun nano-composite fi bers combining polyvinylpyrrolidone and rare-
earth complexes were prepared by Zhang  et al . 52  In addition, several types 
of magnetic polymer fi bers were fabricated by incorporating magnetic nano-
particles such as Fe 3 O 4  and FePt into a polymer matrix and then electrospin-
ning. 53–55  The incorporation of a component – such as Fe 3 O 4  or CNT – could 
clearly introduce new functionality to a nano-composite fi ber. Usually, how-
ever, nanofi bers are limited to a single component, and there is comparatively 
little published material on multi-component nano-composite fi bers. Thus, 
combinations of polymer, particles, and nanofi bers may result in novel multi-
functional nano-composite fi bers, with a wide range of applications. 
 CNTs are a prospective novel material for multi-component nano-com-
posite fi bers, as they have been widely applied as composites components 
because of their excellent optical, mechanical, and electrical properties. 56–58 
Cobalt ferrite (CoFe 2 O 4 ) nanoparticles are an important magnetic material 
used in high-density data storage, ferrofl uids, and electronic devices. 59,60 
 This chapter outlines the fabrication, using electrospinning technology, of 
nano-composite fi bers made from polyacrylonitrile (PAN) containing two 
other components, multi-walled CNTs and CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles (PAN/
CNT-CoFe 2 O 4 ), and an examination of their characteristics. The incorpo-
ration of CNT and CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles was expected to give rise to fi bers 
with dual functionality, namely electromagnetic shielding and magnetic 
properties. 
 PAN, with an average molecular weight of 150 000, was purchased from 
Aldrich Chemical Company, USA. Multi-walled CNTs with diameter of 
20–30 nm were purchased from Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd., Japan. 
All other reagents in this work were of analytical grade and used as received 
without further purifi cation. 

Electrospinning and characterization of nano-composite ﬁ bers   133
 7.4.1  Fabrication of CoFe 2 O 4 /PAN nanoﬁ bers by 
electrospinning 
 Pristine CNTs (30 mg) were fi rst dispersed into 60 mL nitric acid (10 M) 
by ultrasonication for 1 h. This CNT suspension was then transferred into 
a round-bottomed fl ask equipped with a magnetic stirring bar and a refl ux 
condenser, and refl uxed at 130 ° C for 12 h with vigorous stirring. The treated 
CNTs were washed repeatedly with deionized water and ethanol to remove 
any residual nitric acid. The CNTs were collected by fi ltration and dried in 
a vacuum drying oven. 
 CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles were synthesized by a hydrothermal method. First, 
0.6 mmol FeCl 3 · 6H 2 O and 0.3 mmol CoCl 2 · 6H 2 O were dissolved into 50 mL 
deionized water. To this solution, sodium hydroxide was added drop-wise 
with vigorous stirring to adjust the pH value to about 13.5. The resulting 
suspension was then transferred to a PTFE-lined stainless steel autoclave 
and maintained at 160 ° C for 8 h. 
 The synthesized CoFe 2 O 4  particles were dispersed ultrasonically in 
dimethyl formamide (DMF) for 1 h, and PAN was added into this solution. 
The PAN concentration was kept at 8 wt.%. After stirring, the solution was 
used to spin the nanofi bers by electrospinning. As a comparison, nanofi bers 
with several CoFe 2 O 4 loadings were prepared. 
 7.4.2  Fabrication of PAN ﬁ bers containing CNT 
and CoFe 2 O 4  
 CNTs and CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles were prepared as described in Section 
7.4.1. The treated CNTs and the synthesized CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles were 
added to DMF, and dispersed by ultrasonication for 1 h. PAN was then dis-
solved into this suspension with magnetic stirring. After that, a more vigor-
ous agitation was carried out to make sure the electrospinning solution was 
completely mixed. The mass fractions of CNT and CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles 
to dissolved PAN were set at CNT: PAN = 5%, 10% and CoFe 2 O 4 :PAN = 
5%, 10%. The concentration of PAN to DMF (PAN:DMF) was adjusted in 
the range 7–8%. 
 The prepared electrospinning solution was added into a 12 mL syringe 
equipped with a 0.80 mm stainless steel spinneret. A voltage of 8–12 kV 
was then applied to this solution at ambient temperature, a polymer jet 
was formed under the infl uence of the external electric fi eld, and the fabri-
cated nano-composite fi bers were collected using a rotating disk collector. 
The fi ber samples will be referred to by their mass fractions (CNT:PAN 
and CoFe 2 O 4 :PAN). The PAN/CNT-CoFe 2 O 4 fi bers are thus PAN/5CNT-
10CoFe 2 O 4  (CNT:PAN = 5%, CoFe 2 O 4 :PAN = 10%) and PAN/10CNT-
5CoFe 2 O 4  (CNT:PAN = 10%, CoFe 2 O 4 :PAN = 5%). As a control, 

134   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
single component PAN fi bers (PAN/5CNT, PAN/10CoFe 2 O 4 ) were also 
prepared.  
 7.4.3   Characterization techniques 
 Raman spectra were recorded using a HoloLab series 5000 Raman spec-
troscope (Kaiser Optical Systems, Inc., USA) at a 514 nm laser excitation. 
Morphologies of as-prepared CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles and the electro-
spun fi bers were observed by fi eld emission scanning electron microscope 
(FESEM, S-5000, Hitachi, Japan) and scanning electron microscope (SEM, 
S-3400 N, Hitachi, Japan) with an operating voltage of 20.0 kV. Analyses of 
XRD patterns were carried out on a Rigaku Geigerfl ex 2028 diffractom-
eter (Rigaku, Japan) with Cu K α radiation (1.5406  Å ). Transmission elec-
tron microscopy (TEM) observations were performed with a JEM-2010 
electron microscope at 200 kV accelerating voltage. The electrospun fi bers 
were directly collected on a copper grid with carbon fi lm during the elec-
trospinning process. Electromagnetic interference shielding effectiveness 
(EMI SE) was estimated over a frequency range of 8–12 GHz (X band) on 
an SE measurement system. Magnetic measurements were performed on a 
vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) with a maximum magnetic fi eld of 
 ± 10 kOe at room temperature. 
 7.5 
 Properties of electrospun nanofibers 
 The properties of developed electrospun nanofi bers are key issues for their 
applications in industry. Here, the structure and morphology of the nano-
fi bers were characterized by fi eld emission scanning electron microscopy, 
transmission electron microscopy, X-ray powder diffraction, and their elec-
tromagnetic interference shielding effectiveness and magnetic property 
were also evaluated for electromagnetic shielding applications. 
 7.5.1   CoFe 2 O 4 /PAN nanoﬁ bers 
 The CoFe 2 O 4 /PAN nanofi bers were fabricated prior to the fabrication of 
PAN fi bers containing carbon nanotubes and cobalt ferrite 38 . The FESEM 
image of synthesized CoFe 2 O 4  particles is shown in Fig. 7.3. Particles with a 
diameter of 10–25 nm are observed, with their irregular shapes attributable 
to aggregation and surfactant-free conditions. 
 Figure 7.4 shows the microscope images of the CoFe 2 O 4 /PAN nanofi bers 
with various CoFe 2 O 4  loadings (1 wt.%, 4 wt.%, 7 wt.%, 10 wt.%). The con-
centration of PAN to DMF (PAN:DMF) was adjusted between 7% and 8%, 
which is an optimum value for the nanofi ber fabrication; at other values, 

Electrospinning and characterization of nano-composite ﬁ bers   135
 7.3  FESEM image of CoFe 2 O 4 particles synthesized by hydrothermal 
method. 
 7.4  SEM images of CoFe 2 O 4 /PAN nanoﬁ bers with various CoFe 2 O 4 
loadings (a) 1 wt.%; (b) 4 wt.%; (c) 7 wt.%; (d) 10 wt.%. 

136   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
beading will be observable. Notably, beads begin to appear at CoFe 2 O 4 load-
ings of 10 wt.%. 
 During CoFe 2 O 4 /PAN nanofi ber preparation, the diameter distribution 
was controlled at 200–400 nm for all of the CoFe 2 O 4 loadings. 
 As shown in Fig. 7.5, obvious peaks could be observed in the XRD pat-
tern of CoFe 2 O 4 , which is consistent with the standard pattern of CoFe 2 O 4 . 
CoFe 2 O 4  particles were successfully synthesized by the hydrothermal 
method. The prepared CoFe 2 O 4 /PAN nanofi bers with 10 wt.% CoFe 2 O 4 
loading were also characterized by XRD; due to the effect of PAN, the 
intensity of the peaks observed decreased signifi cantly. Although some weak 
peaks were hidden, the main characteristic peaks could be easily identifi ed, 
matching the pattern of CoFe 2 O 4 , suggesting that CoFe 2 O 4  was embedded 
in the PAN. 
 7.5.2   PAN ﬁ bers containing CNT and CoFe 2 O 4  
 A uniform dispersion of CNTs in the electrospinning solution is critical 
for fabricating nano-composite fi bers. Poorly dispersed CNTs always yield 
beaded morphologies, even at low concentrations. 61  However, van der Waals 
forces cause these CNTs to readily aggregate, making dispersion in liquid 
diffi cult. 62,63  To overcome this problem, the CNTs were treated with concen-
trated nitric acid, which has proven to be an effective method for improving 
the dispersion of CNTs in liquid. 63,64 
 Raman spectroscopy was used to investigate the structures of the CNTs 
before and after treatment, and the spectra are shown in Fig. 7.6. For both 
pristine and treated CNTs, the patterns display two obvious bands centered 
120
100
80
60
40
Intensity (a.u.)
20
0
20
30
40
50
2θ (°)
CoFe2O4/PAN
CoFe2O4
60
70
80
 7.5  XRD patterns of CoFe 2 O 4 and CoFe 2 O 4 /PAN nanoﬁ bers.  

Electrospinning and characterization of nano-composite ﬁ bers   137
around 1343 cm –1  and 1580 cm –1 , which may correspond to the D and G 
bands. The D band originates from disordered structures or defects in graph-
ite carbon, and the G band could be associated with tangential stretching 
vibrations of the C–C bonds present in graphite. 65  Treatment by concen-
trated nitric acid may introduce functional groups (such as carboxyl and 
hydroxyl) onto the CNTs, the presence of which leads to an increase in 
disordered structures. Therefore, the intensity ratio of  D  and  G  band ( R = 
 I  D  / I  G  ) is an index for disorder density, 66  and was used to evaluate the effec-
tiveness of the treatment on the CNTs. From Fig. 7.6, the R-value is 1.03 for 
pristine CNTs, while the treated CNTs show a value of 1.32. The increased 
R-value indicates the presence of a more disordered structure in the CNTs 
after treatment, presumably owing to the introduction of functional groups. 
We assume that the treatment was limited to the CNT surface because of 
the similar Raman spectra patterns for pristine and treated CNTs shown in 
Fig. 7.6. 
 Photographs of several kinds of electrospun fi ber sheets (PAN, PAN/5CNT, 
PAN/10CoFe 2 O 4 , PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4 ) are shown in Fig. 7.7. The photo-
graphs provide visual evidence that regular sheets of nano-composite fi bers 
were fabricated by electrospinning. Compared with the white PAN fi ber 
sheet (Fig. 7.7a), the PAN/5CNT and PAN/10CoFe 2 O 4 fi ber sheets (Figs 7.7b 
and 7.7c) are deep black and light brown in color, while the PAN/5CNT-
10CoFe 2 O 4 fi ber sheet (Fig. 7.7d) shows a mixture of colors from Figs 7.7b 
and 7.7c. These variations in the color of the electrospun fi ber sheets could 
be attributed to the incorporation of CNTs and CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles into 
600
800
1000 1200 1400
Raman shift (cm–1)
Raman intensity
1600
D band
G band
Pristine CNT
Treated CNT
1800 2000 2200 2400
 7.6  Raman spectra of pristine and treated CNTs. 

138   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
PAN. The presence of CNTs and CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles in the PAN fi bers 
are indicated in color. 
 The SEM images (Fig. 7.8) give further detailed information about the 
electrospun fi bers. PAN fi bers of diameter 200–400 nm display a smooth 
surface, and no beads are observed (Fig. 7.8a). Compared with PAN fi bers, 
there is no obvious difference for PAN/10CoFe 2 O 4 fi bers (Fig. 7.8b), except 
for a slight increase in diameter. This suggests that adding CoFe 2 O 4 nano-
particles to a PAN electrospinning solution hardly affects the appearance 
and size of the electrospun fi bers. Figure 7.8c shows PAN/5CNT fi bers with 
a further increased diameter of about 400–700 nm. This could be attributed 
to the increase of solution viscosity because of the introduction of CNTs. 67 
The regular morphology of the fi bers also suggests a uniform CNT disper-
sion through the PAN solution, even at high CNT concentrations. Fig. 7.8d 
illustrates PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4 fi bers fabricated by electrospinning; 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
 7.7  Photographs of electrospun ﬁ ber sheets (a) PAN; (b) PAN/5CNT; 
(c) PAN/10CoFe 2 O 4 ; (d) PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4. 

Electrospinning and characterization of nano-composite ﬁ bers   139
the larger diameter of about 700–1000 nm may be the result of a further 
increase in viscosity when CNTs and CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles were added 
into the electrospinning solution. In addition, we found that the surface 
of the fi bers become a little rough in some places. This could be attrib-
uted to a slight aggregation of CNTs and CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles within 
the fi bers.  
 To investigate the crystal structures present in the nano-composite fi bers, 
XRD patterns from PAN/5CNT and PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4 fi bers were 
taken, and are shown in Fig. 7.9. For PAN/5CNT fi bers, two strong diffraction 
peaks are observed (Fig. 7.9a). The peak, around 2  θ  = 17 ° , could correspond 
to orthorhombic PAN (110). 68  The other peak, at 2  θ  = 26 ° , is assigned to the 
(002) plane, which corresponds to the graphene layers of CNT. 69 Therefore, 
the appearance of these two characteristic diffraction peaks proves the 
existence of PAN/CNT composites. Figure 7.9b shows several strong dif-
fraction peaks besides the two diffraction peaks shown in Fig. 7.9a. These 
peaks may be assigned to the (220), (311), (222), (400), (422), (511), (440) 
crystal planes, which are a good match with the spinel structure of CoFe 2 O 4 
(JCPDS 22-1086). The presence of the spinel structure confi rms that the 
CoFe 2 O 4 was synthesized by a hydrothermal process. The average particle 
 7.8  SEM images of electrospun ﬁ bers (a) PAN; (b) PAN/10CoFe 2 O 4 ; 
(c) PAN/5CNT; (d) PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4. 

140   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
size of CoFe 2 O 4  was further estimated using the Scherrer formula, and the 
calculation result based on the peak indexed (311) was about 17 nm. From 
the XRD pattern shown in Fig. 7.9b, we conclude that the both CNTs and 
nanoparticles were in agreement with the PAN matrix. 
 The presence of CNTs inside the nano-composite fi bers was further con-
fi rmed using Raman spectroscopy. The obtained spectrum of PAN/5CNT-
10CoFe 2 O 4 fi bers is shown in Fig. 7.10, where three obvious bands are 
observed. A comparison with the spectrum of PAN fi bers (shown in the 
inset) confi rms that the band centered at 2240 cm –1  comes from PAN, and 
corresponds to the nitrile group ( − CN). 70  The other two bands that could be 
assigned to D and G bands come from CNTs – referring to the spectra in 
Fig. 7.6. The Raman spectra (as shown in Fig. 7.10) thus prove the incorpo-
ration of CNTs into the PAN matrix. Compared with Fig. 7.6, we also note 
that there is a slight shift of Raman bands and an increase of  R  =  I  D  / I  G  for 
the CNTs incorporated in PAN, which may be attributed to the interactions 
between CNTs and PAN. 71 
 TEM observations were performed to study the distribution of CNTs and 
CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles inside the nano-composite fi bers. For PAN/10CoFe 2 O 4 
fi bers (Fig. 7.11a), it could be clearly observed that CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles 
were embedded in PAN, although the distribution was not homogeneous 
due to the aggregation of CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles. The nano-scale size, 
high concentration, and lack of subsequent surface modifi cation of these 
10
Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)
20
30
(110)
(110)
(002)
(002)
(220)
(311)
PAN/CNT fibers
(a)
(b)
PAN/CNT-CoFe2O4 fibers
(222)
(400)
(422)
(511)
(440)
40
2θ (°)
50
60
70
 7.9  XRD patterns of (a) PAN/5CNT ﬁ bers and (b) PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4 
ﬁ bers.  

Electrospinning and characterization of nano-composite ﬁ bers   141
as-prepared CoFe 2 O 4  particles may be the reasons for aggregation during 
the electrospinning process. 
 Figure 7.11b shows a PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4 fi ber. The CoFe 2 O 4 nanopar-
ticles inside the PAN fi ber exhibit a general ribbon arrangement along the 
fi ber axis, which is very different from the distribution of CoFe 2 O 4 nanopar-
ticles observed in Fig. 7.11a. In contrast to the obvious presence of CoFe 2 O 4 
nanoparticles, the CNTs are hardly seen. This may be partly attributed to the 
relatively larger size of the fi ber. Here, we further assume that the CoFe 2 O 4 
nanoparticles absorb onto the CNTs, and many of the CNTs were encap-
sulated by these CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles. Those functional groups (such as 
carboxyl) on the surface of CNTs that were introduced by nitric acid treat-
ment were considered to serve as attachment points to anchor the other 
600
800 1000 1200 1400
D band
G band
PAN/CNT-CoFe2O4
1600
Raman shift (cm–1)
Raman shift (cm–1)
-CN
PAN fibers
Raman intensity
Raman intensity
1800 2000 2200 2400 2600 2800
2000
2050
2100
2150
2200
2250
2300
2350
2400
2450
 7.10  Raman spectrum of PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4 ﬁ bers; Inset shows the 
Raman spectrum of PAN ﬁ bers.  
 7.11  TEM images of (a) PAN/10CoFe 2 O 4 ﬁ ber; (b) PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4 
ﬁ ber and (c) CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles on the surface of composite ﬁ ber.  

142   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
nanoparticles. 72  CNTs have been observed to be well arranged along the 
axis in polymer fi bers by electrospinning. 73,74 This also explains the ribbon 
arrangement of CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles inside the PAN fi bers. As shown in 
the inset in Fig. 7.11b, a CNT partially unencapsulated by CoFe 2 O 4 nanopar-
ticles is observed, further supporting this assumption. Due to the occasional 
defects appearing on the surface of the nano-composite fi bers, incomplete 
embedding of CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles inside the PAN fi bers is observed – as 
shown in Fig. 7.11c. The high magnifi cation image clearly shows the synthe-
sized CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles, with a particle size about 10–25 nm, which is in 
agreement with the estimation result from XRD pattern. 
 The incorporation of CNTs into a polymer matrix can increase conduc-
tivity, 75,76  suggesting that these composites may have electromagnetic shield-
ing applications. To test whether the above-fabricated PAN/CNT-CoFe 2 O 4 
fi bers would exhibit shielding properties, EMISE of PAN/10CNT-5CoFe 2 O 4 
fi ber sheets was evaluated. Shielding effectiveness (SE) is defi ned as the 
attenuation of electromagnetic waves, and is expressed as: 
 
 SE = 10log P
P
O
P
T
P  
 
 where  P  O   and  P  T   respectively refer to the power of incident and transmitted 
electromagnetic waves through a shielding material. 76,77 
 Figure 7.12a shows the shielding curve of a PAN/10CNT-5CoFe 2 O 4 fi ber 
sheet over 8–12 GHz, and a curve from a PAN /5CNT-10 CoFe 2 O 4 fi ber sheet 
is presented for comparison. The areal density was controlled at about 9.7 
mg/cm 2  for both samples. Compared with the PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4 fi ber 
sheet, the PAN/10CNT-5CoFe 2 O 4 fi ber sheet exhibits a higher SE. This indi-
cates that the SE of the nano-composite fi bers depends on the concentra-
tion of CNTs, and increases with increased fi ber CNT content. Conductivity 
is considered an important factor for shielding, and a higher conductivity 
should bring a higher SE. Therefore, the increased SE observed in the nano-
composite fi bers could be related to improvements in conductivity owing to 
the formation of a CNT conductive network. No obvious SE effect from the 
CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles is observed over this frequency range. In Fig. 7.12b, 
the SE curves (PAN/10CNT-5CoFe 2 O 4 fi ber sheets) corresponding to differ-
ent areal densities (9.7, 19.4, 29.1, 38.8 mg/cm 2 ) are arranged to confi rm the 
effect of areal density. 
 It is observed that the SE signifi cantly increases with increased areal den-
sity. For the sample with an areal density of 38.8 mg/cm 2 , an SE of about 3.9 
dB is achieved at 12 GHz. From the results of our SE evaluation, we can 
conclude that the SE of PAN/CNT-CoFe 2 O 4 fi bers depends on CNT con-
centration and areal density: higher CNT concentration and areal density 

Electrospinning and characterization of nano-composite ﬁ bers   143
yield higher SE. Thus, nano-composite fi bers have possible applications in 
electromagnetic shielding. 
 To illustrate the fi bers’ magnetic properties, the room temperature mag-
netization curves of PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4 fi bers and as-prepared CoFe 2 O 4 
nanoparticles are shown in Fig. 7.13, and typical hysteresis loops are observed 
for both. For the PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4 fi bers, the saturation magnetiza-
tion (Ms) and coercivity (H C ) are 4.7 emu/g and 0.8 kOe, respectively. The 
magnetic properties of the PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4 fi bers arise from their 
8
0.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
0.2
0.4
0.6
Shielding effectiveness (dB)
Shielding effectiveness (dB)
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
(b)
(a)
9
10
Frequency (GHz)
11
38.8 mg/cm2
29.1 mg/cm2
19.4 mg/cm2
9.7 mg/cm2
12
8
9
10
Frequency (GHz)
11
12
PAN/10CNT-5CoFe2O4 Fibers
PAN/5CNT-10CoFe2O4 Fibers
 7.12  SE curves of (a) PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4 and PAN/10CNT-5CoFe 2 O 4 
ﬁ ber sheets; (b) PAN/10CNT-5CoFe 2 O 4 ﬁ ber sheets with different areal 
density. 

144   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
incorporated CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles. Based on the CoFe 2 O 4  loading in 
PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4 fi bers, the calculated value of pure CoFe 2 O 4 nanopar-
ticles is about Ms = 54 emu/g, which is very close to the experimental value of 
Ms = 54.1 emu/g indicated by the curve taken from CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles. 
This indicates that the Ms of the nano-composite fi bers is well matched with 
the proportion of CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles in the nano-composite fi bers, show-
ing that the magnetic properties of these nano-composite fi bers can be accu-
rately tailored by adjusting their CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticle loading.  
–10
–60
–40
–20
–20
20
0
0
M (emu/g)
M (emu/g)
20
40
60
(b)
(a)
–5
0
H (kOe)
5
10
–10
–5
0
H (kOe)
5
10
CoFe2O4 Nanoparticles
(Ms = 54.1 emu/g)
PAN/5CNT-10CoFe2O4 Fibers
(Ms = 4.7 emu/g)
 7.13  Magnetization hysteresis loops of (a) CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles, and 
(b) PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4 ﬁ bers.  

Electrospinning and characterization of nano-composite ﬁ bers   145
 7.6 
 Conclusion 
 In the fi rst step of this work, CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles with a particle size of 
about 10–25 nm were synthesized using a simple hydrothermal process. 
CoFe 2 O 4 /PAN nanofi bers with various CoFe 2 O 4  loadings (1 wt.%, 4 wt.%, 
7 wt.%, 10 wt.%) were prepared by electrospinning, and the fi ber diameter 
was controlled to a distribution of between 200 nm and 400 nm. The pres-
ence of CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles in PAN nanofi bers was confi rmed by XRD 
characterization. 
 PAN nano-composite fi bers containing CNTs and CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles 
were fabricated by electrospinning. The presence of CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles 
and CNTs in the PAN matrix was confi rmed by XRD patterns and Raman 
spectra. SEM showed the regular morphologies of the fabricated nano-com-
posite fi bers, and TEM observation revealed the distribution of CNTs and 
CoFe 2 O 4  nanoparticles inside the nano-composite fi bers. As a multifunc-
tional material, the nano-composite fi bers achieved an EMI SE of about 
3.9 dB, and exhibited magnetic properties with an Ms of 4.7 emu/g for the 
developed PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4 fi bers. This property can be accurately 
tailored by adjusting CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticle loading. 
 These results show that electrospinning technology can be used effec-
tively in producing various fi ber materials at a nano-scale. Multifunctional 
nano-composite fi bers can also be fabricated; these fi bers potentially have 
extensive industrial applications. 
 7.7 
 References  
 1. 
 S. H. Tan, R. Inai, M. Kotaki and S. Ramakrishna (2005),  Polymer ,  46 , 6128. 
  2.    J. H. Park, B. S. Kim, Y. C. Yoo, M. S. Khil and H. Y. Kim (2007),  J Appl Polym 
Sci ,  107 , 2211. 
 3.  J. Doshi and D. H. Reneker (1995),  J Electrostat ,  35 , 151. 
  4.    K. Wei, T. Ohta, B. S. Kim, K. H. Lee, M. S. Khil, H. Y. Kim and I. S. Kim (2010). 
 Polym AdvTechnol ,  21 , 746. 
  5.    F. Liu (2012), Development of functional polyvinyl alcohol nanofi bers by elec-
trospinning technology, Doctoral thesis in Shinshu University. 
 6.  H. Fong, I. Chun and D. H. Reneker (1999),  Polymer ,  40 , 4585. 
  7.    Y. M. Shin, M. M. Hohman, M. P. Brenner and G. C. Rutledge (2001),  Polymer , 
 42 , 9955. 
 8.  H. Fong, W. Liu, C. S. Wang and R. A. Vaia (2000),  Polymer ,  43 , 775. 
 9.  P. P. Tsai, H. Schreuder-Gibson and P. Gibson (2002),  J Electrostat ,  54 , 333. 
  10.    P. Gibson, H. Schreuder-Gibson and D. Rivin (2001),  Colloid Surface A ,  187–
188 , 469. 
  11.   
 E. R. Kenawy, G. L. Bowlin, K. Mansfi eld, J. Layman, D. G. Simpson, E. H. 
Sanders and G. E. Wnek (2002),  J Control Release ,  81 , 57. 
  12.    Y. K. Luu, K. Kim, B. S. Hsiao, B. Chu and M. Hadjiargyrou (2003),  J Control 
Release ,  89 , 341. 

146   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
  13.    K. Suzuki (2011), Fabrication and characterization of oriented nano fi ber non-
woven by electrospinning method, Master thesis at Shinshu university. 
  14.    R. Dersch, A. Greiner, M. Steinhart and J. H. Wendorff (2003),  DWI Report ,  8 , 
127. 
 15.  A. Greiner (2005),  Lecture on ‘ Electrospinning for Biomedical Applications ’, 
DWI Aachen, Germany. 
  16.    H. Thomas, E. Heine, R. Wollseifen, C. Cimpeanu and M. Möller (2005),  Int 
Nonwovens J ,  14 (3), 12. 
  17.   
 T.H. Grafe and K.M. Graham (2003), Nanofi ber webs from electrospinning, 
 Nonwovens in Filtration, 5th International Conference, Stuttgart , Germany, 
11–13 March. 
  18.    H. Schreuder-Gibson, P. Gibson, K. Senecal, M. Senett, J. Walker, W. Yeomans, 
D. Ziegler and P.P. Tsai (2002),  Adv Mater ,  34 , 44. 
  19.    L. Huang, R.A. McMillan, R.P. Apkarian, B. Pourdeyhimi, V. Conticello and 
E.L. Chaikof (2000),  Macromolecules ,  33 , 2989. 
  20.    G. Verreck, I. Chun, J. Rosenblatt, J. Peeters, A. Van Dijck, J. Mensch, M. Noppe 
and M.E. Brewster (2003),  J Control Release ,  92 , 349. 
 21. 
 A. Frenot and I.S. Chronakis (2003),  Colloid Interf Sci ,  8 , 64. 
  22.    P. Gibson, H. Schreuder-Gibson and D. Rivin (2001),  Colloids Surf A: 
Physicochem Eng Asp ,  187–188 , 469. 
 23.  M. Jacobsen (1991),  Nonwovens Industry ,  36 . cf. also: Chemiefasern/
Textilindustrie  39/91 , 868 (1989). 
 24.  E.R. Kenawy, G.L. Bowlin, K. Mansfi eld, J. Layman, D.G. Simpson, E.H. Sanders 
and G.E. Wnek (2002),  J Control Release ,  81 , 57. 
  25.    L. Larrondo and R. St. John Manley (1981),  J Polym Sci: Polym Phys Ed ,  19 , 
909. 
  26.    L. Larrondo and R. St. John Manley (1981),  J Polym Sci: Polym Phys Ed ,  19 , 
921. 
  27.    L. Larrondo and R. St. John Manley (1981),  J Polym Sci: Polym Phys Ed ,  19 , 
933. 
 28.  G.I. Taylor (1964),  Proc R Soc Lond Ser A ,  280 , 383. 
 29.  G.I. Taylor (1969),  Proc R Soc Lond Ser A ,  313 , 453. 
  30.    M. Shin, M.M. Hohman, M.P. Brenner and G.C. Rutledge (2001),  Appl Phys 
Lett ,  78 , 1149. 
  31.   
 M.M. Hohman, M. Shin, G. Rutledge and M.P. Brennera (2001),  Phys. Fluids , 
 13 (8), 2201. 
  32.    P. Dalton, T. Kuenzel, D. Klee and M. Moeller (2004),  J Mey Eur Cell Mater , 
 7 (1), 52. 
 33.  A Weghmann (1981),  Schriftenreihe des Deutschen Wollforschungsinstitutes ,  85 , 
314. 
 34.  K. Schmidt (1980),  Melliand Textilber ,  61 (6), 495. 
 35.  D. Luzhansky (2003),  INDA/TAPPI , Baltimore, MD, 16–18 September. 
 36.  Air Filtration, Liquid Filtration (2013),  http://www.hovo.com . 
 37.  Nanospider (2013),  http://www.elmarco.cz and  http://www.nanospider.c z/
aplikace.php?kategorie=1&h . 
  38.    X. D. Jin, Q. Q. Ni, Y. Q. Fu, L. Zhang, T. Natsuki (2012),  Polymer Composites , 
 33 , 317–323. 

Electrospinning and characterization of nano-composite ﬁ bers   147
  39.    J. Dexmer, C. M. Leroy, L. Binet, V. Heresanu, P. Launois, N. Steunou,C. Coulon,J. 
Maquet, N. Brun, J. Livageand and R. Backov (2008),  Chem Mater ,  20 , 5541. 
 40.  H. Guo and S. Tao (2007),  Sens Actuators B ,  123 , 578. 
 41. 
 S. Y. Yeo and S. H. Jeong (2003),  Polym Int ,  52 , 1053. 
 42.  S. Y. Yeo, H. J. Leeand and S. H. Jeong (2003),  J Mater Sci ,  38 , 2143. 
 43.  Y. Li and T. Chung (2008),  Microporous Mesoporous Mater ,  113 , 315. 
  44.    A. Alshebani, M. Pera-Titus, E. Landrivon, Th. Schiestel, S. Miachon and J.-A. 
Dalmon (2008),  Microporous Mesoporous Mater ,  115 , 197. 
 45.  L. Y. Jiang and T. S. Chung (2006),  AIChE J ,  52 , 2898. 
  46.    H. Wolf, Z. Pajkic, T. Gerdes and M. Willert-Porada (2009),  J Power Sources , 
 190 , 157. 
 47.  H. Lu, D. Li, K. Sun, Y. Li and Z. Fu (2009),  Solid State Sci ,  11 , 982. 
  48.    M.J. Uddin, F. Cesano, F. Bonino, S. Bordiga, G. Spoto, D. Scarano and A. 
Zecchina (2007),  J Photochem Photobiol A ,  189 , 286. 
  49.    M. Jin, X. Zhang, A. V. Emeline, Z. Liu, D. A. Tryk, T. Murakami and A. Fujishima 
(2006),  Chem Commun , (43), 4483–85. 
  50.    D. Zhang, A. B. Karki, D. Rutman, D. P. Young, A. Wang, D. Cocke, T. H. Ho and 
Z. Guo (2009),  Polymer ,  50 , 4189. 
  51.   
 D. Chen, T. Liu, X. Zhou, W. C. Tjiu and H. Hou (2009),  J Phys Chem B ,  113 , 
9741. 
  52.    H. Zhang, H. Song, H. Yu, X. Bai, S. Li, G. Pan, Q. Dai,T. Wang, W. Li, S. Lu, X. 
Ren and H. Zhao (2007),  J Phys Chem C ,  111 , 6524. 
 53.   S. Wang, C. Wang, B. Zhang, Z. Sun, Z. Li, X. Jiang and X. Bai (2010),  Mater Lett , 
 64 , 9. 
 54.  B. Wang, Y. Sun and H. Wang (2010),  J Appl Polym Sci ,  115 , 1781. 
  55.    T. Song, Y. Zhang, T. Zhou, C. T. Lim, S. Ramakrishna and B. Liu (2005),  Chem 
Phys Lett ,  415 , 317. 
  56.    H. G. Chae, T. V. Sreekumar, T. Uchida and S. Kumar (2005),  Polymer ,  46 , 
10925. 
  57.    L. Vivien, P. Lan ç on, D. Riehl, F. Hache and E. Anglaret (2002),  Carbon ,  40 , 
1789. 
  58.    O. Meincke, D. Kaempfer, H. Weickmann, C. Friedrich, M. Vathauer and H. 
Warth (2004),  Polymer ,  45 , 739. 
 59.  M. H. Khedr, A. A. Omar and S. A. Abdel-Moaty (2006), Colloids Surf A ,  281 , 
8. 
 60.  Y. Ju, J. Park, H. Jung, S. Cho and W. Lee (2008),  Mater Sci Eng B ,  147 , 7. 
  61.   
 E. J. Ra, K. H. An, K. K. Kim, S. Y. Jeong and Y. H. Lee (2005),  Chem Phys Lett , 
 413 , 188. 
 62.  I. Chen, C. Wang and C. Chen (2010),  J Phys Chem C ,  114 , 13532. 
  63.    N. G. Sahoo, S. Rana, J. W. Cho, L. Li and S. H. Chan (2010),  Prog Polym Sci ,  35 , 
837. 
 64.  X. Xie, Y. Mai and X. Zhou (2005),  Mater Sci Eng R ,  49 , 89. 
  65.    T. McNally, P. P ö tschke, P. Halley, M. Murphy, D. Martin,S. E.J. Bell, G. P. 
Brennan, D. Bein, P. Lemoine and J. P. Quinn (2005),  Polymer , 46 , 8222. 
 66.  S. Osswald, M. Havel and Y. Gogotsi (2007),  J Raman Spectrosc ,  38 , 728. 
 67.  P. Heikkil ä and A. Harlin (2009),  Express Polym Lett ,  3 , 437. 
 68.  J. Chen, Z. Li, D. Chao, W. Zhang and C. Wang (2008),  Mater Lett ,  62 , 692. 

148   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
  69.    G. Wang, X. Shen, J. Yao, D. Wexler and J. Ahn (2009),  Electrochem Commun , 
 11 , 546. 
  70.    H. Hou, J. J. Ge, J. Zeng, Q. Li, D. H. Reneker,  A. Greiner and S. Z. D. Cheng 
(2005),  Chem Mater ,  17 , 967. 
 71. 
 H. Zhang, L. Xu, F. Yang and L. Geng (2010),  Carbon ,  48 , 688. 
  72.    K. A. Wepasnick, B. A. Smith, K. E. Schrote, H. K. Wilson, S. R. Diegelmann and 
D. H. Fairbrother (2011),  Carbon ,  49 , 24. 
  73.    J. J. Ge, H. Hou, Q. Li, M. J. Graham, A. Greiner, D. H. Reneker, F. W. Harris and 
S. Z. D. Cheng (2004),  J Am Chem Soc ,  126 , 157–54. 
 74.  K. Saeed and S. Park (2010),  J Polym Res ,  17 , 535. 
 75.  T. Yang, D. Wu, L. Lu, W. Zhou and M. Zhang (2011),  Polym Compos ,  32 , 1280. 
 76.  Y. Li, C. Chen, S. Zhang, Y. Ni and J. Huang (2008),  Appl Surf Sci ,  254 ,57–66. 
 77.  J. S. Im, J. G. Kim, S. Lee and Y. Lee (2010),  Colloids Surf. A ,  364 , 151. 
 

© 2014 Woodhead Publishing Limited
149
 8 
 Integrated composite spinning (ICS)  
 W.  OXENHAM ,  North Carolina State University, USA 
 DOI : 10.1533/9780857099174.2.149 
 Abstract : The chapter reviews ICS, which is the creation of a yarn by 
bonding staple fi bers to a fi lament core using molten polymer as the 
bonding agent. An overview of the development of the concept through 
to a commercial machine is presented, including the optimization of the 
key components. The results of independent studies on the system are 
summarized, including analyses of yarn structure and properties. The 
conclusion offers thoughts on why a system with so much promise was not 
adopted by the industry. 
 Key words : integrated composite spinning (ICS), Bobtex, hybrid yarns. 
 8.1 
 Introduction 
 Integrated Composite Spinning (ICS) is based on the concept of combin-
ing fi lament yarns with staple fi bers to produce a so-called ‘composite yarn’ 
(Denton and Daniels, 2002). There have been many approaches to spin-
ning composite yarns, including the creation of core spun yarns on a ring 
frame (Jeddi  et al ., 2009) and wrap-spun yarn using hollow-spindle tech-
nology (Xie  et al ., 1986; Jiang and Chen, 2012). Techniques utilizing elec-
trostatic charging of the fi laments, prior to their combination with staple 
fi bers, were proposed to better integrate the fi lament and staple compo-
nents (Jou  et al ., 1996). Recently, core spun yarns, consisting of a fi lament 
core covered with staple fi bers, have also been created using systems such 
as rotor spinning (Nield and Ali, 1977), friction spinning, and jet spinning 
(Ortlek and Ulku, 2007). All of these techniques rely on twist (or false 
twist) to provide structural integrity to the resultant yarn. An alternative 
approach was to use an adhesive to stick the staple fi bers to each other. In 
commercial applications the adhesive used was water soluble and this was 
removed after fabric formation, yielding a fabric with good aesthetics and 
performance (Selling, 1971). 
 What differentiated ICS from other composite yarn formation systems 
was that the process was designed to integrate a staple fi ber component into 

150   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
‘semi-molten’ polymer. The ‘semi-molten’ polymer could be an extruded fi l-
ament that had not fully cooled, and staple fi bers were added to the still 
‘tacky’ surface. The favored technology was to start with a fi lament yarn 
and coat it with molten polymer, and then to add staple fi bers to the surface 
before the polymer had cooled. The technology was invented and brought to 
commercial realization by the Bobtex Corporation (of Montreal, Canada) 
and marketed as the Bobtex ICS system (Mohamed, 1973). The system was 
initially launched during the early 1970s, which was the era when many new 
technologies were being introduced into staple spinning, most of which had 
the goal of replacing ring spinning as the standard approach to staple yarn 
production. 
 The concept aroused a lot of excitement, because of its high produc-
tion speed compared to all other staple spinning competitors, and several 
installations underwent extensive industrial trials. Additionally, a number 
of research papers were published on different aspects of the technology, 
ranging from the structure and properties of yarns and fabrics through to 
discussions of the potential economic benefi ts of the system. Ultimately, the 
system was not a major commercial success and, although the technology 
was viewed as revolutionary when it was fi rst introduced, it is now regarded 
as a historical curiosity. 
 This chapter will review the development of the process, the infl uence of 
processing parameters on the structure and properties of yarns and fabrics, 
the strengths and weaknesses of the system, and a comment on whether 
there is a potential for such a system in an industry which now has a greater 
focus on technical, performance, and medical textiles. 
 8.2 
 The background and history of integrated 
composite spinning (ICS) 
 The following sections briefl y describe the history of the Bobtex Integrated 
Composite Spinning Process and the transition from a concept into a machine 
which was capable of creating yarns with staple fi bers at signifi cantly higher 
speeds than any machine available at that time or indeed today 
 8.2.1   Concept originators 
 The development of the ICS technology can be traced back to a suite of pat-
ents fi led by the father and son team of Emilian and Andrew J. Bobkowicz, 
who founded the Bobtex Corporation in Montreal, Canada. This team 
(Figs 8.1 and 8.2) had many patents over a wide range of textile related top-
ics, and history may remember them as great inventors but not so great as 
entrepreneurs. 

Integrated composite spinning (ICS)   151
 8.2.2  Prototype development 
 The technology used to manufacture ICS yarns evolved over several years 
and different prototype machines. While the concept of the fi nal version 
may have been part of the original vision, it is evident that several alterna-
tive approaches were also tried. The key feature of the earlier proposals was 
to embed staple fi bers into an extruded, but not fully cooled, thermoplastic 
 8.1  Emilion Bobkowicz at the ofﬁ ces of Bobtex Corporation. 
Photograph provided by Bobtex Corporation to the author, 
15 September 1975. 
 8.2  A. J. Bobkowicz examining upholstery fabric made with Bobtex ICS 
ﬁ lling. Photograph provided by Bobtex Corporation to the author, 
23 September 1975. 

152   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
22
21
22
23
24
25
4
1
1
2
3
 8.3  Two component composite spinning. Based on Bobkowicz and 
Bobkowicz (1970a). 

Integrated composite spinning (ICS)   153
polymer. Since the polymer had not cooled, the staple fi ber adhered to the 
‘sticky’ surface of the polymer. The fi bers were then further embedded into 
the polymer by the movement of the polymer surface, which was induced 
using a false twist device in the threadline (Bobkowicz and Bobkowicz, 
1970a). The product of this machine was known as a two component yarn, 
consisting of staple fi bers embedded in an extruded thermoplastic polymer. 
The potential to include a fi lament yarn as a core and thus produce a three 
component yarn was indicated, but this is best regarded as a further devel-
opment, or refi nement of the technology. What differentiated the ‘proto-
type’ from later developments was the way the polymer and fi bers were 
assembled. 
 A schematic of the prototype is shown in Fig 8.3. Polymer chips in a 
hopper (2) were fed to a melt extrusion unit (21) resulting in the produc-
tion of ‘fi lament’ (3). The fi lament passed between a pair of nip rollers 
(called laminating rollers), which were covered with staple fi bers. The nip 
rollers (22) not only provided a method of squeezing the staple fi bers into 
the surface of the fi lament but could also act as draw rollers, imparting 
orientation (and improved tensile properties) to the ‘fi lament.’ The staple 
fi bers were typically fed to the machine as sliver (1) and, in earlier ver-
sions, the sliver was drafted by a roller drafting system into a thin web. The 
laminating rollers were also perforated, and suction through the rollers 
held the fi bers on the roller surface before they were transferred to the 
fi lament. The composite structure now passed through a false twist device 
(24), which caused the fi bers to become further embedded into the poly-
mer. Because the polymer component was still not fully cooled, the false 
twisting created surface shear and the resultant yarn, which was cooled 
(23) as it passed to the winder, exhibited the surface character of a twisted 
yarn. The resultant composite yarn (4) was taken up onto a high speed 
winding unit (25).  
 A proposed alternative to the above approach was to create a polymer 
fi lm/fi ber tape that could then be slit, hot-drawn, and twisted to create 
the yarn, but this was not further developed (Bobkowicz and Bobkowicz, 
1970b). 
 8.3 
 The development of ICS technology 
 While the concept of creating composite structures had earlier been pro-
posed by Bobkowicz – indeed the idea had been indicated in patents from 
1965 – these had been associated with the terminology ‘textured fi lament 
yarn’ (Bobkowicz and Bobkowicz, 1967), and the fi rst patent specifi cally 
relating to ‘Composite Spinning’ was granted in 1974 (Bobkowicz and 
Bobkowicz, 1974a). 

154   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 8.3.1   The machine as an assembly of speciﬁ c 
components 
 The machine was regarded as an assembly of several modules, which are 
shown in Fig. 8.4, and each module was specially developed for the creation 
of composite yarns (Mohamed, 1973). The extrusion unit was designed to 
be capable of handling many polymer types, and claimed to be ‘electrically 
heated with automatic temperature control and simple setting of the tem-
perature for the resin. Built to be operated by textile workers with no expe-
rience in extrusion of polymers, ease of cleaning and maintenance has been 
incorporated in the design of the extruder’ (ibid.). The spinning unit was 
where the staple fi bers were joined to the polymer (or polymer-coated core 
yarn), and the fi ber feed system that was ultimately adopted was an opening 
roller system (sometimes called combing roller). The twisting unit was a bush 
friction twister capable of speeds up to 25 000 revolutions per minute. The 
winding module had two winding heads for each position to enable contin-
uous running, and was capable of producing 3.5 kg packages at 600 m/min. 
The drive module housed the motors and controllers for the machine. 
 8.3.2   Application of technology in achieving 
functional components 
 The schematic of the Bobtex ICS machine is shown in Fig. 8.5 and a picture 
of the Bobtex Mk1 ICS is given in Fig. 8.6. From the diagram, Fig. 8.5, it can 
be seen that a yarn, (called the core, carrier or fi lament) was taken from a 
supply package and passed through an extrusion unit where it was coated 
with molten polymer (resin). The coated yarn passed down to a laminating 
Extrusion
Spinning
Winder
Drive
 8.4  Construction ‘modules’ of Bobtex ICS machine. Based on a diagram 
in Mohamed (1973). 

Integrated composite spinning (ICS)   155
roller covered with staple fi bers, and these adhered to the still tacky poly-
mer. On its way to a winding unit the yarn was subjected to a false twist-
ing action, and this consolidated the structure and drove the fi bers into the 
polymer. Because of the plastic nature of the polymer, the net effect was a 
yarn that had the characteristics of a twisted structure. 
 The machine, Fig. 8.6, consisted of two positions, mounted back to back, 
each producing a yarn. A single extrusion unit fed molten polymer to nozzles 
on both sides of the machine. Figure 8.5 shows that two slivers and a core 
yarn were fed into each side of the machine. The Mk 1 machine did have the 
possibility of producing two component yarns, but was primarily designed 
to create three component ICS using a fi lament core (carrier). To this end, 
there was signifi cant development in the extrusion unit, particularly in the 
design of the die and nozzle arrangements. For a three component yarn, the 
fi lament core passed through the nozzle where the polymer was extruded as 
an annulus to give complete coverage to the surface of the core. 
 If a two component yarn was required, the jet could be simpler; however, 
there were some limitations. It had been found that it was better to use a 
core when lower quality, shorter fi bers were used, but for other applica-
tions the core could be eliminated. When not using a core there was the 
Fiber
Fiber
Carrier
ICS Spun yarn
Polymer
 8.5  Schematic diagram of Bobtex Mk1 ICS machine. Redrawn from 
illustration in Riordon and Bobkowicz (1974). 

156   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
possibility of drawing the extruded polymer in order to a give a stronger 
product; however, this could present problems. It was found that at speeds 
beyond 150 m/min there were instabilities in the threadline between the 
nozzle and the laminating rollers, which, as indicated above, were also act-
ing as draw rolls. A solution to this problem was to use a ‘spray extrusion 
technique’ in which the use of compressed air and a modifi ed nozzle blew a 
fi ne continuous polymer stream to the nip of the laminating rollers. This not 
only eliminated the problem of instability, and hence enabled much higher 
speeds, but it also better integrated the polymer with the staple fi ber and 
produced a better yarn. 
 Figure 8.7 (Bobkowicz and Bobkowicz, 1974a) shows a much simpli-
fi ed schematic of the nozzle design. If a two component yarn were being 
produced the molten polymer would pass down the central orifi ce and air 
would be blown down the ‘annulus,’ indicated in the diagram as B. The air 
fl ow improved the spinning stability and resulted in a better yarn quality. 
For three component yarn, the yarn core would pass through the central 
orifi ce, and molten polymer would issue through B to provide the coating, 
to which the staple component would later adhere. 
 In the case of a three component yarn there were also some problems 
associated with the appearance and staple fi ber cover of the fi nal yarn and 
these were improved by the use of an additional vortex at the exit of the 
 8.6  Bobtex Mk1 ICS Machine. Photograph provided by Bobtex 
Corporation to author, 15 September 1975. 

Integrated composite spinning (ICS)   157
nozzle. Since for a three component yarn there was no drawing between the 
nozzle and the laminating roller, the covered polymer was caused to swirl 
and this created better cover and appearance in the fi nal yarn (Bobkowicz 
and Bobkowicz, 1974b). 
 The staple fi ber opening system consisted of an opening roller, similar 
to that found in a rotor spinning machine. It is notable, however, that the 
productivity of a Bobtex unit is signifi cantly greater than a rotor spinning 
machine and thus the opening roller is working under much more demand-
ing conditions (heavier slivers being processed at much higher throughput 
speeds). Optimization of the opening roller resulted in the use of pins rather 
than card wire for the roller covering, since this was claimed to give better 
opening with less fi ber damage (Lord, 1973). 
 The streams of fi bers that issued from the openers were collected on a 
perforated roller through which air was sucked to hold the fi bers on the rol-
ler. This was the so-called laminating roller, since this was also contacted by 
the tacky polymer (or the polymer coating of the core yarn), and the fi bers 
were squeezed into the polymer. There was such a unit at either side of the 
threadline, and the laminating rollers formed a nip for drawing when mak-
ing a two component yarn. Later machines, which were designed for three 
component yarns, used only one laminating roller, since the three compo-
nent yarn could not be drawn. There were some issues with the laminat-
ing roller, since at higher speed the centrifugal force could overcome the 
suction force and fi ber could fl y off. Modifi cations to the laminating roller, 
which included additional suction slots, overcame this problem and per-
mitted higher speeds (Bobkowicz and Bobkowicz, 1975a). Table 8.1 shows 
examples of yarns produced and the capabilities of the improved grooved 
laminating roller.      
B
B
A
 8.7  Schematic of nozzle designs based on proposals made by 
Bobkowicz and Bobkowicz (1974a). 

 Table 8.1  Examples of yarn production parameters and resultant properties 
 Fibers (F) 
 Carrier (C) 
 Resin (R) 
 Count 
(tex) 
 Tenacity 
(gf/tex) 
 Composition 
(F/C/R%) 
 Fiber feed 
(ft/min) 
 Grooved 
roller 
speed 
(ft/min) 
 Twist 
applied 
(turns/in.) 
 Polypropylene 2.5 in. 
15 denier  Sliver 
4134 tex 
 Polypropylene 
Ribbon 40 tex 
 Polyethylene 
 M.I. 150 
 M.P. 300 ° F 
 179 
 10.1 
 34/22/44 
 4.9 
 330 
 22 
 Cotton 15/16 in., Sliver 
4400 tex 
 Glass 
multiﬁ lament 
33 tex 
 Polyethylene 
 M.I. 150 
 M.P. 300 ° F 
 114 
 15.6 
 27/28/45 
 2.1 
 300 
 54 
 Polyester 1.5 in. 
1.5 denier  Sliver 
4000 tex 
 Polyester 
multiﬁ lament 
 15 tex 
 Polyester 
 i.v. = 70 
 M.P. 345 ° F 
 72 
 12.1 
 37/21/42 
 9.3 
 1400 
 74 
 Polyester/cotton 
waste (5/8 in.) Web 
4400 tex 
 Polyester 
multiﬁ lament 
 15 tex 
 Polyethylene 
 M.I. 150 
 M.P. 300 ° F 
 46 
 11.5 
 45/25/30 
 7.3 
 2000 
 40 
 Rayon 1 9/16 in. 
1.5 denier Sliver 3015 
tex 
 Nylon 
multiﬁ lament 
 11 tex 
 Polyethylene 
 M.I. 150 
 M.P. 300 ° F 
 46 
 10.8 
 34/23/43 
 21.3 
 4100 
 43 

Integrated composite spinning (ICS)   159
 The element that consolidated the yarn was the false twisting unit, 
which was a bush friction twisting device, similar to those used on textur-
ing machines at that time. This could be driven up to 25 000 revolutions 
per minute but, because of the large ratio of the bush diameter to the yarn 
diameter, the yarn rotated at much higher speeds. The amount of false twist 
inserted greatly affected the structure of the yarn and in particular the con-
solidation, which in turn determined the amount of staple fi ber remaining 
on the surface. Since the polymer was still ‘soft’ there was slippage of the 
sheath around the core in three component yarns, and plastic deformation 
of the polymer in a two component yarn. This resulted in the false twist 
creating a yarn that appeared to have real twist, and the magnitude of this 
effect was obviously infl uenced by the level of false twist. 
 Two further improvements to the basic concept were proposed. The fi rst 
was a broad-based patent based on the development of an open-end spin-
ning technology called aerodynamic break spinning (ABS) but which uti-
lized differential twisting to create a novel yarn structure from staple fi bers 
at very high speeds (claims of potentially 3000 m/min). Within the gen-
eral claims, there is also the potential to include a fi lament core (to make 
a core spun yarn) or to incorporate a fi lament covered with molten poly-
mer (Bobkowicz, 1976). When viewed against the ICS system, the proposed 
approach was much more complex and was not commercialized. 
 Table 8.2  ICS yarn examples using FOY and POY ﬁ lament carrier yarn 
 Count (tex) 
 75 
 80 
 95 
 89 
 190 
 140 
 Fiber (%) 
 W 55 
 W 57 
 A 45 
 A 44 
 V 60 
 W/MA 27 
 Polymer (%) 
 PPA 23 
 PPA 22 
 PPA 19 
 PPA 19 
 PPA 14 
 SA 49 
 Filament (%) 
 PETP 22 
 PETP 21 
 PETP 36 
 PETP 37 
 PETP 26 
 Glass 24 
 1  × POY 
 1  × FOY 
 2  × POY 
 2  × POY 
 3  × POY 
 1 
 Speed (ft/min) 
 1450 
 2034 
 2150 
 2650 
 2040 
 2040 
 Run tension (%) 
 36 
 65 
 30 
 40 
 150 
 50 
 Efﬁ ciency (%) 
 85 
 85 
 90 
 90 
 90 
 70 
 Adhesion Index 1 
 3 
 1 
 4 
 5 
 5 
 5 
 Breaking strength 
(gf) 
 633 
 650 
 1275 
 870 
 1050 
 2500 
 Elongation (%) 
 30 
 29 
 21 
 26 
 46 
 3.3 
 Shrinkage 2 (%) 
 7 
 5 
 5 
 7 
 13 
 0 
 1  Measure of ability to strip the ﬁ bers/polymer sheath from the carrier core  ﬁ lament 
on a scale of 1 to 5; 1 signiﬁ es easy sliding off with almost no  resistance, 5 signiﬁ es 
no stripping, the force to strip being in excess of the total breaking strength. 
 2  Shrinkage in relaxed form, dry heat 15 min at 230 ° F. 
 Abbreviations: 
 A- Acrylic; V-Viscose; SA-Saran Alloy; PPA-Polypropylene Alloy; W-Wool; 
MA-Modacrylic; PETP-Polyester PP-Polypropylene. 

160   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 The second improvement was to overcome a potential problem at higher 
speeds of breaks, or discontinuity, in the polymer sheath surrounding the 
fi lament core. This obviously, in turn, yields a yarn with variable staple fi ber 
cover, since fi bers cannot adhere uniformly without a continuous sheath. 
It was demonstrated that this problem could be reduced or eliminated by 
using partially oriented yarn (POY), or undrawn yarn, as the core feedstock 
and drawing the core before or during coating. Table 8.2 shows examples 
of yarns produced from fully oriented yarn (FOY) and POY, and it can be 
observed that the use of POY (and multiple cores) gives signifi cant improve-
ments in adhesion between the core and the polymer, and general improve-
ment in yarn quality and processing effi ciency (Bobkowicz, 1981). 
 The development work culminated in the Bobtex Mk 3, which was a sin-
gle spindle design where units could be bolted together to form a larger 
machine. Figure 8.8 shows a set-up of ten positions, which was the rec-
ommended number per operative. The units were designed to run up to 
1000 m/min (with a minimum line speed of 700 m/min). 
 8.4 
 The impact of material selection and processing 
parameters on ICS yarn properties 
 While much of the data available on ICS emanate from the Bobtex organi-
zation, there were a limited number of publications from academics. There 
were also commentaries in trade journals on the potential and possible limi-
tations of the system. 
 8.8  Bobtex Mark 3 ICS Machine. From publicity material ‘Spin at 1000 
m/min’ supplied to the author by Bobtex International, Leicester, UK. 

Integrated composite spinning (ICS)   161
 8.4.1  Initial predictions 
 Initial discussions centered on the two component yarn system, and the 
fi rst machine, which was called the ‘E7 Bobtex ICSOMAT’ (Bobkowicz 
and Bobkowicz, 1971b), and the yarns produced were called ‘BOBYARNS’ 
(Bobkowicz and Bobkowicz, 1970c). The main conclusions from these 
papers were: the yarn cross-section was variable; the yarn fl exibility was 
improved by using more fi bers and less polymer; adding twist to the yarns 
gave an increase in strength, following a similar trend to the role of twist in 
other staple spinning systems; and fabrics made from composite yarns had 
much better abrasion resistance than fabrics from equivalent spun yarns. 
 The idealized model of the three component ICS yarn is shown in Fig. 8.9 
and, as expected, the various components play different roles in the yarn 
properties. It was argued that Bobtex ICS was the only yarn that could 
be truly engineered to meet specifi c properties – through material selec-
tion and optimization of processing parameters (Riordon and Bobkowicz, 
1974). Table 8.3 is a summary of the impact of material and process on 
specifi c yarn properties. In general, the tensile properties were determined 
primarily by the fi lament core, whereas the bulk and fl exibility were deter-
mined by the staple fi bers on the yarn surface. Consolidation of the struc-
ture was largely governed by the level of false twist that drove the staple 
fi bers into the polymer sheath. Indeed, in extreme cases it was possible to 
get an ‘inverted’ structure where the staple component was totally embed-
ded in the sheath, resulting in no surface fi bers. It was also acknowledged 
by Riordon that Bobtex yarns were stiffer than conventional yarns, but 
it was argued that the difference diminished after fabric fi nishing, which 
tended to break some of the secondary mechanical bonds resulting in a 
softer hand.           
 8.9  Idealized yarn structure. Copied from publicity material ‘Spin at 
1000 m/min’ supplied to author by Bobtex International, Leicester, UK. 

162   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 In a subsequent paper, Bobkowicz identifi ed several market areas that 
he believed offered opportunities for Bobtex yarns, based on their proper-
ties and cost. These were broadly classifi ed as ‘commodity’ and ‘new oppor-
tunity’ yarns, with the former including carpet backing, industrial fabrics, 
and outerwear, whereas the latter related to high tech applications, such as 
the use of glass fi ber core and the manufacture of fl ame-retardant products. 
Other areas of application included fi bers not normally associated with tra-
ditional textiles, such as short fi ber waste, wood pulp, and fi brids, all of which 
are claimed to process into satisfactory yarns (Bobkowicz, 1975b). 
 8.4.2   Results from experimental data on yarns 
 Since the machinery was being developed and improved by the manufac-
turer and undergoing ‘user trials’ with selected partners in the industry, there 
 Table 8.3  Yarn engineering principles 
 Property 
 Variable 
 Comment 
 Tenacity 
 Carrier dominated 
 Fiber assisted 
 Stronger carrier (ﬁ lament) gives stronger 
yarn. Longer stronger ﬁ bers contribute 
more 
 Elongation 
 Carrier dominated 
 Sheath inﬂ uenced 
 Process inﬂ uenced 
 Extensible carrier give extensible 
resultant yarn but can be inﬂ uenced 
by combined effect of polymer/staple 
which can restrict the mobility of the 
ﬁ lament 
 Modulus 
 Carrier dominated 
 Sheath inﬂ uenced 
 As with elongation the role of the sheath 
can modulate the inﬂ uence of the 
core – this depends on adhesion of 
the components 
 Cover 
 Fiber percentage 
 Fiber ﬁ neness 
 Consolidation 
 Finer ﬁ bers (which means a greater 
number of ﬁ bers for the same 
percentage) give better cover as does 
less consolidation (induced by twist) 
 Bulk 
 Consolidation 
 Fiber participation 
 Carrier type 
 Polymer density 
 Fiber crimp level 
 Twist drives the staple into the polymer 
and gives more consolidation but less 
bulk. Split ﬁ lm can give bulkier core 
than ﬁ laments and obviously ﬁ ne 
denier ﬁ bers in the core give more 
bulk than, say a monoﬁ lament 
 Flexibility 
 Polymer percentage 
 Carrier type and 
percentage 
Twister speed 
 Fiber migration 
 Twist inﬂ uences the ﬁ ber migration and 
the ability of the sheath to restrict the 
mobility of the yarn. 
 Cost 
 Components 
proportions 
 The use of lower cost components may be 
possible but yarn quality is essential. 

Integrated composite spinning (ICS)   163
was some confi dentiality about the data generated. This resulted in very lim-
ited independent data or critical commentary on the system, and indeed 
it was apparent that several of the ‘independent’ reports in trade journals 
were very largely based on information released by Bobtex Corporation. 
Mohamed  et al . carried out studies on both the two component and three 
component yarns, investigating the structure and selected properties of the 
yarn and fabric. 
 His initial investigation (Nichols  et al ., 1972) focused on a two component 
yarn, 188 tex made from 55% polyester staple (2.5 dtex, 50 mm) and 45% 
polyethylene resin, and a plain weave fabric made from the yarns. His fi nd-
ings can be summarized as follows:
  The yarn was bulky and regular but weak and highly extensible (proba-
• 
bly associated with undrawn polymer). 
  The cross-section was irregular, often ribbon-like, and the staple com-
• 
ponents were not uniformly distributed, but tended to be concentrated 
on one side of the polymer. Fig. 8.10 is an illustration of the ideal yarn 
structure A compared to what was commonly observed B–F. 
  In some cases the cross-section indicated that the polymer had split into 
• 
smaller parts, shown in Figure 9.10 E/F, but this was considered a positive 
effect, since it could potentially give better fabric cover and softness. 
 8.10  Schematics of observed yarn structure. Redrawn from Nichols 
 et al . (1972). 

 Table 8.4  Physical properties of three component yarns 
 Percentage 
composition 
 Components 
 Tex 
 Breaking 
load (gf) 
 Elongation 
(%) 
 Tenacity 
(gf/tex) 
 40/25/35 
 Cotton (15/16) in./polyester ﬁ lament (132/32 trevira round)/
polyethylene resin 
 62.7 
 770 
 16.8 
 12.3 
 50/25/35 
 Polyester fortrel (1.5 in.  × 1.5 denier)/polyester ﬁ lament (132/32 
trevira round)/polyethylene resin 
 62.5 
 924 
 15.2 
 14.8 
 38/21/41 
 Polyester fortrel (1.5 in.  × 1.5 denier)/polyethylene resin 
 71 
 917 
 18 
 12.9 
 35/17/48 
 Polyester fortrel (1.5 in.  × 1.5 denier)/ﬁ brillated polypropylene 
ﬁ lm/polyethylene resin 
 75 
 725 
 16 
 9.7 
 27/30/43 
 Rayon staple (17/16 in.  × 1.5 denier)/polypropylene ﬁ lm/
polyethylene resin 
 184 
 1866 
 10 
 10.1 
 34/30/36 
 Polypropylene staple (2 in.  × 6 denier)/polypropylene ﬁ lm/
polyethylene resin 
 192 
 1490 
 24 
 7.8 
 38/24/38 
 Nylon staple 2in.  × 2.5 denier)/nylon ﬁ lament (100/32)/nylon resin 
 45 
 530 
 32 
 11.8 
 27/23/50 
 Wool (2 in. 64 s)/nylon ﬁ lament (100/32)/nylon resin 
 48 
 506 
 40 
 10.5 

Integrated composite spinning (ICS)   165
  The addition of twist to the yarn was found to increase the strength 
• 
and extensibility up to a maximum before declining with further twist 
(exhibiting a similar behavior to that found in ring spun yarns). 
  The tensile behavior of the yarn showed three regions: an initial higher 
• 
modulus region due to staple fi bers, followed by a low modulus as the 
polymer was drawn, and fi nally a higher modulus as the drawn polymer 
extended and broke. 
  Because of the variation in cross-section and uneven coverage of the 
• 
yarn, the bending rigidity was found to vary along the yarn length. 
 In a follow-up paper (Mohamed  et al ., 1974), the properties of three compo-
nent ICS yarns were studied. It was claimed that with suitable choice of raw 
material many different properties could be achieved, and Table 8.4 shows 
typical examples of yarns. Analysis of cross-sections of the various yarns 
indicated that the cross-sectional shape was very much dependent on the 
shape of the core yarn. Thus, while a fi lament yarn (sample 1 in Table 8.4) 
yielded a round cross-section, the use of fi brillated tape (sample 4) produced 
a fl attened shape. It was also found that for some yarns there was signifi cant 
migration of the staple into the polymer (and associated movement of poly-
mer to the surface of the yarn). Yarn sample 1 was evaluated for tensile 
properties and then re-evaluated after the chemical removal of the staple 
fi bers and the polymer. Table 8.5 shows that, while the strength of the yarn 
was higher when the staple fi bers were present, the tenacity was lower than 
the fi laments. Additionally, the presence of polymer and staple reduces the 
elongation of the yarn. 
 8.4.3  Results from experimental data focusing on fabrics 
 Nichols  et al . (1972) made observations on the cross-section of plain fab-
rics that had been woven from two component yarn, and there was some 
 Table 8.5  Tensile properties of three component ICS yarn 
 Yarn 
 Tex 
 Breaking 
load (gf) 
 Tenacity 
(gf/tex) 
 Extension 
(%) 
 Initial 
modulus 
(gf/tex) 
 Speciﬁ c 
work of 
rupture 
(gf/tex/in.) 
 Yarn 1 Table 8.4 
 62.7 
 770 
 12.3 
 16.8 
 243.9 
 1.5 
 Yarn 1 with 
cotton 
removed 
 48 
 470 
 14.0 
 27.5 
 142.8 
 2.4 
 Yarn 1 with 
cotton and 
resin removed 
 17.7 
 543 
 30.6 
 20.0 
 345.9 
 3.6 

166   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
concern that there may be shedding of the staple component during weav-
ing. There had also been concern about the stiffness of the yarns, since this 
could result in harsh handling fabrics, which would severely curtail their 
potential areas of application. Lord (1974) carried out some experimenta-
tion on denim manufactured from blue cotton warp and Bobtex weft yarn. 
The weft was 45 tex made from 35% (38 mm, 1.3 dtex) rayon, 35% fi lament 
nylon carrier, and 30% polyethylene polymer. It was expected that wash-
ing would soften the fabric; however, there was little change after several 
washing and drying cycles. This result is thought to be associated with the 
combined effects of the washing, breaking the bonds, and softening the fab-
ric, which was countered by fabric shrinkage, which made the fabric stiffer. 
In strength, tear, and abrasion tests the fabric performance was very good 
when compared to a fabric made from 100% cotton, and in some cases the 
fabric properties improved after washing. 
 8.5 
 Commercialization of the process 
 It is clearly evident that Bobtex managed to maintain active press cov-
erage of its developments, and particularly the performance benefi ts 
of its yarn and the economic advantages of its process. In an article on 
cost issues, Lord (1973) indicated that there may be potential disadvan-
tages in moving from a two component to a three component yarn. He 
explained that the core yarn (carrier), which must be greater than 10% of 
the total yarn weight, represented the most signifi cant cost, although the 
use of fi brillated tape could offer some savings. For stronger yarns the core 
component should be increased, but it was essential to ensure that there 
was always adequate staple fi ber to give good cover. He also indicated 
that there were many available resins that could be used, and it may have 
thus been possible to use lower cost resins in less critical applications and 
potentially reduce the overall raw material costs. Typically, fi ne yarns (<30 
tex) required about 30% resin, whereas coarser yarns (>100 tex) could 
be made with 20%. There were many staple fi bers that could be used, but 
fi ner fi bers, while being generally more expensive, gave better cover and 
softness to the yarn. 
 Through various trade shows and conferences, the textile industry was 
kept aware of Bobtex technology. Frequent press releases before and during 
the international Textile Machinery Exhibition in Milan in 1975, indicated 
that Mk 1 Model B, an updated version of the machine, would be exhibited. 
It was also announced that Leesona Corporation had been granted a non-
exclusive license to commercialize the Bobtex ICS system. It was notewor-
thy that Johnson (1975) produced a short, technical article indicating the 
signifi cance of tension on the carrier and particularly the problem of main-
taining constant tension when processing at high speeds. Specially designed 

Integrated composite spinning (ICS)   167
hysteresis tensioners were incorporated into the threadline to ensure con-
stant tension. 
 To stimulate machinery sales, the economic advantages of Bobtex ICS 
were promoted, and this included the encouragement of the use of poly-
propylene as the polymer of choice (Bobkowicz, 1975c). In a subsequent 
paper, Bobkowicz and Slanik (1978) further indicated that alloys of poly-
propylene could be used as polymer and, while this was relatively inex-
pensive, it offered signifi cant benefi ts in terms of reduced yarn stiffness 
coupled with better bonding of staple fi ber components. In this paper it is 
also shown that for coarse count yarns, payback on investment for a 20 posi-
tion ICS installation (from bale to yarn) could be less than one year when 
the machinery was operated at the highest production speeds. Typical areas 
of application for the yarns are given in Table 8.6. Similar reports concern-
ing the benefi ts of the new alloy polypropylene appeared elsewhere, along 
with indications of the possibilities of producing economic fl ame-retardant 
fabrics (Anon, 1978).      
 While Bobtex was promoting the ICS system, there was also a lot of 
news coverage surrounding a development in the UK, which was the 
fi rst commercial production unit of Bobtex ICS (Anon, 1981a). Remora 
Textiles Ltd., led by Alan Barnes, had moved to a purpose-built building 
in Leicester, which was the heart of the UK knitting industry, and set up a 
group of ten Bobtex ICS machines plus the necessary preparatory machin-
ery. Barnes had purchased a group of machines that had been used in dif-
ferent processing mills on a trial basis, and assembled them into a single 
production unit (Lennox-Kerr, 1980a). The report was very favorable and, 
by working with the local knitting industry, it appeared that Remora might 
make a success of Bobtex. One particular comment was that the rigidity of 
the core structure actually presented benefi ts in certain applications, such 
as pleated knitted skirts, which were prone to sagging when made from 
staple yarns. 
 Table 8.6  Examples of applications of ICS yarn 
 Application 
 Remarks 
 Produce packaging 
 Woven or knit bags, strong, lightweight, spun surface 
does not damage produce, waste ﬁ ber used for 
cover. 
 Industrial and 
environmental 
 High abrasion resistance, unique constructions for 
chemical and surface needs. 
 Decorative, household 
 Easy multi-color, high wear. 
 Fashion outerwear 
 Superior knittability, Shetland colors easy, wool and 
naturals desired hand and softness, fancy knits. 
 Protective 
 Anti-ﬂ am construction inherent: clothing, drapery, 
upholstery. 

168   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 Other reports (Anon, 1980b) indicated that Remora had conducted mar-
ket research and focused production of yarns using wool, acrylic, and wool/
acrylic blends, and making yarns of 65, 80, and 104 tex with 167, 220, and 330 
dtex polyester core yarns. The yarns were claimed (Anon, 1980a) to offer 
better stitch clarity, and it was argued that the claimed superior abrasion 
resistance would be readily applicable to the sock market. Lennox-Kerr 
(1980b) reported that as well as offering the advantage of 10% greater bulk, 
the yarns were also typically 10% cheaper than their traditionally spun 
equivalents. It is interesting to note that in the initial stages Remora worked 
closely with fi ber producers Monsanto and Viscosuisse to optimize fi ber 
and machine parameters for the core and staple components of the yarns 
(Anon, 1981b). 
 Early in 1981, Remora was spinning 3.5 tons per week on ten machines, 
and two additional machines were due for delivery. The goal was to add an 
additional machine to give a capacity of 20 tons per week (Anon, 1981b). 
Unfortunately, the dreams of the various reporters were never realized, and 
Remora and its machines disappeared. The reasons for this failure are com-
plex, since the company was exploring alternative markets to develop the 
business, including more technical yarns for fl ame resist products (Barnes, 
1984). Unfortunately, this was a time when the UK textile industry was 
downsizing and global completion was becoming a reality. International 
sourcing meant that products were being imported for prices cheaper than 
they could be manufactured in the UK, largely because of labor costs, and 
thus the market for yarns for the commodity market was waning. 
 8.6 
 Assessing the advantages and 
disadvantages of ICS technology 
 Bobtex ICS was part of the boom that occurred in new spinning methods 
in the 1970/1980 era, and to yarn technologists it seemed to offer a lot of 
potential, but it perhaps suffered from the mindset ‘if it’s strong and I can 
spin it fast and economically then it will succeed.’ Bobtex was only one of 
many systems that either died or ended up in small niche markets despite 
offering signifi cant promise. 
 There are several aspects which must be considered when determining 
the ‘quality’ of a yarn:
 Performance parameters 
• 
   Physical attributes, which are normally measured in a testing lab-
• 
oratory, such as strength, uniformity, bulk, abrasion resistance, etc. 
These can be readily measured but the translation of these proper-
ties through to fabric and end-product must also be evaluated. 

Integrated composite spinning (ICS)   169
  Processing performance, including some measure of how well the 
• 
yarn spins, knits, and weaves. This should also take into consideration 
how easily the fabric can be fi nished and ultimately converted into a 
product (is it easy to sew?) 
 Cost 
• 
   This should consider the cost to manufacture the yarn, through to the 
• 
fi nal product including special fi nishing treatments that may need to 
be used. 
 Aesthetics 
• 
   The majority of apparel textiles are bought based on perceptions 
• 
of aesthetics, and this includes appearance, color, feel, and these so-
called ‘tactivisual properties’ (i.e. those perceived through touch and 
sight) are based on personal preferences. 
 In order to be successful, a yarn must be adequate in all of the above areas, 
and not just outstanding in one or two. 
 Despite the many articles to the contrary, there were certainly problems 
with Bobtex as an apparel yarn. While the use of different polymers to bind 
the staple to the core resulted in some improvement in aesthetics, the yarns 
and fabrics were still distinctly different from the products they were trying 
to replace, and it is likely that the apparel market should not have been con-
sidered a real opportunity for Bobtex yarns. 
 8.7 
 Future trends 
 It is interesting to note that, with the growth in demand for composite prod-
ucts, there is a renewed interest in composite yarns. One particular area of 
focus is the use of natural fi bers in a synthetic resin; however, there is an 
issue in obtaining adequate distribution of the resin through the fi bers. A 
possible solution to this problem is to use composite yarns, where the natu-
ral staple fi ber has been combined with a fi lament, which can be formed into 
fabric and then molded. When heat is applied, the fi lament melts and pro-
vides intimate penetration of the staple component (Jing, 2012). A potential 
advantage of this approach is that the orientation of the staple fi bers can 
potentially be controlled by the technique used to produce the composite 
yarn (since this is signifi cantly infl uenced by the degree of alignment of the 
staple component). 
 A further potential area of application of composite yarns is in the pro-
cessing of much shorter fi bers, such as for example carbon nanotubes. It is 
interesting to note that one of the many patents fi led by Bobkowicz per-
tained specifi cally to the processing of fi brids (specifi ed as 1/8–1/2 inch and 
0.2 and 1 denier), and it was argued that there was no other satisfactory 

170   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
technique of spinning these fi bers into yarns. (Bobkowicz and Bobkowicz, 
1971a). This technology was based around the two component system in 
which the fi brids were embedded into a molten polymer, which may be 
drawn during yarn formation. The patent claims: ‘Thus, according to the 
invention there is fi rst of all provided a novel composite yarn of high absor-
bency, high retention of absorbed liquid, outstanding durability, excellent 
tensile strength, superior stretch and recovery characteristics, easy perfor-
mance in washing and dry cleaning, good heat sealability, excellent surface 
softness as well as fi brous touch and, with selected fi brids, a good chemical 
resistance and dielectric strength’ (Bobkowicz and Bobkowicz, 1971a). 
 The idea of using a polymeric adhesive to bind very short fi bers to a core 
yarn was also proposed by Schutte (1976), where the ‘fi bers’ were fl ock, 
from wood pulp, with lengths of less than 0.25 in. While this patent shows 
idealized structures and provides examples of yarn properties, there is no 
clear indication of the technology used to manufacture the yarns. While 
fl ocked yarns, using very short fi bers to cover the surface, tend to rely 
on different technology from the original ICS concept, which was based 
around an extrusion process, the product from fl ocking is somewhat sim-
ilar. A further major difference between fl ocking and the original ICS is 
that the fi bers are added to the core, which is covered with an adhesive, by 
means of electrostatic forces (Haranoya and Iwamoyo, 1989). There is pres-
ently considerable interest in yarn fl ocking technology, which is claimed to 
be driven by market forces, and there is active research into better produc-
tion techniques.  
 8.8 
 Conclusion 
 While the Bobtex ICS system was a sophisticated system and offered the 
opportunity to engineer certain yarn characteristics, it could never offer soft 
‘aesthetically pleasing’ yarns. Composites are fundamentally stiffer, and this 
is evidenced in nature where fi bers in a matrix create more rigid structures. 
Indeed, this problem was experienced in other spinning systems, where core 
fi bers were bound together, since it prevents relative movement of fi bers 
and thus the product will always be relatively stiff. There never seemed to 
be market research aimed at identifying a market where a stiff yarn could be 
advantageous. Unfortunately, the quest seemed to be commodity yarns, and 
this was a major mistake in developing a new market for a new yarn. 
 Even Remora, who were hailed as the future of the UK yarn manufactur-
ing industry, fl oundered by selecting the wrong market. While it seemed 
likely that here could be a market for wool and wool/acrylic blend yarns, 
the wool market is probably the most diffi cult to introduce change, with 
purchasers of wool garments being typically conservative and not ready to 
accept changes. Added to this problem is the fact that wool is a fairly stiff 

Integrated composite spinning (ICS)   171
fi ber and as such is not the ideal choice for inclusion in a yarn that is further 
stiffened by the structure. While Remora was considering technical applica-
tions, they unfortunately spent considerably more effort developing prod-
uct for the apparel industry, which proved to be an expensive exercise with 
limited opportunity. 
 It is evident that this approach of misidentifying trends was a problem at 
the beginning of the development of Bobtex, when for example the yarns 
were proposed as candidates for inclusion in denim fabrics. A major fashion 
feature of denim is that it fades and can be distressed; however, claims made 
for Bobtex were that its wear characteristics, including abrasion resistance, 
were much better than other yarns. This would appear to restrict the appli-
cation of Bobtex to denim that would be used only for work-wear. 
 A fi nal question would be: ‘if Bobtex were to be introduced today, would 
it be successful?’ If the strategy were ‘to create yarns to meet technical 
requirements, rather than creating a yarn and then trying to fi nd a use for 
it in an apparel application,’ then it is believed that it could be successful 
in specialist, but high value, markets such as medical, technical, and sports 
applications. As indicated above, there is a growing demand for yarns made 
from ‘non-textile’ fi bers and, while there are coating techniques available, 
these tend to lack the elegance and fl exibility of Bobtex. 
 As a long time ‘yarn technologist,’ if given the opportunity to acquire one 
piece of spinning equipment, a Bobtex ICS machine would be always the 
fi rst choice, and this is a view shared by colleagues with similar interests. 
 8.9 
 References 
 Anon (1978), Update on unconventional spinning,  Textile Industries , March. 
 Anon (1980a), Leicester’s revolutionary new spinning mill,  Knitting International , 
August. 
 Anon (1980b), Rethink yarn manufacture,  African Textiles , November, 13–15. 
 Anon (1981a), British plant makes a go of the Bobtex yarn system,  Canadian Textile 
Journal , January, 44. 
 Anon (1981b), Leicester spinners are the world leader in Bobtex technology,  Textile 
Month , February, 38–39. 
 Barnes A. (1984), Flame resistant yarns and fabrics, and furnishings incorporating 
such fabrics, EP0106840. 
 Bobkowicz E. and Bobkowicz A.J. (1967), Textured fi lament yarns, USP 3347727. 
 Bobkowicz E. and Bobkowicz A.J. (1970a), Universal open-end spinning method of 
multicomponent yarns production, USP 3494118. 
 Bobkowicz E. and Bobkowicz A.J. (1970b), Method and apparatus for ringless spin-
ning of fi ber-polymer yarns, USP 3548581. 
 Bobkowicz E. and Bobkowicz A.J. (1970c), The Bobtex ICS process,  Canadian Textile 
Journal , April, 77–84. 
 Bobkowicz E. and Bobkowicz A.J. (1971a), Composite yarns and method of manu-
facture, USP 3621646. 

172   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 Bobkowicz E. and Bobkowicz A.J. (1971b), The Bobtex yarn-making technology: its 
future and implications,  Textile Research Journal ,  41 , 773–778 
 Bobkowicz E. and Bobkowicz A.J. (1974a), Composite spinning, USP 3844097. 
 Bobkowicz E. and Bobkowicz A.J. (1974b), Aerodynamic spinning of composite 
yarns, USP 3848403. 
 Bobkowicz E. and Bobkowicz A.J. (1975a), Composite yarn forming method and 
apparatus, USP 3924396. 
 Bobkowicz A.J. (1975b), Bobtex integrated composite spinning yarns: applications 
and possible offsprings,  Modern Textiles , June. 
 Bobkowicz A.J. (1975c), Polypropylene and ICS processing,  International Conference 
on ‘ Polypropylene Fibers in Textiles ’, University of York, UK, 1 October, paper 
G7. 
 Bobkowicz E. (1976), Method and apparatus for the manufacture of composite yarn 
products, USP 3987612. 
 Bobkowicz A.J. and Slanik J. (1978), Bobtex integrated composite spinning: new 
use of fi bers and polymer alloys to modify fi laments’ surface,  Canadian Textile 
Journal , May. 
 Bobkowicz A.J. (1981), POY yarn compositions, USP 4244174. 
 Denton M.J. and Daniels P.N. (2002),  Textile Terms and Defi nitions , Manchester, UK, 
The Textile Institute. 
 Haranoya T. and Iwamoyo S. (1989), Flocked yarn and method for manufacture, 
USP 4886693. 
 Jeddi A.A.A., Johari M.S. and Merati A.A. (2009), A study of the structure and phys-
ical properties of cotton-covered nylon fi lament core-spun yarns,  Journal of the 
Textile Institute ,  88 , 12–20. 
 Jiang J. and Chen N. (2012), Preforms and composites manufactured by novel fl ax/
polypropylene co-wrap spinning method,  Journal of Composite Materials , 
Available from  http://jcm.sagepub.com/content/early/2012/01/18/00219983114
30155 (Accessed 27 April 2012). 
 Johnson F.M. (1975), Bobtex ICS machine design considerations,  Canadian Textile 
Journal , October. 
 Jou G.T., East G.C., Lawrence C.A. and Oxenham W. (1996), The physical proper-
ties of composite yarns produced by an electrostatic-fi lament charging method, 
 Journal of the Textile Institute ,  87 , 78–97. 
 Lennox-Kerr P. (1980a), A yarn for the times?,  Textile Asia , November, 11. 
 Lennox-Kerr P. (1980b), Bobtex: the system takes off at Remora Textiles,  Textile 
Institute and Industry , November, 307–308. 
 Lord P.R. (1973), Three-component Bobtex yarns raise cost question,  Textile Month , 
September, 85–89 
 Lord P.R. (1974), Bobtex denim: some surprises,  Textile Industries , May. 
 Mohamed M.H. (1973), Bobtex (ICS) new yarn and new technology,  Canadian 
Textile Journal , September, 91–94. 
 Mohamed M.H., Rochow T.G. and Heeralal R. (1974), Some structural and physical 
properties of yarn made on the integrated composite spinning system. Part II: 
Three-component yarn,  Textile Research Journal ,  44 , 206–213. 
 Nichols L.D., Mohamed M.H. and Rochow T.G. (1972), Some structural and physical 
properties of yarn made on the integrated composite spinning system. Part I: 
Two-component yarns,  Textile Research Journal ,  42 , 338–344. 

Integrated composite spinning (ICS)   173
 Nield R. and Ali R.A. (1977), Open-end-spun core-spun yarns,  Journal of the Textile 
Institute ,  68 , 223–229. 
 Orleck H.G. and Ulku S. (2007), Effects of spandex and yarn counts on the prop-
erties of elastic core-spun yarns produced on Murata Vortex spinner,  Textile 
Research Journal ,  77 , 432–436. 
 Riordon P.R. and Bobkowicz A.J. (1974), Bobtex ICS as a new system for making 
yarns,  Textile Manufacturer , July, 26–30. 
 Selling H.J. (1971),  Twistless Yarns , Watford, Merrow Publishing Co. Ltd. 
 Schutte R.W. (1976), Flocked elementary element and structures made therefrom, 
USP 3 968 283. 
 Xie Y., Oxenham W. and Grosberg P. (1986), A study of the strength of wrapped 
yarns. Part I: The theoretical model,  Journal of the Textile Institute ,  77 , 295–304. 
 

© 2014 Woodhead Publishing Limited
174
 9 
 Wet spinning of synthetic polymer fibers  
 B.  OZIPEK  and  H.  KARAKAS , 
 Istanbul Technical University, Turkey 
 DOI : 10.1533/9780857099174.2.174 
 Abstract: This chapter deals with the production of wet-spun man-made 
fi bers. In this context, major commercially available wet-spun fi bers are 
discussed. The principles of wet spinning, including extrusion, coagulation, 
and drawing stages are described. Parameters affecting polymer solution 
and spinning process which, in turn, determine the resultant fi ber 
behavior and performance, are briefl y explained. Special attention is 
given to acrylic and cuprammonium fi ber production and resultant fi ber 
characteristics. End-use properties of wet-spun fi bers are also evaluated. 
Finally, new developments in the wet-spun fi ber production and future 
prospects are outlined. 
 Key words: wet spinning, extrusion, coagulation, stretching, fi ber 
properties. 
 9.1 
 Introduction 
 Solution spinning techniques require dissolving of polymer in a solvent 
without degrading the polymer. The wet spinning process involves fi lament 
extrusion into a nonsolvent. Since it is a gentle process, applying lower tem-
peratures, it has been the preferred method for production of fi bers that 
cannot be melt spun. The wet spinning process offers the advantage of pro-
ducing a wide variety of fi ber cross-sectional shapes and sizes. Higher pro-
duction speeds have been successfully attained in wet spinning over the last 
few years. This chapter focuses on the principles of wet spinning, with spe-
cial emphasis on cuprammonium rayon and acrylic production. 
 9.2 
 Principles of wet spinning 
 Wet spinning of fi bers requires pumping of the polymer solution through 
the fi ne orifi ces of a spinneret into a coagulating bath, and drawing off as 
continuous fi laments by means of take-up rollers. The bath removes the sol-
vent from the as-spun fi laments so that they become solidifi ed. They are 
collected together to form a continuous tow or rope. 

Wet spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   175
 The wet spinning method was fi rst used in the manufacture of rayon 
(Chardonnet Silk) by extruding the alcoholic solution of the cellulose 
nitrate through a mouthpiece dipped in cold water. As the stream of collo-
dion (solution of cellulose nitrate) passes through the water, the fi laments 
are stretched and solidifi ed. Solidifi cation of the fi lament takes place from 
surface to the core. Originally, the viscose solution, which is ripped, is forced 
by compressed air to the spinning frame. The pump used for production 
of viscose is usually of the gear type through which the viscose passes to 
the fi lter, and subsequently through a spinneret. The spinnerets are gener-
ally submerged in an acid bath, and are usually arranged so that fi laments 
emerge almost at right angles to the surface of the bath. As the viscose solu-
tion passes through the jets into the acid bath, it solidifi es into fi laments, 
owing to regeneration of the cellulose. Signifi cantly lower speeds are used in 
wet spinning compared to melt and dry spinning techniques, as the spinning 
takes place using fl uids of higher viscosity that generate high tension on the 
fi laments. This problem can be overcome by using low speeds. 
 Wet spinning of  acrylic fi bers  may be carried out in a variety of precipi-
tating baths. Glycerol or water is used in the baths. Meanwhile, no specifi c 
method has been released for a particular yarn production yet. Differences 
in bath composition result in signifi cant differences in the properties of the 
acrylic fi bers produced. 
 Some of the baths used for acrylic fi bers can be summarized as follows:
   A 20% solution of polymer in ethylene carbonate is heated to 120 ° C, 
• 
and extruded into a bath of 80% dipropylene glycol and 20% ethylene 
carbonate at 130 ° C. The yarn is washed with water at 80 ° C, stretched 
ten-fold at 150 ° C, and fi nally relaxed at 140 ° C (Fig. 9.1) . 
  A 20% solution of polymer in dimethyl acetamide is spun into glycerol 
• 
at 140 ° C and wound on to a bobbin, which is washed free of glycerol with 
water and dried. The yarn is maintained under tension during its passage 
through the glycerol bath. Sometimes two glycerol baths may be used, 
the fi rst at 120 ° C and the second at 170 ° C. 
  A 20% solution of polymer in dimethyl acetamide is spun into a 40% 
• 
solution of calcium chloride in water at 90 ° C. 
  An 18% solution of polymer in dimethyl acetamide is spun into a mix-
• 
ture of 2 parts dimethyl acetamide and 1 part water. As the yarn emerges 
from the bath, it is washed with water, which fl ows counter-currently 
into the spinning bath at such a rate that the bath composition is kept 
constant. Dimethyl acetamide is continually being added to the polymer 
while it is extruded. 
  In the case of Courtelle®, which is a commercial type of acrylic fi ber by 
• 
Acordis Acrylic Fiber and formerly Courtaulds, the polymer was origi-
nally dissolved in a strong aqueous solution of calcium thiocyanate and 

176   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
was spun in an aqueous bath. Besides dimethyl acetamide, dimethyl 
formamide, 60% zinc chloride, and 70% nitric acid are solvents that can 
be used for the preparation of acrylic fi laments (Fig. 9.2) . 
 Alginate fi bers  are also produced by the wet spinning method. The alginic 
acid is reacted in the solid state with sodium carbonate and the resulting 
sodium alginate is used for spinning. The grade used for fi ber spinning has 
a viscosity of about 60–80 centistokes in 1% solution at 25 ° C; lower grades 
(lower viscosities) give poor fi bers. Much higher grades are more diffi cult to 
 9.1  Production of wet-spun acrylic ﬁ ber. ( Source : Courtesy of Aksa, a 
member of AKKOK Group of Companies, Turkey.) 
 9.2  Extrusion of acrylic ﬁ bers from the spinneret. ( Source : Courtesy of 
Aksa, a member of AKKOK Group of Companies, Turkey.) 

Wet spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   177
dissolve and fi lter, but may yield a better quality fi ber than any made from 
seaweed. A solution of 8–9% sodium alginate is prepared and is sterilized by 
the addition of a bactericide. It is fi ltered and spun into a coagulating bath 
containing normal calcium chloride solution, 0.02 N hydrochloric acid solu-
tion, and a small quantity of a cationic surface active agent. As the sodium 
alginate is ejected from the jet it is precipitated in the form of calcium algi-
nate fi laments. The fi laments are drawn together, washed, lubricated, dried, 
and wound. The function of the hydrochloric acid is to prevent closure of 
the jets by the growth of calcium alginate on their sides; that of the cationic 
agent is to prevent fi lament adhesion. 
 Aramid fi bers  are produced via the wet spinning process. Kevlar and 
Twaron are both p-phenyleneterephthalamides (PPTA), the simplest form 
of the AABB para-polyaramide. PPTA is a product of p-phenylenediamine 
(PPD) and terephthaloyl dichloride (TDC or TCl). Production of PPTA 
relies on a co-solvent with an ionic component (calcium chloride, CaCl 2 ) 
to occupy the hydrogen bonds of the amide groups, and an organic com-
ponent (N-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP)) to dissolve the aromatic polymer. 
After production of the polymer, the aramid fi ber is produced by spinning 
the dissolved polymer from a liquid chemical blend to form a solid fi ber. The 
polymer solvent for spinning PPTA is generally 100% anhydrous sulfuric 
acid (H 2 SO 4 ). 
 Dynel, a  modacrylic fi ber , is a wet-spun fi ber. Two chemicals, i.e. acry-
lonitrile and vinyl chloride, are co-polymerized in the ratio of 2:3 and the 
copolymer is dissolved to a 21% solution in acetone. The acetone solution 
is de-aerated, fi ltered, and then extruded by the usual wet spinning tech-
nique into a water bath, where it coagulates to form continuous strands of 
fi laments. 
 9.3 
 Types of fibers used 
 Production of viscose rayon and cuprammonium rayon will be described as 
they are among the oldest wet-spun man-made fi bers. 
 9.3.1  Production of viscose rayon 
 Viscose rayon fi ber production benefi ts from the wet spinning process, 
as it necessitates spinning of fi lament from a liquid of regenerated cellu-
lose in a spinning bath. The viscose process consists of the following steps 
(Fig. 9.3) :
   1.   
  Steeping: cellulose pulps in large white sheets are immersed in vats con-
taining 17–20% aqueous sodium hydroxide (NaOH) at a temperature 

178   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
ranging between 18 ° C and 25 ° C. The cellulose sheets are swollen, and 
cellulose is converted into alkali cellulose. 
  2.     Pressing: the swollen alkali cellulose sheets are pressed so that a press 
weight ratio of 2.7–3.0 is obtained. This is the ratio of the weight of 
pressed alkali cellulose sheet to air-dried pulp. 1 
  3.     Shredding: the sheets of alkali cellulose are mechanically shredded in 
the form of ‘crumbs,’ which are fi nely divided particles. This process 
provides increased surface area to increase the reaction ability of alkali 
cellulose. 
  4.     Ageing: ageing aims to decrease the polymerization degree of alkali cel-
lulose to the desired level. This process allows the alkali cellulose under 
controlled humidity and temperature conditions to obtain the required 
viscosity for spinning. 
  5.     Xanthation: this step is the reaction of aged alkali cellulose with carbon 
disulfi de to have a resultant mass of cellulose xanthate. The cellulose 
crumbs become orange in color at the end of this process. 
  6.     Preparation of the viscose solution: the cellulose xanthate is mixed with 
an aqueous caustic solution in a stirring tank to form the viscous solu-
tion. It is called ‘viscose’ as this solution has a high viscosity. The viscose 
solution is thoroughly fi ltered to remove any undissolved material, and 
then de-aerated for removal of all air bubbles. 
  7.     Ripening: in order to decrease the viscosity of the prepared solution, it 
is allowed to ripen for a period of time. During this process, the xanthate 
groups revert to cellulosic hydroxyls and free CS 2 . 
  8.     Filtering and degassing: the solution is then fi ltered once more to pre-
vent the disruption of the spinning process. The air bubbles are removed, 
as otherwise they may lead to breaks or weak spots during spinning. 
 9.  Spinning: Viscous rayon fi laments are spun by wet spinning process. The 
viscous fl uid is delivered to the spinneret, which is immersed in a spin 
bath containing sulfuric acid, sodium sulfate and zinc sulfate. As the 
rayon fi laments rapidly coagulate they are stretched, and cellulose xan-
thate decomposes to regenerated cellulose. 
 10.  Drawing, washing and cutting: the viscose rayon fi laments are drawn to 
exhibit orientation of molecular chains along the fi ber axis. This step 
is intended to obtain the required tenacity for use as textile fi bers. The 
impurities and salts are washed away. This is followed by cutting if the 
fi laments are to be converted to staple form. 
 Instead of batchwise processes, continuous processes are predominantly 
used in the viscose process. Process continuity has been guaranteed via 
improved level of automation. 1 
 The environmental impact of viscose processes, energy consumption, and 
use of limited sources and disposability of the products have been major 

Wet spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   179
issues in the recent years. Additionally, viscose fi ber manufacturing plants 
have effl uent generation, as viscose fi ber manufacturing can be regarded 
as a wet process using high amounts of process water. Use of carbon disul-
fi de is an important burden for the environment. Sulfur recovery cannot 
be maintained at 100%, as it forms sulfur compounds such as CS 2 , H 2 S, 
COS, and SO 2 . These compounds can be found in exhaust gases, spin baths, 
and wastes. 2  Effective recovery of CS 2  and H 2 S, and attempts to reduce the 
use of chemicals such as NaOH and H 2 SO 4 , have been the most impor-
tant objectives of the viscose industry’s environmental concerns. CS 2  is an 
expensive material, and therefore its reuse is preferred. The high amounts of 
CS 2  and H 2 S are removed by degassing for easier recovery. Spinning liquors 
are evaporated and CS 2  is mostly recovered by condensation or adsorption 
from high and low concentrated process exhaust gases respectively. In most 
viscose plants, precipitated crystals of Na 2 SO 4 (Glauber’s salt) are mostly 
Steeping
Pressing
Shredding
Ageing
Xanthation
Dissolution
Ripening
Filtration, degassing
Spinning
Drawing, washing, cutting
 9.3   Viscose ﬁ ber production steps. 

180   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
heated and converted into anhydrous sodium sulfate for use. The viscose 
spinning bath contains zinc sulfate, which has also to be recovered, due to 
environmental concerns. Effl uent treatment is made through chemical or 
biological treatment. 3 
 9.3.2   Production of cuprammonium rayon 
 The cuprammonium rayon process was fi rst used in America by the American 
Bemberg Corporation in 1926, in a plant located in Elizabethton, Tennessee. 
The trade name of this rayon yarn was Bemberg. In fact, the technology for 
the production of Bemberg was fi rst invented by a German, J.P. Bemberg, and 
the fi rst commercial production began in Germany in 1897. The parent com-
pany J. P. Bemberg was the German affi liate of VereinigteGlanzstoffFabriken. 
Today, Asahi Chemical Industries Corporation in Japan and Bemberg SpA 
in Italy produce Bemberg. 
 Cotton linters, the short fi bers on the surface of cotton seed after gin-
ning, are used for this process, and the solvent used here is a mixture of 
copper hydroxide and aqueous ammonia. The solution of copper hydroxide 
(or basic copper sulfate), aqueous ammonia, and cellulose is fi ltered and 
degassed, followed by the addition of a small amount of aqueous sodium 
hydroxide. A process called ‘stretch spinning,’ invented by Edmund Thiele 
in 1901 in Germany and fi rst used by J. P. Bemberg AG, was used for the pro-
duction of Bemberg. The fi laments are formed during the passage of the sol-
vent from the spinnerets through a cone-shaped tunnel with degassed and 
deionized water. Ammonia and some of the copper are removed during the 
passage of the fi laments. Coagulation takes place in this tunnel, and mean-
while the coagulated dope is elongated hundreds of times, resulting in fi ber 
formation. The yarn is then washed thoroughly with water and then dried. 
 Asahi Chemicals Industries Corporation developed the double or triple 
funnel system and a bath between 1950 and 1990. A number of patents 
were taken to improve the ‘two-step funnel’ concept. In 1962, Aizawa  et al . 
invented an improved method for the stretch-spinning process by discharg-
ing the spinning solution into a stream of coagulating liquid fl ow. The sec-
tional view of the invention and the conventional funnel type can be seen 
in Fig. 9.4. The apparatus consisted of a conical tube, a long straight tube, 
and a coagulation zone. The cuprammonium spinning solution with a coag-
ulating liquid was extruded into a stretch coagulation zone and stretched. 
Then they were passed into a further coagulation zone, prior to comple-
tion of the fi rst coagulation process, where the fl ow rate of the coagulat-
ing liquid was diminished. Coagulation was completed in a relaxed state . 
Thereby, cuprammonium rayons of superior tenacity, homogeneous sec-
tional structure and easy resin fi nishing character were achieved. 4–7  

Wet spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   181
 9.3.3  Production of lyocell 
 Lyocell fi bers were fi rst developed and manufactured as Tencel ™  fi ber by 
Courtaulds Fibers, UK, in the 1980s. Lenzing AG, Austria produces lyocell 
under the brand name ‘Lyocell by Lenzing.’ The generic name being ‘lyocell,’ 
the fi bers are produced under brand names that include Tencel (Acordis, 
5
(a)
(b)
7
4
6
1
d1
l1
′
d2
′
d1
′
l2
′
d2
2
3
8
l1
l2
 9.4  (a) Sectional view of the apparatus invented by Aizawa  et al ., 
(b) Typical conventional funnel type apparatus. 7 

182   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
previously Courtaulds), Lenzing Lyocell (Lenzing), Newcell (Akzo Nobel), 
and special brands including Seacell (Zimmer AG). 2 
 Lyocell and viscose are produced from wood pulp but with different 
manufacturing processes. Lyocell is produced by direct dissolving process 
and involves no derivative, unlike viscose rayon. 
 Solution of hot N-Methylmorpholine-N-oxide (NMMO), a cyclic amine 
oxide that has proved to be an excellent solvent for cellulose, is used to dis-
solve wood pulp. The viscous solution, after fi ltering, is spun into a coagu-
lation bath of aqueous solution of the amine oxide. (Gupta, Kothari). The 
spinning process is followed by washing and drying of the fi laments. The pro-
cess gives the advantages of a reduced number of processing stages, almost 
99% solvent recovery, and fi ber properties unattainable by the classic pro-
duction processes. 8–10  Only very small amounts of NMMO remain in the 
waste water, which is further treated biologically. 
 Lyocell fi bers offer advantages with their properties and environment 
friendly production processes. Fibrillation, which is among the most impor-
tant properties of lyocell fi ber, can be used to produce an appealing fabric 
touch called ‘peach-skin effect’. 2 
 9.4 
 Fiber properties 
 Fiber properties are greatly affected from the process parameters of the wet 
spinning process, which is a gentle process on the fi bers. The process also has 
the advantage of offering a wide range of cross-sections. 
 9.4.1   Cross-section 
 Wet spinning offers a wide range of cross-sectional shapes, including circular 
and bean-shaped. Wet-spun fi bers have also been highly stretched approx-
imately to round. This applies to acrylics, cuprammonium, casein, lyocell, 
alginate, or so on. It is worthwhile to note that this is mainly because of the 
usage of aqueous bath in wet spinning. Lyocell fi bers have a circular cross-
section and smooth fi ber surface. 
 9.4.2   Density 
 The density of acrylics is around 1.17 g/c.c. at 25 ° C. For viscose fi bers, it is 
1.52 g/c.c., which is higher than cellulose acetate but equivalent to cupram-
monium. Casein fi bers have a density of 1.29 g/c.c., very similar to wool. On 
the other hand, alginate fi bers have a high metal content; calcium alginate 
contains about 10% calcium, and this brings about the high specifi c density 
of 1.75 g/c.c. Lyocell also has a comparatively high density of 1.5 g/c.c. 

Wet spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   183
 9.4.3  Mechanical properties 
 The tenacity of casein fi bers is about 0.8–1.0 g/den, and the elongation at 
break is about 15%. When wet, the tenacity is very low; this is the main defect 
of casein fi bers, but the elongation at break is correspondingly higher. 
 Ordinary viscose fi ber is reasonably strong, with tenacity about 2.6 g/den. 
This compares very favorably with cellulose acetate, which has a dry tenac-
ity of 1.3–1.7 g/den. The wet strength of viscose fi ber was originally about 
1.4 g/den. A great deal of work has been carried out to increase the wet 
strength of viscose fi bers, and today its different types have rather good wet 
strengths. 
 Calcium alginate fi bers have a dry strength comparable with that of vis-
cose fi bers, but their wet strength is low; their extensibility is suffi ciently 
high to meet most textile requirements. 
 Lyocell is the strongest cellulosic fi ber when dry, even stronger than cot-
ton or linen, and is stronger than cotton when wet. Lyocell is much stron-
ger than viscose fi ber when wet. This property of high wet strength usually 
determines the extent to which fabrics can be machine washed successfully. 
Lyocell fi bers have a high degree of orientation and crystallinity. 
 In the case of acrylics, the dry tensile strength is 2.5 g/den and extension 
at break is 35%; corresponding fi gures for wet fi ber is 2.0 g/den and 44%. In 
a study by Aghanouri  et al ., the tenacities of dry-spun and wet-spun acrylic 
fi bers have been compared after photooxidative degradation, as photooxi-
dation of acrylic fi bers can lead to discoloration and reduction in mechani-
cal properties. It was found that degradation was dependent on the spinning 
method. Wet-spun fi bers had a greater decrease in tenacity compared to 
dry-spun fi bers. 11 
 9.4.4  Moisture regain 
 Viscose rayon has a moisture regain of 11–13%, whereas lyocell has 11.5% 
at standard conditions (20 ° C, 65% relative humidity). Acrylic’s moisture 
regain value ranges between 1 and 2%. Cellulosic fi bers have polar groups 
and show high regain, whereas nonpolar fi bers have no or little regain. 12 
 9.5 
 Factors affecting wet spinning 
 The spinning speeds in wet spinning are lower compared to dry spinning, 
which has even lower speeds than melt spinning as the process involves fi l-
ament formation by coagulating in a spin bath. Application of low tempera-
tures and the fl exibility of having all spinning and post-spinning operations 
in a continuous process compensate for the low spinning speeds, and make 
this method favorable. 

184   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 The wet spinning process consists of preparation of the polymer solution, 
extrusion of polymer solution into a liquid bath, coagulation in this bath and 
further processes applied to the spun fi bers. Polymer concentration in the 
dope depends mainly on polymer solubility and spinning pressure limita-
tions. 1,13 The fi ber formation in the coagulation bath is a complex process 
and it involves parameters of bath composition, temperature, extrusion and 
take-up velocity. 
 Mass transfer rate difference is among the most important factors in the 
coagulation of the outer layer of the dope, and is determinative in the resul-
tant properties and microstructure of the as-spun fi bers. 
 Mass transfer in wet spinning has been studied extensively in the liter-
ature. Rende built a physiochemical model to understand the relationship 
between coagulation of polyacrylonitrile and the coagulation bath variables. 
The model shows that polymer is precipitated at a distance from the fi ber 
axis that varies with time. 14 
 Ji investigated the effect of coagulation variables and defi ned the mass 
transfer rate difference between solvent and coagulant. Polyacrylonitrile 
and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) dopes were immersed in coagulation baths 
with different coagulants and weight loss was observed in the dope during 
the coagulation process.  15  Liu  et al . have investigated the effect of variables 
on the coagulation of cellulose from various solutions. The coagulation rate 
was determined to be a function of molecular volumes of coagulant, bath 
temperatures, bath compositions, and cellulose concentrations. 16 
 9.6 
 Applications and future trends 
 New wet spinning methods are being developed and used for various fi ber 
formations. Hollow tubular chitosan fi bers have been produced by the wet 
spinning method, which involves successive washing with water to stop 
the coagulation process. The chitosan dope is obtained by dissolving chi-
tosan with acetic acid, while the coagulation bath is an aqueous solution 
of sodium hydroxide. Interrupted wet spinning allowed obtaining hollow 
chitosan fi bers as the reaction in the coagulation bath was interrupted by 
water washing baths. This process allows the forming of a chitosan outer 
membrane gel and a core chitosan solution, followed by removal of the core 
chitosan solution and formation of the hollow fi ber structure. Use of dilute 
chitosan dope lower than 2.5% (w/w) led to a smaller internal fi ber diame-
ter of less than 200  μ m. 17 
 Wet spinning methods are also being explored by fi ber scientists to develop 
conducting polymer fi bers. Continuous poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):p
oly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) fi bers were produced by using a sim-
plifi ed wet spinning process. Optimum wet spinning conditions were shown 
to produce fi bers with good mechanical and electrical properties. The fi ber 

Wet spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   185
spinning set-up involved the extrusion of the spinning solution from the top 
and passing into a vertical glass column containing the coagulation bath. 
Use of isopropanol as a coagulation bath reduced the coagulation rate dur-
ing spinning. 18 
 Continuous graphene fi bers were produced by the wet spinning method 
followed by chemical reduction. Graphene is among the most interesting 
and attractive carbon-based materials. Graphene oxide (GO) dopes were 
injected into a coagulation bath of hexadecyltrimethyl ammonium bromide 
(CTAB). The CTAB solution was selected as the coagulation bath due to its 
positive charge. A 1.6 m long fi ber could be drawn from the bath. This was 
followed by highly-effi cient chemical reduction. 19 
 In conclusion, wet spinning is a comparatively cost-effective production 
method. The drawbacks of low spinning speeds have recently been elimi-
nated. Additionally, recent developments have shown that wet-spun fi bers 
have wide application in the area of high-tech textiles. 
 9.7 
 References 
  1.   
 V. B. Gupta and V. K. Kothari (1997),  Manufactured Fiber Technology , Chapman 
and Hall, London, UK. 
  2.   
 R. B. Chavan and A. K. Patra (2004), ‘Development and processing of lyocell’, 
 Indian Journal of Fiber and Textile Research ,  29 , December, 483–492. 
 3. 
 C. Woodings (Ed.) (2001),  Regenerated Cellulose Fibers , Woodhead Publishing 
Limited, Cambridge, England. 
 4. 
 H. R. Mauersberger (1947),  Textile Fibers , John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 
USA. 
 5. 
 T. Nakajima (Ed.) (2000),  Advanced Fiber Spinning Technology , Woodhead 
Publishing Limited, Cambridge, England. 
 6. 
 P. V. Vidyasagar (Ed.) (2000),  Encyclopedia of Textiles , Mittal Publications, New 
Delhi, India. 
  7.   
 H. Aizawa and F. Ishida (1962), Process and apparatus for stretch-spinning 
cuprammonium rayon, United States Patent 3049755. 
 8. 
 J. Robertson (1999),  Forensic Examination of Fibers , CRC Press, London. 
 9. 
 Lyocell Fibers: Production, Properties, End-Uses , Melliand International,  1 , 6–8, 
(1995). 
  10.    D. Loubinoux and S. Chounis (1985), An experimental approach of spinning 
new cellulose fi bers with NMMO (N-Methylmorpholine-oxide) as solvent of 
cellulose, Lenzinger Berichte, August, 105–109. 
  11.   
 A. Aghanouri, A. Zadhoush and M. Haghighat (2009), ‘Effect of dry-wet spin-
ning on the photooxidative degradation of acrylic fi bers’,  Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science ,  111 , 945–952. 
 12.  S. B. Warner (1995),  Fiber Science , Prentice Hall, New Jersey. 
 13.  A. Ziabacki (1976),  Fundamentals of Fiber Formation , John Wiley and Sons, 
New York. 
  14.    A. Rende (1972), ‘A new approach to coagulation phenomena in wet-spinning’, 
 Journal of Applied Polymer Science ,  16 (3), 585–594. 

186   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
  15.    B. Ji (2010), ‘Study on the mass transfer process in pan wet-spinning’,  Materials 
Science Forum ,  650 , 336–342. 
  16.    C.-K. Liu, J. A. Cuculo and B. Smith (1989), Coagulation studies for cellulose 
in the ammonia/ammonium thiocyanate (NH 3 /NH 4 SCN) direct solvent system, 
 Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics ,  27 (12), 2493–2511. 
  17.   
 R.N.R. Araiza, C. Rochas, L. David and A. Domard (2008), ‘Interrupted 
wet-spinning process for chitosan hollow fi ber elaboration’,  Macromolecular 
Symposia ,  266 (1), 1–5. 
  18.    R. Jalili, J. M. Razal, P. C. Innis and G. G. Wallace (2011), ‘One-step wet-spinning 
process of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene): poly(styrenesulfonate) fi bers 
and the origin of higher electrical conductivity’,  Advanced Functional Materials , 
 21 (17), 3363–3370. 
  19.    H. P. Cong, X. C. Ren, P. Wang and S. H. Yu (2012), ‘Wet-spinning assembly of 
continuous, neat and macroscopic grapheme fi bers’,  Scientifi c Reports ,  2 , 613. 
 

© 2014 Woodhead Publishing Limited
187
 10 
 Dry spinning of synthetic polymer fibers  
 Y.  IMURA , New Jersey Institute of Technology, USA,
 R. M. C.  HOGAN,  Omni Tech International, USA and 
M.  JAFFE ,  New Jersey Institute of Technology, USA 
 DOI : 10.1533/9780857099174.2.187 
 Abstract : Dry spinning is the fi ber formation process that transforms 
a high vapor pressure polymer solution to a solid fi ber by controlled 
fi ber evaporation in the spinline. The key variables in dry spinning are 
heat transfer, mass transfer and stress on the fi lament. The spinning 
fi ber reaches its fi nal velocity/fi nal denier when the stress applied to the 
spinning fi lament is no longer suffi cient to draw the fi ber to a smaller 
diameter. Solvent evaporation proceeds from the fi ber surface inwards, 
often leading to a skin-core structure with trapped solvent in the fi ber 
interior. Diffusion of this residual solvent can lead to the collapse of 
cylindrical fi ber to the characteristic ‘dogbone’ shape often associated 
with dry spun fi bers. This shape is also responsible for improved 
comfort and fabric cover. Most important of the dry spun fi bers and 
cellulose acetate (CA), cellulose triacetate(CTA) and acrylics. Other 
fi bers that are wet spun include spandex, polybenzimidazole (PBI) and 
polyvinylchloride (PVC). 
 Key words : solvent spinning, polymer solution, vapor pressure, skin-
core, solvent diffusion through fi lament wall, dogbone, cellulose 
acetate, cellulose triacetate, acrylic, spandex, polybenzimidazole, 
polyvinylchloride. 
 10.1  Introduction 
 There are three major methods for producing polymeric fi bers:
 melt spinning 
 wet spinning 
 dry spinning. 
 The different processes for melt, dry, and wet spinning are shown in Fig. 10.1. 
Most commercial synthetic fi bers are produced by the melt spinning pro-
cess, which is a relatively simple and low-cost technique compared to wet or 
dry spinning. However, for polymers without a stable melt phase, spinning 

188   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
the fi ber from a solution is required, a process known as solution spinning. 
There are two types of solution spinning:
   If a highly volatile solvent (high vapor pressure) can be employed, such 
• 
that the fi ber forms by solvent evaporation during spinning, the process 
is known as dry spinning. 
  If the only potential polymer solvents are of low volatility (low vapor 
• 
pressure), the fi ber needs to be spun into a non-solvent bath to remove 
the spinning solvent and also to coagulate the fi ber, in which case the 
process is known as wet spinning. 
 Dry spinning is used when the polymer is vulnerable to thermal degrada-
tion, cannot form thermally stable or viscous melts, or when specifi c surface 
characteristics of the fi lament are required (Gou and McHugh, 2004). 
 This chapter reviews key steps in the dry spinning process:
 Characteristics of dry spun fi bers 
• 
 Key variables in dry spinning 
• 
  Dry spinning of particular fi ber types: acrylics, cellulose acetate and 
• 
triacetate, polybenzimidazole (PBI), spandex and polyvinyl chloride 
(PVC)  
 More recent developments in dry spinning. 
• 
Melted
polymer
Dissolved
polymer
Dissolved
polymer
Solvent
extraction
Cool air
Spinneret
Melt spinning
Dry spinning
Wet spinning
Spinneret
Spinneret
Evaporating
cabinet
 10.1  Melt, dry and wet spinning. 

Dry spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   189
 10.2  The dry spinning process 
 Dry spinning is used to produce fi bers from polymers. such as cellulose ace-
tate, cellulose triacetate, polyvinyl chloride, polymers and co-polymers of 
vinyl chloride, and acrylonitrile. Fibers that are dry spun include acrylics, 
spandex, PBI, and PVC. The basic dry spinning process begins with dis-
solving the polymer in an organic solvent. Polymers for dry spinning must 
be soluble in a volatile solvent such as ether or acetone. This solution is 
blended with additives and fi ltered, producing a viscous polymer solution. 
This solution is called ‘dope.’ The dope (which needs to be of much lower 
viscosity than for melt spinning) is fi ltered, de-aired, and pre-heated. It is 
then pumped through fi lters to achieve the right consistency. 
 The dope is then extruded in a spinning tube (also known as a spin-
ning cell or evaporation chamber). In the extrusion process, fi ber-forming 
substances in the solution are forced through the fi ne orifi ces in a metallic 
plate called a spinneret (or jet) at a controlled rate. The exiting jets of the 
polymer solution come into contact with a stream of hot gas. The gas may 
be air or an inert gas: air in the case of acetate, nitrogen (N 2 ) in the case 
of polyurethane. The solvent vaporizes in this gas stream, increasing the 
polymer concentration in the fi lament and thus solidifying it without the 
need for further drying. As the viscous fi lament streams enter the gas fl ow, 
the solvent fi rst evaporates from the surface, forming a solid skin and then, 
with further evaporation during the downward passage through the gas 
fl ow, fully solidifi ed fi laments, resulting in the characteristic dumbbell/dog 
bone shape of dry spun fi bers (discussed in more detail in Section 10.3). 
 The solidifi ed fi laments are drawn off by rotating rolls (or godets) and put 
onto bobbins or bales. Simultaneous stretching by down-drawing can also 
be applied in the same way as in melt spinning, enabling orientation of the 
polymer chains along the fi ber axis. Filaments are typically combined into a 
yarn and wound onto a package by a ring and traveler system, which inserts 
a small degree of twist to hold the fi laments together. 
 The solution concentration in the spinning dope ranges from 15% to 40% 
with corresponding viscosities ranging from 300 to 5000 P. The temperature 
of the inlet gas may range from 100 ° C to 250 ° C. Typical spinning velocities 
range from 10 2  to 10 3  m/min. Production rates typically range from 100–800 
mpm. In a solvent spinning process such as dry spinning, the solvent is gen-
erally recovered. Capture and recovery of this solvent is important for both 
cost and environmental reasons. Recovery systems vary by polymer and sol-
vent type, but include gas adsorption, gas absorption, condensation, and dis-
tillation methods. 
 The process is more complex than melt spinning, because production 
of the fi lament is a function both of temperature and dope concentration, 
which is coupled to the mass transfer mechanisms of solvent evaporation 

190   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
and diffusion. As a result, dry spun fi bers are typically more expensive to 
produce than melt spun fi bers. 
 10.3  Characteristics of dry spun fibers 
 Dry spun fi bers have a characteristic dumbbell or dog bone shape compared 
to wet spun fi bers, which are mainly round or kidney bean shaped. This is 
the result of the solvent diffusion and evaporation stages that lead to poly-
mer solidifi cation. As the solvent evaporates from the polymer solution, the 
outer part of the forming fi ber solidifi es before the inner part. This causes 
radial inhomogeneity within each fi lament. The outer part collapses inwards 
to produce the characteristic shape (see Fig. 10.2). Dry spinning also typi-
cally produces fi bers that have rough rather than smooth surfaces compared 
to fi bers produced by melt extrusion. 
 Because of the composition and characteristic cross-section of the fi ber, 
which gives it a relatively large surface area, fabrics made from dry spun 
fi bers typically have a high bulk-to-weight ratio and better cover. The char-
acteristic cross-section means that more air is trapped between fi bers, pro-
ducing better insulating properties in the resulting fabric. In addition, the 
shape of dry spun fi bers results in good dimensional stability with uniform 
breaking elongation, good tenacity and resiliency but a reduced modulus. 
These fi ber properties are well-suited for interior textile applications such 
as carpets which require a strong, wear resistant fi ber. 
 The other major difference between dry spun fi bers and those produced 
by other techniques such as wet or melt spinning is the absence of the gel-
state phase in dry spinning, which results in signifi cant differences in phys-
ical properties. This can be seen, for example, in studies of the dry spinning 
of polyamide (PA) fi bers reviewed by Vasanthan (2009). Tensile proper-
ties of dry spun PA fi bers have been found to be superior to wet spun PA 
fi bers (Hancock  et al ., 1977). A separate study showed that dry spinning of 
PA6 fi bers resulted in higher tensile strength compared to fi bers prepared 
by melt spinning (Gogolewski and Pennings, 1985). These differences have 
been related to better molecular orientation in the fi bers during fi ber for-
mation and subsequent drawing, the use of high molecular weight poly-
mers, and the high concentration of polymer to solvent used in dry spinning 
(Vasanthan, 2009).  
 10.2  Formulation of dry spun ﬁ bers.  

Dry spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   191
 10.4  Variables in dry spinning 
 There are a number of variables that control fi ber quality in dry spinning 
(Ziabicki, 1976; Van Kerevelen and Nijenhuis, 2009). These include:
 Polymer solution concentration and rheology 
 Die swell and skin friction in fi lament formation 
 Filament solidifi cation. 
 As in all fi ber spinning processes, the key engineering variables are temper-
ature,  T , stress,   σ , and, in the case of solution spinning, mass transfer,   β . Key 
to solution properties is the polymer molecular weight,  M , which is a strong 
factor in both solution viscosity and solidifi cation rate. 
 The following sections review these variables. 
 10.4.1   Polymer solution concentration and rheology 
 The dry spinning dope is a polymer solution. The presence of a solvent 
component adds to the more complex nature of the viscosity of the solu-
tion in comparison to that for polymer melts. The inclusion of the solvent 
component makes the viscosity of the polymer solution a function of the 
nature and concentration of the solvent and the temperature of the solu-
tion. Concentrated polymer solutions exhibit a property known as critical 
molecular mass, where for a plot of log η0
η  vs log  M , the slope undergoes 
a dramatic change when  M  exceeds a critical value  M cr . The effect of the 
molecular mass and concentration on the viscosity was initially determined 
by the power-law equation (Krevelen and Nijenhuis, 2009): 
 
 η
β
0
η =
∞
Kc M  
 [10.1] 
 where  K ,  ∞ , and  β  are constants. The effect of temperature on the viscosity 
of the concentrated solutions is similar to that for dilute solutions, where it 
is described by the Andrade equation: 
 
 η
η
S
η
B
E
RT
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
exp
 
 [10.2] 
 where  B  = constant and Eη is the activation energy. The viscosity of the poly-
mer solution is also dependent on the shear rate. At low shear rates, poly-
mer solutions exhibit Newtonian behavior. Interestingly, as the shear rate is 
increased and the viscosity at fi rst decreases, the curve approaches another 

192   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
constant value, known as the second Newtonian region. At the shear rates 
found in dry spinning (up to 10–10s  − 1 ) the fl uid behaves in a non-Newtonian 
manner (Ziabicki, 1976). 
 10.4.2   Die swell and skin friction 
 The hydrodynamics of the dry spinning fl uid is affected by the die swell 
phenomenon. Die swell can affect both fi ber strength and spinning effi -
ciency (Deopora  et al ., 2013). Non-Newtonian shear fl ow within the spin-
neret channel with radius,  R 0 , causes the fl uid jet exiting the channel to 
contract axially, followed by an increase in radius to a value of  R max . During 
this radius expansion, the velocity decreases to conserve mass. The degree 
of swelling, called the die swell ratio, is χ = R
R
max
0
R  and depends on the 
conditions of extrusion, temperature, and the geometry of the extrusion die 
(Ziabicki, 1976). In dry spinning, the free jet undergoes elongation between 
the spinneret and the take-up device. The elongational viscosity is assumed 
to be three times the zero-shear viscosity and is valid for low deformation 
rates. This viscosity is also known as the Trouton viscosity. 
 The forces acting on the spin line are given in the general force balance 
(Ziabicki, 1976): 
 
 F
F
F
F
F
F
ext
F
grav
surf
F
in
aer
F
o
rF heo
=
Fgrav
F
+
Fin
F
 
 [10.3] 
 where the terms are for the applied external tension, gravity, surface ten-
sion, inertia, air drag, and the rheological effects, respectively. The most 
signifi cant departure from melt spinning takes place in the determination 
of  F aero , which is affected by the skin friction coeffi cients. Due to the mass 
transfer via evaporation between the polymer fl uid jet and its ambient 
environment, the boundary layer thickness changes. This in turn affects the 
skin friction, heat transfer, and the mass transfer coeffi cient parameters of 
the system.  
 10.4.3   Solidiﬁ cation of the ﬁ lament 
 Solidifi cation of the dry spinning fi lament is due to the evaporation of the 
solvent component from the spin line. There are three mechanisms in the 
solvent removal process:
 fl ash vaporization 
 diffusion within the spin line 
  convective mass transfer from the fi lament surface to the surrounding 
gas medium. 

Dry spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   193
 Flash vaporization of the solvent occurs at the spinneret exit as a result 
of the decompression of the hot polymer solutions. This mechanism is gov-
erned by the relationship between the pressure of the solvent,  P  s  , over the 
polymer solution with the volume fraction of the solvent,  c  s  , as given by the 
Flory-Huggins theory (Ziabicki, 1976): 
 
 ln
l
P
P
c
c
sP
sP
s
sc
s
0
12
2
1
1
csc
1
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠=
+
lnc
(
)
−
(
)
−
1
12 (
)
ζ
χ
)+
1
 
 [10.4] 
 where PsP0 is the partial pressure of pure solvent, ζ  is the ratio of the molecu-
lar solvent volume to the molecular polymer volume, and χ12
χ  is the Huggins 
polymer-solvent interaction parameter. 
 A particularly important mechanism of solvent transfer in dry spinning, 
and one that has been shown to be the rate controlling factor in fi lament 
solidifi cation, is the process of diffusion. The diffusion process for a binary 
polymer-solvent system is described by the Fick equation: 
 
 ∂
∂
=
∂
∂
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
∂
∂
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
c
t
r
r
D r c
r
s
∂
r c
s
−r 1 ⎛
⎞⎛D
1
∂
⎛
⎞⎛
∂
⎛
⎞⎛D
 
 [10.5] 
 where  D  *  is the mutual diffusion coeffi cient and  r is the radius. 
 Of equal importance in the mass transport process is the convection of 
the solvent into the gas phase. The boundary condition for diffusion in this 
convective case is given by 
 
 D
c
r
j
s
r R
s
*
cs
*
∂
∂
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
= −
(
)
P
P
s R
P
sP
,
,
R
s
(
)
P
PsP ,
= −
β*
ρ  
 [10.6] 
 where β*
β is the convective mass transfer coeffi cient, Ps R
P ,  and PsP ,∞ are the par-
tial pressures of the solvent on the fi lament and gas sides, respectively, and 
 P is the total pressure in the gas phase. 
 10.5  Dry spinning of acrylic fibers 
 The importance of some of these process issues relating to polymer solution 
rheology and solidifi cation can be seen in the dry spinning of acrylics (Cox, 
2005). An acrylic fi ber is one in which the fi ber-forming substance is any 
long chain synthetic polymer composed of at least 85% by weight of acrylo-
nitrile (AN) units (-CH2-CH(CN)-). Acrylic fi bers are made from the poly-
mer polyacrylonitrile (PAN), a synthetic, semicrystalline, organic polymer 

194   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
resin with a linear formula (C 3 H 3 N)  n  . Typical comonomers are vinyl acetate 
(C 4 H 6 O 2 ) and methyl acetate (C 4 H 6 O 2 ). Acrylics are solvent-produced fi bers 
using either wet or dry spinning processes. 
 A typical dry spinning unit for acrylic fi bers is shown in Fig. 10.3. The 
polymer is dissolved in solvents such as N,N ′ -dimethylformamide (C 3 H 7 NO) 
(known as DMF) or aqueous sodium thiocyanate (NaSCN), at concentra-
tions of 28–30% (Cox, 2005). DMF is the main solvent used  in dry spinning 
because of its low boiling point and low cost (Masson 1995). The polymer 
is fi rst dispersed in the cold solvent to form a slurry. It is then dissolved by 
application of heat and shear in a dope mixer or heater. A typical dope tem-
perature is about 90 ° C. The dope is usually fi ltered and de-aerated prior to 
fi ber spinning. It is passed through a series of fi lters of increasing fi neness as 
it approaches the spinneret. Filtration pressure also removes air, resulting in 
an air-free dope at the end of fi ltration. Additives can be introduced during 
fi ltration, such as titanium dioxide, which acts as a delustrant, and carbon 
black, which acts as a pigment. As it passes through the fi nal fi lters, the dope 
is heated up to 130–140 ° C. The pressure of the dope entering the spinning 
tube containing the spinneret is typically 0.8–1.5 MPa. Before reaching the 
spinnerets, pigments can be added. This leads to colored fi bers with excel-
lent fastness properties. 
 A typical spinneret is a ring made from stainless steel alloy and contain-
ing up to 2800 holes. Hole diameters are usually in the region of 0.1–0.3 mm. 
Bowl or hat-shaped spinnerets can also be used. Ring spinnerets have the 
Drying gas
Polymer solution
Pump
Spin pump
Spinneret
Spinning tube
Take-off unit
Finish
applicator
Redirecting godet
Spin can
Drying gas and
solvent vapor
 10.3  Dry spinning of acrylic ﬁ bers.  

Dry spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   195
advantage that the hot gases used to evaporate the solvent can be introduced 
through the center of the ring as well as from the outside, whereas it is pos-
sible to introduce gases only from the outside with other designs. 
 As the polymer leaves the spinneret it encounters hot gas at around 200–
350 ° C, evaporating most of the solvent. Between 5% and 25% of the DMF 
is retained in the undrawn fi ber to help orientate the molecular chains in 
the following drawing process (Kim, 2009). The quantity of solvent retained 
is dependent on temperature, column length, and take-up speed. A typi-
cal gas mixture is air mixed with nitrogen, which reduces the risk of explo-
sions as well as potential yellowing of fi bers. Gas fl ows can be co-current or 
counter-current. In co-current systems, the gas enters the spinning tube at 
the top close to the spinneret and is removed at the bottom through suc-
tion. In counter-current systems, the gas enters at the bottom of the tube 
and is removed at the top. Hot gas laden with solvent is removed so that the 
solvent can be recovered and re-used. In co-current systems, spinning tubes 
need to be operated under vacuum to prevent gas escaping with the fi bers 
at the bottom. 
 A typical dry spinning line is divided into two units, each containing up to 
35 spinning tubes. Output of fi bers from each tube is 8 to 15 kg/h. The result-
ing fi ber is taken up by the godet, and an oil fi nish may be applied before 
the fi ber is collected in spin cans. The resulting fi ber will then require fur-
ther processing to improve its tensile and elastic properties. These processes 
include drawing, washing, crimping, and cutting. 
 Those involved in dry spinning of acrylics refer to a ‘spinnability window,’ 
i.e. the conditions required to produce a fi ber of the right quality. As noted 
in the preceding section, polymer solution viscosity and temperature are 
key factors. A polymer solution viscosity that is too high or too low can lead 
to broken fi laments, as can too high a polymer solution temperature. As also 
noted earlier, the rate of evaporation of the solvent is another key factor. If 
evaporation is too rapid, vapor bubbles can form in the fi laments, reducing 
fi lament strength (Cox, 2005). 
 Because of the composition and characteristic cross-section of the fi ber, 
fabrics made from acrylics have a high bulk-to-weight ratio. This gives them 
insulating properties, and makes them popular as substitutes for wool fi bers. 
Because acrylic fi bers are thermoplastic, fabrics may be heat-set for wrinkle 
resistance and to provide permanency to pleats. Acrylic fabrics have low 
moisture absorbency and dry relatively fast. In general, acrylic fi bers are 
resistant to the degrading effects of ultraviolet rays in sunlight and to a wide 
range of chemicals and fumes. Acrylic fi bers have relatively poor fl ame resis-
tance compared with other fi bers. Static and pilling can be a problem. 
 Acrylic fi ber applications include fl oor coverings, blankets, throws, 
awnings, outdoor furniture, and apparel uses such as suits, pile fabrics, coats, 
sweaters, collars, linings, dresses, and shirts. 75% of acrylic fi bers are used in 

196   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
apparel, 20% in home furnishing, and 5% in industrial end-uses. PAN fi bers 
are the chemical precursors of high-quality carbon fi bers. PAN is fi rst ther-
mally oxidized in air at 230 ° C and then carbonized above 1000 ° C in inert 
atmosphere to make carbon fi bers. These fi bers are found in high-tech appli-
cations for civil and military aircraft components, solid propellant rocket 
motors, pressure vessels, as well as sports equipment such as fi shing rods, 
golf clubs, and tennis rackets. 
 Modacrylic (MAC) fi bers are defi ned as those in which the fi ber-forming 
substance is any long chain synthetic polymer composed of less than 85% 
but at least 35% by weight of acrylonitrile units. As with acrylics, both wet 
and dry spinning are used. They are fl ame retardant, do not combust, and 
have superior resistance to chemicals. They have relatively high durability, 
low tenacity, and moderate abrasion resistance. Fibers are resilient to mil-
dew and sunlight, can be washed and dried, but should not be exposed to 
temperatures above 120 ° C or steamed because they are more heat sensitive. 
The principal end-uses of modacrylic fi bers are in applications where envi-
ronmental resistance or fl ame retardancy is needed, e.g. in carpets or protec-
tive gear. The low density of the fi bers makes them suitable for lightweight 
protective clothing. They are also used in fl eece, knit pile fabrics, paint roll-
ers, stuffed toys, wigs, fake fur draperies, carpets, and fi lters. 
 10.6  Dry spinning of cellulose acetate and triacetate 
 In general, dry spinning of cellulose acetate is a cleaner and faster process 
than wet spinning and requires less labor (Hearle and Woodings, 2001). 
The cellulose for acetate production is reacted with acetic acid and acetic 
anhydride in the presence of sulfuric acid. It undergoes partial hydrolysis 
to remove the sulfate and a suffi cient number of acetate groups to give the 
desired product properties. The anhydro glucose unit is the functional repeat-
ing cellulose structure and has three hydroxyl groups, which react to form 
acetate esters. Once the acetic anhydride is added, the acetylation reaction 
occurs. Temperature control of the process is critical to prevent cellulose 
degradation. The end result is a viscous liquid. Testing for intrinsic viscosity 
or degree of polymerization is done to determine when to stop the reaction. 
The next stage is hydrolysis. When the desired acetyl value is achieved, the 
hydrolysis is stopped by the addition of sodium, calcium, or magnesium salt 
solutions. Following acetylation, the resultant product is precipitated, puri-
fi ed, and dried to produce cellulose acetate fl akes. 
 The fl ake is then dissolved in acetone and water to prepare the concen-
trated spinning solution or dope at a concentration of 15–30% solids. As 
with acrylic fi bers, titanium oxide may be added as a delustrant, as well as 
pigments to color the fi bers. The dope is subsequently fi ltered and de-aer-
ated using varied fi ltration technologies to remove impurities. 

Dry spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   197
 After fi ltration, the highly viscous ‘dope’ solution is extruded through 
spinnerets into a column of warm air in which the acetone is evaporated, 
leaving solid continuous fi laments of cellulose acetate (see Fig. 10.4). The 
dope typically descends vertically for 2–5 m against a counter-current of hot 
air. The temperature, moisture content and velocity of the air are important 
parameters. The spinneret holes are typically 50–100 microns (Hearle and 
Woodings, 2001). The number of holes, and the hole dimensions, vary based 
on product. Round holes in spinnerets produce an almost round crenulated 
fi lament (Fig. 10.5). Holes with different shapes can also be used. A stretch 
of around 100% is imposed on the yarn as it is drawn down from the spin-
neret. This stretch causes molecular orientation to develop in the plastic fi la-
ments in the upper part of the tube, providing the level of strength required 
for most textile applications. The evaporated acetone is recovered using a 
solvent recovery system and used to prepare additional spinning solution. 
For acetone the usual recovery process consists of adsorption by activated 
carbon and re-distillation. 
 A guide roll at the bottom of the spinning tube directs the fi bers out to a 
collection device. For staple fi ber, the fi laments from numerous spinnerets 
are combined into tow form, crimped, cut to the required length, and pack-
aged in bales. A take-up bobbin is used to insert a small amount of twist. 
Take-up speeds are typically between 200 and 400 m/min but can be as high 
as 1000 m/min. For fi lter tow the fi laments are crimped, dried, and packaged 
in bales. 
Polymer
solution
Pump
Spinneret
Evaporation
chamber
Air inlet
Air outlet
Heating
jacket
Filament
thread
Spool
 10.4  Dry spinning of cellulose acetate ﬁ bers.  

198   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 The linear density (tex or denier) of the fi laments depends on the rate of 
mass fl ow through the spinneret holes. Common fi lament sizes are around 
3.7 denier (4.1 dtex). Yarns range from 55 to 600 denier (60.5–660 dtex). 
Fibers are relatively weak, extensible, and have low stiffness with poor elas-
tic recovery above about 5% extension. Moisture absorption of fi bers is 
high. Because of the characteristic fi ber shape, which helps to trap air, cellu-
lose acetate is also an excellent insulator. Typical industrial applications of 
acetate fi bers include apparel, ribbons, cigarette fi lters, ink reservoirs, uphol-
stery, drapes, and high absorbency product (diapers). Cigarette fi lter tow 
accounted for over 90% of the world consumption of acetate fi bers in 2011. 
Fibers are hydrophilic, have breaking tenacities of 1.2–1.4 gpd, but rapidly 
loose strength when wet. 
 Triacetate uses dichloromethane and methanol as solvents. It is increas-
ingly used as the fi lm for LCD displays. It is very popular in fi lms because 
of its excellent optical clarity, glossy surface characteristic, and resistance to 
grease. It is, however, prone to degradation. Fabrics of triacetate are shrink 
and wrinkle resistant. They are easily washable at high temperatures because 
they have higher heat resistance than acetate fabrics, and can be safely 
ironed at higher temperatures. Triacetate fabrics that have been properly 
Roughness
Ra0.01 μ
500  20.0 μm
 10.5  Spinnerets for dry spinning of cellulose acetate ﬁ bers.  

Dry spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   199
heat-set (usually after dyeing) have improved ease-of-care characteristics 
because of a change in the crystalline structure of the fi ber. 
 10.7  Dry spinning of other fibers: polybenzimidazole 
(PBI), spandex and polyvinyl chloride (PVC) 
 Dry spinning is also the method of choice for several other polymers includ-
ing spandex, polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and polybenzimidazole (PBI). These 
polymers share the characteristic of thermally degrading prior to/during 
melting and solubility in high volatility solvents. In all cases it is the cost-
effectiveness of dry spinning that leads to its adoption as the fi ber formation 
method of choice. 
 10.7.1   Polybenzimidazole (PBI) 
 Polybenzimidazole or PBI is a manufactured fi ber in which the fi ber-form-
ing substance is a long chain aromatic polymer having recurring imidazole 
groups as an integrated part of the polymer chain. PBI is a step growth 
polymerization process from 3,3 ′ ,4,4 ′ -tetraaminobiphenyl and diphenyl 
isophthalate (C 20 H 14 O 4 ). A step growth polymerization refers to a type of 
polymerization mechanism in which bi-functional or multifunctional mono-
mers form fi rst dimes, then trimers, oligomers and eventually long chain 
polymers. The polymer is dissolved in solution with dimethylacetamide 
(CH 3 C(O)N(CH 3 ) 2 ) and dope is then dry spun. 
 PBI is a high performance fi ber used in fi refi ghter, astronaut, racing car 
driver, and welder apparel. Fiber properties feature low static electric-
ity buildup and low electrical conductivity. Its chemical resistance is good 
except against acids. The natural color of PBI is a gold-khaki shade, but it 
can be dyed to almost any medium to dark shade with conventional basic 
dyes after a caustic pretreatment. Fibers will not mildew and are abrasive 
resistant. A particularly important characteristic is heat resistance. Fibers 
do not melt in the presence of heat. They also do not ignite or smolder, 
retaining fi ber integrity to 540 ° C, and only starting to degrade at 760 ° C. The 
fi ber and fabrics from PBI retain their fl exibility, dimensional stability, and 
signifi cant strength without embrittlement, even when exposed to fl ame or 
extreme heat. PBI has high moisture regain and low modulus with comfort 
properties similar to cotton. 
 10.7.2   Spandex 
 Spandex is a synthetic fi ber known for its elasticity. The term ‘spandex’ is 
the acronym in the USA, while the term ‘elastane’ is used in the European 
Union. It has been defi ned as a manufactured fi ber in which the fi ber-

200   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
forming substance is a long chain synthetic polymer composed of at least 
85% of segmented polyurethane. The fi bers can be produced by several 
methods: melt, wet, dry, and reaction spinning. Dry spinning accounts for 
over 90% of production. 
 A prepolymer is required for dry spinning, as it is for other spinning tech-
niques. Manufacture of spandex fi bers begins with prepolymer production. 
The prepolymer is made up of long chain polyurethane, which is produced by 
reacting polyester with a diisocyanate monomer. This prepolymer is reacted 
with diamine. The spinning solution is pumped into a cylindrical spinning 
cell and extruded through the spinneret. The fi ner cells pass through the 
cell, which is heated in the presence of nitrogen and solvent gas. The liquid 
polymer reacts chemically and forms solid fi bers. The polymer is extruded 
in a multiplicity of fi ne fi laments to form a monofi lament. The structure and 
properties of fi bers is signifi cantly infl uenced by mass fl ow rate through the 
spinnerets and take-up speed (Kotani  et al ., 1992). Fiber bundles are further 
treated with fi nishing agents to prevent fi bers from adhering to each other. 
 Spandex is lighter in weight, more durable and suppler than conven-
tional elastic threads, and can be repeatedly stretched over 500% without 
breaking and still recover instantly to its original length. Fibers do not suf-
fer deterioration from oxidation, and are not damaged by body oils, per-
spiration, lotions, or detergents. Stabilizers are added to protect fi bers from 
heat, atmospheric contaminants, and chlorine. To protect fi bers against light 
degradation, UV (ultraviolet) screeners such as hydroxybenzotriazoles are 
added. Spandex is white in color when fi rst produced. Colorants are added 
later to improve its visual appearance. Normally dispersed and acid dyes 
are used. If spandex fi bers are interwoven with other fi bers like nylon or 
polyester then special dyeing methods are used. Major spandex uses include 
athletic wear, foundation garments, gloves, hosiery, orthopedic braces, hose, 
webbing, and stretchable clothing. It is blended quite often with polyester, 
to provide garments with a good look and feel but with added comfort. 
 10.7.3   Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)/vinyon 
 PVC or vinyon is defi ned as a manufactured fi ber in which the fi ber-forming 
substance is any long chain synthetic polymer composed of at least 85% by 
weight of vinyl chloride units (–CH2–CHCl). Vinyl chloride is a chemical 
obtained from ethylene and chlorine. Most PVC fi bers are produced by dry 
spinning, though some are produced by melt spinning. Dry spinning solvents 
used are acetone-benzene solution or acetone-dioxide solutions. PVC fi bers 
have excellent moisture permeability. Moisture absorption is less than 0.5% 
and moisture regain is less than 0.1%. PVC is an outstanding fl ame retar-
dant fi ber because of its chlorine containing chemical structure. PVC does 

Dry spinning of synthetic polymer ﬁ bers   201
not ignite but softens at low temperatures (55 ° C). PVC also has excellent 
heat retention and negative electrostatic properties. 
 10.8  Conclusion and future trends 
 This chapter has reviewed the key processes in dry spinning, characteristics 
of dry spun fi bers and applications in a range of synthetic fi bers. The versa-
tility of the process, suggested by the different fi bers that have been success-
fully produced by dry spinning, suggests its potential for new applications. 
More recently, dry spinning has been used to spin carbon nanotube (CNT) 
fi bers (Ghemes  et al ., 2012). Carbon nanotubes have been one of the most 
widely investigated types of nanomaterial due to their outstanding elec-
trical, thermal and mechanical properties. A range of spinning techniques 
have been used, including solution spinning (Zhang  et al ., 2004; Shaffer and 
Sandler, 2007). Dry spinning techniques for CNTs were fi rst developed by 
Windle, who referred to the process as ‘direct spinning’ (Li  et al ., 2004). The 
technique involved injecting a liquid carbon mixture, plus catalyst and car-
rier gas, into a high-temperature electric furnace to form fi bers that were 
then drawn from the bottom. Ghemes  et al . (2012) describe growing carbon 
nanotubes using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) that were dry spun from 
vertically aligned arrays of carbon nanotubes to produce fi bers with excel-
lent mechanical properties, including high tensile strength (up to 500 MPa). 
Other researchers have also found that dry spinning improves the tensile 
strength of CNT fi bers and yarn (Tran  et al ., 2010). Dry spinning of CNT 
fi bers has achieved a spinning rate of 20–30 m/min., suggesting it is suit-
able for mass production of CNT fi bers (Choo  et al ., 2012). Developments 
such as these indicate the continuing value and evolution of this method of 
spinning. 
 10.9  References 
 Choo H., Jung, Y, Jeong Y. and Kim, H. (2012), ‘Fabrication and applications of car-
bon nanotube fi bers’,  Carbon Letters ,  13 (4), 191–204. 
 Cox, R. (2005), ‘Acrylic fi bres’, in McIntyre, J. (ed.),  Synthetic Fibres , Woodhead 
Publishing Limited, Cambridge. 
 Deopora, B., Chatterjee, A. and Padaki, N. (2013), ‘Process control in the manufactur-
ing of synthetic textile fi bres’, in Majumdar, A., Das, A., Alagirusamy, R. 
and Kothari, V. (eds.),  Process Control in Textile Manufacturing , Woodhead 
Publishing Limited, Cambridge. 
 Ghemes, A., Muramutsu, J., Minami, Y. and Okada, M. (2012), ‘High performance 
carbon nanotube fi bers spun from long multi-walled carbon nanotubes’,  Journal 
of Advanced Research in Physics ,  3 (1), 1–3 
 Gogolewski, S. and Pennings, A. (1985), ‘High-modulus fi bers of nylon-6 prepared by 
a dry-spinning method’,  Polymer ,  26 , 1394–1400. 

202   Advances in ﬁ lament yarn spinning of textiles and polymers
 Gou, Z. and McHugh, A. J. (2004), ‘Dry spinning of polymer fi bers in ternary sys-
tems’,  International Polymer Processing ,  19 (3), 244–253. 
 Hancock, T., Spruiell, J. and White J. (1997), ‘Wet spinning of aliphatic and aromatic 
polyamides’,  Journal of Applied Polymer Science ,  21 , 1227–1247. 
 Hearle, J. and Woodings, C. (2001), ‘Fibres related to cellulose’, in Woodings, C. (ed.), 
 Regenerated Cellulose Fibres , Woodhead Publishing Limited, Cambridge. 
 Kim, H. (2009), ‘The structure of acrylic, polyvinylalcohol and polyvinylchloride 
fi bers’, in S. Eichhorn, J. Hearle, M. Jaffe and T. Kikutani (eds.),  Handbook of 
Textile Fibre Structure Volume 1: Fundamentals and Manufactured Polymer 
Fibres , Woodhead Publishing Limited, Cambridge. 
 Kotani, T, Hayashi, S., Ishihara, H. and Matsui, T. (1992), ‘Structure and properties of 
dry-spun segmented polyurethaneurea elastic fi bers’,   Journal of Macromolecular 
Science, Part B: Physics ,  31 (1), 65–86. 
 Li, Y., Kinloch, I. and Windle, A (2004), ‘Direct spinning of carbon nanotube fi bers 
from chemical vapor deposition synthesis,  Science ,  304 , 276—278, DOI: 10.1126/
science.1094982. 
 Masson, J. (1995),  Acrylic Fiber Technology and Applications , Marcel Dekker, New 
York. 
 Shaffer, M. and Sandler, J. (2007), ‘Carbon nanotube and nanofi bre reinforced poly-
mer fi bres’, in P. Brown and K. Stevens (eds.),  Nanofi bers and Nanotechnology 
in Textiles , Woodhead Publishing Limited, Cambridge. 
 Tran, C., Humphries, W., Smith, S. and Huynh, C. (2010), ‘Improving the tensile 
strength of carbon nanotube spun yarns using a modifi ed spinning process’, 
Paper delivered at the 2010 International Conference on Nanoscience and 
Nanotechnology (ICONN), Sydney, Australia. 
 Van Krevelen, D. W and Nijenhuis, K. (2009),  Properties of Polymers Fourth Edition , 
Elsevier B.V., Amsterdam. 
 Vasanthan, N. (2009), ‘Polyamide fi ber formation’, in S. Eichhorn, J. Hearle, M. Jaffe and 
T. Kikutani (eds.),  Handbook of Textile Fibre Structure Volume 1: Fundamentals 
and Manufactured Polymer Fibres , Woodhead Publishing Limited, Cambridge. 
 Ziabicki, A. (1976),  Fundamentals of Fibre Formation: the Science of Fibre Spinning 
and Drawing , John Wiley and Sons, New York. 
 Zhang, M., Atkinson, K. and Baughman, R. (2004), ‘Multi-functional carbon nano-
tube yarns by downsizing an ancient technology’,  Science ,  306 , 1358–1361. 
 

203
 
 Index  
 acetylation,  196 
 acrylic fi bres,  175 ,  193–6 
 acrylics,  66 
 acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene 
(ABS),  5 
 addition polymerisation,  6–8 
 aerodynamic break spinning (ABS),  159 
 aesthetics,  169 
 ageing,  178 
 alginate fi bres,  176–7 
 Andrade equation,  191 
 anisotropic fi bre spinning,  24 
 anisotropic polymers,  24 
 aqueous suspension,  16–17 
 aramid fi bres,  177 
 artifi cial silk,  31 
 automatic transfer winders,  58 
 Avantium,  13 
 Barus effect,  42 ,  44 
 Barus ratio,  43 
 bi-component fi bres  
 applications,  124–5 
 classifi cation,  114–16 
 cross-sectional conformations of 
different types,  115 
 bi-component spinning  
 bi-constituent spinning of synthetic 
polymer fi bres,  113–26 
 applications,  124–5 
 classifi cation,  114–16 
 factors affecting spinning,  120–4 
 future trends,  126 
 spinning technologies,  116–19 
 bi-constituent spinning  
 bi-component spinning of synthetic 
polymer fi bres,  113–26 
 applications,  124–5 
 classifi cation,  114–16 
 factors affecting spinning,  120–4 
 future trends,  126 
 spinning technologies,  116–19 
 bicomponent fi bres,  63 
 equipment,  58–61 
 Hills chart of bicomponent fi bre 
types,  59 
 microfi bre products,  60 
 mixed fi bre products,  60–1 
 sheath and core products,  58–9 
 side-by-side products,  59 
 tipped yarns,  60 
 Bingham fl uid,  33 
 bio-plastics,  13 
 biopolymers,  12 
 BOBYARNS,  161 
 Brinkman number (Br),  40 
 bulk continuous fi bre (BCF) spinning, 
 50–2 
 bulk polymerisation,  14–15 
 calcium alginate fi bres,  183 
 carbon nanotube (CNT),  132 ,  201 
 casein fi bres,  183 
 cellulose acetate,  66 
 fi bres,  196–9 
 chain growth polymers,  6–8 
 Chardonnet Silk,  175 
 chemical vapour deposition (CVD),  201 
 CoFe 2 O 4 /PAN nanofi bres,  134–6 
 FESEM image of particles 
synthesised by hydrothermal 
method,  135 
 SEM images with various loadings,  135 
 XRD patterns,  136 

204   Index
 commodity polymers,  8 
 composite spinning,  153 
 composite yarns  
 integrated composite spinning (ICS), 
 149–71 
 assessing the advantages and 
disadvantages of ICS technology, 
 168–9 
 background and history,  150–3 
 commercialisation of process, 
 166–8 
 future trends,  169–70 
 impact of material selection and 
processing parameters on yarn 
properties,  160–6 
 technology development,  153–60 
 concept originators,  150–2 
 A.J. Bobkowicz examining upholstery 
fabric made with Bobtex ICS 
fi ling,  151 
 Emilion Bobkowicz at offi ces of 
Bobtex Corporation,  151 
 continuous graphene fi bres,  185 
 continuous polymerisation process,  116 
 core sheath type,  114 
 cost,  169 
 cost-effective production method,  185 
 cotton linters,  180 
 Courtelle,  175–6 
 Criminate-Ericksen-Filbty (CEF) 
equation,  84 
 cuprammonium rayon  
 production,  180–1 
 sectional view of apparatus 
invented and typical 
conventional funnel type,  181 
 curved channel model,  80 
 Decalin,  105 
 degassing,  178 
 die swell,  192 
 model,  84 
 phenomenon,  41–4 
 evolution of Barus number as 
function of shearing rate,  43 
 evolution of geometry in capillary 
die,  41 
 polylactide/polycaprolactone alloy, 
 42 
 ratio,  81 
 theory,  81 
 dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO),  111 
 dope,  189 
 draw down ratio (DDR),  77 
 drawing,  178 
 dry spinning,  19 ,  23 ,  67 
 acrylic fi bres,  193–6 
 schematic diagram,  194 
 cellulose acetate and triacetate, 
 196–9 
 cellulose acetate fi bres illustration, 
 197 
 spinnerets of cellulose acetate 
fi bres,  198 
 synthetic polymer fi bres,  187–201 
 characteristics of dry spun fi bres, 
 190 
 future trends,  201 
 polybenzimidazole (PBI), spandex 
and polyvinyl chloride (PVC), 
 199–201 
 process,  189–90 
 techniques,  175 
 variables,  191–3 
 die swell and skin friction,  192 
 fi lament solidifi cation,  192–3 
 polymer solution concentration 
and rheology,  191–2 
 dry spun fi bres  
 characteristics,  190 
 formulation,  190 
 DuPont,  64 
 Dyneema,  69 
 Dynel,  177 
 electromagnetic interference shielding 
effectiveness (EMI SE), 
 134 
 electrospinning,  69 
 nanofi bres,  132–4 
 characterisation techniques,  134 
 fabrication of CoFe 2 O 4 /PAN 
nanofi bres,  133 
 fabrication of PAN fi bres 
containing CNT and CoFe 2 O 4 , 
 133–4 
 principles,  129–30 
 set-up from polymer solutions,  129 

Index   205
 processing and characterisation of 
polymer-based nano-composite 
fi bres,  128–45 
 properties of electrospun 
nanofi bres,  134–44 
 technology,  130–2 
 Taylor cone,  131 
 electrospun mats,  129 
 electrospun nanofi bres  
 properties,  134–44 
 CoFe 2 O 4 /PAN nanofi bres,  134–6 
 PAN fi bres containing CNT and 
CoFe 2 O 4 ,  136–44 
 Elmarco,  70 
 emulsion polymerisation,  15 
 entanglement,  101–2 
 Evolon,  64 ,  124–5 
 Exceval,  63 
 experimental data  
 results focusing on fabrics,  165–6 
 results on yarns,  162–5 
 physical properties of three 
component yarns,  164 
 schematics of observed yarn 
structure,  163 
 tensile properties of three 
component ICS yarn,  165 
 extruders,  116 
 false twisting unit,  159 
 fi bre properties,  182–3 
 cross-section,  182 
 density,  182 
 mechanical properties,  183 
 moisture regain,  183 
 Fick equation,  193 
 fi eld emission-scanning electron 
microscope (FESEM),  134 
 fi lament solidifi cation,  192–3 
 fi lled fi bres,  59 
 fi ltering,  178 
 fi ltration,  196 
 fi rst fl ow theory,  79 
 fi shing line,  55 
 Flory-Huggins theory,  193 
 fully oriented yarn (FOY),  160 
 functional components  
 technology application,  154–60 
 Bobtex mark 3 ICS machine,  160 
 Bobtex Mk1 ICS machine,  156 
 examples of yarn production 
parameters and resultant 
properties,  158 
 ICS yarn examples using FOY and 
POY fi lament carrier yarn,  159 
 schematic diagram of Bobtex Mk1 
ICS machine,  155 
 schematic of nozzle designs 
based on proposals made by 
Bobkowicz,  157 
 2,5-Furandi carboxylic acid (FDCA)-
based polyester,  13 
 gel spinning,  25 ,  69 ,  100–12 
 affecting factors,  106–8 
 extraction,  108 
 ladder speed,  107 
 molecular weight,  106 
 molecule type,  106 
 schematic diagram,  107 
 solution concentration,  107 
 solvent type,  107 
 spinning temperature,  107–8 
 stretching magnifi cation,  108 
 stretching temperature,  108 
 comparison of fi bre strength and 
modulus,  101 
 factors affecting fi bre strength, 
 102–3 
 degree of orientation and 
crystallinity,  103 
 fi bre density and processing 
methods,  103 
 molecular weight,  102–3 
 factors affecting the spinning of 
polymers,  101–2 
 future trends,  110–12 
 gel spun textile products,  109–10 
 composite materials,  110 
 fi shing nets,  110 
 high tensile ropes,  109–10 
 safety protective equipment,  109 
 sports and leisure goods,  110 
 technologies,  103–5 
 types of fi bres produced,  105–6 
 PAN fi bre,  106 
 PVA fi bre,  106 
 UHMWPE fi bre,  105 

206   Index
 gel-state phase,  190 
 general force balance,  192 
 glass fi bres,  9 
 glass transition temperature,  18 
 graphene oxide (GO),  185 
 highly aesthetic fi bre spinning,  23–4 
 Hills, Inc.,  63 
 hollow fi bre membranes,  67–8 
 HoloLab series 5000 Raman 
spectroscope,  134 
 homopolymers,  14 
 hydrodynamics,  192 
 hydroentangling,  64 
 hydrolysis,  196 
 industrial fi bre spinning equipment, 
 54–5 
 initial predictions,  161–2 
 idealised yarn structure,  161 
 yarn engineering principles,  162 
 integrated composite spinning (ICS)  
 commercialisation of process,  166–8 
 examples of applications of ICS 
yarn,  167 
 composite yarns,  149–71 
 assessing the advantages and 
disadvantages of ICS technology, 
 168–9 
 background and history,  150–3 
 future trends,  169–70 
 impact of material selection and 
processing parameters on yarn 
properties,  160–6 
 initial predictions,  161–2 
 results from experimental data 
focusing on fabrics,  165–6 
 results from experimental data on 
yarns,  162–5 
 technology development,  153–60 
 machine as an assembly of specifi c 
components,  154 
 technology application in achieving 
functional components,  154–60 
 interfacial interaction,  121–2 
 irradiation polymerisation,  16–17s 
 Kevlar,  49 ,  66 ,  69 ,  109 
 laminating roller,  157 
 liquid crystal polymers (LCP),  9 
 liquid-crystal spinning method,  103 
 lower tex fi bres,  62–3 
 Lycra,  49 ,  66 
 Lyocell,  49 ,  66 
 lyocell fi bres,  181–2 ,  183 
 lyotropic polymers,  24 
 machine  
 specifi c components assembly,  154 
 construction modules of Bobtex 
ICS machine,  154 
 mass balance equation,  77 
 mass conservation,  77 
 mass polymerisation,  14–15 
 mass transfer rate,  184 
 matrix fi bril,  114 
 medium-density polyethylene 
(MDPE),  5 
 melt blowing,  20 ,  65–6 
 schematic,  65 
 melt fracture,  88 
 melt spinning,  19 ,  22–3 ,  75–95 
 developments,  88–95 
 advance process characterisation, 
 93–5 
 equatorial X-ray diffraction 
profi les of as-spun PEN fi bres,  94 
 nanotubes incorporation,  89–92 
 piston-type spinning device for 
monofi laments production,  91 
 PLA fi bre with3.0 wt% MWNT,  91 
 structure development in 
composite fi laments,  89 
 structure-property relationship in 
syndiotactic polypropylene,  93 
 TEM images of PLA fi bre 
containing3.0 wt% MWNT,  92 
 fi lament interaction with the 
environment,  84–7 ,  88 
 spundonding process schematic 
diagram,  87 
 web formation in melt blown 
process,  87 
 fundamentals,  76–9 
 energy balance,  78 
 mass balance,  77–8 

Index   207
 momentum balance,  78–9 
 typical melt spinning process,  76 
 future trends,  95 
 limitations,  88 
 modelling of polymer fl ows,  79–84 
 die swell effect,  82 
 modelling of polymer fl ow inside 
the screw,  79–80 
 modelling of polymer fl ow inside 
the spinneret,  80–4 
 melting point,  18 
 melting techniques,  175 
 mesophases,  9 
 Miratec,  64 
 modacrylic fi bre,  177 ,  196 
 momentum balance equation,  78 
 monofi lament fi bre equipment,  55–8 
 drawing of typical monofi lament fi bre 
spinning line,  57 
 multifi lament melt spinning process,  86 
 nano-fi bre spinning,  69–70 
 natural fi bres,  4 
 natural polymerisation,  14 
 Newtonian behaviour,  191–2 
 Newtonian viscosity,  34 
 Newton’s law,  33 
 Nomex,  66 
 nozzle design,  156 
 numerical simulation,  121 
 Nusselt number,  85 
 one-dimensional (1-D) nano-composite 
fi bres,  132 
 optical fi bre,  25 
 organic fi bres,  9 
 parallel plate analogy,  80 
 partially oriented yarn (POY),  160 
 peach-skin effect,  182 
 performance parameters,  168–9 
 Phan Thien-Tanner fl uid model,  93 
 pipe-in-pipe mixing element,  117–18 
 polyacrylonitrile (PAN),  132 
 containing CNT and CoFe 2 O 4 ,  136–44 
 images of electrospun fi bre sheets, 
 138 
 magnetisation hysteresis loops,  144 
 Raman spectra of pristine and 
treated CNT,  137 
 Raman spectrum of PAN/5CNT-
10CoFe 2 O 4 fi bres,  141 
 SE curves of PAN/5CNT-
10CoFe 2 O 4 and PAN/10CNT-
5CoFe 2 O 4 fi bres sheets,  143 
 SEM images of electrospun fi bres, 
 139 
 TEM images of PAN/10CoFe 2 O 4 , 
PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4 fi bres 
and CoFe 2 O 4 nanoparticles,  141 
 XRD patterns of PAN/5CNT fi bres 
and PAN/5CNT-10CoFe 2 O 4 
fi bres,  140 
 polyamide 6.6,  32 
 polybenzimidazole (PBI),  199 
 polycondensation,  8 
 polyester staple fi bre (PSF),  52 
 polylactic acid (PLA),  13 
 polymer-based nano-composite fi bres  
 electrospinning processing and 
characterisation,  128–45 
 nanofi bres,  132–4 
 principles,  129–30 
 properties of electrospun 
nanofi bres,  134–44 
 technology,  130–2 
 polymer rheology,  20 
 polymer solution concentration,  191–2 
 polymeric adhesive,  170 
 polymerisation,  6 ,  14 ,  196 
 polymers,  4 
 polyvinyl chloride (PVC),  200–1 
 power law,  81 
 equation,  191 
 prepolymer,  200 
 pressing,  178 
 primary variables,  78 
 process parameters,  130 
 prototype development,  151–3 
 two component composite spinning, 
 152 
 pseudoplastic fl uids,  33 
 Raman spectra,  134 
 Raman spectroscopy,  136–7 
 rayon,  49 

208   Index
 Reicofi l 4,  65 
 reinforcing fi bres,  5 
 resulting variables,  78 
 Reynolds number,  83 
 rheology,  20 ,  191–2 
 Riefenhauser lines,  64 
 ripening,  178 
 rupture of melting,  44 
 scanning electron microscope (SEM), 
 134 
 secondary variables,  78 
 self-heating phenomenon,  45 
 semi-melt spinning,   see  gel spinning 
 sheath-core spinning,  122–3 
 sheath polymer,  59 
 shield effectiveness (SE),  142 
 shredding,  178 
 side-by-side,  114 
 skin friction,  192 
 solidifi ed fi laments,  189 
 solution polymerisation,  16 
 solution spinning,  23 
 solvent spinning lines,  66–7 
 Sontara,  64 
 spandex,  199–200 
 specialty polymer fi bres,  5 
 Spectra,  49 ,  66 ,  69 ,  109 
 spin head,  56 
 spin pack,  56 
 spinnability window,  195 
 spinneret,  56 ,  194–5 
 design,  116–17 
 spinning,  178 
 technologies,  116–19 
 core conjugate spinning,  117 
 pipe-in-pipe mixing element,  118 
 schematic diagram of bi-
component spinning,  118 
 schematic of bi-component 
spinning,  117 
 spinneret assembly for islands-in 
sea spinning,  119 
 tension,  23 
 spunbond lines,  61–5 
 bicomponent fi bres,  63 
 drawing of bicomponent spunbond 
process,  62 
 hydroentangling,  64 
 lower tex fi bres,  62–3 
 new polymers,  63–4 
 open vs closed systems,  64 
 Reicofi l 4,  65 
 staple draw machine,  53 
 staple fi bre opening system,  157 
 staple fi bre spinning,  52–4 
 steeping,  177–8 
 stretch spinning,  180 
 synthetic fi bres,  4 
 synthetic polymer fi bres  
 bi-component and bi-constituent 
spinning,  113–26 
 applications,  124–5 
 classifi cation,  114–16 
 future trends,  126 
 spinning technologies,  116–19 
 chemistry of fi bre-forming polymers, 
 6–13 
 addition polymerisation,  6–8 
 aromatic polyimides, aromatic 
polyamides and aromatic 
polybenzimidazoles,  11 
 condensation polymerisation,  8 
 four classes of high temperature 
synthetic fi bres,  12 
 high strength, high modulus fi bres, 
 11–13 
 liquid crystalline/rigid rod 
polymers,  9–11 
 melt of conventional random coil 
polymer and liquid crystalline 
polymer,  10 
 polymerisation,  6 
 polymerisation reactions,  7 
 polymers for specialty and high 
performance fi bres,  8–9 
 schematics of typical chain 
addition mechanism,  7 
 structure of liquid crystalline 
polymer,  10 
 current trends,  26 
 dry spinning,  187–201 
 acrylic fi bres,  193–6 
 cellulose acetate and triacetate, 
 196–9 
 characteristics of dry spun fi bres, 
 190 
 future trends,  201 

Index   209
 melt, dry and wet spinning,  188 
 polybenzimidazole (PBI), spandex 
and polyvinyl chloride (PVC), 
 199–201 
 process,  189–90 
 variables,  191–3 
 effects of molecular weight on fi bre 
spinnability, structure and 
properties,  18–19 
 factors affecting bi-component and 
bi-constituent spinning,  120–4 
 compatibility of polymers for 
sheath-core spinning,  122–3 
 interfacial interaction,  121–2 
 post spinning conditions,  123–4 
 viscosity and structure 
development,  120–1 
 fi bre formation techniques,  22–5 
 anisotropic fi bre spinning,  24 
 gel spinning,  25 
 highly aesthetic fi bre spinning,  23–4 
 melt spinning,  22–3 
 solution spinning,  23 
 spinning of ultra-fi ne fi bres and 
optical fi bres,  25 
 thermotropic liquid-liquid crystal 
polymer spinning,  24–5 
 fl ow properties of polymers,  19–21 
 shear thinning characteristics of 
polymer,  21 
 gel spinning,  100–12 
 affecting factors,  106–8 
 factors affecting fi bre strength, 
 102–3 
 factors affecting the spinning of 
polymers,  101–2 
 future trends,  110–12 
 gel spun textile products,  109–10 
 technologies,  103–5 
 types of fi bres produced,  105–6 
 infl uence of chemical structure on the 
physical properties of chemicals 
and fi bres,  17–18 
 crystalline and amorphous region 
of a polymer,  18 
 manufacturing technologies,  48–70 
 bicomponent fi bre equipment, 
 58–61 
 gel spinning,  69 
 hollow fi bre membranes,  67–8 
 industrial fi bre spinning 
equipment,  54–5 
 melt blown processes,  65–6 
 monofi lament fi bre equipment, 
 55–8 
 nano-fi bre spinning,  69–70 
 solvent spinning lines,  66–7 
 spunbond lines,  61–5 
 polymerisation processes,  14–17 
 aqueous suspension and irradiation 
polymerisation,  16–17 
 bulk polymerisation,  14–15 
 criteria for determining the 
polymerisation process,  14 
 emulsion polymerisation,  15 
 general schematics of solution 
polymerisation,  16 
 kneader reactor concept for bulk 
polymerisation,  15 
 solution polymerisation,  16 
 post-fi bre formation treatments,  26 
 principles of solidifi cation during 
fi bre formation,  21–2 
 staple fi bre spinning,  52–4 
 drawing of Hills bicomponent 
staple spinning line,  54 
 textile fi lament and bulk continuous 
fi bre (BCF) spinning,  50–2 
 Barmag WINGS winder,  51 
 Barmag_eFK false twist texturing 
machine,  52 
 and their processing requirements, 
 3–26 
 types of fi bre,  4–5 
 commodity, specialty and 
engineered fi bres,  5 
 natural and synthetic fi bres,  4–5 
 understanding the behaviour during 
spinning,  31–45 
 die swell phenomenon,  41–4 
 drawing of polymers,  44–5 
 molten state rheology of 
thermoplastic polymers,  32–5 
 polymer behaviour during cooling 
and resulting fi bre structure, 
 35–9 
 polymer behaviour during fi lament 
spinning,  39–41 

210   Index
 wet spinning,  174–85 
 applications and future trends, 
 184–5 
 factors,  183–4 
 fi bre properties,  182–3 
 principles,  174–7 
 types of fi bres used,  177–82 
 synthetic polymeric fi laments  
 melt spinning,  75–95 
 developments,  88–95 
 fi lament interaction with the 
environment,  84–7 
 fundamentals,  76–9 
 future trends,  95 
 limitations,  88 
 modelling of polymer fl ows,  79–84 
 system parameters,  130 
 textile fi lament,  50–2 
 thermoplastic polymers  
 behaviour during cooling and 
resulting fi bre structure,  35–9 
 representation of crystalline 
lamellae in polyethylene,  38 
 spatial distribution of crystalline 
lamellae in spherulite,  36 
 spherulitic superstructure in 
polypropylene fi lm,  36 
 behaviour during fi lament spinning, 
 39–41 
 molten state rheology,  32–5 
 different kinds of deviations 
compared to Newtonian fl ow as 
a function of shearing rate,  33 
 energy of activation to promote 
a polymer fl owing in the liquid 
state,  35 
 shearing rate profi les in a spinning 
capillary,  34 
 thermosets,  6 
 thermotropic liquid-liquid crystal 
polymer spinning,  24–5 
 thermotropic polymers,  24 
 three component yarn,  156–7 
 toothbrush,  55 
 transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM),  134 
 triacetate fi bres,  196–9 
 tricomponent spinning systems,  126 
 Tyvek,  66 
 Tyvex,  49 
 ultra-fi ne fi bre,  25 
 ultra-high molecular weight 
polyethylene (UHMWPE),
  5 ,  45 
 Ultrasuede,  60 
 ultraviolet (UV),  200 
 van der Waals forces,  136 
 vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM), 
 134 
 vinyon,  see  polyvinyl chloride (PVC) 
 viscose rayon fi bre  
 production,  177–80 
 diagram of viscose fi bre 
production,  179 
 viscose solution preparation,  178 
 viscosity,  32 ,  120–1 
 ‘weed-eater’ string,  55 
 wet spinning,  23 ,  67 
 principles,  174–7 
 extrusion of acrylic fi bres from 
spinneret,  176 
 production of wet-spun acrylic 
fi bre,  176 
 synthetic polymer fi bres,  174–85 
 applications and future trends, 
 184–5 
 factors,  183–4 
 fi bre properties,  182–3 
 types of fi bres used,  177–82 
 production of cuprammonium 
rayon,  180–1 
 production of lyocell,  181–2 
 production of viscose rayon,
  177–80 
 White-Metzner fl uid model,  93 
 WINGS,  50 
 X-ray diffraction,  134 
 xanthation,  178 
 Young’s modulus,  125 
synthetic polymer fi bres (cont.)

This page intentionally left blank

This page intentionally left blank

