Advances in Theoretical & Computational Physics
Volume 2 | Issue 4 | 1 of 6
Using Space Particle Dualism Theory to Solve the Hierarchy Problem
Research Article
Sky Darmos 
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hongkong
*Corresponding author
Sky Oliver Andreas Darmos, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hongkong; 
Email: Skydarmos@qq.com
Submitted: 26 Sep 2019; Accepted: 28 Sep 2019; Published: 16 Oct 2019
Brief mathematical introduction
According to space particle dualism theory gravity is caused by 
differences between what is called ‘granular dimensionality’ [4]. 
Granular dimensionality is given by the rather simple equation [5]: 
Here nE is the number of connections from one elementary space 
to other elementary spaces. The value of D is always very close to 
3, but it never reaches 3 entirely.
The closer the value of D is to 3 already in empty space, the smaller 
are the differences between the values of D in different locations 
in a gravitational field.
Former estimates (2016) had shown that D must be 2.999…with so 
many 9’s that differences can show up only in the 36th digit after the 
comma [6]. That would explain why gravity is 1036 times weaker 
than electromagnetism. Those estimates were rather imprecise 
and the agreement with the observed strength of gravity was not 
precise. That was because they didn’t account for the variable size 
of elementary spaces [7].
Now we also need to know the size of elementary spaces. According 
to space particle dualism theory that is given by [8]:
One last thing we need to know is the energy at which the elementary 
space becomes larger than the wavelength of the particle. For photons 
that is [9]:
Which corresponds to a wavelength of about 9×10-17 m.
For electrons the critical energy is reached at the following speed 
[10]:
Adv Theo Comp Phy, 2019
ISSN: 2639-0108
www.opastonline.com
Abstract
The following paper is based on an approach to quantum gravity the author has been developing since 2005 [1]. In this theory 
space is quantized by postulating that every particle carries its own quantum of space with it, which is a 2-sphere with two 
complex dimensions [2, 3]. Different from all other approaches to quantum gravity is that in this theory, which the author calls 
‘space particle dualism theory’ the quantums of space do not all have the same size and are not inhabiting the Planck scale, but 
are comparatively large in size, being just below the subatomic level and having an energy dependent size. 
In this theory gravity is modeled as differences in the density of elementary spaces. The density of elementary spaces in the 
absence of gravity determines the strength of gravity. The aim of this paper is to test whether or not this leads to the right strength 
(or weakness) of gravity. 
This present paper is not an introduction to the theory, and therefore not all the concepts that are needed to understand it can 
be introduced at length. 
A few equations of the theory have to be known to the reader in order to understand the paper. 

Volume 2 | Issue 4 | 2 of 6
Adv Theo Comp Phy, 2019
www.opastonline.com
Which corresponds to a wavelength of 8.862×10-17 m [11-13].
Higher energies and speeds are possible, but according to this theory 
it is not possible to measure shorter distances directly using photons 
or electrons.
Shorter distances can however be measured using interference, as 
the recent detection of gravitational waves showed [14].
We can represent the strength of the gravitational constant by the 
connectivity n of elementary spaces as follows [15]:
It shall be noted that this G is slightly stronger than the usual 
G, because in space particle dualism gravity is a side effect of 
hypercharge, and thus measurements of G that don’t take account 
of mass defect, don’t yield the right outcome. Accordingly the index 
S here represents ‘strong force’ [16].Gravity is seen as a side effect 
of mainly the strong force. All the details to that can be found in 
other papers of the author. 
From there we know that [17]:
We can use this value to compute an expected value for the granular 
connectivity of space (the number of connections) [18]:
And that leads to an expected value for the granular dimensionality 
of:
                          
It would be too lengthy for this paper to explain all these figures 
in detail. Giving these basics, we can now go over to examine 
if calculating the energy of the quantum vacuum really leads us 
to the above figures for the granular connectivity and granular 
dimensionality of the quantum vacuum, and therefore to the right 
strength of gravity.
Solving the hierarchy problem
We shall now look at the degree of connectivity n of elementary 
spaces provided by electrons and other fermions. 
The formula for the tightest packing of spheres can provide us with 
the elementary space density required for a continuous space, and 
that is [19]:
We want to know how many times a volume of space can be filled 
up with different sized elementary spaces.
The volume of each elementary space is [20]:
There are 1 ⁄ VP  of them in a cubic meter of space and they need to 
arrive at the density ρ in order to fill up the cubic meter once. So the 
contribution from one particular relativistic mass of an electron is: 
We need to quantize the mass-energy of these virtual electrons, and 
therefore we must look at their wavelength [21], which is:
Solving this for v yields:
Now we can substitute λ2 by n2 lP
2 and enter this term into the 
original equation for the number of connections nE on elementary 
spaces, which yield:
The next step is to take the sum of all different values for n, up to 
the value that corresponds to the ‘maximal relevant wavelength ‘that 
was mentioned in the mathematical introduction. It corresponds to 
n = 2.5×1037, so we write:

Volume 2 | Issue 4 | 3 of 6
Adv Theo Comp Phy, 2019
www.opastonline.com
For the sake of simplicity we will now replace the individual groups 
of constants by the factors A, B,C and D:
This can be further simplified into:
With:
The order of magnitude of D is 10-113. When we divide this by C, 
we get an order of magnitude of 10-47. When we square the maximal 
value for n, we get 6.25×1074.
 
In the following we will use a method which only applies to D’ n2 
<< 1. The terms for which d’ n2 >>1 we will calculate separately. 
Accordingly our first sum goes only ton=1023, which is about the 
half of 47. After isolating the factors A and B and replacing the 
root, we get:
In this case D’n2 is much smaller than 1, and that allows the following 
simplification:
Thus the sum is reduced to:
With ζ(3) being Apéry’s constant, which has the value:
1.202056903159594285399 …
Putting the physical constants back into our equation we get: 
And that is: 
This value is far higher than what we expected, namely the nE  =1070 
mentioned in the mathematical introduction.
Estimates from 2016 didn’t take account of the varying elementary 
space size, and thus a much lower value for nE was obtained there, 
although the amount of vacuum energy that was assumed to exist 
was the same. 
This might be a hint that vacuum fluctuations equivalent to the 
Planck energy in fact don’t exist. Such a fluctuation would have an 
elementary space with the radius of ridiculous 40 meters (!).
The shorter the lifetime of a quantum fluctuation is, the more 
energetic it is. Shouldn’t the same apply to extension in space? For 
particles with wavelengths larger than their own diameter that is 
certainly true. Fluctuations with huge energies are usually confined 
to smaller volumes of space. Large elementary spaces would violate 
this rule. 
If this line of reasoning is correct, then the critical energy mentioned 
in the introduction should at the same time be the maximal energy 
of vacuum fluctuations. Particles with larger energies do exist, but 
presumably only as real particles, not as virtual particles in the 
quantum vacuum. 
As we saw in the introduction, the critical energy corresponds to 
a wavelength of 8.862×10-17  m and that equals 5.483132598×1018 
Planck lengths. 
That means a new calculation should start with n = 5×1018 and end 
with n=2×1037.
Again we note that: 
And that this difference becomes neglect able for ‘small’ values of 
n, namely whenever:

Volume 2 | Issue 4 | 4 of 6
Adv Theo Comp Phy, 2019
www.opastonline.com
So whenever n is smaller than1024, the whole term simplifies into 
D’ n2. 
For very big values of n on the other hand, we have the simple 
estimate:
Overall we can assess that:
Whereas
and
That means we have to separate the sum there. For n1 we have:
Adding back in A and B and solving the integral yields:
And for n2 that is simply:
Adding together the two yields:
As mentioned in the introduction, the connectivity (number of 
connections) of elementary spaces in empty space is:
It is good that our result here did not exceed this value. If it did, the 
theory would be in serious trouble. 
Now we have to calculate the contribution from massless bosons 
like the photon. 
Out of m =  E⁄c2  and E= h c ⁄ λ as well as the equation we used 
before for the contribution of electrons follows that:
For finding the contribution from all different wavelengths we take 
the sum from the shortest wavelength up to the longest wavelength. 
For photons these correspond to:
Thus the photon contribution to the connectivity of elementary 
spaces is given by:
The constant cluster on the right has the value:
We can now approach this sum using an integral:

Volume 2 | Issue 4 | 5 of 6
Adv Theo Comp Phy, 2019
www.opastonline.com
These yields:
This is far below the overall value of 1070 for the connectivity of 
elementary spaces in empty space. This calculation shows that 
rest mass particles like electrons contribute by far more to nE than 
massless particles like photons. 
The question now is if the diversity of particles in the quantum 
vacuum can explain the gap between our before calculated value 
of 1066 and the expected overall value of about 1070. 
In previous estimates the result was multiplied by 17, for 17 
fundamental particles, and then by 1.5, to account for all the dark 
matter particles [22].
However, due to the ‘coldness’ of dark matter it is to be doubt that 
it really contributes significantly to the quantum vacuum [23].
Something else that was wrong with that former estimate is that it 
counted in only elementary particles, while in reality all subatomic 
particles contribute to the quantum vacuum. Including not yet 
observed ones that give a total of 226 baryons, 196 mesons, 6 
leptons and 4 vector bosons and 1 scalar boson. That gives a total 
of 433 subatomic particles. Accounting for all their anti-particles we 
have to multiply that by 2 and arrive at 866. Two of these particles, 
the photon and the gluon, do not have rest mass, and do therefore 
contribute much less to the connectivity of granular space. That 
leaves us with a factor of 862, which yields:
Here I didn’t calculate the contribution from different rest mass 
particles separately. That is because we know the only thing that is 
different with these particles is the mass, and since mass is a side 
effect of charge, differences in mass are presumably only due to 
the running of coupling. 
However, a vast majority of the particles we counted were subatomic 
compound particles (mesons and baryons) composed of 2 or 3 
quarks. 
Three quarks correspond to three elementary spaces, thus each 
baryon counts as three particles. This gives us a new particle count, 
which yields: 
Using this particle count we arrive at:
Of course, on earth we have a much higher vacuum energy density 
due to all the force transmitting virtual particles that are emitted by 
all the charges and hypercharges around. However, according to 
space particle dualism theory this higher density is not observable, 
because implies a change in the strength of gravity, and a change 
in the value of a fundamental constant is indistinguishable from a 
Lorenz transformation [24].This idea was also formerly considered 
by Einstein himself [25, 26].
Similarly space particle dualism is explaining speed dependent time 
dilation and length contraction by saying that uniformly growing 
elementary spaces are indistinguishable from a change in the speed 
of light, which is effectively perceived as time dilation [27].
Even if it is impossible to measure a higher G far away from any 
gravitational source, the number of connections between elementary 
spaces must definitely be lower there, although we are not able to 
measure that, because it changes the way we perceive space and time. 
If this line of reasoning is correct, the departure between the actual 
value of G and the predicted one, can tell us how much time dilation 
we have here on earth relative to a hypothetical observer infinitely 
far away from any gravitational source. 
References
1. Sky Darmos (2014-2019) One core component, the similar 
worlds interpretation, is however older. It was first conceived 
in 2003. Quantum Gravity and the Role of Consciousness in 
Physics. 
2. Sky Darmos (2014-2019) Originally different values for 
the complex factors a and b were considered (2005). That 
was rooted in the notion of oscillating mass. However, since 
August-2019 a new scheme has been introduced, in which a = 
b is the general assumption. The old scheme is still introduced 
in the present book. See chapters 3.3 and 3.5 of “Quantum 
Gravity and the Role of Consciousness in Physics”. 
3. The disadvantage of the old scheme was that it had the 
ungeometric distinction between source mass/energy and 
surface (2017) The new scheme drops this distinction; butit 
still has the disadvantage that it still relies on assuming a point-
like particle that orbits the elementary space. This still seems 
to violate strict geometrism. A possible solution could be the 
assumption of oscillating surface. The downside of that is that 
it makes it harder to define geodesics in granular space in such 
a scheme.
4. 
Sky Darmos (2014-2019) An in depth introduction to granular 
dimensionality can be found in chapter 3.8. Quantum Gravity 
and the Role of Consciousness in Physics. 
5. 
The square root was not there in the original 2005 version of 
the equation. It was added in 2015 in order to account for the 
fact that one needs to be able to access more directions in order 
to get a feeling of three-dimensionality in a granular space with 
2-dimensional elementary spaces (2-spheres), than one would 
need in a granular space with 1-dimensional elementary spaces. 
6. 
Sky Darmos (2014-2019) That first calculation can be found in 
chapter 3.8 (formally 3.7) of “Quantum Gravity and the Role of 
Consciousness in Physics”. The more precise calculation can 
be found in chapter 3.16 and in his present paper. 
7. 
The reason the first approximation in 2016 got somewhat close 
to the right result is the fact that wavelengths of more than 
one meter were omitted. On the other hand very energetic 
fluctuations up to the Planck mass were allowed, while they 
are not in this present calculation, as we shall see. 
8. This precise value for GE was not known before 2018. In 
2016 an approximated value was used, which was one order 
of magnitude too large. That was because it was believed that 

Volume 2 | Issue 4 | 6 of 6
Adv Theo Comp Phy, 2019
Copyright: ©2019 Sky Oliver Andreas Darmos. This is an open-access 
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 
License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
www.opastonline.com
GE would have to be a G that is scaled up to the strength of 
the GUT-force. Later it was found that the running of coupling 
makes that unnecessary, because when using the strength of 
the GUT-force one would have to also use the naked mass of 
particles, and the two effects cancel out. 
9. 
Sky Darmos (2014-2019) Some readers probably would like 
to suggest that the electron mass is more fundamental and that 
it should be preferred when defining the strength of gravity. 
However, according to space particle dualism gravity is mainly 
caused by nuclei, not by electrons, so using the proton mass 
is appropriate here. According to SPD the gravity of electrons 
falls-off after 40 meters. See chapter 6.6 of “Quantum Gravity 
and the Role of Consciousness in Physics”. 
10. Sky Darmos (2014-2019) The derivation of this formula can 
be found in chapter 3.8 (formally 3.7) of “Quantum Gravity 
and the Role of Consciousness in Physics”.
11. Ibid.
12. It is not yet clear what the close approximation of these two 
critical frequencies indicates. It might be suggesting some 
sort of deeper connection between photons and electrons; or 
maybe Penrose is right that the distinction between massive and 
massless particles vanishes at high energies (Penrose; 2010). 
13. When we translate this into a mass we get 2.447830123 ×10-26 
kg, somewhat close to the mass of the W- and Z-bosons. That 
could be indicating a connection, or not. 
14. Whitcomb SE (1995) “Precision Laser Interferometry in the 
LIGO Project”, Proceedings of the International Symposium 
on Modern Problems in Laser Physics. Novosibirsk, LIGO 
Publication P950007-01-R. 
15. Dividing through 10 is because we need to get behind the last9, 
in the figure for granular dimensionality, because that is where 
differences between the density of space between different 
regions show up. 
16. Sky Darmos (2014-2019) In a newer connotation used since 
2019, ‘GS’ is written as G|Y|, with |Y| standing for ‘cardinal 
hypercharge’ (read as ‘absolute double-struck Y’). It is usually 
denoting the number of quarks nq. See chapter 6.6 of “Quantum 
Gravity and the Role of Consciousness in Physics”.
17. Ibid.
18. Sky Darmos (2014-2019) This equation is derived in chapter 
3.9 (formerly 3.8) of “Quantum Gravity and the Role of 
Consciousness in Physics”.
19. Gauß CF (1831) Besprechung des Buchs von L. A. Seeber: 
Untersuchungen über die Eigenschaften der positiven ternären 
quadratischen Formen usw” [Discussion of L. A. Seeber’s book: 
Studies on the characteristics of positive ternary quadratic 
forms etc]. 
20. Sky Darmos (2014-2019) This is simply based on the elementary 
space radius equation introduced earlier in this paper and in 
chapter 3.3 and 3.8 of “Quantum Gravity and the Role of 
Consciousness in Physics”.
21. One could consider a quantization directly through the size of 
elementary spaces. However, the wavelength is more directly 
measurable and should thus be preferred. 
22. Sky Darmos (2014-2019) That was done in chapter 3.8 (formerly 
3.7) of “Quantum Gravity and the Role of Consciousness in 
Physics”. 
23. Sky Darmos (2014-2019) Mathematical reasons of why dark 
matter must be cold are given in chapter 4.9 of “Quantum 
Gravity and the Role of Consciousness in Physics”.
24. Sky Darmos (2014-2019) Gravitational time dilation was 
derived in in chapter 6.3 of “Quantum Gravity and the Role of 
Consciousness in Physics”. 
25. Einstein Albert (1907) Uber das Relativitätsprinzip und die aus 
demselben gezogenen Folgerungen. Jahrbuch fur Radioaktivität 
und Elektronik 4: 411-462.
26. Einstein (1911) “Uber den Einfluß der Schwerkraft auf die 
Ausbreitung des Lichtes” (PDF). Annalen der Physik 35: 898-
906. 
27. Sky Darmos (2014-2019) Speed dependent time dilation was 
derived in chapter 3.13 of “Quantum Gravity and the Role of 
Consciousness in Physics”.

