REVIEW
1800561  (1 of 24)
© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
www.advmat.de
30 Years of Lithium-Ion Batteries
Matthew Li, Jun Lu,* Zhongwei Chen,* and Khalil Amine*
DOI: 10.1002/adma.201800561
1. Introduction
Demand for high-performance rechargeable batteries had 
become so tangible and ubiquitous in the recent years that its 
numerous requirements and functions had nearly risen to the 
status of common knowledge. Like most scientific-engineering 
fields, such a strong desire for advanced light-weight batteries 
was not always the case. Research into batteries began modestly 
Over the past 30 years, significant commercial and academic progress has been 
made on Li-based battery technologies. From the early Li-metal anode itera-
tions to the current commercial Li-ion batteries (LIBs), the story of the Li-based 
battery is full of breakthroughs and back tracing steps. This review will discuss 
the main roles of material science in the development of LIBs. As LIB research 
progresses and the materials of interest change, different emphases on the 
different subdisciplines of material science are placed. Early works on LIBs 
focus more on solid state physics whereas near the end of the 20th century, 
researchers began to focus more on the morphological aspects (surface coating, 
porosity, size, and shape) of electrode materials. While it is easy to point out 
which specific cathode and anode materials are currently good candidates for 
the next-generation of batteries, it is difficult to explain exactly why those are 
chosen. In this review, for the reader a complete developmental story of LIB 
should be clearly drawn, along with an explanation of the reasons responsible 
for the various technological shifts. The review will end with a statement of 
caution for the current modern battery research along with a brief discussion on 
beyond lithium-ion battery chemistries.
Hall of Fame Article
M. Li, Dr. J. Lu, Dr. K. Amine
Chemical Sciences and Engineering Division
Argonne National Laboratory
9700 Cass Ave, Lemont, IL 60439, USA
E-mail: junlu@anl.gov; amine@anl.gov
M. Li, Prof. Z. Chen
Department of Chemical Engineering
Waterloo Institute of Nanotechnology
University of Waterloo
200 University Ave West, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada
E-mail: zhwchen@uwaterloo.ca
Dr. K. Amine
Institute for Research and Medical Consultations
Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University
Dammam 34212, Saudi Arabia
Dr. K. Amine
Material Science and Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
The ORCID identification number(s) for the author(s) of this article 
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201800561.
and climbed sharply in popularity. It could 
be argued that it was the creation of the 
transistor at a small enough scale that 
fueled the research for better recharge-
able batteries.[1] Or, it could have been 
just out of pure scientific curiosity that 
such research was undertaken.[2] Regard-
less of the initial cause(s), about 30 years 
ago Sony Co. commercialized the world’s 
first lithium-ion battery (LIB). LIB’s revo-
lutionization of portable electronics led to 
an explosive increase in research interest 
throughout the following years. Adding 
to this interest, governments around the 
world became more conscious of the role 
of greenhouse gases in climate change and 
launched numerous initiatives on green 
energy technologies (solar, wind, etc.) and 
electric vehicles with energy storage sys-
tems at the core of these solutions. Conse-
quently, Figure 1 reveals that research into 
batteries had drastically increased from 
2010, far exceeding the percentage rate of 
increase of overall publication across all research field. In the 
span of 7 years, researchers around the globe have added at 
least 119 188 new publications on batteries from 2010 to 2017 
representing a 260% growth in total literature volume based on 
the search query “batteries” (on the Web of Science online data-
base). This represents about a 4.5 times the % rate of increase 
in general published literature.
While the growth of battery research was impressive, the 
goals of research have not changed over the years: to decrease 
the weight and size of the battery, increase the cycle durability, 
maintaining safety while minimizing cost have always been the 
mandate of all battery scientists. Recent reviews on LIBs have 
provided a good overview of the historical and technical chal-
lenges of LIBs.[3–5] However, in accordance with the 30th anni-
versary of Advanced Materials (Wiley-VCH), this review will 
aim to provide a comprehensive story of the development and 
advancement of the lithium-ion battery systems with emphasis 
on the electrode materials over the past 30 years. From the lab 
setting to commercialization and current cutting-edge research, 
this review will discuss the main roles of material science in the 
development of LIBs. As LIB research progressed and the mate-
rials of interest changed, different emphasis on the different 
subdisciplines of material science were placed. Early works 
on LIBs focused more on solid state physics whereas near 
the end of the 20th century with nanotechnology on the rise, 
researchers began to focus more on the morphological aspects 
(surface coating, porosity, size, and shape) of electrode mate-
rials. We hope to clearly draw for the readers a complete story 
of the driving forces responsible for the various technological 
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (2 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
shifts in LIBs and research themes. This review concludes with 
perspective of the future of LIBs in terms of application and 
material science.
2. Commercialization of the Lithium-Ion Battery
The market for the generic battery started with the inven-
tion of portable electrical systems such as portable electronic 
calculators, implantable electronics or even simple flashlights. 
There have been many battery technologies prior to the incep-
tion of LIBs. It could have been the oil crisis in the 1970s[6] that 
motivated researchers to search for a superior battery system 
to replace petroleum.[7,8] It could also have been the invention 
of the transistor with its yearly size reduction[9] that urged con-
sumers and companies to demand a new energy storage device. 
Irrespective of its origin, the desire for a system such as LIBs 
can be ultimately traced to the performance deficiencies of its 
predecessors. The secondary battery technologies that existed 
years prior to LIB (such as the Ni metal hydride and lead-acid 
system) possessed low energy densities with limited future 
potential. The search for a higher energy density system had 
drawn researchers to the wide voltage window of organic elec-
trolytes, lithium’s highly reducing nature (−3.04 V vs standard 
hydrogen electrode) and low atomic mass.[7] Furthermore, the 
small atomic radius of Li-ions offered a high diffusion coeffi-
cient when used as the charge carrier and theoretically, appeared 
to be a very promising system for the high energy density and 
high-power demands of portable energy storage systems.
Historically, the ancestor of the current rechargeable LIBs can 
be traced back to the rechargeable Li metal battery (LMB). The 
first account of a cell that resembled a secondary LMB was pub-
lished by Lewis and Keyes in 1913.[10] It was not until 1965 that 
the more familiar lithium metal anode in propylene carbonate 
based electrolyte was attempted by Selim et  al.[11] at NASA, 
where practicality concerns were expressed about the low strip-
ping/redeposition efficiency of ≈50–70%. The following years 
yielded numerous research articles on the problems and poten-
tial solutions for rechargeable Li metal anodes, but with little 
success.[12–14] In the mid-1970s, work by Vissers et al. and Gay 
et al. at Argonne National Laboratory (ANL) explored high tem-
perature (450 °C) Li and Li-Al alloy/FeS2 system.[15] While this 
battery design did possess high energy density, it was intended 
for off-peak grid energy storage and electric vehicles which had 
little applicability for portable electronics.
2.1. The Search for a Cathode
The earliest iterations of a cathode that resembled the current 
cathode materials were designed by Whittingham.[16] The lay-
ered crystal structure of near metallic metal dichalcogenides 
such as TiS2 and TaS2 were used to store Li-ions. Whittingham 
called the Li-ion storage reaction, “the intercalation mecha-
nisms” which was highly reversibly due to minimal changes 
in the crystal structures. He explained that this phenomenon 
stemmed from TiS2’s ordered layered structure with alternating 
Ti and S sheets. The ordered structure did not have disor-
dered Ti cations distributed randomly throughout the crystal 
lattice which was beneficial for Li-ion transfer.[2] TiS2 was later 
paired with a Li or Li–Al alloy metal anode, forming the Li/
TiS2 system and commercialized by Exxon in the late 1970s at 
280 Wh L−1 (130 Wh kg−1).[2] This product was sadly restricted 
to the coin cell level and was only applied in watch batteries.[17] 
The main problems of Exxon’s commercial Li/TiS2 system can 
be categorically divided into the cathode, electrolyte and the 
anode. Although the TiS2 cathode possessed a high Li-ion inter-
calation capacity (≈240 mAh g−1) and high cycle durability, the 
Jun Lu is a chemist at 
Argonne National Laboratory. 
His research interests focus 
on the electrochemical energy 
storage and conversion 
technology, with main focus 
on beyond Li-ion battery 
technology. Dr. Lu earned his 
bachelor degree in Chemistry 
Physics from University of 
Science and Technology of 
China (USTC) in 2000. He 
completed his Ph.D. at the Department of Metallurgical 
Engineering at University of Utah in 2009.
Zhongwei Chen is Canada 
Research Chair Professor 
in Advanced Materials for 
Clean Energy at University of 
Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada. 
He is also the Director of 
Collaborative Graduate 
Program in Nanotechnology 
at University of Waterloo. He 
received his Ph.D. (2008) in 
Chemical and Environmental 
Engineering from University 
of California Riverside. His expertise is advanced energy 
materials for zinc–air/lithium-ion/lithium-–sulfur batteries 
and fuel cells.
Khalil Amine is a 
Distinguished Fellow and the 
Manager of the Advanced 
Battery Technology pro-
grams at Argonne National 
Laboratory, where he is 
responsible for directing the 
research and development 
of advanced materials and 
battery systems for HEV, 
PHEV, EV, satellite, military, 
and medical applications. 
Dr. Amine currently also serves as member of the U.S. 
National Research Consul on battery related technologies.
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (3 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
voltage was relatively low (≈2 V vs Li/Li+) and was usually made 
in the “charged” (delithiated) state which meant it required a 
Li source in the anode. Furthermore, TiS2 was problematic to 
handle in ambient conditions due to its spontaneous release of 
toxic H2S gas upon contact with moisture. The electrolyte was 
very dangerous due to the shock sensitive LiClO4 salt while the 
safety and stability of a Li metal-based anode were still of great 
concern. This dangerous nature of a Li-metal anode was later 
experienced firsthand by Moli Energy Ltd in Vancouver, Canada 
in their Li/MoS2 (MOLICEL) batteries in the late 1980s.[18] Moli 
Energy issued a total recall of all of their Li/MoS2 batteries 
used in cell phones due to reports of battery fires. This dis-
couraged the commercial use of metallic Li-anode for the near 
future, making the Li/TiS2 and Li/MoS2 two of the few LMBs 
that ever made it to the market. Such severe problems with 
Li-metal based battery technologies although unfortunate, pre-
sented themselves as the design criteria for the next generation 
of battery technologies. A cathode that was stable in ambient 
condition (ease of manufacturing) which also possessed a high 
energy density and an anode that was stable to cycle with lim-
ited safety concerns soon became the key benefits of the next 
generation of batteries.
A few years post “commercialization” of Li/TiS2, the first 
appearance of the modern layered metal oxide was made in 
February of 1980 where Godshall et al. at Stanford University 
published an article regarding the use of a high voltage metal 
oxide cathode material namely LiCoO2 (LCO).[19] While LCO 
of Godshall et  al. was operated at elevated temperatures of 
400–450  °C, a few months later, Mizushima et  al. reported a 
room temperature LCO cathode using organic electrolytes.[17] 
LCO had a very similar layered crystal structure (Figure 2a) 
to TiS2 but offered many crucial advantages such as its sta-
bility in ambient conditions (moisture), a significantly higher 
Li-ion insertion voltage (3.5–4  V vs Li/Li+ in propylene car-
bonate as shown in Figure 2b). If one mole of Li was extracted 
from one mole of LCO, the calculated theoretical capacity was 
274 mAh g−1. Unfortunately, it required a very high voltage 
(5  V vs Li/Li+) to completely delithiated LCO. Such a high 
voltage would cause the oxidation of the organic electrolyte 
and instability of the cathode material. Accordingly, a com-
plete delithiation was found to result in a severe 5% irrevers-
ible capacity loss at each cycle as reported by Amatucci et al.[20] 
which was quite prohibitive for practical application. The “prac-
tical capacity,” or the capacity of Li-ions which can be revers-
ibly extracted and inserted into LCO was around half of the 
theoretical which was more than enough at that time. Another 
advantage, that indeed was the key to LCO’s success, was the 
fact that LCO was manufactured in its lithiated state which pro-
vided more freedom for the choice of anode material.
2.2. The Search for an Anode
The search for an anode that was safer and more stable than 
pure Li metal had already undergone great progress almost in 
parallel to the search for a cathode. While primary batteries 
with a Li anode had been long available to the consumer, the 
secondary LMB to this day have never reached widespread com-
mercialization due to concerns regarding energy efficiency and 
safety. The challenges of finding a suitable anode were more 
problematic than the cathode and led to many abandoned 
concepts that never made it to market.[21] Concepts such as 
the Si–Li and Sn–Li alloying anodes were discouraged by the 
large volume change upon lithiation and the subsequent dis-
integration of electrodes.[14] The LiAl alloy anode was rather 
promising compared to the other alloy candidate and provided 
>90% Coulombic efficiency[13,22] but only when it was limited 
to an impractically low capacity of 5 C cm−2 (≈1.4 mAh cm−2) 
at a low current density of 1  mA cm−2.[23,24] In 1980, Lazzari 
and Scrosati published work on an insertion based tungsten 
dioxide anode and paired it with TiS2.[25] Though Li-ion inser-
tion and extraction reactions from WO2 were highly reversible, 
it was required to be first lithiated (externally by Li metal) to 
LixWO2 in order to introduce Li-ion into the TiS2/WO2 full cell. 
Other problems with this design were the anode’s high voltage 
(0.75 V vs Li/Li+) and low capacity (125 mAh g−1).[26]
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561
Figure 1.  Comparison of literature growth from 1987 to 2017 between search query “batteries” (blue circles) and pseudo-empty search query “the” 
(black squares) in the field of search “topic,” utilizing the website Web of Science accessed through: https://webofknowledge.com/ on October 25 2017.

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (4 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
Of all the directions of anode research, the carbon-based 
anode was deemed the most promising. This mainly because 
the lithiation/delithiation reactions of carbon materials were 
quite reversible, carbon had a high capacity (372 mAh g−1), 
and the lithiation potential was low. The first reported use of 
an intercalation based graphite anode was by Besenhard in the 
mid-1970s,[23,24] where various alkali-ions such as Li, K, Na, Rb, 
and Cs were intercalated into graphite. Figure 2a shows Besen-
hard’s first reported lithiation (along with insertion of the other 
alkali-ion) voltage profiles of a graphite anode with its cyclic 
voltammetry shown in Figure 2b. Quick to follow were the 
numerous reports of organic electrolyte decomposition on the 
surface of graphite upon lithiation[23,27] which was identified 
to have an electrode blocking effect to promote Li-plating.[27,28] 
First coined by Peled in 1979, this decomposition layer that 
separated the graphite from the bulk liquid electrolyte will be 
forever known as the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI).[29]
Later in 1981, Basu at Bell Labs patented a high temperature 
(375–500  °C) molten salt cell which was implemented with a 
LiC6 graphite anode and metal sulfide cathode.[30] Without 
an organic electrolyte, the graphite anode was stable with no 
SEI. Two years later in 1983, Basu filed another patent on an 
ambient temperature secondary battery that used a LiC6 anode 
and NbSe3 cathode in a 1,3-dioxolane (DOL) solvent with LiAsF6 
salt electrolyte.[31] In the same year, Yazami and Touzain pub-
lished work on a 60 °C operating temperature graphite anode 
cell with a solid electrolyte and demonstrated its reversibility 
through cyclic voltammetry.[32]
High-temperature molten salt designs of Basu were obvi-
ously prohibitive for consumer electronics while the solid elec-
trolyte design by Yazami possessed impractically high internal 
cell resistance. Among these works, the most feasible anode for 
application in consumer electronics was Basu’s room temper-
ature ether based organic electrolyte system. While DOL and 
other ethers were known to form very stable passivation layers 
over graphite,[33] they were anodically unstable against a high 
voltage cathode such as LCO.[34] Accordingly, during this period, 
the more anodically stable PC was by far the most reported/
common solvent in organic electrolytes for secondary lithium-
ion based batteries.[35] During the same period, A. Yoshino of 
Asahi Kasei Corporation was working on a secondary LiCoO2/
polyacetylene full cell[36] but had also moved on in favor of the 
higher energy density graphite-based anodes. He expressed 
concerns over the poor energy efficiency caused by the high 
cell impedance of the large SEI layer and looked for another 
carbonaceous anode to substitute graphite.[36] There was a pro-
portional relationship between the degree of graphitization and 
capacity. However, it was also found that the more graphitic the 
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561
Figure 2.  a) The crystal structure of LCO and b) the discharge/charge voltage profile of LCO. Reproduced with permission.[17] Copyright 1980, Elsevier. 
c) Discharge voltage profile of intercalation of various alkali metals into graphite in LiClO4, NaBF6, KPF6, RbI, CsI, NMe4Cl/DMSO. d) Cyclic voltam-
metry of Li-ion intercalation into graphite in 1 m LiClO4/DMSO electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.[24] Copyright 1976, Elsevier.

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (5 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
structure carbon was, the more unstable the SEI formation. PC 
would intercalate into the graphite structure, causing exfolia-
tion of the graphite layers.[37] It was later discovered in 1990 by 
Dahn, that in general if the graphitic structure was disordered 
such as those of soft carbons (less graphitized carbon), the 
higher the cyclability. He explained that the stability was prob-
ably increased due to the many lattice defects which pinned 
graphite layers together making them harder to be exfoliated.[38] 
Nishi later added that since the spacing between the graphite 
layers (d002) were too small, the graphite would contract and 
expand significantly during cycling. In contrast the larger 
intrinsic spacing of hard/soft carbon limited this effect.[39] In 
1987, Yoshino et al. settled on coke-carbon, a type of soft carbon 
that demonstrated a reversible capacity of ≈200 mAh g−1 (out 
of a theoretical of 372 mAh g−1) with excellent capacity reten-
tion.[40] He paired it with the LCO cathode discovered by Good-
enough in a PC mixed with diethyl carbonate-based electrolyte 
and patented what we now call the LIB.[40] While there had 
been many notable milestones reached on both the cathode and 
anode, it was this final work on the anode and cell integration 
by Yoshino that laid the last layer of foundation for modern 
LIBs and made him the commonly accepted inventor of LIBs. 
However, prior to mass production, the safety of this secondary 
battery had to be validated. Borrowing a battery safety testing 
facility, Yoshino subjected his new cells to a standard safety 
validation test which consisted of impacting an “iron lump” on 
the LIB. The testing apparatus is shown in Figure 3a. Figure 3c 
shows an exploding LMB after experiencing the impact. 
Whereas in Figure 3b, the deformed LIB cell did not explode 
nor catch fire. Where so many have failed, Yoshino’s new LIB 
did not. He described this result as, “the moment when the 
lithium-ion battery was born,[36]” since this was the last bar-
rier before this technology can be granted commercial rel-
evancy. Shortly after, Sony Co. in 1991 and A&T Battery Co. 
(a partnership between Asashi Kasei Co. and Toshiba) in 1992 
commercialized the LIB for consumer electronics at 200 Wh L−1  
and 80 Wh kg−1 which were charged to 4.1 V.[41] The commer-
cialization of LIB was quickly received by companies as it filled 
a much-loathed gap in the market. Finally, a battery was simul-
taneously small, light, and durable while being reasonably 
priced for electronics such as camcorders and cell phones.
2.3. Post Commercialization Enhancements
The creation of the LIB revolutionized the way portable elec-
tronics were designed and enabled the many hand-held elec-
tronics that defined many aspects of modern human life. Post 
commercialization, LIBs underwent notable performance 
increases. With the cathode mostly left unchanged (initially), 
modifications to the anode and electrolyte were made to reach 
higher energy densities, higher discharge/charge rates, and 
longer cycle life. Investigations into carbonaceous anode led 
to the definition of three distinct classes of materials: graphite, 
hydrogen-containing carbon, and hard carbon by Dahn in 1995. 
The various generic voltage charge/discharge profiles of these 
materials are shown in Figure 4a.[42] In contrast to graphite and 
hard carbon, the capacity of the hydrogen-containing carbon 
material was large, but the overpotential during delithiation 
was far too severe for any practical application and was aban-
doned.[43] Somewhat complementing the work by Dahn, A. 
Satoh of the Toshiba Corporation recognized in 1995[44] that 
the capacity and charging stability of the carbon depended 
on its d002 spacing. Shown in Figure 4b, at d002 = ≈0.344 nm 
the capacity was at a minimal. By decreasing the spacing 
(becoming more graphitic) or increasing (becoming hard 
carbon) the capacity could be raised. Like graphite, hard carbon 
possessed a higher capacity than soft carbon but did not suffer 
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561
Figure 3.  Photos of the safety validation tests performed for Yoshino: a) image after the cells was impacted with the iron lump, b) Yoshino’s LIB after 
impact, and c) the flaming aftermath of the LMB cell. Reproduced with permission.[36] Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH.

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (6 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
from the same exfoliation problems as graphite and enjoyed 
enhanced stability. Furthermore, in contrast to the small d002 of 
soft carbon (0.344 nm), the larger d002 spacing (>0.372 nm) did 
not experience much volume change (1% change vs 10% for 
graphite[45]) upon lithiation and provided excellent reversibility 
even at a higher charging voltage (4.2  V full cell, delithiation 
for LCO and lithiation for hard carbon).[39] As such, the second 
generations of LIB did not use soft carbon (coke) but instead 
hard carbons[40] produced from carbonized highly crosslinked 
polymers such as phenolic resins.[46] Hard carbon endowed 
the anode with superior stability[47] and the 2nd generation of 
the LIBs were rated at 220 Wh L−1and 85 Wh kg−1 and charged 
to 4.2  V.[41] This was about a ≈10% increase in volumetric 
energy density over its first generation and was improved up to 
295 Wh L−1 and 129 Wh kg−1.[39] Unfortunately, in addition to 
its lower mass density (larger spacing between graphite layers), 
hard carbon possessed an unusually large irreversible first cycle 
capacity. This consumed significant amounts of Li-ions from 
the cathode on the first charge and ultimately required extra 
cathode capacity to compensate, lowering the overall energy 
density.[43] Moreover, the lithiation/delithiation plateaus of hard 
carbon (and even soft carbons) were sloped whereas graphite’s 
voltage plateaus were exceptionally flat. A graphite anode was 
once again sought after. The use of graphite was initially pro-
hibitive due to the unstable SEI formed by PC.[34] An initial 
adjustment to the electrolyte was the substitution of the pro-
pylene carbonate electrolyte solvent with ethylene carbonate 
(EC). EC was known in the 1980s to offer a more stable SEI 
layer compared to PC but had a high melting point of ≈39 °C. 
It was mandatory for EC to be mixed with other solvents to 
remain in a liquid state at room temperature with a reason-
able viscosity.[48] In 1990 Fong et  al. proposed to use EC and 
PC in a 50:50 mixture and demonstrated that the incorpora-
tion of EC prevented the cointercalation of PC into the graphite 
structure and ultimately mitigated the detrimental exfoliation 
of graphite.[49] This restricted the irreversible SEI formation to 
mostly occur on the first discharge cycle and remained stable 
for the subsequent cycles. The use of EC mixed with PC and 
other carbonates in the electrolyte was one of the main reasons 
that allowed for the reintroduction of graphite in commercial 
LIBs in around 1995–1997.[50–52] The high capacity of graphite 
still came at a cost of cyclability which meant hard carbon was 
not fully abandoned. Graphite and hard carbon each had their 
own benefits and disadvantages with some even blending them 
together.[53] However, by the mid-1990s, most LIBs have already 
shifted toward a graphite anode (Figure 4c) which already rep-
resented over half of the total anode market by 1995 with the 
remaining mostly occupied by hard carbon (Figure 4d).[54] By 
2010 (Figure 4e), the market share of hard carbon effectively 
disappeared and was completely dominated by graphite-based 
materials. The presence of hard carbon in the LIB anode 
market never recovered (≈7% in 2016),[55] but research is still 
recently being conducted on this material for LIB.[56] If hard 
carbon’s large initial irreversible capacity can be avoided then it 
could still be revived commercially.
In addition to the innovations made on the electrolyte, this 
movement away from hard carbon was due to the innova-
tions made on graphite materials. Within the class of graphite 
anodes, there were the synthetic and natural graphite types. 
Produced by Kawasaki Steel Co., a type of synthetic graphite 
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561
Figure 4.  a) Charge/discharge profile for graphitic, hydrogen containing, and hard carbon. Reproduced with permission.[42] Copyright 1995, The American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. b) Relationship between carbon type and capacity. Reproduced with permission.[44] Copyright 1995, 
Elsevier. c) Absolute capacity in mAh of LIBs from 1992 to 2005 with corresponding technological trends. Adapted with permission.[51] Copyright 2009, 
Springer Nature. Approximate market share of various anode materials in d) 1995 and e) 2010, with data estimated from ref. [54].

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (7 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
known as mesophase carbon microbeads (MCMB), offered high 
electrode packing density and low surface area which decreased 
the amount of SEI formation (more stable).[45,57] MCMB was 
very popular initially but was expensive due to the high tem-
perature (2800 °C) nature of its production.[58] The demand for 
MCMB drastically decreased from 1995 to 2010 as the massive 
artificial graphite (MAG, manufactured by companies such as 
Hitachi Ltd.[59]) became a very popular anode material occu-
pying ≈40% of the LIB anode market share by 2006.[59,60] MAG 
were aggregated graphite particles of 20–30  µm in diameter. 
They possessed a larger surface area of about 320 m2 g−1 which 
resulted in 30 Ah kg−1 of irreversible capacity on first lithiation 
compared to the MCMB’s 20 Ah kg−1 at 150 m2 g−1.[61] However, 
this was justified by the far superior rate capability of MAG 
owing to the enhanced accessibility of the graphitic layers. 
Also, the packing density of MAG was superior due to its large 
particle size. By 2010, the presence of MAG in the market was 
significantly higher than MCMB. The artificial graphite class of 
materials was undoubtedly exceptional materials as anodes for 
LIBs. Their downfall was the high cost of manufacturing stem-
ming from high production temperatures.
Natural unmodified graphites were much cheaper but 
unstable due to the intercalation of PC and the subsequent 
exfoliation of it graphitic layers. Therefore, without the use of 
significant amounts of EC in the electrolyte, natural graphite 
cannot be used unless some clever modifications were made. 
Moving away from the mostly solid-state physics based work on 
LIB thus far, work on the graphite anode now took a more con-
temporary material science approach. Natural graphite found 
commercial success by introducing a thin carbon coating over 
the surface,[62] surface functionalized,[63] and also coated with 
Zr[64] to limit direct contact with the electrolyte. It should also 
be noted that many other technologies such as the alloy, conver-
sion and intercalation based anode have been pursued simulta-
neously during this time period. Si and Sn alloys were heavily 
studied[65] but did not make a widespread commercial appear-
ance. The problems associated with the enormous volume 
change is still a challenge to this day. Whereas the conversion 
based chemistries also poses the same volumetric problems but 
also introduces prohibitively high charging overpotential.[66] 
Of the many attempted anode technologies, lithium titianate 
or specifically the Li4Ti5O12 has been the only other widely 
successful anode technology out in the market. Its incredibly 
reversible intercalation coupled with its relatively high lithiation 
potential made it a very robust material.[67]
Ever since the graphite anodes were made feasible in 
1995–1997, the volumetric capacity has undergone significant 
enhancements (from ≈350 Wh L−1 in 1997 to ≈625 Wh L−1 in 
2011).[54] In parallel to anode research, electrolyte research led to 
the realization that the stability of the SEI dictated the lifespan 
of the LIB.[68] If the SEI was not sufficiently passivating/stable, 
it was possible for the continuous formation of SEI layers on 
the surface of the anode. The SEI was found to grow slowly but 
noticeably at each cycle, resulting in the continuous consump-
tion of electrolyte. As the electrolyte became more and more 
depleted after each cycle, the cells eventually failed from either 
an excessive overpotential due to an abnormally large amount 
of SEI material covering the anode or by simply drying out.[51,69] 
Without a proper control of the SEI, improvements in cycle 
life could not be achieved (with or without EC) and sparked 
an immense amount of research. Initially this led to very early 
development of high purity electrolytes (removal of water)[70] 
and the mass production of high purity electrolyte solvent in 
1992 by Ube Industries Ltd.[51] Later, the industry focused on a 
new concept and began searching for a “functional” electrolyte 
additives that did not replace the PC solvent but complimented 
PC and decoupled the many confounding requirements of the 
electrolyte.[50] The movement away from hard carbon to the 
higher capacity graphite occurred from 1995 to 1997 and was 
also partially driven by progress made in functional electrolytes 
additives. The search for high-performance electrolyte additives 
by Ube Industries Ltd. entailed a rigorous screening process 
as shown in Figure 5a as described by Yoshitake.[51] To search 
for a superior electrolyte additive, the design criteria must first 
be understood. As summarized concisely by Goodenough and 
Kim,[71] the stability of the electrolyte is related to the electro-
lyte’s lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and highest 
occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) levels. If the electrochem-
ical potential of the anode was higher than the LUMO of the 
electrolyte then the electrolyte would be reduced on the anode. 
If the electrochemical potential of the cathode was lower than 
the electrolyte’s HOMO, the electrolyte would be oxidized on 
the cathode. The oxidizing potential of the electrolyte often dic-
tated the maximum charging voltage of the cell. The criteria 
for the reduction of electrolyte on the anode was often fulfilled 
for LIBs due to the low potential of lithiated carbon. First the 
solvents would be screened based on its HOMO and LUMO 
levels. The idea was to identify a high voltage electrolyte addi-
tive (i.e., low HOMO) possessing a LUMO which was more 
easily reduced by the anode than that of the electrolyte solvent 
(i.e., LUMOadditive < LUMOsolvent). This was key in decoupling 
the physical requirements of electrolyte solvent (i.e., viscosity of 
EC) with the SEI formation requirements. After the identifica-
tion of such an electrolyte additive, it was synthesized and the 
calculated LUMO and HOMO levels potentials were confirmed 
by measuring the oxidation and reduction potential. Finally, the 
last step was to fabricate and evaluate various cell performance 
indices.
The fruits of such work were the commercialization of high 
purity, functional electrolyte in 1996 by Ube Industries Ltd. 
under the name Purelyte.[51] While exact chemicals were rarely 
explicitly published and considered as key trade secrets, poten-
tial additives such as vinyl acetate, divinyl adipate, and allyl 
methyl carbonate were added at compositions that were specific 
to the anode technologies used by the customers (battery man-
ufacturer). These additives allowed for a stable graphite anode 
in PC even without EC which boosted the low-temperature 
performance of the cell. Other major changes to the electrolyte 
included the addition of vinylene carbonate (VC) and fluoro-
ethylene carbonate (FEC) which polymerized over the lithi-
ated graphite (SEI stabilizer),[74] flame retardants,[75] separator 
wetting agents,[76] and overcharge protection.[77] Arguably, the 
electrolyte additive is the most impactful parameter to achieve 
enhancements in cell performance. Above all the benefits of 
these additive, the formation of the SEI can be specifically con-
sidered as the single most important chemical phenomenon 
that has allowed for the use of such reductive anodes. It pre-
vents the direct contact between the anode and the electrolyte 
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (8 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
(Figure 5b), while allowing for Li-ion transfer. This selective 
electron passivation offered by the SEI significantly enhanced 
the stability of LIBs. The composition of the SEI has been 
considered as complex blend of LiF, Li2O, Li2CO3, and poly-
olephines as shown in Figure 5c.[73] One important function 
of the salts is to facilitate Li-ion conduction through the SEI 
layer, if the Li-ion transfer is too slow, the subsequent overpo-
tential can promote Li-plating.[74] Such a film was formed by 
the reduction of organic electrolytes solvents to form polymeric 
films over the surface. The polymeric layers provides an elastic 
characteristic that is important to prevent SEI breakage during 
graphite’s volume expansion.[79] FEC has the capability of trans-
forming into VC (also a crucial additive) which serves to form 
very stable films over the surface of the anode and has become 
one of the most important electrolyte additive for current cut-
ting edge Si anode systems.[80] Unfortunately, this review 
cannot properly cover the vast research area of electrolytes and 
its indispensable role in the development of LIBs. Very inform-
ative reviews on electrolyte solvents[50] and additives[51,81] can 
offer more information to the readers on the historical develop-
ment of the electrolytes for LIB.
As for the cathode, a 40% increase in energy density can be 
achieved by simply charging LCO cathode to a higher voltage 
(4.5  V instead of 4.2  V) as the number of Li-ions that are 
extracted from the LCO are increased.[82] However, high voltage 
charging (>4.2) can be detrimental to the cycle stability and 
safety of the cell. The highly delithiated state of LCO was prob-
lematic. Its unstable nature promoted the physical cracking of 
LCO particles,[83] oxygen evolution,[84] cobalt dissolution and 
deposition on the anode,[82] and electrolyte decomposition.[85] 
Surface coatings of inert materials such as Al2O3, TiO2, and 
ZrO2 have been investigated to prevent direct contact between 
the electrolyte and LCO in attempt to enable >  4.2  V LCO 
cathodes.[86]
Near the end of the 20th century, the LIBs for consumer 
electronics began to move away from liquid electrolyte cells 
with metal housing and began manufacturing cells made from 
plastic casings. Such batteries had many names but were gen-
erally called the Li-polymer battery (LPB).[87] At the heart of the 
LPB technology was the nature of the electrolyte. Ideally, a LPB 
should have a solid-state electrolyte composed of a polymer 
membrane (polyethylene oxide and polyacrylate among others) 
blended with a Li salt which later became primarily propylene 
oxide/ethylene oxide copolymers.[88] However, the liquid free 
LPB were only operable at >60 °C due to high impedance from 
the solid-state electrolyte. By swelling the polymer membrane 
with the electrolyte solution, a type of gel was formed which 
can be considered as a compromise between solid state and 
liquid electrolyte. The initial polymers used for gelling were 
high molecular weight polyethylene oxide, polyacrylonitrile, 
and polyvinylidene difluoride. Bellcore Lab used polyvinylidene 
difluoride/hexafluoropropylene copolymer and attracted much 
attention from the industry but was recalled because the liquid 
started separating from the polymer.[88] Depending on the 
interaction between the electrolyte and the polymer, a gel elec-
trolyte can be very efficient at eliminating any free electrolyte 
liquid in the cell. Sony Inc. was the first company to properly 
mix the polymer with the electrolyte solution to obtain a gel 
electrolyte that did not leak any liquid and commercialized it 
in their 3rd generation LIBs.[52] By reducing the volume of free 
liquid inside the cell, the need for robust/bulky/heavy pack-
aging such as metal casings were eliminated. This increased 
the gravimetric energy of LIB solely due to the decrease in 
packing weight. There was also a significant cost reduction 
as manufacturing LPB was more stream-lined than the tradi-
tional methods. Finally, the last benefit of LPB was the safety 
it introduced. In addition to the obvious benefits of employing 
less electrolyte (highly flammable), the polymer electrolyte 
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561
Figure 5.  a) New electrolyte identification methodology from Ube Industries Ltd. Reprinted/adapted with permission.[51] Copyright 2009, Springer 
Nature. b) Schematic of SEI in relation to the anode. Reproduced with permission.[72] Copyright 2010, Elsevier. c) Schematic of SEI composition where 
A = Li2O, B = LiF, C = Li2CO3, D = polyolefins, and E = semicarbonates. Reproduced with permission.[73] Copyright 1997, Electrochemical Society, Inc.

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (9 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
was found to be especially good at limiting dendritic lithium 
formation.
3. The Electric Vehicle’s Demands for a New 
Battery
Beyond its early and modern dominance in the consumer elec-
tronics market, LIBs were also implemented in the power tool 
and uninterrupted power supply where some of the new LIB 
cathode technologies such as the spinel LiMn2O4 and olivine 
LiFePO4 were applied.[89] The lightweight and compact nature 
of LCO based LIB appeared to be very attractive compared to 
other battery technologies. However, the ultimate and most 
exciting market that was ambitious even for the LIB, was the 
electric vehicle (EV) market.
The electrification of transportation has been identified 
as a crucial component to reduce mankind’s greenhouse gas 
emission.[90] Acting both as a green revolution to the internal 
combustion engine and a potential load leveler for the energy 
grid,[91] EVs have become the main focus of many discussions 
of mankind’s future energy economy.[92] Today, almost all major 
car manufacturing companies have at least either one type of 
hybrid vehicle or a full EV (xEV, x = pure and hybrid) on their 
product line. The battery is one of the most defining features 
of a xEV, almost all the disadvantages (driving range, charging 
time, cost and safety) of an xEV can be traced to a limitation 
or problem of its battery technology. While there were other 
markets for LIBs such as power tools and consumer elec-
tronics, 43% of all manufactured LIBs in 2016 are represented 
by demand in the electric vehicle sector (xEV including electric 
busses) and forecasted to be ≈50% in 2025.[55] With such a large 
percentage of the current day LIB market occupied by xEVs, 
the historical development of LIB was clearly intertwined and 
driven by the design requirements of xEVs.
3.1. History of Electric Vehicles
The beginning of the electric vehicle could be found as far back 
as 1873 (earlier than the first gasoline vehicle in 1885) by R. 
Davidson who built the first practically useable EV in Britain.[8] 
Later in 1897, the Electric Carriage & Wagon Company later 
acquired by the Electric Vehicle Company, was the first to bring 
forward EVs as a commercial possibility to the United States. 
The original intention of this technology was to replace or com-
pete with horse-drawn taxi cabs. Although some success was 
initially enjoyed in North America and Europe with over 2000 
vehicles delivered, the company declared bankruptcy in 1902. 
This was caused by the combining effect of a lower than speci-
fied delivered performance, expensive lawsuits based on the 
Selden patent[93] and fierce competition from the gas powered 
and steam-powered vehicles.[94] Sadly after this brief period of 
commercial success, the electric vehicle would be considered 
nothing more than a niche novelty item for the better part of 
the century to come. The next major spark that induced interest 
into xEVs was the energy crisis in the 1970s. In 1976, USA 
implemented its Electric and Hybrid Vehicle Research Devel-
opment and Demonstration Act (Public Law 94-413).[8] With 
emphasis on demonstration, this was mainly to see how feasible 
it was to develop xEVs that were comparable in performance to 
modern internal combustion engines.[95] Electric vehicles that 
commercially surfaced in the 1990s did not perform well as 
products. Examples such as the lead-acid based General Motors 
EV1, high-temperature Na–S based Ford Ecostar and the Ni–Cd 
hydride battery based Chrysler TEVan, all suffered from either 
a prohibitively low range (<150 miles) or high cost of purchase 
and long recharge time.[96] Only a meager 4017 total electric 
vehicles were leased/sold from 1996 to 2000 in the USA across 
all companies[97] and were often speculated to be leased/sold 
at a monetary loss to the manufacturer.[98] The viability of fully 
electric vehicle was limited by the high cost of manufacturing 
and low driving range per charge. By finding and exploiting 
the middle ground between the range and recharging problem, 
Toyota introduced the world’s first mass-production hybrid 
electric vehicle, the Toyota Prius in the late 1990s with Honda 
following closely after with the Honda Insight.[99] As hybrids 
vehicles can rely on its internal combustion engines to extend 
the range, both the Toyota Prius and Honda Insight did not 
require the use of high energy density batteries but instead 
implemented the Ni-Cd hydride battery and found commer-
cial success. The gas efficiency and greenhouse gas emissions 
of hybrids were superior to pure internal combustion engines, 
but this was nevertheless a compromise on pure EVs. The high 
energy density LIB was a great answer to the range problems 
of EVs but proved to be difficult to replicate its success in con-
sumer electronics market. The first example of a LIB based EV 
was the Nissan Altra introduced in 1997. The Altra was able to 
offer up to 192 km in range with a 350 kg LCO cathode based 
on 12 modules battery pack with each modules containing eight 
100 Ah cells (schematic shown in Figure 6).[100] At the time, the 
Altra had the lowest battery weight to range ratio among the 
available EVs (comparison table shown in Table 1.[97] However, 
the cost of the Nissan Altra was high (≈51 000 US$) for a low 
range of 192  km. Ultimately, Nissan only ever leased/sold an 
underwhelming 110 units of the Altra model.[98]
3.2. Cost and Safety, the Two Factors for EVs
The contribution of cost to the commercial failure of the Altra 
could be explained by a study of L. Gaines at ANL in 2000 
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561
Figure 6.  Schematic of the battery cell-module-pack design of the Nissan Altra.

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (10 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
where she estimated that 150 US$ kWh−1 was the threshold 
for EV to have competitive pricing compared to internal 
combustion engines.[100] Assuming the price of Co was 
10 US$ lb−1, it was estimated that the material cost alone would be  
300 US$ kWh−1 for the Altra, which was already double of the 
targeted 150 US$ kWh−1.[100] With even more stringent cost tar-
gets made by the US Joint Center for Energy Storage Research 
(100 US$ kWh−1),[101] it was clear that next generation LIBs 
must include a significant cost reduction. Patents pertaining to 
cheaper technologies such as the layered LiNiO2 cathode (which 
was not safe) were already granted to researchers as early as 
1998,[102] but achieving a cheaper alternative while maintaining 
safety was significantly more difficult. Recent trending news 
of xEVs’ battery succumbing to fire/explosion[103,104] and cell 
phone batteries[105] and are quite reminiscent of Moli Energy’s 
LMB fire in the late 1980s.[18] While the cost is important, the 
safety of LIBs was paramount.
Catastrophic failures of the LIBs were typically the manifes-
tation of phenomena such as the formation of dendritic lithium 
at high charge rates.[106] This occurred because the overpotential 
generated at higher current densities lowered the experienced 
potential of the anode to that of favoring Li-ion reduction (i.e., 
Li-plating). A method to reduce to the chance of Li-plating to 
was to increase the absolute capacity ratios between the anode 
and cathode (colloquially known as the N/P ratio).[107] By 
having an excessive amount of Li-ion storage sites the poten-
tial of the anode can be kept higher which thermodynamically 
reduces the chance of Li-plating even when presented with a 
polarization. Beyond this methodology, researchers began 
looking into higher lithiation potential anodes (which would 
not reach the Li-plating potential) such as lithium titanate oxide 
(LTO) in 1995,[108] the Li3-xMxN (M = Co, Ni or Cu, x = 0.1–0.6)  
anode systems in 1996[109] and conversion reaction anodes 
(amorphous tin oxide) in 1997.[110] Among these anode technol-
ogies, only LTO had been successfully commercialized into EVs 
such as the Honda Fit.[111] While the other anodes had prob-
lems with cycle stability, LTO was known for its highly revers-
ible “zero-strain” lithium insertion and extraction mechanism. 
Furthermore, LTO’s high lithiation potential did not thermody-
namically favor the decomposition of electrolyte which made 
it extremely stable and robust but sacrifice the cell voltage and 
capacity (i.e., lower energy density).[110] Another strategy was 
the use of a ceramic modified separator due to its insignificant 
effect on energy density which have drawn both academic[112] 
and commercial interest.[113] Panasonic cells made for Tesla 
Inc. are known to implement a separator coated by a thin layer 
of ceramic.[3] The modified separators are manufactured and 
supplied by Sumitomo Chemical Co. and are used to increase 
the puncture strength of the separator, and thereby reduce the 
chance of internal short-circuiting.[114] Changes in the electro-
lyte composition to increase the Li transference number could 
also help by reducing the polarization which in turns reduces 
the favorability of Li-reduction on the anode.[50,115]
A complementing phenomenon to Li-plating was the 
problem of overcharging the cells. The high energy density 
demands from the industry can be partially met by increasing 
the charging voltage of the cell. If the charging voltage was 
higher, then more energy can be extracted from the cell. 
However, when LiCoO2 is overcharged/over-delithiated to 
Lix→0CoO2, the formation of Co3O4 and O2 begins to occur 
which leads to the highly exothermic combustion of electrolyte, 
Li and carbonaceous materials.[116] This process was drasti-
cally amplified if the charging rate was increased, which was 
most likely due to the higher occurrence of Li-plating. At 1C 
(Figure 7a) the voltage dropped due to a partial internal short 
circuit while the temperature increases to ≈90  °C and the 
cell expanded in volume. When the current was increased to 
3C (Figure 7b) the cell underwent a complete internal short 
(voltage dropped to 0) and the temperature increased sharply 
to ≈300 °C. If the heat removal system design for the battery 
cannot transfer the thermal energy quickly enough to quench 
the reaction, then there is a very serious risk of a thermal run-
away reaction resulting in flaming battery cells (cell burned 
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561
Table 1.  Comparison between the first LIB EV with other EVs in 2002.[97]
EV model
Battery type
Battery weight 
[kg]
Driving range 
[km]
Price [sale 
US$|rent US$]
GM EV-1
Pb-Acid  
NiMH
553  
410
88–152  
120–208
33 959|424 
43 995|499
GM S-10
Pb-Acid  
NiMH
612  
N/A
64–88  
104–128
32 995|N/A 
42 995|N/A
Ford Ranger  
EV
Pb-Acid  
NiMH
N/A  
N/A
80  
104–136
32 795|349 
42 795|450
Toyota RAV4
NiMH
450
202
45 000|N/A
Honda EV Plus
NiMH
450
200–220
44 999|454
Nissan Altra
Li-ion
350
192
50 999|599
Chrysler EPIC
NiMH
N/A
128–144
N/A|450
Figure 7.  The relationship between temperature and charging voltage during an overcharge test of a LiCoO2 cell at a) 1C and b) 3C. Reproduced with 
permission.[116] Copyright 2008, Elsevier.

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (11 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
from catastrophic failure Figure 7b).[104,117] A more thorough 
understanding of LIB safety can be found through the fol-
lowing review.[118]
Amid the problematic safety concerns of overcharging and 
the cost concerns of using LCO, LIB still remained the most 
promising battery technology for EVs due to its unequivocally 
high energy densities. The next design parameters: safety 
and cost were aimed simultaneously by researchers. Interest-
ingly, the issue of LCO’s expensive raw material cost was well 
known in the battery fields and it was always envisioned that 
alternatives must be found before commercialization can be 
successful. Obviously, this was not how events unfolded, as 
the LCO based LIBs did find its first commercially successful 
application in the expensive but popular consumer electronics 
such as the cell phone and camcorder markets. However, this 
early notion of cost awareness among many researchers drove 
research on cheaper alternatives such as Mn, Fe, Ni, and Al 
based cathodes years prior to Sony Co.’s commercialization.
3.3. The Search for a 2nd Generation Cathodes
3.3.1. Lithium Manganese Oxide
MnO2 was a very common cathode material for primary bat-
teries such as the Zn/MnO2 aqueous Leclanché cells (patented 
in 1867), where protons would be inserted into the structure 
of MnO2.[120] MnO2 was investigated as a cathode in a Li based 
rechargeable battery years (1974) before LCO,[121] and could 
store about 308 mAh g−1 at 5 V versus Li/Li+ which was much 
higher than the commercial LCO. Furthermore, Mn offered a 
substantial cost advantage over LCO due to the cheap price of 
Mn. However, it suffered from severe structural changes when 
lithiated from MnO2 to the rock salt structure of LiMnO2 ren-
dering it practically useless as a rechargeable cathode mate-
rial.[122] In 1981, Hunter published an article about the lithium 
diffusion in spinel LiMn2O4[123] but it was not until 1983 that 
Thackeray demonstrated the 3D spinel structured LiMn2O4 
(hausmannite, LMO) with a dual discharge plateau at 3 and 
4 V versus Li/Li+ as an alternative to LCO,[121,124] shown in the 
charge/discharge voltage profile (Figure 8a) and cyclic voltam-
metry plot (Figure 8b). Similar to LiMnO2, LMO was signifi-
cantly cheaper than LCO, less toxic, possessed greater thermal 
stability at charged state and higher power density due to its 
3D framework structure.[125] But unlike LiMnO2, the spinel 
crystal structure endowed it with better cycle stability, making 
it promising for EVs. Based on work by Thackeray, Tarascon 
et al. at Bellcore was the first to pair the LMO cathode with a 
carbon anode (analogous to the Sony’s LCO cells) and reported 
relatively stable performance at room temperatures.[126] How-
ever, the benefits of LMO were met by several challenges at 
lower discharge voltages such as the Jahn–Teller distortion,[127] 
volume expansion due to phase transformations and the dis-
solution of manganese from the cathode via disproportiona-
tion reaction (2Mn3+→Mn2++Mn4+) induced by the HF acid 
produced from the reaction between LiPF6 (electrolyte salt) and 
trace water impurities in the electrolyte. The generated Mn cat-
ions migrates to the graphite anode and increased the charge-
transfer resistance of the anode.[128] These phenomena resulted 
in severe cycle life degradation and was further amplified by 
increased cycling temperatures (≈50–70  °C).[129] It was found 
that the intrinsic reason for the instability of LiMn2O4 was the 
oxygen deficient nature of its crystal structure.[130] Work by 
Yoshio and co-workers have demonstrated a strong relationship 
between the cycle stability and the oxygen content in the Mn 
spinel structure.[131] If the oxygen was stoichiometric, the addi-
tion of metal substituents such as Al and Mg into the spinel 
structure was found to limit the Mn dissolution and enhanced 
its cycle stability at higher temperatures (50 °C).[132] However, a 
study at ANL demonstrated that even with a minimum amount 
of Mn ions in the electrolyte (such as Li1.06Mn1.95Al0.05O4), the 
reduction/deposition of Mn on the surface of graphite was still 
observed.[133]
LMO was not an ideal candidate to replaced LCO in LIBs 
for xEVs. Although, LMO was cheap and could be reason-
ably stabilized by comprising capacity (theoretically, LMO 
possessed 148 mAh g−1), the practical capacity was limited 
to 110 mAh g−1 to ensure stable cycling.[134] This had limited 
the commercial use of LMO to only about 10% in 2005 which 
were mostly in cell phones by NEC Co. where LCO domi-
nated the market[135] and decreased to 8% (absolute usage still 
increased)[55] as of 2016. Today, most of its applications are in 
power tools and EVs such as the Nissan Leaf where it is mixed 
with other more expensive, less safe but higher energy den-
sity Co based layered materials to reduce the overall cost and 
enhance the safety.[136]
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561
Figure 8.  a) Thackeray’s voltage profile and b) the cyclic voltammetry profile of LMO. Reproduced with permission.[119] Copyright 1997, Elsevier.

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (12 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
3.3.2. Lithium Iron Phosphate
Another class of cathode materials were the olivine structured 
LiFePO4. Initially, the cheap LiFeO2 was investigated by Sakurai 
et al. in 1996 but the capacity was low (≈100 mAh g−1) and the 
lithiation profile was severely sloped.[138] Later the polyanions 
(Fe2SiO4) with a NASICON framework, was investigated by 
Manthiram and Goodenough in 1989 and was found to possess 
a flat voltage plateau.[139] In 1997, another metal polyanions 
(PO4) in the form of 1-D ordered olivine structured LiFePO4 
(LFP), LiMnPO4, LiCoPO4, and LiNiPO4 were investigated by 
Padhi et al. now at University of Texas-Austin.[140] At the time, 
Padhi discovered that out of all the metal phosphates tested, 
LFP was the only one that could reversible extract and insert Li-
ions. LFP was significantly cheaper than the Co based cathode 
and possessed similar capacity making a promising candi-
date for EVs. Historically, various forms of iron phosphates 
were also investigated. LiFeP2O7, Li3Fe2(PO4)3, Fe4(P2O7)3 
and LiFePO4 all demonstrated ability to reversibly insert and 
extract Li-ions. It was found that Fe3+/Fe2+ couple of LiFePO4 
possessed the largest gap from the Fermi level of Li and lithi-
ated at 3.5  V versus Li/Li+[137,141] as shown in Figure 9a. The 
differences in the charge/discharge voltage profile between 
Fe4(P2O7)3 and LFP are shown in Figure 9b,c respectively. LFP 
has a higher lithiation voltage of ≈3.5  V whereas Fe4(P2O7)3 
begins with ≈3.5 V but slopes downward to <3.0 V. Additionally, 
LFP was inherently safer than the layered metal oxides. Due 
to the strong PO bond, the oxygen release seen in LCO that 
led to catastrophic failure was not possible from the LFP struc-
ture. Thermal decomposition experiments indicated that LFP 
only released a small amount of heat (147 J g−1) at >250 °C.[142] 
The LiFePO4 possessed a two-phase lithiation process at ≈3.5 V 
versus Li/Li+ which offered an extremely stable voltage plateau 
in contrast to the single-phase intercalation process of layered 
oxide materials with a sloped lithiation voltage profile. How-
ever, in contrast to the spinel Mn or the layered dichalcogenides 
of TiS2 and CoO2 cathode materials, LFP was not electrically 
conductive and does not become any more conductive at any 
state of lithiation. This prevented the use of bulk LFP particles 
in the cathode which severely hindered its initial commerciali-
zation. Strategies included incorporating a conductive carbon 
coating over the particles,[143] conductive networks[144] and 
reduction in particle size.[142] The use of material science to 
control features at the nanoscale achieved carbon-coated nano-
sized LFP and was commercialized in the early 2000s by A123 
Systems Inc.[54,145] In contrast to LCO and LMO, the commer-
cialization of LFP was quite dramatic with a multi-front patent 
battle between University of Texas for Goodenough, Nippon 
Telegraph & Telephone, and A123 from MIT.
The smaller particles and conductive coating endowed good 
electrical percolation to the insulating LFP particles. However, 
the nanosized LFP suffered from a low tap density. The low tap 
density caused a low volumetric capacity. Along with its low 
lithiation potential of 3.5 V, LFP has been widely recognized as 
a cheap, low energy density cathode. LFP does however possess 
a higher stability, higher rate capability and superior good abuse 
tolerance compared to the layered oxide cathodes.[136] In 2016, 
LFP occupied about 36% market share of all LIB cathode mate-
rials with most of its application in electric busses and power 
tools where the energy density is not as stringent of a design 
requirement.[55] The low energy density of LFP has limited its 
adoption into the EV market. Two of the few occurrences of 
LFP in EVs were in the Coda Automotive EV in 2010,[146] and 
the Chevrolet Spark.[3]
3.3.3. Ni-Based Cathodes
The two 2nd generation LIB technologies discussed thus far 
(LMO and LFP) did not and still do not have much of a pres-
ence in the modern EVs. Perhaps the most impactful and 
fruitful cathode materials for xEV applications were the layered 
Ni–Mn–Co oxide (NMC) and Ni–
Co–Al (NCA) oxides. The origin of 
these two materials can be traced 
back to the layered LiNiO2 (LNO). 
LNO was first synthesized and iso-
lated by L D. Dyer in 1954,[147] but 
the first electrochemical testing 
of LiNiO2 was in 1985 by Thomas 
et  al. where a single voltage pro-
file was shown.[148] LNO was a 
material that possessed a similar 
layered structure material com-
pared to LCO[149] but with a higher 
capacity (220 mAh g−1) and energy 
density (800  Wh kg−1).[150] LNO 
was originally investigated as a 
cheaper alternative to LCO due to 
the lower cost of Ni and slightly 
lower voltage versus Li/Li+ com-
pared to LCO which mitigated 
anodic 
electrolyte 
decomposi-
tion.[151] Unfortunately, LNO suf-
fered from many problems such 
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561
Figure 9.  a) The Fermi level of Fe3+/Fe2+ in various structures. Charge/discharge voltage profile of  
b) LixFe4(P2O7)3 and c) LiFePO4.[137] Reproduced with permission.[137] Copyright 1997, Electrochemical 
Society, Inc.

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (13 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
as: low 1st charge/discharge Coulombic efficiency and ina-
bility to sustain deep charge cycles due to severe changes in 
crystal structure where Ni2+ tended to relocate irreversibly to 
Li+ sites due to its similar atomic size (cation mixing).[4] The 
cation mixing effect severely deteriorated the rate performance 
of LNO. Moreover, the thermal stability of LNO was extremely 
poor and worse than LCO.[152] These problems effectively ren-
dered it unusable for the industry.[41,153] Based on these prob-
lems, researchers abandoned the single metal LNO system and 
moved onto dual metal systems. Researchers discovered that 
if Co,[154,155] Al,[156] or Mn[155,157,158] was partially substituted 
for Ni in LNO, the cation mixing between Ni2+ and Li+ was 
reduced and the irreversible crystal structure transitions expe-
rienced at deep charges was prevented, resulting in enhanced 
cyclability and capacity. In terms of safety, a standard safety test 
for next-gen metal oxide based cathode had become dynamic 
scanning calorimetry, where the thermal stability was quanti-
fied by its decomposition temperatures. Researchers found 
that the onset temperature of thermal decomposition of LNO 
mixed with any of the three metals was delayed compared to 
LNO and LCO.[159] It was recognized that the incorporations 
of any singular selection of these three metals with Ni clearly 
offered substantial but distinct benefits. For example, the incor-
poration of Mn indeed enhanced thermal stability and cycle sta-
bility,[160] but the practical reversible capacity was low[161] and 
the synthesis of LiNi1-xMnxO2 (0 < x  < 1) was rather difficult 
to achieve.[162] Similarly, though improvements on thermal sta-
bility from adding Al was apparent, it was not as beneficial as 
the other metals in preventing the migration of Ni2+ to vacated 
Li+ sites resulting in a large initial irreversible capacity and 
poor rate performances.[163] Finally, the mixing of Co with Ni 
undeniably prevented the migration of Ni2+ but still possessed 
a strong exothermic reaction peak upon heating to higher tem-
peratures and did not satisfy thermal stability concerns.[159,164] 
It was clear that the mixing of only a singular selection of metal 
was insufficient, thus researchers began to simultaneously 
substitute two different metals for Ni forming a ternary lay-
ered metal oxide and found synergistic effects.[165] One of the 
most common mix of metals of commercial relevance was the 
ternary NMC system. First invented and patent filed at 2001 
(2004 granted) by researchers at Argonne National Laborato-
ries,[166] the NMC system is the most widely used lithium-ion 
battery in EVs. The main benefits of NMC were its increased 
capacity, high decomposition temperature, use of lower tox-
icity material and the reduced cost due to the substitution of 
both Co and Ni with cheap Mn. Initially, the cycle stability and 
electronic conductivity was lower than LCO and posed con-
cerns for the commercial application of ternary metal oxides. 
However, drastic changes in performance were found when 
tuning the ratio between the three metals and led to intensive 
research into finding the best mix between the metals. Each 
metal had a different role in NMC, Ni was responsible for pro-
viding capacity as it was oxidized from Ni2+→Ni3+→Ni4+,[167] 
while Mn4+ was not electrochemically active but maintained 
the structural stability and lowered the cost.[168] Co was oxidized 
from Co2+→Co3+ after the oxidation of Ni2+ and prevented the 
Ni from migrating in the Li sites. Research on NMC cathode 
began with low Ni ratios. In 2001 Ohzuku and Makimura syn-
thesized and tested LiNi0.33Mn0.33C0.33O2[169] while in the same 
year, Dahn and co-workers[170] investigated LiNixCo1-2xMnxO2 
(x = 0.25 and 0.375), the work from both of these groups intro-
duced the NMC class of material to the battery field. All ratios 
demonstrated reasonably high capacities (>150 mAh g−1), good 
cycle stability (depending on the charge cut off voltage[150]) and 
enhanced thermal stability.[171] NMC with x = 1/3 has exhibited 
inferior rate performances due to the lower Li-ion diffusion 
compared to LCO and was often blended with the safer, higher 
rate performance and cheaper LMO. This blend of NMC–LMO 
has become a very popular cathode material among researchers 
and industry as the LMO provided extra safety to the system, 
in addition to lowering the cost and increasing the power den-
sity.[136,172] In 2011, Z. Li and Whittingham[173] sought to find 
an optimal NMC ratio, testing NMC 333, 442, and 992. Com-
pared to NMC 333, NMC 442 possessed a higher capacity at low 
currents and comparable capacities at higher currents while 
reducing cost (lowered Co content from 33% to 20%). NMC 992 
was found to possess significantly poorer capacity at high dis-
charge rates and was less stable. In general, it was realized that 
the higher the Ni content in the cell, the higher the intrinsic 
specific capacity but at a cost of poorer stability and rate perfor-
mance.[174] Specifically, NMC materials with Ni content >50% 
(known as Ni-rich compounds) were particularly problematic.
Ni-rich cathodes can almost be considered as another class 
of layered cathode material. While Ni-rich compounds were 
theoretically denser in energy and cheaper (lower Co content), 
they were usually problematic to implement due to safety 
and cycle stability concerns. The relationship of Ni content 
on thermal stability and oxygen gas generation is shown in 
Figure 10a. Following the convention: NMC 433 (4-Ni:3-Mn:3-
Co molar ratio), the ratio with the least amount of Ni exhibited 
the least amount of gas generation and at a higher decompo-
sition initiation temperature. Every subsequent increase in Ni 
content noticeably decreased the onset temperature for phase 
change from the original layered to spinel structure and rock 
salt which sped up the overall degradation phase transforma-
tion process.[174,175] Additionally, the higher Ni content and 
reduced Co content promoted the irreversible migration of Ni2+ 
to Li+ sites[176] which severely hindered Li+ transfer throughout 
the structure of the NMC particle and increased the overall 
cell impedance.[177] Though the exact mechanism that caused 
these detrimental effects were not fully understood, it was clear 
that the combining effect of phase transition and impedance 
increase resulted in poorer cycle performance at higher Ni con-
tents. A comprehensive relationship between Ni content, spe-
cific capacity, cycle stability and thermal stability is shown in 
Figure 10b. Very recently, based on density functional theory, 
researchers concluded that more Ni4+ are present in Ni-rich 
materials which readily oxidizes the electrolyte and oxygen ions 
due to its relatively low LUMO which promoted oxygen genera-
tion and electrolyte decomposition.[178]
Strategies to achieve viable Ni-rich NMC materials typically 
revolved around preventing the transformation of the NMC 
layered phase. Yang and Xia have demonstrated that doping 
with Li2MnO3 can suppress the phase transition.[183] Adopting 
a more morphological themed approach, researchers at ANL 
developed the now popular strategy coating of less reactive 
(lower Ni content) NMC or other cathode materials over a 
Ni-rich particle (core-shell structure) which required specific 
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (14 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
expertise for precisely controlling the coverage.[184–186] This 
strategy mitigates the surface exposure of high Ni-content NMC 
to the electrolyte which is the main interface where undesired 
reactions occurs. However, the key disadvantage of this strategy 
is the mismatch in volume change between 
the core and shell material cutting off charge 
transfer pathways.[185] This phenomenon is 
the main reason for the cycle degradation 
of core shell Ni-rich structures. Building 
upon this work, in 2009 ANL has created 
what is called a concentration gradient shell 
(CGS).[187] CGS uses a shell that consisted 
of a Ni concentration gradient with the Ni-
content highest near the center and lowest 
at the surface covering a Ni-rich core. This 
material was synthesized by simply precipi-
tating NMC with progressively lower Ni con-
tent onto a Ni-rich core (substrate), Such a 
strategy has been shown to completely elimi-
nate the structural mismatched generated in 
the core–shell strategy but tended to degrade 
due to migration of Ni content toward the 
surface.[188] Further advancement in this 
technology created what is known as the full 
concentration gradient (FCG)[189] where the 
Ni and Mn concentrations varied all the way 
from the core to the surface which further led 
to the two-sloped full concentration gradient 
(TSFCG)[190] where a smooth concentration 
profile of Ni, Co and Mn was created from 
the core to near the surface with an abrupt 
concentration change near the surface. 
Both FCG and TSFCG offered substantially 
higher performance benefits over the CGS 
materials, with the TSFCG material demon-
strating excellent stability over 500 cycles in a 
full cell configuration (Si-based anode) deliv-
ering 350 Wh kg−1 on the first cycle.[190] Ini-
tially, the lower Ni- content NMC have found 
significant application in the industry, rep-
resenting ≈26% by mass of all battery cath-
odes[55] sold in 2016 and has become by far 
the most popular cathode material for EVs. 
Currently, NMC 333 and 532 represents a 
large portion of the NMC market with NMC 
622 and 811 still at minority,[55] but higher Ni 
content cathodes are expected to be more and 
more prevalent in the near future.[191]
In addition to Ni-rich NMC, another Ni-rich 
ternary metal cathode material was the NCA 
system. NCA was slightly better than Ni-rich 
NMC in terms of energy density but had a 
slightly lower discharge voltage due to slightly 
different active redox pairs.[192] The first 
appearance of the NCA system was in 2001 
by Lee and co-workers[193] and has become a 
very popular cathode material with Panasonic 
implementing it in the Tesla vehicles.[111,194] 
The most popular mix was: LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05 
and has been known colloquially among industry and researchers 
as NCA.[195] One should note that NCA incorporates relatively 
low level of its third metal (Al at 5–10%), much lower than the 
Mn in NMC (10–40%). This was because the use of higher levels 
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561
Figure 10.  a) The dependence of thermal stability in gas evolution on Ni content in NMC. 
Reproduced with permission.[175] Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. b) The depend-
ence of Ni content on discharge capacity and capacity retention and thermal stability in NMC. 
Reproduced with permission.[179] Copyright 2013, Elsevier. c) Schematic of storage side reac-
tions of Ni-rich cathode materials and d) the corresponding SEM image before (left) and after 
(right) storage. Reproduced with permission.[180] Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
e) Thermal stability in W g−1 of various Ni compositions in NMC. Reproduced with permis-
sion.[181] Copyright 2007, Electrochemical Society, Inc. f) Thermal stability of regular NCA 
and modified NCA (Ni:Co:Al = 0.8:0.15:0.05). Reproduced with permission.[182] Copyright 
2017, American Chemical Society. All thermal stabilities measurements were conducted after 
charging to 4.3 V.

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (15 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
of Al (>10%) resulted in severe capacity decay and poor Li+ ion 
diffusion throughout its structure.[159,165] Because NCA can only 
operate acceptably at low Al content, all metal ratios of NCA 
are usually considered Ni-rich and also suffers from the corre-
sponding disadvantages. A common problem between all Ni-
rich is the chemical sensitivity of Ni3+ which along with residual 
excess Li (from its lithiation manufacturing steps) promotes 
adsorption of moisture and CO2 forming LiOH and Li2CO3 (sche-
matically shown in Figure 10c and experimentally in Figure 10d) 
which has been shown to limit cycle life. During storage in 
ambient air, the surface Ni-ions reacts with CO2 and moisture 
forming insulating layers on its surface.[180] Furthermore, similar 
to the Ni-rich NMC cathode, the Ni cation in NCA is known to 
dissolve into the electrolyte due to the HF created by the reaction 
between LiPF6 (electrolyte salt) with trace amounts of water.[150] 
This phenomenon decayed the cathode and had very recently led 
material scientists to apply more resistive coatings composed of 
ZnO,[195] FePO4,[196] Li3PO4,[197] AlPO4,[198] LiMnPO4[199] among 
many other similar concepts from work done on surface coatings 
for NMC. Al offered good thermal stability compared to LCO and 
LNO but still underwent severe exothermic reactions at higher 
temperatures (200–250  °C) when NCA was at its delithiated 
state.[182,200] The thermal stability of NCA was inferior to NMC 
333[192] due to the higher Ni content which rendered it prob-
lematic for commercial use. However, when compared to NMC 
811, the thermal stability of NCA was far superior. As shown in 
Figure 10e, thermal decomposition of NMC 811 began to occur 
at ≈190 °C and peaked at ≈220 °C releasing 3285 J g−1. For NCA, 
the thermal decomposition began to increase at ≈200 °C peaking 
at ≈239  °C and only released 1573 J g−1 (Figure 10f). Besides 
Panasonic/Tesla Inc., no other EV company uses a pure NCA 
cathode, but Automotive Energy Supply Corporation (AESC) 
does supply NCA mixed with LMO cathodes for the Nissan Leaf 
EV.[136] In 2016, NCA only occupied ≈9% (16 200 tons) of all bat-
tery cathode materials sold (180  000 tons) and is forecasted to 
reach about 40 000 tons (10%) in 2025 if Tesla Inc. continues to 
incorporate NCA into their cathodes.[55]
3.3. The Current Status of Electric Vehicles and Lithium-Ion 
Batteries
It is typically recognized that materials with <60% Ni content 
have been fully commercialized while >80% is still under 
develop.[201] Overall, the commercialization of Ni-based lay-
ered oxide cathode materials (NMC and NCA) has been quite 
successful, representing a total of 35% of the battery market 
in 2016 (Figure 11) and instrumental in improving the range 
and cost of EVs. From its early stage at the Electric Vehicle 
Company (2000 units sold), to the current increase in interest 
by almost all automotive companies, the incorporation of 
these new cathodes had undoubtedly made an impact on the 
commercialization of xEVs. The market penetration of xEVs 
increased drastically over the recent years. Just in the year of 
2014, the total sales of xEVs have reached 320 000 vehicles with 
over half being pure EVs (182 400 vehicles). Although this only 
represented 0.3% of all passenger vehicles sold during this time 
span, it was orders of magnitude higher than the EVs sold in 
the past decades.[202] Companies such as Toyota, Honda, GM, 
Tesla Inc. have heavily invested in a xEV based future. Volvo 
Cars have even recently announced that they will be looking to 
completely electrify (either EV or hybrid) its passenger vehicles 
line by 2019.[203] Several European countries have set goals to 
eliminate the internal combustion engine by 2040.[204] With 
a global market size of >$2.4 billion in 2011, >$8.9 billion in 
2015, and a forecasted >$14 billion by 2020,[205] it is now hard 
to imagine a future society without EVs. However, there is still 
much room for improvement.
The energy density requirements of EVs have always been a 
topic of much discussion. While it played a crucial role in the 
development of LIBs it appears that the current driving range 
for even pure EVs are approaching satisfactory levels for the 
consumer. The energy density targets (volume and mass basis) 
have nearly been reached by current LIBs. Cell-level volumetric 
energy density was targeted at 750 Wh L−1[206] and the state-of-
the-art high tension cylindrical 18650 cells for Tesla Inc. are 
already at 600–650 Wh L−1 (20% less for pouch and prismatic 
cell configurations).[207] Cell-level gravimetric energy density of 
current LIBs (248 Wh kg−1 in Tesla Model S 2014[136]) are rea-
sonably close to the targeted 350 Wh kg−1.[206] A study was con-
ducted by Needell et al. on the impact of higher range EVs where 
they proposed the metric: daily vehicle adsorption potential 
(DAP) as shown in Figure 12a.[208] The DAP is defined as the 
% of days that a pure-EV would not be able to make the driver’s 
daily trips on a single charge. Inversely, 1-DAP represents the % 
of days that drivers of EVs will be required to recharge within 
the day. Shown in Figure 12b, in 2013, the 1-DAP of the Nissan 
Leaf (88  Wh kg−1) was about 10%. This means that in 2013, 
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561
Figure 11.  Mass percent of all LIBs market shares of the leading materials in 2016 and forecasted to 2025.[55]

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (16 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
around 10% of the time the drivers will not be able to return 
home without requiring a recharge. The 2016 Tesla Model S-90 
has a 1-DAP of only about 1–2%. It was argued that such a low 
percentage of 1-DAP is already sufficient for the widespread 
adoption of EVs into the markets for that specific geographical 
location of study. While the exact implications on the EV market 
penetration of a 1-DAP value of 1% are subjective without any 
concrete input from the consumers, it is still quite surprising 
that future solutions to the very popular problem of energy 
density will most likely experience diminishing returns. This 
suggests that the most important challenge for the electrifica-
tion of transportation is probably not its energy density (albeit 
still important for other LIB applications), but instead the cost 
of LIBs. However, it should be noted that the cost and energy 
density are intrinsically related. This is because higher energy 
density electrode requires less active material and therefore, 
lowering the cost of manufacturing. Nevertheless, the cost tar-
gets of <150 US$ kWh−1 for battery packs[206,209,210] have yet to 
be met by any of the battery manufacturing companies.
The cumulative cost benefits thus far of these new cathode 
and anode materials can perhaps be summarized in the modeled 
cost of productions by the US Department of Energy (DOE), 
Vehicle Technologies Office. Over a 7-year span, the modelled 
cost has decreased ≈70% to ≈268 US$ kWh−1 (2015).[212] While 
there are still a large volume of estimates from literature that 
ranges from 1700 to 1000 US$ (YR:2014) as summarized by 
Nykvist in Figure 13a, there were a number of corroborating 
optimistic estimates claiming ≈220–400 US$ (YR:2014) kWh−1 
(Figure 13b)[209] and 250 US$ kWh−1 in 2015.[55]
Reported in 2014 by Advanced Automotive Batteries (data 
presented in Table 2), the main battery technologies used in 
EVs were NCA, NMC, and LMO usually blended with NCA or 
NMC due to LMO’s low specific capacity.[111] LFP is currently 
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561
Figure 12.  a) Impact of the type of driving (urban, rural) in the US on the 
1-DAP value. Reproduced with permission.[208] Copyright 2016, Springer 
Nature. b) Relationship between the % of days when the EV range is 
insufficient (1-DAP) versus the battery capacity and the range with 2013 
EV (Nissan Leaf @ 88 Wh kg−1) and 2016 Tesla Model S-90 labeled on 
graph. Reproduced with permission.[211] Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.
Figure 13.  Estimated cost of battery packs in 214 US$ kWh−1 from 2005 to 2014 and forecasts to 2030. Reproduced with permission.[209] Copyright 
2015, Springer Nature.

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (17 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
a very popular cathode material for BYD Auto, a major EV 
producer in China.[191] In contrast to the wide selection of 
cathode technologies, the anode of choice for passenger xEVs 
remains to be carbon based with only Toshiba among the 
shown companies utilizing LTO as the anode. LTO has found 
more application in the electric bus market with companies 
such as Microvast demonstrating significant interest in the 
safety aspect of this technology.[213] Interestingly, there are no 
reported use of LCO in any of the EVs, possibly suggesting 
that the cost benefits of adding the allegedly cheaper low-Co 
cathodes should have already been reflected in the price 
of EVs. This implies that most recent cost reduction were 
achieved solely through process optimization such as the cur-
rent movement away from the 18 650 cylindrical cells to the 
21 700 format.[214] Estimates from industry, when maintaining 
the use of NMC cathode material, there was still a substantial 
drop in the cost of cathode from ≈64 to ≈40 US$ kWh−1 in 
the time frame of 2010–2015 which was due to the increased 
NMC production efficiency.[55] Cost reductions were also expe-
rienced in the separator, electrolyte, anode technologies, and 
from economies of scale (recycling, overhead, utilities) even 
though the same base materials were used. However, without 
another major change in materials, these cost reductions were 
ultimately limited as reflected in the asymptotic approach to 
150 US$ kWh−1 of forecasted cost curves (Figure 13b,d). Fur-
thermore, since the costs of nickel and cobalt are quite vola-
tile (Co increased from ≈15 US$ lb−1 in 2005 to 52 US$ lb−1 
in 2007 and recent increases from ≈10 US$ lb−1 in 2015 to 
≈27 US$ lb−1 in 2017)[210] the marginally acceptable forecasted 
prices could be easily invalidated. In addition to the simple 
cost of raw material, the safety concerns could also have 
severe monetary penalties for battery manufacturers. In 2006, 
Sony’s recall of its LIB in laptops have resulted in a 40% loss 
that year in their battery business.[55] After lacking a sufficient 
recovery, Sony has recently sold its battery business to Murata 
in 2016 which could be an indication of the financial severity 
of a recall.[215]
4. Next-Generation Li-Ion Battery Research
Next generation Li-ion battery technologies with potentially 
huge cost and performance benefits could be the answer to 
reaching the cost and energy density targets. Systems such as 
Li- and Mn-rich cathodes, 5 V cathodes, and silicon anode have 
been extensively researched.
5 V cathode materials were considered as a potential candi-
date for “next-generation” LIBs. This class of material includes 
the spinel LiMn1.5Ni0.5O4 (published by Dahn in 1997[216] and 
patent filed in 1997 by Amine et al.[217]), inverse spinel LiNiVO4 
(Dahn and co-workers in 1994)[218] and the olivine LiCoPO4 
(by Amine in 2000)[219] among others which all possessed an 
extremely high discharge voltage profile of >4.5 V versus Li/Li+ 
as shown in the cyclic voltammetry (Figure 14a) and charge/
discharge voltage profiles (Figure 14b). As the energy density 
is a product of capacity and discharge voltage, this class of 
material is envisioned to achieve energy densities well above 
400 Wh kg−1. One of the main problems associated such high 
voltage cathode is the oxidation of the electrolyte. Traditional 
carbonate-based electrolytes cannot withstand potentials higher 
than 4.3 V vs Li/Li+ and will be oxidized if used with 5 V cath-
odes. Accordingly, researchers have employed more anodically 
stable electrolytes such as ionic liquids, sulfones, nitrile, car-
bonates derivatives, and carbonates with additives.[220] Addi-
tional problems with 5 V cathodes were unique to the type of 
the material but similar to its parental archetype. For example, 
similar to the spinel LiMn2O4, Mn2+ dissolution is a concern 
for the spinel LiMn.1.5Ni0.5O4 cathode especially at high tem-
peratures[221] while the LiCoPO4 olivine cathode also suffers 
from poor electronic conductivity much like the olivine LFP.[222] 
Although the nature of the problems and solutions were sim-
ilar to its parental archetype,[223] the 5 V cathode materials have 
yet make it to market.
Another class of material that also employs high voltages 
is the Li- and Mn-rich (LMR) cathode or sometimes known as 
layer-layered/layered-spinel material. Pioneered at ANL, the 
concept was to substitute entire crystal units rather than just 
cations.[225] Versions of this material composed of a layered 
R-3m structured LiMO2 (where typically M = Ni) stabilized by 
a C2/m structured monoclinic Li2MnO3. Together, this com-
bination was often written as xLi2MnO3· (1 − x)LiMO2 where 
0 < x < 1.[134,226] The first patent on LMR was filed by Thack-
eray and Amine in 2001[166] and later published by Lu and 
Dahn in 2001,[157] which demonstrated a reversible capacity of 
≈200 mAh g−1 for 50 cycles at 55 °C from 4.6 to 2.0 V versus Li/Li+. 
In addition to a high theoretical specific energy (≈900 Wh kg−1), 
the cost benefits of completely removing Co makes this mate-
rial quite attractive. Unfortunately, this material is still far from 
commercialization. The initial promises of LMR were met with 
severe performance challenges. These performance hurdles 
were due to the LMR’s high voltage (up to 4.6–4.8 V vs Li/Li+) 
charging requirements in order to “activate” the Li2MnO3 
component and realize its high capacity.[227] There were many 
ensuing issues that are involved in this process: 1) This voltage 
range is beyond the stability window of the typically used elec-
trolyte. 2) The transformation of the crystal structure on the 
surface of LMR particles[228] forms what is known as the sur-
face reconstruction layer which limited Li-ion diffusion. This 
layer was formed during the activation process of Li2MnO3 
where oxygen atoms are irreversibly removed.[229] Without 
oxygen atoms, the destabilized Ni-ions irreversibly migrates to 
vacant Li-ion sites.[230] The result was a spinel-like layer situated 
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561
Table 2.  List of battery company, their vehicle of application, and battery 
material.[111]
Battery company
Vehicle of application 
[company/model]
Battery material 
[anode||cathode]
AESC
Nissan/Leaf
Graphite||LMO-NCA
LG Chem
Renault/Zoe
Graphite||NMC-LMO
Li-Tec
Daimler/Smart
Graphite||NMC
Li Energy Japan
Mitsubishi/i-MiEV
Graphite||LMO-NMC
Samsung
Fiat/500
Graphite||NMC-LMO
Lishen Tianjin
Coda/EV
Graphite||LFP
Toshiba
Honda/Fit
LTO||NMC
Panasonic
Tesla/Model S
Graphite||NCA

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (18 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
between a rock-salt-like outer layer and the original LMR lay-
ered structure in the bulk.[134] 3) The removed oxygen tends to 
react continuously with the electrolyte forming an evergrowing 
SEI layer over LMR. The combination of the surface reconstruc-
tion layer and the continuous SEI formation ultimately leads 
to severe voltage decay. This lead to the interesting situation 
where the capacity might exhibit relatively high stability but 
both the charge and discharge voltage profile drops significantly 
as presented by Zheng et al.[224] as shown in Figure 14c. The 
first cycle Coulombic efficiency was found to be very low which 
was associated with the high charging voltage activation pro-
cess. The activation process for LMR contains a large portions 
of irreversible capacity which made it problematic for pairing 
electrodes in a full-cell.[231] The final problem of LMR cathode 
stems from its relatively poor conductivity which results in rate 
performances inferior to that of commercial cathodes (NMC, 
NCA, etc.).[232]
Proposed mitigation strategies for the problems of the 5 V 
cathode and LMR were both very similar to the methodologies 
taken in Ni-rich field of research. By applying a surface coating 
of various materials,[134,224,233] the direct contact between LMR 
and the electrolyte is limited and so for the degree of SEI 
formation on the cathode. Techniques based more on solid 
state physics are also very popular. Lattice substitution for 
Al,[234] Mg,[235] Ti[236] among other elements can help to pre-
vent the phase changes, limiting voltage decay or improve the 
conductivity.[237] Though scientifically insightful, most of the 
reported lab scale tests cannot be scaled to the commercial 
level. Accordingly, the 5  V spinel and LMR class of cathodes 
have yet to find commercial application. Researchers have even 
combined the LiMn1.5Ni0.5O2 with the LMR system, known as 
the integrated layered-spinel structure.[238] First proposed by 
Park and Thackeray in 2006,[238a] this combines the benefit of 
the high capacity of LMR with the fast lithium diffusion of the 
spinel structure.
Alloy based anodes[239] such as Ge,[240] Sn,[241] and espe-
cially Si has recently drawn much renewed attention most 
likely due to the onset of research into nanotechnology. Early 
on (prior to 1976), these alloy-based anodes have already been 
researched as a potential replacement to the unstable and dan-
gerous pure Li anode.[242] The problem with alloy based anodes 
is the enormous volume expansion upon lithiation (>300% 
for Si) which cause severe electronic disconnections and pro-
mote continuous SEI formation. Strategies adopting nanowire 
structures[243] and nanoparticles[244] demonstrated enhanced 
utilization and stability of Si anode. To follow was an explo-
sive research interest into the Si anode technology with focus 
surrounding the use of breathable conductive networks,[245] 
porous breathable Si morphologies,[246] Si dimensional control 
among other techniques.[247] It is also not necessary to fabricate 
an anode solely with Si as the active material, it is possible to 
blend Si with graphite or hard carbon to achieve a high capacity 
(700 mAh g−1) without the severe cycle degradation for pure 
Si.[60] Often neglected in literature, the volume expansion will 
affect the volumetric capacity at the cell level.[248] With rumors 
describing Tesla Inc.’s incorporation of small amounts of Si (in 
the form of SiOx) into their anodes to boost energy density,[249] 
Si based anodes are arguably the most important next-gen 
anodes material,[206] but probably only certain configurations 
of Si anodes will be commercially viable. The commonly used 
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561
Figure 14.  a) Cyclic voltammetry and b) charge discharge profile (1st and 2nd cycle) of the 5 V cathode. Reproduced with permission.[219] Copyright 
2000, Electrochemical Society, Inc. c) Charge/discharge profiles of LMR, demonstrating its characteristic voltage fade problem. Reproduced with per-
mission.[224] Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (19 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
nanoparticles in literature will most likely pose severe chal-
lenges in achieving appropriate volumetric energy densities.
5. Future Perspectives
Throughout the years, the focus of research has switched from 
different lithium-based battery chemistries, involving many of 
the various sub disciplines of material science and electrochem-
istry. From our documentation of the historical development 
of LIB, it appears that many of the commercially successful 
materials (LCO, NMC) were mostly developed with strategies 
revolving around a more solid-state physic themed. Techniques 
such as changing the crystal structure or the substitution of 
one transition metal for another: Li-MnO2 to LMO, LNO to 
NMC, and NCA enabled the commercialization of almost all 
the current LIB electrode technologies. After optimization of 
the crystal structure, a more morphological approach was taken 
in hopes of achieving greater performance. Some of these ben-
efits were commercially realized in the case of reducing the 
size of LFP particles and the morphology of synthetic graphite 
(MCMB and MAG). Arguably, such precise control in mate-
rial morphologies were made possible due to the numerous 
advancements in nanoscience. Researchers such as Besen-
hard in 1997 used these techniques to revisit concepts such as  
Li-alloy anodes (Sn) and provided encouraging results based on 
nanoparticles.[189] From the implementation of novel synthesis 
techniques to the application of advanced microscopy tech-
niques for morphological and mechanistic confirmation, more 
and more nanotechnology terminologies such as core–shell,[184] 
surface coatings,[250] nanostructures, nanosized and nanoscale 
effect,[251] began to appear in cutting edge battery research lit-
erature. Previously abandoned chemistries such as conversion 
reaction based materials, lithium–sulfur battery, Si anode, 
lithium metal battery among others have once again resurfaced 
both academically and commercially (for Si) with a pronounced 
emphasis on nanotechnology.
From the groundbreaking research of nanowires for reducing 
the mechanical stress of Si anodes[252] to the polysulfide trap-
ping capabilities of porous carbon with nanosized pores for S 
cathode,[253] it appears that the spark for many of these initially 
abandoned chemistries began specifically with nanotechnology. 
It seems that nanomaterials will play an instrumental role in 
battery science both practically and academically.[254] Interest-
ingly, the improvement of the commercial Li-based batteries 
has not been as spectacular when compared to the volume of 
literature published regarding nanomaterials and LIBs. This is 
most likely due to two major pitfalls of modern battery research: 
nanomaterials and proper testing conditions. These two pitfalls 
have most likely led some researchers to overstate the impor-
tance of their work which resulted in a situation where the 
growth in the volume of literature for Li-based batteries is not 
necessarily reflected in the performances of commercial bat-
teries. Much of recent papers on Li based battery research are 
composed of some form of materials engineering with testing 
conditions that are questionable for commercialization. Com-
monly overlooked factors such as electrolyte amount, electrode 
thickness, while not penalizing for publications, cannot be 
practically transferred to the more stringent commercial scale. 
In the future, researchers must be quick to point out these fac-
tors such as those in the field of lithium sulfur battery. Though 
nanomaterial can offer valuable insight into the underlying 
natural phenomenon occurring, its role must be clearly under-
stood by scientists. The low volumetric energy density,[255] and 
poor film forming abilities of nanoparticle[256] will undoubtedly 
complicate if not restrict its commercial scale-up. Fortunately, 
there are strategies that can be used to mitigate the disadvan-
tages of nanomaterials. A common strategy implemented in 
Li–S battery entails the agglomeration of the nanosized sulfur 
host into micron sized secondary particles. This method will 
reduce the exposed surface area leading to ease of electrode fab-
rication while also increasing the packing density of the elec-
trode.[256,257] Although some success has been found utilizing 
nanotechnologies, there is still much work to be done to bridge 
the gap between lab-scale and commercialization to enable 
next-gen performing Li-based batteries.
While there were many markets for LIBs after consumer 
electronics such as E-bikes and power tools, the next major 
challenge that dictated the research of LIBs was the xEV 
market. The simultaneous goals of high energy/power den-
sity, safety and lower cost have proved to be a challenging task 
for LIB battery scientists around the globe. In 2018, nearly  
30 years after its initial commercialization, xEVs still only rep-
resent a fraction of the passenger market. Current technologies 
such as NMC, NCA, LMO, and LFP will continue to serve their 
respective roles in the xEV and asymptotically approach the 
cost and energy density targets if the support systems remain 
stagnant (cost of raw materials and government incentive pro-
grams). LIBs have enabled next-gen consumer electronics and 
currently, the status of LIBs could be described as: in progress 
of enabling xEVs.
xEVs are often considered green, but in reality it is only as 
green as its electricity source. If the electricity was generated 
from a coal plant, the use of xEV might contribute similar if 
not more CO2 than an internal combustion engine. Therefore, 
grid-level energy storage systems (GESS) can be considered 
as another potential LIB application that is even more inti-
mate to the energy problem than xEVs. The most detrimental 
problem with renewable energy source such as wind, hydro 
and solar are their intermittent nature which can be solved 
by GESS through buffering this intermittency. Smart grid is 
a proposed decentralized grid design that allows for the opti-
mized scheduling (deployment, storage and demand response) 
of numerous different energy generation source (fossil fuel 
or renewables).[258] Such a grid design will facilitate the adap-
tation of renewable resource into the energy market and is 
crucial in combating against climate change.[259] This applica-
tion of GEES has similar requirements to EVs such as energy 
efficiency, power density, low cost, high cyclability but less 
emphases are placed on safety and energy density.[260] While 
the development of LIB for EV is nearing 27 years (≈1991 to 
present), its application in GESS will most likely take less 
time. LIBs based GESS such as the Tesla Powerwall have 
already been commercialized into what is known as a micro-
grid (a decentralized energy storage concept) where relatively 
small size battery packs are installed directly into individual 
homes. As part of the bigger smart grid concept,[258] these 
small energy storage systems can be leveraged to buffer the 
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (20 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
intermittent nature of household/government/corporate solar 
panels and wind turbines with technologies. Recently, a large-
scale (100 mW powering over 30 000 homes) LIB based grid 
energy storage system was also delivered by Tesla Inc. to South 
Australia to act as the intermittency buffer of wind energy.[261] 
LIBs are quite competitive among other off-peak energy 
storage systems in terms of lifespan and power/energy densi-
ties. Of all its evaluation indices, the high cost of LIB have pre-
sented itself as the main problem against its widespread use 
in grid storage.[262] As one might notice, cost is also one of the 
underlying factors that is preventing the widespread commer-
cialization of xEV. The implementation of LIBs for GESS will 
most likely follow shortly after, if not in-sync with the wide-
spread adoption of xEV if the supply of raw materials can keep 
up with the large kWh demand required to have a presence in 
the GEES market.
There is currently a large concern on whether the estimated 
supply of Li is enough to support the inevitable demand 
for LIBs. LIB recycling has also become a popular field of 
research as it can at least partially alleviated the demand of 
LIB raw materials. Furthermore, though LIBs are considered 
a green energy technology, its main constituents are not. Co 
and Ni are toxic to the environment/humans[263] and the com-
monly used LiPF6 salt in electrolytes are known to form HF 
when exposed to air.[264] The environment implications of 
LIBs waste will no doubt play a large regulatory role in the 
future of the LIBs industry. Fortunately, recent studies on 
LIBs recycling have already began looking into recycling the 
heavy metals in the cathode through chemical, bioleaching 
and physical methods.[265] These methods usually produces 
Co, Ni in its various compounds such as Ni(OH)2 and even 
LiCoO2 which could stand as a significant economic benefit 
for the manufacturers and made the entire LIB industry’s 
material supply more manageable.[266] Alternatively, in antici-
pation for potential Li supply crisis, researchers have also 
begun to focus on non-Li based battery electrochemistries 
such as Na, K, Mg, Ca, and Al. Particularly, recent progress 
in Na-ion batteries could pose as a serious contender for grid 
level storage.[267]
The role that Li-based batteries played in revolutionizing con-
sumer electronics and electric vehicles has been clearly indis-
pensable and will probably continue to be so for the foreseeable 
future. The first commercialized LIB by Sony Co. in 1991 had 
its energy density as the main design criteria. Since consumer 
electronics were inherently somewhat of a luxury item, the 
cost was less important. Modern improvements into the con-
sumer electronics LIB still holds to this theme while research 
into LIB for xEVs mandates cheaper cells. We hope this review 
have presented to the next generation of battery scientists and 
even veteran battery scientists with a comprehensive devel-
opmental history of Li-ion batteries. From its early lithium 
metal battery iterations to the current thriving LIB industry 
and now back to lithium metal-based batteries, the evolution 
of LIB has presented itself as a very interesting story driven 
by commercial demand. Indices such as energy density, cycle 
life, cost, and safety have very much dictated its evolutionary 
pathway. To ensure the longevity of the xEV market, significant 
progress must be made in the intrinsic battery chemistries of 
the electrodes.
Acknowledgements
J.L. and K.A. gratefully acknowledge support from the U.S. Department of 
Energy (DOE), Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Vehicle 
Technologies Office. Argonne National Laboratory is operated for DOE 
Office of Science by UChicago Argonne, LLC, under contract number 
DE-AC02-06CH11357. Z.C. and M.L. would like to acknowledge financial 
support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of 
Canada (NSERC) and the Waterloo Institute for Nanotechnology (WIN). 
J. Lu gratefully acknowledges support from the Assistant Secretary for 
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Office of Vehicle Technologies 
of the U.S. Department of Energy through the Advanced Battery 
Materials Research (BMR) Program (Battery500 Consortium). This 
article is part of the Advanced Materials Hall of Fame article series, which 
recognizes the excellent contributions of leading researchers to the field 
of materials science.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Keywords
anode, cathode, electrolyte, Li-ion battery, lithium metal
Received: January 25, 2018
Revised: March 7, 2018
Published online: June 14, 2018
[1]	 B. Scrosati, J. Solid State Electrochem. 2011, 15, 1623.
[2]	 M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev. 2004, 104, 4271.
[3]	 G. E. Blomgren, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2017, 164, A5019.
[4]	 N. Nitta, F. X. Wu, J. T. Lee, G. Yushin, Mater. Today 2015, 18, 252.
[5]	 V.  Etacheri, R.  Marom, R.  Elazari, G.  Salitra, D.  Aurbach, Energy 
Environ. Sci. 2011, 4, 3243.
[6]	 D.  Pimentel, L.  Hurd, A.  Bellotti, M.  Forster, I.  Oka, O.  Sholes, 
R. Whitman, Science 1973, 182, 443.
[7]	 J. B. Goodenough, Acc. Chem. Res. 2013, 46, 1053.
[8]	 K. Chau, Y. Wong, C. Chan, Energy Convers. Manag. 1999, 40, 1021.
[9]	 R. R. Schaller, IEEE Spectrum 1997, 34, 52.
[10]	 G. N. Lewis, F. G. Keyes, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1913, 35, 340.
[11]	 R. G. Selim, K. Hill, M. Rao, Research and Development of a High 
Capacity, Nonaqueous Secondary Battery, PR Mallory & Company, 
Springfield, VA 1966.
[12]	 a) R.  Selim, P.  Bro, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1974, 121, 1457;  
b) J. O. Besenhard, G. Eichinger, J. Electroanal. Chem. 1976, 68, 1; 
c) B. M. L. Rao, R. W. Francis, H. A. Christopher, J. Electrochem. 
Soc. 1977, 124, 1490.
[13]	 J. O. Besenhard, J. Electroanal. Chem. 1978, 94, 77.
[14]	 A. N. Dey, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1971, 118, 1547.
[15]	 a) D. R.  Vissers, Z.  Tomczuk, R. K.  Steunenberg, J. Electrochem. 
Soc. 1974, 121, 665; b) E. C.  Gay, D. R.  Vissers, F. J.  Martino,  
K. E. Anderson, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1976, 123, 1591.
[16]	 a) M. S.  Whittingham, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun. 
1974, 328; b) M. S.  Whittingham, Science 1976, 192, 1126;  
c) M. S.  Whittingham, F. R.  Gamble, Mater. Res. Bull. 1975, 10,  
363.
[17]	 K.  Mizushima, P. C.  Jones, P. J.  Wiseman, J. B.  Goodenough, 
Mater. Res. Bull. 1980, 15, 783.
[18]	 a) F. C.  Laman, K.  Brandt, J. Power Sources 1988, 24, 195;  
b) D. Fouchard, J. Taylor, J. Power Sources 1987, 21, 195.
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (21 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561
[19]	 N. A.  Godshall, I. D.  Raistrick, R. A.  Huggins, Mater. Res. Bull. 
1980, 15, 561.
[20]	 G. G.  Amatucci, J. M.  Tarascon, L. C.  Klein, J. Electrochem. Soc. 
1996, 143, 1114.
[21]	 D. Fauteux, R. Koksbang, J. Appl. Electrochem. 1993, 23, 1.
[22]	 I. Epelboin, M. Froment, M. Garreau, J. Thevenin, D. Warin, J. Elec-
trochem. Soc. 1980, 127, 2100.
[23]	 J. O. Besenhard, H. P. Fritz, J. Electroanal. Chem. 1974, 53, 329.
[24]	 J. O. Besenhard, Carbon 1976, 14, 111.
[25]	 M. Lazzari, B. Scrosati, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1980, 127, 773.
[26]	 D. W. Murphy, F. J. Disalvo, J. N. Carides, J. V. Waszczak, Mater. 
Res. Bull. 1978, 13, 1395.
[27]	 a) A.  Dey, B.  Sullivan, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1970, 117, 222;  
b) G. Eichinger, J. Electroanal. Chem. 1976, 74, 183.
[28]	 M. Arakawa, J.-I. Yamaki, J. Electroanal. Chem. 1987, 219, 273.
[29]	 E. Peled, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1979, 126, 2047.
[30]	 S. Basu, US Patent 4304825 A,  1981.
[31]	 S. Basu, US Patent 4423125 A,  1983.
[32]	 R. Yazami, P. Touzain, J. Power Sources 1983, 9, 365.
[33]	 D. Aurbach, Y. Ein-Eli, O. Chusid, Y. Carmeli, M. Babai, H. Yamin, 
J. Electrochem. Soc. 1994, 141, 603.
[34]	 M.  Morita, M.  Ishikawa, Y.  Matsuda, Lithium Ion Batteries,  
Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany 2007, p. 156.
[35]	 R. Jasinski, S. Carroll, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1970, 117, 218.
[36]	 A. Yoshino, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed 2012, 51, 5798.
[37]	 Z. Shu, R. McMillan, J. Murray, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1993, 140, 922.
[38]	 U. y. S. Rosamara Fong, J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1990, 137, 
2009.
[39]	 Y. Nishi, Chem. Rec. 2001, 1, 406.
[40]	 A. Yoshino, K. Sanechika, T. Nakajima, US Patent 4668595 A, 1987.
[41]	 Y. Nishi, J. Power Sources 2001, 100, 101.
[42]	 J. R. Dahn, T. Zheng, Y. Liu, J. S. Xue, Science 1995, 270, 590.
[43]	 E. Buiel, J. R. Dahn, Electrochim. Acta 1999, 45, 121.
[44]	 A. Satoh, N. Takami, T. Ohsaki, Solid State Ionics 1995, 80, 291.
[45]	 Z.  Ogumi, H.  Wang, in Lithium-Ion Batteries (Eds: M. Yoshio,  
R. J. Brodd, A. Kozawa), Springer Science + Business Media LLC, 
New York 2009, p. 49.
[46]	 a) T.  Zheng, Q.  Zhong, J.  Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1995, 142, 
L211; b) Y. P. Wu, E. Rahm, R. Holze, J. Power Sources 2003, 114, 
228.
[47]	 Y. Liu, J. S. Xue, T. Zheng, J. R. Dahn, Carbon 1996, 34, 193.
[48]	 a) S. I. Tobishima, J. I. Yamaki, T. Okada, Electrochim. Acta 1984, 
29, 1471; b) S.-I. Tobishima, A. Yamaji, Electrochim. Acta 1984, 29, 
267.
[49]	 R. Fong, U. Von Sacken, J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1990, 137, 
2009.
[50]	 J.  Kalhoff, G. G.  Eshetu, D.  Bresser, S.  Passerini, ChemSusChem 
2015, 8, 2154.
[51]	 H. Yoshitake, in Lithium-Ion Batteries (Eds: M. Yoshio, R. J. Brodd, 
A. Kozawa), Springer Science + Business Media LLC, New York 
2009, p. 343.
[52]	 K. Xu, Chem. Rev. 2004, 104, 4303.
[53]	 H. Fujimoto, A. Mabuchi, K. Tokumitsu, N. Chinnasamy, T. Kasuh, 
J. Power Sources 2011, 196, 1365.
[54]	 A.  Yoshino, in Lithium-Ion Batteries (Ed: G. Pistoia), Elsevier, 
Amsterdam 2014, p. 1.
[55]	 C.  Pillot, presented at the 31st International Battery Seminar & 
Exhibit, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA, March 2017.
[56]	 a) J.  Ni, Y.  Huang, L.  Gao, J. Power Sources 2013, 223, 306;  
b) H. Yu, X. Dong, Y. Pang, Y. Wang, Y. Xia, Electrochim. Acta 2017, 
228, 251.
[57]	 A. Mabuchi, Tanso 1994, 1994, 298.
[58]	 J. Yamaura, Y. Ozaki, A. Morita, A. Ohta, J. Power Sources 1993, 43, 
233.
[59]	 Y. Muranaka, E. A. Ueda, T. Nishida, Hitachi Rev. 2006, 55, 41.
[60]	 M. K. Datta, P. N. Kumta, J. Power Sources 2007, 165, 368.
[61]	 T.  Nishida, in Lithium-Ion Batteries (Eds: M. Yoshio, R. J. Brodd, 
A. Kozawa), Springer Science + Business Media LLC 2009, p. 329.
[62]	 M. Yoshio, H. Wang, K. Fukuda, Y. Hara, Y. Adachi, J. Electrochem. 
Soc. 2000, 147, 1245.
[63]	 Y. Wu, C. Jiang, C. Wan, R. Holze, J. Power Sources 2002, 111, 329.
[64]	 I. R. M.  Kottegoda, Y.  Kadoma, H.  Ikuta, Y.  Uchimoto, 
M. Wakihara, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett. 2002, 5, A275.
[65]	 Z.-L. Xu, X. Liu, Y. Luo, L. Zhou, J.-K. Kim, Prog. Mater Sci. 2017, 
90, 1.
[66]	 P.-L. Taberna, S. Mitra, P. Poizot, P. Simon, J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. 
Mater. 2006, 5, 567.
[67]	 V.  Aravindan, Y.-S.  Lee, S.  Madhavi, Adv. Energy Mater. 2015, 5, 
1402225.
[68]	 M. B. Pinson, M. Z. Bazant, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2013, 160, A243.
[69]	 A.  Andersson, D.  Abraham, R.  Haasch, S.  MacLaren, J.  Liu, 
K. Amine, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2002, 149, A1358.
[70]	 R. J. Jasinski, S. Kirkland, Anal. Chem. 1967, 39, 1663.
[71]	 J. B. Goodenough, Y. Kim, Chem. Mater. 2009, 22, 587.
[72]	 P. Verma, P. Maire, P. Novák, Electrochim. Acta 2010, 55, 6332.
[73]	 E. Peled, D. Golodnitsky, G. Ardel, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1997, 144, 
L208.
[74]	 a) D. Aurbach, K. Gamolsky, B. Markovsky, Y. Gofer, M. Schmidt, 
U.  Heider, Electrochim. Acta 2002, 47, 1423; b) A. L.  Michan, 
B. S.  Parimalam, M.  Leskes, R. N.  Kerber, T.  Yoon, C. P.  Grey,  
B. L. Lucht, Chem. Mater. 2016, 28, 8149.
[75]	 X. Wang, E. Yasukawa, S. Kasuya, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2001, 148, 
A1058.
[76]	 A.  Chagnes, B.  Carré, P.  Willmann, R.  Dedryvère, D.  Gonbeau, 
D. Lemordant, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2003, 150, A1255.
[77]	 S. R. Narayanan, S. Surampudi, A. I. Attia, C. P. Bankston, J. Elec-
trochem. Soc. 1991, 138, 2224.
[78]	 R. V. Bugga, M. C. Smart, ECS Trans. 2010, 25, 241.
[79]	 D. Aurbach, J. Power Sources 2003, 119, 497.
[80]	 a) S.-K. Jeong, M.  Inaba, R.  Mogi, Y.  Iriyama, T.  Abe, Z.  Ogumi, 
Langmuir 2001, 17, 8281; b) E. Markevich, G. Salitra, D. Aurbach, 
ACS Energy Lett. 2017, 2, 1337.
[81]	 a) S. S. Zhang, J. Power Sources 2006, 162, 1379; b) D. Aurbach, 
Y.  Talyosef, B.  Markovsky, E.  Markevich, E.  Zinigrad, L.  Asraf,  
J. S. Gnanaraj, H. J. Kim, Electrochim. Acta 2004, 50, 247.
[82]	 B.  Li, Y.  Wang, H.  Lin, J.  Liu, L.  Xing, M.  Xu, W.  Li, Electrochim. 
Acta 2014, 141, 263.
[83]	 J. N. Reimers, J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1992, 139, 2091.
[84]	 R. V.  Chebiam, A. M.  Kannan, F.  Prado, A.  Manthiram, Electro-
chem. Commun. 2001, 3, 624.
[85]	 J.-Y. Eom, I.-H. Jung, J.-H. Lee, J. Power Sources 2011, 196, 9810.
[86]	 a) A. M. Kannan, L. Rabenberg, A. Manthiram, Electrochem. Solid-
State Lett. 2003, 6, A16; b) Y. J.  Kim, H.  Kim, B.  Kim, D.  Ahn, 
J.-G.  Lee, T.-J.  Kim, D.  Son, J.  Cho, Y.-W.  Kim, B.  Park, Chem. 
Mater. 2003, 15, 1505.
[87]	 B.  Scrosati, presented at IECEC-97 - Proceedings of the Thirty-
Second Intersociety Energy Conversion Engineering Conference,  
Vols. 1–4,  1997, p. 5.
[88]	 T.  Osawa, M.  Kono, in Lithium-Ion Batteries (Eds: M. Yoshio,  
R. J. Brodd, A. Kozawa), Springer Science + Business Media LLC, 
New York 2009, p. 413.
[89]	 R. J. Brodd, in Lithium-Ion Batteries (Eds: M. Yoshio, R. J. Brodd,  
A. Kozawa), Springer Science + Business Media LLC, New York 
2009, p. 1.
[90]	 M.  Tran, D.  Banister, J. D.  Bishop, M. D.  McCulloch, Nat. Clim. 
Change 2012, 2, 328.
[91]	 J. Tomić, W. Kempton, J. Power Sources 2007, 168, 459.
[92]	 a) F. Mwasilu, J. J. Justo, E.-K. Kim, T. D. Do, J.-W. Jung, Renew. 
Sust. Energy Rev. 2014, 34, 501; b) M. Longo, D. Zaninelli, F. Viola, 
P.  Romano, R.  Miceli, presented at 2015 Tenth Int. Conf. on 

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (22 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561
Ecological Vehicles and Renewable Energies (EVER), Monte Carlo, 
Monaco, March 2015; c) Y. Xue, J. Mod. Power Syst. Clean Energy 
2015, 3, 297; d) N. Kittner, F. Lill, D. M. Kammen, Nature 2017, 
2, 1.
[93]	 G. B. Selden, US Patent 549160A,  1895.
[94]	 D. A. Kirsch, The Electric Vehicle and the Burden of History, Rutgers 
University Press, Piscataway, NJ 2000.
[95]	 C. C. Chan, Proc. IEEE 2007, 95, 704.
[96]	 L. A.  Tauber, presented at Northcon 95. IEEE Technical Applica-
tions Conf. and Workshops, Portland, OR, USA, October 1995.
[97]	 C. Chan, Proc. IEEE 2002, 90, 247.
[98]	 W. D. Jones, IEEE Spectrum 2003, 40, 70.
[99]	 K. G. Høyer, Utilities Policy 2008, 16, 63.
[100]	 L. Gaines, R. Cuenca, Technical report: Costs of lithium-ion batteries 
for vehicles, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 2000.
[101]	 R. Van Noorden, Nature 2014, 507, 26.
[102]	 S. T. Mayer, US Patent 5783333 A,  1998.
[103]	 M. Hovis, InsideEVs, https://insideevs.com/number-of-fire-related-
deaths-per-year-caused-by-evs/ (accessed: December 2017).
[104]	 Q. S. Wang, P. Ping, X. J. Zhao, G. Q. Chu, J. H. Sun, C. H. Chen, 
J. Power Sources 2012, 208, 210.
[105]	 L. 
G. 
Angela 
Chen, 
The 
Verge, 
https://www.theverge.
com/2016/9/8/12841342/why-do-phone-batteries-explode-
samsung-galaxy-note-7 (accessed: December 2017).
[106]	 J. M. Tarascon, M. Armand, Nature 2001, 414, 359.
[107]	 C.-S. Kim, K. M. Jeong, K. Kim, C.-W. Yi, Electrochim. Acta 2015, 
155, 431.
[108]	 T. Ohzuku, A. Ueda, N. Yamamoto, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1995, 142, 
1431.
[109]	 T. Shodai, S. Okada, S.-i. Tobishima, J.-i. Yamaki, Solid State Ionics 
1996, 86, 785.
[110]	 Y. Idota, T. Kubota, A. Matsufuji, Y. Maekawa, T. Miyasaka, Science 
1997, 276, 1395.
[111]	 M.  Anderman, Technical report: Assessing the Future of Hybrid 
and Electric Vehicles: The 2014 xEV Industry Insider Report, 
Advanced Automotive Batteries, Needham, Ma, USA 2013.
[112]	 a) P. Yang, P. Zhang, C. Shi, L. Chen, J. Dai, J. Zhao, J. Membrane 
Sci. 2015, 474, 148; b) W.-K.  Shin, D.-W.  Kim, J. Power Sources 
2013, 226, 54; c) V. Deimede, C. Elmasides, Energy Technol. 2015, 
3, 453.
[113]	 C. J. Weber, S. Geiger, S. Falusi, M. Roth, AIP Conf. Proc. 2014, 66, 
1597.
[114]	 Y. Shinohara, Y. Tsujimoto, T. Nakano, US Patent 6447958 B1,  2002.
[115]	 Y. Lu, M. Tikekar, R. Mohanty, K. Hendrickson, L. Ma, L. A. Archer, 
Adv. Energy Mater. 2015, 5, 1402073.
[116]	 C.-H.  Doh, D.-H.  Kim, H.-S.  Kim, H.-M.  Shin, Y.-D.  Jeong, 
S.-I. Moon, B.-S. Jin, S. W. Eom, H.-S. Kim, K.-W. Kim, D.-H. Oh, 
A. Veluchamy, J. Power Sources 2008, 175, 881.
[117]	 Y. Baba, S. Okada, J.-i. Yamaki, Solid State Ionics 2002, 148, 311.
[118]	 P. G. Balakrishnan, R. Ramesh, T. Prem Kumar, J. Power Sources 
2006, 155, 401.
[119]	 M. M. Thackeray, Prog. Solid State Chem. 1997, 25, 1.
[120]	 G. l. leclanche, US Patent 64113A,  1867.
[121]	 F. W. Dampier, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1974, 121, 656.
[122]	 M. Thackeray, Prog. Solid State Chem. 1997, 25, 1.
[123]	 J. C. Hunter, J. Solid State Chem. 1981, 39, 142.
[124]	 M. M. Thackeray, W. I. F. David, P. G. Bruce, J. B. Goodenough, 
Mater. Res. Bull. 1983, 18, 461.
[125]	 S. Lee, Y. Cho, H. K. Song, K. T. Lee, J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed 
2012, 51, 8748.
[126]	 a) J. Tarascon, D. Guyomard, G. Baker, J. Power Sources 1993, 44, 
689; b) J. Tarascon, D. Guyomard, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1991, 138, 
2864.
[127]	 Y. K. Sun, Y. S. Jeon, H. J. Leeb, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett. 2000, 
3, 7.
[128]	 a) Y. L.  Ding, J.  Xie, G. S.  Cao, T. J.  Zhu, H. M.  Yu, X. B.  Zhao, 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2011, 21, 348; b) H. Jiang, Y. Fu, Y. Hu, C. Yan, 
L. Zhang, P. S. Lee, C. Li, Small 2014, 10, 1096; c) A. Blyr, C. Sigala, 
G. Amatucci, D. Guyomard, Y. Chabre, J. M. Tarascon, J. Electro-
chem. Soc. 1998, 145, 194.
[129]	 a) A.  Du Pasquier, A.  Blyr, P.  Courjal, D.  Larcher, G.  Amatucci, 
B.  Gérand, J. M.  Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1999, 146, 428;  
b) Y. Xia, M. Yoshio, J. Power Sources 1997, 66, 129.
[130]	 Y. Gao, J. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1996, 143, 100.
[131]	 X. Yang, X. Sun, M. Balasubramanian, J. McBreen, Y. Xia, T. Sakai, 
M. Yoshio, Electrochem. Solid State Lett. 2001, 4, A117.
[132]	 a) F.  Zhou, X.  Zhao, J. R.  Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2010, 157, 
A798; b) S. H. Park, K. S. Park, Y. K. Sun, K. S. Nahm, J. Electro-
chem. Soc. 2000, 147, 2116; c) L.  Guohua, H.  Ikuta, T.  Uchida, 
M.  Wakihara, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1996, 143, 178; d) K.  Amine, 
H. Tukamoto, H. Yasuda, Y. Fujita, J. Power Sources 1997, 68, 604.
[133]	 K.  Amine, J.  Liu, S.  Kang, I.  Belharouak, Y.  Hyung, D.  Vissers, 
G. Henriksen, J. Power Sources 2004, 129, 14.
[134]	 J.  Zheng, S.  Myeong, W.  Cho, P.  Yan, J.  Xiao, C.  Wang, J.  Cho, 
J.-G. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater. 2017, 7, 1601284.
[135]	 Y.  Nishi, in Lithium-Ion Batteries (Eds: M. Yoshio, R. J. Brodd,  
A. Kozawa), Springer Science + Business Media LLC, New York 
2009, p. V.
[136]	 Q.  Xiao, B.  Li, F.  Dai, L.  Yang, M.  Cai, Electrochemical Energy: 
Advanced Materials and Technologies, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL 
2015.
[137]	 A.  Padhi, K.  Nanjundaswamy, C.  Masquelier, S.  Okada, 
J. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1997, 144, 1609.
[138]	 Y. Sakurai, H. Arai, S. Okada, J.-i. Yamaki, J. Power Sources 1997, 
68, 711.
[139]	 A. Manthiram, J. B. Goodenough, J. Power Sources 1989, 26, 403.
[140]	 a) A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy, J. B. Goodenough, J. Elec-
trochem. Soc. 1997, 144, 1188; b) J. B. Goodenough, A. K. Padhi,  
K. S. Nanjundaswamy, C. Masquelier, US Patent 5910382 A,  1999.
[141]	 C. Liu, Z. G. Neale, G. Cao, Mater. Today 2016, 19, 109.
[142]	 A. Yamada, S.-C. Chung, K. Hinokuma, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2001, 
148, A224.
[143]	 S. F. Yang, P. Y. Zavalij, M. S. Whittingham, Electrochem. Commun. 
2001, 3, 505.
[144]	 P. S. Herle, B. Ellis, N. Coombs, L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater 2004, 3, 
147.
[145]	 C. Vartanian, N. Bentley, presented at 2011 IEEE/PES Power Sys-
tems Conf. and Exposition (PSCE), Phoenix, AZ, USA, May 2011.
[146]	 S.  Drabek, Energy Storage in the Emerging Era of Smart Grids, 
InTech, Riejeka, Croatia 2011.
[147]	 L. D. Dyer, B. S. Borie, G. P. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc 1954, 76, 
1499.
[148]	 M. Thomas, W. David, J. Goodenough, P. Groves, Mater. Res. Bull. 
1985, 20, 1137.
[149]	 T. Ohzuku, A. Ueda, M. Nagayama, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1993, 140, 
1862.
[150]	 W. Liu, P. Oh, X. Liu, M.-J. Lee, W. Cho, S. Chae, Y. Kim, J. Cho, 
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed 2015, 54, 4440.
[151]	 J. R. Dahn, U. von Sacken, M. W. Juzkow, H. Al-Janaby, J. Electro-
chem. Soc. 1991, 138, 2207.
[152]	 J. R.  Dahn, E. W.  Fuller, M.  Obrovac, U.  von  Sacken, Solid State 
Ionics 1994, 69, 265.
[153]	 a) J.  Choi, A.  Manthiram, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2005, 152, A1714;  
b) H.  Arai, S.  Okada, Y.  Sakurai, J.-i.  Yamaki, Solid State Ionics 
1998, 109, 295.
[154]	 a) C.  Delmas, I.  Saadoune, Solid State Ionics 1992, 53, 370;  
b) C. Delmas, I. Saadoune, A. Rougier, J. Power Sources 1993, 44, 
595.
[155]	 H. Arai, S. Okada, Y. Sakurai, J. i. Yamaki, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1997, 
144, 3117.

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (23 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561
[156]	 T. Ohzuku, A. Ueda, M. Kouguchi, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1995, 142, 
4033.
[157]	 Z.  Lu, D. D.  MacNeil, J. R.  Dahn, Electrochem. Solid State Lett. 
2001, 4, A191.
[158]	 a) E. Rossen, C. D. W. Jones, J. R. Dahn, Solid State Ionics 1992, 57, 
311; b) K. Kang, Y. S. Meng, J. Bréger, C. P. Grey, G. Ceder, Science 
2006, 311, 977.
[159]	 J. Xu, F. Lin, M. M. Doeff, W. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A 2017, 5, 874.
[160]	 J. M. Paulsen, C. L. Thomas, J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2000, 
147, 861.
[161]	 Z. Lu, J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2001, 148, A710.
[162]	 J. M. Paulsen, J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2000, 147, 2478.
[163]	 M.  Guilmard, A.  Rougier, M.  Grüne, L.  Croguennec, C.  Delmas,  
J. Power Sources 2003, 115, 305.
[164]	 L. Wang, J. Li, X. He, W. Pu, C. Wan, C. Jiang, J. Solid State Electro-
chem. 2009, 13, 1157.
[165]	 P. Kalyani, N. Kalaiselvi, N. G. Renganathan, M. Raghavan, Mater. 
Res. Bull. 2004, 39, 41.
[166]	 M. M.  Thackeray, C. S.  Johnson, K.  Amine, J.  Kim, US Patent 
6677082 B2,  2004.
[167]	 a) H.  Ren, Y.  Huang, Y.  Wang, Z.  Li, P.  Cai, Z.  Peng, Y.  Zhou, 
Mater. Chem. Phys. 2009, 117, 41; b) B. J.  Hwang, Y. W.  Tsai, 
D. Carlier, G. Ceder, Chem. Mater. 2003, 15, 3676.
[168]	 Y. Wei, J. Zheng, S. Cui, X. Song, Y. Su, W. Deng, Z. Wu, X. Wang, 
W. Wang, M. Rao, J. Am. Chem. Soc 2015, 137, 8364.
[169]	 T. Ohzuku, Y. Makimura, Chem. Lett. 2001, 30, 642.
[170]	 Z.  Lu, D. D.  MacNeil, J. R.  Dahn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett. 
2001, 4, A200.
[171]	 I. Belharouak, Y. K. Sun, J. Liu, K. Amine, J. Power Sources 2003, 
123, 247.
[172]	 a) J. W. Kim, J. J. Travis, E. Hu, K.-W. Nam, S. C. Kim, C. S. Kang, 
J.-H. Woo, X.-Q. Yang, S. M. George, K. H. Oh, S.-J. Cho, S.-H. Lee, 
J. Power Sources 2014, 254, 190; b) Z.  Mao, M.  Farkhondeh, 
M.  Pritzker, M.  Fowler, Z.  Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2016, 163, 
A458.
[173]	 Z.  Li, N. A.  Chernova, M.  Roppolo, S.  Upreti, C.  Petersburg,  
F. M. Alamgir, M. S. Whittingham, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2011, 158, 
A516.
[174]	 R. Jung, M. Metzger, F. Maglia, C. Stinner, H. A. Gasteiger, J. Elec-
trochem. Soc. 2017, 164, A1361.
[175]	 S.-M.  Bak, E.  Hu, Y.  Zhou, X.  Yu, S. D.  Senanayake, S.-J.  Cho, 
K.-B. Kim, K. Y. Chung, X.-Q. Yang, K.-W. Nam, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 2014, 6, 22594.
[176]	 X. Zhang, W. J. Jiang, A. Mauger, Qilu, F. Gendron, C. M. Julien,  
J. Power Sources 2010, 195, 1292.
[177]	 K. Kang, G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B 2006, 74, 094105.
[178]	 M.  Dixit, B.  Markovsky, F.  Schipper, D.  Aurbach, D. T.  Major,  
J. Phys. Chem. C 2017.
[179]	 H.-J. Noh, S. Youn, C. S. Yoon, Y.-K. Sun, J. Power Sources 2013, 
233, 121.
[180]	 P. Oh, B. Song, W. Li, A. Manthiram, J. Mater. Chem. A 2016, 4, 
5839.
[181]	 K.-S. Lee, S.-T. Myung, K. Amine, H. Yashiro, Y.-K. Sun, J. Electro-
chem. Soc. 2007, 154, A971.
[182]	 P.  Hou, H.  Zhang, X.  Deng, X.  Xu, L.  Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 2017, 9, 29643.
[183]	 J. Yang, Y. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8, 1297.
[184]	 Z.  Chen, Y.  Qin, K.  Amine, Y. K.  Sun, J. Mater. Chem. 2010, 20, 
7606.
[185]	 Y.-K. Sun, S.-T. Myung, B.-C. Park, K. Amine, Chem. Mater. 2006, 
18, 5159.
[186]	 W. Li, A. Dolocan, P. Oh, H. Celio, S. Park, J. Cho, A. Manthiram, 
Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 14589.
[187]	 Y.-K.  Sun, S.-T.  Myung, B.-C.  Park, J.  Prakash, I.  Belharouak, 
K. Amine, Nat. Mater. 2009, 8, 320.
[188]	 P. Hou, H. Zhang, Z. Zi, L. Zhang, X. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A 2017, 
5, 4254.
[189]	 B. B.  Lim, S. J.  Yoon, K. J.  Park, C. S.  Yoon, S. J.  Kim, J. J.  Lee,  
Y. K. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2015, 25, 4673.
[190]	 J. H. Lee, C. S. Yoon, J.-Y. Hwang, S.-J. Kim, F. Maglia, P. Lamp, 
S.-T. Myung, Y.-K. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci. 2016, 9, 2152.
[191]	 E. A. Olivetti, G. Ceder, G. G. Gaustad, X. Fu, Joule 2017, 1, 229.
[192]	 T. Inoue, K. Mukai, Electrochem. Commun. 2017, 77, 28.
[193]	 K. K. Lee, W. S. Yoon, K. B. Kim, K. Y. Lee, S. T. Hong, J. Power 
Sources 2001, 97, 308.
[194]	 C.  Julien, Title of the Book Missing, Springer, Cham, Switzerland 
2015, p. 119.
[195]	 Y.-Q.  Lai, M.  Xu, Z.-A.  Zhang, C.-H.  Gao, P.  Wang, Z.-Y.  Yu,  
J. Power Sources 2016, 309, 20.
[196]	 S. Xia, F. Li, F. Chen, H. Guo, J. Alloys Compd. 2017.
[197]	 Z.-F. Tang, R. Wu, P.-F. Huang, Q.-S. Wang, C.-H. Chen, J. Alloys 
Compd. 2017, 693, 1157.
[198]	 R. Qi, J.-L. Shi, X.-D. Zhang, X.-X. Zeng, Y.-X. Yin, J. Xu, L. Chen, 
W.-G.  Fu, Y.-G.  Guo, L.-J.  Wan, Sci. China Chem. 2017, 60, 
1230.
[199]	 J. Duan, C. Wu, Y. Cao, K. Du, Z. Peng, G. Hu, Electrochim. Acta 
2016, 221, 14.
[200]	 S. Albrecht, J. Kümpers, M. Kruft, S. Malcus, C. Vogler, M. Wahl, 
M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, J. Power Sources 2003, 119, 178.
[201]	 J.  Kim, H.  Lee, H.  Cha, M.  Yoon, M.  Park, J.  Cho, Adv. Energy 
Mater. 2017.
[202]	 E. A. Grunditz, T. Thiringer, IEEE Trans. Transp. Electrification 2016, 
2, 270.
[203]	 J. Ewing, Energy & Environment, The New York Times, NY 2017.
[204]	 C. 
Morris, 
Charged—Electric 
Vehicles 
Magazine, 
https://
chargedevs.com/newswire/uk-to-ban-new-ice-vehicles-from-2040/ 
(accessed: December 2017).
[205]	 D. Chung, E. Elgqvist, S. Santhanagopalan, Clean Energy Manufac-
turing Analysis Center (CEMAC) 2015, (accessed: December 2017).
[206]	 D. Howell, B. Cunningham, T. Duong, P. Faguy, U.S. Department 
of Energy Annual Merit Review, Washington, DC,  2016.
[207]	 J. W. Choi, D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2016, 1, 16013.
[208]	 Z. A. Needell, J. McNerney, M. T. Chang, J. E. Trancik, Nat. Energy 
2016, 1, 16112.
[209]	 B. Nykvist, M. Nilsson, Nat. Clim. Change 2015, 5, 329.
[210]	 S. Chu, Y. Cui, N. Liu, Nat. Mater. 2017, 16, 16.
[211]	 W. Kempton, Nat. Energy 2016, 1, 16131.
[212]	 D.  Howell, presented at the U.S. Department of Energy Vehicle 
Technologies Office 2017 Annual Merit Review and Peer Evaluation 
Meeting, Washington, D.C., June 2017.
[213]	 Technology Page on Microvast Website, Microvast©, http://
www.microvast.com/index.php/solution/solution_t 
(accessed: 
November 2017).
[214]	 S. Jain, Auto Tech Rev. 2017, 6, 52.
[215]	 Nikkei, Nikkei Asian Rev., https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Deals/
Sony-pulls-plug-on-pioneering-battery-business-eyes-Murata-deal 
(accessed: November 2017).
[216]	 Q. Zhong, A. Bonakdarpour, M. Zhang, Y. Gao, J. R. Dahn, J. Elec-
trochem. Soc. 1997, 144, 205.
[217]	 K. Amine, H. Yasuda, Y. Fujita, US Patent 6420069 B2,  2002.
[218]	 G. T. K. Fey, W. Li, J. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1994, 141, 2279.
[219]	 K.  Amine, H.  Yasuda, M.  Yamachi, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett. 
2000, 3, 178.
[220]	 S. Tan, Y. J. Ji, Z. R. Zhang, Y. Yang, ChemPhysChem 2014, 15, 1956.
[221]	 A. West, J. Mater. Chem. 1998, 8, 837.
[222]	 Q. D.  Truong, M. K.  Devaraju, Y.  Ganbe, T.  Tomai, I.  Honma,  
Sci. Rep. 2014, 4.
[223]	 T. N. L. Doan, I. Taniguchi, J. Power Sources 2011, 196, 5679.
[224]	 J. Zheng, P. Xu, M. Gu, J. Xiao, N. D. Browning, P. Yan, C. Wang, 
J.-G. Zhang, Chem. Mater. 2015, 27, 1381.

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
1800561  (24 of 24)
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800561
[225]	 M. M.  Thackeray, S.-H.  Kang, C. S.  Johnson, J. T.  Vaughey, 
R. Benedek, S. A. Hackney, J. Mater. Chem. 2007, 17, 3112.
[226]	 C. Johnson, J. Kim, C. Lefief, N. Li, J. Vaughey, M. Thackeray, Elec-
trochem. Commun. 2004, 6, 1085.
[227]	 M. M.  Thackeray, S.-H.  Kang, C. S.  Johnson, J. T.  Vaughey, 
R. Benedek, S. Hackney, J. Mater. Chem. 2007, 17, 3112.
[228]	 A. Boulineau, L. Simonin, J.-F. Colin, C. Bourbon, S. Patoux, Nano 
Lett. 2013, 13, 3857.
[229]	 Z. Lu, J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2002, 149, A815.
[230]	 a) B. Xu, C. R. Fell, M. Chi, Y. S. Meng, Energy Environ. Sc 2011, 4, 
2223; b) P. Yan, A. Nie, J. Zheng, Y. Zhou, D. Lu, X. Zhang, R. Xu, 
I. Belharouak, X. Zu, J. Xiao, Nano Lett. 2014, 15, 514.
[231]	 A. R.  Armstrong, M.  Holzapfel, P.  Novák, C. S.  Johnson, 
S.-H. Kang, M. M. Thackeray, P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc 2006, 
128, 8694.
[232]	 C. Yu, H. Wang, X. Guan, J. Zheng, L. Li, J. Alloys Compd. 2013, 
546, 239.
[233]	 a) S.  Shi, J.  Tu, Y.  Tang, X.  Liu, Y.  Zhang, X.  Wang, C.  Gu, Elec-
trochim. Acta 2013, 88, 671; b) W.  West, J.  Soler, M.  Smart, 
B.  Ratnakumar, S.  Firdosy, V.  Ravi, M.  Anderson, J.  Hrbacek, 
E. Lee, A. Manthiram, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2011, 158, A883.
[234]	 P. K.  Nayak, J.  Grinblat, M.  Levi, E.  Levi, S.  Kim, J. W.  Choi, 
D. Aurbach, Adv. Energy Mater. 2016, 6.
[235]	 R.  Yu, X.  Wang, Y.  Fu, L.  Wang, S.  Cai, M.  Liu, B.  Lu, G.  Wang, 
D. Wang, Q. Ren, J. Mater. Chem. A 2016, 4, 4941.
[236]	 Z.  Yu, S.-L.  Shang, M. L.  Gordin, A.  Mousharraf, Z.-K.  Liu, 
D. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A 2015, 3, 17376.
[237]	 B. Yuan, S.-X. Liao, Y. Xin, Y. Zhong, X. Shi, L. Li, X. Guo, RSC Adv. 
2015, 5, 2947.
[238]	 a) S. H.  Park, S. H.  Kang, C. S.  Johnson, K.  Amine,  
M. M. Thackeray, Electrochem. Commun. 2007, 9, 262; b) H. He, 
H. Cong, Y. Sun, L. Zan, Y. Zhang, Nano Res. 2017, 10, 556.
[239]	 W.-J. Zhang, J. Power Sources 2011, 196, 13.
[240]	 a) R. Mo, D. Rooney, K. Sun, H. Y. Yang, Nat. Commun 2017, 8; 
b) T.  Kennedy, E.  Mullane, H.  Geaney, M.  Osiak, C.  O’Dwyer,  
K. M. Ryan, Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 716.
[241]	 a) W. M.  Zhang, J. S.  Hu, Y. G.  Guo, S. F.  Zheng, L. S.  Zhong,  
W. G.  Song, L. J.  Wan, Adv. Mater. 2008, 20, 1160;  
b) J. O. Besenhard, J. Yang, M. Winter, J. Power Sources 1997, 68, 87.
[242]	 R. A. Sharma, R. N. Seefurth, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1976, 123, 1763.
[243]	 C. K.  Chan, H. L.  Peng, G.  Liu, K.  McIlwrath, X. F.  Zhang,  
R. A. Huggins, Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2008, 3, 31.
[244]	 H. Li, X. Huang, L. Chen, Z. Wu, Y. Liang, Electrochem. Solid-State 
Lett. 1999, 2, 547.
[245]	 a) K.  Feng, W.  Ahn, G.  Lui, H. W.  Park, A. G.  Kashkooli, 
G. Jiang, X. Wang, X. Xiao, Z. Chen, Nano Energy 2016, 19, 187;  
b) F. M. Hassan, R. Batmaz, J. Li, X. Wang, X. Xiao, A. Yu, Z. Chen, 
Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 8597.
[246]	 H. Kim, B. Han, J. Choo, J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2008, 47, 
10151.
[247]	 K. Feng, M. Li, W. Liu, A. G. Kashkooli, X. Xiao, M. Cai, Z. Chen, 
Small 2018, 14, 1702737.
[248]	 S. Chae, M. Ko, K. Kim, K. Ahn, J. Cho, Joule 2017, 1, 47.
[249]	 C. Ruoff, Charged—Electric Vehicles Magazine, Issue 20,  2015.
[250]	 a) W.  Cho, S.-M.  Kim, J. H.  Song, T.  Yim, S.-G.  Woo, K.-W.  Lee, 
J.-S.  Kim, Y.-J.  Kim, J. Power Sources 2015, 282, 45; b) H.  Kim,  
M. G. Kim, H. Y. Jeong, H. Nam, J. Cho, Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 2111.
[251]	 a) H. K. Song, K. T. Lee, M. G. Kim, L. F. Nazar, J. Cho, Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 2010, 20, 3818; b) J. Chen, Materials 2013, 6, 156.
[252]	 L. F. Cui, R. Ruffo, C. K. Chan, H. L. Peng, Y. Cui, Nano Lett. 2009, 
9, 491.
[253]	 X. Ji, K. T. Lee, L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater. 2009, 8, 500.
[254]	 L. A.-W.  Ellingsen, C. R.  Hung, G.  Majeau-Bettez, B.  Singh, 
Z. Chen, M. S. Whittingham, A. H. Strømman, Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2016, 11, 1039.
[255]	 C. W.  Sun, S.  Rajasekhara, J. B.  Goodenough, F.  Zhou, J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 2132.
[256]	 D.  Lv, J.  Zheng, Q.  Li, X.  Xie, S.  Ferrara, Z.  Nie, L. B.  Mehdi,  
N. D. Browning, J.-G. Zhang, G. L. Graff, J. Liu, J. Xiao, Adv. Energy 
Mater. 2015, 5, 1402290.
[257]	 M. Li, Y. Zhang, F. M. Hassan, W. Ahn, X. Wang, W. Liu, G. Jiang, 
Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A 2017, 5, 21435.
[258]	 H. Farhangi, IEEE Power Energy Mag. 2010, 8, 18.
[259]	 C. Clastres, Energy Policy 2011, 39, 5399.
[260]	 B. Dunn, H. Kamath, J. M. Tarascon, Science 2011, 334, 928.
[261]	 T. Ong, The Verge, Vox Media, NY 2017.
[262]	 a) B. Diouf, R. Pode, Renew. Energy 2015, 76, 375; b) P. Kubiak, 
Z.  Cen, C. M.  López, I.  Belharouak, J. Power Sources 2017, 
372, 16.
[263]	 a) A.  Anderson, D.  Meyer, F.  Mayer, Aust. J. Agric. Res. 1973, 
24, 557; b) L. O.  Simonsen, H.  Harbak, P.  Bennekou, Sci. Total 
Environ. 2012, 432, 210; c) K. V. Brix, C. E. Schlekat, E. R. Garman, 
Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 2017, 36, 1128.
[264]	 C. L.  Campion, W.  Li, W. B.  Euler, B. L.  Lucht, B.  Ravdel,  
J. F. DiCarlo, R. Gitzendanner, K. M. Abraham, Electrochem. Solid-
State Lett. 2004, 7, A194.
[265]	 X. Zeng, J. Li, N. Singh, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 44, 
1129.
[266]	 X.  Wang, G.  Gaustad, C. W.  Babbitt, K.  Richa, Resource Conserv. 
Recycl. 2014, 83, 53.
[267]	 M. D.  Slater, D.  Kim, E.  Lee, C. S.  Johnson, Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2013, 23, 947.

