Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Information Design in Aﬃliate Marketing
Sharadhi Alape Suryanarayana · David
Sarne · Sarit Kraus
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract The recent massive proliferation of aﬃliate marketing suggests a
new e-commerce paradigm which involves sellers, aﬃliates and the platforms
that connect them. In particular, the fact that prospective buyers may become
acquainted with the promotion through more than one aﬃliate to whom they
are connected calls for new mechanisms for compensating aﬃliates for their
promotional eﬀorts. In this paper, we study the problem of a platform that
needs to decide on the commission to be awarded to aﬃliates for promoting
a given product or service. Our equilibrium-based analysis, which applies to
the case where aﬃliates are a priori homogeneous and self-interested, enables
showing that a minor change in the way the platform discloses information
to the aﬃliates results in a tremendous (positive) eﬀect on the platform’s ex-
pected proﬁt. In particular, we show that with the revised mechanism the
platform can overcome the multi-equilibria problem that arises in the tradi-
tional mechanism and obtain a proﬁt which is at least as high as the maximum
proﬁt in any of the equilibria that hold in the latter.
Keywords aﬃliate marketing · equilibrium · dynamic pricing · mechanism
design · gig economy
Sharadhi Alape Suryanarayana
Department of Computer Science
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
E-mail: sharadhi.as@gmail.com
David Sarne
Department of Computer Science
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
E-mail: david.sarne@biu.ac.il
Sarit Kraus
Department of Computer Science
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
E-mail: sarit@cs.biu.ac.il

2
Suryanarayana et al.
1 Introduction
Aﬃliate marketing is a new e-commerce paradigm in which by promoting other
people’s (or companies’) products or services one can earn a commission (either
resulting from a click or from an actual sale) [33,42]. The idea is that content
producers can monetize their network of followers by promoting products and
services, hence saving manufacturers time and eﬀort in reaching their target
audience. The manufacturers in turn compensate the content producers by
sharing some of the revenue and this has led to many companies nowadays of-
fering content producers a ﬁnancial incentive to promote their product through
an aﬃliate program. The content producers are internet-based businesses that
have multiple streams of income such as programmatic advertisement rev-
enue (advertisements on websites), revenue from pre-roll advertisements (e.g.,
Youtube advertisements), custom content (sponsored posts, brand shoutouts
etc.) and aﬃliate marketing [19] to monetarily support the content that, in
many cases, is available at no cost to the reader. Aﬃliate marketing, which is
an important source of revenue, has become a very large industry and a key
source of online income for many thousands of professional bloggers, celebrities
and social media stars, ultimately creating passive income streams.
Aﬃliate Marketing is a key component of an emerging trend called gig
economy. Gig economy can be deﬁned as ‘people using apps (also commonly
known as platforms) to sell their labour’ [56] and algorithmic management is
central to the operation of such online labour platforms [58]. Gig work can
be local where work is transacted via platforms but delivered locally such
as food delivery and couriering, or it can be remote where a wide variety of
digital services such as data entry and programming are outsourced to remote
workers [27].
In this sense aﬃliate Marketing is a source of income while working at the
comfort of sitting at one’s home [57] and on the other hand aﬃliate marketing
can also be used to promote gig apps or companies that the aﬃliates are pas-
sionate about [14,50]. All in all, even though many consider aﬃliate marketing
to be a non-easily comprehensible marketing strategy (compared to, for ex-
ample, pay-per-click (PPC) [43] and email marketing [44]), recent projections
suggest it will generate billions in revenue in the coming years.1
The process of aﬃliate marketing generally involves four parties, namely
the advertiser, the platform, the aﬃliate and the buyer. First, there is the
advertiser, who sells a product or a service online, and the aﬃliate who gen-
erates content through which she can promote the product. The connection
between the advertiser and the aﬃliate is made through a platform (such
as AWIN (www.awin.com), ShareASale (www.shareasale.com), Maxbounty
(www.maxbounty.com), Tradedoubler (www.tradedoubler.com) and CJ Aﬃli-
ate (www.cj.com)). The platform lists products and services requiring promo-
tion and provides special links, known as aﬃliate links, which the aﬃliates use
1 E.g., according to a Business Insider Report from 2018, aﬃliate marketing is projected
to generate $8.2 billion revenue in the US by 2022 [52].

Information Design in Aﬃliate Marketing
3
for directing prospective buyers to the product web page on the advertiser’s
website and for identifying the aﬃliate (usually implemented using cookies).
The platform is also the one receiving the payment from the advertiser and
gets to decide how much to oﬀer the aﬃliates for their service [15]. Finally,
there is the buyer who is usually unaware of these dynamics that take place
between the advertiser, the platform and the aﬃliate.
Aﬃliate marketing oﬀers several beneﬁts to the three major parties in-
volved in the process. For the advertiser, it oﬀers a signiﬁcant decrease in ad-
vertising expenditure and is highly helpful in reaching out to new customers
at a low acquisition cost [15]. Also, aﬃliate marketing is particularly beneﬁcial
to new websites/start-ups that cannot churn out hefty sums of money on pub-
licising their product or service. For the aﬃliate, it oﬀers an opportunity to
leverage her social network for monetary gains. For the prospective buyers, af-
ﬁliate marketing oﬀers exposure to new products or services from trustworthy
sources that could have gone unnoticed in the context of personalized internet
advertising or any other legacy forms of advertising [41].
Most research on aﬃliate marketing to date has focused on the beneﬁts
and the potential of this new mechanism [11, 15], pricing strategies for the
advertiser [33], methods for recommending aﬃliates to advertisers [38,47] and
fraud detection and prevention [2, 8, 54]. None of these works has considered
aﬃliates’ strategic considerations in their decision whether or not to promote
a speciﬁc product.
In this paper we provide a game-theoretic based analysis of a multi-agent
system with the aﬃliate marketing platform and aﬃliates as the two distinct
types of agents, when the aﬃliates are a priori homogeneous, i.e., they are
all subject to the same posting (promoting) cost, and overlaps between their
followers are drawn from a common probability distribution function. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt to date to model the agents of
the aﬃliate marketing network and to provide a formal game-theoretic based
analysis of such a model. Not only did prior work not take into consideration
aﬃliates’ strategic behavior (i.e., their choice of whether or not to promote a
product), it also did not take into account the network eﬀect in the sense that
aﬃliates may have common/overlapping followers. The analysis is initially car-
ried out on the core mechanism which models aﬃliate marketing as it is done
today. Our analysis reveals that in many cases there is not one, but many pos-
sible equilibria. In such cases, the core equilibrium analysis does not provide a
way to determine which of the equilibria will be adopted by the agents. Hence
the platform cannot optimize the mechanism, and in particular has no way to
determine the optimal payment to be oﬀered to aﬃliates, since the eﬀective-
ness of such payments will depend on the speciﬁc equilibrium reached by the
agents. To overcome the problem, we introduce a simple information disclo-
sure scheme called the Sequential Mechanism, enabling disclosing the number
of aﬃliates that have already become acquainted with a given opportunity.
We show that even by revealing such minimal information, the platform can
enforce an equilibrium using a dynamic commission structure of the highest

4
Suryanarayana et al.
possible expected proﬁt among those that hold in the legacy mechanism used
in practice in most platforms nowadays.
In the following section, we review related work, primarily in the area of
aﬃliate marketing. The model and assumptions used are formally introduced
in Section 3. Comprehensive equilibrium analysis and illustrative numerical
examples are provided in Section 4. Finally, we provide the discussion and
conclusions in Section 5.
2 Related Work
One of the earliest reported use of aﬃliate marketing is CDNow’s BuyWeb
program launched in 1994. Being an online music retailer, CDNow oﬀered
music-oriented websites to review or list albums on their pages that their
visitors might be interested in purchasing, along with a link to CDNow’s page
[26,50]. Since then aﬃliate marketing has evolved and is now a key component
of internet marketing [39]. At present, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Big Data
could be used for aﬃliate marketing in areas such as Aﬃliate Recruitment,
Aﬃliate Management, Product Data Feed Optimization, Tracking, Attribution
and Forecasting [37]. Despite its high applicability [37], revenue potential [52]
and presence in online markets [22], the number of studies directly touching
on aﬃliate marketing is rather modest and it seems like research still has a
long way to go in order to fully unveil the potential of this transformative
mechanism. In particular there is a need for theoretical and empirical research
analyzing the dynamics typically formed between all of the parties involved in
aﬃliate marketing [16].
Prior literature has considered the conﬂict between the advertiser and aﬃl-
iate for customer attention. For example Ak¸cura [1] studies the incentive for a
ﬁrm to join an aﬃliate marketing program (due to the fact that this will divert
its customers to another website), pricing strategies and impact on social wel-
fare. Bhattacharya et al [7] characterize the strategies of an advertiser and the
aﬃliate as they compete for sponsored keywords. Libai et al [33] analyze the
choice of the payment mechanisms such pay-per-click and pay-per-conversion
based on the nature of relationship with the aﬃliate partner.
Taking the aﬃliate partner’s perspective, Ma [36] models the decision of
the partner to join an aﬃliate program based on parameters such as conver-
sion rate, network traﬃc, opportunity costs and commission rate. However, the
analysis centers around the decision of a partner to promote the product as a
function of the above parameters and does not involve a strategic interaction
between the diﬀerent aﬃliate partners and the platform. On the other hand
Mizuno [42] simulates aﬃliate and buyer agents, basing the behaviors of the
agents on surveys. The simulation results attempt to suggest the right mix-
ture of advertisement content in the aﬃliate’s blog to increase her revenues.
Benedictova and Nevosad [6], present descriptive analysis, based on surveys,
from the partner’s perspective and propose suggestions to the advertiser. Alas,

Information Design in Aﬃliate Marketing
5
none of the above work considers the full dynamics and inter-partner strategic
considerations as in this case.
Empirical research on aﬃliate marketing has focused on a variety of topics
such as intentions to use aﬃliate marketing [48], recommending aﬃliates to
advertisers [38, 47], the eﬀect of social media on aﬃliate marketing [46] and
modeling the contribution of aﬃliate marketing to the overall revenue of a
ﬁrm [4]. One interesting domain for empirical research is analyzing unethical
practices by aﬃliates such as non-disclosure of aﬃliate marketing content [40]
and aﬃliate fraud detection and prevention [2,8,54]. In order to prevent aﬃliate
marketing abuse Edelman and Brandi analyze management structures and
provide suggestions according to the scale of violation by the aﬃliates [17].
A strikingly similar marketing strategy and domain of research is inﬂuencer
marketing where individuals/content-generating businesses that have a huge
fan-following are paid for their product endorsements by the parent ﬁrm. How-
ever, the inﬂuencers are oﬀered heterogeneous payments based on the category
of followership the inﬂuencer falls into and the credibility of the endorsements
from the followers’ point of view while the commission oﬀered to an aﬃliate
follows a homogeneous structure such as pay-per-click or pay-per-conversion.
Fainmesser and Galeotti [20] model the decision of an inﬂuencer with respect
to allocation of sponsored and organic content based on user engagement and
followership category, analyze the market implications of a change in search
technology eﬃciency and demonstrate the eﬀect of transparency regulation
on the market for online inﬂuence in a monopoly. In an oligopolistic setting,
Fainmesser and Galeotti [21] (in a companion paper) characterize the equilib-
rium prices for diﬀerent consumer groups, characterize the ineﬃciencies due
to consumer preferences, analyze consumer surplus and proﬁt erosion due to
competition, and also study the ﬁrms’ incentive to acquire information on
consumer inﬂuence. Pei and Mayzlin [49] demonstrate that the optimal level
of aﬃliation between the ﬁrm and the inﬂuencer depends on the consumer’s
awareness and her prior belief on product ﬁt. As in the case of aﬃliate market-
ing, inﬂuencer marketing has its own share of unscrupulous practices. Research
in this direction has been done on identiﬁcation of fake likes in Instagram [53],
characterization of fake inﬂuencer accounts on Twitter [59] and helping in-
ﬂuencers manage authenticity for themselves due to brand encroachment into
their content [3].
Few somehow tangential areas of research are Cashback marketing, Re-
ferral marketing and Multi-level marketing. Cashback marketing is a form of
aﬃliate marketing where the merchant aﬃliates to a site such as ebates (now
named Rakuten) and customers who purchase through the aﬃliate site are re-
imbursed with a portion of transaction, called cashback. Ho et al [25] develop
pricing strategies for the merchant based on consumer segments, characterize
the decision of a merchant to get aﬃliated to a website and the impact of
cashback marketing on social welfare. Zhou et al [61] determine the optimal
strategies of the cashback website and the ﬁrm under diﬀerent settings. How-
ever, the analysis in most of the cases is centered around the customer when
determining the price as well as the cashback rate. In aﬃliate marketing the

6
Suryanarayana et al.
decision of the aﬃliate partner is whether or not to promote based on the
social network parameters (followers and other prospective partners) and she
does not determine the price that is requested from the potential buyer. Em-
pirically, Ballestar et al [5] classify the users of a cashback website into clusters
based on their commercial activity and their role within the cashback social
network.
In referral programs [23, 51] whenever a consumer makes a purchase, the
ﬁrm gives her a link to share with friends, and every purchase coming through
that link generates a referral payment. Still, the assumptions that prior work
studying referral programs models have relied on, especially those related to
the nature of the promotion made, are very diﬀerent than those used for af-
ﬁliate marketing. For example, Lobel et al [35] assume that in the referral
program, the consumer needs to directly contact each friend, i.e., incurs a cost
for every referral made. Therefore, the key decision for the consumer is how
many friends to contact. In aﬃliate marketing, the aﬃliate incurs a one-time
publication cost for exposing all of her followers to the opportunity. Further-
more, the analysis provided by Lobel et al is based on the assumption that
the population of potential consumers is represented as a rooted graph, and
that only the consumer that is the root of this graph is approached by the
ﬁrm. From that point on, the process follows the dynamics of a pyramid. In
aﬃliate marketing, on the other hand, aﬃliates join only through accessing
the platform, and there is no a priori advantage to any aﬃliate in the sense
of getting the information before the others. Guo et al [24] investigate opti-
mal pricing and referral reward strategies under diﬀerent demand dynamics
for referral marketing where an existing consumer refers the product to her
friends. However, the authors do not consider the decision of the consumer on
whether or not to promote the product. They instead model the probabilities
of buying and referring as an eﬀect of the price and referral reward.
With respect to multi-agent systems, research on information propagation
through social networks where each node is an agent that holds some inﬂuence
on the mechanism has been carried out in the form of designing mechanisms
such that every agent that is buying the product is incentivized to share the
information to the neighbours in her social network [32,60]. These were used
primarily for studying formal mechanisms and properties of multi-level mar-
keting (MLM) through social inﬂuence networks [18] and the management of
early adopters, taking into account their social inﬂuence, when launching a
new product [12,30]. However, none of these take into consideration the fact
that the targeted buyers, followers in the case of our problem, can be connected
to more than one agent that is propagating the information for a monetary
gain.
Finally, with the hype of gig jobs, much general work can be found on
that topic. In particular, research on manual gig work has been conducted on
topics such as usage of urban taxis for food delivery [34], crowdsourcing last
mile delivery by exploiting a social network of the customers [13], providing
the optimal rider schedules for vehicles to maximize the overall utility in the
case of ridesharing [10] and allocating spatial tasks to crowdsourced workers

Information Design in Aﬃliate Marketing
7
such that the overall cooperation is maximized [9]. In the case of gig work with
digital labor, research has been conducted on verifying the quality of workers
on platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk [28], grouping workers into
tasks such that the total proﬁt of the tasks is maximized [55] and identifying
and classifying malicious tasks (also called crowdturﬁng tasks) on platforms
such as Fiverr [31]. Unfortunately none of the above is transferable to the
study of the questions that are the locus of the current paper.
3 Model
Our model considers an aﬃliate marketing platform and N prospective aﬃliate
partners (denoted “partners” henceforth). The platform oﬀers a product or a
service requiring promotion and provides its aﬃliate link, which the partners
can use for directing their followers (connections/friends who are the potential
buyers) from their social network to the product’s web page on the advertiser’s
website. The model assumes that the partners are a priori homogeneous, in
the sense that each of them is connected to k followers2 and each of the latter
is potentially connected to 1 ≤w ≤N partners overall, where w is a pri-
ori unknown and characterized by a probability function pW (w) such that
PN
w=1 pW (w) = 1 (see Figure 1).
Fig. 1: Network Structure - each partner has k followers with some overlap.
A partner can either promote the product or opt not to promote it (see
Figure 2 for an illustrative summary of the process). Promoting incurs a cost c,
whereas not promoting does not incur any cost.3 The model assumes that upon
2 Alternatively, we can assume that the number of potential followers of each partner is
a priori probabilistic. This would require some technical changes in the analysis, primarily
adding expectation calculations in the equations, however will not change the claims and
proofs.
3 All partners are characterized with the same promotion cost as this is usually the (quite
standard) cost of time it takes for uploading a post or the reputation loss associated with
promoting the product in the generated content.

8
Suryanarayana et al.
promoting, the content will reach all of the partner’s followers, and even if a
follower does not read it right away she will review the promotions in the order
received (e.g., in case she is connected to several partners that promote the
product). In order to encourage partners to promote the product, the platform
oﬀers a commission (in the form of a ﬁxed payment) M for each lead that will
convert to a purchase. Since followers are human, their purchase decisions are
modeled as probabilistic and do not reﬂect any game-theoretic considerations.
Therefore, we assume that a random follower will be interested in the promoted
product (to the level of purchasing it) with probability pB.4 A follower will not
use the aﬃliate link in case another link to the same product has already been
received from one of the other partners to whom she is connected.5 Finally,
the platform’s gain from each successful sale of the product is denoted G.
Fig. 2: The choices of partners and followers in the model, and the resulting
payments and costs incurred.
All of the agents (platform and partners) are assumed to be fully rational
and self-interested in the sense that their goal is to maximize their individual
expected proﬁt. This is primarily because these are internet-based businesses
and their decision-making process is of a repeated nature.6 The expected proﬁt
of the platform is its gain from successful sales minus the commissions paid to
partners. The expected proﬁt of a partner is zero if not promoting the product
4 Notice that by setting pB = 1 the model changes into (and the analysis and all proofs
become applicable to) a pay-per-lead scheme.
5 While we rely on the assumption of homogeneous partners where a follower is indiﬀerent
between the partner whose aﬃliate link she clicks, an alternate scenario is however possible
where the follower chooses from the partner that is the most reputed/reliable according to
the follower. In such cases the equilibrium computation becomes combinatorial due to the
assignment of diﬀerent probability of purchase for each follower and does not add much in
terms of insights.
6 Even the partners need to make promotion decisions on a daily basis driven by the above
mentioned considerations of time spent, reputation loss and commissions to be earned.

Information Design in Aﬃliate Marketing
9
and otherwise it is the expected total commissions received minus the cost of
promotion. Finally, the model assumes that all of the agents are familiar with
the parameters M, pB, N, k, c, G and the function pW (w). This usually holds
in real-life settings, as most of this information is either publicly available or
can be found with minimal eﬀort.7 For exposition purposes we will refer to
speciﬁc settings onward using the tuple (N, k, M, c, G, pB, pW (w))
4 Analysis
We begin with analyzing the aﬃliate marketing mechanism in its core form,
i.e., the platform advertises the listing with the pre-set commission, M (see in
Figure 2) and does not disclose any other information. We refer to this mech-
anism, as applied by the platforms nowadays, the Core Mechanism. We then
propose and analyze a slightly modiﬁed mechanism in which the number of
partners that have already viewed the listing is disclosed to the partner that
views the listing while the commission oﬀered is the same for every partner.
This is referred as the Sequential Mechanism. Finally, we extend and improve
the Sequential Mechanism with a Dynamic Commission Structure. Here, in
addition to revealing the number of partners that have viewed the listing,
we also have a commission structure that is correlated to the position of the
partner in the sequence. Details of the three mechanisms are explained in the
sections that follow. The proﬁt of the platform depends on the equilibrium
adopted by the partners. Hence, the analysis involves the characterization of
the equilibrium of the partners and the calculation of the proﬁt of the plat-
form based on the equilibrium adopted by the partners. Synthetic numerical
examples are used, whenever applicable, for illustration purposes.
4.1 Core Mechanism
When the platform simply lists the details of the product and generates aﬃliate
links to partners, the setting can be considered a simultaneous game. Meaning
that even though the partners do not necessarily all access the listing at the
same time, they are unaware of how many of the other partners will decide to
promote it.
A partner’s strategy can thus be captured by the probability 0 ≤p ≤1 she
will choose to promote the product. A pure-strategy Nash equilibrium is thus
one where each partner Pi is using pi ∈{0, 1}. A mixed-strategy Nash equilib-
rium is the one where at least one partner Pi is using 0 < pi < 1. One natural
and highly intuitive equilibrium (since all of the partners operate in similar
conditions and are familiar with the parameters) that always holds is the sym-
metric equilibrium when all partners are using the same strategy p [45].8 For
7 For example, it is easy to know how many readers a blog post has reached [42] or to
predict exposure of future posts.
8 For example, Lobel et al use this kind of equilibrium in their referral-programs based
model [35].

10
Suryanarayana et al.
exposition purposes, we use this equilibrium whenever considering a mixed-
strategy equilibrium, alas the proofs we provide regarding the dominance of
the equilibrium of the proposed modiﬁed mechanism over mixed-strategy equi-
libria of the core mechanism hold also for all types of mixed-strategy equilibria.
Let us consider the partners P1 and P2 from Figure 1 promoting the prod-
uct. While counting the number of unique followers exposed to the promotion,
we need to account for the fact that P1 and P2 have one follower in common
and each of them has a probability of 1/2 to be the one beneﬁting from the pro-
motion to that follower. The generalization of this scenario to the case where
the number of followers exposed to the promotion when i out of N partners
promote the product, denoted Expose(i), is given by:
Expose(i) = ik
N
X
w=1
pW (w) ·
min(w−1,i−1)
X
z=max(0,w−N+i−1)
 i−1
z
  N−i
w−1−z

 N−1
w−1

1
z + 1
(1)
Here, for all of the i promoting partners, we iterate over each of the k
followers in order to account for the overlap of a given follower with other
promoting partners. Every follower is connected to at least one and at most N
promoting partners. Hence the iteration is given by the index w which ranges
from 1 to N. Since the partner under consideration is herself promoting the
product we need to account for every subset of the other w −1 partners,
promoting the product. For every subset of size z of w −1 partners connected
to a given follower, we calculate the probability that the z partners are a part
of the i −1 promoting partners and w −1 −z of them are a part of the
N −i partners that do not promote. Hence the probability of having z of the
other i −1 promoting partners be part of the set of w −1 other partners to
whom the current follower is connected is given by (
i−1
z )(
N−i
w−1−z)
(
N−1
w−1)
. Given a ﬁxed
value of w the minimum number of promoting partners is 0 and the maximum
number of promoting partners is w−1 and the limits for z are initially set from
0 to w −1. However, considering the numerator of the probability, we have
z < i−1 and w−1−z < N −i. Hence the range of z is max(0, w−N +i−1) to
min(w −1, i −1). Finally, since we repeat the calculation for each of the i −1
partners, we eliminate the redundancy in the number of followers by dividing
by z + 1. This can be understood as each partner having a chance of 1/(z + 1)
to be the one beneﬁting from the promotion to that follower.
Figure 3 depicts the value of Expose(i) as a function of the number of
promoting partners, i for the setting (N = 25, k = 50, pW (w) = 1/N ∀w ∈
1...N)). Here, we can observe that Expose(i) increases at a decreasing rate in
i, which is explained by the fact that we are dealing with a ﬁxed population of
followers, with many of them being connected to more than one partner.The
upper bound for the number of followers i.e the total population size, S, which
is given by Equation 2 can be obtained by substituting i = N (since the total
number of partners cannot exceed N) in Equation 1 and simplifying further.

Information Design in Aﬃliate Marketing
11
Fig. 3: Expose(i) as a function of the number of promoting partners, i.
S = N · k ·
N
X
w=1
pW (w)
w
(2)
Hence as the number of partners increases the overlap between the followers
of a newly added partner and followers of all of the other partners promot-
ing prior to the newly added partner increases. Consequently, the number of
unique followers added by the newly promoting partner decreases with every
increase in the number of promoting partners.
The expected proﬁt of a promoting partner if the total number of promoting
partners (including herself) is i, denoted BP
core(i), is thus:
BP
core(i) = −c + Expose(i)MpB
i
(3)
Similarly, the expected proﬁt of the platform when the total number of
promoting partners is i, denoted Bplatform
core
(i), is:
Bplatform
core
(i) = Expose(i)(G −M)pB
(4)
The analysis of the symmetric mixed strategies is quite similar. The ex-
pected proﬁt of the platform when the partners use a mixed strategy p, denoted
Bplatform
core
(p), is:
Bplatform
core
(p) =
N
X
i=0
N
i

pi(1 −p)N−iExpose(i) · (G −M)pB
(5)

12
Suryanarayana et al.
Similarly, the expected proﬁt of a promoting partner, if all other partners
are promoting with probability p, denoted BP
core(p), is:
BP
core(p) = −c +
N−1
X
j=0
N −1
j

pj(1 −p)N−j−1 Expose(j + 1)MpB
j + 1
(6)
An alternative calculation of BP
core(p) is the one which considers the num-
ber of other partners to whom each of her followers is connected:
BP
core(p) = −c + k
N
X
w=1
pW (w) ·
w−1
X
z=0
w −1
z
pz(1 −p)w−z−1
z + 1
MpB
= −c + k
N
X
w=1
pW (w) 1
w ·
w−1
X
z=0
 w
z + 1

pz(1 −p)w−z−1MpB
= −c + k
N
X
w=1
pW (w) 1
w ·
w
X
z=1
w
z

pz−1(1 −p)w−zMpB
= −c + k
N
X
w=1
pW (w) 1
wp ·
w
X
z=1
w
z

pz(1 −p)w−zMpB
= −c + k
N
X
w=1
pW (w)(1 −(1 −p)w)
wp
MpB
(7)
Here we iterate over the k followers of the partner, considering for each of them
the number of partners w to whom she is connected. For each w we calculate
the probability that z of the w −1 other partners are promoting (given that
each one promotes with probability p), in which case the partner has a chance
of 1/(z + 1) to be the one beneﬁting from the promotion to that follower.
Figure 4 depicts the value of BP
core(p) as a function of the probability of
promotion, p for the setting (N = 25, k = 50, M = 9, c = 4, pB = 0.1, pW (w) =
1/N ∀w ∈1...N)). Here, we can observe that BP
core(p) decreases with an
increase in p.
Characterization of the equilibrium. The best response strategy of every part-
ner is: (a) to promote if BP
core(i+1) ≥0 whenever the other partners are using
a pure strategy according to which i of them promote; and (b) to promote
if BP
core(p) ≥0 whenever the other partners are promoting with probability
0 < p < 1. A pure-strategy Bayesian Nash Equilibrium (BNE) solution where
i ≤N partners promote is thus one where BP
core(i) ≥0 ≥BP
core(i + 1), i.e.,
neither promoting nor non-promoting partners have an incentive to deviate.
A symmetric BNE solution p is one where BP
core(p) = 0. The above analysis
can be augmented to accommodate solutions where some of the partners use
pure strategies and some use mixed ones. The extension is quite mathemati-
cally technical and does not contribute much in terms of results, therefore it
is omitted.

Information Design in Aﬃliate Marketing
13
Fig. 4: BP
core(p) as a function of the probability of promotion, p.
Proposition 1 Any i-based promoting partners pure-strategy equilibrium of
the core mechanism in which the partners are making zero proﬁt (i.e., BP
core(i) =
0 according to (3)) results in at least as high expected proﬁt (to the platform)
as any other i-based pure-strategy equilibrium in which the partners’ expected
proﬁt is positive.9
Proof. This derives from the fact that the platform’s gains from the partners’
promotions are the same (and equal Expose(i) · pB · G), whereas in the case
where partners’ proﬁt is zero, the expected sum of commissions paid is neces-
sarily lower than when they make a proﬁt (as the partners’ gain derives solely
from the platform’s commission).
Based on Proposition 1, we can calculate the expected-proﬁt-maximizing
M value by setting BP
core(i) = 0 and solving (3) for any i (and calculating the
corresponding expected proﬁt Bplatform
core
(i) according to (4)). Now, all we need
to do is go over the N latter values (Bplatform
core
(i), ∀i) and pick the M value
associated with the maximum among them.10
Figure 5 depicts the platform’s proﬁt with the mixed and pure equilibria
as a function of the commission used, M, and of the cost of promotion, c, for a
setting (N = 50, k = 25, M = ∗, c = ∗, G = 20, pB = 0.1, pW (w) = 1/N ∀w ∈
1...N). For the graph that uses the commission M as the independent variable
(left), the cost of promotion is set as c = 4 and for the graph that uses the
9 An i-based promoting partners pure equilibrium necessarily exists for any i > 0, as the
increase in Expose(i) due to an increase in i is a decreasing function. Figure 3 which depicts
Expose(i) as a function of the number of promoting partners, i, visualizes this assertion.
10 The calculation for the M value that maximizes the platform’s expected proﬁt with
mixed strategies is more complex, yet as we prove later on it is unnecessary as it is dominated
by a pure-strategy equilibrium.

14
Suryanarayana et al.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5: Inﬂuence of commission M and cost of promotion c on proﬁt.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6: Inﬂuence of cost of promotion c and commission M on the mixed-
strategy equilibrium.
promotion cost as the independent variable (right) the commission is set as
M = 6. In the left graph we observe that while the mixed-strategy equilibrium
is continuous in M (as the probabilities used by the partners are continuous),
the pure-strategy equilibrium exhibits a recurring pattern of a sharp increase
(a step-function) followed by a continuous decrease. The increase is associated
with a transition from an equilibrium based on i promoting partners to one
with i + 1. The decrease is when the number of promoting partners remains
the same, yet the increase in M reduces the proﬁt gained from any purchasing
follower. This provides the intuition for the proof of Proposition 1.
Further, we observe from Figure 5 that with small M values, the pure-
strategy equilibria generally yield a greater expected proﬁt compared to the
mixed ones (for the same M value) and very similar proﬁt when M is relatively

Information Design in Aﬃliate Marketing
15
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7: Inﬂuence of cost of promotion c and commission M on pure-strategy
equilibrium.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 8: Inﬂuence of mixed strategy equilibrium on number of promoting part-
ners: (a) Probability distribution of the number of promoting partners when
N = 50, p = 0.076; and (b) Probability distribution of the number of promot-
ing partners when N = 50, p = 0.73.
high. This is explained by the nature of the induced number of promoting
partners probability function. When M is small, the promotion probability is
relatively small, and since Expose(i) increases at a decreasing rate the eﬀect of
those cases where the number of promoting partners with mixed strategies is
smaller than with pure strategies is signiﬁcantly greater than with the opposite
cases. When M is high, the promotion probability is high hence the diﬀerences
between the above cases are very small.
Figures 6 and 7 show the inﬂuence of the cost of promotion, c and com-
mission, M, on the values of the probability of promotion in equilibrium when

16
Suryanarayana et al.
the partners are using mixed strategies and the number of promoting partners
in equilibrium when the partners are using pure strategies respectively. For
a given value of p, BP
core(p) is directly proportional to the value of M. An
increase in M, therefore, increases the value of p at which BP
core(p) = 0. The
smaller the value of p, the more skewed the distribution (of the number of
promoting partners) is to the right, and the higher the value of p, the more
skewed the distribution is to the left. This is due to the fact that the distri-
bution of the number of promoting partners follows a binomial distribution
and the pattern of skewness is in accordance with the binomial distribution.
Figure 8 illustrates the inﬂuence of the mixed-strategy equilibrium on proba-
bility (of the binomial distribution) of the number of promoting partners. The
values of p considered are the mixed strategy equilibrium at M = 3.167 and
M = 13.948. The same can be said about the inﬂuence of M on BP
core(i) and
the value of i at equilibrium as M increases. However, instead of a continuous
increase as in the case of the partners using mixed strategies, the value of i at
equilibrium exhibits an increasing step function with the increase in M.
Hence, when M is relatively small, p is relatively small and the distribution
of the number of promoting partners with the mixed equilibrium is right-
skewed (Figure 8a). Therefore, the loss due to cases where a relatively small
number of partners promote is substantial. When M is relatively high, the
distribution of promoting partners is left-skewed (Figure 8b), therefore the
loss due to cases of small number of promoters diminishes while the gain
from better using M to induce higher promotion becomes more apparent.
As expected, overall, the expected proﬁt curve generally increases and, upon
reaching a maximum level, decreases. This is because with small commissions,
the number of promoting partners is small (with pure-strategy equilibrium)
and their distribution is skewed to the right (with mixed equilibrium) hence
any increase in M will strongly aﬀect the number of unique followers reached.
The decrease with small M values is explained by the reversed eﬀect.
The cost of promotion, c, is negatively proportional to the expected proﬁt
i.e. an increase in the cost of promotion leads to a decrease in the expected
proﬁt (Figure 5b). However, the comparison of the pure strategy equilibrium
with the mixed strategy equilibrium follow similar dynamics as in the case
of the inﬂuence of the commission oﬀered, M. For a given value of p or i,
an increase in the value of c results in the decrease of BP
core(p) or BP
core(i)
respectively. Hence, an increase in c, decreases the value of p or i at which
BP
core(p) = 0 and BP
core(i) = 0. The only diﬀerence between the eﬀect of M
and c is in the general trend—unlike with the increase in the commission used,
the increase in the cost of promoting always results in a general decrease in the
number of promoting partners, or to a more skewed distribution of promoting
partners with mixed equilibrium, hence the expected proﬁt generally decreases.
Next we show the eﬀect of the increase in the number of followers (per part-
ner, i.e., the followers’ population is not pre-set and its size changes (increases)
as the number of followers each partner has increases) on the resulting equilib-
ria. Taking all other model parameters to be ﬁxed, an increase in the number
of followers will necessarily result in an increase in the platform’s expected

Information Design in Aﬃliate Marketing
17
proﬁt. Figure 9 illustrates the phenomenon. The setting used is (N = 50, k =
{5, ..., 112}, M ∈{4, 7}, c = 4, G = 20, pB = 0.1, pW (w) = 1/N ∀w ∈1...N).
Graphs (a) and (b) of the ﬁgure depict the platform’s expected proﬁt, for
M = 4 and M = 7 (where the ﬁrst corresponds to an interval where the in-
crease in M results in an increase in expected proﬁt, and the second to an
interval associated with a decrease - see Figure 5a which illustrates the inﬂu-
ence of the commission on the platform’s proﬁt). As expected, the resulting
increase in the size of the population yields an increase in the platform’s ex-
pected proﬁt. While the diﬀerence between the platform’s proﬁt while using
pure and mixed strategies is not easily distinguishable, the more interesting
inﬂuence is that of the inﬂuence of the commission, M on the probability
of promotion in equilibrium. Graph (c) in the ﬁgure depicts the promotion
probability of the partners in equilibrium. Here, the increase in M results in
a greater promotion probability, for every number of followers. Consequently,
mixed-strategy equilibria cease to hold with a smaller number of followers. Fig-
ure 10 provides a similar perspective, one that varies the value of the promotion
cost c. It uses the exact same setting, this time however with k = {9, ..., 124},
M = 9 and c ∈{9, 10}. While the general pattern is similar to the one exhib-
ited in Figure 9, the eﬀect of the increase in c is reversed - an increase in c
results in a decreased promotion equilibrium probability.
All in all, we observe that neither of the equilibria types (pure and mixed)
generally dominate the other in terms of the platform’s expected proﬁt for any
given M. Later on, we prove that if M is within the control of the platform,
as is often the case in most real-world settings, the pure-strategy equilibrium
yields the maximum expected proﬁt for the platform.11
4.2 Proposed Modiﬁed Mechanism
While with the core mechanism the platform cannot inﬂuence the equilibrium
that will hold in a multi-equilibria scenario, we propose a simple modiﬁcation
to the mechanism. With the modiﬁed mechanism only one equilibrium holds.
The idea is that the platform will provide every partner that accesses the
listing with the number of other partners that have already accessed it (see
Figure 11).12 This small change turns the game into a sequential one, as it
enables each partner some additional information. Therefore, while in the core
mechanism a pure strategy of a partner is simply a binary decision - whether
or not to promote, here the strategy of partner Pi is a function, determining
whether or not to promote given the information about the number of other
partners that have accessed the listing so far.
11 An example where M is not fully within the control of the platform is when the platform
oﬀers a ﬁxed M for all products or services listed on its website.
12 Meaning that we do not even need to provide information about how many others have
received an aﬃliate link. Instead we only provide information about how many times the
listing was uniquely viewed.

18
Suryanarayana et al.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 9: The platform’s expected proﬁt for pure and mixed strategies equlibria
as a function of the number of followers for M = 4 (a), M = 7 (b), and the
promotion probability used (for mixed equilibria) as a function of the number
of followers (c).
The modiﬁed mechanism (denoted “Sequential” henceforth) is a dynamic
game. As such, the proper, or natural solution concept for this model is the
sub-game perfect Nash equilibrium (SPNE). We note that since the sequential
game is a game of complete information, the SPNE can be easily computed
using backward induction. Note that except for the relatively rare case of ties,
the sub-game perfect Nash equilibrium is unique and uses pure strategies.
We use Exposemarginal(i) to denote the expected number of new followers
becoming exposed to the product as a result of the ith promotion. Formally,
Exposemarginal(i) = Expose(i) −Expose(i −1)
(8)
The expected proﬁt of a partner who is the ith promoting partner is therefore:
BP
seq(i) = −c + Exposemarginal(i)MpB
(9)

Information Design in Aﬃliate Marketing
19
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 10: The platform’s expected proﬁt for pure and mixed strategies equlibria
as a function of the number of followers for c = 9 (a), c = 10 (b), and the
promotion probability used (for mixed equilibria) as a function of the number
of followers (c).
Proposition 2 The SPNE for the sequential mechanism is to have each part-
ner participate if the number of other partners who accessed the listing is
n′ < n∗, where n∗= ⌊n⌋such that n is the solution to BP
seq(n) = 0 (according
to (9)), and avoid participation otherwise.
Proof. Consider any partner who receives information n′ < n∗. In this case,
the expected proﬁt if promoting is at least BP
seq(n′ +1), as BP
seq(i) decreases in
i13 and the number of promoting partners so far is at most n′. Since n′+1 ≤n∗
and BP
seq(i) decreases in i, BP
seq(n′+1) ≥BP
seq(n∗) ≥0. Therefore promoting is
the dominating strategy and as such all partners receiving information n′ < n∗
will promote. Now consider a partner receiving information n′ ≥n∗. Knowing
that the ﬁrst n∗partners who viewed the listing necessarily promoted it, the
13 Since Expose(i) increases at a decreasing rate in i, Exposemarginal(i) decreases in i.

20
Suryanarayana et al.
Fig. 11: Pictorial representation of the Sequential Mechanism.
partner will ﬁnd not promoting to be the dominating strategy, as BP
seq(n′) ≤
BP
seq(n∗+ 1) < 0.
The expected proﬁt of the platform can be calculated using 4, substituting
i = n∗.
Unfortunately, the sequential mechanism as presented above falls behind
pure-strategy Nash equilibria of the core mechanism, as stated in Proposition
3.
Proposition 3 For any M, the SPNE of the sequential mechanism is weakly
dominated by at least one pure Nash equilibrium of the core mechanism that
uses the same M.
Proof. In the sequential case in equilibrium there are exactly n∗partners
choosing to promote. We show that any pure equilibrium that holds with
the core mechanism is based on at least n∗promoting partners.
Consider the n∗th promoting partner in the sequential mechanism. The ex-
pected proﬁt of this partner BP
seq(n∗) is non-negative, based on Proposition 2.
Furthermore, BP
seq(n∗) = −c+Exposemarginal(n∗)MpB = −c+(Expose(n∗)−
Expose(n∗−1))MpB < −c + Expose(n∗)MpB/n∗= BP
core(n∗).
The interpretation of this inequality is as follows. Exposemarginal(n∗) de-
notes the number of unique followers exposed to the product as a result of the
n∗th promotion. Expose(n∗)
n∗
equally splits all of the followers that are exposed
to the promotion among the n∗partners that are promoting the product. Since
Expose(i) increases at a decreasing rate (and not at a uniform rate) in i, the
number of unique followers exposed to the product as a result of the n∗th
promotion is less than the share of followers if we were to split Expose(n∗)

Information Design in Aﬃliate Marketing
21
equally among all of the n∗partners. Therefore BP
core(n∗) > 0, meaning that
there are at least n∗partners promoting in any pure-strategy equilibrium in
the core model. Therefore, since the platform’s expected proﬁt increases in the
number of followers being exposed to the product (as both in the core and se-
quential mechanisms the same M is used), the pure-strategy equilibrium with
the core mechanism oﬀers at least the same expected proﬁt as the SPNE of
the sequential mechanism.
4.3 Using Dynamic Commission
Proposition 3 suggests that when the commission oﬀered is ﬁxed, other than
solving the multi-equilibria problem the sequential mechanism oﬀers no ad-
vantage, e.g., in terms of the platform’s expected proﬁt. Fortunately, the se-
quential mechanism can be further revised in a way that its SPNE will yield
the same expected proﬁt as the equilibrium associated with the maximum ex-
pected proﬁt in the core mechanism. This is achieved by replacing the ﬁxed
commission M with a changing commission (“dynamic commission”), such
that the ith approaching partner will receive a commission Mi ∀i ≤N (see
Figure 12). By properly setting the dynamic commission, the platform can
take over the entire partners’ surplus.
Fig. 12: Pictorial representation of the Sequential Mechanism with a Dynamic
Commission Structure.

22
Suryanarayana et al.
Theorem 1 The sequential mechanism with dynamic commission will result
in an SPNE with the maximum expected proﬁt to the platform when setting the
commission for the ith querying partner to Mi = min(
c
Exposemarginal(i)pB , G).14
Furthermore, the platform’s expected proﬁt with this SPNE will be at least
as high as with any pure-strategy Nash equilibrium in the core mechanism. In
particular, when the platform has full control over M in the core mechanism,
the expected proﬁt with the SPNE of the sequential dynamic mechanism will
be equal to the expected proﬁt obtained with the pure-strategy Nash equilibrium
yielding the maximum expected proﬁt in the core mechanism.
Proof. First we prove that oﬀering a commission min(
c
Exposemarginal(i)pB , G)
to the ith querying partner is optimal in the sequential mechanism. Assume
otherwise, i.e., the platform uses a diﬀerent commission structure. Obviously,
any commission structure oﬀering partner i a commission Mi > G is not
optimal. This is because by using Mi = G and restructuring the remaining
N −i commissions the platform gains twice: First, it gains from the reduction
in Mi—the only possible change in partner Pi’s strategy is deciding not to
promote in case she was promoting with the former scheme (as the commissions
oﬀered decreases), hence the platform will avoid the loss Mi −G. As for the
remaining N −i partners, the strategic situation for the platform has improved
- having Pi opt not to promote increases the expected proﬁt of each of the
other partners if choosing to promote, though the platform can extract at least
the same expected proﬁt from these partners by optimizing their commissions.
Therefore, we only consider cases where a commission other than Mi =
c
Exposemarginal(i)pB < G is used. Consider the ﬁrst partner Pi for which a com-
mission M ′
i < Mi =
c
Exposemarginal(i)pB (and yet M ′
i < G) is used. Since every
partner Pj<i encountered earlier in the sequence has been oﬀered a commis-
sion Mj, her best-response strategy is to promote (since the gain from the
promotion is equal to the cost of promotion (see Equation 9)). Hence all prior
i −1 partners have promoted. Therefore Pi’s best response is not to promote.
Now replace the commission oﬀered to any partner Pj>i−1,j̸=N by the com-
mission oﬀered in the original scheme to partner Pj+1. The strategic situation
for partners Pi, ..., PN−1 is the same as the strategic situation for partners
Pi+1, ..., PN with the original commission scheme (given that Pi opts not to
promote with the original scheme). Hence the platform’s expected proﬁt re-
mains the same. At this point the platform can potentially further improve its
expected proﬁt, by optimizing the commission to PN. Therefore the proposed
revised scheme weakly dominates the original one.
Now consider the ﬁrst partner Pi for which a commission M ′
i > Mi =
c
Exposemarginal(i)pB (and yet M ′
i < G) is used. Here, reducing the commission
14 To be completely accurate, any other commission function according to which a subset of
j arriving partners, where j is the integer part of the solution j′ to
c
Exposemarginal(j′)pB =
G, are being oﬀered
c
Exposemarginal(l)pB (where l is their order of arrival within the se-
quence) and the remaining partners being oﬀered zero will result in the same expected
proﬁt in its SPNE.

Information Design in Aﬃliate Marketing
23
to Mi will not change the decision of Pi, as her gain remains non-negative.
Consequently, none of the remaining partners will change their promotion
decision and the platform’s gain will increase. Therefore, a commission scheme
diﬀerent than the one given in the theorem is necessarily not optimal.
Next, we show that for any pure-strategy equilibrium with i promoting
partners (that results in zero proﬁt, as only equilibria of these types need to
be considered according to Proposition 1) in the core mechanism, the plat-
form can achieve the exact same expected proﬁt in the sequential mechanism
by using commissions
c
Exposemarginal(i)pB for the ﬁrst i participating partners
and G for the remaining ones. The expected proﬁt from those receiving a com-
mission
c
Exposemarginal(i)pB is the same as with the core mechanism as in both
cases we obtain i promoting partners and the commission they receive equals
their costs. The expected proﬁt from those oﬀered a commission G is zero.
The expected proﬁt with the sequential mechanism can be further improved
by switching to the commission structure dictated by Theorem 1, as we are ei-
ther giving up on partners yielding a negative expected marginal proﬁt (when
c
Exposemarginal(i)pB > G) or adding partners yielding a positive proﬁt (when
c
Exposemarginal(i)pB < G). This, together with Proposition 1, suggests that the
sequential mechanism will result with at least the same expected proﬁt as the
core mechanism.
Finally, we show that when the expected-proﬁt-maximizing M value is
used in the core mechanism, the resulting pure-strategy equilibrium yields the
same expected proﬁt as the proﬁt obtained with the sequential model. This
derives from the fact that in the core mechanism for any i ≤N there is a
pure-strategy equilibrium in which there are i partners promoting (and the
others do not) where the expected proﬁt of all partners is zero. Therefore, if
picking the M value that results in i-promoting-partners equilibrium such that
i is the highest number of partners for which
c
Exposemarginal(i)pB < G in the
sequential mechanism, we get the same number of promoting partners with
both mechanisms and the expected sum of commissions paid in both equals
c · i. Therefore the platform’s expected proﬁt in both is equal.
The expected proﬁt of the platform is therefore (setting the commission
using Theorem 1):
Bplatform
seq
=
N
X
i=1
Exposemarginal(i)(G −Mi)pB
(10)
Corollary 1 The sequential mechanism with ﬁxed commission is dominated
by the sequential mechanism with dynamic commission, as far as the platform’s
expected proﬁt is concerned.
The proof is straightforward, joining Proposition 3 and Theorem 1.
The improvement achieved with dynamic commission structure compared
to ﬁxed commission structure is highly aﬀected by the network structure, in
particular the connectivity level (i.e., the number of partners each follower

24
Suryanarayana et al.
is connected to). In general as the connectivity increases the platform can
reach a greater number of unique followers for each given number of promot-
ing partners. With the core mechanism, this is the sole inﬂuence over expected
proﬁt. This is also the case with the sequential mechanism whenever using dy-
namic commission, as the platform is taking over the entire partners’ expected
proﬁt. With the ﬁxed-commission sequential mechanism, there is an additional
inﬂuence associated with the increase in network connectivity—the increased
connectivity results in a greater disparity in individual partner, favoring those
that are ﬁrst in the sequence. This latter phenomena has a negative eﬀect, as
when the commission is ﬁxed, in order to incentivize partner i to promote,
the oﬀered (ﬁxed) commission needs to be increased, resulting in a decreased
expected proﬁt for the platform.
To illustrate, we provide two diﬀerent scenarios in which connectivity in-
creases in the form of increasing the maximum number of shared partners each
follower is associated with (keeping the actual number of shared connections
uniform between 1 and the maximum number). The two scenarios diﬀer in the
assumption used regarding the total population size. In the ﬁrst, we keep the
number of followers per partner constant, hence an increase in connectivity
leads to a decrease in the total population size. In the second scenario, we
keep the total size of the population constant, hence an increase in connectiv-
ity requires an increase in the number of followers per partner. Both scenario
use the parameters (N = 50, k = ∗, M = ∗, c = 10, G = 15, pB = 0.1, pW (w) =
1/Nmax∀w ∈1...Nmax), where Nmax is the maximum number of partners to
whom a follower can be connected. For the ﬁrst scenario we use k = 40 whereas
for the second we set the population size to 350 and calculate k accordingly.
The commission used is the expected-proﬁt-maximizing one.
For both scenarios we analyze the two variants of the sequential mechanism
(ﬁxed versus dynamic commission). For the ﬁrst scenario we introduce Figure
13 which depicts the platform’s expected proﬁt as a function of the maximum
number of partners to whom a follower can be connected (keeping the number
of followers per partner in the network ﬁxed).
From the ﬁgure we observe that indeed as given in Corollary 1, the resulting
SPNE with a ﬁxed commission is dominated by the resulting SPNE with the
dynamic commission structure. The general behavior of both curves reﬂect a
decrease in the platform’s expected proﬁt as the number of shared partners a
follower has increases. This results from the fact that partners become more
reluctant to promote as with the increase in network density, the percentage of
their followers that will ﬁrst receive the promotion from them decreases. With
the ﬁxed commission, there is an additional eﬀect taking place - the increase
in the number of shared partners a follower has, results in a greater disparity
in the proﬁt of the diﬀerent partners. This is illustrated in right-hand-side
graph which depicts the portion (in percentages) of each partner’s proﬁt out
of the total partners’ proﬁt as a function of its position in the sequence. As
can be seen from the right graph, the denser the network, the greater is the
inequality in individual proﬁt—the platform needs to pay substantially more in
order to incentivize any additional partner-promotion. Therefore the platform

Information Design in Aﬃliate Marketing
25
Fig. 13: Platform’s expected proﬁt when using the sequential mechanism with
dynamic vs. ﬁxed commissions structure (left) and the distribution of partner’s
proﬁts according to their position in the sequence when using ﬁxed commission
structure (right) as a function of the network connectivity (reﬂected by the
maximum number of shared partners a follower has).
ends up using a commission that incentivizes a smaller number of partners to
promote, ending up in a smaller expected proﬁt. The diﬀerence between the
expected proﬁt with the two mechanisms ﬁrst increases and then decreases as
connectivity increases. The increase is explained by the decrease in the number
of unique followers reached with each additional promoting partner and the
increase in the proﬁt partners secure for themselves when promoting, as the
connectivity increases. The decrease results from the decrease in the number of
partners that eventually promote with both schemes, as connectivity increases.
An opposite trend is illustrated in Figure 14, which uses the second sce-
nario speciﬁed above, i.e., diﬀers only in the assumption made regarding the
population size (keeping it ﬁxed and only makes the diﬀerent adaptations in
the number of followers assigned to each partner). Here, the proﬁt increases
as the connectivity increases. This is attributed to the ability to reach more
unique followers with each promotion, due to the increase in the number of
followers each partner has. Regardless of the behavior of the expected proﬁt,
we observe here also that, as given in Corollary 1, the ﬁxed-commission-based
mechanism is dominated by the dynamic one.
While Theorem 1 proves that the sequential mechanism guarantees the
maximum expected proﬁt that can be obtained with pure-strategy equilibria
in the core mechanism, the choice of using the former will depend on whether
or not it also dominates mixed-strategy equilibria of the latter. Theorem 2
proves that indeed such domination holds.
Theorem 2 Any mixed strategy equilibrium of the core mechanism is strictly
dominated (as far as the platform’s expected proﬁt is concerned) by the SPNE
of the sequential mechanism with dynamic commission.

26
Suryanarayana et al.
Fig. 14: Platform’s expected proﬁt when using the sequential mechanism with
dynamic vs. ﬁxed commissions structure (left) and the distribution of partner’s
proﬁts according to their position in the sequence when using ﬁxed commission
structure (right) as a function of the network connectivity (reﬂected by the
maximum number of shared partners a follower has).
Proof. A mixed equilibrium results in an induced distribution over the num-
ber of promoting partners, as captured in (5). The expected overall cost
incurred by the partners when i ≤N of them choose to promote is c · i
and consequently the expected overall cost given the induced distribution
is PN
i=0
 N
i

pi(1 −p)N−ic · i. Recall that the expected proﬁt of any part-
ner Pi which mixes between promoting and not promoting is zero. Mean-
ing that the expected commission payment made by the platform, accord-
ing to (5), is equal to the overall expected cost for the partners, formally:
PN
i=0
 N
i

pi(1−p)N−ic·i = PN
i=0
 N
i

pi(1−p)N−iExpose(i)·MpB. Therefore
the platforms’ expected proﬁt can be expressed as:
Bplatform
core
(p) =
N
X
i=0
N
i

pi(1 −p)N−i(Expose(i)GpB −c · i).
(11)
Now consider the expected proﬁt with the sequential mechanism with dy-
namic commission. Here as well the platform fully covers the promoting part-
ners’ expected cost, which equals c · i, and its expected gain is Expose(i)GpB.
However, unlike with the mixed equilibrium case, here the platform gets to
explicitly choose the number of partners i that will promote, through the
structure of the commission it oﬀers. Formally, it chooses an i that maximizes
Expose(i)GpB −c · i.
Consider a random variable X = Expose(i)GpB −c · i where 0 ≤i ≤N
which follows a binomial distribution with parameters N and p. Since the ex-
pected value of a binomial random variable is generally less the maximum value
assumed by the random variable, ﬁnally, we obtain that maxi(Expose(i)GpB−
c·i) > PN
i=0
 N
i

pi(1−p)N−i(Expose(i)GpB−c·i), i.e., the expected proﬁt with

Information Design in Aﬃliate Marketing
27
the sequential mechanism is greater than with the mixed strategy equilibrium
of the core mechanism.
Notice that the above proof also holds for the case where a non-symmetric
mixed-strategy equilibrium is used in the core mechanism, and even for the
case where some of the partners use pure strategy and some mix. In both cases
we still get a distribution over the number of participating partners. The only
diﬀerence is that those partners using a pure strategy in the core mechanism
are actually making a positive proﬁt (i.e., requiring a greater payment from
the platform’s side). Everything else in the proof remains the same.
Theorem 2 has two important implications. First, since according to The-
orem 1 the SPNE of the sequential mechanism provides the same expected
proﬁt as the best pure-strategy Nash equilibrium of the core mechanism, and
as the former dominates any mixed-strategy equilibrium that holds in the core
mechanism, then when having full control over the commission oﬀered M, the
platform will always prefer a pure-strategy Nash equilibrium over any mixed-
strategy equilibrium. This is illustrated in Figure 15 which depicts the proﬁt
of the core mechanism with the pure and mixed strategies as a function of the
cost of promotion c, for a setting (N = 50, k = 25, M ∗, c = ∗, G = 15, pB =
0.1, pW (w) = 1/N ∀w ∈1...N) when the proﬁt-maximizing commission M ∗
is used with each of the mechanisms. From the ﬁgure we observe that indeed
the pure-strategy equilibrium yields a higher expected proﬁt compared to the
mixed-strategy one.
Fig. 15: The platform’s expected proﬁt under diﬀerent equilibria, for diﬀerent
promotion cost c values, when using the proﬁt-maximizing commission.
The diﬀerence between the expected proﬁt with the pure-strategy and
mixed-strategy equilibria is small with relatively high and low promotion costs.
This is attributed to the induced probability distribution over the number of
promoting partners. With low and high costs, the variance is relatively small,

28
Suryanarayana et al.
as the distribution is highly skewed. Therefore the expected number of pro-
moting partners in mixed-strategy equilibrium is quite similar to the number
of promoting partners in pure-strategy equilibrium. For other costs, the vari-
ance is quite substantial, resulting in performance degradation compared to
the pure-strategy case.
Also, the pure-strategy equilibrium with the highest proﬁt has the same
number of promoting partners as that of the sequential mechanism with a
dynamic commission structure which leads us to the second implication of
Theorem 2 which is that the platform can guarantee highest proﬁt of the pure-
strategy Nash equilibrium simply by switching to the sequential mechanism
with the dynamic commissions. We note that even in cases where the platform
is forced to use the core mechanism, the sequential mechanism can be used to
facilitate the calculation of the M value that will maximize the expected proﬁt
of the platform if the pure-strategy equilibrium is to be used. Simply solve (3)
taking i to be the integer part of the solution to
c
Exposemarginal(i)pB = G. The
latter i value is the number of promoting partners according to the sequential
mechanism with dynamic commission. Therefore solving (3) with that i will
guarantee the use of the pure-strategy equilibrium that results in the same
expected proﬁt as the one achieved with the latter mechanism, and according
to Theorem 1 it is the expected-proﬁt maximizing equilibrium.
5 Discussion and Conclusions
With tech giants like Twitter realizing the ramiﬁcations of small changes in
mechanism design [29] and as aﬃliate marketing is becoming an established
key source of online income for hundreds of thousands over the internet, the
choice of the mechanism according to which it should be managed becomes
more acute. The importance of the equilibrium analysis provided in this paper
is in being the ﬁrst, to the best of our knowledge, to model the participants of
aﬃliate marketing as self-interested agents and to consider the strategic choices
of partners in aﬃliate marketing while taking into account the complete set
of inﬂuencing factors that hold in real-life. These include the information dis-
closed by the platform, the promotion costs and the possible overlap between
the followers, as is the case of social networks. In fact, this is the ﬁrst attempt
to study information design in the context of aﬃliate marketing.
The analysis is split into three main parts, namely, the core mechanism,
the sequential mechanism and a dynamic pricing extension to the sequential
mechanism. The core mechanism models aﬃliate marketing as it is done to-
day, with a pre-determined ﬁxed commission oﬀered to the partners and with
no other information revealed to them. The sequential mechanism proposes
a minor change in information disclosure where the number of times a given
listing is viewed is revealed to every partner considering the opportunity. Fi-
nally, the dynamic pricing extension to the sequential mechanism proposes a
pricing mechanism where the commission oﬀered to the partner is based on
her position in the sequence.

Information Design in Aﬃliate Marketing
29
The theoretical analysis is complemented by various numerical investiga-
tions revealing much insight related to the eﬀect of the network structure
(number of followers and distribution of shared followers) as well as various
other model parameters (the promotion cost and oﬀered commission) over the
platform’s expected proﬁt.
The proposed mechanism, according to which information about the num-
ber of times an opportunity has been reviewed is disclosed to the partners and
the commission oﬀered is dynamic, is both easy to implement and encapsulates
several important inherent advantages. The primary advantage is of course the
guarantee to obtain an expected proﬁt that equals the one obtained with the
most proﬁtable equilibrium among those that hold in the core mechanism in
a multi-equilibria scenario. Others relate to computational aspects and the
nature of the equilibrium (SPNE vs. NE). Furthermore, the sequential mech-
anism does not require the platform to determine an order in which partners
review opportunities. Instead, they are serviced based on the order of arrival,
hence no fairness issues arise.
We note that an alternative way for enforcing the expected-proﬁt maxi-
mizing pure-strategy equilibrium in the core mechanism is to simply limit the
number of partners who can promote (and set the commission accordingly,
such that all promoting partners end up with no proﬁt), as discussed in the
former section. Yet, limiting the number of partners that can promote a given
product is probably less appealing for the platform compared to simply pro-
viding information on how many have already reviewed the opportunity, as
it may make partners reluctant to subscribe to the platform (which is bad,
especially when some subscription fee is charged, as in some of the platforms).
Indeed, much like in many other game-theoretic analyses of markets, our
model relies on the assumption that partners are a priori homogeneous. The
extension to the heterogeneous case is mostly technical and does not add
much in terms of insights. The extraction of the equilibrium is quite the same,
with the only change required being the assignment of a diﬀerent promotion
probability to diﬀerent partners and some basic adaptation in the way the
number of followers being exposed to the promotion is being calculated. With
heterogeneous partners, however, two new challenges arise. The ﬁrst is com-
putational one, as equilibrium calculation becomes combinatorial. The second
is the ordering used in the sequential mechanism. While this latter factor has
no inﬂuence in the a priori homogeneous case, it has a great inﬂuence once
the partners are heterogeneous. Consequently, we can quite easily construct
settings where the sequential mechanism is inferior to the core mechanism and
vice-versa.
We see many directions for extending this work. One natural direction is
the analysis of multi-platform competition. This may become especially im-
portant as many platforms nowadays are becoming exclusive (due to contracts
with manufacturers). A tangential direction for future research is the analysis
of aﬃliate marketing where the cost of promotion c varies as a probability
distribution in a cost range. Another interesting direction for future empirical
research —correlating the theoretical results with empirical ﬁndings related to

30
Suryanarayana et al.
the commissions used, the eﬀort associated with promoting and the structure
of the social network in real-world settings. With aﬃliate marketing being
a largely internet-based marketing strategy, we also hope that our analysis
sparks interest on research on aﬃliate marketing in the domain of multi-agent
systems where automated agents help the platforms reﬁne their commission
structure and reap higher proﬁts while similar automated agents can help
the partners take more informed decisions on whether or not to promote the
product.
Acknowledgements Preliminary results of this research appear in Proceedings of the First
International Conference on Distributed Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DAI’19). This research has
been partly supported by the ISRAEL SCIENCE FOUNDATION (grants No. 1162/17 and
1958/20) and the EU project TAILOR under Grant 992215.
References
1. Ak¸cura, M.T.: Aﬃliated marketing. Information Systems and e-Business Management
8(4), 379–394 (2010)
2. Amarasekara, B.R., Mathrani, A.: Controlling risks and fraud in aﬃliate marketing:
A simulation and testing environment. In: 2016 14th Annual Conference on Privacy,
Security and Trust (PST), pp. 353–360. IEEE (2016)
3. Audrezet, A., de Kerviler, G., Moulard, J.G.: Authenticity under threat: When social
media inﬂuencers need to go beyond self-presentation. Journal of business research 117,
557–569 (2020)
4. Avagyan, V.: Marketing strategies for enhancing word of mouth: sales acceleration and
aﬃliate programs. Ph.D. thesis, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid (2012)
5. Ballestar, M.T., Grau-Carles, P., Sainz, J.: Customer segmentation in e-commerce: Ap-
plications to the cashback business model. Journal of Business Research 88, 407–414
(2018)
6. Benediktova, B., Nevosad, L.: Aﬃliate marketing: Perspective of content providers. Mas-
ter’s thesis, Department of Business Administration and Social Sciences, Lulea Univer-
sity of Technology (2008)
7. Bhattacharya, S., Roy, A., Kumar, S., Wattal, S.: Search engine advertising strategies
when contracting with an online search infomediary: A game-theoretic model
8. Chachra, N., Savage, S., Voelker, G.M.: Aﬃliate crookies: Characterizing aﬃliate mar-
keting abuse. In: Proceedings of the 2015 Internet Measurement Conference, pp. 41–47.
ACM (2015)
9. Cheng, P., Chen, L., Ye, J.: Cooperation-aware task assignment in spatial crowdsourc-
ing. In: 2019 IEEE 35th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), pp.
1442–1453. IEEE (2019)
10. Cheng, P., Xin, H., Chen, L.: Utility-aware ridesharing on road networks. In: Proceed-
ings of the 2017 ACM International Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD
’17, p. 1197–1210. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2017).
DOI 10.1145/3035918.3064008. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3035918.3064008
11. Daniele, R., Frew, A.J., Varini, K., Magakian, A.: Aﬃliate marketing in travel and
tourism. Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2009 pp. 343–354
(2009)
12. Dayama, P., Karnik, A., Narahari, Y.: Optimal incentive timing strategies for product
marketing on social networks.
In: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems-Volume 2, pp. 703–710. International
Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (2012)
13. Devari, A., Nikolaev, A.G., He, Q.: Crowdsourcing the last mile delivery of online orders
by exploiting the social networks of retail store customers. Transportation Research Part
E: Logistics and Transportation Review 105, 105–122 (2017)

Information Design in Aﬃliate Marketing
31
14. Doles,
B.:
How
to
capitalise
on
the
gig
economy
(2019).
URL
https://www.tune.com/blog/how-to-capitalize-on-the-gig-economy/
15. Duﬀy, D.L.: Aﬃliate marketing and its impact on e-commerce. Journal of Consumer
Marketing 22(3), 161–163 (2005)
16. Dwivedi, Y.K., Rana, N.P., Alryalat, M.A.A.: Aﬃliate marketing: An overview and
analysis of emerging literature. The Marketing Review 17(1), 33–50 (2017)
17. Edelman, B., Brandi, W.: Risk, information, and incentives in online aﬃliate marketing.
Journal of Marketing Research 52(1), 1–12 (2015)
18. Emek, Y., Karidi, R., Tennenholtz, M., Zohar, A.: Mechanisms for multi-level marketing.
In: Proceedings of the 12th ACM conference on Electronic commerce, pp. 209–218. ACM
(2011)
19. Fagan,
C.:
How
the
ﬁnancial
diet
actually
makes
money
(2017).
URL
https://theﬁnancialdiet.com/how-the-ﬁnancial-diet-actually-makes-money/
20. Fainmesser, I.P., Galeotti, A.: The market for online inﬂuence. Johns Hopkins Carey
Business School Research Paper (18-13) (2019)
21. Fainmesser, I.P., Galeotti, A.: Pricing network eﬀects: Competition.
Johns Hopkins
Carey Business School Research Paper (17-08) (2019)
22. Fiore, F., Collins, S., Foreword By-Marciano, J.L.: Successful aﬃliate marketing for
merchants. Que Corp. (2001)
23. Garnefeld, I., Eggert, A., Helm, S.V., Tax, S.S.: Growing existing customers’ revenue
streams through customer referral programs. Journal of Marketing 77(4), 17–32 (2013)
24. Guo, Z.: Optimal decision making for online referral marketing. Decision Support Sys-
tems 52(2), 373–383 (2012)
25. Ho, Y.C.C., Ho, Y.J.I., Tan, Y.: Online cashback pricing: a new aﬃliate strategy for
e-business. In: Proceedings of the 34th international conference on information systems
(ICIS) (2013)
26. Hoﬀman, D., Novak, T.: How to acquire customers on the web?
Harvard Business
Review 78, 179–88, 218 (2000)
27. Huws, U., Spencer, N., Joyce, S.: Crowd work in europe: Preliminary results from a
survey in the uk, sweden, germany, austria and the netherlands (2016)
28. Ipeirotis, P.G., Provost, F., Wang, J.: Quality management on amazon mechanical turk.
In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD workshop on human computation, pp. 64–67
(2010)
29. Jackson,
L.,
Ibekwe,
D.:
Jack
dorsey
on
twitter’s
mistakes
(2020).
URL
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/08/07/podcasts/the-daily/Jack-dorsey-twitter-
trump.html
30. Kempe, D., Kleinberg, J., Tardos, ´E.: Maximizing the spread of inﬂuence through a
social network. In: Proceedings of the ninth ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 137–146. ACM (2003)
31. Lee, K., Webb, S., Ge, H.: The dark side of micro-task marketplaces: Characterizing
ﬁverr and automatically detecting crowdturﬁng. In: Proceedings of the International
AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, vol. 8 (2014)
32. Li, B., Hao, D., Zhao, D., Zhou, T.: Mechanism design in social networks.
In: Pro-
ceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 586–592
(2017)
33. Libai, B., Biyalogorsky, E., Gerstner, E.: Setting referral fees in aﬃliate marketing.
Journal of Service Research 5(4), 303–315 (2003)
34. Liu, Y., Guo, B., Du, H., Yu, Z., Zhang, D., Chen, C.: Poster: Foodnet: Optimized on
demand take-out food delivery using spatial crowdsourcing. In: Proceedings of the 23rd
Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, pp. 564–566
(2017)
35. Lobel, I., Sadler, E., Varshney, L.R.: Customer referral incentives and social media.
Management Science 63(10), 3514–3529 (2016)
36. Ma, M.: Performance-based marketing on the internet. AMCIS 2006 Proceedings p. 225
(2006)
37. Maile, F.L.: Artiﬁcial intelligence and big data in aﬃliate marketing: A deep dive into
the tools, techniques, and opportunities. Master’s thesis, University of Applied Sciences
Aalen (2018)

32
Suryanarayana et al.
38. Malik, Z.K., Fyfe, C., Crowe, M.: Priority recommendation system in an aﬃliate net-
work. Journal of Emerging Technologies in Web Intelligence 5(3), 222–229 (2013)
39. Mariussen, A., Daniele, R., Bowie, D.: Unintended consequences in the evolution of
aﬃliate marketing networks: a complexity approach. The Service Industries Journal
30(10), 1707–1722 (2010)
40. Mathur, A., Narayanan, A., Chetty, M.: Endorsements on social media: An empirical
study of aﬃliate marketing disclosures on youtube and pinterest. Proceedings of the
ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2(CSCW), 1–26 (2018)
41. Mazurek, G., Kucia, M.: Potential of aﬃliate marketing. In: International Conference
Management of Technological Changes, vol. 7, pp. 1–4 (2011)
42. Mizuno, M.: How consumer-generated advertising works: An empirical agent-based sim-
ulation. In: Advances in computational social science, pp. 17–29. Springer (2014)
43. Mordkovich, B., Mordkovich, E.: Pay-per-click search engine marketing handbook: low
cost strategies to attracting new customers using Google, Yahoo & other search engines.
Lulu. com (2005)
44. Morris, N.: Understanding digital marketing: Marketing strategies for engaging the dig-
ital generation. Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice 10(4), 384–387
(2009). DOI 10.1057/dddmp.2009.7. URL https://doi.org/10.1057/dddmp.2009.7
45. Nash, J.: Non-cooperative games. Annals of mathematics pp. 286–295 (1951)
46. Olbrich, R., Schultz, C.D., Bormann, P.M.: The eﬀect of social media and advertis-
ing activities on aﬃliate marketing. International Journal of Internet Marketing and
Advertising 13(1), 47–72 (2019)
47. Papatla, P., Bhatnagar, A.: Choosing the right mix of on-line aﬃliates: How do you
select the best? Journal of Advertising 31(3), 69–81 (2002)
48. Patrick, Z., Hee, O.C.: Factors inﬂuencing the intention to use aﬃliate marketing: A
conceptual analysis. International Journal of Academic Research in Business and Social
Sciences 9(2) (2019)
49. Pei, A., Mayzlin, D.: Inﬂuencing the inﬂuencers. Available at SSRN 3376904 (2019)
50. Ryan, D.: Understanding Digital Marketing: Marketing Strategies for Engaging the
Digital Generation. Kogan Page Publishers (2016)
51. Schmitt, P., Skiera, B., den Bulte, C.V.: Referral programs and customer value.
Journal
of
Marketing
75(1),
46–59
(2011).
DOI
10.1509/jm.75.1.46.
URL
https://doi.org/10.1509/jm.75.1.46
52. Schomer, A.: E-commerce in digital media, business insider intelligence report (2018)
53. Sen, I., Aggarwal, A., Mian, S., Singh, S., Kumaraguru, P., Datta, A.: Worth its
weight in likes: Towards detecting fake likes on instagram. In: Proceedings of the 10th
ACM Conference on Web Science, WebSci ’18, p. 205–209. Association for Comput-
ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2018).
DOI 10.1145/3201064.3201105.
URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3201064.3201105
54. Snyder, P., Kanich, C.: No please, after you: Detecting fraud in aﬃliate marketing
networks. In: Proceedings of the Workshop on the Economics of Information Security
(2015)
55. Tang, S.: Proﬁt-driven team grouping in social networks. In: Thirty-First AAAI Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (2017)
56. Taylor, M., Marsh, G., Nicol, D., Broadbent, P.: Good work: The taylor review of
modern working practices (2017)
57. Wolves,
F.:
14
gig
economy
jobs
to
make
money
(2020).
URL
https://ﬁnancialwolves.com/gig-economy-jobs/
58. Wood, A.J., Graham, M., Lehdonvirta, V., Hjorth, I.: Good gig, bad gig: autonomy and
algorithmic control in the global gig economy. Work, Employment and Society 33(1),
56–75 (2019)
59. Zenonos, S., Tsirtsis, A., Tsapatsoulis, N.: Twitter inﬂuencers or cheated buy-
ers?
In: 2018 IEEE 16th Intl Conf on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Com-
puting, 16th Intl Conf on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, 4th Intl Conf
on
Big
Data
Intelligence
and
Computing
and
Cyber
Science
and
Technology
Congress(DASC/PiCom/DataCom/CyberSciTech), pp. 236–242 (2018)
60. Zhao, D., Li, B., Xu, J., Hao, D., Jennings, N.R.: Selling multiple items via social
networks. In: Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents
and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 68–76 (2018)

Information Design in Aﬃliate Marketing
33
61. Zhou, Y.W., Cao, B., Tang, Q., Zhou, W.: Pricing and rebate strategies for an e-shop
with a cashback website. European Journal of Operational Research 262(1), 108–122
(2017)

