
AGE OF PROPAGANDA
The Everyday Use and Abuse of Persuasion
REVISED EDITION
ANTHONY R. PRATKANIS and ELLIOT ARONSON
University of California, Santa Cruz

To the memory of my parents, Harry Aronson (1903-1950) and Dorothy
Aronson (1901-1989)
They had a wonderfully innocent, childlike trust that, in this country, almost
everything they read (especially if it was between the covers of a book) was
absolutely true.
E. A.
To my son, Tony T. Pratkanis (born 1991)
Chances are, he will grow up with a healthy skepticism but a regrettable
cynicism about the truth of everything he reads, hears, and sees.
A. R. P.

WHY
WE WROTE THIS BOOK
We are of different generations. One of us (E. A.) was born in 1932 and grew up
during World War II. "At that time, I fervently believed just about everything I
was exposed to in school and in the media.
For example, I knew that all Germans were evil and that all Japanese were
sneaky and treacherous, while all white Americans were clean-cut, honest, fair-
minded, and trusting. Perhaps you had to be eleven years old to take seriously
the racial and national caricatures presented in the war movies of the early
1940s. But in those days, most grown-ups—including my parents (to whom this
book is dedicated)—certainly wanted to believe in the basic message of the war
movies and did, in fact, have a childlike trust in the media. They hung on every
word President Roosevelt said in his famous fireside chats and never dreamed of
questioning the nobility of the motives behind our national policy. They thought
(and so did I) that the purpose of commercial advertising was to inform the
consumer."
The world has taken a few turns since then. A. R. P. grew up during the Vietnam
war and was witness to the blatant lying by public officials of that era. "At the
time, I sat riveted to my television screen, scared to death by the images of death
and destruction beamed into my living room from Vietnam, all the while
learning that politicians only lie when their lips move. I came of age during the
Watergate era when a sitting president, Richard Nixon, was forced to resign
when faced with incontrovertible evidence (some of it supplied by his own tape
recordings) of the lying, dirty tricks, and attempted cover-up that he and his
cronies had perpetrated on the American people. For me, commercials, whether
for different brands of products or different brands of politicians, were
entertainment designed to make someone rich or more powerful."
In the first edition of this book, we lamented the fact that there was no White
House tape recorder in use during the 1980s—so that President Reagan escaped
the consequences of deceiving the American people (and the world) by
subverting the Constitution through the covert sale of arms to Iran and the
diversion of the profits from that sale to support the Nicaraguan Contras.1 We

felt (and continue to feel) it to be a sad commentary on our times that, although
the majority of the American people were furious at Nixon and his cronies, by
the time of the Iran-Contra scandal most Americans seemed to have developed a
more cynical attitude about being deceived and did not seem displeased when
Oliver North, John Poindexter, and President Reagan himself succeeded, for the
most part, in "beating the rap." And now, ho hum, other
investigations come along—the savings and loan debacle, the BCCI crisis, Ruby
Ridge, and various shady campaign contributions given to U.S. politicians of
every stripe. Who cares? Business as usual. Such cynicism carries a price. A
cynical electorate is a lackadaisical electorate, as evidenced by the fact that
fewer than 50% of eligible Americans now bother to vote.
And then there was the world-famous slow-speed chase, the media circus of the
century—the trial of O. J. Simpson.2 An international audience sat riveted to
their TV sets as an army of more than 1,000 credentialed reporters plus untold
media pundits went over and over and over every excruciating detail of the case
and the story—from the cost of the trial to the menu at the Mezzaluna Restaurant
to Marcia Clark's topless vacation on the French Riviera.
CNN alone employed 70 correspondents and 250 legal experts to produce 1,530
hours of O. J. trial coverage and commentary. O. J. trinket vendors made more
than $1 billion selling such treasures as novelty Simpson wrist watches, T-shirts,
orange-scented O. J. air fresheners, and Judge Ito Jell-0 molds. From January 1,
1995, until the week after the verdict, television network news spent twenty-six
hours and fifty minutes, or 13.6% of the available airtime, covering the O. J.
story. That is more time than was devoted to Bosnia (thirteen hours and one
minute), the bombing in Oklahoma City (eight hours and fifty-three minutes),
and the U.S. budget (three hours and thirty-nine minutes)—the other top three
"news"
stories—combined.
And after the O. J. verdict was rendered, what was the news media to do?
The trial had been a cash cow. The coverage was relatively cheap to produce,
garnered great ratings, and brought in top advertising revenues. For example, the
television networks charged advertisers ten times their normal rate for thirty
seconds of commercial time during the O. J. verdict. What would top a juicy,

g
p
j
y,
intriguing trial of a prominent athlete? What would keep the advertising revenue
flowing?
How about an impeachment trial of a U.S. president for sex crimes?
And that is what we watched next. Beginning in January of 1998, the nation's
mass media, particularly its news programming, launched around-the-clock
coverage of stories and speculation about then-President Clinton's sexual
misconduct, especially with a White House intern named Monica Lewinsky.3
The number of jokes told about Bill Clinton on late-night TV soared a whopping
111.3 %
during the year of the saga. An estimated 67.6 million Americans watched
Clinton's televised speech on August 17, 1998, in which he admitted an
inappropriate relationship with Monica Lewinsky. In the month just before this
announcement, the network morning news shows devoted 179 segments to the
Clinton sex scandal and only 56 segments to any other news about the Clinton
administration. Much of this coverage bordered on the hysterical, with rumor
chasing gossip chasing innuendo—much like the coverage of the O. J. trial. For
example, a panelist on CNBC stated that the president had had sex with four
other interns besides Lewinsky, ABC News reported that Clinton and Lewinsky
had been caught in the act, possibly by Secret Service agents, and then the
Dallas Morning News followed up with news that an agent was ready to testify
that he saw the president and Lewinsky engage in a sex act. Of course, these still
unsubstantiated rumors were repeated over and over again by the news media,
giving them an air of respectability. Amidst this media roar, President Clinton
infamously shook his finger at the American public and denied having sex with
"that woman."
What were the reactions of Americans to having their news shows turned into
the "All Monica, All the Time" network? Bill Clinton's approval ratings soared
during the period. Newt Gingrich and others who led the impeachment charge
lost favor with the American public (with some being forced to leave
government because of their own revealed sexual indiscretions). Opinion polls
showed that Americans had lost respect for the news media and did not like the
way the saga was covered. We think the most telling statistic of all is this: QVC,
the "All Shopping, All the Time" TV network posted the second-highest sales
week in its history immediately after the August 17 admission by Clinton.
Apparently, many of those 67.6 million Americans who tuned in to hear Clinton

went channel surfing without delay after the pronouncement and settled on QVC
as an alternative to the "news" coverage. It was as if American citizens were
saying, "I am sick and tired of the blather. I am going shopping."
Something needs to change. The mass media respond to our itch for
entertainment and spectacle and create "news" coverage of the ilk found in the
O. J. Simpson trial and the Monica Lewinsky saga. Such "news"
coverage feeds our cynicism about government and the state of our nation. For
example, consider the media coverage of the 2000 U.S.
presidential election. The campaign was marked by a lack of interest from both
citizens and the news media. However, as soon as a possibly entertaining
spectacle emerged—the recount of votes in Florida—then the networks launched
around-the-clock coverage—coverage that feeds our cynicism that things seem
to be out of control.
The losers are those of us who respect democracy. For while we sat glued to the
trial and the saga, we didn't sit glued to stories covering investigations of
campaign finance violations or providing in-depth analysis of issues of great
importance to our country, such as spiraling health care costs, the continued
proliferation of nuclear weapons at the international level, the shrinking middle
class, the expanding number of children in poverty, and the continued
consolidation of mass media power into the hands of a few large firms. This itch
for entertainment carries a price—the information we need to participate in a
democracy is replaced by trivial entertainment, thus making it harder and harder
for us to carry out our responsibilities as citizens.
We wrote this book because we passionately believe that there are more than
two choices: naive acceptance of the fruits of propaganda on the one hand and
total cynicism combined with a lust for entertainment on the other. During an
age characterized by ever more sophisticated uses of propaganda techniques, it is
important, especially in a democracy, that citizens become informed about these
devices, the psychological dynamics of what makes them effective, and how to
counteract their effectiveness without withdrawing into abject cynicism. That's
what this book is about. We are researchers who have been studying the nuts and
bolts of persuasion techniques for a combined total of more than fifty years—
and we believe we know something about what works and what doesn't work
and why. Moreover, we believe we know something about how to guard against

the abuse of these techniques by unscrupulous communicators—including
(especially) those unscrupulous communicators who might be running for the
highest political offices in the land.
In addition, our experience has led us to understand the difference between
persuasion and propaganda. Thus, this book also contains advice for those of you
who might want to be effective communicators in ways that are honest and
above-board. We believe that, in an age of propaganda, the most important thing
for the survival of democracy is the existence of communicators who know how
to present their message clearly and fairly, coupled with an informed electorate
that knows the difference between a fair presentation and a con job. It is toward
achieving these ends that we wrote this book.
As with any effort of this size, there are a number of people who should be
thanked. First, we would like to thank all the readers of the first edition of this
book who bothered to mail us their opinions or who corresponded with us via
interactive media such as talk radio and the Internet. In this revision, we sought
to respond to your comments by clarifying a misleading or inaccurate point or
even revising our opinion. In addition to these changes, we have also updated the
research (where appropriate), added new chapters on issues of concern to readers
(e.g., the use of hypocrisy in persuasion, what to do about propaganda), and
updated our examples of propaganda.
Some people deserve special thanks. Vera Aronson, Mahzarin Banaji, Susan
Brennan, Jonathan Cobb, Peter Far-quhar, Erika Goldman, Craig Leve, Nathan
Maccoby, Richard Petty and the Ohio State Research Group on Attitudes and
Persuasion, Rosemarie Pratkanis, Michael Santos, Carol Tavris, and our students
at the University of California, Santa Cruz, provided helpful comments. Marlene
Turner provided continuous, invaluable feedback as the book was being written.
 

1
Our Age of Propaganda
In the early 1990s, seventeen-year-old Demetrick James Walker was
sentenced to life in prison for killing a sixteen-year-old. The reason for the
slaying: Demetrick so badly wanted a pair of $125 Nike Air Jordans like
the ones he had seen on TV that he put a .22-caliber pistol to the head of
Johnny Bates, pulled the trigger, and walked off with a new pair of high-
tops. During the trial, Houston prosecutor Mark Vinson placed some of the
blame on the images created by advertising. Said Vinson, "It's bad when
we create an image of luxury about athletic gear that it forces people to kill
over it."1
The 1990 North Carolina U.S. Senate race was one of the most heated—
and expensive—political contests in recent years. Going into the last
weeks of the campaign, the black Democratic challenger, Harvey Gantt,
held a slight lead in the polls over the white Republican incumbent, Jesse
Helms. Eight days before the election, Helms broadcast an ad dubbed
"White Hands." The spot, created by political consultant Alex Castellanos,
showed a pair of white hands crumpling a letter of rejection. The voice-
over: "You needed that job, but they had to give it to a minority because of
racial quotas. Is that really fair?" Although Gantt was on record as opposed
to quotas, the spot appears to have had its intended effect: Helms squeaked
through and by a slim margin was reelected to the Senate, supported by a
huge majority in white precincts. The tactic worked so well that Helms did
it again in his 1996 rematch with Gantt; this time Helms accused Gantt of
being the recipient of preferential treatment in the awarding of contracts.2
In the 2000 U.S. presidential election, Alex Castellanos again achieved
notoriety when he produced a 30-second ad for the Republican National
Committee. This ad contained the word RATS subliminally flashed across
the television screen.
Some years ago, CBS aired the film Cry Rape. Essentially, the story made

it clear that a rape victim who chooses to press charges against her attacker
runs the risk of undergoing an ordeal that may be as harrowing as the rape
itself. In this case the rapist, exuding boyish innocence, presented a
convincing argument to the effect that he had been seduced by the woman.
During the next few weeks, there was a sharp decrease in the number of
rapes reported by victims to the police—apparently because victims, taking
their cue from the television movie, feared the police would not believe
them.
In October 1982, when seven people in the Chicago area died after taking
Tylenol headache capsules laced with cyanide, the event was widely
publicized by the national news media. Indeed, for several days it was
difficult to turn on the TV or radio, or pick up a newspaper, without
encountering the Tylenol poisonings. The effects of this prominent
coverage were immediate: Similar poisonings were reported in cities
across the country, involving the contamination of mouthwash, eyedrops,
nasal spray, soda pop, even hot dogs.
Dramatically billed as "copycat poisonings," these incidents, in turn, received
widespread media attention. The public reaction spiralled: Many people
panicked, seeking medical aid for burns and poisonings when they suffered from
no more than common sore throats and stomachaches. False alarms outnumbered
actual cases of product tampering by 7 to 1.
What do Demetrick James Walker, the voters of North Carolina, rape victims,
and, indeed, anyone who has ever watched television or read a newspaper or
magazine have in common? Every time we turn on the radio or television, every
time we open a book, magazine, or newspaper, someone is trying to educate us,
to convince us to buy a product, to persuade us to vote for a candidate or to
subscribe to some version of what is right, true, or beautiful. This aim is most
obvious in advertising: Manufacturers of nearly identical products (aspirins, for
example, or toothpastes, or detergents, or political candidates) spend vast
amounts of money to persuade us to buy the product in their package. Influence

need not be so blatant—the impact of television news shows and programs such
as Cry Rape, for instance, extends far beyond their most obvious effects as
documentaries or dramatizations. This influence can be very subtle indeed, even
unintentional. As the response to the movie about rape aptly illustrates, even
when communicators are not directly attempting to sell us something, they can
succeed in influencing the way we look at the world and the way we respond to
important events in our lives. The purpose of this book is to look at the nature of
persuasion in our everyday life—to understand how it influences our behavior,
how we can protect ourselves from unwanted propaganda, and how we can
ultimately come to use persuasion wisely.
A Glut of Influence
The primary vehicle for many persuasive appeals is the mass media. The
statistics on the pervasiveness of the mass media are startling.3Communications
is a $400-billion-plus industry with $206 billion spent on mass communications,
that is, communications produced and distributed in identical form to people in
different locations. In the United States, there are 1,449 television stations and
four major networks, 10,379 radio stations, 1,509 daily newspapers and 7,047
weekly newspapers, more than 17,000 magazines and newsletters, and nine
major film studios. Americans have ample opportunity to consume mass media
messages, and consume they do. Each year the typical American watches 1,550
hours of TV, listens to 1,160 hours of radio on one of 530 million radio sets, and
spends 180 hours reading 94 pounds of newspapers and 110 hours reading
magazines. Each year an American has the opportunity to read more than 50,000
new books in print. More than half of our waking hours are spent with the mass
media.
If you watch thirty hours of TV per week (as does the typical American), you
will view roughly 38,000 commercials per year. The average prime-time hour of
TV contains more than 11 minutes of advertising.
That works out to more than 100 TV ads per day. You are likely to hear or see
another 100 to 300 ads per day through the other mass media of radio,
newspapers, and magazines.

And the advertising glut does not stop there. More than 100 million orders will
be placed after home viewers watch continuous advertising on networks such as
QVC and the Home Shopping Network—resulting in sales of more than $2.5
billion. This year you will receive, on average, 252 pieces of direct-mail
advertising (a $144.5-billion industry and still growing) and about fifty phone
calls from telemarketers, who contact 7 million persons a day. Americans
purchase $600 billion worth of goods and services over the phone each year.
Today advertisers are developing new ways of delivering their message using
the Internet and World Wide Web. Each day more than 257
million Internet users worldwide check more than 11.1 million available Web
sites featuring a range of information, propaganda, and, of course, merchandise
for sale. Each year, American businesses spend $150 billion to hire more than
6.4 million sales agents.
Approximately one in every twelve American families has a member working in
sales. This force of millions attempts to persuade others to purchase everything
from cars to shoes to small and large appliances, to contribute vast sums to
needy charities, to enlist in the military, or to enroll in a specific college.
If you walk down just about any city street in America, you will encounter
countless billboards, posters, bumper stickers, and bus and cab displays, each
with a separate advertising appeal. Your kitchen cupboard is probably full of
product packages and labels, each containing at least one sales message. It seems
that no place is free of advertising. Go to the racetrack and you will see 200-
mile-an-hour race cars carry advertising worth $75 million per year. Go to a
tennis tournament, a jazz festival, or a golf match and you will find corporate
sponsors, such as the makers of Virginia Slims, Kool, and Doral cigarettes. Go
to a movie and you will find that marketers have paid a handsome sum (roughly
$50 million per year) to have your favorite stars use their products in the film.
Even 007's famous martini dictum, "shaken, not stirred," is not sacred, as James
Bond orders a "Smirnoff Black, neat" in Goldeneye thanks to a pricey product-
placement fee paid to the movie's producers. Look at just about anyone in
America and you will see human bodies turned into walking billboards with
brand names appearing on T-shirts and ballcaps, not to mention the ubiquitous
designer labels.
On any given day, Americans are exposed to 18 billion magazine and newspaper
ads, 2.6 million radio commercials, 300,000 TV commercials, 500,000

billboards, and 40 million pieces of direct mail. With 6% of the world's
population, the United States consumes 57% of the world's advertising.
Manufacturers spend more than $165 billion a year on advertising and more than
$115 billion a year on product promotions (coupons, free samples, rebates,
premiums, and the like). This corresponds to spending 2.2% of the U.S. gross
national product on advertising (compared to 0.95% in Japan and 0.9% in
Germany), or more than $1,000 per year per American—a sum larger than the
yearly income of a typical citizen of a third world nation.
But persuasion is not just the specialty of advertisers and marketers.
The U.S. government spends more than $400 million per year to employ more
than 8,000 workers to create propaganda favorable to the United States. The
result: ninety films per year, twelve magazines in twenty-two languages, and 800
hours of Voice of America programming in thirty-seven languages with an
estimated audience of 75 million listeners—all describing the virtues of the
American way.
Persuasion shows up in almost every walk of life. Nearly every major politician
hires media consultants and political pundits to provide advice on how to
persuade the public and how to get elected (and then how to stay elected). For
example, in the 2000 U.S. presidential election, George W. Bush raised more
than $184 million to support his campaign, with Al Gore collecting more than
$133 million in his bid for the White House. Once elected, the typical U.S.
president is likely to spend millions of dollars to hire personal pollsters and
political consultants in an attempt to keep those positive approval ratings.
Virtually every major business and special-interest group has hired a lobbyist to
take its concerns to Congress or to state and local governments.
Today, such political action committees serve as a primary source of funds for
most political campaigns. Is it any wonder that Congress is loath to instigate
serious curbs on major lobbyists such as the NRA, AARP, or AMA? In nearly
every community, activists try to persuade their fellow citizens on important
policy issues.
The workplace, too, has always been fertile ground for office politics and
persuasion. One study estimates that general managers spend upwards of 80% of
their time in verbal communication—most of it with the intent of cajoling and

persuading their fellow employees.
With the advent of the photocopying machine, a whole new medium for office
persuasion was invented—the photocopied memo. The Pentagon alone copies an
average of 350,000 pages a day, the equivalent of 1,000 novels. Sunday may be
a day of rest, but not from persuasion, as an army of preachers takes to the
pulpits to convince us of the true moral course of action. They also take to the
airwaves, with 14% of all radio stations airing programs extolling the virtues of
Christianity.
And should you need assistance in preparing your persuasive message, millions
stand ready in the wings to help (for a fee). Today there are 675,000 lawyers
actively arguing and persuading in courts of law—and in the courts of public
opinion when their high-profile clients so require. More than 300 companies (at
billings of $130
million per year) provide "image consulting"—advice on how to make your
personal image more appealing. Public relations firms can be hired to deal with
any public opinion problem. There are more than 500 major marketing research
and opinion-polling firms ready to find out what Americans think about any
conceivable issue.
These firms query more than 72 million Americans a year. The top 100
marketing research firms alone have combined revenues of more than $5
billion.
Every day we are bombarded with one persuasive communication after another.
These appeals persuade not through the give-and-take of argument and debate
but through the manipulation of symbols and of our most basic human emotions.
For better or worse, ours is an age of propaganda.

The Growth of Postindustrial Propaganda
Every society requires a mechanism for making decisions, resolving disputes,
and coordinating activities. Our society has opted for persuasion. In the former
Soviet Union, during the heyday of Communist party rule, a bureaucratic
Politburo attempted to regulate consumer tastes and choices. In our culture, we
assign that function to the persuasive skills of the advertiser. In traditional
societies, marriages are arranged by parental authority according to rules and
customs. In modern Western societies, love is left to the social-influence devices
of the two potential lovebirds and their friends and families. During the Middle
Ages in Europe, most disputes were settled by the decree of feudal lords or by
the papacy or by a joust. Today lawyers attempt to solve disputes by negotiating
out-of-court settlements and, if that fails, arguing the merits of the case before a
complex system of judges. In many of the world's cultures, rulers come to power
either by the use of force or by family inheritance. The populace of the United
States selects its rulers by a persuasion ritual known as the election campaign.
The roots of American persuasion practices go back to the founding of the

nation.4 The United States was then, as it is today, a diverse society populated by
native Americans and people from England, Spain, Africa, Holland, and France,
among other places. Each possessed his or her own beliefs and values. Although
violence and threats of violence were frequently used to secure compliance, the
bulk of the work of forging a new consensus from this diversity of opinion and
perspective fell to persuasion. Early promoters induced settlers to the New
World with promises of vast riches, cheap land, religious freedom, and a strange
new world. Catholic priests and Protestant ministers preached to the converted
and attempted to win over the unconverted, mostly native Americans, to the
cause of Christ. The establishment of printing presses in America made possible
the wide distribution of tracts, pamphlets, and newspapers designed to persuade
fellow colonists. When the colonists ratified the U.S. Constitution, they ensured
that persuasion would be at the heart of decision making by guaranteeing
freedom of speech, freedom of the press, and the rights of assembly and of
petitioning the government. The U.S. government, with its three branches
(including two legislative houses), is a system of checks and balances that
demands debate, argument, and compromise. The U.S. legal system is
adversarial and requires the government to prove by strength of fact and
argument, beyond a reasonable doubt, that a citizen committed a crime.
Few places symbolize this early American fascination with persuasion as vividly
as Faneuil Hall and Quincy Market in Boston.5 The hall, built in 1742 by Peter
Faneuil, was originally intended to be a market "to Encourage and accommodate
the Countrey People who bring Provisions into this Town." However,
consumerism then, as now, was somewhat controversial, and to encourage the
town of Boston to accept his gift, Faneuil added a meeting hall on the second
floor, above the market stalls. Faneuil Hall has witnessed debate on nearly every
major issue that has confronted the United States, including the decisions for
independence, slavery, temperance, and women's rights, as well as debate on
every American war from 1812 to the Persian Gulf. The market, expanded
eighty-four years later and renamed Quincy for the then-mayor of Boston, is still
in use today as one of America's oldest shopping malls. Not far away stand such
monuments to persuasion as the Old State House and the Old North Church, the
location of many of the first speeches and acts of the independence movement. Is
it any wonder that the government these colonists helped to establish in the late
eighteenth century had at its heart the art of persuasion?
However, it was not until the full force of the Industrial Revolution was felt in
the nineteenth century that interest in, and organization of, persuasion emerged

in earnest on a mass scale. The Industrial Revolution saw the invention of many
new devices—steam engines, cotton gins, power looms, railroads, telegraphs,
and assembly lines—resulting in the manufacture of more and more material
goods for the mass market. Within a few generations, goods that could once be
possessed only by the rich became the aspiration of almost everyone. An ever
increasing supply of products meant that items were purchased not solely
because of need, but because of the dictates of fashion and style as well.
Consumers did not always buy the offered goods, however. There are a number
of possible reasons for this. Potential customers might not know about the
advantages of a certain product, or they might distrust the manufacturer, or they
might consider the product to be frivolous.
They may not have had enough money to purchase the offered goods
immediately. Out of necessity, manufacturers increasingly turned to sales and
marketing to persuade people to purchase their products on a mass scale. With
the rise of each of the mass media—printing presses in the seventeenth century,
mass market magazines in the 1880s, radio in the 1930s, television in the 1950s,
direct-mail advertising and telemarketing in the 1980s, and the World Wide Web
as we entered the new millennium—manufacturers found an increasingly
convenient way to do just that.
If we were to pick a specific date for the beginnings of our age of propaganda,
however, we would select an obscure event that is not covered in most textbooks
of American history. The modern age of propaganda began in Philadelphia in
1843 when a young man named Volney Palmer opened the first advertising
agency. The shop was primitive by today's standards, serving only to broker
advertising space between newspaper publishers and advertisers.6 Soon
thereafter, full-service advertising agencies offering a wide range of client
services, such as media planning and the creation and preparation of ad copy,
appeared, along with a host of marketing research firms, publicity agencies, and
opinion pollsters—all in the service of persuasion.
Academics were quick to get in on the act as well. In the early 1890s, new
courses with titles such as "Principles of Advertising,"
"Salesmanship," and "Wholesaling and Retailing"
began appearing at universities. Academic textbooks with titles such as

Advertising and Its Mental Laws and Psychology in Advertising were being
published, all promising to teach the art of persuasion—at least as applied to
advertising and sales.7 Just after the turn of the century, the basic institutions of
American propaganda became firmly established. The evolution of humankind
from hunter-gatherers to shopper-disposers was complete.
It did not take long for the principles of advertising and marketing developed to
sell consumer goods to be applied to the "sale"
of political ideas and candidates. One of the first such applications came in the
selling of World War I. In a book first published in 1920
and entitled How We Advertised America, George Creel, a publisher and head of
the Committee on Public Information, proudly divulged how he and his
committee used the principles of advertising to convince Americans to go to war
with Germany.8 Creel's success inspired others, most notably Adolf Hitler, to use
and develop these techniques on a grand scale. The apparent success of such
ventures has caused considerable concern—to say the least; modern critics have
referred to persuasion as mind-control, brainwashing, and hidden seduction and
have called attention to the damaging effects of propaganda.
The Distinction Between Propaganda and Persuasion
The forms of persuasion that have come to dominate our twentieth-century
lifestyle are much different from those seen in any other age of persuasion,
certainly much different from those experienced by colonial Americans. For this
reason, we use the term propaganda to refer to the techniques of mass
persuasion that have come to characterize our postindustrial society. The word
propaganda is of relatively recent origin. Its first documented use occurred in
1622, when Pope Gregory XV established the Sacra Congregatio de Propaganda
Fide. At the time, in the wake of the Protestant Reformation, the Roman Catholic
Church was engaged in mostly unsuccessful holy wars to reestablish the faith by
force of arms.
Realizing that this was a losing effort, Pope Gregory established the papal
propaganda office as a means of coordinating efforts to bring men and women to

the "voluntary" acceptance of church doctrines. The word propaganda thus took
on a negative connotation in Protestant countries but a positive one (similar to
that of education or preaching) in Catholic areas.
The term propaganda did not see widespread use until the beginning of the
twentieth century, when it was used to describe the persuasion tactics employed
during World War I and those later used by totalitarian regimes. Propaganda
was originally defined as the dissemination of biased ideas and opinions, often
through the use of lies and deception. However, as scholars began to study the
topic in more detail, many came to realize that propaganda was not the sole
property of "evil" and totalitarian regimes and that it often consists of more than
just clever deceptions. The word propaganda has since evolved to mean mass
"suggestion"
or "influence" through the manipulation of symbols and the psychology of the
individual. Propaganda involves the dextrous use of images, slogans, and
symbols that play on our prejudices and emotions; it is the communication of a
point of view with the ultimate goal of having the recipient of the appeal come to
"voluntarily" accept this position as if it were his or her own.9
The use of propaganda goes back to the birth of human civilization itself. For
example, the early hieroglyphic writings of Egyptian and Mesoamerican (Aztec,
Mixtec, Zapotec, and Maya) cultures consisted of symbols and images
describing a "history" that favored the ruling class.10 As just one case in point,
Mayan texts and monuments often manipulated historic dates, life spans of
rulers, astronomical cycles, and real events to place a current ruler in a favorable
light—for example, aligning the birth date of a current leader with the birth date
of a stronger leader of the past to suggest the old leader's reincarnation, or
depicting slain enemies and captives in an exaggerated way to make a leader
appear strong and to strike fear into the masses. Given that only leaders and their
priests could decipher and create hieroglyphic images and symbols, the nature of
persuasion in these cultures was unidirectional—from the ruler to the masses.
However, not all persuasion is propaganda. The classical rhetorical techniques of
the ancient Greeks and Romans— which were avidly studied by those
responsible for crafting the governments of Western Europe and America—were
aimed at creating discourse that could illuminate the issue at hand. Such
persuasion could take the form of an argument, a debate, a discussion, or just a
well-argued speech presenting the case for or against a given proposition. The

end result was an education for both the audience and the speakers.
In the city-states of ancient Greece, all citizens were considered equal and
everyone was expected to be able to speak on his own behalf.11 For example, the
Greek court system did not allow lawyers or individuals hired to plead a case;
citizens were required to plead their own cases in the courts or, more exactly,
before a jury of their neighbors. Similarly, the citizen of Greece was also
expected to speak on the issues of the day in political assemblies. This task was
not left to elected representatives. Needless to say, the average Greek citizen was
interested in learning how to argue, lest he lose his possessions or be banished
from his community on the basis of a frivolous lawsuit.
To help him learn about persuasion, the Greek citizen could hire a Sophist to
provide instruction on how to argue. The Sophists were itinerant teachers who
gave lectures and wrote the first books on persuasion, similar in nature to the
how-to books that can be found in bookstores today. These handbooks, most of
which are now lost to antiquity, described "commonplaces"—general arguments
and techniques that could be adapted for a variety of persuasive purposes. One
famous handbook, the Dissoi Logoi, consisted of a series of pro and con
arguments on a number of topics—ready for use by a speaker at a moment's
notice.
The Sophists are perhaps best known for their "dangerous" views about the role
of persuasion in society—hence the negative connotations of the word sophistry,
meaning "trickery"
or "fallacious argumentation." The Sophist viewpoint is expressed in two
seemingly innocent maxims attributed to Protagoras: "Humans are the measure
of all things" and "There are two sides to every issue." For the Sophist there is
no absolute truth and no surefire means, whether through divine inspiration or
human intuition, for finding this truth. The only standards are human ones, and
these are always debatable. How, then, does one decide what to do? The
Sophists believed that persuasion is necessary to discover the "best" course of
action; by arguing and debating, many facets of an issue can be laid bare and the
advantages and disadvantages of a course of action can be more plainly seen.
Foreshadowing much modern commentary on persuasion, Plato was outraged by
the Sophist position. Plato believed in an absolute truth that could be appreciated
only through the study of philosophy. The "word tricks" of the Sophists, in

Plato's mind, merely confused the youth of Athens and clouded the
understanding of what he saw as truth.
Around 323 B.c., Aristotle reconciled the view of the Sophists and the position of
his teacher, Plato, in the Rhetoric—the first comprehensive theory of persuasion.
For Aristotle, the purpose of persuasion was the communication of a point of
view or position. Although the Sophists believed that persuasion was needed to
discover important facts, Aristotle believed that knowledge could be gained only
by logic and reason. Unfortunately, according to Aristotle, not everyone was
capable of reasoning clearly about every issue. For these denser souls, the art of
persuasion was needed to communicate the truth to them in such a manner that
they might come to a right conclusion.
The tradition of "decision by persuasion" was kept alive by the early Romans.
The political and court system of the Roman Republic, much like that of the
Greeks, encouraged debate and political speechmaking. However, unlike the
Greeks, the Romans employed professional persuaders—politicians and lawyers
who made a career of arguing. The role of persuasion in Roman society was
aptly expressed by one of the most famous of the Roman professional
persuaders, the lawyer Cicero (106 to 43 B.c.).
When asked "Has rhetoric produced more harm than good?" Cicero gave an
answer that would have satisfied even Aristotle: "Wisdom without eloquence has
been of little help to the states, but eloquence without wisdom has often been a
great obstacle and never an advantage."12
The eloquent rhetoric of ancient Greek and Roman, as well as colonial
American, is a far cry from the typical communication of today, with its
emphasis on the use of simple slogans and images. Increasingly, the goal of
modern propaganda is not to inform and enlighten but rather to move the masses
toward a desired position or point of view.
The persuasion landscape of today differs vastly from those of the past in some
very important ways.
We live in a message-dense environment. The advertisers Al Ries and Jack
Trout call ours an "overcommunicated" society.13 The average American will
see or hear more than 7 million advertisements in his or her lifetime. In contrast,
the average pious Puritan attending church once a week in seventeenth-century

New England would hear about 3,000 sermons in a lifetime. This message-dense
environment places a burden on both the communicator and the recipient of a
message intended to persuade. The communicator must design a message that
will not only be appealing but will also attract special notice in this cluttered
environment. On the other hand, the recipient is so deluged by messages that it
becomes difficult to devote the mental energy necessary to make sense of many
of the important issues of the day.
Our age of propaganda differs in another way as well. Puritan sermons could last
as long as two hours. Roman orators of the second century took courses to
improve their memory so that they could remember all that they had to say.
Early American patriots spent the entire summer of 1787 debating the U.S.
Constitution and then produced, for the newspapers of the day, eighty-five
articles totaling nearly 600 pages in its defense. Today, a televised political
advertisement typically runs for thirty seconds or less. Magazine ads often
consist of little more than a picture and a phrase. News of the day comes in short
"soundbites" and "news snippets." For example, 70% of all local TV news
stories are a minute or less in length. As the columnist George Will once put it, if
Lincoln were to issue the Emancipation Proclamation today, he would probably
say: "Read my lips. No more slavery." Our age of persuasion is populated with
short, catchy, and often visually oriented messages. Although such persuasive
images are frequently successful in capturing our attention in the message-dense
environment, they substitute slogans and images for well-reasoned arguments
and can turn complex issues into vulgar black-and-white caricatures of reason.
Persuasion in modern times is also much more immediate. The Puritan would
wait all week for a sermon and months for news from England. Since the launch
of Telstar 1 in July 1962, any event happening almost anywhere in the world can
be covered immediately. For example, despite efforts by the Chinese
government to the contrary, CNN's coverage of the Tiananmen Square massacre
consisted of journalists telephoning detailed reports of the violence as well as
play-by-play descriptions of government action and student reaction, which were
then quickly broadcast to an eagerly waiting but stunned world. In a similar vein,
a week before the Allied bombing of Iraq in 1991, Tariq Aziz, foreign minister
of Iraq, claimed to understand American politics because he got his news from
CNN. Over 1 billion people in 108 nations tuned in to CNN to watch its live and
on-line coverage of the Persian Gulf war. After the nation was entertained by O.
J.
Simpson's slow speed chase CNN E! Court TV and others offered continuous

Simpson s slow-speed chase, CNN, E!, Court TV, and others offered continuous
coverage and immediate "analysis" of the trial.
More than 150 million Americans watched the delivery of the verdict on TV.
Such intense coverage was repeated again only a short time later—but this time
it was the president of the United States, Bill Clinton, on trial for lying about his
affair with a young intern.
In the 2000 U.S. presidential election, this itch for immediacy created a bizarre
situation in which the news media first claimed that Al Gore had won in the state
of Florida (before some polls even closed in the state) and then later in the same
evening stated that the vote in Florida was too close to call and then finally
reported that George W. Bush had won the state. This news prompted Gore to
telephone Bush conceding the election. However, before announcing his
concession to the nation, Gore found out that the election was once again too
close to call and retracted his statement. The news media's rush to call the
election and then recall it sent the candidates and the nation on an emotional
roller coaster, creating confusion and anger on all sides.
And the immediacy of today's persuasion is getting even more immediate.
As just one indicator: The first TV movie about the 1978 mass suicide in
Jonestown took 513 days to produce; only 34 days elapsed between the fire at
the Branch Davidian compound in Waco, Texas, and the first TV movie about it.
The result is timely information—but often, perhaps, too timely. Whereas the
Puritan could spend all week mulling over the implications of last Sunday's
sermon, today's TV
viewer and magazine reader has little time to think about one persuasive image
before another one quickly takes its place: The trees are replacing the forest.
Perhaps the major difference between our own and past eras is the way in which
we instruct our citizens about persuasion. If you were a citizen of a Greek city-
state in the third century B.c., your education would include four years of rhetoric
designed to teach you how to understand persuasive arguments and to construct
your own. Should you miss your lessons, a Sophist could be hired to provide
further instruction. Roman students of the first century took courses in
persuasion from perhaps the greatest professor of rhetoric of all times,
Quintilian, whose textbook on the subject was used for almost 1,000 years.
Students at Harvard College in seventeenth-century America also had many

opportunities to learn about persuasion. Every Friday afternoon for four years,
the students would study how to argue; at least once a month they were required
to demonstrate what they had learned by taking a stand, defending it, and
attacking the views of others.
These cultures, unlike our own, considered an understanding of persuasion to be
an essential skill needed by every citizen in order to participate fully in the
affairs of state. The teaching of persuasion was a basic component of their
education. In contrast, few Americans have taken a formal course on social
influence. "Pop" books on the subject typically present exaggerated warnings of
the dire consequences of persuasion and the mass media or simplistic "how-to-
get-ahead" instructions. Although we are bombarded daily with persuasive
messages, we have little opportunity to learn about the techniques of persuasion
and to understand how they work.
Sadly, such a state of affairs can lead to a sense of alienation and cynicism, as
many Americans become bewildered by the basic decision-making processes of
their society.
The Goals of This Book
For the last six decades, social psychologists such as ourselves have been
studying the everyday use and abuse of persuasion.14 They have conducted
thousands of experiments to test countless hypotheses concerning the effects of a
persuasive communication. Their labors have resulted in the discovery of which
persuasion techniques are effective and an understanding of what makes a
persuasive message so persuasive. One purpose of this book is to share this
information.
In the next section, we provide an overview of what social psychologists and
other investigators have discovered about how we are persuaded: What factors
determine when we will be influenced? How do we respond, in general, to a
persuasion attempt? The next four sections, the heart of the book, present an in-
depth analysis of propaganda tactics commonly used today, along with a
discussion of why these tactics are so effective in securing our compliance.
Then, investigating the techniques of the propagandist, we look at how these

tactics can be put together to create a campaign of persuasion. We conclude by
discussing what we can do to limit the effects of propaganda in our lives and to
insure that deliberative persuasion remains at the heart of democracy.
This book has a second purpose as well. The persuasive appeals directed at
Demetrick James Walker, the voters of North Carolina, rape victims, and every
television viewer and magazine reader take advantage of our basic human
psychology; they often appeal to our deepest fears and most irrational hopes, all
the while playing to our most simplistic beliefs; they come to paint a picture of
the world—distorted as it may be—in which we must live. It is our hope that by
discussing the ways of persuasion, we can all better understand our world of
propaganda and deal with it sensibly and effectively.
 

The Psychology of Everyday Persuasion

2
Mysterious Influence
The Manchurian Candidate, produced in 1962, has become something of a cult
classic. The movie, starring Angela Lans-bury, Frank Sinatra, and Laurence
Harvey, tells the story of an American soldier captured during the Korean War
and brainwashed by the Chinese Communists. The POW is programmed to go
into a hypnotic trance and to assassinate U.S. political leaders on command. The
plot thickens when the Chinese Communists are able to mastermind the
nomination of their own candidate for U.S. vice-president and the brainwashed
ex-soldier is commanded to kill the presidential nominee.
The Manchurian Candidate is certainly a thriller. But we wonder if its popularity
is not based, at least in part, on the image it presents of social influence.
Persuasion is presented as a mysterious and powerful force. In the hands of those
"in the know," it can be used to bring us to perform some strange and often
despicable acts for no apparent good reason.
People indeed do strange things for seemingly no good reason. Many mysterious
causes have been invented throughout history to help explain why we humans
are influenced and persuaded. For example, the ancients believed that a person's
fate is determined by the position of distant stars. During the Middle Ages, there
was a widespread belief that a person could be possessed by demons or that
behavior could be controlled by witches who cast spells over the unsuspecting.
Centuries later, in the 1770s, Franz Anton Mesmer (whose name gave us the
word mesmerize) created a secular version of witchcraft that still influences our
thinking today.1 According to Mesmer, we are not possessed by spirits or
demons, but each of us possesses an "animal fluid" that serves as a major
determinant of our behavior—as well as of our health and well-being.
(Interestingly, the word influence comes from the word fluid and literally means
"to affect fluid.") Mesmer claimed he could control human behavior and
promote human potentials by passing a magnet over the body to redirect the flow
of this animal fluid.

Therapy sessions inspired by Mesmer's ideas created quite a stir in eighteenth-
century Europe and America. At a typical session, a leader would "mesmerize" a
few faithful souls either by placing magnets at key locations around their bodies,
or by manually massaging their bodies to stimulate the flow of the animal fluid,
or, later, simply by a voice command. Those in the mesmerized state would
report seeing bright lights or feeling the animal magnetism tingle their bodies or
would report no pain from pinpricks, pinches, or other pain inducers. Loud
clapping and ammonia passed under the nose would not wake them from the
trance. Some claimed to be cured of disease. A blue-ribbon panel of the leading
scientists of the day—including Antoine Lavoisier and Benjamin Franklin—was
commissioned to investigate Mesmer's practices. They concluded that "there is
no proof of the existence of Animal Magnetism; that this fluid, having no
existence, has in consequence no utility."
The panel dismissed the claims for physical cures as "the mere product of the
patient's own imaginations."2 Indeed, Mesmer used many common influence
tactics—making himself into an authority, manipulating expectations for a cure,
playing on people's hopes and self-esteem—to promote his "therapy."
Mesmer's successors were undaunted by the commission's report. They began a
search for new and improved techniques, leading to the abandonment of
magnetism and the discovery of the hypnotic trance as a technique for
controlling our animal nature.3 The first popular self-help movements in
America, the Society of Harmony of the 1830s and the New Thought movement
of the 1890s, made extensive use of Mesmer's theories of human nature.
Thousands of Americans sought relief from all sorts of ailments—psychological
and physical—by taking the "cure," which could involve anything from being
placed in a hypnotic trance, to receiving treatment from a magnet, to the spiritual
healing of Mary Baker Eddy. Similarly, today's New Age healers seek to
influence behavior by rechanneling the inner self, sometimes called chi, by
means of hypnotic trances, subliminal commands, or the power not of magnets
but of crystals.
In nearly every age and nearly every culture, humans wonder just how they
come to be influenced by others. Our culture is no different.
With the coming of the Industrial Revolution, much of this reflection has
centered on the influence of the mass media and on the power of strong
individuals such as demagogues, politicians, sales agents, and cult leaders.
Opinion on the power of mass media influence is divided Some people believe

Opinion on the power of mass media influence is divided. Some people believe
that the mass media are all-powerful and capable of influencing and duping the
masses on just about any issue.
In other words, they believe that the mass media are today's functional
equivalent of Mesmer, inducing us into a trancelike acceptance of all that we see
and hear. Others believe that the mass media have little influence, especially
when they think of the impact on their own lives: "/ am smart enough and
rational enough to see through the cheap ploys of advertisers and politicians"—
or so we think. Wherein lies the truth? As with most great debates, the answer is
"somewhere in-between." But we get ahead of ourselves. Let's look at each of
these beliefs—that the mass media are mysteriously all-powerful versus that they
have little effect—so that we will be in a better position to understand when we
are most likely to be influenced by the propagandist.
Myth #1: Magic Bullets
By the beginning of the twentieth century, the Industrial Revolution had brought
about dramatic changes in American society. As we saw in the last chapter, the
development of industry led to a rise of the mass media, which some feared
would come to dominate and control a mass public. Sociologists of the day
observed that Western societies were experiencing a change in the nature of
social relationships—from small, cohesive communities emphasizing personal
relationships to a web of impersonal, secondary relationships in which the
individual was socially isolated and in tension with others.4 Cut off from their
social roots, individuals, it was feared, would be.
dependent on the mass media and select leaders for all their information and thus
would be defenseless against propaganda. As some claimed, the mass media
could fire magic bullets of information capable of shaping public opinion and
swaying the masses toward any point of view advocated by the communicator.5
Proponents of this view cited many examples of the power of propagandists,
especially those who had the means to use the mass media—for example, the
dissemination of atrocity stories by British and American governments to
mobilize their citizens for World War I; the rise of demagogues, such as
Pitchfork Ben Tillman, Aimee Semple McPherson, Father Divine, Father

Coughlin, and Joseph McCarthy, capable of captivating crowds as well as radio
and TV audiences; the increasing use of advertising to sell consumer goods and,
subsequently, politicians; and, of course, the systematic use of propaganda in
Nazi and other totalitarian regimes.
The two dominant psychological theories of the early twentieth century—
behaviorism and psychoanalysis—also lent support to the magic bullet thesis.
According to the boast of behaviorist John Watson, he could take any infant at
birth and, through the systematic application of behavioral principles, create any
sort of human being he desired. What Watson had in mind was the systematic
application of the principles of classical conditioning developed by Ivan Pavlov.6
According to Pavlov, we learn by the repeated pairing of an unconditioned
stimulus (say, a shock that elicits the unconditioned response of pain) with a
neutral stimulus (say, a picture of a foreign leader or a political point of view).
Eventually, mere exposure to the neutral stimulus—the foreign leader or the
political point of view— would come to elicit pain. The mass media could fire
magic bullets, according to the behaviorist, simply by repeatedly associating
stimuli—for example, a brand of car with an attractive woman—and thus come
to control the thoughts of the masses.
Such claims obviously attracted the attention of advertisers. Early advertising
textbooks spelled out how behavioral principles such as repetition, intensity (use
bright and loud ads), association (link content to the recipients experiences), and
ingenuity (make the ad distinctive) can be used to improve the effectiveness of a
message.7 Indeed, after he was asked to leave his faculty position at Johns
Hopkins University because he was having an affair with one of his students,
Watson was quickly hired by the advertising agency of J. Walter Thompson. The
behaviorist's vision of society also inspired its share of critics, as evidenced by
books such as Aldous Huxley's Brave New World and Anthony Burgess's A
Clockwork Orange—both of which provide a futuristic glimpse of a bleak and
scary world completely guided by behavioristic principles.
Although often seen as antagonists, behaviorists and psychoanalysts do agree on
the power of the mass media to fire magic bullets of influence.
The two theories differ, however, on the nature of those bullets. In many
respects, the psychoanalytic theory of persuasion can be seen as a descendant of
mesmerism. Animal magnetism is replaced by the psychic energy of the

unconscious; magnets as a means of influence are replaced by appeals to the
hidden world of the unconscious through the use of hypnotism, subliminal
commands, or symbolic messages.
As early as the 1890s, the concept of hypnotic suggestion was used to explain
the reaction of the masses to demagogues and other assorted scoundrels. The
French sociologist Gustave Le Bon argued that crowds transformed individuals
into mindless, anonymous entities through a form of hypnotic suggestion and a
dissociation of higher mental processes. Others quickly applied this metaphor to
suggest that the mass media hypnotized their audiences.8
However, it wasn't until the 1950s that the psychoanalytic approach to
persuasion was brought to the public's attention in Vance Packard's highly
popular expose, The Hidden Persuaders.9
According to Packard, advertising agencies were secretly using the principles of
psychoanalysis to create ads that were amazingly powerful and successful. To
produce such ads, marketers were busily engaged in finding the hidden meaning
of things. One handbook on the subject, prepared by Ernest Dichter, actually
listed common objects and what they mean, in theory, to the unconscious—for
example, he claimed rice means fertility, removing one's gloves is erotic and
intimate, soup is the magic elixir of life, and eggs mean growth and fertility.10
Once the unconscious meaning of a thing was uncovered, an advertiser could
design a campaign, at least according to psychoanalytic theory, that appealed to
our deepest motivations and thus was capable of overwhelming our defenses.
Myth #2: The Rational Citizen
If true, these claims about the power of the mass media and other agents of
influence—whether through classical conditioning or hidden persuasion—are
quite frightening and, for the most part, mysterious. However, beginning in the
1940s, researchers found it difficult to document the power of the mass media.
This research led some to conclude that the mass media have a minimal effect
and that citizens use the information distributed by the mass media in a rational
manner to determine the best course of action.

One of the first studies to question the belief that the mass media are all-
powerful was conducted by the famed communications researcher Paul
Lazarsfeld and his colleagues during the 1940 presidential campaign.11 At the
beginning and end of the campaign, the voters of Erie County, Ohio, were
interviewed about their preferences, party affiliation, media habits, and so on.
The results showed that the mass media had little impact on whom a citizen
voted for; much better predictors were the voter's political party (Republican or
Democratic) and the preferences of friends—the beliefs of those the voter
worked, played, and prayed with. Other studies followed showing that the mass
media had limited, if any, effects on behavior. For example, early studies of
advertising found that the amount a firm spends on advertising has little or no
effect on either sales or growth in market share. Experimental investigations of
single exposures to ads found that few people pay attention to any specific
exposure and what little effects are created usually dissipate quickly.12
The psychological underpinnings of the magic bullet theory also did not fare
well. Although many of the basic findings of behaviorism have been supported,
subsequent research found that many of its effects are often limited in nature; for
example, it was found that some associations are very difficult to learn and that
rewards can often backfire and lead to the opposite of the intended results.13
Similarly, attempts to use psychoanalysis to guide propaganda efforts failed.
For example, in the 1950s and early 1960s, the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA) did indeed attempt to create the "Manchurian Candidate"—that is, the
CIA experimented with a variety of "magic bullets," such as hypnosis, drugs,
and subliminal implants, in an attempt to control human behavior.14 The
experiments failed to achieve their goal, prompting one CIA official to conclude
that it would be far easier just to hire a professional killer to perform
assassinations than to attempt to engineer one using psychological techniques.
During the 1950s, advertisers also employed consultants and others trained in
psychoanalysis to help create advertising, just as Vance Packard claimed. Every
agency had its "depth man." However, by the mid-1960s most agencies had
abandoned this approach, because, quite simply, it did not work. Advertisers
found psychoanalytic theory to be too vague to guide their applications; the
techniques used for assessing the psychoanalytic meaning of a persuasive
communication—analysis of inkblots, free associations, dreams, hypnosis—
were notoriously unreliable.15 The sensational claims of effectiveness made

during the 1950s were never realized. Nevertheless, the psychoanalytic theory of
persuasion continues to garner much popular attention, as evidenced by the
storylines of movies such as The Manchurian Candidate and many television
crime dramas, as well as by the marketing success of books and tapes touting the
power of subliminal influence. As we will see in Chapter 34, there is yet to be a
reliable demonstration that a subliminal message can influence motivation or
behavior.
As evidence appeared to accumulate that the mass media produced minimal
effects, an information-processing model (sometimes called a learning model)
replaced behaviorism and psychoanalytic theory as the primary explanation of
mass media effects. According to the information-processing model, a
persuasive message must successfully pass through a series of stages.16 First, the
message must attract the recipient's attention; ignored messages will have little
persuasive impact. Second, the arguments in the message must be understood
and comprehended. Third, the recipient must learn the arguments contained in
the message and come to accept them as true; the task of the advertiser and other
persuaders is to teach arguments supportive of the cause, so that these arguments
will come easily to mind at the appropriate time and place. Finally, the recipient
of the messages acts on this learned knowledge when there is an incentive to do
so; a persuasive message is learned, accepted, and acted upon if it is rewarding
to do so. Given that later stages of the persuasion process are dependent on the
completion of earlier stages, the chances of any given persuasive communication
passing to the final stage are quite low and thus the effects are minimal. The
recipient of the message, according to the information-processing model, is quite
rational, deciding on how much information to accept from each communication
depending on how that information satisfies and rewards.
The Law of Cognitive Response
Of course, if that were the end of the story and the mass media were truly
watched by rational citizens with minimal effects, then there would be no need
for this book. We would tell you, "Go ahead and watch TV; let the advertisers
pay for it; it won't have any effect on you." But that is not the end of the story. In
the last decade, researchers have found that the mass media can have strong
effects under certain identifiable conditions, which, in turn, has led to a new

understanding of how persuasion works. Let's look at some of this research.
First, investigators have found that the mass media can produce many subtle, or
"indirect," effects—in other words, the mass media may not tell you what to
think, but they do tell you what to think about and how to do if.17 Consider
someone who watches TV and repeatedly sees competing ads extolling the
virtues of Chevys and of Fords. It is unlikely (in most cases) that any given ad
will cause that person to switch her or his preference for one car over the other.
However, it is very likely that this heavy dose of car ads will lead that person to
want a car and to give little consideration to alternative modes of transportation,
such as mass transit or walking. Many of us dream of that special car—the
feeling of independence of the open road, listening to the ooohs and ahhhs from
our neighbors and members of the opposite sex as they see our new car. Few of
us have such fantasies about taking the subway.
Further, that massive dose of car advertising will suggest what factors are
important to consider in making our purchase—namely, those attributes that
appear in the advertising, such as spottiness, luxury, or high performance, as
opposed to others that might be considered in selecting a mode of transportation,
such as the vehicle's impact on the environment or the ability to work, socialize,
or just enjoy the passing scenery as you ride to your destination. We will have
more to say about this in the section on pre-persuasion, and especially in Chapter
7.
Second, researchers have also found evidence for the direct effects of the mass
media—that is, changes in attitudes consistent with the content of the mass
media message. The Chevy-versus-Ford advertising illustrates the difficulty of
detecting such effects, however. With massive doses of influence from each side,
there is little reason to expect the average consumer to prefer one car over the
other.
However, what about the case when a consumer sees more ads from one brand
as opposed to its competitor?
Such cases can be identified using what has been termed "single-source"
data—that is, data that result from tracking the TV ads watched by a household
and the brands of products that household subsequently purchases. Using such
data, advertising researcher John Philip Jones found that, on average, watching

an ad for a brand at least once during a seven-day period increased the brand's
share of purchases by 6%.18 However, these effects varied considerably, with
strong ads (those that communicated a benefit and that consumers found likable
and visually appealing) tripling sales and weak ads actually cutting purchase
rates in half.
The political scientist John Zaller has found similar results for the effects of
news and political advertising.19 Zaller identified U.S. House of Representatives
elections in which there were what he called "reception gaps"—that is, voters
were likely to receive the campaign message of one candidate but not the other.
In such cases, he found that voters often defected from their own party to vote
for the candidate who received more exposure in the mass media. This defection
rate could be as high as 70%. But in elections in which voters were likely to
receive information from and about both candidates (say, in a heavily covered
presidential contest), exposure to the mass media produced minimal effects
because the effect of a message from one candidate was canceled by the message
from the other candidate.
Sometimes the mass media carry only one side of an issue. Such was the case in
1990 when then-president George Bush decided to send troops to the Persian
Gulf. His decision was also supported by members of Congress, none of whom
issued a statement opposing the decision. The mass media reflected this
consensus among Washington policy makers and carried news stories describing
the arguments for sending troops to the Gulf.
The effect of watching this one-sided coverage is clear. According to Zaller,
only 23% of those Americans who watched very little news in August of 1990
supported the decision to send troops to the Persian Gulf. However, among those
who habitually kept track of the news, 76%
favored the invasion of Iraq—a gain of 53%!
But that wasn't the only way the media affected our attitudes about the Persian
Gulf crisis. Although both conservatives and liberals agreed on the need for
intervention, they differed on how this should be done, with conservatives taking
a tougher stand (for example, favoring immediate military action) than liberals
(who wanted to give economic sanctions more time to work)—a difference of
opinion that was also reflected in the mass media. In this case, watching the
news merely reinforced one's original beliefs. Those conservatives who

habitually attended to their TV sets took a tougher stand on intervention than
those conservatives who watched little news, whereas liberals showed the
opposite pattern.
Clearly, then, the mass media do affect some of our most fundamental beliefs
and opinions and can even lead us to purchase an advertised brand of product or
to support the destruction of other human beings. It is true that sometimes we
can act as rational beings—for example, when the mass media carry a full debate
on an issue and we are motivated to think about that issue. However, this is not
always the case. Sometimes we may hear only one side of the issue and not take
the time to explore alternatives; in such circumstances, we are likely to adhere
mindlessly to what we have been told. In other cases, the mass media may
present viewpoints that oppose our own and we either attempt to avoid them or
rationalize them away, in the process becoming more entrenched in our own
beliefs.
To understand how the mass media (and other influence agents, for that matter)
persuade, we need to understand our cognitive responses to what is
communicated—that is, the thoughts running through our head as we see and
hear the message. In other words, influence depends on how a message is
interpreted and responded to by the recipient—which could vary depending on
the individual, the situation, and the appeal. For example, sometimes we think
carefully about what is said; at other times we think very little and follow our
initial prejudices; at still other times we may be overcome with emotions— our
fears, our hopes, our insecurities—to such an extent that it clouds our judgment.
The cognitive response approach to persuasion began in the late 1960s at Ohio
State University in response to some findings that could not be explained by the
information-processing model.20 Research accumulated showing that a
communication can be persuasive even if it fails in a few of the information-
processing stages. Sometimes a message can be persuasive even if its arguments
are not fully understood or comprehended. For example, in his autobiography
the onetime Watergate burglar and current talk-show host G. Gordon Liddy
reports that in his youth he would often be persuaded by the speeches of Adolf
Hitler, which he heard in German on the radio, even though he knew only a few
German phrases.21 Sometimes a message can be persuasive even if the key
arguments are not learned or remembered. For example, children are often
influenced by toy ads even though they recall very little of the content of the
communication. Similarly, much research shows that there is little relationship

between what someone recalls of a message and whether he or she will be
persuaded by that message.
The cognitive response approach has given us one of the most important laws for
determining the effectiveness of a persuasive tactic: The successful persuasion
tactic is one that directs and channels thoughts so that the target thinks in a
manner agreeable to the communicators point of view; the successful tactic
disrupts any negative thoughts and promotes positive thoughts about the
proposed course of action.
To say that persuasion is dependent on the thoughts running through one's head
as a persuasive message is received seems straightforward.
But it begs an important question: What determines the thoughts running
through one's head? Where do our cognitive responses come from? What
determines the way we think about a persuasive communication? This book
seeks to answer these questions. In the next three chapters of this section we will
look at some overarching principles that describe our cognitive responses to
persuasive communications. In Chapter 3, we will find that we humans often
seek to conserve our cognitive energy by taking mental shortcuts whenever we
can. We will explore when we are most likely to do this and examine some of
the consequences. In Chapter 4, we will explore a human tendency to rationalize
our thoughts and behaviors so that they appear reasonable to ourselves and
others. In Chapter 5, we will look at four goals that propagandists must achieve
if they hope to be effective. To do so, propagandists attempt to take advantage of
our two basic human tendencies—to take mental shortcuts and to rationalize our
behavior—by constructing various tactics that play on our prejudices and
emotions.22 We look at those tactics in the next four sections.
As we journey through this book, the reader should note a constant theme:
Persuasion is no more mysterious than a household lamp. For those who do not
understand the principles of electricity, a modern lamp can be a magical, often
frightening device. Imagine for a moment that you know nothing about
electricity and a woman comes into your home and plugs in a lamp)—and
suddenly the room becomes brighter. What would you think? You would
probably wonder in awe: "Who is this all-powerful goddess of light? What
magical fluid or spirit resides in the lamp, hidden from view? Can this goddess
with her magical fluid cure my insomnia, too?" If you happen to touch the lamp
and receive a shock, your reverence may turn quickly to fear. In many ways,

your reactions to the lamp would not be much different from the feelings of
those who first saw Mesmer and his magnets or watched The Manchurian
Candidate in fear and amazement. Suppose we told you that we were going to
equip every home in a faraway land with electricity and modern electrical
devices but that we were going to keep the populace of that country ignorant of
how electricity works. You would no doubt call us irresponsible and perhaps
evil. How much more irresponsible would it then be to equip every home with
modern propaganda and not provide instructions concerning the ways of
persuasion?
 

3
Mindless Propaganda, Thoughtful Persuasion
Here are six facts that professional persuaders have learned about modern
propaganda:1
Ads that contain the words new, quick, easy, improved, now, suddenly,
amazing, and introducing sell more products.
In supermarkets, merchandise placed on shelves at eye level sells best.
Indeed, one study found that sales for products at waist level were only 74% as
great and sales for products at floor level were only 57%
as great as for those products placed at eye level.
Ads that use animals, babies, or sex appeal are more likely to sell the
product than those that use cartoon characters and historical figures.
Merchandise placed at the end of a supermarket aisle or near the checkout
aisle is more likely to be purchased.
Bundle pricing—for example, selling items at two for $1 instead of 500
each—often increases the customer's perception of product "value."
In solicitations and sales calls, asking the target "How are you feeling?"
and then acknowledging the response can double the rate of compliance
with the request.
Why do these six techniques work? When you think about it, it makes little
sense to purchase an item because it happens to be placed at the end of a
supermarket aisle or on a shelf at eye level. You may not really need this
conveniently located product, or the item you really want may be located on a
top shelf. It makes little sense to be convinced by an ad because it uses a baby or
contains certain words; such "information" is of little value in determining the
quality of the product. A subtle rewording of the price does not add any value to

the product. Merely asking us how we feel does not make the charity or product
any better. But that is the point—we consumers often don't think about the
reasons we make the decisions we do. Studies show that about half of purchases
in a supermarket are impulse buys and that upwards of 62% of all shoppers in
discount stores buy at least one item on an unplanned basis.2
We often respond to propaganda with little thought and in a mindless fashion.
Consider the experiments on mindlessness conducted by Ellen Langer and her
colleagues.3 Langer's collaborators walked up to persons busily using a
university copy machine and said: "Excuse me: May I use the Xerox machine?"
What would you do in such a situation? If you are like most people, it would
depend on your mood. On some occasions you might think: "Sure, why not?
I'm a helpful person." At other times, you might say to yourself: 'Is this person
nuts or what? I got here first and have lots of work to do." Indeed, Langer's
results indicate that both types of thinking were going on—a little more than half
of the people complied with this request.
Now, here's the interesting part. Langer found that she could get almost everyone
to agree to let another person cut in front of them at the copy machine by adding
one detail to the request—a reason for why the machine was needed. This makes
sense. It takes a cold heart to deny someone, perhaps panic-stricken with an
urgent need, the simple use of a copy machine. The odd thing about Langer's
study is that although some of the reasons given made no sense at all, nearly
everyone let the person cut in. For example, on some occasions Langer's
collaborators would say, "Excuse me: May I use the Xerox machine, because I
have to make copies." When you think about it, this is a pretty silly thing to say:
Why would you need a copy machine if you were not planning to make copies?
It is the same as no reason at all. But that is the point. Most of the people in the
study did not think about it and mindlessly complied with the request. Any
reason will do!
Advertisers understand that often any reason will do. The communications
expert Ivan Preston made a catalog of typical claims made in mass media
advertising.4 He notes that many ads trumpet trivial differences as if they were
important (e.g., Camel Wides, which are two millimeters wider than usual), state
nonfacts that make the brand appear impressive (e.g., "Coke is it!"—whatever
"it"
may mean) and exude meaningless puffery or meaningless superlatives (e g

may mean), and exude meaningless puffery or meaningless superlatives (e.g.,
"Bayer—the world's best aspirin" when all
aspirin are alike). In other words, just about any reason apparently will do.
We can also be influenced when we are being thoughtful. For example, most of
us, at one time or another, have been panhandled, that is, stopped on the street by
a passerby who asks for a quarter or any spare change. A common response is to
ignore the request and continue to walk mindlessly down the street. Recently, we
were panhandled in a novel manner. The panhandler asked, "Excuse me, do you
have 170 that I could have?" What thoughts would run through your head in this
situation? When this happened to us, our immediate thought was: "Why does this
person need exactly 170? Is it for bus fare? Is it for a specific food purchase?
Maybe the person came up short at the market. " Suddenly the panhandler was a
real individual with real needs, not someone we could mindlessly pass by. We
were persuaded to part with a handful of change. Intrigued, we later sent our
students out on the streets to panhandle for a local charity. They found that
almost 60% more people contributed when asked for 170 or 370 compared to
those who were asked for a quarter or any spare change.5
People can be persuaded both when they are in a mindless state and when they
are thoughtful, but exactly how they are influenced in either of these two states
differs considerably. Richard Petty and John Cacioppo argue that there are two
routes to persuasion—peripheral and central.6 In the peripheral route, a message
recipient devotes little attention and effort to processing a communication. Some
examples might include watching television while doing something else or
listening to a debate on an issue that you don't care much about. In the peripheral
route, persuasion is determined by simple cues, such as the attractiveness of the
communicator, whether or not the people around you agree with the position
presented, the pleasure or pain associated with agreeing with the position, or
whether a reason is given (no matter how bogus) for complying with a request.
In the central route, a message recipient engages in a careful and thoughtful
consideration of the true merits of the information presented. For example, in the
central route the person may actively argue against the message, may want to
know the answer to additional questions, or may seek out new information. The
persuasiveness of the message is determined by how well it can stand up to this
scrutiny.
Let's see how the two routes to persuasion could be used to process one of the

most influential and controversial television ads in the history of presidential
elections. It was 1988; George Bush was running against Michael Dukakis. This
ad, prepared by the Bush campaign, told the story of Willie Horton, a black man
who had been sent to prison for murder. During the time when Dukakis was
governor of Massachusetts, Horton was released on a prison furlough program.
While on furlough, Horton fled to Maryland, where he raped a white woman
after stabbing her male companion.
The ad was influential because it required little thought for a person in the
peripheral route to get the point. A typical response elicited by the ad went
something like this: "Dukakis let Horton out of prison to rape and kill. Dukakis
is weak on crime, especially those committed by bad black guys." The ad follows
the classic propaganda formula: a simple image (Willie Horton) that plays on
prejudices (white Americans' stereotypes of black Americans) and emotions
(fear of crime) to produce a simple, but nonetheless effective, response (in favor
of George Bush). Michael Dukakis was painted as a weak leader who was soft
on crime; by comparison, George Bush looked strong and tough, capable of
protecting us from the likes of Willie Horton.
However, no one was forced to think about this ad in the peripheral route. For
example, in the central route to persuasion, the viewer might have asked: "Just
how unusual is the Massachusetts prison furlough program? Do other states have
similar programs? What is the success rate of such programs? Have instances
like the Horton case happened in other states and with other governors? Can
Dukakis really be held personally responsible for the decision to release Horton?
How many prisoners were furloughed in Massachusetts without incident? Given
that the cost in 1988 of imprisoning someone for four years was approximately
$88,000, or equal to the cost of four years of tuition for a student at Harvard with
enough left over to buy the student a BMW upon graduation, is the prison
furlough program worth trying?"*
In the central route, the Horton ad is potentially less effective (and might even
have had the potential to damage the Bush campaign).
The ad addressed few questions that a thoughtful viewer might raise.
This raises a crucial question: What determines which route to persuasion will be
adopted? One factor identified by Petty and Cacioppo is the recipients

motivation to think about the message. In one experiment, Petty and Cacioppo,
along with their student Rachel Goldman,8 investigated the role of personal
involvement in determining how we think about a message. Students at the
University of Missouri heard a message advocating that their university adopt an
exam that all students would need to pass in their senior year in order to
graduate. Half of the students were told that their university's chancellor was
considering adopting the comprehensive exam the following year, thereby
making the issue of adopting the exam personally relevant for these students.
The other half were told that the changes would not take effect for ten years and
thus would not affect them personally.
To see how the personal relevance of an issue influenced thinking about a
communication, Petty, Cacioppo, and Goldman prepared four different versions
of the comprehensive exam message. Half of the messages were attributed to a
source low in expertise—a local high school class. The other half of the
messages were attributed to a source high in expertise—the Carnegie
Commission on Higher Education.
The researchers also varied the quality of arguments in the message, with half of
the messages containing weak arguments (personal opinions and anecdotes) and
the other half consisting of strong arguments (statistics and other data about the
value of the exam).
This simple study can tell us a lot about the way people think about a persuasive
message. Suppose someone was operating in the central route to persuasion and
was carefully scrutinizing the communication.
When would that person be most persuaded? Given that the person was thinking
carefully, he or she would not be persuaded by weak arguments and the source
of the communication would not matter much; however, a strong message that
stood up to close examination would be very effective. In contrast, the content of
the message would not matter much to someone who was not thinking too much
about the issue; instead, someone using the peripheral route would be most
persuaded by a simple device such as attributing the communication to an
apparently expert source.
What did Petty, Cacioppo, and Goldman find? The personal relevance of the
issue determined the route to persuasion. For those students for whom the issue
of comprehensive exams was personally relevant, the strength of the message's

argument was the most important factor determining whether or not they were
persuaded. In contrast, for those students for whom the issue of the
comprehensive exam was not personally relevant, the source of the
communication mattered—the source high in expertise convinced; the one from
the high school class failed to do so.
Petty and Cacioppo's two routes to persuasion should alert us to two important
points—one about ourselves as human beings and one about propaganda in our
modern world. In many ways, we are cognitive misers, forever trying to
conserve our cognitive energy.9 Given our finite ability to process information,
we often adopt the strategies of the peripheral route for simplifying complex
problems; we mindlessly accept a conclusion or proposition not for any good
reason but because it is accompanied by a simplistic persuasion device.
Modern propaganda promotes the use of the peripheral route to persuasion and is
designed to take advantage of the limited processing capabilities of the cognitive
miser. The characteristics of modern persuasion—the message-dense
environment, the thirty-second ad, the immediacy of persuasion—make it
increasingly more difficult to think deeply about important issues and decisions.
Given that we often operate in the peripheral route, professional propagandists
have free rein to use the type of tactics described at the beginning of this chapter
and throughout this book to achieve, with impunity, whatever goal they may
have in mind.
We have a state of affairs that may be called the essential dilemma of modern
democracy. On the one hand, we, as a society, value persuasion; our government
is based on the belief that free speech and discussion and exchange of ideas can
lead to fairer and better decision making. On the other hand, as cognitive misers
we often do not participate fully in this discussion, instead relying not on careful
thought and scrutiny of a message but on simplistic persuasion devices and
limited reasoning. Mindless propaganda, not thoughtful persuasion, flourishes.
The antidote to the dilemma of modern democracy is not a simple one. It
requires each of us to take steps to minimize the likelihood of our processing
important information in the peripheral route. This might include increasing our
ability to think about an issue through education or improving our ability to
detect and understand propaganda by learning more about persuasion. It could
involve restructuring the way information is presented in our society so that we
have the time as well as the ability to think before we decide. It may mean

alerting others to the personal importance of an issue so that many more citizens
are encouraged to think deeply about a proposition. The dilemma of modern
democracy is one that we will face throughout this volume. Given the stakes, it
behooves each of us to think carefully about how this dilemma can best be
resolved.
*
Some facts about Dukakis and the furlough program did emerge a few years
after the election.7 Some of these facts include: Four other convicted murderers
who were participants in the furlough program escaped—all white; selecting the
one black man for the ad emphasized the racial motives. The furlough program
was begun in Massachusetts by Dukakis's Republican predecessor; during ten
years of the Dukakis administration, 275 furlough participants escaped compared
with 269 in just three years of the preceding Republican administration. After
the Horton escape (and before the 1988
election), Dukakis strengthened the program requirements created by his
Republican predecessor. Similar crimes had been committed by participants in
the federal and California furlough programs under Bush and Reagan. The
creator of some of Bush's negative campaign ads, Dennis Frankenberry, was
himself a beneficiary of a work-release program, serving 250 hours of
community service as opposed to going to prison for severely injuring two
young men in a hit-and-run accident that occurred when he was driving under
the influence of alcohol. Ironically, it was the public service announcements that
Frankenberry created while on work-release that brought him to the attention of
the Bush campaign.

 

4
The Rationalizing Animal
We humans like to think of ourselves as rational animals. However, it is more
true that we are rationalizing animals, that, no matter how irrationally we might
actually behave, we attempt to appear reasonable to ourselves and to others.
According to the existentialist philosopher Albert Camus, we humans are
creatures who spend our entire lives in an attempt to convince ourselves that our
lives are not absurd. How do we demonstrate that our lives are not absurd? By
finding ways to justify our actions, as the following example illustrates.
Marian Keech was a charismatic, middle-aged woman living in a large
midwestern city who, in the early 1950s, claimed to be receiving messages from
outer space.1 One evening in September, she received a message from the planet
Clarion informing her that on December 21, the world would be destroyed by a
great flood. The message went on to say that a fleet of flying saucers would
come from Clarion to rescue her and those close to her.
Mrs.
Keech attracted a small but loyal group of followers who fervently believed in
her prophecy and made a great many sacrifices consistent with this belief—they
quit their jobs; gave away their money, houses, and possessions (who needs
money and possessions on the planet Clarion?); and withdrew from their friends.
A few even left their spouses.
Mrs.
Keech also attracted a small group of social psychologists who infiltrated the
movement, pretending to be believers, because they wanted to get a precise,
close-up view of what these people would do after December 21 when they
discovered that their prophecy had failed—if, indeed, it did fail! The social
psychologists noted that Mrs. Keech and her followers were a gentle, benign,
reclusive group. One of the most interesting things about them was that they
shunned publicity and discouraged converts; they were content to stick to
themselves. They treated the "newcomers"

politely, but they made it clear that it was of no consequence to them whether or
not the newcomers chose to remain a part of the group. They were confident in
their beliefs, but it was a quiet, nonflamboyant confidence. Mrs. Keech and her
followers refused to grant interviews to reporters and declined to publicize their
beliefs in any way.
On the morning of December 20, Mrs. Keech received a message from the
planet Clarion instructing her group to be prepared to be picked up precisely at
midnight. They were also told to remove all metal from their clothing. The group
complied; zippers and clasps were dutifully removed from trousers, skirts, and
blouses. When midnight passed and the spaceship did not arrive, the group
became increasingly engulfed by feelings of anxiety and despair. By 4:00 a.m.
the group was sitting in stunned silence. But then, at 4:45 a.m., Mrs. Keech's face
suddenly took on a radiant glow; she had just received a message from Clarion
to the effect that there was no longer any need for the flying saucers to descend
—the world had been spared a cataclysm because of the unflagging faith of this
small group of believers! The message went on to say that the little group, sitting
all night long, had spread so much light that the God of Earth had decided to
save the world from destruction. As you might imagine, the group was relieved
and elated to hear this news.
What the group did next aroused the curiosity of the social psychologists even
more. Within twenty-four hours, the true believers—this group of quiet,
reclusive, shy people—began calling newspapers and TV stations to talk about
their prophecy and why it had failed.
They made speeches at the drop of a hat and stood on street corners handing out
leaflets trying very hard to attract followers.
Apparently, the group suddenly found it of urgent importance to spread its
message to as broad an audience as possible. Why?
We would suggest that, after the initial elation, the group experienced some
doubts; they had given up a great deal because of their belief in the imminent
end of the world. The world had not ended, and they were now devoid of their
homes, jobs, and possessions—even, a few of them, their spouses. How could
they be certain that they had done the right thing? How could they convince
themselves that their behavior had not been absurd? By convincing others, of

course! After their original prophecy failed, the group felt motivated to attract
followers as a way of convincing themselves that the sacrifices they had made
were not in vain; if they could somehow persuade others that their belief had
saved the world, then they could allay their own doubts. In the process, they
transformed themselves from believers into zealots.
In 1957, Leon Festinger, one of social psychology's most important theorists and
a member of the team of social psychologists who had infiltrated Mrs. Keech's
group, proposed his theory of cognitive dissonance, which describes and predicts
how we humans rationalize behavior.2 Dissonance occurs whenever a person
simultaneously holds two inconsistent cognitions (ideas, beliefs, opinions). For
example, the belief that the world will end on a certain day is dissonant with the
awareness, when the day breaks, that the world has not ended. Festinger
maintained that this state of inconsistency is so uncomfortable that people strive
to reduce the conflict in the easiest way possible. They will change one or both
cognitions so that they will "fit together" better. This is especially true in
situations (such as the one just described) in which a person's self-esteem is at
risk.3 In these circumstances, individuals will go to great lengths of distortion,
denial, and self-persuasion in order to justify their past behavior.
When our self-esteem has been threatened by our own past behavior, we all have
a powerful tendency to become rationalizing animals.
The fact that we are rationalizing animals has important implications for how we
receive and react to propaganda. Consider what happens when Frank, a smoker,
is confronted with evidence that smoking causes cancer. Frank will be motivated
to change either his attitudes about smoking or his behavior. And as anyone who
has tried to quit knows, the former alternative is easier. Frank may decide that
the studies are lousy. He may point to friends—"If Sam, Jack, and Kate smoke,
cigarettes can't be all that dangerous." He may conclude that filters trap all the
cancer-producing materials or he may try a low-tar, low-nicotine brand of
cigarette. Or he may argue that he would rather live a short and happy life with
cigarettes than a long and miserable life without them. The more a person is
committed to a course of action, the more resistant that person will be to
information that threatens that course. Psychologists have reported that the
people who are least likely to believe in the dangers of smoking are those who
tried to quit and failed. They have become more committed to smoking.
By reducing dissonance, a person defends the ego and retains a positive self-

image. But self-justification can reach startling extremes; people will ignore
danger in order to avoid dissonance, even when that ignorance can cause their
deaths and the deaths of loved ones.
We mean that literally.
California is earthquake country.4 On May 2, 1983, an earthquake of magnitude
6.5 struck the quiet farming town of Colinga, California.
Although the quake caused considerable damage and destruction to the town,
there was one positive result: The state of California mandated that all cities and
towns assess how local buildings would fare in a large earthquake and begin to
take steps to minimize that damage. In the city of Santa Cruz (where we live),
Dave Steeves, a respected engineer, was charged with the task of preparing such
an earthquake audit. Steeves identified 175 buildings that would suffer severe
damage in a large earthquake, many of which were located in the Pacific Garden
Mall area, the picturesque downtown shopping area of Santa Cruz. This area was
particularly vulnerable to earthquake damage because many of the buildings
were constructed of unreinforced masonry and, in addition, were built on sandy
landfill, which tends to magnify the effects of a quake.
What was the reaction of the Santa Cruz city council to Steeves's report?
A rational response would have been to evaluate carefully what he had to say.
Did his arguments about unreinforced masonry and sandy landfill make sense?
Did he do a complete inspection of the town?
Once satisfied that Steeves's argument was sound, a rational person would then
have turned to a search for solutions—perhaps asking state and federal agencies
for aid, alerting citizens to the danger, identifying immediate but low-cost ways
of improving safety, marshaling local citizens to help with the situation, and so
on.
Indeed, Steeves identified at least one such low-cost solution.
But this was not the reaction of the town to Steeves's news. Instead, his report
was dismissed by the city council, which voted unanimously in 1987 to wait for
the state of California to clarify the "nature of the state law, its options and their
legal circumstances regarding the state law" and to convene a new committee to
look at the issue. Steeves was called an alarmist and was charged with

threatening the town with financial ruin. Many denied that a large earthquake
was imminent or would even come at all. In short, Steeves's report set off an
attempt at collective dissonance reduction among town leaders.
On October 17, 1989, an earthquake of magnitude 7.1 hit Loma Prieta, a
mountain area just outside Santa Cruz. Five people were killed and about 2,000
were injured in Santa Cruz County; 300 homes were destroyed and 5,000 more
were seriously damaged. The Pacific Garden Mall lay in ruins. If anything,
Steeves's report had erred on the side of optimism. As further testimony to the
powerful need to reduce dissonance, one city official blamed Steeves for the lack
of earthquake preparedness because his report "succeeded in having the whole
issue put off by scaring people."
Dissonance reduction can lead to more than just attempts to avoid disagreeable
information, as in the case of the smoker and the city of Santa Cruz.
The reduction of dissonance is a part of everyday life; this is used to advantage
by propagandists in what we call the rationalization trap. The trap goes like this.
First, the propagandist intentionally arouses feelings of dissonance by
threatening self-esteem—for example, by making the person feel guilty about
something, by arousing feelings of shame or inadequacy, or by making the
person look like a hypocrite or someone who does not honor his or her word.
Next, the propagandist offers one solution, one way of reducing this dissonance
—by complying with whatever request the propagandist has in mind. The way to
reduce that guilt, eliminate that shame, honor that commitment, and restore your
feelings of adequacy is to give to that charity, buy that car, hate that enemy, or
vote for that leader.
Throughout this book, we will see many variations of the rationalization trap,
especially when we talk about the use of emotions in propaganda. But for now,
to provide a flavor of what we mean, let's look at two examples of the trap: one
involving a subtle request to give to a charity and the other dealing with the
more serious issue of war propaganda.
Suppose you are at home and someone knocks at your door, asking you to
contribute to a worthy charity. If you don't want to contribute, you probably
wouldn't find it too difficult to come up with reasons for declining—you don't
have the money, your contribution probably won't help much anyway, and so on.
But suppose that, after delivering a standard plea for a donation, the fund-raiser

adds one simple phrase—"even a penny will help." There goes your easy excuse.
Refusing to donate after hearing this statement would undoubtedly stir up some
dissonance by challenging your self-concept.
After all, what kind of person is it who is too mean or stingy to come up with a
penny? Your previous justifications would no longer apply. The rationalization
trap is set. The request threatens your self-esteem, and there is only one way to
reduce this negative feeling—give to the charity.
Such a scenario was tested experimentally by Robert Cialdini and David
Schroeder.5 Students acting as fund-raisers went door to door asking for
donations. Their appeal was identical except that half of the time they added the
phrase "even a penny will help."
The residents who were approached with the "even-a-penny"
request gave contributions more often, donating almost twice as frequently as
those getting just the standard plea. Furthermore, on average, the "even-a-penny"
contributors were likely to give as much money as the others; that is, the
statement legitimizing the small donation did not reduce the size of the
contributions. Why?
Apparently, not only does the lack of external justification for refusing to donate
encourage people to give money, but, after they have decided whether to
contribute, the desire to avoid appearing stingy or cheap affects their decision
about how much to give. Once people reach into their pockets, emerging with a
mere penny is self-demeaning; a larger donation is consistent with their self-
perception of being reasonably kind and generous.
One of the most pernicious functions of war propaganda is to make it easier for
members of one nation to destroy members of another nation with psychological
impunity. War causes a great deal of harm and destruction, often to innocent
bystanders and children. The cognition "I and my country are decent, fair, and
reasonable" is dissonant with the cognition "I and my country have hurt
innocent people." If the harm is clear, then you cannot reduce your dissonance
by claiming that it wasn't done or it wasn't really violence. In this situation, the
most effective way to reduce dissonance is to minimize the humanity or
maximize the culpability of the victim of your action—to convince yourself the
victims deserved what they got.

How else can we account for the following phenomenon? Near the end of World
War II, American planes dropped nuclear bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
More than 100,000 civilians (including women and children) were killed, and
countless thousands suffered severe injuries. It is currently fashionable for most
Americans to decry that decision. But a week after the bombs were dropped, a
public opinion poll indicated that less than 5% of the American population felt
we should not have used those weapons, and an astonishing 23% felt we should
have used many more of them before allowing Japan the opportunity to
surrender.6
Some of our readers might consider these events ancient history. But, more
recently, during the Persian Gulf war, the people of Iraq were depicted as the
unfortunate followers of Saddam Hussein, "the butcher of Baghdad." In the
aftermath of the war, amidst the legitimate celebration of a stunning victory,
very few Americans paused to express much regret about the killing of tens of
thousands of Iraqi noncombatants by our "surgical" bombing raids—which also
destroyed the infrastructure of Baghdad (including the water supply), resulting in
the suffering of hundreds of thousands of innocent civilians. Almost every war
in modern times has been accompanied by characterizations of the enemy as less
than human.
Dehumanization succeeds in resolving any dissonance that may be aroused by
our cruelty toward our enemies. However, watch out; the more we justify our
cruelty, the easier it becomes. The rationalization trap becomes an escalating
spiral: "I committed an act of cruelty; I justify this act by believing that the
victim deserved it. If the victim deserved that cruelty, well maybe they deserve
more and maybe I am just the one to give it to them." Today's "ethnic cleansing"
in places such as Bosnia, Rwanda, and Kosovo are yet other cruel examples of
this cruel trap.
In this chapter, we have seen that the tendency to justify our past behavior can
lead us into an escalation of rationalizations that can be disastrous. The irony, of
course, is that, in order to avoid thinking of ourselves as stupid or immoral, we
set the stage for increasing our acts of stupidity or immorality. Is there any
antidote to the rationalization trap? Although it is clear that most of us will go to
great lengths to justify our actions, it is just as clear that, if that were all we did,
we would never learn from our experience; human beings cannot live by
consonance alone.7

In our everyday experience, we have seen people break out of the rationalization
trap by courageously admitting to their mistakes and learning from their errors.
How? Under what conditions? Ideally, when we make a mistake, it would be
useful for us to be able to interrupt the ego-protective tendency to deny, distort,
and to justify it; to bring ourselves to say, in effect, "OK, I blew it. What can I
learn from the experience so I will not end up in this position again?" This can
come about, first, through an understanding of our defensiveness and
dissonance-reducing tendencies and, second, through the development of enough
ego strength to recognize and face up to errors in past behavior that require
correction—not justification.
We are well aware of the fact that this is easier said than done. We live in a
culture where mistakes are not easily tolerated and failure is considered sinful—
where children who flunk an exam are sometimes held up to ridicule and where
skillful major league baseball managers are fired after one losing season.
Perhaps, if we could bring ourselves to be more tolerant of the failure of others,
we might be able to tolerate our own shortcomings and thereby short-circuit the
knee-jerk tendency to justify whatever it is that we have done.
 

5
The Four Stratagems of Influence
In the fall of 1863, Abraham Lincoln was perhaps one of the least popular and
most despised presidents in U.S. history. Elected in 1860
with less than 40% of the popular vote, Lincoln presided over a divided nation.
He faced a hostile press that accused him of everything from being a drunkard to
exchanging pardons for votes to warmongering to being a cowardly tyrant and
dictator to advocating "free love, free land, and free Negroes." His Union
soldiers were called "Lincolnpoop."
Immediately after Lincoln assumed the presidency, rebel forces took control of
Fort Sumter in South Carolina, forcing a bloody civil war. The war was
unpopular from the start, and support ebbed further as the citizens of the
northern states, never fully convinced of why slavery should be abolished,
witnessed one bloody battle after another and mourned the loss of their war
dead. By 1863, anti-war sentiment had coalesced into draft riots, with mobs
raging through the streets of New York City looting, burning, and killing until
federal troops could be brought from the battlefield to quell the violence. One of
the bloodiest battles of the Civil War occurred at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania,
where both sides suffered casualties of more than 50,000 dead or wounded. The
bodies were buried by a local contractor in a new seventeen-acre cemetery at a
cost of $1.59 per corpse. To dedicate the cemetery, Edward Everett, a politician,
orator, and former president of Harvard College, gave a two-hour address
recounting the events of the battle. President Lincoln was also invited to attend
the dedication and to deliver "a few appropriate remarks." He required only three
minutes to speak his 272 words at Gettysburg; however, when he finished,
Abraham Lincoln had given the citizens of his country a vision of what they
were building—a nation based on the principles that all are created equal and
that government should be of the people, by the people, for the people.1
During the early 1970s, Jeff Christy was a little-known disc jockey working in
the Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, area. However, Christy's stint ended in 1974, when
radio station KQV fired him for being a "no-talent bum." After landing a job on
Kansas City's KFLX, Christy was fired again, this time because of "personality

clashes." To make a living, Rush Limbaugh (Christy's real name) took a job in
the sales department of the Kansas City Royals baseball team until he got his big
break—his own radio talk show with KFBK in Sacramento, California. Today,
Rush Limbaugh is heard (on almost 600 radio stations) at least two times a week
by 11% of the U.S. adult population. And his influence doesn't stop there.
During the 1992
presidential election, Limbaugh was invited to spend the night at the White
House; President Bush personally carried Limbaugh's luggage to the Lincoln
bedroom. In 1994, Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas took time from his
busy schedule to officiate at the wedding of Limbaugh to his third wife, Marta.
Justice Thomas hosted the wedding at his own home. Mary Matalin, Bush's
deputy campaign manager in 1992
and co-host of a cable TV talk show, told one reporter, "Senators and
congressmen all across the board on the Republican side call [Limbaugh] all
morning long before he goes on the air."2
Paul Ingram was a pillar of his Olympia, Washington, community. At age forty-
three, he was the chief civil deputy of the sheriff's department and active in both
local politics and his Church of Living Water. All that changed on November 28,
1988, when Ingram was arrested for sexually molesting his two daughters—
Ericka (then twenty-two years old) and Julie (then eighteen years old). After a
series of interrogations led by police detectives Joe Vukich and Brian Schoening,
clinical psychologist Richard Peterson, and Pastor John Bra tun, Ingram
confessed to these heinous crimes. According to the confession, he and his wife,
Sandy, had been sexually abusing their daughters for seventeen years. Ingram
admitted that he was the leader of a satanic cult engaged in ritual slaughter of
infants and animals on his farm. He admitted further that he had impregnated
one of his daughters and then forced her to have an abortion. He stated that his
home served as headquarters for a ring of pedophiles (including two members of
the local police) who would regularly get drunk and rape Julie.
What makes this story even more remarkable is that there is no evidence that
what Ingram admitted to ever occurred and much evidence that, at the very least,
parts of it never could have happened. For example, after massive police
investigations, including large-scale excavations of Ingram's farm, no physical
evidence of murdered infants and animals was ever found. Despite an extensive
search, the doctor who allegedly performed the abortion was never located. The

Ingram family doctor found no physical evidence of abuse when he examined
the daughters. Nighttime aircraft patrols never spotted the bonfires supposedly at
the center of ongoing satanic rituals in the area (although these patrols did lead
to busts of a few fraternity beer parties). The two police officers alleged to be
members of the ring of pedophiles denied abusing the daughters. Julie Ingram
did claim to have received a threatening letter from her father; however, the
letter was later shown to be written in Julie's own handwriting.
Court-ordered examinations failed to find scars on the bodies of Ericka and Julie
—scars that they claimed were the result of repeated satanic tortures. Ericka still
publicly claims that she carries these scars and has denounced the sheriffs office
for refusing to arrest thirty doctors, lawyers, and judges who she identified as
part of the satanic conspiracy and who she claims continue to murder innocent
babies. Other than Ingram's confession, there is no evidence to corroborate the
allegations of sexual abuse made by Ericka and Julie. Paul Ingram is now
serving a twenty-one-year sentence for a crime most experts agree was never
committed.3
Although Abraham Lincoln, Rush Limbaugh, and the interrogation team of
Vukich, Schoening, Peterson, and Bratun appear to be as different from each
other as different can be, they all have at least one thing in common—each
provides us with an example of extremely effective persuasion. Abraham
Lincoln's Gettysburg Address defined what it means to be an "American"; it
continues to be taught in American schools and influences us yet today, some six
score and seventeen years later. Through entertainment and persuasion, Rush
Limbaugh has captured the attention of presidents, congressional leaders,
Supreme Court justices, key political operatives, and more than 20 million
regular listeners. The interrogation team convinced Paul Ingram to do something
many people think is impossible— to change the memory of his life—and to
believe (almost certainly falsely) that he committed a crime that is perhaps the
worst a father could commit. How did these brokers of persuasion do it? What
makes someone an effective influence agent?
The successful persuasion agent can use any number of influence tactics capable
of inducing the target to think positively about an issue or course of action.
However, maximum influence is most likely to occur when four main stratagems
of influence or general maneuvers for obtaining compliance are accomplished.
What are these four stratagems of influence? The first is to take control of the

situation and establish a favorable climate for your message, a process we call
pre-persuasion. Pre-persuasion refers to how the issue is structured and how the
decision is framed. If fully successful, pre-persuasion establishes "what everyone
knows"
and "what everyone takes for granted" (even if it shouldn't be and should,
instead, be taken as a point of discussion). By cleverly establishing how an issue
is defined and discussed, however, a communicator can influence cognitive
responses and obtain consent without even appearing to be attempting to
persuade us. Next, the communicator needs to establish a favorable image in the
eyes of the audience. We call this stratagem source credibility. In other words,
the communicator needs to appear likable or authoritative or trustworthy or
possessed of any other attribute that would facilitate persuasion. The third
stratagem is to construct and deliver a message that focuses the targets' attention
and thoughts on exactly what the communicator wants them to think about—for
example, by distracting the targets from arguing against the proposal, or by
focusing targets' attention on a vivid and powerful image, or even by inducing
the targets to persuade themselves. Finally, effective influence controls the
emotions of the target and follows a simple rule: Arouse an emotion and then
offer the target a way of responding to that emotion that just happens to be the
desired course of action. In such situations, the target becomes preoccupied with
dealing with the emotions, complying with the request in hopes of escaping a
negative emotion or maintaining a positive one.
The four stratagems of influence go back to ancient times. As we noted in
Chapter 1, Aristotle was the first to develop a comprehensive theory of
persuasion.4 His theory recognized three facets of persuasion—the source
(ethos), the message (logos), and the emotions of the audience (pathos). For each
facet, Aristotle provided recommendations to the would-be communicator. For
example, he recommended that the orator present himself as a good person and
as one who could be trusted; he advised that speech writers, in constructing a
persuasive message, use arguments that appear to follow the rules of logic and
that they use vivid historical and imaginary examples to illustrate points. The
message should be tailored to fit the preexisting beliefs of the audience.
Aristotle considered an understanding of the feelings of the audience to be
essential. An angry person will act differently from one who is pleased. The
orator must be able to direct these emotions to good use. To this end, Aristotle
described how to evoke emotions in an audience—anger, friendship, fear, envy,

shame—and discussed how to put such emotions to effective persuasive use.
Aristotle also recognized one other factor influencing persuasion, which he
called atechnoi—facts and events outside the immediate control of the speaker.
In a court of law, for example, he identified certain circumstances—the way the
law is written, the content of a contract, the testimony of a witness—that set the
stage for persuasive argument; in a sense, these circumstances establish the
playing field on which argument takes place. They serve to focus the issue and
to constrain the range of tactics that might be used.
As such, they are important determinants of the outcome of a case.
Aristotle suggested a number of ways for dealing with these factors—
challenging the validity of a law, discrediting a witness—that we might today
call "putting the right spin"
on the matter.
The Roman lawyer Cicero agreed with much of what Aristotle said about
persuasion. Cicero, who achieved fame in ancient Rome for his successful
courtroom defense of some of Rome's most notorious villains and murderers,
established what he called the officio, oratoris, the duties of the orator—to
charm (establish the credibility of the orator), to teach (present a message with
sound arguments), and to move (fill an audience with emotions).
One of Cicero's most important contributions was the further development of
Aristotle's concept of atechnoi into a theory of statis, or status of the issue—
what we term pre-persuasion. The task of an orator or a lawyer is to provide a
definition of the situation that is most advantageous for her or his own point of
view.
For example, suppose your client has been accused of murder. The first line of
defense is to deny the facts—"No, my client didn't do it." If that is not possible,
then challenge the definition of the action—"Sure, she killed him, but it wasn't
murder." If that fails, then question the quality of the deed—"Yes, it was murder,
but it was murder with good intent and performed under extenuating
circumstances." When all else fails, question the right of the tribunal to try the
case in the first place—"This court has no authority to judge a queen." Readers
will probably see parallels between Cicero's recommendations and the conduct
of many modem legal cases.

Let's turn our attention now to the three effective influence agents described at
the beginning of this chapter and see how each accomplished the four stratagems
of influence.
Abraham Lincoln's persuasion task at Gettysburg was a multifaceted one, to say
the least. First, he had to justify the war effort. For what purpose had these
soldiers died at Gettysburg? Why was the continuation of the war worth the
continued loss of life? Next, Lincoln had to justify an action he had taken a few
months earlier—the issuance of the Emancipation Proclamation, which freed the
enslaved population of the South. The Emancipation Proclamation represented a
shift in Lincoln's policy from containment of slavery to the southern states to its
elimination. Had he lived today, Lincoln would have been labeled a "waffler" or
a "liberal masquerading as a conservative," depending on your position on
slavery. Finally, and most importantly, Lincoln had to heal the nation, preserve
the Union, and unite the rebels to the rest of the nation. Notice that this complex
of objectives limited the rhetoric that Lincoln could use. For example, one
common way of justifying war is to use the atrocity story—in this case, to vilify
the southern rebels through graphic depictions of the pain of slavery or incidents
of slaughter. Such a tactic would have made it harder, however, for the rebels to
later embrace the Union. At the end of this chapter, we reprint how Lincoln
addressed these issues at Gettysburg.
In his Gettysburg Address, Lincoln employed a standard pre-persuasion tactic
used by just about every politician worth his or her salt—define the issue in such
a way that you can't help but win. What is remarkable about the speech is that it
failed to mention any of the major issues of the day—slavery, the Emancipation
Proclamation, a policy for treatment of the former slaves, or how the war would
be waged to achieve victory. It was not a speech for policy wonks—those
seeking a detailed analysis of why we should embark on a given course of
action. Instead, Lincoln defined the issues in a way that everyone could agree
with, using glittering generalities and purr words (see Chapter 6)—for example,
Lincoln called for the nation to support the "unfinished work" of those who died
and to usher in a "new birth of freedom." These are issues that just about any one
could endorse.
Perhaps Lincoln's most effective pre-persuasion tactic, however, occurred in the
first six words of the address—the ones learned and often parodied by
schoolchildren: "Four score and seven years ago."
How so? With these six words Lincoln identified the birth of the United States

How so? With these six words, Lincoln identified the birth of the United States
with the signing of the Declaration of Independence in 1776, not the ratification
of the U.S. Constitution in 1789. The fact that Americans now universally accept
1776 as the birth of the nation, not 1789 (witness the celebration of the
bicentennial in 1976
compared to the near neglect of the Constitution's bicentennial in 1989), is a
testament to the power of Lincoln's message. Such acceptance was not the case
in 1863. The first government established by the colonists was based on the
Articles of Confederation, and, for the most part, it failed. The founders tried
again with a new Constitution, adopted in 1789. Proponents of slavery argued
for the primacy of the U.S. Constitution, which at the time did not outlaw
slavery. On the other hand, those who opposed slavery took solace in the
Declaration's proposition "that all men are created equal."5 So without so much
as mentioning the abolition of slavery, the Emancipation Proclamation, or the
war, Lincoln justified them all with six little words that identified the birth of the
nation with the Declaration of Independence and the guiding principle of
equality. Interestingly, Lincoln's sleight of hand was not accepted by everyone in
the North at the time. An editorial in the Chicago Times expressed outrage that
Lincoln would betray the Constitution (by giving priority to the Declaration) and
defame those who wrote it and died for it at Gettysburg—"men with too much
self-respect to declare that Negroes were their equals."6
When it came to establishing and using source credibility, Lincoln had a major
problem: His authority as president was not accepted by large portions of his
audience—most obviously by southerners in rebellion, but also by many
northerners who disliked his policy of war and felt that slavery should be
contained but not necessarily eliminated, and even by abolitionists who
distrusted him because of the slow pace of change. What could Honest Abe do?
He adopted a tactic commonly used today by advertisers (who are not much
trusted either): Get someone else to be the source of the message. Although
Lincoln delivered the speech (the voice-over, if you will), the source of the
message was the nations founders and the soldiers who died in battle for a nation
conceived in liberty. Lincoln built their credibility by calling them brave and
honored, and calling their cause nobly advanced; he even questioned his own
and his audience's worthiness to dedicate the ground in which they were buried.
Note how this redirection of source enhances the effectiveness of the message.
If Lincoln had implied that he was asking the nation to unite in his name, he

would have been scoffed at by all who opposed him and found him
untrustworthy. But who can argue with the nation's founders and those who died
in battle to protect their vision?
Surprisingly, the Gettysburg Address does not employ many of the message
tactics commonly used today; for example, the speech contains no vivid, searing
images of battle and no repetition of a catchphrase. Lincoln, however, did
package his message around a theme that appears throughout the speech—
conception, birth, dedication, and consecration of a new nation. For the
nineteenth-century audience, well versed in the Bible, this packaging conveyed a
special, spiritual nature to American democracy. To turn one's back on this
special nation would be to turn one's back on God's will.
At Gettysburg, Lincoln masterfully played on the emotions of Americans.
First, he summoned the pride in being an American (by making use of what we
call in Chapter 25 the granfalloon tactic). Interestingly, he never mentioned the
sides that fought in the battle at Gettysburg, nor did he divide Americans into
southerner versus northerner or black versus white or slave versus free. Instead,
he talked about all Americans, even the southerners in rebellion, as special and
engaged in a great experiment of self-government and liberty. Next, he aroused
fear—fear that a nation conceived in liberty and dedicated to that proposition of
equality could forever perish from the earth. Finally, he evoked feelings of
obligation and commitment to those who brought forth this special nation and
who had given their lives to preserve it. Note how each of these emotions
requires one concerted action: To maintain our pride as Americans, to eliminate
the fear that this special nation will be no more, and to repay our debt, we must
continue to fight for the Union, work for liberty, and join with all Americans to
fulfill this special mission.
It is Lincoln's evoking of the emotion of hypocrisy that perhaps did the most to
change the course of American history. As Garry Wills puts it: "Americans at
that time were reverent toward (prejudiced in favor of) the Declaration of
Independence; yet many of them were also prejudiced in favor of slavery.
Lincoln kept arguing, in ingenious ways, that they must, in consistency, give up
one or the other prejudice."7 At that time, the typical way to resolve this
inconsistency was to claim that, regardless of how one felt about slavery, the
U.S. Constitution gave Americans the right to self-govern—and if some states
wanted slavery, so be it. Even Lincoln had accepted this compromise for some

time. However, at Gettysburg he would have none of this. He reminded his
audience of their hypocrisy in his first line—a nation "dedicated to the
proposition that all men are created equal." How could there be government of
the people, by the people, and for the people if some Americans could be
excluded against their will? He offered his audience no choice but to confront
their prejudice and decide whether a nation "so conceived and dedicated, can
long endure."
Within seven years of the Gettysburg Address, the United States had adopted the
Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments to the Constitution—
amendments that forever secured the nation's commitment to equality by
outlawing slavery, ensuring equal protection under the law for all citizens, and
guaranteeing the right to vote regardless of race or color.
In contrast to the complexity of Lincoln's mission, Rush Limbaugh needs to
perform only two simpler tasks of influence. First, he has to secure an audience.
As he puts it, "A turning point in my career came when I realized that the sole
purpose for all of us in radio is to sell advertising"8—that is, to secure ratings.
Limbaugh's second task, which he often denies or downplays, is to win support
for his political views. His show is replete with calls to write Congress regarding
issues Limbaugh feels are important and to vote for his preferred candidates. He
accomplishes the first task by being engaging, entertaining, and fun to listen to,
especially if you agree with him. He accomplishes the second task by executing
the four stratagems of influence.
One pre-persuasion tactic Limbaugh frequently uses is labeling a person or issue
in such a way that few would be inclined to like the person or endorse the issue.
For example, he cautions his audience to look out for environmental wackos,
feminazis, liberal Democrats, the spaced-out Hollywood Left, long-haired
maggot-infested dope-smoking peace pansies, faggots, commie libs, and uglo-
Americans. On the other hand, he defines his program as "excellence in
broadcasting."
Who can be for Nazis of any stripe, and who can oppose "excellence"?
Limbaugh also distorts positions to make them easy to refute. For example,
during the Clinton years, Limbaugh took Bill Clinton to task for his proposed
income tax increase on families making less than $50,000 and his plan to
unilaterally disarm the United States. Pretty frightening, huh? Clinton, of course,

had neither advocated nor attempted to implement either policy.
Next, Limbaugh maintains complete control of the information on his show.
To participate, callers must go through a screening process ensuring that what
they have to say fits with what Limbaugh wants. Should an unwanted point of
view happen to make it through the screen, Limbaugh can cut off the audio to
the caller so that he or she can't hear the program and thus sounds stupid for not
responding to the issues; if the caller is particularly troublesome, Limbaugh can
simply hang up.
For example, when a conversation with an African-American caller wasn't going
the way he wanted, Limbaugh hung up and told the caller to "take that bone out
of your nose and call me back." The caller, of course, couldn't do the same to
Limbaugh or answer his charge. Limbaugh wins by default.
Limbaugh's stock-in-trade pre-persuasion tactic is rumor and innuendo—a
distortion, half-truth, outright falsity, or unsupported claim presented as the
truth. Rumor and innuendo pre-persuade by setting a context for later argument.
For example, suppose I wanted you to believe that government is too liberal and
wasteful and that this "liberal" government was failing in areas such as civil
rights, energy, education, and tobacco regulation. One way, adopted by
Limbaugh, is to repeat rumors and innuendoes such as the following:
"The Supreme Court has become the refuge of liberalism." (At the time of
the statement, eight of the nine Supreme Court members had been
appointed by Republican presidents, with four appointed by Reagan.)
"I remember those long gas lines of the 1970s resulting from Jimmy
Carter." (The lines occurred in 1973 during the Nixon administration.)
"Kansas City now has more people working for the government than they
have working in the private sector." (Roughly 5% of the workers in Kansas
City work for the government.)
"Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas is a man who escaped the bonds
of poverty by methods other than those prescribed by civil rights
organizations." (Thomas was admitted in 1971 to Yale's law school under
an affirmative action program with a goal of admitting 10% minority
students—a fact acknowledged by Thomas.)

"We are providing enough money per classroom today to provide
chauffeured limousines to teachers and kids." (In Santa Cruz, California, it
costs $55 per hour plus tax and tip, with a three-hour minimum, to hire 5-
Star Limo Service; this works out to $512 per eight-hour day, or $102,400
per forty-week year for each kid and teacher—tip not included. For each
class of twenty students and a teacher, the school board would need to
spend more than $2.1 million per year—perhaps they can car-pool.)
"There is no conclusive proof that nicotine's addictive. And the same thing
with cigarettes causing emphysema, lung cancer, heart disease."
(Virtually all scientists agree that there is abundant evidence to justify
government alarm.)
To establish source credibility, Limbaugh presents an image of a "regular guy
just like his audience members." For example, Limbaugh stated on his TV show:
"All of these rich guys—like the Kennedy family and Perot—pretending to live
just like we do and pretending to understand our trials and tribulations and
pretending to represent us, and they get away with this." Notice how this image
facilitates influence: We usually don't argue with our friends. (We should also
note that when he said this, Limbaugh was earning an estimated $20 million a
year—a salary far above that of the average American.)
Rush Limbaugh employs a number of tactics to ensure that his audience thinks
about his message in the way he desires. For example, he uses vivid images to
focus attention on his arguments: "Watermelons are environmentalist. They're
green on the outside but red on the inside." "Ralph Nader is a human
handkerchief."
Limbaugh distracts his audience members from thinking deeply about what is
said with disparaging humor: "Governor Ann Richards was born needing her
face ironed." "Hillary Clinton looks like a Pontiac hood ornament." His
arguments are packaged in racism, making them more persuasive to listeners
who are racially prejudiced: In arguing for NAFTA, he said, "Let the unskilled
jobs, let the kinds of jobs that take absolutely no knowledge whatsoever to do—
let stupid and unskilled Mexicans do that work." Finally, he repeats his
arguments over and over; for example, he will pick a theme for the day and keep
repeating his point of view in different ways. In Chapter 20 we discuss how
repetition alone can increase the effectiveness of a communication.

Limbaugh frequently plays on two sets of emotions. First, he arouses fear of
what might happen if his preferred course of action is not granted.
Some examples: "There is a law coming down which says if you have a Bible at
your desk at work, then you are guilty of religious harassment." He relabeled an
attempt to reinstate the Fairness Doctrine (a requirement that broadcasters cover
some controversial issues in their community with balancing views) as "the
Hush Rush Bill," intended to get him personally off the airwaves. He also
claimed, "The First Amendment has been used to forcibly remove religion from
not just our classrooms but all government institutions."
Second, similar to Abraham Lincoln, Rush Limbaugh employs the granfalloon
(group-pride) tactic, but with some important twists. Whereas Lincoln aroused
feelings of pride in being an American, Limbaugh trumpets the superiority of
being a "dittohead"—an avid listener to Limbaugh who agrees with whatever
Limbaugh just said. Whereas Lincoln meant the term American to be inclusive,
Limbaugh enhances the prestige of being a dittohead by contrasting it with out-
groups such as liberals ("You are morally superior to those liberal compassion
fascists; you have a real job—they must beg for a living"), minorities ("Have
you noticed how all newspaper composite pictures of wanted criminals resemble
Jesse Jackson?"), and his political rivals ("Those of you who want to take off the
Clinton/Gore bumper stickers, just go get a handicapped parking sticker instead,
and people will know why you voted that way"). Feelings of superiority among
dittoheads are strengthened by ridiculing others. In 1993, on his TV show,
Limbaugh put up a picture of Socks, the Clintons' cat, and asked, "Did you know
there is a White House dog?" He then proceeded to show a picture of Chelsea
Clinton, then thirteen years old. How can you get these feelings of superiority
for yourself? Simple. Listen in (thereby increasing Limbaugh's ratings) and just
say, "Ditto."
Finally, let's see how Paul Ingram came to believe that he raped and molested his
daughters. This involves two persuasion tasks—convincing first the daughters
and then the father.
The evidence for how Ericka and Julie came to believe their father molested
them is spotty. What is known is that they attended an annual retreat for teenage
girls, called Heart to Heart, sponsored by their church. Apparently, child abuse
was often discussed at the camp. During earlier retreats, both Ericka and Julie
had lodged independent complaints alleging sexual abuse by two different

neighbors. Police follow-ups determined that there was no basis to press charges
in either case. During the 1988 retreat, Karla Franko, a born-again Christian
claiming the gift of healing, made a prophecy—someone in the room had been
molested as a young girl by a relative. Immediately, one girl ran out of the room,
claiming abuse. Other girls joined in stating that they, too, had been abused.
By late afternoon of the last day of the retreat, Ericka had come forward as well
with the realization that she, too, had been sexually abused by her father.
Although this description is incomplete, we can begin to see some of the
influence factors that produced the charge—a situation in which claiming sexual
abuse was not only appropriate but also rewarded with attention, affection, and a
sense of belonging. Unfortunately, the Ingram case is not an isolated incident;
there has been a nationwide epidemic of parents being accused of sexually
abusing their children.
Needless to say, sexual abuse does occur within families, with tragic
consequences. At the same time, there is growing evidence that many of these
claims of sexual abuse are based on constructed memories that do not reflect
reality.9 A close examination of these cases reveals parallels to the Ingram
incident and the consistent use of the four stratagems of influence.
Therapy sessions that elicit false memories of sexual abuse use a number of pre-
persuasion tactics. First, a context for sexual abuse claims is created by
promoting—through interpersonal influence, stories in the mass media, and
books such as The Courage to Heal, Repressed Memories, and Michelle
Remembers10—three interrelated assumptions: (1) incest is much more common
than people think and can include nonphysical abuse such as seeing your father
in the bathroom or hearing an uncle making a suggestive remark; (2) satanic
cults are operating in secret across the nation and have ritually abused children
and animals; and (3) survivors of incest repress the memory of their abuse for
many years after the fact, with 60% of all incest victims not remembering their
abuse. (Actually, careful research shows the opposite—that it is extremely
difficult for trauma victims to forget.) Next, a jargon is promoted for interpreting
events—terms such as in denial, violated boundaries, emotional incest,
codependency, and in recovery.
Note how these terms can be used to put a spin on virtually any given event.
When the client raises an argument against the abuse hypothesis, she is in denial.
The mother who will not back the daughter's story of dad's rape is a

The mother who will not back the daughter s story of dad s rape is a
codependent. Ambiguous behavior and even acts of love can be cast in a sinister
mold by claiming that the fatherly hug violated boundaries and was really
emotional rape.
Clients who behave in a manner acceptable to the therapist are in recovery.
Finally, the expectation is established that the client was probably sexually
abused. For example, Franko made a prophecy that someone in the audience had
been abused; therapists often ask about abuse directly ("Were you sexually
abused as a child?") or indirectly ("You sound to me like the sort of person who
might have been sexually abused").
The source of the abuse message is typically a therapist or counselor. We expect
therapists to be professional, to have specialized training in their area of
expertise, and to have our best interests at heart. In addition to these
characteristics, Ericka and Julie accepted Karla Franko's claims of the gift of
healing and prophecy. As such, the therapist is accepted as an authority figure
who ultimately knows what is best for us.
The therapy session is conducive to the use of one of the most powerful message
tactics: self-generated persuasion or prompting and guiding the target to generate
a message that is consistent with a diagnosis of sexual abuse. How is this done?
One way to have a client convince herself that she was sexually abused is to
provide her with a long checklist of symptoms supposedly indicating abuse: Do
you have trouble knowing what you want? Are you afraid to try new
experiences?
Are you fearful of being alone in the dark? Do you feel different from other
people? The problem is that most normal people experience some of these
symptoms from time to time. By answering "yes"
to a few of these questions, the client is on the road to convincing herself that
she is a victim of abuse. Next, the client needs to develop an understanding of
how the abuse occurred. Here the therapist may use "imagistic work" (taking a
negative scene from childhood—say, a bad dream or being afraid in bed—and
then attempting to add as much detail to the image as possible); hypnotize the
client (age-regressing her in an attempt to remember the past); administer a drug
such as sodium amytal, which is inaccurately called a "truth serum," and then
guide her recall of sexual abuse; or ask the client to maintain a journal in which
she free-associates to fleeting images from the past. The result is often a set of

vivid "memories" of sexual abuse—"memories" that are highly believable
because they were self-generated.
The therapy session is often an emotional one; after all, people enter therapy
because they feel they have problems that need to be solved.
In therapy sessions that create false memories of abuse, hope is raised by
promising the client that "you'll feel better once you bring out the memories of
abuse." The alleged abuse becomes a psychological crutch, a means for
justifying failure; any problem—failure in school, a poor love life, being
overweight—is attributable to the abusive parent, not to anything for which the
client herself might be responsible. A new identity is given to the client—that of
victim and survivor.
The client is rewarded for adopting this new identity by the therapist and in
group sessions where reporting of abuse is encouraged. And this new identity
feels good. As Robert Lynd once put it: "There is nothing that makes us feel so
good as the idea that someone else is an evildoer."11 Finally, the client is
encouraged to confront the parent with the charge of sexual abuse. Once the
confrontation takes place, the client becomes committed to a course of action
that is hard to reverse, and the family is almost always torn apart by the turmoil
caused by these allegations.
In his interrogation, Paul Ingram faced many of the same tactics that created
false memories in "survivors." For example, his interrogators reminded Ingram
of the reality of the devil (an entity he believed in) and told him that it was
common to repress memories of crimes of this nature. He was pressed to agree
that his daughters would not lie about something like this, thus forcing Ingram to
either admit the crime or accuse his daughters of lying (as opposed to another
possibility—that his daughters had succumbed to influence tactics at the summer
camp). Everyone in Ingram's immediate environment—police, ministers, family,
counselors, friends—behaved as if the accusations were true. Not only were
these people authorities and experts who should know about such matters, but
they were also trusted friends who would not knowingly lie and deceive. Ingram
was reminded of certain ambiguous events (such as Julie's and Ericka's aloofness
over the past few years) and asked to generate an explanation for it. With his
best friends and the experts convinced that he had committed the crime, Ingram's
confidence in his own memories was undermined. He felt guilty as a parent for
what his daughters were experiencing and felt fear that something worse could

happen. He was offered the same hope as Julie and Ericka—confession would
begin the healing process and allow the family to face what had happened.
The power of these techniques can be seen in an interview of Paul Ingram by the
social psychologist Richard Ofshe—an expert on cults who was called in by the
prosecution for some advice on how to investigate the case. From the beginning,
Ofshe was skeptical of the story and decided to test his suspicions by seeing if
Ingram would accept as true an incident that was entirely fabricated—that
Ingram had forced his son and daughters to have sex together while he watched.
At first Ingram could not remember the event. Ofshe instructed him to attempt to
remember the scene. Ingram complied with the request and the next day returned
with a detailed account of how, on a Saturday or Sunday afternoon, he told his
children to undress and ordered Ericka to kneel and have oral sex with his son.
Ofshe's demonstration is remarkable on at least two accounts. First, it clearly
illustrates a finding consistent with much research in psychology—that human
memory is a constructive process. For example, in her research on human
memory, cognitive psychologist Elizabeth Loftus frequently demonstrates that
memories of, say, an accident or a crime scene can be modified and changed
simply through the questions asked about the incident (see Chapter 9).12 In one
study, Loftus took it a step further by demonstrating that it is possible to implant
childhood memories simply by having a parent or family member ask leading
questions about a fictitious event (in this case, being lost in a shopping mall as a
child). Second, Ofshe's questioning of Paul Ingram shows in no uncertain terms
how some common but nonetheless powerful persuasion tactics are capable of
changing something that most people hold as quite precious—their own
memories.
We had two purposes for describing these three successful sources of influence
in detail. First, we wanted to present an overview of what lies ahead. In the next
four sections of the book we will describe various tactics for accomplishing the
four stratagems of influence—to see what works and why. Second, we
juxtaposed these three sources of influence to raise some questions: When does
persuasion turn into propaganda? What forms of persuasion serve our interests
the best?
One way commonly suggested to identify propaganda is by how likable or
agreeable it is. We suspect that readers' reaction to the previous passages varied,
depending on how much they admire Abraham Lincoln, respect Rush Limbaugh,

and believe in the value of certain therapies.
If you find Lincoln or Limbaugh attractive or believe that traumatic memories
are commonly repressed and recovered, then you probably cringed as you read
this chapter (if you indeed continued to read it) and probably labeled us as
"biased" and "propagandist."
On the other hand, if you think Lincoln is overrated, hate Limbaugh, or think
psychotherapy is all bunk, you probably cheered and exclaimed, "Finally
someone who exposed those charlatans for what they are." But there is a
problem here. The use of "likable" and "agreeable" makes it seem arbitrary as to
just what propaganda is. For example, in the 1860s Abraham Lincoln would
have been labeled a propagandist; today, he is an American hero. And there is an
irony. The primary purpose of propaganda is to get you to like the communicator
and to agree with the message. So, if you find yourself readily liking and
agreeing with a communicator, this could be a sign that the message was not the
truth you thought it was, but just some very effective propaganda.
We would like to suggest two sets of questions, based on the theories presented
in the last two chapters, for distinguishing propaganda from fair and deliberative
persuasion.
First, does the communication induce thought about the issues at hand? Or does
it truncate thought and play on prejudices? (In other words, is the message
processed in the central or peripheral route described in Chapter 3?) For
example, as we prepared the material on the Gettysburg Address, we were
surprised by just how much we learned about American history, the issues of the
time, the way government does and should work, the range of options open to a
leader, why the U.S. Constitution was amended three times in the decade after
the Gettysburg Address, precisely why safeguarding of minority opinions and
rights is important in a democracy, and what the traditional values of America
are. Contrast this with the innuendo that Hillary Clinton looks like a Pontiac
hood ornament or the rumor that Paul Ingram led a satanic ring of pedophiles.
Thought stops. There is no reason to discuss further an opinion of Hillary
Clinton's—say, on health care or on parenting— because she is nothing more
than a silly hood ornament not worthy of our attention. Far from encouraging
deliberation, such disparaging humor results in what is known as jeer pressure:
It induces conformity to others'

opinions out of a fear that we, too, can be the subject of ridicule.13 Similarly,
once we become committed to the notion that Paul Ingram is satanic, there is no
reason to investigate further or to consider alternative explanations—but there
are plenty of reasons to overlook any evidence that happens to be inconsistent
with our position.
Second, how does the communicator use emotions? It is absurd to think that we
can respond without feelings to the issues of the day; indeed, it would be a sorry
world if we did not feel anger at injustice or sorrow at the pain of another or
pride in what we have accomplished.
But how we feel these emotions can make all the difference. Lincoln used our
sense of pride to ask us to explore what it meant to be an American and to be
consistent with that ideal. A good therapist can do the same— using feelings of,
say, dissatisfaction to motivate the exploration of how one should live and to
stimulate the development of skills for living.14 Contrast this with a cheap joke
designed to make fun of a teenager's looks just because she happens to be the
daughter of a president. What purpose does this serve? Does it advance our
understanding of policy issues? Does it encourage the deliberative persuasion so
vital to a democracy? It is nothing more than a cheap attempt to make us feel
superior at the expense of another. Such humor can also serve to increase
prejudices against those who are disparaged.15 When a propagandist
unscrupulously plays on our feelings of insecurity, or exploits our darkest fears,
or offers fake hope, exploration and inquiry stop. We become snared in the
rationalization trap described in the previous chapter. The goal becomes to prove
yourself superior and right no matter what. We become dependent on those who
will support our masquerade. Our emotions overwhelm our critical abilities. And
we take actions that we might not otherwise consider wise to take—developing
false memories of the past or treating an innocent person cruelly.
At a party, Tom Milewski—chief operating officer of Greater Media, a network
of highly successful radio stations—once quipped, "The formula for a successful
talk show these days is to find out what your audience's bigotry is and play to
it."16 His statement is worthy taking seriously and is a challenge to us all.
 
Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg Address

Four score and seven years ago our fathers
brought forth on this continent a new nation,
conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the
proposition that all men are created equal.
Now we are engaged in a great civil war,
testing whether that nation or any nation so
conceived and so dedicated can long endure.
We are met on a great battlefield of that war.
We have come to dedicate a portion of that
field as a final resting place for those who
here gave their lives that that nation might
live. It is altogether fitting and proper that we
should do this.
But, in a larger sense, we cannot dedicate—
we cannot consecrate—we cannot hallow—
this ground. The brave men, living and dead,
who struggled here have consecrated it, far
above our poor power to add or detract. The
world will little note, nor long remember what
we say here, but it can never forget what they
did here. It is for us, the living, rather, to be
dedicated here to the unfinished work which
they who fought here have thus far so nobly
advanced. It is rather for us to be here
dedicated to the great task remaining before us
—that from these honored dead we take
increased devotion to that cause for which
they gave the last full measure of devotion—
that we here highly resolve that these dead
shall not have died in vain—that this nation,
under God, shall have a new birth of freedom
—and that government of the people, by the
people, for the people shall not perish from
the earth.
 

 

Pre-Persuasion: Setting the Stage for
Effective Influence

6
Words of Influence
The popular comedienne Roseanne tells a joke that goes something like this. "I
have a great new recipe for trail mix—two scoops of Reese's Pieces to one scoop
of Peanut M&M s. The kids love it.
You know it's nutritional because it's trail mix." The joke is funny because we all
know that candy cannot be turned into a nutritional foodstuff simply by calling it
by a different name. Yet this is what advertisers and political pundits do every
day for their products with great success. They know that the language allows
for much latitude in usage and interpretation—latitude that can be used for
persuasive purposes. In such cases, their joke may be on us.
The social psychologist Daryl Bern provides us with an interesting analysis of
how words and slogans are used in television commercials.1 According to Bern,
a well-known brand of aspirin (which we will call "Brand A") is advertised as
100% pure aspirin; the commercial goes on to say that government tests have
shown that no other pain remedy is stronger or more effective than Brand A.
What the maker does not bother to mention is that the tests actually showed that
no brand was any weaker or less effective than any of the others. In other words,
aspirin is aspirin; all tested brands are equal—except in price, that is. For the
privilege of gulping down Brand A, consumers must pay approximately three
times the price of an equally effective but unadvertised brand.
Or perhaps you prefer an aspirin proclaimed to be "unsurpassed in speed—no
other brand works faster" and buffered so that "none is gentler to your stomach."
The same government tests showed that this buffered brand works no faster than
regular aspirin, nor is there any difference between the two in the frequency of
stomach upset. Thus it is truly unsurpassed—but, of course, it doesn't surpass
any other brand, either. This well-known brand sells briskly at five times the
price of equally effective products with less familiar brand names.
Another product is touted as using the ingredient "that doctors recommend." By
reading the label, we discover the "magic"

ingredient to be good old inexpensive aspirin. Several pharmaceutical companies
also market "extra-strength" varieties of "arthritic pain" formulations. You will
pay a premium price for these products, although their extra strength comes only
from extra aspirin (or acetaminophen, an aspirin substitute), along with a dose of
caffeine. Taking additional aspirin would be less expensive, but the product
sounds great in the ads: "Not one, but a combination of medically proven
ingredients in an extra-strength formula."
Such blatant attempts at mass persuasion seem pitifully obvious when we are
mindful and scrutinize them closely. But most of us are not always mindful and
are, therefore, vulnerable to being unwittingly influenced. Thus the cash
registers ring, and in tremendous numbers we line up and buy the advertised
product as if we really believed that there is a major difference among brands of
aspirin.
How, then, do words gain their power, their ability to influence and persuade?
Briefly put, the way an object is described and the manner in which a course of
action is presented direct our thoughts and channel our cognitive responses
concerning the communication. Through the labels we use to describe an object
or event, we can define it in such a way that the recipient of our message accepts
our definition of the situation and is thus pre-persuaded even before we seriously
begin to argue. This simple rule of persuasion was recognized by Cicero more
than two millennia ago. Cicero claimed that one of the factors in his success at
establishing the innocence of some of Rome's most notorious murderers was his
ability to argue that their heinous crimes were not "crimes" at all, but virtuous
deeds—that the victims were villains who deserved to be killed.
Psychologically, the aspirin commercials work because by saying that no other
remedy is stronger, faster, gentler, or more effective, they lead us to draw,
almost automatically, the (incorrect) inference that no other pain reliever is as
strong, as fast, as gentle, as effective as Brand A. The product description
creates the illusion that Brand A is the best, not that Brand A is just like all the
rest.
In a telling experiment, two consumer psychologists demonstrated the
effectiveness of message wording in the formation of consumers'
attitudes toward ground beef.2 They found that consumers'
evaluations were more favorable toward a beef labeled "75% lean"

eva uat o s we e
o e avo ab e towa d a bee
abe ed
5% ea
than one labeled "25% fat." Is it any wonder that gasoline stations (who charge a
bit more if you use a credit card) call the price of gas purchased by cash "a cash
discount," that grocery stores refer to frozen fish for sale in the fresh meats
department as "fresh frozen," that hawkers of health care insurance for the
elderly call their sales brochure "a free Medicare supplementary guide," and that
small-appliance makers describe their battery-run products as "cordless
electric"?
The word lean is more attractive than the word fat; the word fresh tends to
obscure the fact that the fish is frozen; a free guide is much more useful than
another piece of advertising; cordless electric sounds much more powerful than
"runs on two D-cell batteries."
Often the full meaning of the inference is left to the imagination of the audience.
In the late 1930s, the Institute for Propaganda Analysis, a group of leading
intellectuals of the day who shared the common goal of lessening the effects of
propaganda, identified this tactic as the use of glittering generalities.3 In such
cases, the propagandist uses "purr" words—words that have positive
connotations but are usually ambiguous in the context in which they are used.
Some examples include: "A kinder, gentler America"; "Let's make America
strong again"; "The best that money can buy"; "We must support our valiant
freedom fighters." Few would disagree that kindness, gentleness, strength, the
best, and fighting for freedom are good things; in most concrete situations,
however, even fewer would agree on the meaning of each of these words.
Take, for example, Richard Nixon's 1968 campaign pledge to secure an
"honorable peace" in Vietnam. What did this really mean?
For some, an honorable peace meant immediate withdrawal and an end to an
unjust war. For others it meant fighting until the United States had achieved an
unconditional victory. What Richard Nixon meant by an honorable peace was
left to each listener's imagination, but it was made perfectly clear that Nixon had
the "right" objective regarding the Vietnam war.
Words can also be used to define problems and thus create personal and societal
needs. In his history of American advertising, Stephen Fox argues that
advertising had its greatest influence during the 1920s.4 At that time, advertisers
gave names to many of the "consumer needs" that we seek to satisfy even today.

For example, the Lambert Company, makers of Listerine, popularized the term
halitosis to refer to bad breath; most Americans didn't know they had halitosis
until the Lambert Company made us all aware of the possibility of offense by
informing us that "even your best friends won't tell you." Arthur Kudner, a
copywriter at Erwin, Wasey, & Jefferson, invented the phrase athlete's foot (to
refer to a fungus infection) and then linked it to a product, Absorbine Jr., that
would presumably cure it. Everett Grady of Ruthrauff & Ryan advertised
Lifebuoy soap as a cure for that dreaded disease, B.O. (body odor)!
More recently, advertisers have invented new product categories (needs) and
brands to fill them, such as NyQuil, the nighttime cold medicine; 7-Up, the
uncola; Miller, the "lite" beer; various brands of vaginal deodorants; and Bill
Clinton, the new-style, centrist Democrat. A good brand name can be worth
more than the factory that makes it. For example, Philip Morris purchased Kraft
for more than six times its book value. When asked why, the CEO of Philip
Morris, Hamish Maxwell, put it bluntly: Kraft is a trusted name with the
consumer and could be used to sell other products. Perhaps one of the most
revealing episodes in the "name is the same" game involved an ad for Procter &
Gambles Rely tampons. You might remember this product; it was removed from
the market after being associated with toxic shock syndrome. The advertising
proudly stated: "Remember, they named it Rely," as if the name made it so.
From our perspective, perhaps we should all remember that they named it Rely
—and that is all they did. A weed by any other name should still be a weed.
Advertisers, of course, are not the only ones to invent new labels as a means of
propaganda.5 Early American patriots were able to increase revolutionary fervor
by terming a minor skirmish with the British the Boston massacre. Adolf Hitler
used the same technique to mobilize the German people by explaining
Germany's economic troubles in terms of the Red menace and the Jewish
problem. Those opposed to abortion call their position pro-life (who could be
against life?), whereas those supporting a woman's right to elect an abortion call
themselves pro-choice (who could be against choice?). The Defense Department
(formerly called the War Department) uses the term low-intensity conflict to
refer to wars the United States supported in Nicaragua and El Salvador during
the 1980s; this is a curious term when one considers that these conflicts have
been very intense experiences for those innocent civilians caught in the crossfire
—estimated at 50,000 in Nicaragua and 70,000 in El Salvador. Similarly, those
opposed to the war with Iraq talked about "bringing home our sons and

daughters in body bags," whereas the military used more sanitized terms, such as
collateral damage and BDA (bomb-damage assessment).
Politicians interpret social problems and invent the national agenda by using
such phrases as the Cold War, the domino theory of creeping communism,
perestroika and glasnost, the war against drugs, Japanese protectionism, the
new world order, and a bridge to the twenty-first century. A self-conscious
example: a memo entitled "Language: A key mechanism of control" circulated
by Newt Gingrich to other conservative Republicans on how to "speak like
Newt." The memo lists two sets of words for spicing up any speech: "optimistic
positive governing" words such as "empowering, workfare, choice, initiative,
and eliminate good-time in prison," which are useful for describing one's own
position, and "contrasting" words such as "decay,
liberal, they/them, radical, unionized, and betray" for defining an opponent.
Indeed, the use of words in such a manner is so common that William Lutz has
amassed a volume of what he calls "doublespeak"
and annually presents an award for the most deceptive and self-contradictory use
of language by a public figure.6
And the power of a name was clearly understood by one Vernon Howell. Upon
assuming leadership of a small religious group in Waco, Texas, called the
Branch Davidians, Howell sought to define himself as a prophet linked to
religious leaders of the past. He took as his last name "Koresh," which is Hebrew
for "Cyrus"—a
Persian king who defeated the Babylonians and who is viewed as a messiah, or
one anointed to carry out a special mission for God.
Howell took "David" as his first name, thereby establishing himself as a spiritual
descendant of King David. "David Koresh"
thus means a descendant of David and a messiah destined to carry out a divine
mission.7 As a messiah, David Koresh believed it was his responsibility to sow
his seed and create a new generation of the elect. Koresh attempted to
impregnate many of his women followers, including both the wives of other men
and children—an activity that was often approved by their husbands and, in the
case of twelve-and fourteen-year-old girls, by their parents. And why not

approve such liaisons? After all, David Koresh was a prophet; his name told you
so.
The propaganda power of words is dramatically portrayed in George Orwell's
novel 1984, in which history is continually rewritten in the language of the day
—Newspeak—to conform to the needs and desires of government leaders. As
Orwell put it:
The purpose of Newspeak was not only to provide a medium of expression
for the world-view and mental habits proper to the devotees of Ingsoc, but
to make all other modes of thought impossible. It was intended that when
Newspeak had been adopted once and for all and Oldspeak forgotten, a
heretical thought—that is, a thought diverging from the principles of
Ingsoc—should be literally unthinkable, at least so far as thought is
dependent on words.8
This novel takes on even more chilling dimensions when one realizes that
Orwell's job during World War II was to write pro-British propaganda for
broadcast to India.
The psychologist Gordon Allport pointed out that it is the nature of language to
divide up and categorize the buzzing boom of information that comes our way
every second of the day.9 It is this inherent nature of language that gives it the
power to persuade. By labeling someone a "man," a "woman," a
"philanthropist," an "attractive Chinese," a
"physician," an "athlete," we emphasize some
particular feature of the object "human being" over many other possible ones.
We then respond to these features, organizing our realities around the label.
Nouns that "cut slices"—such as we-they, black-white, rich-poor, free-Soviet,
male-female—serve to divide up the world into neat little packages and to imply
the range of appropriate courses of action to take. As just one example,
researchers have found that job announcements using the generic he (a pronoun
that supposedly applies to both males and females) produced considerably fewer
female applicants than those that use more inclusive terms.10 Advertisers know
the power of naming and so select brand names for their products—such as Head
& Shoulders shampoo, DieHard battery, Close-Up toothpaste—that draw

attention to the brand's major selling point.11
The history of advertising and political movements attests to the fact that people
tend to act on the names and labels that are used to describe an event or
situation. But the power of words and labels to influence how we conceive of the
world extends to other contexts as well. One of social psychology's best
documented phenomena is the self-fulfilling prophecy—the tendency for a
definition of a situation to evoke behavior that makes the definition come true.
Dozens of experiments have shown that students who are randomly labeled
"smarter" tend to act smarter; sane people identified as "insane" are treated as if
they are insane and may begin to act that way; and women labeled "beautiful"
behave as if they are beautiful.
The research of Richard Miller, Phillip Brickman, and Diana Bolin, for example,
illustrates the persuasive power of a label in an educational setting.12 In one of
their studies, Miller and his colleagues attempted to persuade fifth-grade
students in Chicago to be neat and tidy and not to Utter—a task that most parents
will recognize as quite formidable. Some of the students received lectures on the
importance of being neat and tidy. These included lectures on ecology and the
dangers of pollution, on why it is important to throw away lunchroom trash, and
a plea from the janitor to keep things clean. Other students did not receive a
lecture but were repeatedly told that they were a neat and tidy class. For
example, these students were told by the janitor that they were one of the neatest
classes in the school, and they were encouraged by their teacher to think about
why they were so tidy.
What did the results show? Those students who received lectures did not
improve their littering behavior. In contrast, the fifth-graders who were
randomly labeled "neat and tidy" became neater and tidier, dropping three times
more litter in the trash cans than did their classmates. In a second study, Miller
and his colleagues repeated their results, finding that average second-graders
who were labeled "math achievers" subsequently improved in math to a greater
extent than their classmates who were merely exhorted to do better at math.13 In
both cases, the name made the thing; a weed by any other name may be a rose.
How do these effects come about? It's not magic. A study by Mark Snyder, Ellen
Decker Tanke, and Ellen Berscheid illustrates how our labels and conceptions of

reality can actually come to create and change that reality.14 Put yourself in the
place of a typical male in their experiment: You have volunteered to participate
in an investigation of "how people become acquainted with each other,"
and you have been paired with a female who is located in another room,
ostensibly because the two .of you are assigned to the "no nonverbal
communication" condition of the study. You will communicate with her on a
telephone. Although you have not seen your partner, you have been given a
packet of information that contains a snapshot. For half of the subjects, the
snapshot was of a very attractive woman; for the others, it was of a relatively
unattractive woman.
How did the label "attractive female" influence the males'
behavior? The males who thought they were talking with an attractive partner
rated her as more poised, humorous, and socially adept than did those who
thought they were talking with a less attractive woman.
This is not very surprising. But what was startling is this: When independent
observers were allowed to listen to a tape recording of only the woman's half of
the conversation (without looking at the photograph), they were far more
impressed by the woman whose male partner thought she was physically
attractive. Why? Since the male partner thought he was talking to an attractive
woman, he spoke to her in a way that brought out her best and most sparkling
qualities.
When these independent observers listened to her conversation, they rated her as
more attractive, more confident, more animated, and warmer than the woman
whose partner thought her to be less beautiful.
In other words, expectations had created reality.
Throughout this chapter, we have emphasized the propaganda value of words
and labels—how they can be used to persuade and create social reality. But
words do not have to be used to cloak reality in deception. The ability to
manipulate words and concepts in our head—that is, the ability to think—is a
uniquely human characteristic. It allows us to solve problems creatively without
requiring the manipulation of the actual thing itself in a trial-and-error fashion.
Given the flexibility of the human mind, there are many ways to label any given

event. This flexibility provides the key to overcoming the propagandist's intent:
When presented with a definition of the world, we can always ask, "Why this
label? What other definitions of the situation would shed more light on the
issue?" By looking at any given event from many different perspectives, we can
gain new insights to guide our decision making.
At the same time, it is important to remember that words have the power to pre-
persuade. The words and labels we use come to define and create our social
world. This definition of reality directs our thoughts, our feelings, our
imagination and thus influences our behavior. Perhaps Joseph Goebbels, Hider's
minister of propaganda, best described the power of words:
It would not be impossible to prove with sufficient repetition and
psychological understanding of the people concerned that a square is in
fact a circle. What after all are a square and a circle? They are mere words
and words can be moulded until they clothe ideas in disguise.15
 

7
Pictures in Our Heads
In Public Opinion, the distinguished political analyst Walter Lippmann tells the
story of a young girl, brought up in a small mining town, who one day went from
cheerfulness into a deep spasm of grief.1 A gust of wind had suddenly cracked a
kitchen windowpane. The young girl was inconsolable and spoke
incomprehensibly for hours. When she finally was able to speak intelligibly, she
explained that a broken pane of glass meant that a close relative had died. She
was therefore mourning her father, who she felt certain had just passed away.
The young girl remained disconsolate until, days later, a telegram arrived
verifying that her father was still alive. It appears that the girl had constructed a
complete fiction based on a simple external fact (a broken window), a
superstition (broken window means death), fear, and love for her father.
The point of Lippmann's story was not to explore the inner workings of an
abnormal personality but to ask a question about ourselves: To what extent do
we, like the young girl, let our fictions guide our thoughts and actions?
Lippmann believed that we are much more similar to that young girl than we
might readily admit. He contended that the mass media paint an imagined world
and that the "pictures in our heads" derived from the media influence what men
and women will do and say at any particular moment. Lippmann made these
observations in 1922. More than seven decades later, we can ask: What is the
evidence for his claim? To what extent do the pictures we see on television and
in other mass media influence how we see the world and set the agenda for what
we view as most important in our lives?
Let's look at the world we see on television. George Gerbner and his colleagues
have conducted the most extensive analysis of television to date.2 Since the late
1960s, these researchers have been videotaping and carefully analyzing
thousands of prime-time television programs and characters. Their findings,
taken as a whole, indicate that the world portrayed on television is grossly
misleading as a representation of reality. Their research further suggests that, to
a surprising extent, we take what we see on television as a reflection of reality.
In prime-time programming, males outnumber females by 3 to 1, and the women

portrayed are younger than the men they encounter. Nonwhites (especially
Hispanics), young children, and the elderly are underrepresented; and members
of minority groups are disproportionately cast in minor roles. Moreover, most
prime-time characters are portrayed as professional or managerial workers:
Although 67% of the work force in the United States are employed in blue-collar
or service jobs, only 25% of TV characters hold such jobs. Prime-time scientists
are portrayed as dangerous, mad, and out of control; although in real life
scientists do not frequently commit homicide, no other occupational group is
more likely to kill on prime-time television. Finally, crime on television is ten
times more prevalent than it is in real life.
The average fifteen-year-old has viewed more than 13,000 TV killings.
More than half of TV's characters are involved in a violent confrontation each
week; in reality, less than 1% of people in the nation are victims of criminal
violence in any given year, according to FBI statistics. Indeed, although violence
in the United States has been declining over the past decade, violence on TV has
not. David Rintels, a television writer and former president of the Writers'
Guild of America, summed it up best when he said, "From 8 to 11
o'clock each night, television is one long lie."3
To gain an understanding of the relationship between television watching and
the pictures in our heads, Gerbner and his colleagues compared the attitudes and
beliefs of heavy viewers (those who watch more than four hours a day) and light
viewers (those who watch less than two hours a day). They found that heavy
viewers (1) express more racially prejudiced attitudes; (2) overestimate the
number of people employed as physicians, lawyers, and athletes; (3) perceive
women as having more limited abilities and interests than men; (4) believe that
science is dangerous and that scientists are odd and peculiar people; (5) hold
exaggerated views of the prevalence of violence in society; and (6) believe old
people are fewer in number and less healthy today than they were thirty years
ago, even though the opposite is true.
What is more, heavy viewers tend to see the world as a more sinister place than
do light viewers; they are more likely to agree that most people are just looking
out for themselves and would take advantage of you if they had a chance.
Gerbner and his colleagues conclude that these attitudes and beliefs reflect the

inaccurate portrayals of American life provided to us by television.
Let's examine the relationship between television watching and our images of
the world by looking more closely at how we picture criminal activity. In an
analysis of "television criminology," Craig Haney and John Manzolati point out
that crime shows dispense remarkably consistent images of both the police and
criminals.4 For example, they found that television police officers are amazingly
effective, solving almost every crime, and are absolutely infallible in one regard:
The wrong person is never in jail at the end of a show. Television fosters an
illusion of certainty in crime-fighting.
Television criminals generally turn to crime because of psychopathology or
insatiable (and unnecessary) greed. Television emphasizes criminals' personal
responsibility for their actions and largely ignores situational pressures
correlated with crime, such as poverty and unemployment.
Haney and Manzolati go on to suggest that this portrayal of the criminal justice
system has important social consequences. People who watch a lot of television
tend to share this belief system, which affects their expectations and can cause
them to take a hard-line stance when serving on juries. Heavy viewers are likely
to reverse the presumption of innocence, believing that defendants must be
guilty of something, because otherwise they wouldn't be brought to trial.
A
similar tale can be told about other "pictures painted in our heads." For example,
heavy readers of newspaper accounts of sensational and random crimes report
higher levels of fear of crime.
Repeated viewing of R-rated violent "slasher" films is associated with less
sympathy and empathy for victims of rape. A heavy dose of ads portraying
women as sex objects induces females to believe that their current bodies are too
large. When television is introduced into an area, the incidence of theft
increases, perhaps due partly to television's promotion of consumerism, which
may frustrate and anger economically deprived viewers who compare their
lifestyles with those portrayed on television.5
It should be noted, however, that the research just described—that done by
Gerbner and colleagues and by others—is correlational; that is, it shows merely

an association, not a causal relation, between television viewing and beliefs. It is
therefore impossible to determine from this research whether heavy viewing
actually causes prejudiced attitudes and inaccurate beliefs or whether people
already holding such attitudes and beliefs simply tend to watch more television.
In order to be certain that watching TV causes such attitudes and beliefs, it
would be necessary to perform a controlled experiment in which people are
randomly assigned to conditions.
Fortunately, some recent experiments do allow us to be fairly certain that heavy
viewing does indeed determine the pictures we form of the world.
In a set of ingenious experiments, the political psychologists Shanto Iyengar and
Donald Kinder varied the contents of evening news shows watched by their
research participants.6 In their studies, Iyengar and Kinder edited the evening
news so that participants received a steady dose of news about a specific
problem facing the United States. For example, in one of their experiments,
some participants heard about the weaknesses of U.S. defense capabilities; a
second group watched shows emphasizing pollution concerns; a third group
heard about inflation and economic matters.
The results were clear. After a week of viewing the specially edited programs,
participants emerged from the study more convinced than they were before
viewing the shows that the target problem—the one receiving extensive
coverage in the shows they had watched—was a very important one for the
country to solve. What is more, the participants acted on their newfound
perceptions, evaluating the current president's performance on the basis of how
he handled the target issue and evaluating more positively than their competitors
those candidates who took strong positions on the target issue.
Iyengar and Kinder's findings are not a fluke. Communications researchers
repeatedly find a link between what stories the mass media cover and what
viewers consider to be the most important issues of the day.7 The content of the
mass media sets the public's political and social agenda. As just one example, in
a pioneering study of an election in North Carolina, researchers found that the
issues that voters came to consider to be most important in the campaign
coincided with the amount of coverage those issues received in the local media.8
Similarly, the problems of racism and the police, international terrorism, NASA
incompetence, and nuclear energy were catapulted into the nation's
consciousness by the coverage of such dramatic events as the beating of Rodney

King by Los Angeles police, the explosion of a Pan American jet over
Lockerbie, Scotland, the Challenger explosion, and the nuclear-reactor accidents
at Three Mile Island and Chernobyl. Former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger
clearly understood the power of the news media in setting agendas. He once
noted that he never watched the content of the evening news but was only
interested in "what they covered and for what length of time, to learn what the
country was getting."9
Even subtle ways in which a story is told can have a dramatic impact on the
pictures in our head. In later research, Shanto Iyengar explored the effects of
how TV news frames a story as either episodic (depicting a single concrete,
specific event such as an attempted murder, terrorist bombing, illegal drug bust,
etc.) or thematic (an abstract report about a general topic such as crime,
terrorism, or drug abuse).10 Not surprisingly, TV news coverage is primarily
episodic: Between 1981 and 1986, 89% of reports on crime focused on a specific
perpetrator or victim and 74% of all terrorism stories focused on a single act.
Some stories do receive more thematic coverage—for example, coverage of
unemployment tends to be thematic.
What is the impact of how TV news is framed on our pictures of the world?
To find out, Iyengar created news stories that were either episodic or thematic in
nature. For example, a story could tell about a person who recently lost his job or
could discuss the nature of unemployment in general. The results showed that
those viewers who were exposed to a story with a concrete episode were more
likely to attribute responsibility for a problem to private motives and the actions
of an individual; those viewers who saw a more thematic presentation held
society and government officials accountable for any wrongdoing and
responsible for fixing the problem. The implication is clear: How a story is told
determines our picture of the world and how we will act on such basic issues as
crime, terrorism, poverty, and unemployment.
Of course, each of us has had extensive personal contact with many people in a
myriad of social contexts; the media are just one source of our knowledge about
political affairs and different ethnic, gender, and occupational groups. The
information and impressions we receive through the media are relatively less
influential when we can also rely on firsthand experience. Thus those of us who
have been in close contact with several women who work outside the home are
probably less susceptible to the stereotypes of women portrayed on television.

On the other hand, when it comes to issues with which most of us have had
limited or no personal experience, such as crime and violence, television and the
other mass media are virtually the only vivid sources of information for
constructing our image of the world.
The propaganda value of the mass media in painting a picture of the world has
not been overlooked by would-be leaders. A social policy such as a "get tough
on crime" program, for example, can be easily sold by relating it to the prime-
time picture of crime as acts committed by the psychopathic and the greedy,
rather than dealing with situational determinants such as poverty and
unemployment. In a similar vein, it is easier to sell a "war on drugs" after the
drug-related death of a prominent basketball star or to promote an end to nuclear
power after a fatal tragedy at a nuclear reactor.
It is even more important for a would-be leader to propagate his or her own
picture of the world. The political scientist Roderick Hart notes that since the
early 1960s, U.S. presidents have averaged more than twenty-five speeches per
month—a very large amount of public speaking.11 By speaking frequently on
certain issues (and thus gaining access to the nightly news), a president can
create a political agenda—a picture of the world that is favorable to bis social
policies. For example, during the 1992 U.S. presidential election, a sign hung in
Clinton's Little Rock campaign headquarters that read "The economy, stupid"—
a not so subtle
reminder to Clinton operatives to keep the campaign focused on the economy.12
The Clinton forces (with help from Ross Perot) focused mass media coverage of
the campaign on the economy (a weak spot for George Bush) by linking every
other issue to this one concern. For example, civil rights were portrayed in terms
of national productivity ("We don't have a person to waste"); education and
welfare reform were termed "investment"; affordable health care was presented
as a means of reducing the budget deficit; environmental protection was linked
to creating business opportunities; change was said to be needed because trickle-
down economics doesn't work. In other words, Clinton set the mass media
agenda in a way that put him at an advantage over his opponent, George Bush.
In the 1996 presidential election, Clinton once again controlled the political
agenda by taking a "middle-of-the-road" position on any issue that might have
won votes for his opponent, Bob Dole (such as welfare reform, school prayer, or
family values), and thus removed those issues from discussion in the campaign.
The 2000 U.S. presidential election can be seen as a battle to control the agenda,

with Al Gore seeking to keep the discussion centered on the economy and
George W. Bush attempting to focus media coverage on problems such as a
declining military.
Agenda setting is of great importance in maintaining power. According to
Jeffrey Pfeffer, an expert on business organizations, one of the most important
sources of power for a chief executive officer is the ability to set the
organization's agenda by determining what issues will be discussed and when,
what criteria will be used to resolve disputes, who will sit on what committees,
and, perhaps most importantly, which information will be widely disseminated
and which will be selectively ignored.13
Why are the pictures of the world painted by the mass media so persuasive? For
one thing, we rarely question the picture that is shown. We seldom ask
ourselves, for example, "Why are they showing me this story on the evening
news rather than some other one?
Do the police really operate in this manner? Is the world really this violent and
crime-ridden?" The pictures that television beams into our homes are almost
always simply taken for granted as representing reality. As the Nazi
propagandist Joseph Goebbels once noted: "This is the secret of propaganda:
Those who are to be persuaded by it should be completely immersed in the ideas
of the propaganda, without ever noticing that they are being immersed in it."14
Once accepted, the pictures we form in our heads serve as fictions to guide our
thoughts and actions. The images serve as primitive social theories—providing
us with the "facts" of the matter, determining which issues are most pressing,
and decreeing the terms in which we think about our social world. As the
political scientist Bernard Cohen observed, the mass media
may not be successful much of the time in telling people what to think, but
it is stunningly successful in telling its readers what to think about. . . . The
world will look different to different people, depending ... on the map that
is drawn for them by writers, editors, and publishers of the papers they
read.15

 

8
Saddam Hussein: The Hitler of Baghdad?
The most recent major war our nation engaged in was the Persian Gulf war of
1991. Before entering that war, the Americans debated the positive and negative
consequences of that action. Those who supported the war described Saddam
Hussein as the new Hitler: They emphasized the parallels between Saddam's
gassing of the Kurds and Hitler's gassing of the Jews, Iraq's invasion of Kuwait
and Germany's invasion of Czechoslovakia and Poland, and Saddam's and
Hitler's build-up of armaments.1 Those who opposed the war saw the situation in
Iraq as paralleling that in Vietnam: They saw both incidents as civil wars—a
fight among various Arab factions and between North and South Vietnam; they
worried about the U.S. military's ability to fight in difficult foreign terrain
consisting of deserts and swamps; they characterized the war effort as being in
support of "big business" and "big oil."
The debate over war with Iraq was really a debate over whose definition of
ambiguous events was "correct." And with good reason: Once it is decided how
an event or person should be categorized, it becomes clear what course of action
should be taken. If Saddam was truly a new Hitler, then a policy of appeasement
and letting him have Kuwait would only bring additional threats to peace and
ultimately a much worse war. If Iraq was another Vietnam, then U.S.
intervention would lead to a long and divisive war and the country would
become stuck in a quagmire with no clear victors and losers.
We "debate" how to define persons and events thousands of times a day, and,
although we usually do not go to war as a result, the consequences of how we
interpret and define events can be quite significant. For example, we may see a
political candidate as "presidential" simply because he or she shares some
irrelevant mannerisms with one of our favorite politicians from the past; a
college athlete may be viewed as "pro" material because he fits the mold of past
successes—he's a Lynn Swann type or he reminds us of the old-style Steeler
linebackers of a previous era; we like the inexpensive new car we purchased
because it is similar in style to a high-priced, sporty model we cannot afford.
Ten years before the Persian Gulf war, Thomas Gilovich published a set of

experiments looking at how irrelevant associations to the past can influence
decision making.2 In one of his studies, students majoring in political science
were asked to resolve a hypothetical international crisis. In this crisis, a small
democratic country was being threatened by an aggressive, totalitarian neighbor
that was conducting subversive activities against the democratic regime as well
as massing troops along a shared border. Embedded in the information about the
crisis were irrelevant phrases designed to highlight the similarities in the
hypothetical crisis to either the war against Nazi Germany or that against North
Vietnam. For example, the political science majors were told either that
minorities were fleeing the democratic country via boxcars on freight trains or
via small boats; the impending invasion was referred to as a Blitzkrieg or a
Quick-strike; the current U.S. president was from the state of New York (as was
FDR) or from Texas (as was LBJ); the briefing concerning the crisis was held in
Winston Churchill Hall or Dean Rusk Hall. Did these irrelevant "similarities"
influence judgments about what should be done about the crisis? Amazingly,
they did. Gilovich found that the students who were primed to see the crisis as
like the one involving Nazi Germany were more likely to recommend U.S.
military intervention than were those primed to see it as another Vietnam.
How do analogies and metaphors persuade?3 In a nutshell, an analogy or
metaphor pre-persuades by highlighting some comparisons while hiding others
and by providing a theme or structure for making sense of potentially ambiguous
information. For example, consider these common metaphors of love— love is
war (his conquest; she fought for his love), love is magic (she cast a spell), love
is a patient (this is a sick relationship), love is a physical force (I was drawn to
her; the relationship lost momentum), and love is madness (I'm crazy about her).
Each metaphor highlights certain aspects of the love relationship (e.g., trickery is
OK, a problem needs to be solved, love is beyond my control), specifies exactly
what to do (e.g., trick her into love, try to heal the relationship, just let things
take their course), and provides a way of making sense of behavior (e.g., boys
will be boys, love grows).
Consider the metaphor of "propaganda is invasion" (i.e., an attacker is trying to
conquer your mind and beliefs), which we developed in the first chapter. It
draws your attention to certain factors: Propagandists such as politicians and
advertisers are the enemy; propaganda tactics are like military maneuvers and
armaments that must be disassembled if they are to be stopped; your mind and
emotions need to be fortified against attack. If you accepted our metaphor of
propaganda, we suspect that you are probably enjoying this book right now. But

we could have selected other metaphors. For example, in the former Soviet
Union, propaganda was seen as education (indoctrination). If we had chosen this
metaphor, this would be quite a different book. We would be discussing
"students" who have an easy or difficult time learning (being persuaded) and
how to use persuasion tactics to open young minds to the truth. On the other
hand, we could have explored the metaphor endorsed by the founders of this
country—persuasion as a building (laying a foundation for argument) and as a
journey (a trip to discover something new). This, too, would be a different book,
but probably one still worth writing.
In the end, however, debates on a course of action must come down to which
definition of the situation is perceived to be correct: Is Saddam more like Hitler
or is Iraq more like Vietnam? Of course, we should entertain the hypotheses that
both analogies are true, that neither is true, or that perhaps other analogies also
fit the situation. For example, the historian Paul Kennedy saw the U.S.
military involvement in the Persian Gulf as reminiscent of Spain's foreign wars
of the 1630s and 1640s.4 One argument given by supporters of U.S. participation
in the war was that the success of the war would help restore American self-
confidence and break the mood of self-doubt and defeatism that had purportedly
prevailed in the country since the 1960s—in other words, overcome the
"Vietnam syndrome." The great Spanish minister the
Count-Duke de Olivares made a similar argument in favor of Spain's
intervention on the side of the Hapsburgs in the Thirty Years' War.
Upon hearing of Spain's first battlefield success, Olivares declared it to be "the
greatest victory of our times," one that proved Spain's domestic and foreign
detractors wrong; because of military prowess, Spain was still number one on
the international scene. Domestically, however, Spain's industries lacked
competitiveness, its streets were filled with the unemployed and the homeless,
and the nation's debts were increasing at a rapid clip. A generation later, Spain
was no longer a world power.
Classical theories of rhetoric look with disdain upon analogy as a form of
persuasion; any given analogy is vulnerable to the attack that it is based on faulty
comparisons—that the points of similarity presented in the analogy are irrelevant
and inconsequential.

According to classical theory, analogies should be evaluated using two rules:
1. The similarities between two things must concern pertinent, significant
aspects of the two things.
2. The analogy must not ignore pertinent dissimilarities between the two things
being compared.5
Notice what happens if we use these two classical rules to evaluate any of the
three proposed perspectives on the Persian Gulf war. We immediately desire
more information and facts about the present and the past: What are the
economic and social conditions of the nations involved? What happened to the
Hapsburg Empire, Germany, and Vietnam after each respective war was over?
What were the economic and social costs of each war? In answering such
questions, we can develop a more complete understanding of the situation at
hand—an analysis that can inform such important decisions as whether or not to
go to war.
There is another way to evaluate the validity of a communicator's definition of
the situation—by the sincerity of the communicator. In other words, does the
advocate of a given view of the world really believe that is the way things are, or
has he or she merely adopted this viewpoint for expedient, propaganda
purposes? For example, shortly before the onset of the Persian Gulf war on
October 15, 1990, President Bush stated:
Every day now, new word filters out [of Kuwait] about the ghastly
atrocities perpetrated by Saddam's forces ... of a systematic assault on the
soul of a nation, summary executions, routine torture . . .
newborn babies thrown out of incubators . . . dialysis patients ripped from their
machines .. . Hitler revisited. But remember, when Hitlers war ended there were
the Nuremberg trials.6
Was he serious? Perhaps so. But given the fact that, just a short time earlier, our
government was staunchly supporting Saddam in his war against Iran, it is at
least conceivable that Bush was exaggerating.
In addition, reports of babies being thrown from incubators and similar atrocity
stories were later found to be rumors started by pro-Kuwaiti sources and

reported uncritically by the news media.
If the president was engaging in hyperbole, some people believe that it is
forgivable. After all, he was intent on mobilizing the nation for what might have
been a long and costly war and on gaining the approval of his fellow citizens for
putting hundreds of thousands of young American men and women in harm's
way in order to come to the aid of a nondemocratic nation. And it worked;
support for the war soared and George Bush's popularity soon reached an all-
time high.
During and immediately after the war, Bush's approval rating hovered around
90%.
But the use of such propaganda devices carries a price—for the communicator as
well as the audience. In this case, once the American people recovered from
their euphoria after the war came to a quick and (in terms of U.S. casualties)
relatively bloodless end, a great many Americans began to wonder why, after
having achieved total military dominance, we had allowed Saddam to remain in
power with a large part of his military force intact—a force that he promptly
began to use with impunity against his own civilian population.7 Indeed, even
the commander of the United Nations forces in the Persian Gulf, General
Norman Schwarzkopf, was bold enough to wonder about this out loud on
network television. Can you imagine the president of the United States in 1945,
having won a smashing victory over Adolf Hitler, allowing Hitler to continue to
govern the German people? Can you imagine the Allied forces stopping just
inside the border of Germany and then turning back? Utterly impossible. If
Hitler had survived he would certainly have been tried, convicted, and executed
as a war criminal.
Why, then, did George Bush allow Saddam Hussein free rein in Iraq? It was
confusing. In a Newsweek poll taken on May 1, 1991, 55% of those questioned
did not view the Persian Gulf war as a victory because Saddam was still in
power. President Bush's popularity began to fade. Ironically, Bush's use of the
"Saddam is Hitler"
metaphor was so successful that it contributed to his own decline as a weak
leader who could not finish the job he started—an image that encouraged others
in his party to challenge his leadership in the presidential primaries and helped
set the stage for his eventual defeat in the 1992 election. This is a common

occurrence with the use of metaphor and analogy to pre-persuade; they often
take on a life of their own, trapping the creator in the web of the creation.8
We think that a good case can be made that George Bush never really believed
that Saddam Hussein was another Hitler. His use of the analogy was a cynical
attempt to strike fear and loathing into the hearts of the American people.
Saddam Hussein is certainly an unsavory villain. But an unsavory villain capable
of achieving stability in Iraq—a stability that President Bush and his advisors
obviously considered worth the price of allowing him to remain in office. An
unsavory villain whom we could live with comfortably—one we had lived with
and supported in the past and not unlike a great many other unsavory villains
around the world whom the United States continues to support.
The cynicism evinced by President Bush is more than merely unfortunate.
As citizens of a democracy, we have the right to look closely at the facts so that
we may arrive at our own rational conclusions about whether or not we should
go to war and whether or not it is appropriate to bring Saddam to trial as a war
criminal—based not on the hyperbole of a president but on the facts of the
matter.
We have a right to be angry at being manipulated by a president if he depicts our
enemy as another Hitler one month and as a difficult but stabilizing force the
next.
It is not our intention to single out George Bush for special criticism.
Unfortunately, pulling the wool over the eyes of the people has been a common
practice in the White House; from Lyndon Johnson's false statements of
optimism during the Vietnam war ("There is light at the end of the tunnel") to
Richard Nixon's stonewalling of the Watergate affair ("I am not a crook") to
Ronald Reagan's statements about the Iran-Contra scandal ("I think I don't
remember") to Bill Clinton's outright lies regarding his sexual improprieties ("I
did not have sexual relations with that woman"), American presidents have been
denying citizens the information necessary to properly analyze a situation and to
act rationally. The truly unfortunate aspect of this is that most Americans have
rather cynically come to take it for granted that they will be misled. Is it any
wonder that in this country, the cradle of modern democracy, less than 50% of
the people now bother to vote?

 

9
A Questionable Persuasion
Imagine that you are the president of the United States and the country is bracing
itself for the outbreak of an unusual epidemic expected to kill 600 people. Your
top advisors have prepared two alternative programs to combat the disease and
have estimated, to the best of their abilities, the likely consequences of each
program.
If Program A is adopted, 200 people will be saved.
If Program B is adopted, there is a one-third probability that 600 people
will be saved and a two-thirds probability that no people will be saved.
Mr. or Ms. President, which program do you favor?
If you are like most of the participants in an experiment performed by Daniel
Kahneman and Amos Tversky, you would select Program A1 (seventy-two
percent of their subjects selected this option). You might think to yourself,
"Program A guarantees that 200 people will be saved, while Program B gambles
the lives of these people for only a 1 in 3 chance that more lives could be saved."
But suppose your advisors had presented the epidemic problem this way instead:
If Program A is adopted, 400 people will die.
If Program B is adopted, there is a one-third probability that nobody will
die and a two-thirds probability that 600 people will die.
Which program would you now favor?
The two sets of options are the same. Program A means that 200 people will live
and 400 will die. Program B results in a one-third chance that no one will die
and 600 people will live and a two-thirds chance that no one will be saved and
600 people will die.
But for most people, their thinking about the epidemic is quite different. "If I go

with Program A, 400 people will surely die; I might as well gamble on B." When
asked in this second manner, 78% of Kahneman and Tversky's subjects favored
Program B.
Why did such a simple rewording of the options produce such a drastic switch in
answers? Kahneman and Tversky (as well as others) have noted that people
dislike losses and seek to avoid them. It is more painful to give up $20 than it is
pleasurable to gain $20. The first policy decision was worded so that Program B
looked like the bigger loss; the second version was phrased so that Program A
looked like a sure loss. It's all in how the question is framed.
This is, of course, just a hypothetical situation. What happens when requests are
reworded in real life? Let's look at the prevention of breast cancer, which is a
serious health threat for many women. Fortunately, early detection and diagnosis
of breast cancer can greatly improve a woman's chances of surviving the disease.
Unfortunately, one of the best methods for detecting breast cancer, a monthly
breast self-examination, is not performed regularly by most women.
Beth Meyerowitz and Shelly Chaiken developed and distributed three pamphlets
asking women to perform a routine breast self-examination regularly.2 One
pamphlet contained only instructions on how to perform a breast self-
examination. The second pamphlet contained these instructions and asked
women to perform the exam and emphasized the positive consequences of self-
examination (i.e., women who perform such examinations have an increased
chance of finding a tumor at a treatable stage). The third pamphlet contained the
instructions and stressed the negative consequences of failing to perform a self-
examination (i.e., women who do not perform such examinations have a
decreased chance of finding a tumor at a treatable stage). Meyerowitz and
Chaiken found that, four months after reading the pamphlet, those women who
were asked to perform the breast exam and were informed of the negative
consequences of failing to do so were significantly more likely to perform a self-
examination. How you ask can make a significant difference in a real life-and-
death situation.
In both of the above examples—the epidemic decision and the communication
about breast self-exams—the way the question was put influenced the way the
issue was denied. In both cases, defining the issue as "losing something" was
more persuasive than stating it in terms of a gain.

Question-asking can be a subtle form of pre-persuasion—a carefully crafted
question can be used to define the issue at hand, to suggest subtly what the
"right" answer may be, and to organize the way we think about the issue. Let's
look at some of the ways that an artfully worded question can produce the results
we seek.
Opinion pollsters have long known that subtle changes in the wording of a
question can produce dramatically different responses. For example, the
percentage of Americans supporting aid for the Contras in Nicaragua from 1983
to 1986 varied from 13% to 42%, depending on how the question was worded.3
If the question mentioned Ronald Reagan or the Contras explicitly, or used
ideological labels to identify the opposing forces in Nicaragua, more Americans
supported the aid. If the question mentioned a dollar amount of aid or presented
both sides of the issue, fewer Americans wanted to give aid to the Contra rebels.
Or consider this polling inconsistency: Within days of each other, a Fox News
opinion poll reported that 54% of Americans believed that Bill Clinton had
sexually assaulted and raped Juanita Broaddrick in 1978, whereas a
CNN/Gallup/C/SA Today poll found that only 34% of Americans believed the
charges. Why the discrepancy? It appears that the Fox News poll prefaced the
question with another loaded and highly charged question that presumed
Clinton's guilt in the matter. Other pollsters using more neutral wording found
results consistent with the CNN/Gallup/USA Today poll.4 Legitimate pollsters
who seek accurate responses will go to great lengths to avoid bias in the wording
of questions. Those who seek to use polls for their own advantage—to convince
people that everyone else supports their policy or their political candidacy—will
not be so careful.
Lawyers also know the importance of a carefully phrased question. Textbooks
describing how to cross-examine a witness stress the maxim, "Never ask a
question for which you don't already know the answer." Or, put more accurately,
"Never ask a question that doesn't get the answer you want." Several years ago,
in a murder trial that held our collective attention for months, the world
witnessed a vivid demonstration of the significance of this textbook maxim. Los
Angeles County prosecutor Christopher Darden asked O. J. Simpson to try on a
pair of bloody gloves. Darden got an answer he neither anticipated nor wanted—
an O. J. Simpson seemingly struggling to put on a pair of gloves allegedly worn
by the killer of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald Goldman. The incident was
one of the deciding moments of the trial. The gloves seemed too small

The famed trial attorney Gerry Spence takes the issue one step further, claiming
that a well-phrased question may contain more persuasive information than the
answer to that question. In a case in which he and his client sued Penthouse
magazine for libel, Spence asked Penthouse publisher Bob Guccione a series of
questions about the nature of the contents of his magazines. The questions were
designed to show that Penthouse was little more than obscene pornography
disguised as literature. The judge sustained most of Guccione's attorney's
objections to the questions. Spence was unfazed. As he put it, the objections
merely annoyed the jury and "the information I wanted to convey to the jury was
sometimes better contained in my questions than any answers I might hope to
get from Guccione."5
Elizabeth Loftus has conducted a program of research looking at how leading
questions can influence eyewitness testimony.6 In one of her studies, Loftus
showed subjects a film depicting a multiple-car accident. After the film, some of
the subjects were asked, "About how fast were the cars going when they
smashed into each other?" Other subjects were asked the same question, but the
word smashed was replaced by the word hit. Subjects who were asked about
smashing cars, as opposed to hitting cars, estimated that the cars were going
significantly faster and, a week after seeing the film, were more likely to state
that there was broken glass at the accident scene (even though no broken glass
was shown in the film).
Leading questions can. influence not only judgment of facts but also actual
memory of what has happened. In another study, Loftus showed subjects a series
of slides depicting an auto-pedestrian accident. In a critical slide, a green car
drove past the accident. Immediately after viewing the slides, half of the subjects
were asked, "Did the blue car that drove past the accident have a ski rack on the
roof?" The remaining subjects were asked this same question but with the word
blue deleted. The results showed that those subjects who were asked about the
"blue" car were more likely to claim incorrectly that they had seen a blue car
(even though in the slide it was green). A simple question had distorted their
memory.
It is not only what is asked but also the order in which it is asked that influence
our decisions and choices. Suppose your head is throbbing and your stomach is
acting up. You need a strong pain reliever that will not adversely affect your
stomach. Displayed below are your available options and how they rate on
various attributes of a pain reliever:

Special-Grip Bottle Easy on the Stomach Pain-Relief Strength
Brand W yes
good
very good
Brand X
yes
good
good
Brand Y
yes
poor
excellent
Brand Z
no
excellent
excellent
Before you rush out to the store, you see the following ad for Brand W on
television: All four pain relievers are lined up in a row. The announcer asks,
"Which of these pain relievers gives you a special-grip bottle?" Brand Z is
removed before your eyes. "Which of these brands won't upset your stomach?"
Out goes Brand Y. "Which brand gives you the most pain relief?" Brand X is
forcefully removed. "The choice is—Brand W."
Or is it? Suppose only the last two questions were asked, and in reverse order?
Our choice would be much different—Brand Z would be our best buy and Brand
W the worst. Given your throbbing head and your upset stomach, you may wish
to give more weight to these two attributes than the special-grip bottle. Again,
Brand Z is your pain reliever.
With all of the information on the different pain relievers conveniently
displayed, it is easy to see how the order in which questions are asked and the
order in which information is received can distort and bias the decision-making
process. The propagandist has employed the technique of card-stacking, or the
deceptive manipulation of information and facts.7 Unfortunately, we rarely have
all the information at once for many of our decisions—either it is unavailable, or
we do not have the time or energy to secure it, or the critical pieces of
information are purposefully hidden and distorted. In such cases, the order in
which we seek and obtain information can influence our decisions in subtle but
important ways.
Question-asking can be a powerful persuasion device because questions
structure our decision-making process.8 They do this by directing our thoughts

about the issues at hand and by implicitly specifying the range of possible
answers. Consider the question, "Do you support the constitutional right to bear
arms?" The question directs our thoughts and attention to the constitutionality of
gun ownership as opposed to other concerns, such as the right to a safe
neighborhood. The question also implicitly defines the issue as guns versus no
guns and excludes middle-of-the road proposals such as gun registration, waiting
periods, and restricted access to certain types of arms (such as Saturday-night
specials, automatic assault weapons, or nuclear arms). The Constitution also
guarantees free speech—but not the right to yell fire in a crowded movie house.
If you doubt the power of a question to pre-persuade, observe how politicians
handle themselves at press conferences and on public affairs programs. They
know that questions can direct attention and change public opinion. That is why,
when a question is not to a politician's liking, he or she will try to dodge it.
Suppose a politician is on record as favoring gun control. The stinging question
about supporting the Constitution can be avoided by rephrasing it ("It's a good
question; just what will I do about the crime in our streets?"), by postponing it
("Let's first clear up a few important issues"), by glossing over it in a way that
appears to answer the question ("You know I support the Constitution of the
United States and the people's right to live in safety as they see fit"), or by
diverting attention by asking yet another question ("But do you believe in the
right of every American to live in safety?").
So far in this section, we have seen how the definition of an issue—whether it be
through choice of words, images, analogies, or just by asking the "right
question"—serves as a form of pre-persuasion. In the next chapter, we look at
how context—the "other" issues and objects that we can consider—influences
perception and, thus, our subsequent behavior.


10
The Power of Decoys
An outing with your local real estate agent can illustrate the powerful impact of a
decoy. At the realtor's office, you are shown pictures and given descriptions of
many homes—beautiful split-levels, roomy ranches, an old Victorian. After
determining your needs, the agent drives you to some homes "you might find of
interest." The first stop is a tiny two-bedroom house sitting on a narrow lot. The
house needs a new coat of paint; the interior is in disarray; the linoleum in the
kitchen is buckling; the living room carpet is worn; the master bedroom is so
small that an average-sized bedroom suite just won't fit. When the realtor tells
you the asking price, you exclaim, "Holy cow! Who'd be dumb enough to pay so
much for this shack?" Probably not you, and probably not anyone else. But that
dilapidated house may influence you to buy another house more readily and to
buy it at a much higher price than you might normally have been willing to pay.
How can this come about? We can clarify the process by looking at an
experiment we conducted with our colleagues Peter Farquhar, Sarah Silbert, and
Jennifer Hearst.1 In our study, students were asked to make decisions such as the
following:
Which would you select (a or b)?
a. Nutri-burger: a tofu burger that is very good on nutrition but only
average on taste
b. Tasti-burger: a hamburger that is very good on taste but only average on
nutrition.
For some decisions, a decoy was given as an additional option. A decoy is an
alternative that is inferior to other possible selections. For example:
Which would you prefer (a, b, or c)?
a. Nutri-burger: the tofu burger described above
b. Tasti-burger: the hamburger described above

c. Bummer-burger: a hamburger that is only good on taste and only
average on nutrition.
In this case, the decoy is option c—the hamburger that is only good on taste (as
opposed to very good). No reasonable person would select this inferior burger. If
you wanted a lunch that tasted great, you would select option b, the very-good-
tasting Tasti-burger. If you wanted nutrition, you would go for the Nutri-burger.
Indeed, in our study the decoy was almost never selected.
But that doesn't mean that its presence as an option wasn't influential. Our study
investigated decisions about nine common consumer products; we found that, on
average, including a decoy increased the probability of people's selecting the
products that were similar but superior to the decoy, such as the Tasti-burger
over the Nutri-burger, by 6.7%. Does 6.7% seem like a small amount? To put
this in perspective, a 1% change in market share for a small brand manufactured
by a company like Procter & Gamble or General Motors could mean an annual
increase in sales of more than $10 million. In short, extrapolating into the real
world, our decoys might have produced a $67-million effect!
How did this relatively worthless decoy change our students' choices? The
answer in a nutshell: contrast effects. To contrast means to make differences
apparent. When an object is contrasted with something similar but not as good,
or not as pretty, or not as tall, it is judged to be better, prettier, taller than would
normally be the case. If a man of normal height (say 5 feet, 11 inches) is in the
company of midgets, he seems very tall. If he is a member of a professional
basketball team, he seems very short. Such was the case with "Tiny" Archibald,
who played basketball for the Boston Celtics. "Tiny" stood 6 feet, 1 inch tall. In
Jonathan Swift's classic novel Gulliver's Travels, the hero, a man of normal
height, was considered a giant when traveling among the residents of Lilliput
and a dwarf when traveling among the residents of Brobdingnag.
As a scientific example of contrast effects, let's look at an experiment by
Douglass Kenrick and Sara Gutierres, who asked males to rate the attractiveness
of a potential blind date before or after watching the television show "Charlie's
Angels."2 The males rated the woman as less attractive after they saw the show
than before. Presumably, the gorgeous Angels provided a stringent context for
rating attractiveness; the blind date appeared to be far less physically attractive
when compared to the Angels than to women in general.

In our study on consumer decision making, two contrast effects occurred that
made the Tasti-burger look more attractive. The presence of a decoy made the
very-good-tasting Tasti-burger appear to be even better-tasting and the average-
tasting Nutri-burger to be even worse-tasting. In other words, the decoy "spread
apart" the Tasti-and Nutri-burgers on the dimension of taste. With this change in
the perception of tastiness, the choice became much clearer for our subjects.
Decoys don't influence just the brands of products we choose. They can also
affect whom we would like to date. In a recent experiment conducted by
Constantine Sedikides and his colleagues,3 students were asked to make dating
choices such as the following:
Who would you most like to date (a or b)?
a. Chris, who is very handsome but rather inarticulate
b. Tory, who is not really handsome but is very articulate.
This is a tough decision that requires a trade-off: Is it better to spend the evening
with someone who looks great but isn't much of a conversationalist or someone
who's a great conversationalist but who doesn't look so great? The choice
becomes much easier when a decoy is added. Some of the subjects also received
information about a third potential date: Jackie, who is fairly handsome (just
slightly less so than Chris) and rather inarticulate (just like Chris). When Jackie
enters the dating scene, Chris increases in popularity and becomes the dating
partner of choice. Poor Tory and Jackie! They spend the evening alone at home.
Now we can see how that visit to the dilapidated house can influence our
purchase. Perhaps the next house we look at is not really ideal. But compared to
that last one—what an improvement! The yard and the master bedroom are
bigger. The interior is in good shape. We won't need to paint it for at least three
years. And the price is only slightly higher than what they were asking for that
old shack. What a deal! Well take it right away— before the owners have a
chance to change their mind!
Decoys come in a variety of shapes and sizes. A used-car dealer may place an
old clunker on the lot to "improve the appearance" of the other autos. A
presidential candidate may select a vice-presidential running mate of lesser
stature to enhance the positive perception of his or her own presidential qualities.

That blind date looks a lot better compared to the loser your uncle is trying to fix
you up with. The taking of seven hostages in Beirut doesn't seem so bad
compared to the taking of an entire embassy in Iran.
The lesson to be learned from research on decoys is that the context makes a
difference. Judgment is relative, not absolute. Depending on the context, objects
and alternatives can be made to look better or worse. Often we do not pay much
attention to the influence of context, much less question the validity of the
alternatives presented. This greatly enhances the power of "context-makers,"
such as politicians, advertisers, journalists, and sales agents. The context they set
can pre-persuade us by influencing our perceptions and judgments; we are thus
lulled into decisions that we would not normally make.

11
The Psychology of Factoids
On September 1, 1944, the Daily Journal-Gazette carried a startling story of a
"gas attack" on the citizens of Mattoon, Illinois. The headline read: anesthetic
prowler on loose.
The story described how a local woman and her daughter had been gassed by an
intruder. Apparently, a sickish, sweet-smelling gas had been sprayed into their
open bedroom window. The gas made both the woman and her daughter ill and
paralyzed their legs for a couple of hours. Although police found no sign of the
intruder, when the woman's husband arrived home from work a few hours after
the incident, he saw a man run from the window.1
This would not be the gasser's last strike. A short time later, Mattoon's at-large
anesthetist attacked another couple, with the husband becoming sick to his
stomach and the woman unable to walk. Four days later, another woman
reported finding a cloth on her porch, which, when she smelled it, burned her
mouth and lips so badly that they bled. In the week that followed, twenty-one
more incidents were reported to the police. All the victims reported symptoms
such as nausea and vomiting, paralysis of the legs, dryness of the mouth and
throat, and burns about the mouth.
The local police were stymied. They beefed up patrols. The state police were
called in as reinforcements. Analysis of the crime scenes and cloths that carried
the gas turned up nothing. Physicians, after examining the victims, were unable
to isolate the chemicals used in the attack.
To this day, the gasser of Mattoon remains at large. He or she has never been
captured or brought to justice for one simple reason—the elusive anesthetist
never existed except in the minds of the citizens of Mattoon. The gasser was a
factoid.
The novelist Norman Mailer, who coined the term factoid,* defines it as "facts
which have no existence before appearing in a magazine or newspaper."2 We
define factoid as an assertion of fact that is not backed up by evidence, usually

because the fact is false or because evidence in support of the assertion cannot be
obtained. Factoids are presented in such a manner that they become widely
treated as true. In our workplaces and neighborhoods, they are known as rumors,
gossip, and urban legends.
In courts of law, factoids are called hearsay and inadmissible evidence. In the
mass media, they are called libel, slander, innuendo, and the reporting of
currently circulating rumors, gossip, and hearsay as news.
Factoids are common.3 On October 30, 1938, Orson Welles presented a radio
dramatization of The War of the Worlds, the H. G. Wells classic that describes
the takeover of Earth by invaders from Mars.
The broadcast, coming during a time of concern over the events in Europe, set
off a panic—people all over the United States were praying, crying, and fleeing
frantically from what they thought was an invasion from Mars. Some tried to
rescue loved ones; others telephoned friends with the news and to say their last
good-byes. A year later, a Spanish version was broadcast in Ecuador. Panic
resulted. When the public found out it was a hoax, a riot broke out, resulting in
the burning of a radio station and the death of twenty-one people.
In the 1960s, rumors circulated that the Beatle Paul McCartney was dead.
Music fans around the world scoured album covers and music lyrics (forward
and backward) looking for (and finding!) clues of Paul's death—a fascination
that still continues.4 Since the late 1970s, consumers have boycotted Procter &
Gamble's products because of a rumor that the thirteen stars in the company's
logo were a tribute to the devil. In the late 1980s, the nation's attention was
riveted on a hunt by Boston police for the black man who murdered Carol Stuart,
a white woman. The search, which eventually resulted in the jailing of a prime
suspect, was instigated by a 911 call placed by Charles Stuart from his car phone
reporting that his wife, Carol, had just been killed by a black youth. A recording
of the phone call was repeatedly played on national television news shows. It
was subsequently discovered that Charles had killed his own wife. The use of
race to spread a rumor was so successful that less than a decade later Susan
Smith tried the same factoid by accusing an unknown black man of abducting
her two children. Susan Smith was later convicted of murdering her own
children by trapping them in a car and then pushing that car to the bottom of a
lake. Prejudice played a key role again in the spread of rumors as CNN, CBS,

ABC, the New York Times, and others initially reported (without hard evidence)
that the tragic bombing of a federal building in Oklahoma City was most likely
the result of a jihad masterminded by Middle Eastern terrorists.
The modern contemporary version of the gasser of Mattoon is the alien
abduction story.5 Books such as Communion by Whitley Striever and Intruders
by Budd Hopkins tell the tale of hundreds of people who have been kidnapped
by extraterrestrial visitors, often for purposes of bizarre sexual and genetic
experiments. The story of Barney and Betty Hill—perhaps the first case of alien
abduction—is typical. Driving home on a lonely New England road in
September 1961, they thought their car was being followed by a bright object in
the sky (which, based on their later description of its location, seems to be the
planet Jupiter).
Several days afterward, Betty began to have a recurring nightmare that she and
Barney had been abducted aboard a flying saucer. She told her story to friends,
who noted that the Hills had been two hours late in coming home that night;
perhaps, they conjectured, these nightmares were true and the "abduction" could
account for the "missing time." The Hills sought the advice of a therapist, who
used hypnotic regression to get to the "truth"
of the matter. Under hypnosis, Betty gave a detailed account of the "abduction,"
whereas Barney told a much more limited tale.
However, their stories did not match on many important details (such as the
looks of the aliens, the language spoken by the alliens, and the aliens' knowledge
of earth's customs), causing the therapist to conclude that the report was a
confabulation. But that would not be the end of the issue. Five years later, Look
magazine published a two-part article describing the possibility of the Hills'
abduction by space aliens. As in Mattoon, others came forward with their own
stories, and a nationwide factoid industry of alien abductions was spawned. And
as with the gasser of Mattoon, police and private investigators have been unable
to produce evidence to substantiate claims of alien visitation, prompting still
more factoids—this time of government conspiracy and cover-up.
Today entire newspapers, magazines, and television programs, under the guise
of presenting "news," are devoted to inventing and circulating believable rumors.
Witness the trial of O. J. Simpson, where one rumor after another—that a bloody

ski mask had been found in Simpson's home, that damaging evidence had been
found in Simpson's golf bag, that Simpson had allegedly confessed to the crime
—was repeated and elaborated on by the "news"
media. There was little attempt to check these rumors, since the public's thirst for
entertainment and the media's quest for ratings required that new and even more
exciting "details" of the crime be presented every day—lest anyone lose interest.
Further advancing the spread of rumors and factoids is the practice of flaming on
the Internet. Flaming is the Internet term for vicious attacks and unfounded
rumors.6 Some cyberspace factoids have included: a major fashion designer
made racist statements on the "Oprah Winfrey Show"; the homepage of a major
software producer contained a virus; and a major cookie maker gave free cookies
to 0. J. Simpson, thereby stimulating a nationwide boycott of the cookies. All of
these rumors were false.7
In politics, the art of innuendo in the United States goes back to the birth of the
nation in what were called "whispering campaigns."
For example, rumors circulated that Thomas Jefferson was an atheist and had
debauched a well-born Virginia belle, that Martin van Buren was the illegitimate
son of Aaron Burr, that Andrew Jackson had lived with his wife before marriage,
and that John Quincy Adams had acted as a pander for a Russian nobleman. The
tradition continues into the modern era. In the 1970s, Richard Nixon's campaign
staff hired "dirty tricksters" to spread rumors about leading Democratic
candidates—rumors that many political analysts believe were at the heart of the
withdrawal of front-running Edmund Muskie from the presidential race. Factoids
continue to be transmitted even today by presidential and congressional 'leaks,"
by mud-slinging in election campaigns, and by journalists' reports based on
information from "well-placed" sources.
The modern version of the whispering campaign could be observed during the
mass media coverage of the Monica Lewinsky-Bill Clinton saga. At one point,
the Dallas Morning News, on its Internet site, reported that a Secret Service
agent was about to come forward as a witness to a sex act between Lewinsky
and Clinton. The next day, headlines in the New York Post and New York Daily
News read: caught in the act. Not to be outdone, the Wall Street Journal, on its
Internet site, reported that a White House steward had told a grand jury that he
had seen Lewinsky and Clinton together. The wire services then picked up this

story. Of course, all these stories were false. Nonetheless, they fed the
impeachment frenzy that was sweeping the press, if not the nation, at the time.
The Clinton administration was the target of many innuendoes and factoids,
including criminal accusations against the Clintons for the unauthorized receipt
of confidential FBI files by a low-level official (the so-called Filegate), as well
as allegations that Hillary Clinton was somehow involved in the suicide of Vince
Foster, that the firing of several White House workers in the travel office (for
possible improprieties) was motivated by the Clintons' desire to use the positions
as rewards for supporters (the so-called Travelgate), and even that a haircut that
then-President Clinton got aboard Air Force One had caused a major delay in air
traffic at the Los Angeles airport. All these accusations were false; indeed,
Special Prosecutor Ken Starr (not known for being biased in favor of Bill and
Hillary), after years of investigation, cleared the Clintons in both the Filegate
and Travelgate matters.
The use of factoids is also a common practice in campaigns against other
nations. Adolf Hitler and his propaganda minister, Joseph Goebbels, mastered
the art of what has been termed "the big lie."
According to Nazi propaganda theory, one effective way to persuade the masses
is to develop and repeat falsehoods—for example, "The German people are a
master race; Europe is menaced by the Jewish conspiracy." Such big lies are
difficult to prove false.
For example, the fact that there is no evidence that a Jewish conspiracy exists is
just further evidence regarding the cleverness of Jews. The big lie is then
supported by many small but often irrelevant facts to make the big lie all that
more believable—for example, some Jews own banks and Karl Marx, the
founder of communism, was Jewish. The big-lie technique continues to be used
by many governments today. As just one example, Iranian government officials
circulated the story that the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait had been masterminded by
the United States as a pretext for the U.S. invasion of the Persian Gulf region.
But do factoids really influence our judgments and beliefs? After all, some of
them are often just plain unbelievable. Much research continues to show that the
reaction of the citizens of Mattoon is not an isolated example; factoids can have
a powerful effect on belief and human action. Let's look at some of that research.

Darnel Wegner and his colleagues have conducted a series of simple
experiments looking at people's reactions to innuendo.8 In their studies,
participants were asked to rate the favorability of political candidates on the
basis of a newspaper headline. For example, participants read either a directly
incriminating headline (bob talbert linked with mafia), a questioning
incrimination (is karen downing associated with a fraudulent charity?),
a denial of unseemly behavior (andrew winters not connected to bank
embezzlement), or a neutral headline (george arm-strong arrives in city).
The results showed, not surprisingly, that candidates linked with a directly
incriminating headline were perceived more negatively.
Strikingly, however, merely questioning whether a candidate had performed an
undesirable behavior or simply denying that the candidate had performed an
undesirable behavior also resulted in negative perceptions of the candidate—just
slightly more positive than those evoked by a direct incrimination. It appears that
simply questioning a candidate's connection with unseemly activities can be
enough to damage that candidate's public image. What's more, the source of the
innuendo made little difference: The candidates were still rated negatively even
if the source of the headline was a newspaper lacking in credibility (the National
Enquirer or the Midnight Globe as opposed to the New York Times or the
Washington Post). Negative political advertising and slur campaigns often do
indeed pay off. As just one example of the power of a negative accusation:
During the trial of William Kennedy Smith for rape, the popularity of President
John F. Kennedy (who was assassinated almost thirty years before the trial of his
nephew) declined, even though the majority of Americans agreed with the
verdict of not guilty rendered in the Smith trial.
Sometimes a false accusation can be more brazen and direct. Some recent
research we conducted with Derek Rucker looked at what we called the
projection tactic—accusing someone else of the misdeed you yourself are
committing.9 The research was inspired by numerous historical examples. For
example, before invading a country, Adolf Hitler would often accuse the leaders
of that country of plotting aggression against Germany. At the beginning of
testimony before his committee, Joseph McCarthy would accuse the witness of
lying, as he, Joseph McCarthy, was preparing to tell one lie after another about
the witness. We wondered if such projections would change how events are
perceived.

In our research, we asked people to view a competitive game or to read about
students cheating on a chemistry test or about countries going to war. In some
cases, one of the characters in the story would accuse others of a misdeed—for
example, accusing an innocent person of lying or cheating on a test or blaming
another country for a war. In four separate experiments, we obtained the same
results: The person making the accusation was exonerated from blame, whereas
the target of the projection was seen as the culprit of the misdeed.
We obtained these results despite raising suspicions about the motives of the
accuser, providing evidence that the accuser was guilty of the misdeed, and
timing the accusation so that it occurred after the accusers misdeeds came to
light. In other words, when it comes to false accusations and blaming others for
your own negative behavior, Adolf Hitler and Joseph McCarthy knew what they
were doing!
If you think that projection is only effective in the laboratory of social
psychologists, go ask Gary Dotson about his experiences. He spent six years in
prison because of a young girl's false allegations. In the summer of 1977,
Cathleen Crowell Webb, then sixteen years old, reported that she had been
raped. Webb showed police her torn blouse and scars allegedly inflicted by the
rapist; she also described the rapist to a police sketch artist. The police sketch
just happened to match the likeness of Gary Dot-son. Two years later, on the
strength of this "eyewitness" evidence, Dotson was sentenced to not less than
twenty-five years and not more than fifty years in the Illinois State penitentiary.
Six years later, in March 1985, Webb retracted her story. She told authorities
that she had made up the rape charge in order to cover up a sexual experience
with her boyfriend.10 Dotson asked that his conviction be overturned. The
original judge would not reverse the decision. The governor of Illinois refused a
pardon but did commute Dotson's sentence to the six years served. Both the
judge and the governor continued to believe the original story—the false
allegation was more believable than the recantation and the truth. It took Dotson
four more years to clear his name through DNA tests showing that the semen on
Webb's underwear could not have come from Dotson but could have come from
her boyfriend. The effects of a teenager's projections lasted for twelve years,
ruining twelve years of an innocent person's life.11
Other researchers have found that unsubstantiated evidence in a court of law can
have an impact on juries, even when the judge explicidy tells the jury to ignore
the factoid.12 For example, in one experiment, Saul Kassin and his colleagues

found that the credibility of an expert trial witness could be damaged merely by
asking accusatory questions, such as, "Isn't it true that your work is poorly
regarded by your colleagues?" The expert's credibility was damaged regardless
of whether the accusation was denied or withdrawn by the lawyer after an
objection was raised. Stanley Sue and his colleagues found that evidence
prejudicial to a defendant would result in more convictions even when the
evidence was ruled inadmissible. Numerous studies have found that negative
pretrial publicity—such as reports of a confession, a failed lie detector test, the
defendant's prior record, details of the case, and other information that was not
admitted into trial testimony—can have a serious impact on jury decision
making.
Factoids can influence not only political and judicial but also consumer decision
making. Just a decade ago, a flier called the "Leaflet of Villejuif" had been
circulating in France and other European nations.13 The leaflet, typed on
ordinary typewriters and then photocopied, urged parents to protect their
children by boycotting popular brands of food and beverage such as Coca-Cola,
Schweppes, Canada Dry, and others because they contained cancer-causing
agents.
Surveys of the French population found that about half of all housewives had
read or heard about the leaflet and that it was likely to have affected their
behavior. In a study of 150 housewives who received the leaflet, 19% stated that
they had stopped buying the listed brands and another 69% stated that they
planned to do so. In a survey of primary school teachers and physicians who had
heard of the leaflet, almost all of the teachers and nearly half of the physicians
agreed with what the leaflet stated. Only a few teachers or physicians (less than
10%) attempted to check out the validity of the claims, although many schools
stopped providing the offending brands at meals out of fear of doing harm to
children.
What is so remarkable about the persuasiveness of the "Leaflet of Villejuif" is
that the claims it made were completely false. For example, the additive
identified by the leaflet as the most serious cancer-causing agent was E330.
E330 is the European Common Market code for harmless citric acid, an
ingredient found in many nutritional fruits such as oranges. Further, the leaflet
also identified other ingredients as "harmless" and therefore good for you, even
though some of these ingredients were actually known carcinogenic agents. In
other words, the leaflet not only contained false and misleading information, it

also contained harmful information. After a year or two of circulation, the
original source of the leaflet was changed from "a hospital in Paris" to the
"Hospital of Villejuif," a hospital internationally recognized for its advanced
research on cancer. The hospital at Villejuif denied any association with the
leaflet and repeatedly denounced its fraudulent claims. Despite these efforts, the
leaflet continued to be passed from one person to the next and continued to be
believed.
As Mark Twain once put it, "A He can travel halfway around the world while the
truth is putting on its shoes." Why are factoids so persuasive? We can suggest
three reasons.
First, few attempts are made to verify the truth of a factoid. We often hear rumor
and gossip directly from trusted friends whom we are not in a habit of
questioning. We also turn to the "news"—whether on television or in other mass
media—expecting, quite frankly, "the news" and are often not prepared to
debunk each and every presented "fact." Factoids often just sneak by our
persuasion defenses. We rarely think to ask, "Is this factoid really true? Who
gains by repeated telling of this factoid?"
Even when we seek to verify a factoid, it is often difficult, since many rumors
deal with "secret information," "secret conspiracies," and "esoteric knowledge"
that is hard to critically evaluate and scrutinize.
Second, we accept factoids because they often meet one or more psychological
needs. For example, many factoids are entertaining and thus capture our
attention—it is fun to look for clues that Paul McCartney is dead. More
seriously, the very best factoids help us rationalize and justify our most
fundamental worries and concerns. The "Leaflet of Villejuif" confirms the belief
held by many that big corporations have conspired to harm us for profit.
Accepting as true a damaging factoid about a well-known person can make us
feel better about ourselves by showing us that even the great "Mr.
So-and-So" has his faults, too. Believing that a black youth killed Mrs. Stuart or
Susan Smith's children helps confirm many people's mistaken ideas about the
nature and character of black Americans. Spreading a factoid may also enhance
our self-images by showing others that we are in the "know" about secret
information and by helping us address some of our most threatening fears. As a
factoid is spread, it is often "modified and elaborated" to better serve our

psychological needs.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, factoids function as a form of pre-
persuasion; they create social reality. Factoids serve as bits and pieces that are
used to construct our picture of the world. As such, factoids direct our attention
and suggest how we should interpret the world. For example, consider a citizen
of Mattoon who wakes up one morning with an upset stomach or a pair of tired,
aching legs (as undoubtably someone in the town will do). What will he or she
think? "It must be the gasser. That's why I feel this way." That person may go on
to interpret other random occurrences, such as a passing cat or a gust of wind, as
supporting the notion of a visit from the gasser. "You know, I did hear the porch
creak and what sounded like a rapping at the window last night." The rumor is
thus given credence and then spread, going on to help others create their social
worlds. Even when the factoid is shown to be false, it can still direct attention
and thinking. For example, a political candidate falsely accused of embezzling
must spend his or her time refuting and denying the charge instead of proposing
substantive new programs in an attempt to win the election. And, as we saw in
the research by Daniel Wegner and colleagues, such denials are usually doomed
to fail, because they often serve to remind the casual reader of the original
accusation.
Given that factoids can be so persuasive, it is understandable that a number of
attempts have been made to limit their influence, with varying degrees of
success. For example, during World War II, the U.S. government was
particularly worried about how rumors and gossip could undermine the war
effort. A well-placed rumor could raise unrealistic expectations of a quick
victory or could dash all hopes of ever winning the war, thereby damaging
morale. Further, spreading rumors about troop movements and the like could
alert the enemy to Allied plans.
During the war, the U.S. government attempted to persuade citizens that
repeating rumors was unpatriotic and could handicap the war effort—as the old
saw went, "Loose lips sink ships." Citizens were instructed to treat rumors as
Nazi propaganda. Rumor-control clinics were also created to identify harmful
rumors and to take measures to defuse them. For example, one government
pamphlet recommended that harmful rumors be referred to the appropriate
government agency (e.g., Army, Navy, FBI), which would then present a logical
and factual refutation of the rumor. In order to stand a chance of succeeding,
such refutations should not overstate the case, should embed the rumor in a

negative context (or damn it, refute it, then damn it again and replace it), and
should not repeat verbatim particularly memorable rumors.
Unfortunately, these tactics can be used to stop even truthful facts. For example,
an effective use of rumor refutation can be seen in Bill Clinton's handling of
accusations of marital infidelity made by Gennifer Flowers in the 1992
presidential campaign. On CBS's 60 Minutes, Bill and Hillary Clinton denied the
affair and said that their marriage had gone through some rough times, but now
things were better than ever. The Flowers allegation probably cost Clinton a win
in the New Hampshire primary, but it did not knock him out of the race. Clinton
tried this tactic again when he went on nationwide television and, as he wagged
his finger at the American public, stated in forceful terms, "I did not have sexual
relations with that woman" in an attempt to deny his affair with Monica
Lewinsky. And the tactic worked again—for a short time.
Immediately after the statement, his trusted aides and cabinet members rallied to
his defense, and many Americans (including his wife) sought to give him the
benefit of the doubt. However, in the long run, the evidence finally accrued to
show otherwise (as it did in the Flowers case as well), and the United States soon
found itself in the midst of a costly and divisive impeachment trial.
Another attempt to regulate the influence of factoids, at least in the courts, is the
development of evidence law. Since the rise of jury trials in twelfth-century
England, some judges have been fearful that untrained, lay jurors would be
misled by false testimony and would succumb to improper appeals to their
emotions and sympathies.14 As a means of lessening the impact of such
information, courts have developed rules of procedure that specify who can
present evidence, what evidence can be admitted, how evidence is to be
introduced, and how a jury is to deliberate about the evidence. For example,
evidence may be excluded from a court of law because it is hearsay, or
secondhand, and therefore of questionable validity; because it is not relevant to
the case and its value to the court is outweighed by the risks of prejudicial
impact; because it is the opinion of an ordinary witness, not fact; or because it is
from a privileged communication (such as that between attorney and client or
husband and wife).
Evidence law is still evolving and generates much controversy even today. As a
case in point, recall the controversies generated by whether the Fuhrman tapes—
those recordings of LAPD officer Mark Fuhrman repeatedly using racial slurs—

should have been admitted as evidence in the trial of O. J. Simpson and whether
Judge Ito should have thrown out all the evidence collected at Simpson's
Rockingham estate on the basis of an illegal search by police. On the one hand,
some claim that evidence law can be frustrating to those seeking an efficient
means of convicting criminals, especially those rules that require the police and
prosecution to observe citizens' rights to privacy and undue search and seizure.
Trial procedure and rules of evidence can present obstacles to the prosecution in
arguing a case, thereby giving the impression that evidence law is designed to
protect the criminal. (In some cases, these same evidence laws can also be used
to exclude material that would make conviction of a defendant more likely.) On
the other hand, evidence law can be an important safeguard for insuring the right
of both the innocent and guilty to a fair trial, one that is devoid of innuendo and
hearsay.
We would argue for even stronger evidence rules, noting that while some rules,
such as changing the location of a trial if there is considerable prejudicial pretrial
publicity, are usually helpful in insuring a fair trial, other procedures, such as
ruling that a piece of prejudicial evidence is inadmissible and instructing a jury
to ignore it, do not prevent a jury from being unfairly influenced by that
evidence. In practice, the value of evidence laws for insuring a fair trial
ultimately resides with the fair application of the laws and a judiciary willing to
risk the possible anger of the public and politicians for the sake of protecting the
constitutional right to a fair trial. Regardless of one's own views on the matter,
the controversy over evidence law should further underscore the importance of
factoids in the persuasion process.
If the control of factoids is difficult in a relatively well-controlled environment
such as a court of law, it is all the more complicated in the mass media.15
Attempts to diminish the effects of factoids in the mass media are relatively
recent. The first court cases involving deceptive advertising in the United States
occurred in the late 1950s and early 1960s. One of the most important cases was
brought by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) against Colgate-Palmolive, the
makers of Rapid Shave. In one of their television commercials, an actor was
shown squirting Rapid Shave onto sandpaper and then, moments later, shaving it
clean with just one stroke. When the FTC attempted to repeat this demonstration,
they found that sandpaper could not be shaved clean unless moisturized for an
hour. Indeed, the makers of the original ad had used Plexiglas covered with sand,
not sandpaper. The courts ruled that this ad was deceptive—it led consumers
mistakenly to believe that Rapid Shave could shave even the toughest textures

quickly—and Colgate-Palmolive was ordered to cease showing the commercial.
However, just stopping a deceptive advertisement may not be enough. We have
seen that a belief in a factoid can linger for a considerable length of time. Such
deceptive advertising can unfairly place business competitors at a disadvantage
and can confuse and mislead consumers.
During the 1970s, the FTC argued that manufacturers who make misleading
claims must not only cease making the claims but correct and dispel any false
beliefs created by the advertisement. For example, Profile Bread claimed to be a
"diet" bread having fewer calories than other breads. (In reality, it had the same
number of calories—but slices were cut thinner to reduce the number of calories
per slice by seven.) Profile Bread was ordered to spend at least one-fourth of its
advertising budget for a year to correct this misleading claim. Other firms,
including other bakers, Ocean Spray (maker of a brand of cranberry juice), and
various manufacturers of analgesics, were similarly ordered to spend a
percentage of their advertising budgets to correct false claims. What did the
manufacturers do? Some merely stopped advertising for a year—one-quarter of
$0 is $0 spent on corrective advertising.
Others spent the money to buy ads that not many people would read—for
example, classified ads in the daily newspaper. In response, the FTC
required subsequent deceptive advertisers to take specific steps to dispel false
beliefs. In particular, Warner-Lambert, maker of Listerine, was required to dispel
the myth that Listerine kills cold-producing germs by spending $10 million to
promote the following statement: "Contrary to prior advertising, Listerine will
not prevent colds or sore throats or lessen their severity." The FTC
also issued guidelines on how to spend the money.
However, correcting mistaken beliefs may not be the most efficient method for
dealing with factoids; perhaps a better approach is to nip them in the bud before
they become factoids. During the 1970s, the FTC
attempted to do this through its program on ad substantiation. This program
required advertisers in selected industries to submit to the FTC evidence that
would substantiate their advertising claims. The response of automakers was
typical: They sent hundreds upon hundreds of technical documents that were
nearly impossible to understand.

Later, the FTC amended its procedures to require more focused and readable
documents.
In the 1980s, however, much of the FTC's attempt to control factoids was
abandoned when the United States elected a president who emphasized a free
market as opposed to the use of "big-government"
regulation. During the Reagan years, the staff of the FTC was cut by almost half.
Other advertising regulatory bodies followed suit, with the major networks
cutting many of their employees responsible for policing television advertising.
This relaxing of government controls reopened the door to blatant abuses. The
attorneys general of various states initiated their own lawsuits in an attempt to
stem the deceptions. When Bill Clinton came to office in 1992, he gradually
restored some of the regulatory powers of the FTC, especially in high-profile
areas such as ads for violent movies, crimes of economic fraud, food labeling,
and tobacco advertising. We should note, however, that many of the Clinton
administrations attempts to curb tobacco advertising were overruled by the U.S.
Supreme Court, which claimed that the Food and Drug Administration (which
issued the guidelines) did not have the authority to regulate tobacco.
Nevertheless, when it comes to factoids, the stakes can be high. Look what
happened politically during the Clinton administration. False allegations against
the Clintons and false denials by Bill Clinton resulted in a year-long mass media
frenzy and preoccupation with all things "Monica." The frenzy was compounded
when several of Clinton's ardent accusers were themselves confronted with
evidence of their own sexual indiscretions. We can certainly appreciate the
feelings of many Americans who are tempted to say "a plague on all their
houses." When a rumor is answered with an innuendo that in turn prompts a lie
that is then refuted with gossip leading to more rumors, a sane person just
doesn't know what to believe. The end result is cynicism and deep distrust of all
those involved. But here is the rub: The plague isn't on their houses, but on ours.
Ultimately we all have a responsibility to challenge factoids— first, when
confronted by a rumor, by asking just what the evidence is for the claim and then
by consciously deciding not to create or spread false rumors and to counter them
if we can.
Citizens worried about commercial and political factoids do have one recourse—
themselves. Both Consumer Reports and Advertising Age publish lists of

advertisements that have been found to make false or misleading claims.
Consumers can also ask manufacturers to substantiate their claims. This is
exactly what students in one of our courses did. They culled magazines and
television to identify ninety-nine advertising claims and then wrote to the
manufacturers of the products asking for any information that would substantiate
their claims. The responses they received would startle even the most cynical
critic of advertising. Just under 50%
of the companies responded to the request. Of those responding, only five
companies sent information that adequately substantiated their claims. The great
majority sent more advertising. Indeed, for every page of materials directly
related to the claim, the students received eighty-six pages of additional
unrelated advertising and promotional materials.
Although the students did not find the answers to their ad-substantiation
questions, their project is still of considerable value. First, it provides yet more
evidence for a basic point of this chapter: Factoids are abundant in the age of
propaganda. Second, the students'
project suggests a method for dealing with potential factoids.
Suppose consumers and voters began questioning and confronting the makers of
factoids directly. It is just possible that many of our advertisers and politicians
would be forced to begin replacing factoids with facts.
*
CNN uses the term factoid to mean little fact, a usage quite different from ours
and Mailer's.
 

Communicator Credibility: Real and
Manufactured

12
The Credible Communicator
Picture the following scene: Your doorbell rings; when you answer it, you find a
middle-aged man in a rather loud, checkered sports jacket. His tie is loose, his
collar is frayed, his pants need ironing, he needs a shave, and his eyes keep
looking off to the side and over your head as he talks to you. He is carrying a
small can in his hand with a slot in the top, and he is trying to convince you to
contribute a few dollars to a charitable organization you have never heard of.
Although his actual pitch sounds fairly reasonable, what is the possibility of his
succeeding in prying you loose from your money?
Now let's turn back the clock a few minutes: You open your door in response to
the bell, and standing there is a middle-aged mart in a conservative business suit,
well tailored and well pressed. He looks you squarely in the eye, introduces
himself as a vice-president of the City National Bank, and asks if you would
contribute a few dollars to the same charitable organization, using exactly the
same words as the fellow in the loud, checkered jacket. Would you be more
likely to contribute some money?
We
were struck by the likely response to such a substitution several years ago when
Allen Ginsberg appeared on one of the late-night talk shows. Ginsberg, one of
the most popular poets of the "beat"
generation, was at it again; his poem "Howl" had shocked and stimulated the
literary establishment in the 1950s. On the talk show, having just finished
boasting about his homosexuality, Ginsberg was talking about the generation
gap.
The camera panned in. He was fat, bearded, and looked a trifle wild-eyed (was
he stoned?); long hair grew in unruly patches from the sides of his otherwise
bald head; he was wearing a tie-dyed T-shirt with a hole in it and a few strands
of beads. Although he was talking earnestly—and, in the opinion of some, very
sensibly—about the problems of the young, the studio audience was laughing.

They seemed to be treating him like a clown. In all probability, the vast majority
of the people at home, lying in bed watching the poet from between their feet,
were not taking him seriously either—no matter how sensible his message, no
matter how earnestly he delivered it. His appearance and his reputation were, in
all probability, overdetermining the audience's reaction.
The scientist in us longed to substitute the conservative-looking banker in the
neatly pressed business suit for the wild-eyed beat poet and have him move his
lips while Ginsberg said the same words off-camera.
Our guess is that, under these circumstances, Ginsberg's message would have
been well received.
No
need. Similar experiments have already been done. Indeed, speculations about
the effects of character and prestige on persuasion are ancient. More than 300
years before the Christian era, Aristode wrote:
We believe good men more fully and more readily than others: this is true
generally whatever the question is, and absolutely true where exact
certainty is impossible and opinions are divided. It is not true, as some
writers assume in their treatises on rhetoric, that the personal goodness
revealed by the speaker contributes nothing to his power of persuasion; on
the contrary, his character may almost be called the most effective means
of persuasion he possesses.1
It
required some 2,300 years for Aristotle's observation to be put to a scientific test.
This was accomplished by Carl Hovland and Walter Weiss.2 What these
investigators did was very simple: They presented large numbers of people with
a communication that argued a particular point of view—for example, that
building
atomic-powered submarines was a feasible undertaking (this experiment was
performed in 1951, when harnessing atomic energy for such purposes was
merely a dream).
Some of the people were informed that the argument was made by a person

possessing a great deal of public credibility; for others, the same argument was
attributed to a source with low credibility.
Specifically, the argument that atomic-powered submarines could be built in the
near future was attributed to J. Robert Oppenheimer, a highly respected and
nationally known atomic physicist, or to Pravda, the official newspaper of the
Communist party in the Soviet Union—a publication not famous in the United
States for its objectivity and truthfulness.
Before reading the arguments, the participants were asked to fill out a
questionnaire that revealed their opinions on the topic. They then read the
communication. A large percentage of those people who believed the
communication came from J. Robert Oppenheimer changed their opinions—they
then believed more strongly in the feasibility of atomic submarines. Very few of
those who read the identical communication attributed to Pravda shifted their
opinions in the direction of the communication.
This same phenomenon has been repeatedly confirmed by several different
investigators using a wide variety of topics and attributing the communications
to a wide variety of communicators. Careful experiments have shown that a
judge of the juvenile court is more likely than most other people to sway opinion
about juvenile delinquency, that a famous poet and critic can sway opinion about
the merits of a poem, and that a medical journal can sway opinion about whether
or not antihistamines should be dispensed without a prescription.
What do the physicist, the judge, the poet, and the medical journal have that
Pravda doesn't? Aristotle said we believe "good men," by which he meant
people of high moral caliber. Hovland and Weiss used the term credible, which
removes the moral connotations present in the Aristotelian definition.
Oppenheimer, the juvenile court judge, the poet, and the medical journal are all
credible—that is, they are not necessarily "good,"
but they appear to be both expert and trustworthy.
It
makes sense to allow yourself to be influenced by communicators who are
trustworthy and who know what they are talking about. It makes sense for
people to be influenced by an editor of Consumer Reports when she is voicing
an opinion about consumer safety, and it makes sense for people to be influenced

by someone like Dr. C.
Everett Koop, the former surgeon general, when he is talking about the use of
condoms to prevent AIDS or about the addictive properties of nicotine. These
are expert, trustworthy people.
But not all people are equally influenced by the same communicator.
Indeed, the same communicator may be regarded by some people as possessing
high credibility and by others as possessing low credibility. Moreover, certain
peripheral attributes of the communicator may loom large for some people; such
attributes can serve to make a given communicator either remarkably effective
or remarkably ineffective.
The importance of peripheral attributes in persuasion was forcefully
demonstrated in an experiment we performed in collaboration with Burton
Golden.3 In this study, sixth-graders heard a speech extolling the usefulness and
importance of arithmetic. The speaker was introduced either as a prize-winning
engineer from a prestigious university or as someone who washed dishes for a
living.
As one might expect, the engineer was far more effective at influencing the
youngsters' opinions than the dishwasher. This finding is consistent with
previous research; in and of itself, it is obvious and of some interest.
But, in addition, we varied the race of the communicator: In some of the trials
the communicator was white, and in others, black. Several weeks prior to the
experiment, the children had filled out a questionnaire designed to measure the
degree of their prejudice against black people. The results were striking: Among
those children who were most prejudiced against blacks, the black engineer was
less influential than the white engineer, although both delivered the same speech.
Moreover, among those children who were the least prejudiced against blacks,
the black engineer was more influential than the white engineer.
It
seems unreasonable that such a peripheral attribute as skin color would affect a
person's credibility. It might be argued that, in a purely rational world, a
prestigious engineer should be able to influence sixth-graders about the
importance of arithmetic regardless of the color of his or her skin, but apparently

this is not a purely rational world. Depending upon listeners' attitudes toward
blacks, they were either more influenced or less influenced by a black
communicator than by an otherwise identical white communicator. More
recently, Paul White and Stephen Harkins have found that whites, in an attempt
not to appear prejudiced, will often pay more attention to what a black
communicator is saying.4 This results in more persuasion if the message is
strong and compelling, but less persuasion if the message is weak.
Clearly, such responses are maladaptive. If the quality of your life depends on
the extent to which you allow a communication about arithmetic to influence
your opinion, the expertise and trustworthiness of the communicator would seem
the most reasonable factors to heed, and it would seem foolish to take into
account factors irrelevant to the issue (such as skin color).
But, although such responses are maladaptive, it should not be very astonishing
to anyone who has ever watched commercials on television.
Indeed, advertisers bank on this maladaptive behavior and often count on
irrelevant factors to increase the effectiveness of a spokesperson. For example,
several years ago Bill Cosby starred in a series of commercials in which he
playfully interacts with children.
He tells the children how delicious a particular brand of pudding is, and together
they chat, laugh, and enjoy their snacks. He also reminds the audience that the
product not only "tastes good"
but is "good for you," because it's made with milk. What made Cosby an expert
on children and nutrition? In the 1980s, on "The Cosby Show," he had played
Dr. Cliff Huxtable, a pediatrician as well as a warm, funny, and insightful father
to five children.
Similarly, Karl Maiden once starred in a series of commercials in which
Americans traveling in a foreign country either lose all their money or have it
stolen. The tourists are distraught, humiliated, traumatized, panicky. At the end
of the commercial, Karl Maiden appears and, in an authoritative voice, warns us
not to carry money while traveling and recommends "American Express
Travelers Cheques—don't leave home without them." What makes Karl Maiden
an expert on vacation financing? Nothing, but he is perceived as somewhat of an
expert on crime. For many television seasons, Maiden portrayed Lieutenant

Mike Stone in "The Streets of San Francisco," a popular detective show.
More recently, the makers of Nicoderm—a stop-smoking patch—hired a young
actress to promote their product. And who was she? The same actress who
played "Dr. Olivet," a psychologist who often evaluated the mental stability of
criminals on the hit TV show "Law & Order." Apparently, pretending to be a
psychologist on TV
for a couple of seasons is enough to allow this actress to voice her opinion about
the best way to quit smoking.
And then there is our favorite in this genre. An actor from the hit daytime soap
opera "General Hospital" comes on the TV
screen and announces, "I'm not a real doctor, but I play one on TV"—and then
goes on to recommend a brand of painkiller.
Though Cosby, an actor from "General Hospital," "Dr. Olivet,"
and Maiden probably do not know a great deal more about nutrition, medicine,
crime, nicotine patches, or even travelers checks than the average viewer, they
almost certainly gain credibility and trust when they are identified with their
particular roles.
The fact that we humans often use the credibility of a communicator to guide us
in the acceptance or rejection of a message opens the door once again for
mindless propaganda. Although it makes sense to believe the credible source
when her or his expertise and trustworthiness are directly related to the issue at
hand, it is often easier to feign credibility than to actually achieve it. For
example, in the 1992 presidential election, Bill Clinton was adept at creating
credibility with a variety of target audiences— such as by appearing on MTV
and playing a saxophone on a late night talk show to attract young voters, eating
at McDonalds to appeal to working-class folks, and playing up his "Bubba"
image to break the Republican stronghold in the South. In the 1996 election,
Clinton abandoned the Bubba schtick and used the trappings of the White House
in an attempt to establish an image of leadership.5
One of the important tasks of media research is to keep tabs on the "reputation
and credibility" of public figures, such as movie stars, sports figures, and other
public "personalities."

Advertisers want to know which celebrity figures are most believable, who
among the stars is most liked by the public, who has been on the cover of
leading magazines, and who has been overexposed. The answers to such
questions determine the celebrity's value as a spokesperson for the advertiser's
product. Credibility has become a commodity not only to be feigned but also to
be bought and sold on the open market.
How can we recognize when a communicator is merely feigning credibility as
opposed to actually possessing it? This is a difficult question.
In order to know that someone is an expert in a given domain, we have to know
enough about that topic to be able to recognize who is and isn't an expert. And if
we know that much, then we are probably experts ourselves. Fortunately,
students of rhetoric such as Douglas Walton have provided us with a set of
questions that can be used to recognize when the use of an expert to guide our
acceptance of a proposition is fallacious.6 Walton suggests that we ask these
questions: Is the expert clearly identified (or is it a vague attribution such as
"leading experts say")? Is the person really an expert or someone who is merely
quoted because of his or her prestige, popularity, or celebrity status? Does the
judgment put forward fall within the field of competence of the expert? Is there
consensus among the experts as to the judgment or opinion? Could the expert
cite objective evidence to support her or his claim? And is the expert trustworthy
and unbiased (or does he or she have a self-interest in the cause)?
When Aristotle wrote his description of the effects of "good character" on
persuasion, a debate was raging in Greece. Many people, such as Socrates and
Plato, saw those engaged in persuasion, such as professional speechmakers and
the Sophists, as deceitful and untrustworthy persons. Rhetoric was a worthless
art practiced by worthless people. In order to justify a place for persuasion in
society, Aristotle argued that not only should a persuader be of good character
for moral reasons but also that the trustworthy source would be more effective
than the speaker lacking in character. Modern research on persuasion has
supported Aristotle's belief in the effectiveness of the trustworthy communicator
—with a few notable exceptions to be discussed later. Modern propaganda
practices, with their ability to manufacture credibility and buy and sell it as a
commodity, raise anew the ethical concerns prominent in Aristotle's times. As
the psychotherapist Erich Fromm once noted, when everything and everybody is
for sale—including persons, convictions, feelings, and a smile&mdmdash;then
fewer people can be trusted because fewer people have a character and an

identity that can be depended upon.7 Without trust, communication becomes
difficult, if not impossible.
 

13
Breakfast of Champions, Junk Food for the Self
The celebrity endorsement has been a common feature of America's advertising
landscape for decades. In the 1950s, future president Ronald Reagan described
the revolutionary collars of Arrow shirts and the high-quality tobacco of
Chesterfield cigarettes. In the 1960s, pro quarterback Joe Namath urged viewers
to "take it off' with Noxema shaving cream. In the 1970s, Rodney Dangerfield,
Bob Uecker, and a collection of madcap football players told us about the less-
filling, great taste of Miller Lite beer. In the 1980s, Priscilla (the wife of Elvis)
Presley told us to go ahead and buy that new car, because it really isn't our
father's Oldsmobile. And today, basketball star Michael Jordan sells everything
from breakfast cereal to cologne to phone service.
The use of such celebrities may seem quite irrational and bizarre. After all, when
we think about it in a rational manner, who is an expert on the topic of razor
blades or shaving cream? Well, perhaps a barber; maybe a dermatologist or a
cosmetologist. Who is it that tells us what blades or lather we should use? Most
often, it is a professional basketball or football player.
The use of athletes to sell products has a long history. Throughout the 1950s and
1960s, one of the most persistent peddlers of breakfast food was former Olympic
decathlon champion Bob Richards, who was probably far more effective at
selling Wheaties than some learned professor of nutrition, no matter how expert
he or she might have been. In the 1970s, Richards was replaced by another gold-
medal decathlon champion, Bruce Jenner. How effective are these sports stars?
Well, when Jenner was finally replaced in the 1980s, the Wheaties people again
decided not to use a nutritionist and hired Mary Lou Retton, an Olympic gold
medalist in gymnastics. She was later replaced by a succession of sports heroes,
including Pete Rose, Walter Payton, Chris Evert Lloyd, Michael Jordan, Joe
Montana, Dan Marino, Cal Ripken, and the gold-medal winners from the 1996
Olympic games. By the time you read this, we would be surprised if Marion
Jones, American premier track star of the 2000 Olympics, has not already graced
the Wheaties cereal box. This would suggest that whoever handles advertising
for Wheaties is convinced of the effectiveness of famous athletes. Indeed, the
sports endorser is such an effective persuasion tactic it appears to be used

worldwide. When the German chocolate maker Jacob Suchard wanted to
advertise its Milka brand chocolates, whom did they hire? They asked Franziska
von Almsick—a fourteen-year old swimmer and winner of four medals at the
1992 Olympics in Barcelona—to appear on TV milking their trademark purple
cow.
Is this conviction justified? Will people be influenced by an ad just because a
prominent celebrity is involved? Even if we admire the skills and talents such
individuals display on the movie screen or the playing field, can we really trust
them to be telling us the truth about the products they endorse? After all, we all
know that the star peddling shaving cream, beer, or breakfast cereal is getting
paid handsomely for her or his time. Indeed, the multimillion-dollar deals
celebrities such as Madonna, Michael Jackson, and Bill Cosby cut with various
sponsors have become part of the common knowledge touted in the news
magazines. So we know better. Surely we cannot be influenced by such blatant
hypocrisy. Or can we?
Our guess is that most people would be quick to say, "No; maybe other people
might be persuaded to run out and buy something because a movie star or sports
figure tells them to, but certainly I wouldn't trust even my favorite celebrity's
advice on how to spend my hard-earned cash." But can people really predict
their own behavior?
Not necessarily. Although most of us might not trust movie actors and sports
stars, that does not necessarily mean we wouldn't buy the products they endorse.
Another significant factor determining the effectiveness of spokespersons is how
attractive or likable they are, regardless of their overall expertise or
trustworthiness.
Several years ago, we and our colleague Judson Mills did a simple laboratory
experiment demonstrating that a beautiful woman—simply because she was
beautiful—could have a major impact on the opinions of an audience on a topic
wholly irrelevant to her beauty and, furthermore, that her impact was greatest
when she openly expressed a desire to influence the audience.1 There is a sense
in which people act as if they are attempting to please someone they find
attractive, even though that person may never know about it. A later experiment
not only replicated the finding that more likable communicators are more
persuasive but went on to show that attractive sources are expected to support
desirable positions.2

Perhaps the most amazing demonstration of the power of attractive and likable
spokespersons to persuade is the use of fictitious
spokespersons—cartoon characters such as Joe Camel, the Pillsbury Dough Boy,
and Snap, Crackle, and Pop or imaginary personalities such as the Lonely
Maytag Man, Aunt Jemima, and the suave yet unidentified spokesman for
Infiniti automobiles. What could be of more suspect credibility? These "people"
don't even exist except to sell you a product. Does it work? Consider Joe Camel,
that sophisticated and smooth symbol for Camel cigarettes. Once Joe Camel
began appearing on the nation's billboards, in magazines, and on a variety of
promotional items such as T-shirts and ballcaps, Camel's market share among
underage smokers increased from 0.5% to a whopping 32.8%, especially among
young smokers—who were the target audience.3
Are we condemned to follow the desires of the beautiful and the famous?
Richard Petty, John Cacioppo, and David Schumann have demonstrated that
there is at least one circumstance in which we do not follow the dictates of the
socially attractive— when we are motivated to think about the issue at hand.4
That is, the attractiveness of the source has less of an impact when we operate in
the centred, as opposed to the peripheral, route to persuasion. In their
experiment, subjects received one of four different ads for a fictitious new
product, "Edge Disposable Razors." Two ads featured photographs of well-
known and well-liked sports celebrities, and two ads featured middle-aged
citizens from Bakersfield, California. Further, two ads contained six cogent and
compelling arguments for Edge Razors (e.g., the handle is tapered and ribbed to
prevent slippage) and two ads contained six specious and vague statements (e.g.,
it is built with the bathroom in mind).
The researchers varied subjects' motivation to think about Edge Razors by telling
half of them that, at the end of the study, they would be allowed to select a gift
from among several brands of disposable razors. The results showed that for
subjects motivated to think about the communication by the prospect of
choosing a gift razor, the quality of the message's arguments, not the
attractiveness of the source, was the most important determinant in the subjects'
ratings of Edge Razors. The other subjects were strongly influenced by the
source of the message, more often rating Edge Razors as superior when the ad
used sports personalities than when it used citizens of Bakersfield, California.

The Petty Cacioppo, and Schumann findings notwithstanding, it is still
somewhat disconcerting that under most circumstances attractive communicators
can wield such influence. Again, we all know that the football player holding up
his can of shaving cream is clearly trying to influence us—the shaving cream
company is not paying him all that money not to sell shaving cream. Moreover,
he seems to be operating in his own self-interest; when we take a good look at
the situation, it's clear the only reason he's up there with the shaving cream is to
make a buck.
The effectiveness of attractive sources in selling products and changing our
beliefs indicates that we hold our beliefs for other reasons in addition to our
desire to be correct and to size up the world accurately. We hold our beliefs and
attitudes in order to define and make sense of our selves. By shaving with the
right razor or eating the right cereal, we are saying, "I am just like that
ballplayer; I am part of the attractive in-group." By purchasing the "right stuff,"
we enhance our own egos and rationalize away our inadequacies as we
"become" just like our favorite celebrity. Perhaps we should remember what
basketball star Charles Barkley frankly said on "Saturday Night Live": "These
are my shoes. They're good shoes. They won't make you rich like me; they won't
make you rebound like me; they definitely won't make you handsome like me.
They'll only make you have shoes like me. That's it." Too bad Demetrick James
Walker didn't watch this episode of "Saturday Night Live" before he decided to
kill another boy for his Nike high-tops.
Advertisers know all too well that we believe what we believe and buy what we
buy in the service of our self-image. They imbue their products with a
"personality." Marlboro cigarettes are macho. Dr. Pepper soft drink is
unconventional. A BMW automobile is yuppie. Calvin Klein is chic. To claim
the desired persona, all we need to do is to purchase and display the right
products.
And political pundits and consultants are increasingly learning that appeals to
our self-image make good politics. Candidates for political office are given
attractive personalities; their images are created by making speeches about the
American flag, by posing in an Army tank, and by being photographed with
schoolchildren in prayer.
All we need to do to be patriotic, to be strong and tough, to be holy, is merely to
cast a vote for the right candidate. It would be sad indeed if we lost our more

than 200-year-old tradition of democracy because, like the unthinking subjects
of Petty, Cacioppo, and Schumann, we were never motivated to scrutinize the
candidate's image and evaluate the substance of her or his message.
 

14
How Do You Persuade if Everyone Knows You Are Untrustworthy,
Unbelievable, and Disliked?
When you think about it, the professional propagandist has a difficult task. We
commonly respond to persuasive messages by questioning the speaker's bias and
noting how his or her self-interest is being served. This general skepticism can
serve a useful purpose for the target of the appeal. By identifying a message as
biased, the audience can prepare to defend its position and either to scrutinize
carefully the contents of the message or to reject it out of hand, depending on the
circumstances. But from the propagandist's perspective, this constitutes a
formidable obstacle to securing compliance. Accordingly, the propagandist finds
it important not to appear to be a propagandist. In order to be successful, the
communicator must appear unbiased and trustworthy. In this chapter we look at
two general strategies for making the untrustworthy, the unbelievable, and the
disliked look trustworthy, believable, and liked.
The Chinese rhetorician Han Fei-tzu, who advised rulers in the third century b.c.,
told the following story to illustrate how a ruler can improve the perception of
his credibility.1 The Duke of Wu wished to invade the country of Hu. The Duke
pulled aside one of his most trusted counselors and asked him to argue in public
that the Duke should attack Hu, which the counselor then did. The Duke
immediately put the counselor to death as a dramatic way of reassuring the ruler
of Hu that he had no intention of attacking. Assured that the Duke was a
trustworthy leader— after all, he had just put one of his most trusted advisors to
death—Hu disarmed. The Duke of Wu immediately launched a surprise attack
and the country of Hu was captured.
One of the morals of Han Fei-tzu's story is that communicators can make
themselves seem trustworthy by apparently acting against their own self-interest.
If we are led to believe that communicators have nothing to gain and perhaps
even something to lose by convincing us, we will trust them and they will be
more effective. When the Duke of Wu put his counselor to death, he appeared to
be arguing against his own self-interest—"No! Invading Hu, even though it may
result in benefits to my country, is wrong. I believe this so strongly that I will put
my favorite advisor to death for merely suggesting it." The problem—for the

citizens of Hu—was that the Duke's position was an illusion; he had arranged it
so that it would appear he was acting and arguing against his own self-interest.
This leads us to the second moral of Han Fei-tzu's story: When it comes to
propaganda, appearances can be deceiving.
The strategy of acting or arguing against your own self-interest can be used to
increase the perception of your trustworthiness without actually putting your best
friend to death. An illustration may be helpful. Suppose a habitual criminal,
recently convicted as a smuggler and peddler of cocaine, was delivering a talk on
the harshness of the American judicial system and the overzealousness of its
prosecutors. Would he influence you? Probably not. Most people would
probably regard him as biased and untrustworthy. The cocaine peddler occupies
a position clearly outside the Aristotelian definition of a "good person." But
suppose he was arguing that criminal justice was too soft—that criminals almost
always beat the rap if they have a smart lawyer and that even if criminals are
convicted, the sentences normally meted out are too lenient. Would he influence
you?
The evidence from one of our own experiments suggests that he probably would.
In a study conducted in collaboration with Elaine Walster and Darcy Abrahams,
we presented our subjects with a newspaper clipping of an interview with Joe
"the Shoulder" Napolitano, who was identified in the manner described above.2
In one experimental condition, Joe "the Shoulder" argued for stricter courts and
more severe sentences. In another condition, he argued that courts should be
more lenient and sentences less severe.
We also ran a parallel set of conditions in which the same statements were
attributed to a respected public official.
When Joe "the Shoulder" argued for more lenient courts, he was totally
ineffective; indeed, he actually caused the subjects'
opinions to change slightly in the opposite direction. But when he was arguing
for stricter, more powerful courts, he was extremely effective—as effective as
the respected public official delivering the same argument. This study
demonstrates that Aristode was not completely correct: A communicator can be
an immoral person and still be effective, as long as it seems clear that the
communicator is not acting in her or his self-interest by attempting to persuade
us.

Why was Joe "the Shoulder" so effective in the experiment?
Let's take a closer look. Most people would not be surprised to hear a known
convict arguing in favor of a more lenient criminal justice system. Their
knowledge of the criminal's background and self-interest would lead them to
expect such a message. When they receive the opposite communication,
however, these expectations are discontinued. To make sense of this
contradiction, the members of the audience might conclude that the convict had
reformed, or they could entertain the notion that the criminal is under some kind
of pressure to make the anti-crime statements. In the absence of any evidence to
substantiate these suppositions, however, another explanation becomes more
reasonable: Maybe the truth of the issue is so compelling that, even though it
apparently contradicts his background and self-interest, the spokesman sincerely
believes in the position he espouses.
Evidence for this phenomenon comes from an experiment by Alice Eagly and
her colleagues, who presented students with a description of a dispute between
business interests and environmental groups over a company's polluting of a
river.3 The students then read a statement about the issue. In some conditions the
spokesman was described as having a business background and was said to be
speaking to a group of business people. In others, his background and audience
were varied, thereby altering the subjects' expectations of his message.
The results supported the reasoning above: When the message conflicted with
their expectations, listeners perceived the communicator as being more sincere
and they were more persuaded by his statement.
It is hard to imagine a more convincing spokesperson for an anti-smoking
campaign than someone whose fortune was made off the habits of millions of
American smokers. In fact, Patrick Reynolds, who inherited $2.5 million from
the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company founded by his grandfather, has taken a
strong public stand against smoking and has gone so far as to urge victims of
smoking-related illnesses to file lawsuits against tobacco companies!4
Similarly, during the height of the Cold War the most effective opponents of the
nuclear arms race were several professionals who took stands that seemingly
contradicted their backgrounds. These communicators—for example, J. Robert
Oppenheimer, a respected nuclear physicist who, for many years, cautioned
against the further development of nuclear technology; Carl Sagan, a trusted

astronomer who warned the world about nuclear winter; and Admiral Elmo
Zumwalt, a former naval commander who campaigned for a halt to certain
military developments—were perceived as highly credible precisely because of
the discontinuity between their messages and the apparent interests of their
professions. First of all, they were experts.
Second, since they had nothing to gain (and perhaps even collegial esteem to
lose), it seemed that only the compelling need for disarmament led them to speak
out. Not only do we tend to take more notice of unexpected events, but we also
attribute more credibility to speakers who appear to resist the pressures of their
colleagues and who take stands in opposition to their backgrounds.
Today one of the nation's most respected authorities on health issues is the
former U.S. surgeon general, Dr. C. Everett Koop. That was not the case when
Koop was first appointed to the position in the early 1980s by President Reagan.
Koop is an evangelical Christian whose position on abortion and contraceptives
caused many Americans, especially those with a more liberal bent, to worry that
Koop would use his position to advance his own view of morality. As the full
meaning of the AIDS epidemic began to be discovered, Dr. Koop made a
dramatic recommendation: Obviously the best way to avoid the AIDS
virus is sexual abstinence or monogamy; however, if you plan to be sexually
active, you should use a condom. Koop's recommendation resulted in a firestorm
from those on the Right and, especially, evangelical Christians. They believed
that Koop's recommendation to use condoms promoted promiscuity.
The firestorm did not end there. In the last days of his appointment, Koop
released a report stating that there was no evidence that an abortion causes
emotional harm to the woman—although Koop himself still believed that
abortion was morally wrong. The report dismayed many in the Reagan
administration, who had hoped to use evidence of emotional harm as an
argument against abortion.
In 1996 C. Everett Koop was once again the center of controversy. This time
Koop supported the Clinton administration's efforts to limit the sale of tobacco to
children. Koop took this position because nicotine is a highly addictive
substance. Smoking among teenagers is at the highest level in nearly two
decades. Each day 3,000 kids start smoking (more than a million a year);
approximately a third will die from their newfound addiction. Most smokers take

up the habit in their early teens.5 Koop's support of efforts to prevent teenagers
from taking up the smoking habit irritated the 1996
Republican presidential candidate Bob Dole, who believes that cigarettes are not
addictive and claimed that Koop had been brainwashed by the liberal media.
Nevertheless, C. Everett Koop has repeatedly demonstrated that he is a man of
impeccable integrity who has earned his reputation as a trustworthy source.
The Chinese philosopher Mencius, who lived in the fourth century b.c., provides us
with another technique for increasing the perception of trustworthiness.6
Mencius had gained fame as a wise counselor. The king sent a polite note asking
Mencius to come to court so that he might advise the king. Mencius replied that
he was not well and was unable to come to court. The next day he walked
conspicuously around town. The king was outraged and sent several men to find
out why Mencius showed so little respect and to beseech him once more to come
to court. Mencius would not receive the men and left to visit a friend. The king
could stomach Mencius's impertinence no more and accused him of disloyalty.
Mencius replied that far from being disloyal and disrespectful, he had shown the
most loyalty and respect for the king in all the land. He could be useful to the
king only if the king absolutely trusted his integrity and independence of mind.
If the king suspected that he might do or say things merely to please, his counsel
would be ignored.
Mencius's actions illustrate another way of increasing the perception of
credibility: The apparent trustworthiness of a person can be increased and the
apparent bias of the message decreased if the audience is absolutely certain the
person is not trying to influence them. To illustrate, let us bring this discussion
into the twentieth century. Suppose a stockbroker calls you up and gives you a
hot tip on a particular stock. Will you buy? It's hard to be sure. On the one hand,
the broker is probably an expert, and this might influence you to buy. On the
other hand, the broker has something to gain by giving you a tip (a commission),
and this could lower the effectiveness of the message. But suppose you
accidently happened to overhear the broker telling a friend that a particular stock
was about to rise. Because the broker was obviously not trying to influence you,
you might be more readily influenced.
This is exactly what was discovered in an experiment by Elaine Walster and
Leon Festinger.7 In this study, a conversation was staged between two graduate
students in which one of them expressed his opinion on an issue. The situation

was arranged such that an undergraduate student was allowed to overhear this
conversation. In one experimental condition, it was clear to the undergraduate
that the graduate students were aware of his presence in the next room; therefore,
the undergraduate knew anything being said could conceivably be directed at
him with the intention of influencing his opinion. In the other condition, the
situation was arranged so that the undergraduate believed the graduate students
were unaware of his presence in the next room. In this latter condition,
undergraduates'
opinions changed significantly more in the direction of the opinion expressed by
the graduate students.
There are many tactics for making it appear that you are not really trying to
influence someone. A few years back, the brokerage firm of E. F.
Hutton ran a series of commercials in which, when one person began to pass on
some stock advice from E. F. Hutton, a sudden hush fell over the room and
everyone strained toward the speaker to better "overhear" the tip. The
implication is clear: Everyone is getting in on advice that was not intended for
them, and the information is all the more valuable as a result. Another example
of this phenomenon is the "hidden camera" advertisements on television: If we
are convinced a person has been caught unaware, we do not attribute a
persuasive intent to the message; believing the person is acting spontaneously,
we are more persuaded by his or her testimony. Finally, politicians are notorious
for claiming that, unlike their opponents, they are above "politics" and are
merely taking the position that they do because they have the best interest of the
public at heart. When communicators do not appear to be trying to influence us,
their potential to do so is increased.
Throughout this book, we look at how clever propaganda tactics can be used to
manipulate our beliefs and behavior. Indeed, in the next chapter we look at the
wholesale manufacture of source credibility. The second moral of Han Fei-tzu's
story—that appearances can be deceiving—is often all too true; but the
acceptance of this moral can breed an unhealthy cynicism.
For this reason, it is good to pause and reflect on the behavior of a person such
as Dr. C. Everett Koop. In an era in which political self-interest appears to
dominate—where, for example, congressional leaders opposed to excessive
military spending are in favor of shutting down military bases except, of course,

for the ones in their districts—it is refreshing to run into a public servant of high
integrity. When Koop, as surgeon general, was confronted with the AIDS crisis,
he conducted a thorough investigation so that he could render an expert
judgment. At great risk to his career and at the cost of alienating his friends and
supporters, Dr. Koop spoke what he knew to be true. The cost to Dr.
Koop's career for his honesty should not be downplayed. Although he made it
clear that he would like to continue in public service and would enjoy a
promotion to secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services, Koop
was not reappointed by the Bush administration.
His accomplishments should not be taken lightly either. There are untold
numbers of Americans—perhaps the people who live next door to you, perhaps
your own son or daughter—who will not die of AIDS but will go on to live long
and productive lives as a result of Dr. Koop's actions. In this age of propaganda,
Dr. Koop's behavior reminds us that there is still a place for Aristotle's
communicator of good character.
 

15
The Manufacture of Credibility
Imagine the following hypothetical situation: Two men are running for the
Senate. One of the candidates has far less money to spend on his campaign than
the other. Accordingly, in order to get maximum free exposure, he consents to
numerous interviews, gives frequent news conferences, agrees to performances
before hostile audiences in an attempt to generate news media interest in the
campaign, and appears often on panel-type programs on television. The
interviewers on these occasions are opponents and seasoned reporters who
frequently ask him difficult questions, even hostile ones. The candidate finds
himself forever on the defensive. Sometimes the camera catches him at an
unflattering angle or in the act of scratching his nose, yawning, or fidgeting.
Watching at home, his mother is surprised at the bags under his eyes and at how
tired and old he looks. Sometimes, when faced with a tough or unexpected
question, he has difficulty finding the right response; he hems and haws and
sounds inarticulate.
His opponent with the well-stocked campaign chest does not need to appear in
such forums. Instead, he spends vast amounts of money videotaping spot
commercials. Because he pays the camera crew and the director, his countenance
is captured only from the most flattering angles. His personal makeup artist
works hard to mask the bags under his eyes and to make him appear young and
dynamic. His mother, watching him at home, never saw him looking so well.
The interviewer asks him questions prepared and rehearsed in advance, so that
his answers are reasonable, concise, and articulate. If the candidate does happen
to stumble over a word or to draw a blank, the cameras are stopped and the scene
is shot over and over again until it portrays him in the best light.
This situation is no nightmarish projection into the future; it closely
approximates what occurred, on a much more important and dramatic scale,
during the 1968 presidential election. In an extraordinary behind-the-scenes
account of Richard Nixon's campaign, journalist Joe McGinness reported on the
adeptness with which Nixon's advisors controlled the image of the candidate that
was projected to the American people.

In reporting these events, McGinness claims that television is a powerful means
of seducing voters to vote for images of candidates rather than the candidates
themselves. Or, as one Nixon staffer put it: "This is the beginning of a whole
new concept.... This is the way they'll be elected forevermore. The next guys up
will have to be performers."1
This proved to be a prescient statement indeed, for in 1980 a seasoned movie
and television personality was swept into office and reelected by a landslide in
1984. Moreover, he managed to retain his personal popularity, despite the fact
that public opinion polls indicated most Americans felt he was not doing a good
job. As this fortieth president of the United States put it, "Politics is just like
show business, you have a hell of an opening, coast for a while and then have a
hell of a close."2
When Nixon's staffer made his prediction, he was referring specifically to a
television program that was arranged to look as though candidate Nixon was
spontaneously answering questions phoned in by voters. In reality, he was giving
carefully rehearsed answers to questions prepared by his staff. When a voter
asked a question on the telephone, Nixon's staff simply reworded it in the form
of a prepared question, attributed the question to the voter, and allowed Nixon to
recite his prepared answer. And Nixon and his supporters continued to stage
such events throughout his presidency. For example, on November 3, 1969,
amidst growing protests against the Vietnam war, Nixon gave his famed "silent
majority" speech, calling on the great silent majority of Americans to support
him and dismiss antiwar demonstrators. After the speech, Nixon received 50,000
favorable telegrams and 30,000 letters of support from what seemed to be that
silent majority. Three decades later the truth came out: According to Nixon aide
Alexander Butterfield, those telegrams and letters were manufactured. Before
the speech, Butterfield had contacted several operatives and arranged for them to
send in the letters and telegrams.3 Three decades later, the technique of staged
events is still used by politicians. For example, in the 1996 and 2000 U.S.
presidential elections, both parties staged "nominating"
conventions that looked more like coronations than a debate over who was best
qualified to lead this nation.
When McGinness's book appeared, many people were shocked and appalled at
what they considered to be unethical and dishonest behavior. On the other hand,
the overwhelming majority of voters either did not care or thought Nixon's

deceptiveness was merely an indication that he was a clever, shrewd politician.
Richard Nixon's popularity remained high throughout his first term in office, and
in 1972 he was reelected in one of the most lopsided landslides in the nation's
history, despite the fact that, at the time, it was known that a group of individuals
financed by the Committee to Reelect the President had been caught breaking
into the offices of the Democratic National Committee in a building called
Watergate.
How extensive is the use of advertising to create seductive images of political
candidates? According to Kathleen Hall Jamieson, U.S.
presidential candidates have always tried to create images of themselves that
would appeal to voters, at least since the 1828
victory of Andrew Jackson over John Quincy Adams.4 However, it was not until
1952, when Dwight D. Eisenhower hired as key campaign advisors two ad
agencies (BBDO and Young & Rubicam) and received volunteer help from a
third (the famed advertiser Rosser Reeves of the Ted Bates agency), that
professional ad agencies were used extensively in presidential campaigns. Today
ad agencies, political pollsters, and media consultants are a common political
fixture and can be found in the highest echelon of political advisors.
How effective are media advisors in electing a candidate? Nixon's victory in
1968 could be interpreted as indicating that such deceptive programming was
effective in spite of its blatant manipulativeness.
On the other hand, one astute observer, John Kenneth Galbraith, has commented
that Nixon may have won in 1968 in spite of these devices.
Jamieson offers another perspective: Spending a large amount of money does
not guarantee success in a campaign; success depends on how well you spend it.
If you are fortunate enough to have a large wad of cash to spend, it will not
insure your election unless, according to Jamieson, you use it to run a campaign
that presents a clear, consistent image of your candidacy and an appealing vision
for the nation. Obviously, if you don't have a big bankroll, you are going to have
a difficult time presenting any image, much less a consistent one, and, needless
to say, you will be at a disadvantage. For example, the typical winner of a seat in
the U.S. Senate spends $3.4
million (compared to $1.9 million for the loser) and the typical winner of a seat

(
p
)
yp
in the House of Representatives spends $410,000
(compared to $200,000 for the loser).5
And, of course, image consultants are not just limited to the political arena. For
example, Amway, a manufacturer of home products sold direcdy to the
consumer, tells its new soap detergent sales agents always to appear in public in
their best clothes—coat and tie or dress—even if they are just going to the corner
grocery. You never know whom you will meet, they are cautioned, and you
should always maintain your image.6
The historian Daniel Boorstin has called attention to the use of pseudo-events to
create celebrities and sensations.7 A pseudo-event is a planned event for the
immediate purpose of being reported by the news media—for example, a
presidential photo-op with a veterans' group or staged hysteria for the Won-
derbra. A celebrity is a person who is only known for being well known, such as
Fabio or Dr. Joyce Brothers or Kato Kaelin. How do you become a celebrity and
a sensation in your own time? Simply create your own pseudo-event .that will
get you into the news.
And don't worry if you are charged with a heinous crime such as murder.
For the right amount of money, your image problems can be fixed.
Before taking the O. J. Simpson case, trial lawyer Robert Shapiro had developed
a detailed strategy for managing the public image of his clients.8 Some of his
advice: Develop a relationship with reporters, make sure your client looks good
on TV, choose the setting for your interviews, and limit your comments about
the trial to a few, select soundbites that promote your client's cause. It appears
both sides in the Simpson trial were well schooled in the art of public relations.
Even the credibility of a fabric can be manufactured.9 By the early 1980s,
polyester had acquired the image of being "tacky,"
"in bad taste," and "unnatural," and it was the butt of frequent jokes. No problem
for PR expert Mary Trudel, who was hired by manufacturers such as du Pont and
Monsanto to turn the image around. A series of events were staged to put
polyester on a positive footing—the 1987 winner of the Miss America pageant
toured the country in a synthetic wardrobe; press releases were used to stimulate

newspaper stories, such as "Beyond Leisure Suits: New Life for Polyester"; and
a touch test was arranged for fashion designers that convinced Pierre Cardin,
Calvin Klein, and others to start using more polyester in their clothes. Although
most of us probably still feel negatively about polyester, it is appearing in our
clothes (courtesy of clothes designers) and we probably don't have as negative a
reaction to its variants, such as Lycra.
But, to return to the world of selling political candidates rather than criminals or
synthetic fabrics, suppose you did have a sufficient wad of cash and you aspired
to elected office, whom could you hire and what could they do for you? You'd
want to hire a public relations expert such as Roger Ailes, who served as advisor
to both the Reagan and Bush campaigns and is now chair and CEO of Fox News.
Or maybe you could employ Robert Dilenschneider, former CEO of the PR firm
of Hill and Knowlton who has given advice to such entities as Metropolitan
Edison on how to handle public reactions to the Three Mile Island incident, the
Chilean government on how to calm fears about a scare that their grapes were
laced with cyanide, and Columbia University on how to deal with the student
protests of the 1960s. And if you are really lucky, you can hire the Spin Doctors
in Love—the husband and wife team of James Carville (he's a Democrat and has
helped elect Governor Robert Casey, Senator Harris Wofford, and President Bill
Clinton) and Mary Matalin (she's a Republican and has worked on the Ronald
Reagan and George Bush presidential campaigns). What advice would you
receive?
According to Ailes, a great speaker has one major characteristic. As he puts it:
If you could master one element of personal communications that is more
powerful than anything we've discussed, it is the quality of being likable. I
call it the magic bullet, because if your audience likes you, they'll forgive
just about everything else you do wrong.
If they don't like you, you can hit every rule right on target and it doesn't
matter.10
Some of Ailes's specific advice for making yourself likable: Say what the
audience thinks (which you can find out through polling), make others feel
comfortable, and control the atmosphere (the situation) for your best advantage.
Here is some of the general advice Dilenschneider gives in his best-selling book,

Power and Influence, for increasing your credibility:11 Set easy initial goals and
then declare victory (this will create the perception that you are a strong leader);
use setting to support image (for example, Reagan designed his presidential
podium to look powerful but soft and understated; interviews should be done in
settings that fit the message); choose the negatives that will be written about you
(most journalists seek a balanced report; provide the reporter with negatives that
you can then refute and thus look good); and understand how people see things,
then appeal to what they prefer.
Matalin and Carville have some advice, too.12 Why not float an idea (a tax cut, a
health care proposal) without attribution (that is, circulate it as a rumor)? If
everyone likes the idea, then claim it as your own. If it gets shot down, then deny
your campaign ever said it. In this manner, you can always be sure to say exactly
what everyone wants to hear. Another piece of advice: Make sure you appear
consistent in the media. And the best way to do this? Just say a few things over
and over again (that way, you don't contradict yourself).
For example, in a focus group held during the 1992 election, the major
complaint about Bill Clinton was that he appeared to be inconsistent and willing
to say anything to get votes. Carville's recommendation, which Clinton followed,
was to stick to a basic theme (a different kind of Democrat) and state it
repeatedly. The result: Clinton appeared more consistent in the latter part of the
campaign.
And finally, don't lie to the press, but do feel free to manipulate the media. For
example, in the 1986 gubernatorial race in Pennsylvania, Democratic candidate
(and Carville's boss) Robert Casey made a statement that he would not make his
opponent's— Republican William Scranton III—admission that he had smoked
pot in the 1960s a campaign issue. However, as we have seen in recent U.S.
presidential elections, drug use by a candidate is too juicy a campaign issue to
pass up. So what is a Carville to do? Simple.
Circulate a rumor that the campaign is preparing an ad on Scranton's use of
drugs. The news media cover the rumor and talk about Scranton's drug use, and
the Casey campaign denies everything.
Carville and Casey are double winners—Scranton has to defend himself in the
media, and Casey appears to have taken the high ground.13

The advice of Ailes, Dilenschneider, Matalin, and Carville is a far cry from
Aristotle's prescription that a communicator be of good character. Credibility is
manufactured, not earned. Credibility is created by carefully managing the
situation so that the star of the event, the communicator, looks just the way he or
she is supposed to look—likable, credible, strong, expert, or whatever image is
needed at the time. Once the image is created in the form of a celebrity or a
politician, then it can be bought and sold like a commodity to advance any cause
that has the resources to purchase the "rights" to the image.
The manufacture of credibility can lead to a cult of personality. Instead of
thinking about important issues for ourselves, we turn to credible-looking
leaders for their solutions. This strategy would make some sense if the people we
turn to do indeed possess the required expertise. Sadly, it is often the case that
"credibility"
has been subtly manufactured and sold for propaganda purposes. And the media
often serve as handmaidens in this charade. Consider, for example, the post-
debate "analyses" served up by many of the TV network pundits, who, instead of
talking about the issues, seem to prefer to discuss such superficialities as which
candidate "looked more presidential" or appeared to handle complex issues
"more adroitly." Such reporting contributes to the cult of personality and
promotes propaganda at the expense of careful and deliberate persuasion. The
image becomes far more important than the substance.

 

16
Prizefighter Slays Eleven with One Look: The Influence of Mass
Media Models
The checkout stand at the local supermarket is lined with newspapers claiming to
have "the largest circulation of any paper in America" and to be "America's
fastest-growing weekly."
Recent issues have contained prophecies to take us well into the new
millennium.1 The psychics predict that a freak change in world weather will
bring torrential rains to the Sahara Desert; Oprah Winfrey will dump her
boyfriend and start dating Chris Darden, the O.
J. Simpson prosecutor; a tunnel under the Hudson River will suddenly rupture
and flood; genetic engineers will isolate the "compass gene" that directs
spawning salmon to the place of their birth and will use the discovery to help
dogs and cats find their way home.
Of course, it is doubtful that many of these predictions will come to pass.*
However, there is a sociologist at the University of California at San Diego
named David Phillips who can, with remarkable accuracy, foretell some striking
future events.2 Phillips's latest startling prediction: Within four days of the next
nationally televised heavyweight championship prizefight, at least eleven
innocent U.S.
citizens who would not otherwise have died will be murdered in cold blood. The
reason: People learn from the behavior of those they see and admire on
television.
Here's how Phillips came to make his startling prediction. He first gathered an
exhaustive list of past heavyweight championship prizefights and examined the
fluctuation of daily homicide rates before and after each fight. After correcting
for the influence of seasons, days of week, holidays, and other trends, he
discovered that homicide rates rose significantly on the third and fourth days
after the fights.

Sadly, homicide rates did not decrease at any time after the fight to compensate
for the immediate effects of the bout. Thus one can safely conclude that most (if
not all) of these eleven murdered individuals would still be alive had there not
been a publicized prizefight.
What is even more haunting about Phillips's research is that the type of person
killed just after a prizefight is likely to be similar to the fighter beaten in the
bout. That is, if a young black male was beaten, then murders of young black
(but not white) males increased.
Similarly, if a young white male was beaten, more young white (but not black)
males were murdered. Furthermore, the effects of prizefights on homicides
increased with the amount of fight publicity: The more people who knew about
the fight, the greater the number of homicides.
Phillips has found that mass media models can influence other behavior as well.
In March 1986, four teenagers in New Jersey made a suicide pact and then
carried out their plan. Within a week of this multiple suicide, two teenagers in
the Midwest were found dead under similar circumstances. Media reports no
doubt spotlighted the confusion and grief surrounding teenage suicide. But did
the media's coverage of these tragedies actually inspire copycat suicides?
According to Phillips, the answer is a qualified "yes."
How can he be sure? Phillips and his colleagues studied suicide rates among
teenagers following network television news or feature stories about suicide.
Their research tracked fluctuations in teenage suicides by comparing suicide
rates before the stories with rates after the stories. Within a week of the
broadcasts, the increase in teenage suicides was far greater than could be
explained by chance alone. Furthermore, the more coverage major television
networks devoted to suicide, the greater the subsequent increase in suicides
among teenagers. These increases held even when the researchers took other
possible causes into account. Thus the most likely explanation for the increase in
teenage suicides following media publicity is that such publicity actually triggers
subsequent copycat suicides in a process similar to the copycat poisoning scare
of the 1980s triggered after seven people died from taking Tylenol laced with
cyanide.
More recently, we have witnessed a string of school slayings in places such as
Pearl, Mississippi; West Paducah, Kentucky; Jonesboro, Arkansas; Edinboro,

Pennsylvania; Fayetteville, Tennessee; Springfield, Oregon; Conyers, Georgia;
and Littleton, Colorado (in a school called Columbine). Each of these tragedies
was covered in depth by the news media; often, the killings were broadcast live
in real time to a watching, horrified nation. Although these news reports most
certainly conveyed the anguish of these slayings, they also conveyed one other
fact of life: Murdering your classmates can get you national attention and is one
way of dealing with life's problems.
The effects of mass media models on violence and other social behaviors have
been known for almost four decades. In the early 1960s, the noted psychologist
Albert Bandura began an extensive laboratory program looking at television
models and aggression.3 In a typical study, children would watch, on a television
monitor, an adult beating a Bobo doll—a large, plastic doll with a weight at the
base. When punched, the doll falls backwards and then springs upright. In the
Bandura-produced television show, models would punch, kick, fling, hit with a
mallet, and scream at a Bobo doll. The children would then have the opportunity
to play with various attractive toys, including a Bobo doll. The results repeatedly
showed that children were likely to do what they had previously seen; those
exposed to the violent model were more likely to strike, hit, punch, kick, and
fling the Bobo doll.
Much subsequent research supports Bandura's initial findings. Aggressive
models have been shown to influence the aggression of both males and females,
children and adults; to influence behavior in and out of the laboratory; and to
teach aggression regardless of whether the model is a cartoon character or a real
person and whether the aggression is an isolated act or part of a complex plot,
such as a television crime story. Watching aggressive models has led people to
kick a Bobo doll, electrically shock a classmate, verbally assault a stranger, and
harm a small animal.4 Strikingly, one of the first TV
advertisements directed at children appeared on "The Mickey Mouse Club" and
offered for sale the Burp gun, a cap-firing machine gun developed by Mattel to
look like machine guns used in World War II. Before Christmas 1955, Mattel
sold more than 1 million Burp guns; the company quickly followed with a line of
toy .45
six-shooters like those wielded in Westerns so that children could pretend to kill
their friends just like they saw on TV.5

Fortunately, modeling works in two directions; that is, the power of mass media
models can also be used to teach pro-social behavior. For example, social
models have been used to increase people's likelihood of helping a stranded
motorist with a flat tire and to increase the amount of donations dropped into a
Salvation Army kettle.6 Similarly, models have been used to teach nonviolent
responses and to lower levels of aggression in a violent situation.7
However, teaching is not the same as preaching; models persuade far more
effectively than words. In a series of insightful studies, James Bryan and his
colleagues exposed children to adult models who preached either greed or
charity or practiced either greed or charity.8 The results: Children were more
influenced by what the model did than what the model said.
This finding takes on increased importance in an era when the mayor of
Washington, D.C., lectures children about the evils of drugs and subsequently is
caught using cocaine, when piety-pandering politicians preach family values and
sexual abstinence and then commit repeated acts of adultery while complaining
about the adultery of others, or when televangelists engage in illicit sexual
behavior or pocket money from the collection plate.
The power of models to persuade has not been lost on advertisers.
Thirty-second spots are full of chubby people losing weight with the right diet
aid; housewives impressing their husbands with clean houses brought about by
an advertised cleanser; boyfriends and girlfriends being rewarded with love,
affection, and prestige for just one smile polished by a special toothpaste; young
couples achieving the good life with the use of a major credit card; Barbie dolls
dressed in the latest fashions. These models do more than just sell products; they
also reinforce values (e.g., thin is good) and teach lifestyles (e.g., housewives
should be husband pleasers, the road to success for little girls is through fashion
and physical attractiveness, the good life can be obtained with a quick fix such
as a diet pill).
Politicians use models, too. One effective technique is to create a bandwagon
effect—the impression that everyone is for the candidate.
Politicians do this by staging large rallies attended by what appears to be a
multitude of supporters in the hopes of convincing the as-yet-uncommitted voter.
Success in the polls— an indication of popular support—is essential if the

candidate hopes to secure campaign contributions.
Mass media models are effective for two primary reasons. First, they teach new
behavior. For example, a young child learns the "specifics"
of how to shoot and kill a "suspect" by watching television crime shows such as
"NYPD Blue" or "Power Rangers."
A newly married couple discovers that the good life can be purchased on credit
by watching others on television use a credit card. A teenager gleans the
mystique of committing suicide or killing classmates from a news report.
Of
course, just because someone knows how does not necessarily mean that he or
she will do it. Most of us know how to beam someone down to the surface of an
alien planet from watching "Star Trek" or to protect Superman from kryptonite
by using a lead shield, but it is unlikely we will ever engage in such behavior.
What, then, causes us to behave like our media models? One important factor is
that we believe the rewards received by a model for a given behavior will also
come to us. That is why advertisers often use models "just like us" and place
them in familiar situations such as at home, work, school, or the supermarket.
This brings us to the second reason why mass media models are persuasive:
They serve as a cue to indicate that a certain behavior is legitimate and
appropriate. After watching a prizefight, it appears to be OK to "punch
someone's lights out"; hearing about a teenage suicide or a schoolhouse murder
suggests that this may be a reasonable way to deal with life's problems or that
those who have wronged us will now be forced to grieve for us or will now be
dead; watching a housewife mop the floor convinces us that this is an
appropriate lifestyle for women (but not necessarily for men). A steady diet of
mass media models can shape and twist our understanding of what is right and
wrong with the world.
Let's take a closer look at the Columbine High School incident. On April 20,
1999, Dylan Klebold and Eric Harris murdered fifteen of their classmates and
seriously wounded another twenty-three. The death toll could have been much
worse. Klebold and Harris had rigged a number of bombs that fortunately failed
to detonate. The Columbine tragedy came on the heels of seven other similar

school slayings—all of which had been well publicized in the mass media. Did
the coverage of these previous school slayings lead Klebold and Harris to
murder their classmates? It is not that simple to answer. The social reality of
Columbine, like many schools, was one of winners (athletes, class officers,
cheerleaders) and losers (nerds, Goths, shy loners) who, like Klebold and Harris,
are often tormented, bullied, and ridiculed by others. Being a teen is hard
enough. Being a teen who is tormented, bullied, and ridiculed by classmates
cries out for a solution. In this context, TV violence, along with the ubiquity of
violent video games, prescriptions for bomb making on the Internet, and news
coverage of schoolmates killing schoolmates, teaches not only how to kill but
that killing can be a legitimate and appropriate way to resolve a problem. What
can be done? Quite obviously we can reduce our intake of violent mass media
models. But this doesn't go far enough. We also need to attack the source of
frustrations by offering our children more pro-social ways to deal with their
problems by teaching empathy and conflict resolution and by making our
schools a more compassionate place by actively reducing bullying and by
instilling norms of cooperation. (Recently, one of us [E. A.]
has written a book on the massacre at Columbine High that describes these
prescriptions in more detail.9)
What characteristics make a mass media model most persuasive? The
accumulation of much research shows that a model is most effective when he or
she is high in prestige, power, and status, is rewarded for performing the
behavior to be learned, provides useful information on how to perform the
behavior, and is personally attractive and competent in facing life's problems. In
other words, the model is a credible and attractive source. Think for a moment
about an advertisement that uses models to persuade. We bet that the people in
these ads possess most, if not all, of these attributes.10
The immediate persuasiveness of mass media models is clearly known by
professional persuaders, although the subtle, but nonetheless important, effects
of such models are often ignored by everyone. For example, if it were known
that in three or four days eleven people would die, perhaps trapped underground,
perhaps at the hands of foreign terrorists, the nation would mobilize. The major
networks would send camera crews and reporters. CNN would carry around-the-
clock coverage. The story would dominate the front pages of newspapers. The
person who predicted such an event would become an overnight celebrity, being
asked to appear on the Leno and Letterman shows, invited to give his or her

opinions on morning talk shows, and, perhaps, become a regular pundit asked to
comment by the news media on every conceivable issue facing or not facing this
nation.
But Phillips's prediction is not about eleven people whom the nation will come
to know personally by media coverage of the event.
The eleven people who will be murdered as a result of the next publicized
prizefight will be, for the most part, nameless faces known only to their loved
ones. They will die not in exotic places or lands but in their own neighborhoods.
They will not die of supernatural causes, of a freak accident of nature, or at the
hands of a ruthless dictator. Indeed, the cause of their deaths will not be known
immediately, if at all. But they will certainly die, and they will die as a result of
the simple fact that mass media models are persuasive.
*
Here are the predictions from the first edition of Age of Propaganda made by
psychics for the early 1990s: Princess Di will divorce Charles to become a nun;
a mysterious virus will turn Barbara Bush's hair bright red; a meteorite will
plow into the White House Rose Garden; Mikhail Gorbachev will buy a beach
home near the Reagans in Bel-Air, California; the AIDS virus will be shown to
have been developed by religious fanatics as a plot to wipe out gays; deep-sea
explorers will discover a sunken Spanish galleon full of gold and artifacts from
an alien spaceship. Only "half of one of these predictions has come to pass, and
one didn't need to be a psychic to predict it: Princess Diana did get a divorce,
but she did not sign up for a nunnery before her untimely death (which was not
predicted by the psychics). The other predictions failed to materialize—at least,
not yet! But we have our eye on Barbara Bush's hair.
 

The Message and How It Is Delivered

17
Packages
The cereal aisle at the local supermarket is the battleground for many a weekly
war of words. The battle usually goes something like this: Seven-year-old
Rachel spots her favorite cereal, Lucky Charms, picks up a box from the shelf
and quietly delivers it to the shopping cart.
Her mom looks at the box in disgust. It is bright red. A leprechaun is sprinkling
shining stars (must be sugar) over pink and purple marshmallow bits. On the
back of the box she reads that a special pair of glasses is enclosed to be used in
spotting hidden leprechauns.
Mom sternly announces, "Rachel, put that junk back on the shelf.
It's loaded with sugar and nothing but empty calories."
Rachel replies, "But mom, it tastes good. The other stuff tastes yukky."
Being a smart woman, mom offers Rachel another choice and a little
inducement, "Why not this one? It's 100% Natural. It's good for you. You'll be a
big girl."
Rachel looks at the box. It is small, but heavy. The front features a bowl of light
brown cereal set against a wood-grain background and a couple of stalks of
unprocessed grains. On the back of the box is a lot of small print.
Rachel exclaims, "Yukko! I don't want to be a big girl."
How would you resolve the great breakfast cereal standoff? Would you side with
the mother and opt for nutrition even though Rachel may not eat it? Or would
you feel that Rachel, even at this young age, should be making her own
decisions regardless of the consequences? Our recommendation may surprise
you. The fight is for naught. Tell Rachel and her mom to buy the Lucky Charms
because, quite truthfully, it is more nutritional than the "natural" cereal.
Every year Americans spend roughly $6.9 billion on breakfast cereals.

Consumer Reports, a highly respected source of consumer information,
conducted a test of some of these breakfast cereals.1 Their researchers fed young
rats, which have nutritional requirements remarkably similar to humans, an
exclusive diet of water and one of thirty-two brands of breakfast cereals for a
period of fourteen to eighteen weeks. They found that the rats grew and
remained quite healthy on a diet of such cereals as Cheerios, Grape-Nuts, Life,
Shredded Wheat, and Lucky Charms. On the other hand, fifteen ready-to-eat
cereals such as Captain Crunch, Corn Flakes, Product 19, and Quaker's 100%
Natural either prevented the rats from growing or were judged to be not
sufficiently nourishing to support life.
A comparison between Lucky Charms and 100% Natural shows that Lucky
Charms is lower in calories but slightly higher in sodium and sugar than 100%
Natural, although the differences probably do not matter very much. However,
100% Natural, like many granola-style cereals, is higher in saturated fats, which
raise blood cholesterol levels.
Whereas Lucky Charms contains no saturated fat, a cup of 100% Natural is
equivalent in fat content to about half a rack of greasy beef ribs. (Recently the
maker of 100% Natural announced a low-fat version, which has slightly more
than a quarter of the fat of the original version).2
What caused the disagreement between Rachel and her mom? It is clear that they
used the cereal package (not the cereal) as what is technically called a heuristic
—a simple cue or rule for solving a problem. In this case, the problem for mom
was to select a nutritious cereal; for Rachel the problem was to get a cereal that
is fun and tasty. The bright colors, the cartoon character, and the kids' game on
the box of Lucky Charms suggest that this cereal is for kids—and we all know
that kids' food is junk food. On the other hand, the earth tones and pictures of
unprocessed grains on the 100% Natural box indicate that this cereal is "all
natural" (even the brand name agrees). Nature is good and wholesome; this
cereal must be nutritious. In both cases, the cereal packages were designed so
that Rachel and her mom would infer certain attributes about the products—
qualities that may or may not be present. Armed with these conclusions, the
choice of which cereal to purchase can proceed without much additional
thought; persuasion occurs in the peripheral route.
It appears that just about anything can be sold to the American public simply by
placing the label "natural" on it—cereal, alternative medicines, juices, vitamins,

soft drinks, ice cream, junk food such as potato chips and popcorn seasoned with
fatty cheese, overpriced vegetables, and now even cigarettes. In an attempt to
appeal to "health-conscious" smokers, manufacturers have developed new
brands of cigarettes—American Spirit, Buz, Born Free, and Sherman's—that
claim to be 100% additive-free and all natural.3The logic (if you want to call it
that) is that the manufacturers of mass-marketed cigarettes use more than 700
chemical additives, some of which are toxic. An all-natural cigarette supposedly
gives a purer, cleaner smoke. Reminiscent of the cigarette ads of the 1940s
claiming that smoking built lung capacity, one brand of herbal cigarettes actually
claims to be good for you—an effective remedy for asthma, various lung
problems, and nervousness. And many smokers and would-be smokers are
buying the pitch. Sales of "natural"
cigarettes have grown by 60% to 90% over the last ten years to a $50-million
market. The "natural" appeal worked so well that R. J. Reynolds adopted it for
its Winston brand, touting the cigarette as additive-free. The ads claim: "I get
enough bull at work. I don't need to smoke it." And the sales skyrocketed.
Health professionals are astonished by the gullibility of the American public and
are alarmed by the claims. The simple truth of the matter is that cigarettes of all
types are loaded with toxins and carcinogens that can kill you. Smoking natural
cigarettes is like asking a murderer to make sure the bullet is clean before using
it to kill you. Indeed, the FTC ruled that Winston's "no-additive claim" was
deceptive, implying that the cigarette was less harmful than others. As a result,
R. J. Reynolds includes this disclaimer in its "no bull" ads: "No additives in our
tobacco does not mean a safer cigarette."
Marketers have been using packages to guide consumer decision making for
nearly a century. Since the 1890s, Quaker Oats has been boxing rolled oats in a
container with a picture of a religious Quaker to suggest the purity and
consistency of their breakfast cereal. In 1898 a man named C. W. Post reinforced
the image of a healthy breakfast food by enclosing a copy of the pamphlet "The
Road to Wellville" in each box of Grape-Nuts cereal. Sales took off. Packaging
is such a successful heuristic device that generic and store brands often try to
take advantage of it by making their packages—the color of their labels, the
shape of the container, and so on—resemble the bestselling national brands.
Other heuristics are also used to encourage consumers to infer product quality
and thus buy a particular brand. Three of the most important are price, store

image, and brand name. Each heuristic comes with its own rules for inferring
product quality. For example, the higher the price, the better the quality—which
is probably true when it comes to such products as Yugos and Rolls Royces but
is not necessarily the case for wines, medicines, sport sneakers, prepackaged
foods, and a host of other products. The same pair of jeans looks better in a high-
class department store than in the local discount mart. Nationally recognized
brand names are automatically deemed superior to store brands and generics. In
addition, advertisers spend vast sums of money to link their brand name to a
brand-specific proposition, such as "Michelob is classy" or "Bud is for the
everyday working Joe," to guide our supermarket visit.
Persons can be packaged, too. The first information that we typically pick up
about a person—gender, age, race, physical attractiveness, and social status—is
usually associated with simple rules and stereotypes that guide thought and
behavior. Gender and racial stereotypes tell us "just how men and women differ"
and "what a particular member of an ethnic group is like." Much research has
demonstrated that beautiful people are assumed to be more successful, more
sensitive, warmer, and of better character than less physically appealing persons
and that we often act in accord with those assumptions. Persons of high social
stature, which is often inferred from their dress and mannerisms, are respected
and held in high esteem. Is it any wonder that "get-ahead"
self-help books often describe how to take advantage of these heuristics by
urging their readers to "dress for success,"
that is, to wear the right clothes to create the right image or to use the right
cosmetics to enhance their attractiveness?
Heuristics can also be used to judge whether a persuasive communication is
worthy of acceptance and belief. In the previous section of this book, we looked
in detail at one such heuristic—the source of the message. We saw that, in
general, the more credible, attractive, or expert the source, the more effective is
the communication; we also saw that we are more likely to use the source to
guide our opinions if we are operating in the peripheral, as opposed to central,
route of persuasion.
There are other persuasion heuristics. For example, the advertisers John Caples
and David Ogilvy argue that advertisements are most effective when they
contain long, compelling copy—in other words, a long message with many

arguments. Obviously, such a message would be more effective than a short
message containing weak arguments—if the message is read. But what about
cases where the message is only skimmed or not read at all? According to
research in social psychology, when people are not thinking very carefully about
an issue, long messages, regardless of whether they contain weak or strong
arguments, are most persuasive.4 It appears that we operate on the principle that
"message length equals message strength." If the message is long, it must be
strong.
If you have watched an infomercial, those half-hour "shows"
that feature knives, blenders, political candidates, cleansers, and sandwich
makers for sale, you have seen another persuasion cue in action. These shows
inevitably feature a "daring"
demonstration of the product—a knife cutting up an old tennis shoe and then
slicing a tomato perfectly, a blender making mayonnaise from scratch, or a
magic powder removing a difficult stain. What is the audience's reaction? At
first there is murmuring, as disbelief fills the air with tension. And then the
audience, acting as one, bursts into loud, thunderous applause.
The thunderous clapping and cheering serves as a social consensus heuristic—a
cue that says, "Everyone accepts the conclusion of this message, so you should,
too!" This technique was employed in the nineteenth century by the sellers of
patent medicines, who would plant shills in the audience to pretend to be cured
of an affliction and to sing the praises of whatever product was for sale.
Recognition of the power of the applause-makes-right heuristic leads politicians
to schedule major talks in favorable settings, television producers to insert
canned laughter and applause, advertisers to use testimonials and portray their
products as being in great demand. Once again, the evidence shows, social
consensus heuristics are most likely to have an impact when people are
unmotivated to think about a messages meaning.5
Another common persuasion heuristic is based on the confidence of the speaker
—the more self-assured and confident a communicator appears, the more likely
that we will accept what is said. Research on trial testimony in courts of law, for
example, has found that juries are more likely to believe testimony when it is
given by an eyewitness or expert who exudes confidence. Similarly, nonverbal
behavior that suggests confidence in the message, such as a low rate of speech

errors, an authoritative tone of voice, and a steady body posture, are positively
related to persuasion.6 For example, many jurors from the O. J. Simpson trial
noted in post-trial interviews that prosecutor Marcia Clark showed signs of stress
and frustration; she would often sigh and make gestures with her hands as
though she was throwing in the towel. All of this undermined her credibility with
the jury. As one juror put it, "It made me think; Well, if your case is so strong,
why are you so frustrated?"7
Still another frequently used persuasion tactic is to load a speech with the
"correct" symbols and buzzwords as a means of informing the recipient that the
message is acceptable and worthwhile. For example, car dealers and politicians
often appear with the flag or invoke God, as if to say, "My position is patriotic
and religious, so it is worthy of acceptance." Of course, history reveals that just
about any scoundrel can wrap him-or herself in the flag—as often for personal
profit as for the nation's best interest.
Often the symbols and buzzwords are tailored to a specific audience. For
example, one craze popular on college campuses and in liberal groups is "PC"—
political correctness. PC is a fast-changing set of symbols, phrases, and actions
that, when properly used, lets everyone know that the message is right and the
communicator is doing the right thing. To gain acceptance, one should not wear
fur in public; one should always say "he or she"—never the generic "he"; one
should eat free-range chicken, not formula-fed, assembly-line chicken; one
should never eat veal; one should use cloth, not disposable, diapers; one should
demand paper bags at the grocery store, never accepting plastic ones; one should
claim to be boycotting certain brands or products; and above all, one should not
be critical of PC.
Never mind that some of the rules are contradictory and ineffective. For
example, if fur is unacceptable, why not forgo leather? Careful analysis shows
that paper bags, unless they are recycled, produce more environmental waste
than plastic, and that cloth diapers result in more pollution in their
manufacturing and cleaning than do disposables and greatly disadvantage
working and single parents. But that is the nature of heuristics—they aren't
meant to be thought about, lest they appear as silly as applauding a sliced
tomato.
Consider the case of McDonald's.8 In the early 1970s, environmentalists
launched a campaign criticizing McDonald's for its use of paperboard packaging.

Ray Kroc, McDonald's founder, commissioned the Stanford Research Institute to
conduct a study comparing the environmental impact of different forms of
packaging.
The study concluded that when all aspects of the issue were considered—from
manufacturing to disposal— polystyrene is better for the environment than
paper. When paper and cardboard are used to package food, they must be coated
with a plastic film, making them nearly unrecyclable. The manufacture of
polystyrene uses less energy and conserves more natural resources than does the
production of paper, and polystyrene takes up less room in landfill and is
recyclable. The infamous McDonald's clamshell was born.
In the 1980s, environmentalists raised another, quite legitimate, concern: the
manufacturing of polystyrene releases chlorofluorocarbons, which contribute to
the destruction of the ozone layer. In 1987, McDonald's directed its polystyrene
suppliers to eliminate the release of chlorofluorocarbons from their
manufacturing process. However, the clamshell had become a symbol of
environmental irresponsibility and McDonald's, in response to pressure groups,
ceased using it in the early 1990s, returning to unrecyclable, plastic-coated paper
wrappers. Ironically, McDonald's image of being "concerned about the
environment" has suffered because it was responsive to environmental concerns.
One of McDonald's competitors, which had not responded to earlier pressures to
adopt the clamshell, actually ran ads claiming that they had always used
cardboard out of concern for the environment. In truth, many American
households and businesses would find it difficult to compete with McDonald's
record on the environment. McDonald's earmarks 25% of its capital budget
($100 million) for purchasing recycled building materials (thus helping to create
this industry), allocates $60 million to purchase recycled paper products, and
developed forty-two initiatives aimed at holding down the volume of garbage at
its restaurants by more than 80%. The destruction of the environment is a
complex problem, requiring more than just symbolic finger-pointing and
heuristic thinking to resolve.
Of course, as we have stressed earlier, persuasion does not have to be peripheral
and decisions do not have to be based on heuristics.
Rachel's parents could carefully read the ingredients on the cereal box, subscribe
to a consumer magazine, or consult nutrition textbooks. Similarly, we could base
our judgment of what a politician is saying not on buzzwords, audience

reactions, and source demeanor but on the actual content and implications of the
message itself.
This raises an important question: What conditions are most likely to lead to
heuristic rather than rational decision making? Research has identified at least
five such conditions.9 Heuristics are most likely to be used when we do not have
time to think carefully about an issue, when we are so overloaded with
information that it becomes impossible to process it fully, or when we believe
that the issues at stake are not very important.
Heuristics are also used when we have little other knowledge or information on
which to base a decision and when a given heuristic comes quickly to mind as we
are confronted with a problem.
A moment's thought will reveal that the persuasion landscape faced by Rachel
and her parents contains many of the features that lead to heuristic decision
making. If they are like most Americans, Rachel and her family are feeling
increasingly pressed for time. As consumers, they face a message-dense
environment complete with a choice of, for example, more than 300 different
brands of cereal currently on the market. They probably have had little consumer
education or training. They have been, however, the recipients of millions of
advertisements, each repeating and repeating a brand image, so that this image
will quickly come to mind in the aisles of the local supermarket. Given this state
of affairs, it is a wonder that all decisions are not made heuristically.
One of the dilemmas of modern life is that with increasing time pressures,
increasing amounts of information, and an increasing number of choices, we
must rely more and more on heuristic decision making. Although relying on
heuristics is sometimes a useful way of dealing with the onslaught of the
message-dense, decision-rich environment, basing our decisions primarily on
heuristics can present some problems.10
First, the heuristic cues that we possess may be false. There is little reason to
assume that brand images and ethnic stereotypes have a reliable basis in fact.
Relying on such heuristics may result in the purchase of an unwanted product
and the missed opportunity to hire a qualified employee or fall in love with that
special person.
Furthermore, a rule may be appropriate in certain situations but be misapplied in

others. For example, spontaneous, legitimate audience applause can signal that
this is an entertaining show worthy of our attention. Canned laughter does not.
Another serious problem is that heuristics can be easily faked and manipulated.
Cereal boxes can be redesigned to look increasingly wholesome. Laughter and
applause can be dubbed into a broadcast.
Politicians can be coached to exude winning mannerisms. Physical attractiveness
can be improved with makeup and surgery. Speeches and advertisements can be
peppered with buzzwords and symbols. Anyone with a little cash can buy a new
blazer and a sincere tie. The essence of propaganda is a well-designed package.
What can be done to lessen our dependence on faulty heuristics? One way to
address these concerns would be to enact legislation to ensure that the cues that
we do use—for example, phrases on product labels such as "low-calorie," 'low-
sodium," or "100%
nutritious"—are accurate and are applied correctly. The Federal Trade
Commission has established guidelines for the use of some labels, such as 'low-
fat" and 'lower calories." (The term "natural" is not included in these guidelines
because the FTC found it nearly impossible to define. In addition, just because
something is supposedly natural doesn't mean it is good to eat; mistletoe berries
are 100% natural and eating them will kill you.) This, along with other efforts to
improve the quality of product information, is a step in the right direction.
However, such efforts are unlikely to succeed in stamping out heuristic thinking.
After all, no government, no matter how vigilant, can protect us from our own
prejudices. In the long run, we must depend on our own knowledge of
propaganda tactics and our own efforts to treat important issues as if they truly
are important.

 

18
Self-Sell
World War II was a war not only of bombs and bullets but of words and
propaganda as well. The Nazi's propaganda offensive was first outlined by Adolf
Hitler in Mein Kampf and then executed by Joseph Goebbels and his Ministry of
Propaganda. The United States relied on a loose collection of social
psychologists and other social scientists to develop its campaign, to boost the
nations morale, and to diffuse the impact of Nazi propaganda.
One of the unlikely combatants in this propaganda war was the U.S. Department
of Agricultures Committee on Food Habits, headed in part by the famed
anthropologist Margaret Mead. Its mission during the wartime emergency was to
maintain the health of the American people despite shortages of certain types of
high-protein foods. One specific project was to increase the consumption of meat
products that, in the United States, had often been thrown away or used as pet
food—meats such as beef hearts, kidneys, and intestines. To do so, the
committee made use of a tactic that is now ubiquitous in attempts at persuasion.
Any parent who has ever tried to get a child to eat green vegetables can
appreciate the difficulty of convincing a nation that beef hearts, kidneys, and
intestines are nourishing and tasty, much less to get people to actually eat them.
To accomplish the task, the Committee on Food Habits called on Kurt Lewin,
the father of social psychology and himself a recent refugee from Nazi Germany.
How did Lewin do it? Well, he didn't—not directly. What Lewin did do was to
get people to persuade themselves to eat these intestinal meats. To demonstrate
the effectiveness of participatory, self-generated persuasion, Lewin conducted a
simple experiment to convince housewives (who at the time made most of their
family's food decisions) to eat intestines and other undesirable meats.1
Half of the housewives received an intriguing lecture on the merits of intestinal
meats. The forty-five-minute lecture emphasized the importance of eating these
meats for the war effort; it stressed the meats' health and economic advantages;
mimeographed recipes were distributed. The lecture concluded with a
testimonial from the speaker about her success in serving intestinal meats to her

own family.
The other housewives spent their forty-five minutes persuading themselves in a
group discussion. This discussion began with a short introduction by the leader
on the problem of maintaining health during the war. The leader then enlisted the
help of the housewives by asking them, "Do you think that housewives like
yourselves could be persuaded to participate in the intestinal meat program?"
The group discussion covered many of the same arguments as the lecture but
produced much more dramatic effects. Of the housewives who had heard the
lecture, only 3% served intestines. In stark contrast, 32% of the housewives who
had engaged in self-persuasion served their families intestinal meats.
Subsequent persuasion research has shown that self-generated persuasion—
whether induced by group discussion, by getting someone to role-play an
opponent's position, or by asking a person to imagine adopting a course of action
—is one of the most effective persuasion tactics ever identified.2 Indeed, one
recent set of studies found that just thinking about how to transmit a persuasive
message to others will result in changes in attitude that persist for at least twenty
weeks.3
And why shouldn't the tactic be extremely effective? The technique of self-
generated persuasion combines many of the facets of successful persuasion
discussed throughout this book. It gains its power from providing subtle social
cues and directions that ask the target of influence, in effect, to "think up as
many positive cognitive responses about the issue as you can and, if you do
happen to come up with some counterarguments, to be ready to refute them."
The resulting message will come from a source that you almost always consider
credible, trustworthy, respected, and liked—yourself. The act of generating
arguments is an act of commitment to the cause. After all, they're your ideas,
aren't they?
World War II may be over, but the use of self-sell in propaganda is certainly not.
Larry Gregory, Robert Cialdini, and Kathleen Carpenter conducted a series of
experiments illustrating the effectiveness of a form of self-persuasion called
"self-imagining" in selling consumer products.4 In one of their studies,
salespersons went door-to-door in Tempe, Arizona, selling subscriptions to cable
television. Some of the potential customers were informed of the advantages of
cable TV (e.g., it is cheaper and involves less hassle than going out to a movie;
you can spend more time with your family). Others were asked to "take a

moment and imagine how cable television will provide you with broader
entertainment." They were then induced to imagine how they would use and
enjoy each benefit of cable television. The results showed that 19.5% of those
merely receiving information about cable television subscribed to the service,
whereas a whopping 47.4% subscribed after they had been asked to imagine
using the service.
The self-generated persuasion technique fits well with the American values of
participation, self-reliance, and deciding for one's self. Ironically, while the
technique trades on the value of self-reliance, in reality we can be manipulated
into a course of action that is often of primary benefit to the manipulator.
A trip to a car dealership (like one we took) will illustrate the point. Much of the
friendly salesman's banter is targeted at getting the potential customer to think
about possessing that car and to come up with his or her own reasons for doing it
right now:
"Sir, can I get you to do me a favor? I know we just met. These babies are
selling like hotcakes and my boss keeps bugging me to find out just why
people like yourself love 'em so much. What should I tell him?"
As we inch closer to the car and an actual test drive, the salesman persistently
asks personal questions (Where do you live? What do you do? What music do
you like?) in an attempt to gather information that can later be used to help us
imagine owning that car. When a seat is taken at the wheel, the salesman states,
"The car looks good on you; and I don't tell that to everyone."
During the test drive, the personal information is used and the pitch continues.
"Did you get a look at the backseat? Plenty of room to pick up those professor
friends of yours at the airport." "Hmmmm, who left this classical station on the
radio? Like you, I normally listen to rock. Let's switch it over to your station."
"Really punch that pedal, professor. I want you to see how it'll handle those
inclines on your commute from Forest Hills."
The test drive over, the salesman dramatically delivers his lines, "Professor, I'm
going in to see the boss and try to get you the best deal on your car." The keys to
the car are pressed into the flesh of the palm and the hand gently closed. We are
left alone in the showroom, tightly holding a key to our beautiful car—left alone
to think, to dream, to imagine owning that car.

This nice, friendly social interaction actually emerges as cunning and blatantly
manipulative once we know the principles and power of self-influence. But what
can be done about it? Here's what we did. It would be difficult for anyone not to
imagine owning that car. You've just daydreamed about it for almost half an
hour. But what also can be imagined is getting that car at a rock-bottom price
and driving it home to show friends and neighbors and hearing them exclaim:
"That car? At that price? What a deal!" Imagining this latter scenario led to a
stalemate that eventually produced a lengthy negotiation (almost two hours) in
which each party dug in his heels.
This tiresome negotiation was getting nowhere slowly. Why not try self-
generated persuasion tactics ourselves? "Hey, Bill [the salesman]. I notice this
dealership gives an award for the salesperson of the month. Just how do they
decide who gets this award and can you get me a sales rep who really wants to
win that thing?" Bill took the bait. He wheeled around in his chair, leaned back,
and began a fifteen-minute free association about the award. A few minutes
later, we were writing a check as a deposit on a very good deal.
Car dealers are not the only merchants who have discovered self-generated
persuasion. Mass media advertisers have developed their own set of variants.
One effective type of commercial is the "slice-of-life" ad that allows us to dream
with characters, much like ourselves, as they successfully solve life's problems
using, of course, the advertiser's brand. Some ads require us to complete the
incomplete jingle, as in "Where's the ... [beef]?" and "You can take Salem out of
the country, but you ... [can't take the country out of Salem]." Still other ads are
in a foreign language, such as a recent campaign for IBM computers which
requires the viewer to translate along with the subtities. Marketing promotions
and contests often ask us to "Tell us why you like Acme-brand widgets in fifty
words or less?" Politicians send out questionnaires and surveys asking for our
opinions in "helping to plan the next election campaign and prioritize our goals."
A new variant of self-generated persuasion can be found in multilevel sales
organizations such as Amway. In these organizations, customers are recruited to
serve as sales agents with the task of finding more customers. By trying to sell
the product, the customer-turned-salesperson becomes more convinced of the
product's worth.
Perhaps you can further convince yourself of the effectiveness of self-generated
persuasion by generating even more examples of self-generated persuasion!

19
Naked Attics and Neighborhood War Heroes: On Vividness in
Communication
Way back in the 1950s, a local community was about to vote on whether or not
to fluoridate the water supply as a means of combating tooth decay. An
information campaign that seemed quite logical and reasonable was launched by
the proponents of fluoridation. It consisted largely of statements by noted
dentists describing the benefits of fluorides and discussing the evidence on the
reduction of tooth decay in areas with fluoridated water, as well as statements by
physicians and other health authorities to the effect that fluoridation has no
harmful effects.
The opponents used an appeal that was much more vivid and emotional in
flavor. By vivid appeal, we mean a message that is (1) emotionally interesting (it
attracts our feelings), (2) concrete and imagery-provoking, and (3) immediate (it
discusses matters that are personally close to us). For example, one
antifluoridation leaflet consisted of a picture of a rather ugly rat, along with the
inscription "Don't let them put rat poison in your drinking water." The
referendum to fluoridate the water supply was soundly defeated.
Of course, this incident does not demonstrate conclusively that vivid appeals are
superior, mainly because the incident was not a scientifically controlled study.
We have no idea how the people would have voted on fluoridation if no
publicity had been circulated, nor do we know whether the antifluoridation
circular reached more people, whether it was easier to read than the proponents'
literature, and so forth. But it does raise an interesting question: Are vivid
appeals more persuasive than other less interesting and more pallid messages?
Research is accruing that indicates the answer is "yes"—under certain
conditions.
A stunning scientific demonstration of the power of vivid arguments to persuade
comes from the area of energy conservation. If homeowners could be induced to
make their homes more efficient (by adding insulation, weatherstripping, and the
like), it could result in a savings of about 40% of the energy that is now wasted.

This would not only be in the national interest, reducing dependence on Persian
Gulf oil, but would also result in substantial financial savings for the individual
homeowner.
In 1978, the government began requiring utility companies to offer the consumer
a free home audit, wherein a trained auditor carefully examines one's home,
recommends what needs to be done to make it more energy-efficient, and offers
the consumer an interest-free loan to get the work done. What a deal! The
problem is that, while a great many homeowners requested a home audit, only
15% of them actually followed the recommendation of the auditor—even though
it was clearly in their best financial interests to do so.
Why?
In order to answer this puzzling question, we and our students Marti Hope
Gonzales and Mark Costanzo interviewed several homeowners and found that
most of them had a hard time believing that something as small as a crack under
a door or as "invisible" as the paucity of insulation in the attic could be very
important.1 Armed with this information, we conducted a workshop in which we
trained several auditors to communicate in more graphic, more vivid terms. For
example, instead of simply saying "You would save money if you
weatherstripped your doors and put some additional insulation in the attic," the
auditors were trained to say something like this:
Look at all the cracks around that door! It may not seem like much to you,
but if you were to add up all the cracks around each of these doors, you'd
have the equivalent of a hole the circumference of a basketball. Suppose
someone poked a hole the size of a basketball in your living room wall.
Think for a moment about all the heat that you'd be losing from a hole of
that size—you'd want to patch that hole in your wall, wouldn't you? That's
exactly what weatherstripping does. And your attic totally lacks insulation.
We professionals call that a "naked" attic. It's as if your home is facing
winter not just without an overcoat but without any clothing at all! You
wouldn't let your young kids run around outside in the wintertime without
clothes on, would you? It's the same with your attic.
Psychologically, cracks around the door may be seen as minor, but a hole the
size of a basketball feels disastrous. Similarly, insulation is something people
don't often think about—but the idea of being naked in winter grabs attention

and increases the probability of action.
The results were striking. Auditors trained to use compelling images increased
their effectiveness fourfold: Whereas previously only 15%
of the consumers had the recommended work done, after the auditors began to
use more vivid communications, this number increased to 61%.
Why do vivid appeals work? Vivid messages affect our cognitive responses in at
least four possible ways. First, vivid information attracts attention. It helps the
communication stand out in the message-dense environment. Second, vividness
can make the information more concrete and personal. We saw earlier the
persuasive power of self-generated arguments and images. Third, the effective
vivid appeal directs and focuses thought on the issues and arguments that the
communicator feels are most important. Finally, a vivid presentation can make
the material more memorable. This is especially important if we do not reach an
immediate conclusion but base our later judgments on information that comes
readily to mind.
Our cognitive response analysis also suggests that vivid information may
sometimes fail to convince—and do so in a quite dramatic fashion. Just because
a message is vivid does not insure that it will induce positive thoughts and thus
be effective. A case in point is the now-infamous Dukakis tank ad used during
the 1988
presidential campaign. In this ad, the Dukakis campaign staff sought to make
Michael Dukakis's commitment to a strong national defense vivid in the minds
of voters by showing him in an army tank. The ad was attention-getting, and it
did succeed in reducing the issue to one concrete, memorable symbol. The end
result was not very persuasive, however. Instead of the reaction hoped for by the
Dukakis campaign (i.e., he surely is tough on defense), many viewers responded
with thoughts such as, "Gee, he looks silly in that tank." The vividness of the
appeal just made it all the worse for Dukakis.2
Nevertheless, a vivid presentation can make a strong argument even more
persuasive; it may also make a more dubious proposition ring true. Consider the
following example. Suppose you are in the market for a new car and the single
most important thing you are looking for is reliability and longevity. That is, you
don't care about looks, style, or mileage—what you do care about is the

frequency of repair. As a reasonable and sensible person, you consult Consumer
Reports and learn that the car with the best repair record is clearly a Toyota.
No other car even comes close. Naturally, you decide to buy a Toyota.
But suppose the night before you are to make the purchase, you attend a dinner
party and announce your intention to one of your friends. He is incredulous.
"You can't be serious," he says, "my cousin bought a Toyota last year and has
had nothing but trouble ever since. First the fuel-injection system broke down;
then the transmission fell out; then strange undiagnosable noises started to come
from the engine; finally, oil started to drip from some unknown place. My poor
cousin is literally afraid to drive the car for fear of what will happen next."
Let's suppose the ranking made by Consumer Reports was based on a sample of
1,000 Toyota owners. Your friend's cousin's unfortunate experience has
increased the size of the sample to 1,001. It has added one negative case to your
statistical bank. Logically, this should not affect your decision. But a large body
of research by Richard Nisbett and Lee Ross (from whose work we drew this
example) indicates that such occurrences, because of their vividness, assume far
more importance than their logical, statistical status would imply.3 Indeed, such
occurrences are frequently decisive.
Thus it would be very difficult for you to rush out and purchase a Toyota with
the example of the plight of your friend's cousin firmly fixed in your mind. All
other things being equal, most people are more deeply influenced by one clear,
vivid, personal example than by an abundance of statistical data.
Vivid examples and case studies are also used by politicians to get us to buy
their programs and policies. In Eloquence in an Electronic Age, communications
researcher Kathleen Hall Jamieson addresses the question of why Ronald
Reagan was considered, by foe and admirer alike, to be a great communicator.4
The Reagan presidency produced no major addresses—no speeches as eloquent
or as memorable as Lincoln's Gettysburg Address, Franklin D. Roosevelt's
fireside chats, or Kennedy's Ich bin ein Berliner speech. In their stead were a
series of catchphrases such as "Make my day"
and "There you go again."
Jamieson argues that Reagan's communication style differed greatly from that of

past presidents. Previous presidents had used the devices of classical rhetoric to
advance their causes— well-constructed arguments, the contrasting of possible
options, argument by metaphor.
Reagan relied on dramatization and storytelling to make his points.
His speeches persuaded by creating visual images, by personalizing the central
themes of his administration, and by involving us in a dramatic narrative of
American life.
For example, in his first inaugural address, Reagan sought to assure his audience
that America's involvement in the Vietnam war was just and honorable. There
are a number of ways to argue for this proposition.
One could provide the listener with a list of reasons for the war: It helped stay
the spread of communism; it was designed to prevent the overthrow of a
democracy and the rise of yet another totalitarian regime; it was ostensibly
supported by the people of South Vietnam; and so on. The war could also be
contrasted with other options available at the time. Such was not Reagan's style.
Instead Reagan, from his location at the Capitol building, described the sights of
Washington, D.C., as TV cameras panned the scene—the Washington
Monument, the Jefferson Memorial, the Lincoln Memorial, and, finally, across
the Potomac River, the hills of Arlington National Cemetery, where rows of
simple white crosses and Stars of David mark the graves of those who gave their
lives for their country. Reagan continued:
Their lives ended in places called Belleau Wood, the Argonne, Omaha
Beach, Salerno, and halfway around the world on Guadalcanal, Tarawa,
Pork Chop Hill, the Chosin Reservoir, and in a hundred rice paddies and
jungles of a place called Vietnam.
By mcluding the Vietnam war dead in a succession of symbols and images
exemplifying the best of American heroism, Reagan had transformed the war in
Vietnam into a just and honorable mission with a single vivid image.
Perhaps Reagan's most memorable addresses were to Congress. In these
speeches, Reagan would describe the personal acts of service performed by
private citizens. The members of Congress would applaud, the viewing public
would be filled with pride at the accomplishments of their fellow citizens, and

Reagan would gain national approval of his policies.
For example, to gain acceptance of the U.S. invasion of the island of Grenada,
Reagan singled out Sergeant Stephen Trujillo. During the attack on Grenada,
Trujillo had saved the lives of many of his fellow soldiers. As Congress
applauded Trujillo's valor, Reagan quickly noted, "you [Trujillo] set a nation
free," thereby justifying America's invasion.
To convince the nation that poverty was not a major social problem, Reagan
frequently used rags-to-riches and neighbor-helping-neighbor stories. On one
occasion, he singled out Jean Nguyen, a Vietnamese refugee who was now, after
a successful academic career, graduating from West Point. On the same night, he
also singled out Clara Hale, a black woman and founder of a home for the
infants of drug-addicted mothers. Hale served as a concrete example that poverty
and drug abuse were problems for private citizens, not the federal government,
to solve and that Reagan's policies did not systematically disadvantage black
Americans.
We can analyze Reagan's arguments concerning the lack of poverty in this
country in much the same way as we looked at our friend's story about the
problematic Toyota. Near the beginning of the Reagan years, one out of every
nine American children lived in poverty. At the end of his term, that figure was
one in four children. It would be a simple matter, depending on our propaganda
purposes, to find vivid examples of either children living in poverty or children
whose parents had gotten themselves out of such circumstances. Such human
examples may make our arguments more persuasive, but they do little to address
the issue of poverty in America. This would require a detailed look at how
various government policies have affected indicators of poverty.
The communist leader Joseph Stalin anticipated the current use of vividness in
the tactics of propaganda when he remarked perceptively: "The death of a single
Russian soldier is a tragedy. A million deaths is a statistic."5
We would be remiss in our duties if we failed to point out that vivid appeals are
not used only by Republicans. A case in point is Democratic strategist James
Carville's book We're Right, They're Wrong.6 This volume is chock-full of vivid
appeals, such as a story of how Carville's grandmother, Octavia Duhon, worked
with pride for the federal government; how Carville went to college on the G.I.
Bill; and the rags-to-riches drama of Dr.

Joseph Giordano, who went to medical school on government loans and who
later removed an assassin's bullet to save Ronald Reagan's life.
Carville uses these images and stories to make a point opposite to that made by
Ronald Reagan: Government can do good things for good people.
Vivid appeals can be found in a wide range of domains. Turn on Saturday
morning TV and you'll see a steady stream of ads directed at children—all
showing graphic, vivid images of a toy supposedly in action. Keep the set on that
night and you will see such vivid demonstrations as ball-bearings rolling down a
car, a lonely Maytag repairman, and an Energizer bunny that appears to keep on
going. Do any of these images prove their point?
Anyone who watched the O. J. Simpson trial should be familiar with the use of
vivid images in the courtroom: As one lawyer tried to outdo the next in
producing the most dramatic, vivid image possible—from 911 tapes of domestic
abuse, to graphic descriptions of police misconduct and incompetence, to,
perhaps most vivid of all (at least for television viewers), 0. J. Simpson trying on
the gloves.7 Indeed, defense lawyer Gerry Spence believes that an effective
attorney is one who tells the client's story in compelling, vivid terms. As he puts
it:
In my mind's eye I see my client coming home at night and I tell the story:
I see Joe Radovick trudging home at night to face a heap of unpaid bills
sitting on the kitchen table. Nothing but the cold bills greets him ... a tired
man, worn-out, exhausted, a man without a penny, without pride, without
hope. An empty man. The bank had it all.8
Such vivid appeals can also work for the prosecution; here the prosecution needs
to paint a vivid, sympathetic picture of the victim of the crime rather than the
perpetrator. In a recent study with our student Lillie Ibayan, we asked subjects to
evaluate the evidence in a murder case and then recommend a verdict and
sentence.9 For some of the subjects, we included vivid, emotional information
about the victim—for example, pictures of the victim's family and testimony that
the victim was at the top of her class and that her young sister was having
trouble sleeping through the night as a result of the murder. The results showed
that this victim-impact information resulted in harsher punishments meted out by
death-qualified jurors (that is, those subjects who believed in the death penalty).

Throughout American history, vivid, personal appeals have moved the soul of
the nation—such novels as Harriet Beecher Stowe's Uncle Tom's Cabin, Upton
Sinclair's The Jungle, John Steinbeck's The Grapes of Wrath, and Kurt
Vonnegut's Slaughterhouse-Five are just a few examples. But although novels
have been effective, it is television's ability to present vivid, emotional images
that is unsurpassed.
Some communications scholars believe that anti-war sentiment during the
Vietnam war—America's first televised war— was due in part to the constant
stream of war images cast onto the nation's television screens.10 The U.S.
military, having learned its lesson in Vietnam, went to great lengths to restrict
the flow of vivid images of the Persian Gulf and Kosovo wars to Americans
watching on their TV sets at home. Indeed, government officials saw to it that
only images that supported U.S. involvement in the Persian Gulf, such as a U.S.
guided missile surgically striking an Iraqi command headquarters or an Iraqi
Scud missile being shot out of the sky, consistently made it to our television
screens. Americans protested when CNN aired footage, supplied by Peter Arnett,
of harm to Iraqi civilians caused by U.S. bombing raids. The Kosovo conflict
received even less news coverage, much of it centered on the plight of refugees.
In recent years, Americans have been angered by watching blindfolded hostages
on exhibit in Iran, impassioned by the sight of young servicemen's coffins on an
airplane tarmac or the destruction and loss of life caused by terrorist bombings in
Oklahoma and aboard Pan Am Flight 103, and moved to compassion by scenes
of devastation after hurricane Andrew and the Santa Cruz and Kobe earthquakes.
And each day, still more vivid and moving images are being televised to replace
those of the day before. The power of television to dramatize warrants our
concern and scrutiny, so that compelling and sometimes vivid arguments are not
replaced by merely vivid, moving tales.
 

20
Why Do They Keep Repeating the Same Ads?
In
1882, Harley T. Procter of Cincinnati, Ohio, began to market his new soap,
which he called Ivory, with newspaper and magazine ads proclaiming that "it
floats" and is "99 44/100% pure."
In 1922, Gerald Lambert, son of the founder of Lambert and Lambert, hired the
Chicago ad agency William and Cunnyngham to improve the sluggish sales of
Listerine—at the time, a product used as an antiseptic in surgery and to fight
throat infection. The resulting campaign: "Even your best friend won't tell you.
Listerine is good for halitosis." Five decades later, in 1954, a delegation from the
Philip Morris tobacco company asked the famed Chicago adman Leo Burnett to
help solve a marketing problem—to develop an ad campaign that would sell
filter cigarettes (regarded at the time to be feminine) to men. The next year,
Burnett released his first ads for Marlboro cigarettes featuring a virile, macho
cowboy riding the range with cigarettes in hand.1
What do these three advertisements have in common (in addition to having sold
millions of products)? These ads have been seen, in one form or another,
countless times by generations of countless Americans.
Repetition of ads, slogans, and selling points is a common feature of the
landscape of twentieth-century American advertising. Yet, in surveys about what
people think about advertising, one of the most common and consistent
complaints is that it is annoying to see the same old stuff over and over again. If
repetitive advertising is so irritating, why do advertisers continue to do it?
From a business perspective, frequent repetition of an advertisement helps to
meet multiple marketing objectives in a cost-efficient manner.
Repeatedly exposing consumers to an ad is a good way to introduce a new
product or to remind customers of the value of an older brand.
Often, repeat exposure is an unintended consequence of attempting to present an

ad to multiple target audiences (the members of which may overlap). With the
high cost of creating and producing new advertising ideas and slogans, it makes
sense to stick with proven winners. As a further inducement to repeat an ad,
advertising agencies typically receive 15% of media costs as their fee. So the
more times an ad is run, the larger the billing. However, the accomplishment of
such marketing objectives and cost benefits would amount to very little if
message repetition did not do one thing more and do it very well—persuade you
to buy the product.
The
Greek storyteller Aesop once advanced the notion that familiarity breeds
contempt. Although Aesop's moral may apply to the social gatherings of foxes
and lions, it certainly does not describe the persuasive effects of familiarity
brought about by repeated exposure to advertising. The modern-day Aesop
writing about advertising would probably conclude the opposite: Familiarity
breeds attraction, liking, and even "truth."
How
familiarity can result in sales can be seen in a typical trip to the grocery store in
search of a laundry detergent. We go to the detergent section and see a
staggering array of brand names. Because it doesn't much matter which one is
purchased, we may simply reach for the most familiar one—and chances are it is
familiar because we've heard and seen the name on television commercials over
and over again. If this is the case, then sudden increases in television exposure
should produce dramatic changes in familiarity and, perhaps, in sales.
Let's look at the data. Several years ago, the Northwest Mutual Life Insurance
Company conducted a nationwide poll to find out how well the public
recognized its name. It came out thirty-fourth among insurance companies. Two
weeks and $1 million worth of television advertising later, the company repeated
the poll. This time it came out third in name familiarity.
Of
course, familiarity does not necessarily mean sales, but the two are frequently
linked. Thus A&W root beer boosted its share of the market from 15% to 50%
after six months of television advertising. By switching channels on a Saturday
morning, a child can watch ads for McDonald's in up to a dozen colorful, fast-

paced commercials each hour; perhaps this is one reason why the chain
continues to sell billions of hamburgers.
Robert Zajonc of the University of Michigan has demonstrated in a laboratory
setting that, all other things being equal, the more a person is exposed to an item,
the more attractive it is.2 In three separate studies, Zajonc presented nonsense
words, Chinese ideographs, and photographs of students taken from a college
yearbook. The items were repeated from zero to twenty-five times. The results
showed that attraction to the item increased with the number of exposures. Much
subsequent research has supported Zajonc's basic finding: More exposure results
in increased liking.
But
is voting for a presidential candidate the same kind of decision as choosing a
laundry detergent or a breakfast cereal or evaluating nonsense words and
Chinese ideographs? The answer may very well be "yes." After the 1972
congressional primaries, Joseph Grush and his colleagues examined the amount
of money candidates spent on political advertising during the elections and
found that a large majority of races were won by big spenders.3 Subsequently,
Grush found again that candidates who spent the most money in the 1976
Democratic presidential primaries typically received the most votes. In both
studies, however, those who tended to gain the most from media exposure were
candidates who were relatively unknown to the voters prior to their campaigns.
But in presidential elections in which candidates are highly familiar, massive
media blitzes are less influential.4 Nevertheless, even minimal impact may be
large enough to swing some close races.
The
power of repetition in propaganda was well understood by Joseph Goebbels, the
head of the Nazi propaganda ministry. His propaganda crusades were based on a
simple observation: What the masses term truth is that information which is most
familiar. As Goebbels put it:
The rank and file are usually much more primitive than we imagine.
Propaganda must therefore always be essentially simple and repetitious. In the
long run only he will achieve basic results in influencing public opinion who is

able to reduce problems to the simplest terms and who has the courage to keep
forever repeating them in this simplified form despite the objections of
intellectuals.5
According to Goebbels, the repetition of simple messages, images, and slogans
creates our knowledge of the world, defining what is truth and specifying how
we should live our lives.
A
set of recent experiments illustrates Goebbels's point—repetition of a piece of
information increases its perceived validity.6 In these experiments, participants
were exposed to statements such as "Leonardo da Vinci had two wives at the
same time" and "Tibet, with 1.2 million square kilometers, occupies one-eighth
of Chinas total area." Some of these statements were repeated on multiple
occasions. The results: The participants in these studies judged the repeated
statements to be more "true" than those not repeated.
Consider something as simple as the Marlboro man, an image we have probably
seen hundreds of times but one that we probably have not thought much about.
What does this cowboy teach us? First, that smoking is for the rugged, self-
confident individual (as opposed to being a health hazard). Second, that
American men should be macho (as opposed to, say, caring and sensitive). And
finally, that you can be rugged and macho simply by smoking Marlboros—it is
that easy. A lifetime of exposures to black Americans as Uneeda Slicker boys
and Aunt Jemima, to Hispanics as Juan Valdez and Frito Banditos, and to
women as either endlessly arguing about the benefits of a brand of paper towels
or sexily draped on the hood of an automobile can reinforce and maintain
pervasive social stereotypes.
This problem does not seem to worry all advertisers. What they do worry about
is annoying the viewers to the point where they refuse to listen to the advertising
and to buy the product. Recall that many American consumers find repetitive
advertising to be irritating. Such annoyance can diminish and even reverse the
effects of repetition, but this reversal is often short-lived. For example, Rick
Crandall, Albert Harrison, and Robert Zajonc showed subjects the same Chinese
ideographs over and over again.7 Immediately after the repetitive presentation,
subjects did not rate these ideographs as any more attractive than less familiar
ones, presumably because the frequent exposures were boring and tedious.

However, after a week's delay, the repeatedly presented Chinese ideographs
gained in attractiveness. Apparently the annoying effects of repetition wore off
faster than the familiarity-induced attraction.
Even so, advertisers know that repeated exposure can lead to what is known as
"wear-out"—when an ad loses its effectiveness
because consumers find repeated exposures to be tedious and annoying.
Wear-out effects are most likely to occur with ads that attract much attention,
such as humorous ads and informational messages.
Advertisers attempt to eliminate wear-out by using a technique known as
"repetition-with-variation." In this technique, the same information or theme is
repeated many times, but the presentation format is varied. For example, the
Marlboro man is posed at different angles and is seen in different settings, or the
halitosis-fighting power of Listerine is demonstrated in the home, at work, and
on a date.
Does repetition-with-variation work? A study conducted by David Schumann
illustrates the effectiveness of repetition-with-variation in overcoming wear-out
effects and identifies an important condition in which variation does not succeed
in producing attraction.8 In this study, participants watched a simulated
television show, complete with advertising for a fictitious pen called the "Omega
3." Half of the participants viewed the same ad for the Omega 3 pen presented
either one, four, or eight times, whereas the other participants watched either
one, four, or eight different ads for the Omega 3—in other words,
repetition-with-variation. (These differing ads contained the same information
about the Omega 3 but varied irrelevant features such as wording, print type, and
setting.) Schumann also varied whether the ad was processed using the central or
peripheral route by encouraging some participants to think about the Omega 3
advertising with a promise that, at the end of the study, they could select a gift
from among several brands of ballpoint pens. Other participants were told that
they would receive a free bottle of mouthwash as a gift and were thus not
motivated to think about ballpoint pens and the Omega 3.
What did Schumann find? Let's look first at the effects ad repetition had for
those participants who were not motivated to think much about the pens—a state

we often find ourselves in when watching television and its advertisements.
When the same ad was repeated, the participants' opinion of the Omega 3 pen
became more favorable with four repetitions but less favorable after eight—in
other words, a wear-out effect occurred. However, when a different ad was
repeated, the participants' opinion of the Omega 3 became more favorable with
every exposure. Repetition-with-variation had reduced the tedium and
eliminated the wear-out effects.
For
those participants who were motivated to think about pens, wear-out occurred
when both the same and different ads were repeated. Specifically, opinions of the
Omega 3 pen became more favorable with four repetitions but less favorable
after eight. For thinking participants, even repetition-with-variation could not
counter the annoying effects of repeat exposure. In this case, the extra exposures
provided an opportunity to scrutinize and critique the advertisement's message.
The
rub, of course, is that we see and hear many, many persuasive messages each
day, and we see and hear them over and over again. It is difficult to think deeply
about each and every one of these communications. After all, how often do we
think, in depth, about the meaning of the Marlboro man or the significance of the
fact that Ivory soap floats? Repetition is thus left to create its own truths.

 

21
If You Have Nothing to Say—Distract Them
When confronted with a persuasive communication, especially one that runs
counter to important beliefs, we tend, whenever feasible, to invent
counterarguments on the spot. This tendency serves us very well: It prevents our
opinions from being unduly influenced. This resistance can serve to defeat the
propagandist's purpose, especially when the arguments for the cause are weak
and specious and therefore easily refuted.
But professional persuaders, aware of our tendency to counterargue, have
discovered a way to overcome some of this resistance. Advertisers have an old
motto: "If you don't have anything to say, sing it!"
In other words, a mild distraction (provided by a song, an irrelevant picture, etc.)
can disrupt counterarguing and increase the effectiveness of a persuasive
message.
The song that was most on the lips of the typical American in the 1940s was not
a great tune by Irving Berlin, Cole Porter, or Rodgers and Hammerstein. It was a
ditty that was as meaningless as it was simple: "Rinso white! Rinso white!
Happy little washday song!" Rinso, a laundry detergent, was no better or worse
than its competitors—but the song, ah, the song. In the 1970s, Coca-Cola hit the
charts with "I'd like to teach the world to sing." Pepsi, just before the turn of the
century, spent millions to have Ray Charles serenade us with "You've got the
right one, baby—Diet Pepsi—uh-huh, uh-huh."
What effect does a song have on persuasion? Does it make people feel happy,
with this happiness somehow increasing the persuasiveness of the message? The
answer is a sometimes "yes"—a lively song can make us happy and thus help us
think happy thoughts about a product.1 At other times the song may get stuck in
our head, reminding us of the brand name (as in "Rinso white!").
At still other times a catchy song or a big production number can attract our
attention to the ad so that we don't change the channel or go to the bathroom and
we at least hear the advertiser's message.

However, when advertisers say "If you don't have anything to say—sing it," they
usually mean that a song or, for that matter, a steamy love scene or a picture of
an elephant using the telephone or any other irrelevant element can serve as a
distraction to disrupt our typical counterarguing of a weak or discrepant
message.
An
early experiment by Leon Festinger and Nathan Maccoby was the first to
demonstrate the validity of the advertiser's motto.2 In this experiment, two
groups of students who belonged to a college fraternity were required to watch a
film that presented arguments about the evils of college fraternities. The
arguments were intended to be powerful and were widely discrepant from the
beliefs of the audience. As you might imagine, the students were motivated to
counterargue this message. In one version of the film, a young professor
delivered the attack on fraternities. In the other version, the young professor was
replaced by an entertaining beatnik artist working on an abstract expressionist
painting. The students still heard the arguments against fraternities but watched
an entertaining and distracting film as they listened.
Festinger and Maccoby reasoned that because this group was engaged in two
tasks simultaneously—listening to the arguments against fraternities and
watching an entertaining film— their minds would be so occupied that they
would have a limited capacity to think up arguments to refute the message. The
members of the control group, on the other hand, were not distracted by the
entertaining film; therefore, they should be better able to devote some of their
thoughts to resisting the communication by thinking up counterarguments. The
results of the experiment confirmed this reasoning. The fraternity men who were
distracted by watching the film underwent substantially more opinion change
(against fraternities) than did the fraternity men who were not distracted.
How do advertisers try to disrupt our counterarguing of their messages?
Sometimes they literally sing, as with the Rinso commercial and many like it.
Another class of distraction techniques is the extensive use of creative license in
the layout and presentation of an advertisement. For a print ad in a magazine or
newspaper, examples of such artsy techniques would include pictures of
attractive models or unique objects that command attention, reverse white-on-
black print, strange layouts that confuse the reader, and typefaces that are

difficult to read. For television, artsy could mean a commercial with many short
scene changes (similar to an MTV
video); the use of strange camera angles; the playing of fast, rhythmic music in
the background; and the inclusion of offbeat characters and yelling, screaming
spokespersons. All of these techniques can provide a mild distraction and thus
prevent counterarguing. The trick for the advertiser is to provide just enough of a
distraction to disrupt counterarguing but not so much that it eliminates the
reception of the message.3
But not all advertisers agree with the "sing-it" dictum. In his advice to fellow
advertisers, David Ogilvy calls this kind of creative license "art-directoritis" and
urges his
colleagues to avoid it.4 Ogilvy claims, based on his own observations and years
of advertising experience, that the techniques associated with art-directoritis
often fail to achieve their desired effects. How does this square with what we
know about distraction and persuasion?
Ogilvy achieved his fame as an advertiser in the 1950s with a series of
influential print ads for Hathaway shirts, Rolls-Royce, and Schweppes tonic.
Although for different products, the ads employed a similar style. Each ad
contained an interesting picture featuring the product. A headline would tell
readers why the product was of special value for them, and lengthy copy would
explain the reason for this assertion. For example, one ad showed a picture of a
Rolls-Royce with the headline: at 60 miles an hour the loudest noise in this new
rolls-royce comes from the electric clock. The copy listed thirteen unique
benefits of owning a Rolls. Similarly, a more recent ad for Acura automobiles
merely shows the car and states that for three consecutive years, the Acura has
been number one in surveys of owner satisfaction. In this kind of situation, when
one can state compelling, cogent arguments, Ogilvy is right. An artsy ad would
distract the reader from the cogent arguments and might actually decrease
persuasion. But that is only half of the equation.
For weak arguments or when one fears counterarguments, well... the persuader
can always sing it.
Our speculation has been confirmed by a neat little experiment by the social
psychologists Richard Petty, Gary Wells, and Timothy Brock.5 In this study, the

investigators distracted students by asking them to monitor a television screen
for X's while they listened to one of two messages arguing for an increase in
their tuition. One message consisted of weak, easily counterargued arguments,
whereas the other consisted of strong, hard-to-refute arguments. Distraction
increased the effectiveness of the weak message (because it disrupted
counterarguing) but decreased the impact of the strong communication (because
it disrupted the ability to pay close attention to the cogent arguments being
made).
Recently television advertisers have introduced a new, more subtle technique
that can serve to distract and disrupt message processing—time compression. To
save media costs, advertisers can, for example, "compress" a thirty-six-second
television ad into a
thirty-second time slot by running the ad at 120% of its normal speed.
Psychologically, time-compressed ads are harder to argue against.
Metaphorically speaking, the advertiser is persuading at 100
miles an hour while you maintain the speed limit and try to defend yourself at 65
miles an hour. You are bound to lose.
A
series of studies by consumer psychologist Danny Moore and his colleagues
confirm this relationship between time compression, distraction, and
persuasion.6 Specifically, they found that participants were less able to develop
counterarguments to a time-compressed message and that time-compressing a
message consisting of strong arguments reduced persuasion whereas it increased
the persuasive impact of a message containing weak arguments.
In
sum, advertisers (and other influence agents) use a variety of tactics to distract us
from processing and counterarguing a message.
This distraction, if it is mild, can lead to more persuasion when our natural
inclination is to argue—for example, if the message is weak or disagreeable. The
end result, of course, is just a little more mindless propaganda and a little less
thoughtful persuasion.

 

22
If You Want to Gain an Inch, Ask for a Mile—Sometimes!
Suppose you are talking to an audience that strongly disagrees with your point of
view—for example, an anti-abortionist speaking to a pro-choice lobby or an
automaker trying to convince consumers that the car they believe to be quite
worthless is, in reality, excellent.
Will it be more effective to present the arguments in their most extreme form or
to modulate the message by presenting it in such a way that it does not seem
terribly different from the audiences position?
For example, suppose you believe people should exercise vigorously every day
to stay healthy; any physical activity would be helpful, but at least an hour's
worth would be preferable. Your audience consists of couch potatoes who seem
to believe that switching TV channels with the remote is sufficient exercise for
the average person. Would you change their opinion to a greater extent by
arguing that people should begin a rigorous daily program of running,
swimming, and calisthenics or by suggesting a briefer, less taxing regimen? In
short, what is the most effective level of discrepancy between the opinion of the
audience and the recommendation of the communicator?
This is a vital issue for any propagandist or educator. For example, the attorney
Gerry Spence has been extremely successful in persuading juries to award
multimillion-dollar settlements to his clients. When asked by other lawyers how
he does it, Spence replies: "I simply ask for the money. I tell the jury what I
want."1 And what he asks for is a lot, at least by the standards of a typical
settlement. Spence asked for and received from a jury $10 million in punitive
damages for the children of Karen Silkwood and $26.5
million from Penthouse magazine for destroying the reputation of a former Miss
Wyoming. How sound is Gerry Spence's strategy of asking for large awards?
Let's look at this situation from the audience's point of view. Most of us have a
strong desire to be correct—to have "the right"
opinions and to perform reasonable actions. When someone disagrees with us, it

makes us feel uncomfortable because it suggests our opinions or actions may be
wrong or based on misinformation. The greater the disagreement, the greater our
discomfort.
How can we reduce this discomfort? One way is by simply changing our
opinions or actions. The greater the disagreement, the greater our opinion change
would have to be. This line of reasoning, then, would suggest that the
communicator should adopt the Gerry Spence strategy and argue for the daily
program of rigorous exercise; the greater the discrepancy, the greater the opinion
change needed.
Several investigators have found that this "linear" relation does hold true. A
good example of this relation was provided by an experiment by Philip
Zimbardo.2 Each woman who was recruited as a participant for the experiment
was asked to bring a close friend with her to the laboratory. Each pair of friends
was presented with a case study of juvenile delinquency, and then each of the
participants was asked, separately and in private, to indicate her
recommendations on the matter. Each woman was led to believe her close friend
disagreed with her, either by a small margin or by an extremely large margin.
Zimbardo found that the greater the apparent discrepancy, the more the women
changed their opinions toward what they supposed were the opinions of their
friends.
However, a careful look at the literature also turns up several experiments
disconfirming this line of reasoning. For example, Carl Hovland, O.
J. Harvey, and Muzafer Sherif argued that, if a particular communication differs
considerably from a person's own position, it is, in effect, outside of one's
"latitude of acceptance"
and the individual therefore will not be much influenced by it.3 They conducted
an experiment and found a curvilinear relation between discrepancy and opinion
change. By "curvilinear," we mean that a small discrepancy increased the degree
of opinion change; but as the discrepancy continued to increase, opinion change
began to slacken; and finally, as the discrepancy became large, the amount of
opinion change became very small. When the discrepancy was very large,
almost no opinion change was observed and in some cases could actually
decline.

To see how it differs from the Zimbardo study, let's take a closer look at this
mid-1950s experiment. The communication was based on a red-hot issue of the
day, one the participants felt strongly about: whether their state of Oklahoma
should remain "dry" or go "wet." The voters of the state were virtually equally
divided on this issue, and the participants in the study were a representative
sample: Some of the subjects felt strongly that the state should remain "dry" and
continue to prohibit the distribution and sale of alcoholic beverages, others felt
strongly it should go "wet," and the rest took a moderate position.
The members of each group were presented with communications supporting
one of the three opinions, so that, in each group, there were some who found the
communication close to their own position, some who found it moderately
discrepant from their own position, and some who found it extremely discrepant
from their own position. Specifically, some groups were presented with a "wet"
message, which argued for the unlimited and unrestricted sale of liquor; some
with a "dry" message, which argued for complete prohibition; and some with a
moderately "wet" message, which argued for legalization of some drinking but
with certain controls and restrictions.
Unlike the Zimbardo findings, Hovland, Harvey, and Sherif found that the
greatest opinion changes occurred when there was a moderate discrepancy
between the actual message and the opinions of individual members of the
groups.
What an exciting state of affairs! In science, when there are a substantial number
of research findings pointing in one direction and a similarly substantial number
of research findings pointing in a different direction, it does not necessarily
mean someone has to be wrong; rather, it suggests there is a significant factor
that has not been accounted for—and this is indeed exciting, for it gives the
scientist an opportunity to play detective.
We beg the reader's indulgence here, for we would like to dwell on this issue—
not only for its substantive value but also because it provides an opportunity to
showcase one of the more adventurous aspects of social psychology as a science.
Basically, there are two ways of doing the detective work necessary to find the
missing factor. We can begin by assembling all the experiments that show one
result and all those that show the other result and (imaginary magnifying glass in
hand) painstakingly scrutinize them, looking for the one factor common to the
experiments in group A and lacking in group B; then we can try to determine,

conceptually, why this factor should make a difference. Or, conversely, we can
begin by speculating conceptually about what factor or factors might make a
difference, then glance through the existing literature with this conceptual
lantern in hand to see if the experiments in group A differ from the experiments
in group B on this dimension.
Let's follow this second mode and speculate about what factor or factors might
make such a difference. We can begin by accepting the notion discussed above:
The greater the discrepancy, the greater the discomfort for the members of the
audience. But this does not necessarily mean the members of an audience will
change their opinion.
There are at least four ways in which the members of an audience can reduce
their discomfort: (1) They can change their opinion; (2) they can induce the
communicator to change his or her opinion; (3) they can seek support for their
original opinion by finding other people who share their views, in spite of what
the communicator says; or (4) they can derogate the communicator—convince
themselves the communicator is stupid or immoral—and thereby invalidate that
person's position.
In a great many situations, including those in these experiments, the message is
delivered either as a written statement (as a newspaper or magazine article, for
example) or by a communicator who is not approachable by the audience (as on
television, on the lecture platform, on the witness stand, etc.). Also, the subject is
often either alone or is part of an audience whose members have no opportunity
to interact with one another. Under these circumstances, it is virtually impossible
for the recipients of the communication either to have immediate impact on the
communicator's opinion or to seek immediate social support. This leaves the
recipients two major ways of reducing this discomfort—they can change their
opinion or they can derogate the communicator.
Under what circumstances would an individual find it easy or difficult to
derogate the communicator? It would be very difficult to derogate a liked and
respected personal friend; it would also be difficult to derogate someone who is
a highly trustworthy expert on the issue under discussion. But if the
communicator's credibility were questionable, it would be difficult not to
derogate him or her.
Following this line of reasoning, we suggest that, if a communicator's credibility
were high, the greater the discrepancy between the communicator's opinions and

we e
g , t e g eate t e d sc epa cy betwee t e co
u cato s op
o s a d
the audience's opinions, the greater the influence exerted on the opinions of the
audience.
However, if the communicator's credibility were not very high, he or she would
be, by definition, subject to derogation.
This is not to say that the communicator with lesser credentials could not
influence the opinions of the audience. Such a communicator would probably be
able to influence people to change their opinions if his or her opinions were not
too different from theirs. But the more discrepant such a communicator's
position is from those of the audience, the more the audience might begin to
question the communicator's wisdom, intelligence, and sanity. The more they
question, the less likely they are to be influenced.
Let's return to our example involving physical exercise: Imagine a seventy-three-
year-old man, with the body of a man half his age, who had just won the Boston
Marathon. If he told us that a good way to stay in condition and live a long,
healthy life was to exercise vigorously for at least two hours every day, we
would believe him.
Boy, would we believe him! He would get much more exercise out of us than if
he suggested we should exercise for only ten minutes a day.
But suppose a person somewhat less credible, such as a high school track coach,
were delivering the communication. If he suggested we exercise ten minutes a
day, his suggestion would be within our own latitude of acceptance and he might
influence our opinion and behavior. But if he advised us to embark on a program
of two hours of vigorous exercise every day, we would be inclined to write him
off as a quack, a health freak, a monomaniac—and we could comfortably
continue being indolent. Thus we would agree with Hovland, Harvey, and
Sherif: People will consider an extremely discrepant communication to be
outside their latitude of acceptance—but only if the communicator is not highly
credible.
Armed with these speculations, we, with two students— Judith Turner and J.
Merrill Carlsmith—scrutinized the existing experiments on this issue, paying
special attention to the ways in which the communicator was described.4 Lo and
behold, we discovered that each of the experiments showing a direct linear
relation between discrepancy and opinion change happened to describe the

source of the communication as more credible than did those whose results
showed a curvilinear relation.
We next constructed an experiment in which we systematically investigated the
size of the discrepancy and the credibility of the communicator. In this
experiment, women college students were asked to read several stanzas from
obscure modern poetry and to rank them in terms of how good they were. Each
student was then given an essay to read purporting to be a criticism of modern
poetry that specifically mentioned a stanza she had rated as poor. For some
subjects, the essayist described this particular stanza in glowing terms—thus
creating a large discrepancy between the opinion of the communicator and the
opinion voiced by the subjects in this experimental condition. For some subjects,
the essayist was only mildly favorable in the way he described the stanza—thus
establishing a moderate discrepancy between the essayist and the subjects. In a
third condition, the essayist was mildly scornful in his treatment of the stanza—
thus placing the recipients of this communication in a situation of mild
discrepancy. Finally, to half of the women in the experiment, the writer of the
essay was identified as the poet T. S. Eliot, a highly credible poetry critic; to the
other half of the subjects, the essay writer was identified as a college student.
The subjects were subsequently allowed to rank the stanzas once again.
When T. S. Eliot was ostensibly the communicator, the essay had the most
influence on the students when its evaluation of the stanza was most discrepant
from theirs; when a fellow student of medium credibility was identified as the
essayist, the essay produced a little opinion change when it was slightly
discrepant from the opinion of the subjects, a great deal of change when it was
moderately discrepant, and only a little opinion change when it was extremely
discrepant.
The conflicting results are accounted for: When a communicator has high
credibility, the greater the discrepancy between the view he or she advocates and
the view of the audience, the more the audience will be persuaded; on the other
hand, when a communicator's credibility is doubtful or slim, he or she will
produce maximum opinion change at moderate discrepancies.
So, is Gerry Spence correct when he advises other lawyers to ask for large
awards for their clients? The answer is "yes"—when the lawyer has established a
credible relationship with the jurors, laid a strong foundation for arguments, and

presented a highly vivid and convincing case; in other words, when the juror has
no other way to reduce the discomfort of rendering an extreme award other than
to give the award. We should note that as a master trial attorney, Mr.
Spence goes out of his way to treat the jurors with respect and dignity, to tell the
story of his clients in a compelling manner, and to spell out the damages suffered
by the plaintiff at the hands of the defendant in no uncertain terms. On the other
hand, if any factor that makes the extreme request appear ludicrous (the
appearance of greed, poor arguments, dis-likable lawyer, unsympathetic
plaintiff, etc.), the request will fall flat and may even backfire. For example,
consider the judge who is later asked by the defendant to overturn the jury's
decision. This judge probably doesn't know much about Mr.
Spence and may even harbor suspicions about a lawyer who can extract such
sizable awards from jurors. With a busy calendar, the judge quickly skims a
rather pallid trial transcript and thus doesn't feel the pain suffered by the
plaintiff. In the judge's experience, large awards for everyday people seem out of
place. In the judge's eye there are ample reasons why Mr. Spence's extreme
request appears incredulous. In such cases, the scientific evidence indicates that
the appeals judge is not likely to go along with a request for a large damage
award. Indeed, many of Gerry Spence's awards have been reduced and
overturned by judges on appeal, including those awarded in the Karen Silkwood
and Miss Wyoming cases.
In this chapter, we have taken a slightly different approach to the topic of
persuasion from that found in the rest of the book—here we looked at it not from
the propagandist's or the target's point of view but from the perspective of a
scientist. In other words, we sought to answer the question of what works, when,
and how. This does not mean that the principles we discussed are not without
their propaganda purposes—the politician, the advertiser, the lawyer, the sales
clerk will all modulate their positions so as best to fit with those of the audience.
We took this perspective, however, to provide a peek behind the scenes at how
the principles of persuasion discussed throughout this book have been identified.
The social psychologist's knowledge of persuasion has not developed from idle,
armchair speculation. Each little fact about persuasion is often the result of
extensive study and research, often performed by many researchers over many
years. Such research is a vital antidote to the propaganda of our times.

 

23
Protagoras'
Ideal: OneSided Puffery versus Two-Sided Debate
The Greek historian Herodotus tells the following tale about the origins of the
Persian war. In 480 b.c., Xerxes, the Persian leader, had decided to go to war
against the Greek city-states in retaliation for their humiliating defeat of the
Persians ten years earlier at Marathon. Artabus, Xerxes' uncle, argued against the
war on the grounds that the Greek army and navy could easily defeat Persia. He
began his speech with these words.
O
king, it is impossible, if not more than one opinion is uttered, to make choice of
the best; a man is forced to follow whatever advice may have been given him;
but if opposite speeches are delivered, then choice can be exercised. In like
manner pure gold is not recognized by itself; but when we test it along with
baser ore, we perceive which is the better.1
Artabus'
words, at first, fell flat. Xerxes was filled with rage and publicly condemned
Artabus for his disloyalty to Persia. However, after a period of "cooling off,"
Xerxes came around to Artabus'
position and canceled the attack.
But then a strange event occurred. In the dead of night, Xerxes was visited
repeatedly in a dream by a ghostly figure urging war. Haunted by the vision,
Xerxes reversed himself once more. The Persians went to war against the Greeks
and, after some initial victories, were soundly defeated. The Persian Empire
went into decline, and the Greek city-states experienced their Golden Age. The
moral of the story was not lost on Herodotus' Greek compatriots: Basing a
course of action on irrational considerations results in disaster; full discussion
and debate offer the possibility of choosing wisely in public affairs.

When it comes to persuasion, the early Greeks possessed a vision of the ideal.
The Sophist Protagoras believed that there are two sides to every issue. His
fellow citizens agreed; they thought that persuasion happened best when all
parties concerned knew both sides of the issue at hand. By juxtaposing one
argument against an opposing one, the issue is made clear; the advantages and
disadvantages of the available courses of action are revealed.
Aristotle made Protagoras' belief in the advantages of a two-sided message a
component of his theory of effective communication.* The confrontation of
opposites is a fundamental process of reasoning. As Aristotle put it:
[a two-sided message as] a form of speech is satisfying, because the
significance of contrasted ideas is easily felt, especially when they are thus
put side by side, and also because it has the effect of a logical argument; it
is by putting two opposing conclusions side by side that you prove one of
them false.2
The influence of the Greek love for two-sided debate is still felt today—
somewhat. Rhetoric textbooks extol the communication that explores carefully
the pros and cons of an issue. The American legal system is based on the ideal
that each party to a litigation should present its best case, with a jury of peers
deciding which side of the issue will prevail. Contrast this with the old Soviet
system, in which there was one truth embodied in the party and the state served
as judge, jury, prosecutor, and defense.
In our own century, the journalist Walter Lippmann argued that opposing
viewpoints are essential to democracy;3 we learn most from those who tell us
what we don't know or don't find agreeable.
Reminiscent of the early Greeks, Lippmann believed that it was only through
listening to various positions on an issue that truth could be found.
But Protagoras' ideal is a long way from the type of persuasion one finds in the
mass media today. The typical ad is onesided and consists of little information,
much puffery, and many exaggerated claims. "This pain reliever is gentler,
faster, best." "Brand X will take fat off fast." "You can't beat the taste of Brand
Y."
"Only presidential candidate Z will strengthen defense, increase domestic
spending, and balance the budget (Congress willing)."

spe d g, a d ba a ce t e budget (Co g ess w
g).
For the most part, debate and comparison are missing from today's persuasion
landscape.
Consider the simplest form of "debate," one that hardly approaches the Greek
ideal: the comparative advertisement, that is, an ad that explicitly compares two
or more brands of a product on at least one attribute. Studies have found that
only 7% to 25% of all advertising in the major media is comparative in its
claims.4 It wasn't always possible for advertisers to present comparative ads. In
the early 1960s, major ad agencies and television networks strongly discouraged
comparative ads and the mentioning of a competitor's brand name on the
grounds that it was unsporting. In 1964, NBC
dropped its ban on such advertising, but the other two networks did not follow,
thereby requiring an advertiser wishing to use a comparative campaign to create
two separate ads—one for NBC and one for ABC and CBS. In the early 1970s,
the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) threatened lawsuits over restraint of trade
to force ABC, CBS, and the major advertisers to reverse their policy. The result,
according to advertising historian Stephen Fox,5 was an increase in comparative
advertising and the development of a new philosophy of advertising termed
brand positioning.6
According to the philosophy of brand positioning, market share can be gained by
Unking a product to one specific selling point or consumer benefit.
One of the best ways to position a brand in the consumer's mind is to compare it
with a competitor, especially if that competitor is well known. Some highly
successful examples: 7-Up doubled its sales by calling itself the uncola in
contrast to Coke; Tylenol became the number-one aspirin substitute by pointing
out that "aspirin can irritate the stomach lining, trigger asthmatic or allergic
reactions, and cause small amounts of gastrointestinal bleeding"; Scope
improved its market share by claiming that Listerine produces medicine breath;
Avis gained valuable ground on Hertz by arguing that because they were number
two, they would try harder.
In all of these positioning ads, a comparison is made that makes the advertised
brand appear superior. Of course, other contrasts can be made that would make it
look inferior. For example, number-one Hertz may not need to overexert itself
since it is already delivering what the consumer wants. Although brand

positioning is comparative, it frequently makes comparisons on only a few
advantageous dimensions and thus falls short of the Greek ideal of a full
discussion of the pros and cons of an issue.
Given the complexity of many public issues, one would hope that the speeches
of politicians and government officials would resemble more the ideals of
Protagoras than the practices of modern consumer advertisers. Alas, the structure
of modern mass media does not always facilitate the ideal. It is difficult to
contrast opposing viewpoints in a thirty-second advertisement or a network news
soundbite. In the televised era, U.S. presidential campaigns look more like an
advertising campaign positioning brands than an ideal debate. For example, in
1964, Lyndon Johnson positioned his opponent, Barry Goldwater, as a trigger-
happy threat to unleash nuclear arms.
(Goldwater failed to reciprocate in kind and lost by a landslide.) Richard Nixon
and Ronald Reagan were both successful in portraying their Democrat rivals as
liberal extremists. In 1988, George Bush carried this theme further by branding
his opponent, Michael Dukakis, as the "ACLU liberal"; Dukakis portrayed Bush
as the "rich boy who became a wimp." Although this positioning strategy failed
for Dukakis, it worked four years later for Bill Clinton, who painted George
Bush as a "rich boy born with a silver foot in his mouth." In the 2000 election,
George W. Bush attempted to link Al Gore with Bill Clinton, hoping that some
of the negative aspects of Clinton would rub off on Gore. To counter, Gore
selected as his running mate Joseph Lieberman, one of Clintons harshest moral
critics, and then depicted George W. Bush as a pawn of the rich.
Sadly, these tactics diminish the amount of time spent discussing some of the
larger issues facing the country, such as education, health insurance, child
welfare, nuclear arms proliferation, and foreign policy.
Is it ever possible for a two-sided argument to be more persuasive than a
onesided message? Or, to put it more blundy, what factors make a onesided
argument so effective that they seem to be the tactic of choice for most modern
propagandists. To sharpen our understanding of the uses and abuses of one-and
two-sided communications, let's examine the conditions under which each is
most persuasive.
Suppose you are about to make a speech attempting to persuade your audience
that more spending on education is necessary or that the budget surplus should

be used to fuel tax cuts. Would you persuade more people if you simply stated
your view and ignored the arguments against your position, or would you be
more persuasive if you discussed the opposing arguments and attempted to
refute them?
Before trying to answer this question, let's look closely at the factors involved. If
a communicator mentions the opposition's arguments, it might indicate that he or
she is an objective, fair-minded person; this could enhance the speaker's
trustworthiness and thus increase his or her effectiveness. On the other hand, if a
communicator so much as mentions the arguments on the other side of the issue,
it might suggest to the audience that the issue is a controversial one; this could
confuse members of the audience, make them vacillate, induce them to search
for counterarguments, and ultimately reduce the persuasiveness of the
communication.
With these possibilities in mind, it should not come as a surprise that there is no
simple relation between onesided arguments and the effectiveness of the
communication. It depends to some extent on how well informed the audience is
and on the audiences initial opinions on the issue.
Research generally finds that the more informed the members of the audience
are, the less likely they are to be persuaded by a onesided argument and the more
likely they are to be persuaded by an argument that brings out the important
opposing arguments and then attempts to refute them.7 This makes sense: A
well-informed person is more likely to know some of the counterarguments;
when the communicator avoids mentioning these, the knowledgeable members
of the audience are likely to conclude that the communicator is either unfair or is
unable to refute such arguments. On the other hand, an uninformed person is less
apt to know of the existence of opposing arguments. If the counterargument is
ignored, the less informed members of the audience are persuaded; if the
counterargument is presented, they might get confused.
The message-dense nature of the mass media often makes it difficult to respond
intelligently to what we receive. It takes considerable mental effort to process
effectively the stream of one short message after another. Advertisers have
observed that consumers frequently find comparative advertising confusing; they
mistake one brand for another, leading to a situation in which the advertiser is
publicizing the competition. For this reason, comparative advertising is rarely
used by the leading brand (why give a new upstart free publicity?); it is used

mostly by a challenger that might gain from being confused with the leader. For
example, in the domain of fast-food burgers, Burger King and Wendy's often
compare themselves with the market leader, McDonald's, which never mentions
its competitors. Pepsi often mentions Coke; the reverse is almost never true. In
the domain of political campaigns, attack advertising is most often used by the
challenger, not the incumbent, and by a candidate who is behind or slipping in
the polls.8 In the confusing, message-dense environment of the mass media,
onesided messages make sense for all but a few propagandists.
Another factor influencing the effectiveness of one-versus two-sided persuasion
is the partisanship of the audience. As we might expect, if a member of the
audience is already predisposed to believe the communicator's argument, a
onesided presentation has a greater impact on his or her opinion than a two-sided
presentation. If, however, a member of the audience is leaning in the opposite
direction, then a two-sided refutational argument is more persuasive.
We should underscore that the research does not favor the effectiveness of a
simple two-sided argument: It favors the effectiveness of presenting both sides
and pointing out the weaknesses in your opponent's position.
Most politicians seem to be well aware of the partisanship phenomenon; they
tend to present vastly different kinds of speeches, depending upon who
constitutes the audience. When talking to the party faithful, they almost
invariably deliver a hell-raising set of arguments favoring their own party
platform and candidacy. If they do mention the opposition, it is in a derisive,
mocking tone. On the other hand, when appearing on network television or when
speaking to any audience of mixed loyalties, they tend to take a more diplomatic
position, giving the opposing view a less emotional airing.
The evidence about the conditions under which a two-sided communication is
more effective is a cause for concern for those who appreciate the ideal of
Protagoras. The message-dense environment of the mass media is not conducive
to thoughtful, intelligent processing of message content. The ease with which we
can switch television channels allows us easily to find the most agreeable and
entertaining message.
Competing in this environment, communicators may come to rely more and
more on the onesided, partisan communication, reducing further the audience's
understanding of the issues of the day.

All is not lost for those who favor the Greek ideal of persuasion—after all, there
are two sides to every issue. During the 1988 presidential campaign, the League
of Women Voters refused to sponsor the presidential debates, as they
traditionally had done. The reason: The political pundits had designed the rules
of the debate so that true discussion could not occur; the candidates were thus
free to deliver their onesided stump speeches and were never placed in danger of
being embarrassed by a careful comparison of their positions on the issues.
The 1992 presidential campaign was different—somewhat.9 Many citizens
seemed legitimately upset about the way the 1988 campaign was conducted, and
the news media appeared embarrassed at its lack of coverage of the issues. The
result was some attempt to stimulate debate and fair discussion in the campaign.
For example, many newspapers and CNN carried analyses of deceptive ads and
statements by the candidates. Ross Perot, an independent candidate who
garnered 19% of the popular vote, attempted to move beyond short soundbites
and outlined his proposals in 30-minute infomercials. All the candidates fielded
questions from average citizens on talk shows such as "The Phil Donahue Show"
and "Larry King Live."
One of the highlights of the 1992 campaign came in Richmond, Virginia, when,
during the presidential debates, audience members reminded candidates to quit
the mudslinging and irrelevant character attacks and get to the issues.
The success, albeit limited, of the FTC in the 1970s in increasing the number of
comparative advertisements on television suggests that the League of Women
Voters and the citizens of Richmond, Virginia, may be on the right track. John
Chancellor, the NBC news commentator, would take it one step further. Given
that American taxpayers, through funding laws, now pay for a major chunk of
the campaign, taxpayers are entitled to determine the campaign rules and norms.
Chancellor argued that the government should no longer provide money for
thirty-second spots and soundbites. In their place would be taxpayer-supported
debates, press conferences, and forums that would lead to in-depth discussions.
As U.S. presidential elections subsequent to 1992 and many state and local races
have shown, if we want issue-oriented elections, citizens must demand them. By
paying attention to the form and style of the persuasive message, we can achieve
the type of persuasion a democracy requires. Perhaps one attribute of a
communicators credibility should be the degree to which he or she considers and
communicates fairly and intelligently on both (or even multiple) sides of an

important issue. The next time a presidential candidate tries to terminate debate
and discussion by responding to an opponent's challenge with the words "There
you go again," as Ronald Reagan did to Jimmy Carter in the 1980 presidential
debates, perhaps the best response, regardless of our own position, would be to
jeer and laugh as the early Greeks might have done. After all, whose intelligence
is being insulted when debate is limited to a onesided communication?
*
Of course, consistent with Protagoras' belief that there are two sides to every
issue, some Greeks argued that onesided persuasion was best. Plato in his
dialogues Gorgias and Protagoras chided the Sophists as "word tricksters and
hucksters"
who obscured the path to the one truth, or what has since become known as the
Platonic ideal.
 

Emotional Appeals: Touch the Heart,
Persuade the Mind

24
The Fear Appeal
In 1741, in the small New England town of Enfield, Connecticut, Jonathan
Edwards delivered a sermon entitled "Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God." In
this sermon, he preached:
Thus it is that natural men are held in the hand of God, over the pit of hell;
they have deserved the fiery pit, and are already sentenced to it... the devil
is waiting for them, hell is gaping for them, the flames gather and flash
about them, and would fain lay hold on them, and swallow them up. ... In
short, they have no refuge, nothing to take hold of; all that preserves them
every moment is the mere arbitrary will, and uncovenanted, unobliged
forbearance of an incensed God.1
Eyewitness accounts indicate that the sermon left the congregation "breathing of
distress and weeping." The records show that thousands gave over their lives to
Christ as part of the Great Awakening of eighteenth-century America.
Two centuries later, Adolf Hitler offered these words to his fellow countrymen
and -women:
The Jew regards work as a means of exploiting other peoples. The Jew is
the ferment of the decomposition of peoples. This means that the Jew
destroys and has to destroy. The Jew is harmful to us. ... What then are the
specifically Jewish aims? To spread their invisible State as supreme
tyranny over all other States in the whole world.
Communism is the forerunner of death, of national destruction, and
extinction.
. . . The red mob is threatening Berlin. . . . Today we may be convinced that
there are more than 600,000 to 700,000 Communists in Berlin. How do people
imagine a German future, as long as this increase is not checked? We must fight
to the very end those tendencies which have eaten into the soul of the German
nation.2

Millions of Germans gladly embraced Hitler's National Socialist party.
Although the goals of Edwards and Hitler were quite different, their method was
the same—instilling fear. Both Edwards and Hitler threatened their audiences
with dire consequences if a certain course of action was not followed.
Fire-and-brimstone preachers and Nazis are not the only ones who arouse fear in
order to motivate and persuade. Life insurance agents play on our anxieties to
induce purchase of their policies. Parents try to scare their children in hopes of
having them come home early from a date.
Physicians use fear to insure that patients adopt and maintain a prescribed
medical regimen. The nightly news carries reports of one sensational crime after
another, thus increasing our fear of the streets. The political party that is out of
office treats us to tales of the economic and moral collapse of the nation in hopes
of gaining power. And special-interest groups announce one food fear after
another—coffee may cause pancreatic cancer, the use of aluminum pots can
produce Alzheimer's disease, corn flakes contain hazardous amounts of the
pesticide EDB—despite the fact that Americans'
life expectancy continues to increase.3
Sometimes these fear appeals are based on legitimate concerns—smoking does
cause cancer; "unsafe sex" increases one's chance of contracting AIDS; failure to
brush and floss can led to painful tooth decay. But often fear appeals are based
on dark, irrational fears—fears stemming from racial prejudice or the notion that
there is a Communist under every bed. At times a regime instills fear by
terrorizing its own citizens, as in Hitler's Germany, Stalin's Soviet Union, Mao's
Cultural Revolution, the Cambodia of the Khmer Rouge, the Argentina of the
junta, Saddam Hussein's Iraq, and at countless other times and places. Fear
appeals are powerful because they channel our thoughts away from careful
consideration of the issue at hand and toward plans for ridding ourselves of the
fear.
When illegitimate fears are used, the message promotes deception—not to
mention the cruelty of the fear itself. It behooves us to look closely at just when
and how fear appeals are effective.
Not all fear appeals are successful in achieving their objectives. For the past few

years, public service announcements have alerted viewers to the dangers of drug
abuse and have frightened Americans about the possibility of contracting AIDS.
Opponents of the nuclear arms race paint a graphic picture of nuclear winter. Yet
drug abuse remains high, the practice of safe sex low, and the possibility of
world annihilation through the use of nuclear weapons ever present. Just what
are the factors that make a fear-arousing appeal more or less effective?
Let's begin with a seemingly simple question: Suppose you wish to arouse fear
in the hearts of your audience as a way of inducing opinion change. Would it be
more effective to arouse just a little fear, or should you try to scare the hell out of
them?
For example, if your goal is to convince people to drive more carefully, would it
be more effective to show them gory technicolor films of the broken and bloody
bodies of highway accident victims, or would it be more effective if you soft-
pedaled your communication—showing crumpled fenders, discussing increased
insurance rates due to careless driving, and pointing out the possibility that
people who drive carelessly may have their driver's licenses suspended?
Common sense argues on both sides of this street. On the one hand, one might
suppose that a good scare will motivate people to action; on the other hand, it
can be argued that too much fear can be debilitating—that is, it might interfere
with a person's ability to pay attention to the message, to comprehend it, and to
act upon it. We have all believed, at one time or another, that it only happens to
the other guy, it can't happen to me. Thus people continue to drive at very high
speeds and to insist on driving after they've had a few drinks, even though they
know better. Perhaps this is because the possible negative consequences of these
actions are so great that we try not to think about them. Thus, if a
communication arouses extreme fear, we tend not to pay close attention to it.
What does the scientific evidence tell us? Experimental data overwhelmingly
suggest that all other things being equal, the more frightened a person is by a
communication, the more likely he or she is to take positive preventive action.
And there are certain conditions that will enhance the impact of a frightening
appeal.
Fear can be a powerful motivating psychological force, channeling all our
thoughts and energies toward removing the threat so that we don't think about
much else. Consider the series of experiments conducted by Dariusz Dolinski

and Richard Nawrat.4 In their research, they aroused fear by blowing a police
whistle as a pedestrian jaywalked or placing a piece of paper that resembled a
ticket used to administer fines on the windshield of cars. In the modern urban
world, police whistles and tickets are sure to startle and create some fear in our
hearts. However, this fear was quickly relieved—no arrest was made among the
jaywalkers and that piece of paper that looked like a ticket turned out to be an ad
for a hair-growth medicine. Next, Dolinski and Nawrat asked the jaywalkers and
motorists to comply with a request (in some studies, to complete a questionnaire
and in other studies, to aid a charity). The results: When fear was aroused and
then relieved, the jaywalkers and motorists were significantly more likely to
comply with the request than those who jaywalked without a whistle or did not
receive the "ticket."
Dolinski and Nawrat conclude that the arousal of fear and its subsequent relief
distract attention from evaluating the request, resulting in more compliance. The
principle of fear-then-relief is well known by terrorists and rogue interrogators.
For example, one common method of extracting a confession from "witches"
during the Inquisition was to torture, terrorize, and inflict harsh pain on the
accused and then show kindness. Dazed and confused, the falsely accused would
sign a confession that then served as their death warrant.
Now let's turn to looking at the use of fear in a persuasive message. The most
prolific researchers in this area have been Howard Leventhal and his
colleagues.5 In one experiment, they tried to induce people to stop smoking and
to obtain chest X-rays. (At the time, medical authorities considered routine chest
X-rays important in the fight against tuberculosis.) Some subjects were exposed
to a low-fear treatment: They were simply presented with a recommendation to
stop smoking and get their chests X-rayed. Others were subjected to moderate
fear: They were shown a film depicting a young man whose chest X-rays
revealed he had lung cancer. The people subjected to the high-fear condition saw
the same film the "moderate-fear"
people saw—and, in addition, they were treated to a vivid, gory color film of a
lung cancer operation. The results showed that those people who were most
frightened were also most eager to stop smoking and most likely to sign up for
chest X-rays.
Is this true for all people? It is not. There is good reason why common sense can

lead us to believe that a great deal of fear leads to inaction: It does—under
certain conditions.
What Leventhal and his colleagues discovered is that the people who had a
reasonably good opinion of themselves (high self-esteem) were the ones most
likely to be moved by high degrees of fear arousal. People with low opinions of
themselves were the least likely to take immediate action when confronted with
a communication arousing a great deal of fear—but (and here is the interesting
part) after a delay, they behaved very much like the subjects with high self-
esteem. People who have a low opinion of themselves may have difficulty
coping with threats to themselves. A high-fear communication overwhelms them
and makes them feel like crawling into bed and pulling the covers up over their
heads. Low or moderate fear is something they can more easily deal with at the
moment they experience it. But, given time—that is, if it is not essential they act
immediately— they will be more likely to act if the message truly scared the hell
out of them.
Subsequent research by Leventhal and his colleagues lends support to this
analysis. In one study, subjects were shown films of serious automobile
accidents. Some subjects watched the films on a large screen from up close;
others watched them from far away on a much smaller screen. Among those
subjects with high or moderate self-esteem, those who saw the films on the large
screen were much more likely to take subsequent protective action than were
those who saw the films on the small screen. Subjects with low self-esteem were
more likely to take action when they saw the films on a small screen; those who
saw the films on a large screen reported a great deal of fatigue and stated that
they had great difficulty even thinking of themselves as victims of automobile
accidents.
It should be relatively easy to make people with high self-esteem behave like
people with low self-esteem. We can overwhelm them by making them feel
there is nothing they can do to prevent or ameliorate a threatening situation.
Much research has shown that if recipients of a fear appeal perceive that there is
no way to cope effectively with the threat, they are not likely to respond to the
appeal but will just bury their heads in the sand— even those who have high
self-esteem.6 Franklin D. Roosevelt knew the debilitating effect of extreme fear
and sought to counteract it when he announced, in his first inaugural address,
"The only thing we have to fear is fear itself."

Conversely, suppose you wanted to reduce the automobile accident rate or to
help people give up smoking, and you were faced with people with low self-
esteem. How would you proceed? If you were to construct a message containing
clear, specific, and optimistic instructions, it might increase the feeling among
the members of your audience that they could confront their fears and cope with
the danger.
These speculations have been confirmed; experiments by Howard Leventhal and
his colleagues show that fear-arousing messages containing specific instructions
about how, when, and where to take action are much more effective than
recommendations that omit such instructions. For example, a campaign
conducted on a college campus urging students to get tetanus shots included
specific instructions about where and when they were available. The campaign
materials included a map showing the location of the student health services and
a suggestion that each student set aside a convenient time to stop by.
The results showed high-fear appeals to be more effective than low-fear appeals
in producing favorable attitudes toward tetanus shots among the students, and
they also increased the students' stated intentions to get the shots. The highly
specific instructions about how to get the shots did not affect these opinions and
intentions, but the instructions did have a big effect on the actual behavior: Of
those subjects who were instructed about how to proceed, 28%
actually got the tetanus shots; but of those who received no specific instructions,
only 3% got them. In a control group exposed only to the instructions, with no
fear-arousing message, no one got the shots. Thus specific instructions alone
were not enough to produce action—fear was a necessary component for action
in such situations.
Very similar results were obtained in Leventhal's cigarette experiment.
Leventhal found that a high-fear communication produced a much greater
intention to stop smoking. Unless it was accompanied by recommendations for
specific behavior, however, it produced little results. Similarly, specific
instructions (buy a magazine instead of a pack of cigarettes, drink plenty of
water when you have the urge to smoke, etc.) without a fear-arousing
communication were relatively ineffective. The combination of fear arousal and
specific instructions produced the best results; the students in this condition were
smoking less four months after they were subjected to the experimental

procedure.
In sum, a fear appeal is most effective when (1) it scares the hell out of people,
(2) it offers a specific recommendation for overcoming the fear-arousing threat,
(3) the recommended action is perceived as effective for reducing the threat, and
(4) the message recipient believes that he or she can perform the recommended
action. Notice how the fear appeal works. The recipients attention is first focused
on the painful fear. In such a frightened state it is difficult to think about
anything other than getting rid of the fear.
Next, the propagandist offers a way to get rid of that fear—a simple, doable
response that just happens to be what the propagandist wanted you to do all
along.
This is exactly what Jonathan Edwards and Adolf Hitler offered their listeners.
Both men described rising menaces—sin or Jews and communists—that, if
allowed free rein, would devastate the soul or the national spirit. Each man
offered a specific remedy for the crisis—commitment to Christ or joining the
Nazi party. These courses of action were easy enough to perform—one needed
only to answer the altar call or to vote for a Nazi candidate.
In contrast, fear appeals to increase nuclear disarmament or to decrease drug
abuse rarely incorporate all four components of a successful fear appeal. We
have all been alerted to the dread of nuclear weapons and the personal and social
destruction of drug abuse. However, there have been few specific
recommendations for removing these threats that have been generally perceived
as effective and doable.
Two counterexamples of effective anti-nuclear arms appeals will make our
point. First, during the 1950s and early 1960s, many people purchased and
installed "nuclear fallout shelters" in their homes.
The reason: Fear of nuclear war was high and the installation of a home fallout
shelter, at the time, appeared to be an effective, doable response.
Second, during the 1964 presidential campaign, Lyndon Johnson, in a series of
television ads, was able to sway voters by portraying his opponent, Barry
Goldwater, as a supporter of the use of nuclear weapons. One controversial ad
featured a young girl counting to ten as she pulled petals from a daisy. A
moment later, the television screen filled with the mushroom cloud of a nuclear

bomb. Johnson's appeal was successful because it linked the fear of nuclear war
to Goldwater and then proposed a vote for Johnson as a specific, doable way to
avoid this threat. In contrast, there doesn't appear to be such a simple response to
today's threat of nuclear winter or a terrorist's use of nuclear arms, so we have a
tendency to avoid our fears by ignoring the issue.
Consider also the campaign to reduce the incidence of drug abuse by telling kids
to "just say no." Although many teenagers are probably frightened by the drug
scene, most will not perceive "just saying no" as an effective and doable
response. Imagine yourself as a teenager whose friends are getting high by
snorting cocaine and are pressuring you to try one little snort. Just saying "no"
is likely to result in even more pressure—"Come on, just one try. What are you?
A loser?" Such pressure is not easy to resist.
Solving the drug problem, given its scope and complexity, will require more
than just a cleverly worded advertisement. However, we can design our appeals
so that they are more effective. For example, recently a teacher asked her
elementary school class to come up with specific ways to say "no" when their
friends pressure them to use drugs. The students produced a book of "ways to
say no"—for example, walking away, calling the dealer the loser, offering the
friend an alternative to doing drugs. Such an approach has the advantage of
"self-selling" the class not to use drugs and also provides a list of specific ways
that children might perceive as effective for dealing with peer pressure; such a
list can then be illustrated on television or role-played in the schools. But in the
final analysis, for our fear appeals to work, we need to offer our children a more
effective and doable solution to life's problems than the advice to "just say no"—
we need to offer them
something to say "yes" to.
The use of fear appeals—for pro-social or for more unseemly crusades—raises a
broader question: Should fear appeals be used at all? Given the power of fear to
motivate and direct our thoughts, there is much potential for abuse. Illegitimate
fears can always be invented for any given propaganda purpose. As persuaders,
it is our responsibility, if we decide to use a fear appeal, to insure that the fear
we instill is, at least, legitimate and that it serves to alert the target to potential
dangers as opposed to obscuring the issue with emotion. If we don't, then we run
the risk of establishing our credibility as little more than that of Chicken Little.

As targets of such appeals, we owe it to ourselves to first ask "How legitimate is
this fear?" before taking the propagandist's bait.
If we don't, we could spend our lives running around in a vain attempt to keep
the sky from falling.
 

25
The Granfalloon Technique
"My God," she said, "are you a Hoosier?" I admitted I was.
"I'm a Hoosier, too," she crowed. "Nobody has to be ashamed of being a
Hoosier."
"I'm not," I said. "I never knew anybody who was."
—Kurt Vonnegut, Cat's Cradle
One of the most interesting and often most unbelievable set of findings in social
psychology is induced by what has come to be known as the minimum group
paradigm, which forms the basis of an emotionally powerful persuasive
technique. In this procedure, first identified by the British social psychologist
Henri Tajfel, complete strangers are formed into groups using the most trivial,
inconsequential criteria imaginable.1 For example, in one study, subjects
watched a coin toss that randomly assigned them to Group X or Group W. In
another study, subjects were first asked to express their opinions about painters
they had never heard of and were then randomly assigned either to a group that
appreciates Klee or to one that enjoys Kandinsky, ostensibly due to their picture
preferences. To use a term coined by the American novelist Kurt Vonnegut,
Tajfel and his colleagues are creating granfalloons—proud and meaningless associations of
human beings.2
What makes Tajfel's research so curious are the results that are often obtained.
Despite the fact that the subjects were total strangers prior to the study, that they
had never interacted with one another before and never would again, and that
their actions were completely anonymous, they acted as if those who shared their
meaningless label were their good friends or close kin. Subjects indicated that
they liked those who shared their label. They rated others who shared their label
as more likely to have a pleasant personality and to have produced better output
than out-group members. Most strikingly, subjects allocated more money and
rewards to those group members who shared their label and did so in a
competitive manner—for example, subjects were more likely to prefer giving

fellow group members $2 and members of the "other" group $1 rather than
giving fellow group members $3 and the members of other group $4.
What makes the granfalloon tick? Researchers have uncovered two basic
psychological processes, one cognitive and one motivational. First, the
knowledge that "I am in this group" is used to divide up and make sense of the
world, much in the same way that words and labels can be used to pre-persuade
(see Chapter 6). Differences between groups are exaggerated, whereas
similarities among members of the granfalloon are emphasized in the secure
knowledge that "this is what our type does." One serious consequence is that
out-group members are dehumanized; they are represented in our mind by a
simple, often derogatory label—gook, jap, redneck southerner, kike, nigger—as
opposed to unique
individuals—Nguyen, Susumu, Anthony, Elliot, Doug. It is a lot easier to abuse
an abstraction. Second, social groups are a source of self-esteem and pride, a
form of reverse Groucho Marxism—"I'd be more than happy to join a club that
would have me as a member."*
To obtain the self-esteem the group has to offer, members come to defend the
group and adopt its symbols, rituals, and beliefs.
Herein lies the secret to the persuasiveness of the granfalloon. If the professional
persuader, the advertiser, the politician, the televangelist can get us to accept his
or her granfalloons, then we have a ready-made way to make sense of our lives
—the propagandist's way—and as our self-esteem becomes increasingly linked
to these groups, we have a strong motivation to defend the group and to go to
great lengths proudly to adopt its customs. What the propagandist is really
saying is: "You are on my side (never mind that I created the teams); now act
like it and do what we say."
Let's look at some specific examples of how granfalloons can be used to
persuade.3
A study by Robert Cialdini and his colleagues illustrates the attraction power of
a granfalloon.4 Every autumn Saturday, many of America's universities and
colleges battle it out on the gridiron—half win and the other half lose. Cialdini
and his colleagues counted the number of college sweatshirts worn on the
Monday following a football game at seven universities that take football

seriously—Arizona State, Louisiana State, Notre Dame, Michigan, Ohio State,
Pittsburgh, and Southern California. The results: More students wore their
university insignias after a victory, and especially after a big win. Nothing
succeeds like a winning granfalloon. Is it any wonder that advertisers pay dearly
to link their products with winners, such as Michael Jordan for sneakers or
Cindy Crawford for makeup, and to create merchandise-selling granfalloons
based on a designer label, movies such as Star Wars or Pokemon, or the latest
Saturday-morning cartoon?
We are also attracted to the people in our granfalloon as well, even if those
people are disreputable and unscrupulous. For example, suppose you found out
that you shared a birthday with Grigori Rasputin, the "Mad Monk of Russia."
What would you think of him? As you know, Rasputin was a scoundrel who
used his position as a religious figure to exploit others mercilessly for his own
gain. If you shared his birth date, would you think more positively of Rasputin?
A pair of experiments by John Finch and Robert Cialdini suggests that you
would.5 In this research, college students were led to believe that they shared the
same birthday as Rasputin. After reading a description that painted Rasputin in
unsavory terms, the students were asked to rate the monk. Those who thought
they shared his birthday rated Rasputin as better, more effective, more pleasant,
and stronger than those who did not share his birthday. In other words, we like
those who end up in our granfalloon, even when membership is based on
something as trivial as a birthday. We are also more likely to cooperate with
those in our granfalloon. In another study, college students played a highly
competitive game with someone they thought shared or did not share their
birthday.6 The results showed that the students tended to cooperate with and not
compete against their birthdaymates (relative to those who did not share a
birthday). Do these results seem surprising to you? If so, we hasten to point out
that many people believe that they share personality traits, fates, and destiny
with those who share their zodiac sign—a collection of twelve granfalloons
based on birthdays.
Sometimes granfalloons come ready-made. In recent decades, marketers have
put forth extraordinary effort to classify America into groups and lifestyles, with
the goal of designing communications and products to fit each group.7 For
example, one scheme advanced by the Claritas Corporation divides America into
forty types of neighborhoods based on values, lifestyles, income, and so on. You
could be a member of the 'Young Influentials," "Blue-Collar Nursery," or "Blue-
Blood Estates." Each group is associated with a certain self-image and lifestyle.

Advertising and products are then targeted to profitable markets. In other words,
products are given a "personality" that fits the image of the target market; this
advertising then goes on to create further the image of each granfalloon by
specifying what needs to be done to maintain a certain image.
When ready-made groups don't exist, the skilled propagandist can create them by
inventing new distinctions or by emphasizing old, forgotten ones, just as Tajfel
and his colleagues have done in their laboratories.
A trip with a friend of ours to purchase a microwave oven illustrates the
invention of a granfalloon in a sales situation. He loves to cook. In contrast, his
wife, who accompanied him on this shopping trip, is of the mind that a woman's
place (especially this one's) is not necessarily in the kitchen, but in the office. As
is common, the salesman began by directing his pitch about the advantages of
microwave cooking to the female. The salesman was abruptly informed by the
wife, "He does the cooking; you should tell him about it." The salesman, without
breaking stride, turned to our friend, positioning his body so that a two-person
group was formed with the wife excluded, and said: "That's great. I think it's
wonderful that more men are cooking. There's nothing I like better than to get in
the kitchen and do some cooking myself." The inherent persuasive message:
"We share the same attitudes; we are of the same type; trust me!"
Or consider this more unseemly example of the phony use of a granfalloon. In an
interview discussing his technique, a fraudulent telemarketer—a person who
would routinely call people on the phone, lie to them that they had won a prize,
and then seduce them into giving up their hard-earned cash—put it this way:
"Any good con artist is going to use whatever [a victim] tells them about
themselves against them. If you tell me you are a veteran of World War II, well,
great, sir, I am a veteran of Desert Storm. We've got something in common. You
always look for an angle with the victim to legitimize what you are doing and to
make yourself more believable."8 In other words, the con criminal tells the target
of the scam, "We are in one big happy granfalloon; you can trust me and do what
I say."
Shared emotion and feeling can also create a granfalloon. A sense of oneness
with others can be produced by sharing a fun time, a sad situation, or a
harrowing experience. Kathleen Hall Jamieson identifies this as one skill that
made Ronald Reagan so persuasive a president—the ability to express the
emotions we are currently feeling or would like to feel.9 Reagan's speeches often

described the emotional experiences of others—what it felt like to carry the
Olympic torch; the feelings of a family as they watched their only son go off to
war; the experience of a daughter who honored her promise to her father, a
World War II veteran, to visit the beach at Normandy. By expressing our
common feelings, Reagan provided the nation with a sense of unity and, not
inconsequentially, made an attack on the Teflon president seem tantamount to
attacking ourselves.
Office politics provides yet another arena for the granfalloon technique.
One common ploy used by organizational politicians is to create personal
fiefdoms, complete with their own agenda and goals and, of course, enemies. For
example, an office games-player may rally the troops by declaring it is us against
them— the marketing department versus production, the psychiatrists versus the
psychologists, the city versus the college. Once the identities are fixed, the
agenda is set.
Often workplace distinctions can be so trivial that they are not easily understood
by an outside observer or a new group member. The cunning office politician
may be so bold as to create temporary, fluctuating group identities. For example,
today's Machiavellian may set one group against another by going to one person
and saying "we women must stick together," to another and saying "we
newcomers have to watch out for the old guard," and to a third and saying "those
of us with an eye to the bottom line better pull together on this one"—all in an
attempt to secure allegiance to a proposal.
Another office persuasion tactic is subtly to change a person's granfalloon—a
technique known as cooption. This tactic is often used to squelch opposition. For
example, consider a social activist who has been highly critical of a corporation's
policies or a feminist who argues that his or her university's hiring practices are
discriminatory. The corporation or university then gives the critic a new
position, often highly visible but without real power within the organization—
for example, a place on the board of directors or appointment as head of a
women's affairs center. The position usually comes with a nice office,
secretaries, letterhead, stationery, and maybe even a parking place. Gradually,
the critic becomes increasingly isolated from old "activist" friends and
increasingly dependent on the corporation or university for material resources
and a sense of identity. The opposition is defused as ties with the old granfalloon
are dissolved.

Tragically, granfalloons are not limited to business offices but can appear at
national and international political levels, where the stakes are much higher.
Adolf Hitler was able to create a strong German identity by manufacturing a
"Jewish" and a "Communist"
threat and by emphasizing a common "Aryan" heritage. During the Cold War,
American and Soviet propagandists portrayed each other as imperialistic
warmongers with little regard for human rights and dignities. Today there
continues to be strife in the Balkans among Serbs, Croats, and Muslims. Once
such identities form, the right and moral course of action becomes abundantly
clear.
The modern masters of the granfalloon are televangelists— Christian
fundamentalist ministers such as Oral Roberts, Pat Robertson, Jimmy Swaggart,
Jim Bakker, and Tammy Faye Messner (formerly Bakker) who use television to
promote not only the gospel but also, with rapid-fire frequency, their sales
message.10 For example, one study looking at the content of Christian programs
found that a typical show makes requests for donations averaging $189.52 per
hour, with the average Bible selling for a pricey $191.91. (Jerry Falwell wins the
title of "God's biggest solicitor," offering Bibles, books, tapes, and other
religious trinkets for sale at a rate of $1,671 per hour.) The results are quite
profitable. In 1980, the top four religious programs took in over a quarter of a
billion dollars, with the Jimmy Swaggart Ministry alone collecting more than
$60 million in 1982. They succeed by defining the image of a "Christian" and
then using the electronic media to create a "family of believers" based on this
image.
Roughly 10 million Americans (or 4% of the U.S. population) regularly watch
Christian programming. Although this is a large number of viewers (it is
estimated that Jesus preached to no more than 30,000 souls in his entire
lifetime), it is not exactly a moral majority, but more like, in marketing terms, a
small but potentially profitable market segment. Who, then, are the members of
the electronic church? Surveys and interviews reveal two broad categories of
viewers: persons who are already converted to Christianity and those who are
lonely and isolated or have recently suffered a loss, such as a personal disability
or the death of a loved one. The success of Christian programming lies in
directly matching the needs of both types of viewers.
The electronic church creates a "Christian identity" for its viewers. The identity,

most clearly expressed by the minister-leader, comes complete with political
attitudes (typically conservative ones, such as opposing abortion and supporting
a strong defense), religious beliefs (a literal interpretation of the Bible, the
principle of "seed-faith," or the giving of money to later receive more in return),
shared feelings (the joy of a spontaneous, televised healing; the tears of Tammy
Faye Messner), goals (the creation of a Christian nation, ridding the nation's
schools of evolutionary teaching, returning prayer to the classroom), enemies
(secular humanists; liberal politicians; at least until recently, the Supreme Court;
homosexuals; intellectuals), and rituals and symbols (the 700
Club, PTL bumper stickers and buttons, "speaking in tongues").11
For those who already believe, Christian broadcasting becomes a means for
further expressing their identity. For those who are lonely or have suffered a
loss, it is a way to replace, repair, or rationalize a self-conception that may be
damaged by, say, loss of job status or of a close family member. A satisfying
self-identity as one of "God's chosen people" can be obtained by watching,
subscribing, donating, and adopting the behaviors suggested by religious
programs.
This image can then be used by the televangelist to sell and market products and
ideas.
Given the booming buzz of modern reality, it is perfectly human to try to reduce
the vast amounts of information we receive to a more manageable level by
categorizing and labeling it. It is also perfectly human to want to belong to
groups and to be proud of membership in these groups. Such feelings can have
positive consequences: "We Are the World" and Jerry Lewis telethons have
raised millions of dollars for worthy causes by tapping into our self-images as
global, caring citizens. Many church, mosque, and synagogue members find
great meaning and religious identification in feeding the hungry, caring for the
less fortunate, and taking the beam out of their own eye first.
At other times, however, granfalloons can be manipulated to get us to purchase
unwanted products, to vote for less than qualified candidates, and to hate
innocent people. What can be done to lessen the chances of falling prey to the
granfalloon tactic?
Here are five simple rules of thumb that might help. First, be wary of those who

attempt to create minimum groups and to define you as a member of a certain
category. There are many ways to define and label a person. Ask yourself, "Why
is this particular label being suggested?" Second, follow the old civil rights
motto, "Keep your eye on the prize." Try linking your self-esteem to achieving
an objective—be it a quality purchase at a reasonable price or a social good—
rather than maintaining a self-image.
Third, don't put all of your self-esteem eggs in one basket, one granfalloon—it
might lead to fanaticism. Fourth, look for common ground—goals that might be
acceptable to both the in-and the out-group—as a means of reducing the
importance of group boundaries. And finally, try to think of an out-group
member as an individual, someone who may share more in common with you
than you might have previously thought.
*
Based on one of Groucho Marx's legendary statements. On learning that he was
admitted to an exclusive club, he remarked, "I would not want to belong to a
club that would have me as a member."
 

26
Guilt Sells
In an annual Girl Scout cookie sales drive, thirteen-year-old Elizabeth Brinton
sold 11,200 boxes of cookies. When asked how she did it, Brinton replied, "You
have to look people in the eye and make them feel guilty."
Guilt sells—a fact of persuasive life that seems to be intuitively grasped by
parents, teachers, clergy, charities, and life insurance agents. But guilt, the
feeling that we are responsible for some wrongdoing, can be used to sell more
than cookies and life insurance.
Guilt can also lead you to admit to a crime you did not commit, as social
psychologists Saul Kassin and Katherine Kiechel recently discovered.1
In a fascinating experiment, Kassin and Kiechel invited college students into
their lab for what appeared to be a study measuring reaction time. Each student
was to type a series of letters read aloud by another student (who was really
working with the experimenters).
Before the study began, the experimenter warned: "Do not touch the ALT key
near the space bar because the program will crash and the data will be lost."
After about a minute of data entry, lo and behold, the computer supposedly
ceased to operate and froze. A highly distressed experimenter accused the typist
of pressing the forbidden ALT key. All the typists initially denied the charge.
The experimenter then tinkered with the keyboard, confirmed the data were lost,
and asked, "Did you hit the ALT key?" The typist was then asked to sign a
handwritten confession stating, "I hit the ALT key and caused the program to
crash. Data were lost," which they were told would result in a phone call from
the principal investigator.
How many typists confessed to a crime they never committed? Kassin and
Kiechel found that a whopping 69% of the subjects signed the confession. What
is more, 28% of the subjects later told another student (supposedly unrelated to
the experiment) that they had hit a wrong button and ruined the study. In other
words, these subjects actually believed they had committed the offense, with

some of them actually making up details about how they came to hit the ALT
key.
Kassin and Kiechel found two factors that increased the likelihood that the typist
would make a false confession. First, if the typists were asked to enter data at a
quick pace, then they were more likely to confess. Second, and perhaps most
interesting, rates of confession were dramatically increased if the typist was
confronted with false incriminating evidence—that is, they were told that the
other student who read the letters aloud saw them hit the ALT key. Police
commonly employ this tactic when they question suspects, leading them to
believe that they have evidence of guilt that they often do not possess.
Of course, this is just a social-psychological experiment. Such things couldn't
happen in real life, where the stakes are much higher and people have more to
lose than just some course credit. Don't bet your life or liberty on it, or you might
discover what Brad Page learned the hard way: Feelings of guilt, even if falsely
induced, can lead one to comply with a police request to confess to a crime.
On the morning of November 4, 1984, Brad and his fiancee, Bibi Lee, had
decided to go jogging with their friend Robin in Redwood Park in Oakland. Brad
and Robin, both strong runners, lost sight of Bibi after a few miles and stopped
to wait for her to catch up. After waiting for several minutes, they became
concerned, doubled back, and began to search for her.
The park is a large one, with several trails that wind through the woods.
Brad and Robin surmised that Bibi might mistakenly have wandered off the
main trail. When they couldn't find her, they decided to head back to the parking
lot and wait near the car, thinking that she would eventually head there. After a
long wait, Brad decided that it would be more efficient if he searched for her by
car, so he asked Robin to wait in the lot in case Bibi came looking for them,
while he drove around the perimeter of the park.
After about fifteen minutes, he returned, reporting that he was still unable to find
her. They waited for her for another half-hour or so.
Then Brad suggested that they drive back home. He felt that Bibi could easily
have hopped a bus back home; besides, he later admitted, he was a little annoyed
at Bibi because he suspected that she might have disappeared on purpose in
order to punish him for a minor squabble they had had earlier that day.

Five weeks later, Bibi's body was found in a shallow grave in a wooded area of
Redwood Park. Who killed Bibi Lee? It might have been a serial killer who had
been active in the area. Indeed, an eyewitness reported seeing a burly, bearded
man (fitting the description of the serial killer) dragging a young woman fitting
Bibi's description into a van; at the time the witness wasn't certain whether it was
a playful or an aggressive act, so she didn't bother to report the incident until
after she read about Bibi's disappearance.
But as time progressed, and there were no hot suspects, the police asked Brad
Page to come in for additional questioning. Their reasoning was that he might
have found Bibi during the fifteen minutes that he left Robin waiting in the
parking lot—and, in a fit of anger, might have killed her. After inducing Brad to
waive his right to an attorney ("We're all friends, here, aren't we?"), the police
interrogators had him go over his story several times. During the interrogation,
they kept asking him how he could possibly have left his girlfriend alone in the
park and driven back home.* Brad felt terribly guilty about it, saying several
times, "It was the biggest mistake of my life!" Each time they asked the
question, his guilt seemed to grow.
Finally, the interrogators told Brad that, late on the night that Bibi had
disappeared, he had been seen near the site of the shallow grave and that his
fingerprints had been found on a rock that had been used as the murder weapon.
As with the false incriminating evidence used in the Kassin and Kiechel
experiment, neither of these statements was true. Brad said that he had no
recollection of having left his apartment that night and had no idea how his
fingerprints could have gotten on the murder weapon (he didn't even know what
the weapon was). But he had no reason to distrust the interrogators, so,
understandably, he became terribly confused and asked them if it is possible for
a person to commit a horrible crime like this and "blank it out." The interrogators
informed him that such things were common occurrences and that it might help
him recall the circumstances and ultimately might help him relieve his guilty
conscience if he closed his eyes and tried to imagine how he might have killed
Bibi if he had killed her.** Brad proceeded to do as he was told, inventing (as
did some of the subjects in the Kassin and Kiechel experiment) what he later
described as an imaginative scenario. Two hours after his alleged confession,
when he was told that the police considered it to be a confession, he seemed
genuinely astonished and immediately recanted.
The police continued to consider this to be a confession, even though a great

many important details did not coincide with the actual physical evidence. Brad
Page was indicted for first-degree murder.
The jury was unable to decide whether or not the confession was real, and a
mistrial was declared. In a second trial, the jury was similarly confused; they
deliberated for six days before finally deciding that while he was not guilty of
murder, he was guilty of manslaughter! Brad Page was sent to prison. In spite of
numerous attempts by lawyers and the media to reopen the case, he served his
full term.
We are in no position to state with absolute certainty that Brad Page did not kill
Bibi Lee. But we are convinced that his confession was not a valid one.
Moreover, we have a pretty good idea of why he complied with the police
request to imagine how he might have killed Bibi. Guilt, whether real or
imagined, leads to compliance. During the interrogation, Brad Page was made to
feel guilty about how he had driven off and left Bibi alone. "You mean to say
you actually drove off and left her alone?" It is likely that the feelings of guilt
helped to make him susceptible to the influence of his interrogators. The Brad
Page case is not exceptional.2 Police interrogation manuals recommend playing
on the suspect's guilt and suggesting incriminating evidence has been found
(even when it hasn't been). Surveys show that confession evidence plays a role in
the majority of trials and, in the minds of jurors, is one of the most powerful and
damning forms of evidence against a defendant.
Unfortunately, some confessions are false, as studies of innocent persons who
were falsely imprisoned often reveal.3
But just how does guilt work as a propaganda device? The effects of guilt on
compliance have been isolated in a clever set of experiments performed by
Merrill Carlsmith and Alan Gross.4 In their studies, subjects were induced to
deliver a series of painful electric shocks to another individual as part of an
experiment on teaching. (In actuality, no shocks were received, but the subjects
were led to believe that the shocks were real.) Such an experience would
undoubtedly lead the participants to feel guilty about their behavior. Other, "not-
guilty" subjects were merely
instructed to ring a buzzer to indicate a wrong answer. All subjects were then
asked by the shock "victim" to make phone calls on behalf of a "Save the
Redwood Forest" committee. The results showed that subjects who were induced

to feel guilt were three times as likely to comply with the request than were the
"not-guilty" subjects. Guilt sells!
Why is guilt so effective in motivating human behavior? Carlsmith and Gross
reasoned that there are at least three possible explanations for why guilt sells: (1)
sympathy, or feeling sorry for the victim; (2) restitution, or feeling the need to
compensate for the wrongdoing; and (3) generalized guilt, or the desire to repair
a self-image tarnished by a transgression.
A
second study by Carlsmith and Gross teased apart these three explanations by
varying who was transgressing against whom. To induce sympathy for the
victim, some subjects first watched someone else supposedly shocking a third
person and then were asked by the shock "victim" to help save the redwoods. To
induce a need for restitution, other subjects were first led to believe they were
shocking a person and later were asked by this "victim" to help save the
redwoods. To induce generalized guilt, a third group of subjects was also led to
believe that they were shocking a person, but this time the request to save the
redwoods came from another individual who was unrelated to the administering
of shocks. The results showed little compliance by those subjects who felt only
sympathy for the victim. However, those subjects who either felt a need for
restitution or who were experiencing generalized guilt were significantly more
likely to volunteer to make more phone calls in an attempt to save the redwood
forests.
What happens when the victim of a transgression offers the guilty party
forgiveness? As strange as it might seem, the transgressor is more likely to
comply with a request when all is absolved. Forgiveness of guilt and compliance
were recently investigated in an experiment conducted by Brad Kelln and John
Ellard.5 In their research, college students were led to believe that they had
mishandled some scientific equipment and thereby ruined the experimenter's
study. As in the Carlsmith and Gross study, the students were more likely to
comply with a request to aid the experimenter in other research when they felt
guilty about mishandling the equipment compared to those students who did not
damage the machine. But here is the interesting twist. One group of students was
forgiven their supposed misdeed. They were told by the experimenter: "Don't
worry about it. That's OK."

What would you do in such a situation? Often the act of forgiveness is seen as
"wiping the slate clean"—the transgressor is absolved of guilt and the person
offering forgiveness is perceived as a friend. However, that is not what Kelln
and Ellard found. In fact, they found that just the opposite occurred. The offer of
forgiveness served as a double whammy; first they felt guilty about damaging
the equipment and then they were offered no means of making it up to the
researcher. The only way to make restitution and to show that they were "good"
people was to comply with the experimenters request to do more work. And that
they did, offering to do almost twice the work as the other students in the
research. But all of these guilty feelings had a cost. When the students were
forgiven their transgressions, they came to dislike the experimenter—the person
who had absolved them of their crime. Apparently, people do not like people to
whom they feel beholden.
We should note that another common response to feelings of guilt produced by
transgressing against another is to derogate the victim.
For example, in an experiment by Keith Davis and Ned Jones, students were
asked to watch another student being interviewed and then to tell the student that
they found him or her to be a shallow, untrustworthy, and dull person.6 The
major finding of the study was that students who volunteered for this assignment
succeeded in convincing themselves that they didn't like the victim of their
cruelty. In other words, after we attack another person we look for ways to
justify, or "make right," our actions. One way to do that is to blame the person
we attacked for our own behavior: He or she is stupid or careless or evil or
whatever and therefore deserved our maltreatment; thus our misbehavior is
rationalized. The victim becomes the scapegoat for our guilt. Skillful
propagandists will make this rationalization coincide with their goals.
The power of guilt to convince and to persuade stems, as with most emotional
appeals, from its power to direct our thoughts and to channel our energies. When
we feel guilty we typically pay little attention to the cogency of an argument, to
the merits of a suggested course of action. Instead, our thoughts and actions are
directed to removing the feeling of guilt—to somehow making things right or
doing the right thing. We fall into the rationalization trap.
Guilt can have its pro-social uses. Imagine a society in which no one felt
remorse for any transgression that he or she performed. Many social
commentators have noted that the success of Martin Luther King, Jr.'s, campaign

to desegregate the South was due, in part, to the guilt feelings induced in many
white southerners when his nonviolent actions were met with billy clubs, fire
hoses, and attack dogs.
Nevertheless, many effects of guilt are, of course, not positive; many guilty
feelings are undeserved. Guilt can be induced by reminding the target of past
sins that have long since been atoned for, by making small transgressions loom
large, or by making it appear that the target is responsible for a crime that he or
she did not commit. Once we are filled with guilt, our thoughts and behavior are
directed toward ridding ourselves of this feeling. The end result is, at best, the
manipulation of our behavior and, perhaps at worst, long-term damage to our
self-esteem or even the loss of our freedom.
*
One of the authors (EA) testified at Brad Page's trial as an expert witness on non
coercive persuasion and, accordingly, was given access to the audiotapes of the
interrogation.
**
It should be noted that this is the one aspect of the interrogation that is disputed;
the interrogators deny that they stated these instructions in a hypothetical
manner, whereas Brad Page insists that they did. Unfortunately (and
unaccountably), the police had turned off the tape recorder during this part of the
interrogation, so it is impossible to obtain objective evidence on this
disagreement.
 

27
What Is the Influence of One Flower Given?
A.
C. Bhaktivedanta spent much of his life in India as a manager of a successful
pharmaceutical company. In the early 1960s, after leaving his wife and family
and accepting the name of Swami Prabhupada, he came to America and founded
the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, a movement devoted to
improving the world's spiritual health by chants and love for Lord Krishna.
Starting from a storefront mission on Manhattan's Lower East Side, the swami,
in less than a decade, was able to gather the resources to establish a worldwide
network of more than a hundred Hare Krishna temples and communes, including
forty located in the United States.1
Swami Prabhupada's primary source of income during this period of rapid
expansion came from public donations and sales of religious merchandise,
including his two most popular items, Back to Godhead magazine and a designer
edition of the Bhagavad Gita. What makes the Hare Krishnas' success so
remarkable was the sales force the swami recruited to sell the society's
merchandise. The swami selected young people—often teenagers, many of them
with psychological problems—dressed them in saffron robes, holy beads, and B.
F. Goodrich sandals, shaved the heads of the males, fed them a diet consisting
primarily of vegetables (most notably dahl and chickpeas), and then sent them
into the marketplace singing, dancing, and chanting the Hare Krishna. Would
you buy a copy of the Bhagavad Gita (or anything else, for that matter) from a
chanting, orange-clad, stubble-headed sales agent? Not likely. The Hare Krishna
sales force breaks just about every persuasion rule (save one) found in this book
—they were low in source credibility, low in interpersonal attraction and liking,
and high in vested self-interest.
How did the swami get thousands of people to part with their hard-earned cash
to finance his spiritual kingdom? Robert Cialdini, one of the world's leading
authorities on influence tactics, wondered how he did it, too.2 At first, Cialdini
notes, the Hare Krishnas were quite unsuccessful in their solicitations. Indeed,
many towns enacted laws and ordinances prohibiting Krishna begging and even

banned them from certain parts of town, especially airports. Occasionally
violence would erupt between Krishnas and townspeople. All of this turned
around, according to Cialclini, when the Krishnas discovered one of society's
most effective persuasion devices, one capable both of overcoming the Krishnas'
negative image and of placing an overpriced copy of the Bhagavad Gita into the
hands of many a weary traveler. Their technique made use of what is called the
norm of reciprocity.
A
norm is a specific guide to conduct—for example, tip 15% of the dinner bill;
don't cut in front of people standing in line at the movies; don't urinate in public;
don't read other people's mail.3 If we break a norm, we most likely receive some
form of social sanction and disapproval—a glaring look, gossip and ridicule,
shunning and ostracism, and sometimes even physical punishment, jail,
banishment, or death. (Note the reaction of some people to the Krishnas because
they broke society's dress and social-interaction norms.) As a consequence of
these sanctions, even a young child begins to learn not to break the norms.
Indeed, when put in a position of transgressing a norm, we often feel highly
anxious—a feeling that we would like to avoid. We may end up obeying the
norm almost automatically without much thought as to why.
Often norms can be associated with a specific role (cooking is women's work;
businessmen are competitive) or a specific culture (eat with a fork as opposed to
chopsticks; don't overproduce in this workshop).
Other norms are widely shared and appear in many cultures and societies (incest
is taboo; honor your commitments). The norm of reciprocity is one such norm. It
states: "If I do something for you, then you are obligated to return the favor and
do something for me." Perhaps one reason why this norm is found in so many
cultures is its value to a society. The norm of reciprocity regulates exchange in a
culture; it insures that the person who makes the first exchange will not be
cheated.
A
study by Dennis Regan illustrates the persuasive power of the norm of
reciprocity, a tactic so powerful that it can even overcome the effects of being
disliked.4 In his experiment, two male students reported for a study that

supposedly was investigating "aesthetic judgments." One of the men was really
an
accomplice who, at the beginning of the study, attempted to make himself
unlikable (by being rude and inconsiderate to another person) or likable (by
being kind and considerate to another). After both "subjects" rated art slides for
about five minutes, the accomplice slipped out of the room for a couple of
minutes and returned either empty-handed or carrying two Cokes and said, "I
asked him [the experimenter] if I could get myself a Coke, and he said it was
OK, so I bought one for you, too." At the end of the study, the accomplice asked
the real subject if he would like to buy some raffle tickets. The results showed
that when the accomplice gave the other student a Coke and thus invoked the
norm of reciprocity, he sold nearly twice as many raffle tickets, compared to
when no Coke was given and regardless of how socially attractive he was
perceived to be!
How did the Krishnas use the norm of reciprocity to solicit money? Quite
simply, they gave the influence target a gift of a flower. As Cialdini, who spent
hours at the airport observing the Krishnas in action, tells it, the sect member
would spy a "victim," who would suddenly find a flower pressed into his or her
hand or pinned to a jacket. If the target attempted to give it back, the Krishna
would refuse by saying, "It is our gift to you." Only then was the request made
for a donation. The gift of a flower established a feeling of obligation and
indebtedness. How could this favor be repaid? Quite obviously by providing the
Society with a donation or with the purchase of an attractive edition of the
Bhagavad Gita.
Hare Krishnas are not the only ones to employ the norm of reciprocity for
persuasive purposes. This may have started on a mass scale with the well-known
"Fuller Brush man," a fixture of the 1930s who went from door to door selling
brushes. He always began by giving the home owner a small, inexpensive brush
as a way to establish the reciprocity norm. A phenomenon of the 1950s,
Tupperware parties, began with a gift from the company (typically a small
Tupperware item) and a gift from the party host (refreshments), thereby
obligating the party goer to both company and host (who receives a gift from the
company if you and your friends buy enough). A recent television ad for an
antacid began with an authoritative-looking man stating, "We believe in our
product so much, that, after watching this ad, if you would like to try our product
just call us toll-free and we will send you a pack." Marketers know that a free

sample—a taste of sausage or orange juice at the supermarket or a trial packet of
cold medicine or shampoo in the mail—can greatly increase product sales. Sales
presentations for such things as vacuum cleaners, automobiles, encyclopedias,
and beachfront property in Florida often begin with a free prize, such as a road
atlas, a transistor radio, or a trial magazine subscription.
Charities and political parties frequently mail free gifts of buttons and bumper
stickers with catchy slogans when they ask for a contribution. Many university
professors will receive a free copy of this book in the hopes that they will assign
it to their classes.
Former President Lyndon B. Johnson, widely known for his powers of influence
in Congress, kept a drawerful of small trinkets—key chains, coffee mugs, and
pens with an official seal. He would hand these keepsakes out to friends and
acquaintances alike, thereby establishing a social relationship of indebtedness.
There are a number of variations on the use of the norm of reciprocity to
increase compliance. One ingenious version has been dubbed the door-in-the-
face technique. Here's how it works. Imagine that you work for a local blood
bank and you want to increase blood donations. Using the door-in-the-face
technique, you would begin by asking for a very extreme favor—say, donate
blood once every two months for at least three years. Such a request would
surely be rejected (hence the name "door-in-the-face") but might lead to more
acceptances of a compromise—say, donating one unit of blood—than would
otherwise be the case. This is exactly what Robert Cialdini and Karen Ascani
found.5 In one study, they asked passersby on an Arizona State University
walkway to either (1) donate a unit of blood sometime tomorrow or (2) donate a
unit of blood once every two months for a period of three years and, when this
request was rejected by the passerby, he or she was asked merely to donate a unit
of blood sometime tomorrow. The results showed that more people agreed to
give blood and actually gave more blood when they received the extreme request
first.
Another use of the norm of reciprocity can be found in the that's-not-all
technique commonly used on late-night TV ads to peddle small kitchen
appliances. This technique was investigated in a set of clever experiments
conducted by Jerry Burger.6 Here's how this technique works. In one
experiment, Burger set up a bake sale to sell cupcakes. No prices were listed.
When a passerby stopped and asked about the cupcakes, he or she was told that

the price was 750.
But before the customer could respond, the seller held up a hand saying: "Wait,
that's not all— you also get these cookies along with the cupcakes," as the
customer was shown two medium-sized cookies. Other passersby were merely
told at the start that for 75¢ they could get the cupcakes and two cookies. Burger
found that nearly double the amount of cupcakes and cookies were sold when
the seller announced the cookies as an extra "that's-not-all"
item as opposed to telling the customer about the cookies from the start.
The door-in-the-face and that's-not-all techniques make use of two basic
psychological processes. First, both the large initial request and the small initial
offer set up a contrast effect, similar to the one that occurs with decoys (see
Chapter 10)—giving a pint of blood doesn't seem nearly so bad when compared
to donating at regular intervals for the next three years, and "a cupcake—plus
some cookies" sounds better than just "a cupcake."
Second, the immediate concession by the requester invokes the norm of
reciprocity. The requester is implicitly saying, "I just reduced my request from
three years of blood donations to just once; now it is your turn to reciprocate my
concession." Similarly, in the that's-not-all technique, the request implies, "I just
added an extra two cookies to the deal; now it is your turn to make a concession
and make the purchase." And many an influence target does just that!
Car dealers have learned the value of the door-in-the-face technique.
Dealers often pad the asking price for an automobile by adding an extra price
sticker that raises the cost of a car by as much as a few thousand dollars. Early in
the negotiations, the dealer will graciously concede this extra charge. Now it is
your turn to reciprocate and to pay more for that car then you might have
intended to. Similarly, infomericals often make use of the that's-not-all
technique. A common ploy on these half-hour-long commercials is to first
describe a product—a blender, fruit dehydrator, or similar product—and to offer
it for sale. But before you can decide whether you want it or not, another item—
a set of six steak knives, a fruit roll-up attachment, or an apple corer— is
announced as a part of the deal and as a concession to you, the consumer. And
again, it is your turn to reciprocate and buy!
In

general, the norm of reciprocity is successful as a persuasion device because it
directs our thoughts and carries its own motivation to act on those thoughts. We
are directed to think "How can I repay my obligation?" as opposed to "Is this a
good deal?"
Our primary motivation is to avoid the uneasy feeling that comes from
transgressing the norm. Other norms can similarly motivate our thinking. Next,
we will look at just one of these norms to see how the rule "honor your
commitments" can be exploited.
 

28
The Committed Heart
A visit from the encyclopedia salesman can illustrate many persuasion tactics.
The "free" road atlas given for listening to the sales representative invokes the
norm of reciprocity. The features of the volumes are described in glowing,
influential words. The salesman encourages you to generate dozens of good
reasons (at least you think so) for owning an encyclopedia set. The fact that your
children and other loved ones don't already have access to a world of knowledge
makes you feel a little guilty.
But perhaps one of the most powerful inducements to buy occurs "after"
the sales presentation. The salesman continues: "Well, if there are no more
questions about the books, that will conclude the presentation. Oh yes, one more
thing. My boss would really like it if I could get your opinion about our
encyclopedias. Would you mind completing a form with me?"
You respond, "OK."
"It's a series of questions about what you would like in an encyclopedia. It would
really help if you would respond as if you were buying a set today."
The salesman goes on to ask a series of questions. "Which color binding do you
like—white, maroon, or black? With or without gold leaf? With or without
double-strength binding?" and so on.
You answer each question mindlessly as the salesman checks off your responses
on a preprinted official form.
At the end of the inquiry he asks, "Would you mind initialing this sheet as a way
of authorizing your answers?" Again, you do so in a half-mindless state.
From that point on, that formal-looking paper is treated as your order for a set of
encyclopedias. The salesman suggests, "Let's see how much it would cost to buy
your set of encyclopedias today; hmmmmm, with a 5% discount, that would be
_," as he hands you a slip of paper with a handwritten number on it. As you read

it, the salesman asks, "Shall I order your set today?"
You stammer, half-confused, "Well, 'em, I'd ... well."
We don't know whether you will buy that set of encyclopedias today or not.
Many of us will undoubtedly see through his ploy. But we bet this procedure of
"taking your order" will increase encyclopedia sales significantly and will do so
because of the feelings it engenders. In general, it is important to all of us to be
"persons of our word," that is, to be self-consistent and to honor our
commitments. Granted, we did not say we would buy an encyclopedia, but the
salesman seems to think so—perhaps we did indicate we would like one. When
we go back on our word, we often feel uneasy, even when it is a seemingly
flimsy commitment like the one given to the encyclopedia salesman. To
maintain a positive view of ourselves, we act on our commitments. The
rationalization trap has captured another unsuspecting victim.
Preying on our sense of commitment as a way to induce persuasion is often
accomplished in small doses. Suppose you would like to enlist someone's aid in
a massive undertaking, but you know the job you have in mind for the person is
so difficult, and will require so much time and effort, that the person surely will
decline. What should you do?
One possibility is to get the person involved in a much smaller aspect of the job,
one so easy that he or she wouldn't dream of refusing to do it. This action serves
to commit the individual to "the cause." Once people are thus committed, the
likelihood of their complying with the larger request increases.
This phenomenon was demonstrated by Jonathan Freedman and Scott Fraser.1
They attempted to induce several homeowners to put up a huge, unattractive sign
in their front yards reading "Drive Carefully." Because of the ugliness and
obtrusiveness of the sign, most residents refused to put it up; only 17%
complied. A different group of residents, however, were first "softened up"
by an experimenter who "put his foot in the door" by getting them to sign a
petition favoring safe driving. Because signing a petition is an easy thing to do,
virtually all who were asked agreed to sign. A few weeks later, a different
experimenter went to each resident with the ugly "Drive Carefully" sign.
More than 55% of these residents allowed the sign to be put up on their property.

Thus, when individuals commit themselves in a small way, the likelihood they
will commit themselves further in that direction is increased.
This process of using small favors to encourage people to accede to larger
requests had been dubbed the foot-in-the-door technique (a technique opposite in
form to the door-in-the-face tactic described in Chapter 27). It is effective
because having done the smaller favor creates pressure to agree to do the larger
favor; in effect, we comply with the large request to be consistent with our
earlier commitment.
Similar results using this technique have been found in studies of charitable
donations and voting. For example, people induced to wear a lapel pin
publicizing an American Cancer Society fund-raising drive were approximately
twice as likely to give a donation the next day as were those who were simply
approached for a contribution.2 Other investigators have found that the chances
of getting people to vote on election day could be increased just by asking them
if they planned to go to the polls.3 In this study, the researchers contacted
potential voters and asked them to predict whether they would vote in an
election to be held on the upcoming Tuesday. All of those contacted, perhaps out
of a desire to appear civic-minded, said "yes," they would be voting. The
respondents then acted on this commitment, with 86.7% of them voting in the
election compared to 61.5% of those not asked to make self-predictions.
Car dealers also know how to use commitment to sell automobiles. Indeed, when
social psychologist Robert Cialdini temporarily joined the sales force of an
automobile dealer, he discovered a common and successful ploy called
lowballing or throwing the customer a lowball.4
The technique works this way. Suppose you enter an automobile showroom
intent on buying a new car. You've already priced the car you want at several
dealers—you know you can purchase it for about $11,300.
Lo and behold, the salesman tells you he can sell you one for $10,542. Excited
by the bargain, you agree to the deal and write out a check for the downpayment.
While the salesman takes your check to the sales manager to consummate the
deal, you rub your hands in glee as you imagine yourself driving home in your
shiny new car. But alas, ten minutes later, the salesman returns with a forlorn
look on his face—it seems he made a calculation error and the sales manager
caught it. The price of the car is actually $11,684. You can get it cheaper
elsewhere; moreover the decision to buy is not irrevocable

elsewhere; moreover, the decision to buy is not irrevocable.
And yet, far more people in this situation will go ahead with the deal than if the
original asking price had been $11,684—even though the reason for purchasing
the car from this dealer (the bargain price) no longer exists.
What is going on in this situation? There are at least three important things to
notice. First, while the customer's decision to buy is certainly reversible, a
commitment was emphasized by the act of signing a check for the downpayment
and handing it over to the salesman. Second, this commitment triggered the
anticipation of a pleasant or interesting experience: driving out with a new car.
To have the anticipated event thwarted (by not going ahead with the deal) would
produce disappointment. Third, although the final price is substantially higher
than the customer thought it would be, it is only slightly higher than the price
somewhere else. Under these circumstances, the customer in effect says, "Oh,
what the hell.
I'm already here, I've already filled out the forms—why wait?
Commitment can be self-perpetuating, resulting in an escalating commitment to
an often failing course of action. Once a small commitment is made, it sets the
stage for ever increasing commitments. The original behavior needs to be
justified, so attitudes are changed; this change in attitudes influences future
decisions and behavior. The result is a seemingly irrational commitment to a
poor business plan, a purchase that makes no sense, a war that has no realistic
objectives, or an arms race gone out of control.
The process of escalating commitment appears to have played an important role
in the deepening U.S. involvement in the war in Vietnam. As Robert McNamara,
secretary of defense under presidents Kennedy and Johnson and a major
protagonist in the buildup of America's forces in Vietnam, put it in his recent
book: "The beginnings of all things are small, and the story of my involvement
in Vietnam is no different."5 According to McNamara, America's involvement
began innocently enough with the sending of 16,000
military advisors in 1961 to help the Vietnamese defend themselves against
communism. In 1963, South Vietnam's leader, Ngo Dinh Diem, was assassinated
(due in part to a confusing directive issued by the Kennedy administration),
resulting in political chaos in the country.
T b
ti
f
i
th U it d St t
i 1964 b
ll
t

To buy time for a new regime, the United States in 1964 began a small covert
action program consisting of propaganda distribution, intelligence gathering, and
general sabotage against North Vietnam.
When this didn't work, the United States developed plans for bombing the Ho
Chi Minh Trail and then more plans for an "integrated political-military attack."
In response to a covert action, North Vietnam attacked the U.S. destroyer
Maddox. The United States retaliated in August 1964 with sixty-four sorties
against patrol boats and an oil complex.
The war was now on. The administration privately made the commitment to take
additional military action by January 1, 1965, although there was no agreement
on what this action would be. On January 28, 1965, President Johnson initiated
the bombing of North Vietnam. With the air strikes came a request for troops to
protect the bases. As McNamara put it:
Once you put the first soldier ashore, you never know how many others are
going to follow him. But the need appeared pressing and the commitment
small, and besides, how could the president decline a commander's petition
for ground troops to protect the lives of airmen?6
The number of troops increased from 23,000 to 175,000 in 1965, with an
additional 100,000 more in 1966. And when the bombing failed to repel the Viet
Cong, more ground troops were sent to Vietnam. And then even more were sent
as the Viet Cong retaliated. By the war's end, 543,400
U.S. troops had been sent to Vietnam. More bombs were dropped on North
Vietnam in three years than in all of Europe in World War II.
In all, 58,191 U.S. citizens were killed in action.
With each commitment and then failure, U.S. objectives would change and grow
increasingly ill defined and vague as those involved in the escalation decision
sought to rationalize and justify their previous actions. At first, the U.S. purpose
was to train the Vietnamese to defend themselves. When it became obvious that
there was little hope of accomplishing this objective, the goal became to retaliate
against attacks from North Vietnam. As the commitment grew, the goal changed
first to crushing North Vietnam's will to fight, and then to just bolstering the
morale of our South Vietnamese allies, and then finally to a vague wish to "win
at any cost."

As a 1971 analysis by the newsmagazine Time stated:
Yet the bureaucracy, the Pentagon Papers indicate, always demanded new
options; each option was to apply more force. Each tightening of the screw
created a position that must be defended; once committed, the military
pressure must be maintained.7
In a thought-provoking analysis, Ralph White suggested that previous
commitments blinded our leaders to information incompatible with the decisions
they had already made.8 As White put it, "There was a tendency, when actions
were out of line with ideas, for decision-makers to align their ideas with their
actions." To take just one of many examples, the decision by the Joint Chiefs of
Staff to continue to escalate the bombing of North Vietnam was made at the
price of ignoring crucial evidence from the CIA and other sources which made it
clear that bombing would not break the will of the North Vietnamese people but,
quite the contrary, would only strengthen their resolve. White surmises the
reason the Joint Chiefs prevailed in their efforts to escalate the bombing was that
their advice was consonant with decisions already made and with certain key
assumptions that later proved to be erroneous. In other words, the Joint Chiefs'
escalation of the war was in part an attempt to reduce their own dissonance about
their previous war efforts, a process reminiscent of what happened after Mrs.
Keech's end-of-the world prophecy failed and after the city of Santa Cruz was
informed about an impending destructive earthquake (see Chapter 4).
As with other self-motives and emotions, commitment and consistency can have
their purpose and value. No one wants to live in a society of inconsistent, two-
faced liars! However, commitments can form a propaganda trap)—we commit
ourselves, sometimes inadvertently, sometimes inappropriately, and then live out
our commitments in all honesty.9 The clever propagandist will know how to
secure our commitment and set a rationalization trap.
In such cases, it may be useful to ask, "How did I get myself into this situation?"
Fortunately, when we are dealing with major purchases many states require that
consumers be given a period of time to "change their minds" about that purchase
—a time to rethink mistaken commitments. Unfortunately, when it comes to acts
of war and international policy such decisions may be irrevocable. In the
Vietnam war, we finally closed it down and got out. Sadly, this was several
years (and thousands of casualties) after Robert McNamara, by bis own
admission, realized that the war was unwinnable. In such cases, it may also help

us if we remember that the most honorable action is always that of ceasing to
honor dishonorable commitments.
 

29
To Practice What You Preach
Occasionally, we humans do things that bring us immediate pleasure but put us
in grave danger as well. To take a poignant example, let's look at the spread of
AIDS. During the past two decades, AIDS has become an epidemic of
monumental proportions. At the start of the new millennium, more than 16
million persons worldwide had died from AIDS; currently more than 35 million
persons are living with AIDS, with millions more infected but not currently
showing symptoms. A particularly vulnerable group is sexually active young
adults; in recent years, AIDS has become the leading cause of death among
individuals between the ages of eighteen and thirty in the United States.
Although medical researchers have made some progress in slowing down the
ravages of the disease, neither a cure nor a vaccine currently exists. Accordingly,
the major weapon we have for reducing the spread of AIDS is persuasion—to
find an effective way of convincing people to change their risky behavior.
Toward this end, the U.S.
government has spent hundreds of millions of dollars on AIDS
information and prevention campaigns in the mass media. Although these
campaigns have been reasonably effective at conveying information about how
AIDS is spread (for example, by having sex with a partner who carries the AIDS
virus), by and large they have failed to prevent young people from engaging in
risky sexual behavior. For example, interviews with sexually active college
students show that, although they are aware of AIDS as a serious problem, most
are reluctant to stop having casual sexual intercourse and only a surprisingly
small percentage seem willing to use condoms regularly.
The reason? They consider condoms to be inconvenient, unromantic, and
reminiscent of death and disease—and they do not want to be thinking about
dying of a horrible disease while getting ready to make love.
Needless to say, this is a serious problem. If attempts to change behavior by
rational arguments have been ineffective, is there anything that can be done to
safeguard sexually active teenagers and young adults against the ravages of

AIDS? A few years ago, at a congressional hearing on AIDS, the dominant
conclusion among public health officials was: Since teenagers and young adults
do not seem to be taking AIDS seriously enough, educators need to get their
attention by devising communications that would (to quote one witness) "scare
the hell out of them."
Unfortunately, the solution is not that simple. As we saw in Chapter 24, the
problem with fear appeals is that, while fear laden messages can be effective
under some circumstances, they do not always trigger reasonable problem-
solving behavior. Indeed, when we are trying to solve a thorny problem like
getting young, sexually active people to change their sexual behavior, we may be
dealing with precisely the kind of situation in which inducing a high degree of
fear is likely to have the opposite effect. That is, when something pleasurable
like sex is involved, if you try to frighten people into doing something they don't
want to do or perceive to be difficult or annoying to do (like using condoms),
they tend to deny it and to convince themselves that such a frightening thing as
AIDS is extremely unlikely to happen to them.
And this seems to be what has been happening. Interviews with sexually active
college students have demonstrated that they will go through all kinds of
mindless denials, extremely convoluted justifications, and other cognitive
gymnastics in order to continue to have unprotected sex without thinking about
the possible negative consequences. For example, some have succeeded in
convincing themselves (erroneously) that they are able to spot someone with
AIDS
just by looking at them or that, "Surely none of my friends could possibly have
AIDS." In short, these young people seem to be saying, "AIDS is a serious and
deadly problem, all right, but not for me!"
The tendency for young people to engage in denial is by no means a recent
phenomenon. Indeed, this strategy was documented by Thucydides some 2,500
years ago when he wrote with obvious chagrin about the fact that young
Athenian soldiers, on preparing to depart for a dangerous war in Sicily, simply
refused to believe there was any possibility of dying; instead of getting their
minds in order and preparing themselves for the strong possibility of death, these
young men occupied themselves with talk of their excitement about seeing
faraway places. Denial is a powerful mechanism—and it can be self-destructive
because it allows people to block out or distort rational argument and thus keep

them from taking useful preventive action.
Given this state of affairs, how might one induce sexually active young adults to
make a more realistic assessment of their vulnerability to AIDS and, therefore,
resolve to use condoms during sexual encounters?
One promising strategy is to find a way to obviate denial. Instead of trying to sell
people on the virtues of safe sex through direct rational argument, we might try
to make an end run around the denial mechanism by appealing to our human
need to consider ourselves to be people of high integrity.
Here's how it works. Suppose Dave is a sexually active college student and, like
most students, (1) does not use condoms regularly, (2) has managed to blind
himself to the personal dangers inherent in having unprotected sex, but yet (3)
realizes the dangers of unprotected sex and the transmission of AIDS. Suppose,
on going home for the holidays, Dave finds that Charley, his sixteen-year-old kid
brother, has just discovered sex and is in the process of boasting about his many
and varied sexual encounters. What might Dave say to him?
Chances are, as a caring, responsible older sibling, Dave will dampen his
younger brother's enthusiasm a bit by warning him about the dangers of AIDS
and other sexually transmitted diseases—and urge him to, at least, take proper
precautions.
Suppose that we are friends of the family who were invited to dinner and who
happen to overhear this exchange between Dave and Charley. What if we were
to pull Dave aside and say something like this: "That was very good advice you
gave Charley—we are very proud of you for being so responsible; by the way,
how frequently do you use condoms?"
Psychologically, we are setting up a situation in which an individual is being
forced to confront his own hypocrisy; that is, we are making Dave mindful of the
fact that he is not practicing what he just got through preaching. The astute
reader will see this situation as the beginning of a rationalization trap. We human
beings want to see ourselves as people of integrity. People of integrity practice
what they preach.
In the hypothetical situation, Dave's self-concept as a person of integrity is
threatened by his own behavior—behavior that suggests he might lack integrity
and that he might be behaving hypocritically. How might Dave rationalize his

behavior and reestablish his self-concept as a person of high integrity? There is
only one sure-fire way: by beginning, forthwith, to put into practice what he has
just finished preaching to his brother Charley. In short, to start using condoms
immediately.
In a series of experiments, we, along with Jeff Stone, Carrie Fried, and other
former students of ours, constructed a procedure very much like the example
mentioned above.1 Specifically, we induced college students to deliver a
convincing speech, talking about the dangers of AIDS and urging the audience
to use condoms every time they had sex. We videotaped the speech after
informing the speakers that we would be showing the tape to high school
students as part of a sex-education class. Next, we asked the speakers to dredge
up and tell us about all the situations in their day-to-day lives when they found it
difficult or impossible to use condoms themselves—thus making them mindful
of the fact that they were preaching one thing but doing something quite
different.
Nobody wants to be a hypocrite. When confronted with their own hypocrisy,
how might college students reestablish their belief in their own integrity?
Exactly like Dave did in the hypothetical example: by resolving to change their
behavior to bring it into line with their own preaching. In our experiments, we
compared the behavior of these college students with a similar group who simply
composed and videotaped their arguments in favor of condom use—but were not
made mindful of their own hypocrisy. The results of these experiments are clear
and powerful. College students who were made to feel like hypocrites purchased
far more condoms after leaving the experiment; even more impressive is the fact
that, some three months later, when interviewed on the telephone about their
sexual behavior, 92%
reported that they were now using condoms regularly. This percentage is almost
twice as high as that of the students whom we did not confront with their own
hypocrisy.
The implications of this experiment are striking. For the past two decades, we
have been begging, cajoling, scaring, and imploring our loved ones to take steps
to avoid the AIDS virus by practicing safer sex. And all the while, the deadly
virus has continued to spread and we have watched, helplessly, as one friend
after another has succumbed to it. We now have one persuasive technique that
works: Simply get people to preach safer sex—and then remind them that they

themselves are not practicing what they are preaching.
Can we apply this strategy to other domains—to issues regarding which almost
all people agree that certain behaviors are important but simply do not engage in
those behaviors? Let's look at the issue of protecting the environment. In this
domain, many of us are potential hypocrites. That is, most Americans profess to
being environmentalists and are in favor of protecting our natural resources, such
as the air we breathe and the water we drink. But when it comes to actually
doing it—recycling, conserving water and energy, car pooling—most of us fall
far short of the behaviors we would endorse. U.S. citizens comprise 6% of the
world's population but consume about 33% of the world's resources. Many of us
seem to feel we are doing our share if we simply put a "Save the Whales"
bumper sticker on our car. How might we use the hypocrisy tactic to make
people more aware of the fact that they are not practicing the environmental
behavior that they are implicitly preaching?
We and our students set out to tackle this problem. In one study, we asked
people to make a speech urging others to recycle bottles, cans, and newspapers
—and then we asked them to think about some of the times that they themselves
had failed to recycle.2 Just as in the condom experiments, this made them
mindful of their own hypocrisy. Subsequently, when we asked them to volunteer
to help with recycling activities, these people were far more willing to help than
were people who made the speech but were not confronted with their own
hypocrisy. Again, when made to feel like a hypocrite, these people found the one
sure way to restore their feelings of integrity: to begin to practice what they were
preaching.
We also used the hypocrisy tactic to help ameliorate another pressing
environmental problem—the conservation of drinking water.3 A few years ago,
there was an acute water shortage in central California. The administration of
our university had been trying hard to use rational arguments to persuade
students to take shorter showers in order to conserve water. They posted signs in
the dormitories and in the locker room of the field house; they gave students pep
talks about how dangerous the water shortage was and what they could do to use
less water. It should be pointed out that, when it comes to matters of the
environment, the students at our university are an unusually conscious and
conscientious group. They care about saving the whales and preserving the
redwoods; they care about the habitat of the spotted owl; they are deeply
opposed to indiscriminate dumping of toxic waste material. But, alas, these

urgings had very little impact on the shower-taking behavior of most of our
undergraduates. Apparently, taking long, luxurious showers proved to be too
attractive an activity for the overwhelming majority of our students to give it up
easily. Our guess is that each probably felt that an occasional long shower "by
just me" would not hurt the conservation effort very much. But, of course, if
almost all the students felt and acted that way, it would indeed hurt a great deal.
Given the failure of direct communication to make a dent in the shower-taking
behavior of the students, we decided to attempt to make our students aware of
their hypocrisy as a way of getting them to take shorter showers. In our
experiment, a research assistant stationed herself in the women's locker room of
the university field house and intercepted, at random, several students who had
just finished working out and were on their way to take a shower. The research
assistant asked each student if she would be willing to sign (in big block letters)
a poster encouraging others to conserve water.
The poster read: "Conserve Water! Take shorter showers! If I can do it, so can
you!" Next, they were asked to respond to a "water-conservation survey"
consisting of items designed to make them mindful of the fact that their
showering behavior was often wasteful. In short, we made the students aware of
the fact that, when it comes to water conservation, they were not practicing what
they preached.
We then compared their shower-taking behavior with that of a group of students
who merely signed the poster but who were not made mindful of their hypocrisy
by taking the water-conservation survey. We were able to measure the length of
their showers directly: A second research assistant was unobtrusively waiting
(with hidden waterproof stopwatch) to time their showers. Our intervention was
phenomenally successful. As in the condom experiments, hypocrisy had a major
impact on the students' behavior. That is, those students who were induced to
advocate short showers and also were made mindful of their own past behavior
took very short showers, lasting just a bit over three and a half minutes—a
fraction of the time of a typical student shower.
What is going on in these experiments? We should note that the results are not
due simply to hypocrisy; that is, it is not simply people's hypocrisy that induces
them to use condoms or to take shorter showers. Hypocrisy is all over the place
and does not usually result in major changes in behavior. To illustrate, the
political comedian Al Franken recently told what has become an old, out-of-date

joke: "Quick; what do Newt Gingrich, Bob Dole, Phil Gramm, and George Will
have in common? They've all been married one less time than Rush Limbaugh."4
(Limbaugh has been married three times.) It's an old joke because, as Franken
was telling it, Newt Gingrich was cheating on his second wife, whom he then
divorced in order to marry his third wife. What gives the joke its bite is the fact
that these pundits and political leaders have been making speeches and writing
columns extolling the value of strong families for a very long time. If one
considers that making a marriage work is part of family values, their behavior
might be considered hypocritical. Will this hypocrisy, in and of itself, affect their
behavior? Probably not. Regardless of political stripe, politicians and ordinary
people like you and us engage in hypocritical activities from time to time, with
little impact on our overall behavior.
This tendency for us humans to engage in all sorts of mental contortions to deny
our hypocrisy can be seen in some recent research conducted by Daniel Batson
and his colleagues.5 In this series of experiments, college students were
confronted with a moral dilemma.
They were required to assign themselves and another person to one of two
treatments in an experiment: a positive condition where the student could win
prizes or a dull and boring condition with no prizes. Fairness requires that each
person (the student and the other person) have an equal chance of getting into the
positive condition.
However, who wants to sit around in a dingy old lab for an hour working on a
boring assignment, especially when you can be having fun winning prizes? What
would you do in such a situation—play fair or take the good time for yourself?
Batson and his colleagues found that the students attempted to do both! First,
most of the students assigned the other person to the boring task; in a typical
study, only 15% took the boring task for themselves—far below the expected
50% if the fairness norm had been used. However, the vast majority of those
who took the fun task sought to appear moral and fair by doing such things as
flipping a coin to determine the assignment (but rigging the outcome) or
pretending that they were merely accepting someone else's unfair decision as
fair. In other words, they engaged in moral hypocrisy: pretending to be fair when
in fact they were not. Batson and his colleagues did find one way of preventing
moral hypocrisy. The students were most likely to play fair when they were (1)
reminded of the moral standard to be fair and (2) made self-aware of their own
moral standards.

And that's our point: In our experiments, what makes the hypocrisy phenomenon
work—what makes it lead to a powerful change in ingrained behavior—is that
the people are made fully aware of their hypocrisy and are handed a perfectly
sensible way to allow them to polish their tarnished integrity (such as using
condoms or taking shorter showers). If we are not made starkly aware of our
hypocrisy, we all share a tendency to push the hypocritical behavior out of sight
and do nothing about it. Without an obvious, available, pro-social pathway
toward restoring our integrity, we might settle for symbolic action such as
wearing a politically correct T-shirt or placing a high-minded bumper sticker on
our car.
Thus far, we have been talking about using hypocrisy to promote goals and
behavior that most people would consider worthwhile or even noble.
That is, most of us would probably agree that it is a good idea to invoke a
powerful mechanism such as hypocrisy if the goal is to induce people to behave
in a responsible manner toward their environment—and especially if the goal is
to save their own lives and the lives of their sexual partners. But there is a darker
side to hypocrisy-induction. Like most of the persuasion strategies discussed in
this book, hypocrisy-induction is a double-edged sword.
What if the goal of invoking hypocrisy were simply to gain a financial profit?
Here is a case in point. A short time ago, some of our students reported to us that
they were thinking of joining a commercial health spa.
When they went in for the orientation, they were asked to fill out a "lifestyle"
questionnaire that included questions such as these: Do you think your health is
important? Do you think it is important to exercise regularly? How much
exercise do you get now?
Would you like to get more?
Naturally, they answered "yes" to all of the "yes/no"
questions. After all, they were thinking of joining a health spa—it would be
ludicrous to say that they didn't think their health was important! Later their
answers were used to make them look like hypocrites if they balked at the hard-
sell sales pitch or showed any hesitation at paying the rather large monthly fee.
"What do you mean that sounds like a lot of money? It is your health that is at

stake. You still consider your health important, don't you?"
One might argue that the goal (physical fitness) is good for the person and
therefore the use of this strategy by the proprietors of the health spa is just as
important as is water conservation, recycling, or AIDS prevention. We might
find that argument more convincing if the proprietors were not turning a
handsome profit. We hasten to add that it appears that the proprietors of the
health spa had been using this technique for several years; they initiated it before
the scientific experiments on hypocrisy were conducted. People who are out to
make a buck often stumble on diabolical ways of doing it, without the aid of
social psychologists.
However, when it comes to hypocrisy and persuasion, there is a silver lining to
this particular cloud. The students who visited the health spa spotted the
hypocrisy-induction tactic and were able to debunk it for what it was—an
attempt to play on their emotions, make them feel hypocritical, and part them
from their money. The reason? They had recently heard a lecture on the
hypocrisy-induction strategy and were delighted at their newfound ability to
identify and resist propaganda. And that is the way it often is with knowledge of
persuasion.
 

30
The Psychology of Scarcity and the Mystique of Phantoms
Potatoes have not always enjoyed the popularity that they do today. In the late
eighteenth century, the French believed that potatoes caused leprosy; the
Germans grew spuds only for cattle and for prisoners; the Russian peasant
considered them to be poisonous. All that changed when Catherine the Great,
ruler of Russia, cleverly ordered fences built around potato fields. Large notices
were posted warning the populace not to steal potatoes.1 The potato became a
staple of the Russian diet, and the rest is potato history.
Catherine the Greats campaign to introduce the potato into the Russian diet made
use of a common, but nonetheless effective, principle of persuasion—scarcity
sells. The attractiveness of an object can be increased by making it appear scarce
and unavailable, by erecting barriers that make the object difficult to obtain. To
paraphrase an old saw, "Scarcity makes the heart grow fonder."
Advertisers and sales agents are well aware that scarcity sells. Their ads
announce: "not available in any store," "get 'em while supplies last," "limited
edition," "available for
a limited time only." Sometimes they deliberately limit supplies. For example,
the Franklin Mint, a direct marketer of such "collector items" as commemorative
dinner plates, keepsake figurines, and souvenir coins, regularly claims: "Only a
limited number of items were produced. NO more will be made. The molds will
be destroyed." Another gold coin merchant restricts sales to "only five coins per
order." Car dealers often make such remarks as, "We only received two models
like this one, and we sold the other one yesterday." The local salesclerk will
gladly tell you, "That's all we have in stock; we can't keep 'em on the shelf—
sorry."
Beginning with the Barbie doll in 1959, almost every year there has been a toy
(or two) that becomes the hot, scarce item— one year, Cabbage Patch dolls; the
next, Ninja Turtles; then Power Rangers, Furby babies, and the Tickle Me Elmo
doll. What will it be next year? The story of the Elmo doll is instructive. The doll
had features that many found appealing—it giggled and vibrated when stroked.

However, the Tickle Me Elmo dolls had one feature that especially made the
cash registers ring— they were frequently
out-of-stock. Parents would line up for hours in the hope of getting dolls for their
children. Battles would break out in toy departments over who would get that
last doll. Stores would conduct lotteries to see who would win an opportunity to
buy a doll. Some owners auctioned off their dolls at upwards of $500. Sales for
the dolls skyrocketed.
What is the lure of scarcity? What happens when an object is made unavailable
and thus becomes a phantom choice? Consider what the typical Russian peasant
must have thought and felt upon seeing a newly restricted potato field: "Hey,
why are they roping off these potatoes? They must be valuable. I wonder if they
will post a guard? Sure they will; they'll see to it that only the rich get to eat
potatoes. Not if I can help it. I'm sick of beet soup day in and day out. I want
potatoes."
As
indicated by our hypothetical peasant, phantoms can capture the imagination.
The unavailable becomes exotic. When we discover that a commodity is scarce
or may be unavailable, one of our first inferences is that it must also be
desirable. Why else would it be so rare? We tend to use a simple rule, or
heuristic: If it is rare, if it is unavailable, then it must be valuable. This is what
lies behind research findings showing that female college students believed that
a scarce pair of nylon hosiery should cost more than a readily available pair, that
children rated cookies in scarce supply as more desirable than similar cookies in
abundant supply, and that, in response to news of an upcoming shortage of
imported beef, orders by supermarkets and other food stores increased to
between two and six times the normally ordered quantities.2 Given the ease with
which information about scarcity and availability can be manipulated, the
propaganda potential of this technique is nearly unlimited and is available to all.
Scarcity and unavailabihty can do more than just make an object appear more
desirable. When a phantom alternative is present, it can also result in a change in
the perception, evaluation, and ultimate choice of the available options. We,
along with Peter Farquhar and Doug Calvin, have conducted a series of
experiments in which college students were asked to choose among brands of
products.3 In some sets of the choices, a very attractive alternative was included,

but the students were told that die item was unavailable and that they could not
select it. In other words, a phantom alternative was presented.
What do the results show? First, the presence of an attractive phantom made the
other brands look less attractive—a contrast effect similar in nature to, but
opposite in direction from, that found with decoys (see Chapter 10). Second, the
phantom changed the relative importance given to the criteria for making a
decision. Specifically, the attribute on which the phantom was superior was rated
as most important for making the decision. For example, if the phantom was a
new computer with lots of memory or a new car that gets great gas mileage, then
the attributes of computer memory and gas mileage became the focus of decision
making. This change in decision criteria also resulted in a change in choice; the
students were much more likely to indicate that they would purchase an
available brand that rated high on the attribute on which the phantom was best.
Thus the presence of a phantom may subtly affect our perceptions. For example,
hearing about the possibilities of a defense shield in the sky, commonly referred
to as the Strategic Defense Initiative, or Star Wars, may cause us to view our
present defense capabilities as inadequate. It can also cause us to shift the focus
of our attention toward strategic high-tech weapons systems and away from
conventional military hardware, even though conventional hardware has been
proven to be more useful in fighting a limited war in places such as the Balkans
or the Middle East.
Phantoms, like scarce but available alternatives, can also arouse our emotions—
emotions that can be played upon by the skilled propagandist.4 As with most
consumer goods, owning an object that is scarce for or unavailable to everyone
else is a means of defining one's self: "I am unique and special because I own
something that no one else (or at least not many) has been able to obtain." Just
hearing about a phantom may induce worry and concern: "If they bring out a
better product, I'll be stuck with this thing. Maybe I should wait." This
experience is so common in the computer industry that computer experts have a
special term for preannounced but unavailable products—vaporware. Not
obtaining a hoped-for phantom can be a frustrating experience leading to
aggression (one explanation for why riots and revolutions occur) or sour grapes
(devaluing the once hoped-for phantom as a way to reconcile oneself with not
getting it). Being the only child on the block without that new toy can often
arouse feelings of inadequacy and incompetence. Finally, taking away an object
or choice can result in what has been termed psychological reactance—the

individual, upset at having his or her freedom denied, attempts at all costs to
restore a sense of autonomy and control.
Given the power of scarce and unavailable items to alter our perceptions and to
arouse our emotions, it is not surprising that propagandists often use a phantom
as a persuasion device. We call this the phantom trap—marshaling most, if not
all, of one's resources in an attempt to obtain that which cannot be reached.
One important aspect of the phantom trap is phantom fixation: a tendency to
focus attention on the scarce or unavailable item. By concentrating on the scarce
or unavailable, we may forget and overlook the possible. A program of research
by Walter Mischel illustrates the point.5 Mischel was investigating the ability of
children to delay gratification. In his studies, children were given a choice: They
could get a small candy bar right away or they could wait and receive a much
more attractive prize later (a big candy bar). Which children were most likely to
wait for the currently unavailable prize? Mischel found that children who could
distract themselves from focusing their attention on either prize—for example,
by thinking of other things—would wait the longest and therefore fared better.
Children who became fixated on receiving the prizes experienced considerable
conflict that was hard to resist and thus were more likely to take the immediate
but lesser prize.
The Mischel experiments demonstrate how phantoms can direct thought. The
presence of an attractive but currently unavailable object can focus our attention
and resources on obtaining the desired prize. Settling for less than the phantom
becomes a conflict that can only be resolved by "strength of willpower," a test
that many of us often fail.
Such a fixation can have positive consequences; it may be helpful in mobilizing
energies to obtain an elusive goal of perhaps great personal or societal benefit. It
can also be exploited for propaganda purposes. For example, early promoters of
the New World such as Ralph Hamor recruited settlers with promises of
fountains of youth, gold, riches beyond belief, and (as one pamphlet put it)
"lands so marvelous as to seem incredible."6 Many signed on, having become
increasingly dissatisfied with their own lives as a result of the propaganda, and
went in search of the phantom, El Dorado. Today, the promoters of Poke-mon
make use of phantom fixation—"I just can't get some of those trading cards"—to
literally make a few billion dollars. In many cases, phantom fixation can be a
waste of time and energy, especially when the phantom is really a "red herring"

of sorts—a truly unavailable option. In such cases, an individual or organization
may expend great amounts of resources to obtain a desired new employee or
access to new markets, only to find that the effort was wasted and the phantom
never existed.
An
experiment we conducted with Ken Freeman and Peter Farquhar demonstrates
another side of the phantom trap—how emotions aroused by a phantom can
serve to persuade.7 In our study, students first earned money by completing a
manual-labor task of turning screws and refilling a box of spools. The money
was used to purchase common office supplies such as erasers and paper clips.
However, when some of the students went to purchase the paper clips, they
encountered a surprise phantom— after selecting the most attractive option, they
were told that they had not earned enough money to purchase it. Although the
students probably didn't care much about the paper clips, the news that they
couldn't get what they wanted (even something as trivial as a paper clip) was in
many ways personally threatening—just as many people feel threatened when
told that they are too late for a sale or that they don't qualify for financing of that
new car.
Because the students felt vulnerable, their emotions could be easily aroused and
their choices were susceptible to manipulation. For example, half of the subjects
encountering the surprise phantom were told, "Given that you are short of money
for the paper clips you want, I'll give you the next most similar clip. It's your
only choice." Such a communication was designed to arouse reactance (a desire
to restore lost freedom), and it did: All but a few subjects pointedly refused to
select the brand the experimenter recommended, instead opting for another, quite
different alternative. In a different condition, subjects, after finding out that they
could not have their first choice, were manipulated much more subtly; they were
told, "You might want to consider the next most similar clip." This
communication was designed so as not to arouse reactance but to inform subjects
how to be consistent with their original choice.
Consequently, almost all subjects chose the paper clips subtly recommended by
the experimenter. The astute reader will recognize this subtle strategy as being
almost identical to the "lowballing"

tactic (commit the customer, then switch 'em) used by many unscrupulous sales
agents and described in Chapter 28.
What is particularly interesting in both conditions is that, whether subjects
resisted direct pressure or succumbed, to subtle pressure, their decisions were
based not on the merits of the products but on the emotions aroused by a
phantom.
Another version of the phantom trap has been termed the "consumer Catch-22
carousel" by C. R. Snyder.8As we mentioned earlier, obtaining a scarce and rare
product adds to one's self-image as a unique and special person. Manufacturers
know this and design and market their products accordingly. If the marketer does
a good job of creating a perception of the product as unique, then you desire and
acquire it. But the catch is, so does everyone else; suddenly you are no longer an
original. Instead of acquiring a product that makes you unique, you have
obtained one that makes you just like everyone else. This further heightens the
need for uniqueness, and off we go in an endless pursuit of the next faddish
phantom. As Erich Fromm points out, once we begin using material goods to
define ourselves, we are doomed to be on an endless treadmill of
dissatisfaction.9
The phantom trap also points up some of the possible pitfalls in using censorship
to regulate human behavior. Attempts to make something "unavailable" through
censorship may increase the perceived value of the forbidden item. For example,
The Satanic Verses was an interesting novel by Salman Rushdie, but it certainly
was not blockbuster material. Its sales might have been limited to several
thousand copies except for one thing: The Ayatollah Khomeini declared it was
sacrilegious and urged Muslims to assassinate the author. The book immediately
rocketed to the top of the best-seller list. A similar event took place recently in
China: Zhou Weihui wrote a sexy but typical romance novel entitled Shanghai
Baby. The Chinese Communist party banned the novel—not for its contents, but
because Weihui apparently showed "too much skin" at a book signing. However,
unlike previous attempts at censorship by the Chinese leadership, this time the
ban was made public. Demand for Shanghai Baby soared. Pirated copies are sold
everywhere.
Weihui sold the rights to her book to publishers in South Korea, Taiwan, Italy,
and Japan (where a guidebook to the bars and dives of Shanghai Baby is
available for the tourist); and, of course, a film version is being discussed.

Further, by limiting commodities such as X-rated movies and "nudie"
magazines to adults only, we provide children a ready-made method of proving
their adulthood and defining themselves as "grown-up"—in a sense, we
unwittingly encourage them to go out and get the fruit forbidden to all but adults.
The point is nicely illustrated in an experiment conducted by David Zellinger
and his colleagues.10 In this study, college students received a description of a
book much like the descriptions that appear on dust jackets. Half of the students
were told that the book had a "21-year-old age restriction." When such a
message was given, the book was rated as more desirable—the students
indicated they would like to read it to a far greater extent than did the students in
the control condition.
How can the phantom trap be avoided? We have three suggestions.11 First,
consider that phantoms may exist where you might not expect them—either
through devious design or simply through unintentional unavailability. In such
cases, it is wise to develop contingency plans in advance. For example, if the car
you want proves to be unavailable, you could walk off the car lot rather than
sliding to the "most similar" alternative. Second, when dealing with phantoms it
may be a good idea to imagine other scenarios—for example, attempting to
obtain other phantoms or accepting a readily available option. This will lessen
the likelihood that you will become fixated on the unavailable. It can also make
clear the relative costs and benefits of pursuing a phantom or perhaps suggest
new, viable alternatives. Finally, use the emotions that often accompany
phantoms as a cue that something is awry. Try to react not to the emotions but to
the circumstances of the situation. Again, this may mean that the best strategy is
simply to walk away and gain the time and composure needed to look more
carefully before you leap.
Whether one is talking about a defense system costing billions, a multimillion-
dollar introduction of a new computer product, or merely a few hundred extra
dollars for the family car, avoiding the potential pitfalls of phantom traps may be
no small potatoes.

 

When Information Fails: The Challenge of
Propaganda to Society

31
Education or Propaganda?
Legend has it that the Greek philosopher Protagoras was the first person in
history to have his books burned in public. Protagoras, who lived in the fifth
century b.c., was a Sophist—an individual who made his livelihood by teaching
others the ways of persuasion. His incinerated volume, lost now to antiquity,
was similar in many respects to the one you are currently reading; it, too,
described various persuasion devices that could be used on any occasion. It
appears that, almost from the beginnings of Western civilization, people have
found the idea that one individual can influence another, using persuasion, to be
distasteful if not downright despicable. Propaganda is often viewed as the work
of an evil manipulator.
On the other hand, Protagoras' other profession, that of educator, is sometimes
held in high esteem. We eagerly send our children to schools and universities
hoping that they will learn a useful trade, develop an appreciation for the finer
things of life, become productive citizens. But what really is the difference
between propaganda and education?
Some would argue that breakfast cereal and aspirin commercials are obvious
attempts to sell something at a high price by intentionally misleading the
audience. They can be considered propaganda. "Selling"
a presidential candidate, however, is more complicated. The devices used by
political pundits and campaign staff to display a candidate in a favorable manner
could conceivably be considered education—an attempt to educate the public on
the policies and virtues of the candidate by presenting those views as clearly,
efficiently, and articulately as possible.
The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language defines propaganda
as "the systematic propagation of a given doctrine" and education as "the act of
imparting knowledge or skill." Again, we could all agree that breakfast cereal
and aspirin ads are propaganda designed to promote the sale of certain brands.
But what about American television programs, which still tend to depict women
and minorities in stereotyped roles? Or, more subtly, what about the vast

majority of school textbooks?
American history textbooks typically distort the past by ignoring or downplaying
less than meritorious events in U.S. history, portraying leaders as bigger than life
and almost superhuman, and making it appear that the theory of American
government is the way it is actually practiced. Until recently, the contributions of
African-Americans and other minorities have been virtually ignored.1 Is this
merely imparting knowledge?
The problem of distinguishing between education and propaganda can be subtler
still. Let us look at arithmetic as taught in the public schools. What could be
more educational? By that we mean, what could be more pure, objective, factual,
untainted by doctrine? The issue, though, isn't as clear-cut as it may appear.
Remember the examples used in your elementary school arithmetic text? Most
of the examples dealt with buying, selling, renting, working for wages, and
computing interest. These examples do more than simply reflect the capitalistic
system in which the education is occurring: They systematically endorse the
system, legitimize it, and, by implication, suggest that it is natural and normal.2
As a way of illustrating multiplication and percentages, the textbook might have
Mr. Jones borrowing $20,000 at 14% interest from a bank in order to purchase a
new car. Would this example be used in a society that felt it was sinful to charge
interest, as early Christian societies believed? Would this example be used in a
society that believed people shouldn't seek possessions they can't afford? What
would be the reaction to a textbook that replaced those problems with ones of
this nature: (1) A family of four needs $100 per week for food, but after paying
the rent has only $25 left for food. Assuming $100 worth of food represents full
nourishment, what is the percentage of undernourishment for this family? (2)
The U.S.
government spends $1.5 trillion annually, with $510 billion spent on the elderly
(Medicaid and Social Security), $328 billion on defense, and $22 billion on
education. How much money would need to be spent on education to bring it to
the same funding level as defense? To the same funding level as the elderly?3
We are not suggesting that it is wrong or evil to use these kinds of illustrations in
arithmetic books, nor do we seek to declare a winner in this political struggle;
we are merely pointing out that something as innocuous as an arithmetic
textbook can serve as a tool for propaganda. If so, it might be useful to recognize
it as such.

The debate over what is education and what is propaganda was brought to the
fore once again with the advent of Channel One. In the early 1990s, Whittle
Communications began Channel One as a "news service" for American
schools.* Schools were offered this deal: Each class that adopted Channel One
would receive a television set, a VCR, and twelve minutes per day of Channel
One programming consisting of news snippets (short news stories of 50 to 175
words on topics such as the Queen of England visiting the United States, Winnie
Mandela being found guilty of kidnapping, and U.S. Marines offering relief to
cyclone victims in Bangladesh). In return, Channel One would show two
minutes of advertising (embedded in ten minutes of "news"), which was offered
to advertisers such as McDonalds, M&M/ Mars, and Pepsi at $200,000 per
thirty-second spot. Reebok, the makers of tennis shoes, sponsored one twelve-
minute segment on physical education. Strapped for cash, nearly 12,000
schools and their 8 million students adopted Channel One in order to obtain the
TV and VCR.
The decision was not without controversy. Advocates argued that today's
children are brought up on TV and that Channel One is thus an effective means
of awakening an interest in public affairs and training citizens. On the other
hand, critics noted that Channel One is blatant commercial propaganda foisted
upon a captive audience; some pointed out that American democracy probably
doesn't need more news snippets but could use more in-depth analysis of current
affairs of the type that occurs in an energized classroom discussion.
What has Channel One accomplished? The research to date supports the fears of
the critics. For example, in one study conducted by education researcher Nancy
Nelson Knupfer and high school principal Peter Hayes, students who watched
Channel One for a year showed no improvement in general knowledge of current
events (relative to those students who did not watch Channel One); in addition,
on quizzes given less than a day after watching the program, most students could
not explain what the stories were about or why the news item was important.
However, the students did demonstrate nearly perfect recall for the ads presented
on the show.4
In practice, whether a person regards a particular course of instruction as
educational or propagandistic depends, to a large extent, on his or her values.
Reflect, for a moment, on the typical film about drug abuse that children are
often required to watch in high school. Such films typically mention that many

hardcore narcotics addicts began by sampling marijuana. Most school officials
would probably regard the presentation of this piece of factual knowledge as a
case of "imparting knowledge," and most marijuana users would probably regard
it as "the systematic propagation of a given doctrine"—because it implies that
smoking marijuana leads to the use of hardcore addictive drugs without
mentioning that the vast majority of people who have sampled marijuana (such
as former president Bill Clinton) do not become hardcore drug users.
By the same token, consider the topic of sex education in the schools as viewed
by a member of the Christian Coalition on the one hand and by the editor of
Playboy magazine on the other hand. For one individual it is propaganda; for the
other, education. Similarly, advertisers are often known to argue that, far from
serving a propaganda purpose, their advertising seeks to inform the consumer
about brands of products and the benefits that may be obtained from them. In a
similar vein, consider the debate on the teaching of evolution and creationism in
biology class. Scientists see creationism as religion and therefore having no
place in a science class. Fundamentalists see evolutionary theory as a kind of
religious dogma and want to censor alternative religions or at least have equal
time.
This is not to say that all communications are drastically slanted and one-sided.
Rather, when we are dealing with an emotionally charged issue about which
people's opinions differ gready, it is probably impossible to construct a
communication that people on both sides of the issue would agree was fair and
impartial. Not surprisingly, researchers have found that pro-Israeli and pro-Arab
partisans rated identical samples of major network television coverage of the
Beirut massacre as being biased against their side.5 Your opinion about the
recount of votes in Florida in the 2000 U.S. presidential election most likely
depended on which candidate you supported. If you backed Al Gore, you
probably saw the recount as a great exercise in democracy in which all the votes
of all the people mattered and should be counted. There is no need to rush
democracy. In contrast, if you supported George W. Bush, then the recount of
votes in selected Florida counties using questionable counting techniques was
tantamount to stealing the election. Two recounts are enough for a democracy.
Research also shows that many Americans agree that the evening news is biased;
they disagree, however, as to the nature of this bias.6 Those who view the
evening news as biased are evenly split, claiming that it is too liberal or too
conservative, too Republican or too Democratic, too supportive of the status quo

or too change-oriented.
The point is that the bias of a communication is often in "the eye of the
beholder." (Opinion polls generally show that members of the elite national
media press tend to be more liberal on cultural issues and more conservative on
economic issues than the average American.7) What is labeled as propaganda
and what is labeled as education depend on one's own propaganda purposes.
Protagoras' book was considered heretical in his day. Today, a similar volume
might be called a "textbook." Undoubtedly some readers of this book may
choose to question our educational purpose, preferring instead to see this volume
as propaganda for the use of rational and fair persuasion strategies.
In many ways, it is dangerous to apply the labels "education"
and "propaganda" to a communication merely on the basis of whether it agrees
or disagrees with one's values. Consider the case of war propaganda, with its
goal of convincing a nation to commit acts of aggression against an evil enemy.
If the appeal is successful, the act of war becomes consistent with our values and
the most blatant propaganda is labeled "news" and "information needed to pull
the nation together." In such cases, we may let our guard down just at the
moment when we need it the most. Consider the opposite case, in which we
learn about a disagreeable fact—for example, that the policies of the president
we elected are in many ways responsible for increased racism and poverty. To
reduce our dissonance, we label the disconcerting information "propaganda"
and deny the validity of the claim. Thus discredited, the fact no longer needs to
be considered in our decision making. In such cases, we miss the opportunity to
educate ourselves about important issues of the day and to discover perhaps
more successful courses of action.
More than five decades ago, Max Wertheimer—a psychologist and a refugee
from Nazi Germany—advanced a distinction between propaganda and education
that we believe is well worth considering.8 According to Wertheimer,
propaganda tries to keep people from thinking and from acting as humans with
rights; it manipulates prejudice and emotion to impose the propagandists will on
others.
Education, in contrast, should provide the skills for people to stand on their own

two feet and to make their own decisions; it should encourage critical thinking.
In Wertheimer s framework, programs such as Channel One are propaganda;
they immerse the student in a world of consumerism and not-so-hard-hitting
"news" and fail to provide an opportunity to develop skills needed for
participation in a democracy.
What is the educational response? It is unrealistic to expect children to have the
sophistication to avoid propaganda— whether it appears on television, in
advertising, or in their textbooks. Therefore, it is important that an education
offers the tools for understanding propaganda. Consider these possible responses
to Channel One (or to any other form of propaganda). Instead of grading papers
while the students watched the show, suppose the teacher pointed out how the
ads were made, what techniques the advertisers used, or how Channel One was
financed. Suppose the teacher took the Channel One video and challenged the
students to create a "better" newscast—a newscast that looked at the issues with
more depth than did Channel One and from multiple points of view. We suspect
that such experiences would alert students to how propaganda is made, increase
their interest and knowledge of current events, and place them in a better
position to make their own decisions about what to buy and what to believe.
At the heart of Wertheimer's view of education is critical debate and group
discussion that explores an issue from multiple perspectives.
How can this be accomplished? In the 1950s, N. R. F. Maier, an organizational
psychologist, developed guidelines for structuring group discussion and decision
making.9 His research, along with research that we have recently completed with
our colleague Marlene Turner, demonstrates that just exposing discussion groups
to these guidelines can increase critical thinking and improve the quality of
decision making.10 Some of Maier's recommendations for generating critical
discussion include:
1. Do not accept the first answer you hear as the answer. Explore alternatives.
Ask, "What else should be considered?" "What else might we do?"
2. Keep any discussion problem-centered and avoid looking for excuses or
seeking to blame others for a problem. Avoid saying things like, "That's a really
stupid idea."
3. Keep track of all suggestions for solving a problem or making sense of an

issue so that each may be explored fully.
4. After gathering a number of suggestions for addressing an issue, then probing
and evaluative questions can be asked. These might include: "How would that
work out?" "Do I understand the issue or do I need to search out more
information?" "Am I mistaken in my assumptions about the issue?" "What are
the advantages or disadvantages of each proposal?" "Is there a way to combine
suggestions to generate an even better solution?"
5. Protect individuals from personal attacks and criticism, especially if they
present minority or divergent viewpoints (after all, they may be right).
6. Make your objective one of understanding differences of opinion in the group
and attempting to resolve them.
As our discussion indicates, the issue of whether a given piece of information is
education or propaganda is complex and goes well beyond whether we simply
like or dislike the content of the information. It behooves us, then, to look
closely at how the tactics that we have presented throughout this volume are
used in propaganda campaigns—a task we take up in this set of chapters. In
taking up this charge, we do so with an eye toward asking, "What forms of
education and persuasion will best serve our society and ourselves?"
*In 1994, Channel One was purchased by K-lll Communications, which owns
Seventeen and the Weekly Reader and is owned in turn by Kohlberg Kravis
Roberts & Co., which is famous for its $25-billion leveraged buyout of RJR
Nabisco.
 

32
What Is News?
Imelda Marcos's shoes. There are very few people who were adults in the
waning days of the Ferdinand Marcos regime who won't know what we are
talking about when we use this simple phrase. Most of us will immediately see,
in our mind's eye, a closet containing thousands of pairs of shoes, of various
colors, styles, and uses. This image, which first appeared on ABC News's
"Nightline," has served as the symbol of the corruption that characterized
Marcos's long reign as president of the Philippines. As a symbol, the picture of
Imelda Marcos's shoes is vivid and effective, but also simplistic.
And very, very useful. It is characteristic of the type of news we are most likely
to get—a vivid image as opposed to a thoughtful discussion.
On any given day, the world is full of happenings such as wars, riots, consumer
frauds, spelling bees, family violence, scientific achievements, political
speeches, and human sorrows and happiness.
Obviously, the news media cannot (and does not) cover all these events. It has
been estimated that, for the typical daily newspaper, more than 75% of the
potential news items of the day are rejected and never see print. For national
media such as network television news, the percentage of rejected news is much
higher. For example, on any given day, there are many armed conflicts occurring
throughout the world. The viewer of the nightly news or the reader of the daily
paper typically learns of approximately two or three of these conflicts and, after
years of watching and reading, could probably name fewer than a dozen current
wars.
Selectivity of news is the beginning of propaganda. As Walter Lippmann once
put it:
Without some form of censorship, propaganda in the strict sense of the
word is impossible. In order to conduct a propaganda there must be some
barrier between the public and the event. Access to the real environment
must be limited, before anyone can create a pseudo-environment that he
thinks wise or desirable. For while people who have direct access can

misconceive what they see, no one else can decide how they shall
misconceive it, unless he can decide where they shall look, and at what.1
Any revolutionary or would-be leader worth his or her salt knows that a primary
objective is to secure the public's source of news. Very early in its existence, the
Nazi party established its own publishing company, the Eher Verlag, which in its
heyday controlled more than 150 publishing houses, employed an estimated
35,000 persons, and had profits exceeding 100 million marks a year. During his
reign as Fuhrer, Hider was successful in holding the press captive by
systematically rewarding agreeable journalists (with choice interviews,
promotions, and party favors) and punishing those who disagreed with Nazi
policy (by limiting their access to news, subjecting them to government
investigations, and suspending their operating licenses).2
Five years before coming to power in the 1917 October revolution, the Soviets
established the newspaper Pravda. For more than seven decades, until the fall of
Communism, Pravda, which ironically means "truth," served the Soviet
Communist party by censoring and filtering the news presented to Russian and
Eastern Europeans.3
Managed news is not the exclusive province of totalitarian regimes. Closer to
home, President Franklin D. Roosevelt, much like other U.S.
presidents, attempted to influence the news, albeit more subtly than his European
counterparts, by flooding the news media with pro-administration information.
For example, during a typical three-month period in 1936, the Roosevelt
administration employed 146
full-time and 124 part-time publicity agents who issued 7 million copies of about
4,800 public news releases. The Works Progress Administration alone spent
more than $1 million in one year on printing—all in an effort to encourage the
news media to convince the American people of the necessity of New Deal
policies.4
In present-day Western democracies, what factors determine which news items
are selected for television and radio newscasts and for publication in magazines
and newspapers? In totalitarian regimes, news is routinely censored by ruling
elites. Such blatant control is rare in Western democracies and when it does
occur, it often results in immediate public outcries—witness, for example,

reactions to the censorship of rap groups or the popularity of "network censor"
jokes. The jokes tap into a wellspring of animosity to such censorship in spite of
the fact that studies of network practices find that, by the time a script reaches
the network censor, only minor changes, if any, are needed to make the show
"airworthy."
However, there are certain circumstances in which direct censorship is not only
accepted but appears to be encouraged by American citizens. Such was the case
during the Persian Gulf war when the Pentagon established rules designed to
regulate information flow concerning the war effort.5 Journalists were permitted
to cover the war scene only if they were in organized pools escorted by a
military leader, a situation that kept them far from the real action. Any journalist
operating independently was subject to arrest by military police. If reporters did
happen to stumble onto newsworthy items, officials were assigned to guide them
quickly away from the action.
With few opportunities to gain firsthand information, reporters became
dependent on official statements and government-issued videotapes. Few
Americans complained. One "Saturday Night Live"
skit poked fun at the coverage of the war by depicting reporters as comically
self-absorbed, with little understanding of national security. John Sununu, at the
time the White House chief of staff, ordered a videotape copy of the show for
viewing at the White House as further evidence that the public supported the
military's press policy.
Clearly, however, the selection of everyday news in Western democracies
involves more than traditional censorship. Considering the mass of information
that comes over the news wires, how do journalists select what to print in the
papers and to show on TV? To answer that question, let's look at how the
primary news gatherer—the reporter—goes about her or his job.6
News reporters typically work beats—that is, they are assigned a group of
institutions to cover such as the local criminal justice system or the White House
or Hollywood or sports teams. This immediately injects one source of bias into
news coverage—something that happens off or between beats has a lower
chance of being covered unless it is a major disaster or other spectacular event.
For example, almost 60% of the stories appearing in the New York Times and the
Washington Post are from routine channels and beats.7 For the citizen, this

means an endless stream of stories about events happening on a given beat, say,
for example, a Hollywood starlet's feelings about home furnishings and nudity or
daily reports on the well-being of our favorite athlete's injured toe. Off-beat
stories rarely are covered and aren't even considered news. For example, we
have come to expect that CNN's "Headline News" will run a little banner at the
bottom of the screen listing sports scores and stock prices. It would appear quite
strange if the network suddenly filled that space with the names of those who
won spelling bees or National Merit Scholarships or listed statistics describing
the health and well-being of workers.
Most reporters are on a deadline; they must prepare a given number of stories by
a certain time regardless of what is happening. In order to meet their deadlines,
reporters place a premium on sources that can be easily contacted (for example,
politicians or bureaucrats) and trusted (ones the reporter has talked with before
and who gave a "successful" interview). This also creates bias in at least two
ways. First, the reporter develops a routine for covering a story; for example, the
reporter covering the crime beats learns to look for stories in such places as
police crime reports and trial calendars and develops relationships with police
and district attorneys that keep the stories corning; others who might shed light
on the causes of crime—for example, welfare agencies, churches, academics, or
the homeless—are for the most part ignored.
Second, the reporters routine results in the same types of people appearing on the
news repeatedly. For example, a survey of guests appearing on ABC News's
"Nightline" finds that the vast majority of those asked to give their opinions on
the show are white and male and employed primarily in government, university
think-tanks, and corporations.8 Women, minorities, labor leaders, and those
representing the public interest are rarely asked to appear. Such a guest list
results in a biased discussion of issues with some points of view clearly
excluded.
Increasingly, reporters work for a corporation.9 For the last decade or so, media
ownership in the United States has become concentrated in the hands of a few
organizations. Today, twenty-three corporations control most of television,
magazines, books, and movies. Some facts about media ownership: 60% of local
daily newspapers belong to one of fourteen corporate chains, three corporations
dominate the magazine industry, six record companies control 80% of the
market for recorded music, and nine film studios produce 70% of network TV's
prime-time schedule. This concentration of ownership results in direct pressure

on the reporter; certain stories are encouraged or not encouraged depending on
their implications for the parent corporation. More subtly, however, corporate
ownership biases programming and coverage.
For example, although almost all Americans are workers and consumers, there is
little sustained coverage of corporate policies and how they affect the welfare of
employees; any attempt to inform consumers about the safety and quality of
products is typically relegated to the back pages of newspapers and back
channels of cable TV. In contrast, reporting on the ups and downs of the stock
market, along with other business news, is a regular feature of both newspapers
and television "news" programs.
A particularly interesting case in point is beautifully depicted in the 1999 film
The Insider, based on the true story of Jeffrey Wigand. Wigand, a researcher for
the Brown & Williamson tobacco company, decided to go public with evidence
indicating that the cigarette industry was not only aware of the addictive-ness of
its product but actually tried to increase that addictive-ness in order to boost
sales. This evidence was particularly damaging because the CEOs of the major
tobacco companies had previously sworn in testimony before Congress that they
did not believe that cigarettes were addictive. Risking his job and arrest for
contempt of court, Wigand bravely went on camera with TV journalist Mike
Wallace for an interview on the TV news show "60 Minutes." But, at the last
minute (on the advice of their attorneys), the top brass of CBS
decided to shelve the interview in order to avoid the messiness of a lawsuit at the
hands of the cigarette companies, leaving Wigand hung out to dry.
As difficult as these pressures may seem, the journalist faces one more pressure
that may mean her or his livelihood—the ability of the news story to hold the
audiences attention. All television programming, including the evening news,
must strive for profits—and that translates into securing ratings and viewers that
will attract advertising dollars. And what induces people to watch the news? A
study of why people watch the news concludes that most viewers want to be
amused and diverted; being informed is only a secondary motive for watching.
As the director of the British Broadcasting Corporation has noted, television
news is just another form of entertainment.10 To guarantee high ratings and
revenues, mass media content tends to be agreeable and to require little effort on
the part of consumers, while still being arousing, emotionally engaging, and
above all entertaining.

Accordingly, when those in charge of news programming make decisions about
which events to cover and which fraction of the miles of daily videotape to
present to the public, they make their decisions, at least in part, on the basis of
the entertainment value of their material.
Around-the-clock coverage of the O. J. Simpson trial or the JonBenet Ramsey
murder or the latest rumor in the Monica Lewinsky saga is far more entertaining
than, say, the events in Bosnia, the concentration of mass media ownership, or a
U.S. presidential election (unless, of course, it is in dispute). Film footage of a
flooded metropolis has much more entertainment value than footage devoted to a
dam built to prevent such a flooding: It is simply not very exciting to see a dam
holding back a flood. And yet construction of the dam may be more important
news.
Just as such action events as football games are more entertaining on television
than such quiet events as chess matches, it is more likely that riots, bombings,
hijackings, earthquakes, massacres, and other violent acts will get more airtime
than stories about people helping one another or people working to prevent
violence. Indeed, news agencies station reporters at "action centers," such as
courts, athletic facilities, and police stations as opposed to schools, churches, and
research laboratories, where more important events may be occurring. Thus,
local news devotes eight times more coverage to sports than to community
problems such as school financing or housing,11 and national TV news telecasts
tend to focus on the violent behavior of individuals—terrorists, protesters,
strikers, or police—because violent action makes for more exciting viewing than
does a portrayal of people behaving in a peaceful, orderly manner.
What makes a great news story? In general, reporters and editors tend to look for
stories that (1) are new and timely, (2) involve conflict or scandal, (3) concern
strange and unusual happenings, (4) happen to familiar or famous people, (5) are
capable of being made dramatic and personal, (6) are simple to convey in a short
space or time, (7) contain visual elements (especially pictures for television), and
(8) fit a theme that is currently prominent in the news or society.
Armed with this understanding of how the news media operate, we can
comprehend how it came to pass that the image of Imelda Marcos's shoes was
beamed into homes around the globe. By providing a frequent forum for her
cause, the producers of "Nightline" had long befriended Corazon Aquino, the
"housewife" who ended the twenty-one-year rule of Ferdinand Marcos. And the

producers of "Nightline" were glad to do it. The Aquino/Marcos feud had all the
elements of a great drama—a simple housewife who was carrying on the legacy
of her assassinated husband, Benigno Aquino, pitted against a corrupt and
arrogant ruler out of touch with his country and very poor at handling the
American media. On the night the Marcos government fell, a "Nightline" crew
was filming the crowds gathered outside the former palace of Ferdinand and
Imelda Marcos when an aide to Corazon Aquino spotted them and invited the
film crew inside for an exclusive tour of the private quarters. As they made their
way through the palace, the "Nightline"
crew filmed riches and opulence unknown to most people. However, it wasn't
until they reached the bedroom that they found the visual image they were
looking for. As "Nightline" host Ted Koppel and producer Kyle Gibson put it:
And there, in the closet we saw these shoes. Thousands and thousands of
shoes. Racks and racks. There was every style—pump, sling-back, flat
heel, spiked heel. For every style, there were at least eight pairs of shoes in
a row, each pair a different color.12
The estimated 3,000 pairs of shoes were the perfect media image—an ABC
News exclusive. The shoes were a strange happening about a famous person;
visually compelling, the shoes fit the current theme of "Nightline" that the
Marcos rule was corrupt. Although the shoes are the perfect image to capture the
corruption, we can ask: What did they really teach us about corruption in the
Philippines? Do we understand anything of what happened in this country other
than the fact that the first lady had a lot of shoes?
The news media's desire to satisfy our itch for entertainment and the resulting
bias in coverage was dramatically illustrated by the way the media handled the
1970 Austin, Texas, "nonriot" in which one of us (E. A.) participated. Tensions
had been running high between University of Texas students and local police
following a confrontation at an impromptu student demonstration against the
invasion of Cambodia by U.S. troops. But this was a mere preface compared to
what seemed to be coming. A few days later, during a peaceful demonstration,
four Kent State University students were slain by members of the Ohio National
Guard. To protest this event, the Texas students planned a gigantic march into
downtown Austin. The city council, fearing trouble, refused to issue a parade
permit. In frustration and anger, the students decided to march anyway. Rumors
spread that hundreds of armed rednecks and hooligans were descending on

Austin with the intention of assaulting the students. Other rumors abounded to
the effect that state troopers and Texas Rangers had been called in and were
determined to take strong and violent action against anyone disobeying the law.
The situation seemed certain to be a prelude to extreme violence.
Sniffing an exciting story, news teams affiliated with the major television
networks were alerted and rushed to Austin. As it turned out, however, the
explosive situation was defused at the eleventh hour: A federal judge issued a
temporary restraining order to prevent the city from enforcing the anti-parade
ordinance, in response to a request from university officials and several members
of the police force. This event—especially because of the role played by the
police—resulted not only in the total absence of violence but also in a genuine
explosion of goodwill and solidarity among diverse elements of the community.
Twenty thousand students did march, but they marched in a spirit of harmony.
Some of them offered cold drinks to the police officers; students and police
exchanged friendly greetings. This was an important event, coming as it did in
an atmosphere of apparently universal distrust between students and police.
Interestingly enough, the national television networks completely ignored this
encouraging turn of events. Given that teams of nationally prominent reporters
from a variety of news organizations had descended on the city during the week,
the lack of coverage seemed puzzling indeed. An unsettling explanation was
provided by community psychologists Phillip Mann and Ira Iscoe: "Since there
was no violence, news media teams left town and there was no national
publicity, a commentary whose implications are by now sadly self-evident."13
It is interesting to note that years later in the same city, a great deal of coverage
was given to an event of higher drama but far less importance. Some fifty
members of the Ku Klux Klan staged a march and were greeted by about 1,000
hecklers. Some rocks and bottles were thrown, and a few people received minor
cuts and bruises. The skirmish was featured in network television news reports
and major stories in newspapers from coast to coast. Clearly, a minor Klan-and-
town conflict was deemed more entertaining than a peaceful expression of
goodwill.
The moral of both of the Austin, Texas, stories is simple: If you want access to
the mass media, be entertaining.

Such coverage does not present a balanced or complete picture of what is
happening in the world, not because the people who run the news media are evil
and necessarily trying to manipulate us but simply because they are trying to
entertain us. And, in trying to entertain us, they oversimplify and thus
unwittingly influence our opinions about the world we live in. For example, as
we noted before, people who watch a lot of TV tend to see the world as a far
more violent place than those who watch very little TV.
The value of entertainment and the lesson of news as drama has not been lost on
those who want to make the news, such as terrorists. Consider the Beirut hostage
crisis of 1985, in which some forty innocent American passengers on a TWA jet
were held captive by Shiite terrorists. TV cameras offered viewers back home
around-the-clock coverage of all aspects of the crisis, important and trivial alike.
There were press conferences held by the terrorists, press conferences held by
the hostages, intimate shots of anguished families, demands, counterdemands,
pistol-wavings, outrageous statements, luncheon menus. The TV cameras did
everything but follow the hostages into the restrooms. The drama was
spellbinding.
Advertisers and direct marketers constantly rediscover the observation that
"news is entertainment." With the advent of interactive cable, computer bulletin
boards, and the World Wide Web, some marketers, sincerely proud of their
products, thought that these new technologies would afford them the opportunity
to go beyond the usual thirty-second spot and provide some real information to
the consumer.
They dutifully prepared large databases containing information on product
attributes, new usage ideas, what to do about typical problems, and so on—only
to find that no one looked at the information. Marketers quickly came to realize
that if they were to use this new technology effectively, then their presentations
had to be entertaining; therefore they have replaced the information displays
with product-oriented video games, contests, and bake clubs.
And the power of the itch for entertainment was not lost on Paragon Cable of
New York. Instead of cutting off services to those who fall behind on their cable
TV bill, Paragon fills each of its seventy-seven channels with C-SPAN
programming. As you know, C-SPAN broadcasts mostly unedited speeches from
the floor of the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives, along with other

public affairs programs.
Officials at the cable company report that, in the aftermath of this strategy,
collection of overdue balances improved dramatically.14 Apparently, news that
isn't entertaining is more painful to watch than no news at all.
The result of this itch for entertainment is soundbite and photo-op news—a
montage of brief visual images that play to the crowds.
Each event and every idea must be part of a dramatic story amply illustrated with
visual displays. Stories that are easily dramatized and visualized, such as a child
trapped in an abandoned well, are readily covered. More complex issues, such as
the details of the latest national health plan, the economy, or regulatory policy,
receive little attention unless they can be made concrete and visual.
Would-be leaders, whether they be peaceful demonstrators, terrorists,
advertisers, or candidates for president, must compete for attention in this
entertainment environment. They do so by staging canned nominating
conventions; using catchphrases guaranteed to make the evening news, such as
"Make my day," "Just don't do it," "Read my lips," or "I will fight for you";
and engaging in endless photo sessions involving, for example, the Vietnam war
memorial, a child with AIDS, a visit to a flag factory, or Arafat and an Israeli
leader shaking hands in front of the White House.15
Television coverage of a political campaign comes to look more like an episode
of a popular soap opera than a discussion of democracy and leadership. Just as
we hear about the sex life of our favorite soap opera characters, who's ahead of
whom in the competition for love and money, the latest rumors and gossip about
the characters, and what sort of family troubles and squabbles they are having,
so, too, we are likely to find out about the political candidates' sexual escapades,
who leads whom in the most recent opinion poll, the latest rumors and gossip
about the candidates, and the intricacies of intraparty squabbles. In a TV soap
opera, image counts more than substance—the same as in a political campaign.
A detailed analysis of our favorite character's business and home finances would
be boring. So, too, would be a detailed analysis of the federal budget. However,
there is a big difference: The characters on a TV
soap opera use "play money." The government uses real taxpayers' real money.

And while we were all peeping into Imelda Marcos's closet and gawking at her
shoes, what did we miss? First, the news media failed to present a detailed
discussion of corruption in the Philippines: How widespread was it? How did it
start? How was it maintained? What role, if any, did the United States play in
this corruption? Such a discussion would be of enormous value in developing a
U.S. policy toward the Philippines. Instead, the political events of the
Philippines were reduced to a plot reminiscent of spaghetti westerns or an
episode of the "A Team"—bad people take over the town; an honest citizen, with
the help of her neighbors, cleans up the town and restores justice. Second, in all
the interviews and photo-ops, we never heard Imelda Marcos's explanation for
why those shoes were in her closet. According to Gerry Spence, the attorney
who defended Imelda Marcos in her criminal trial for fraud and racketeering,
Mrs. Marcos confided to him that she owned so many shoes because there are
many shoe factories in the Philippines.16 As the first lady, she received hundreds
of shoes each year from companies that wanted to claim that Imelda Marcos
wore their shoes.
Most of the shoes were useless because they did not fit, but she stored them in
the closet anyway. Of course, this could be little more than a self-serving
explanation. (One wonders why she didn't give them to charity.) Regardless of
where the truth lies, it is far more complex than a closet full of shoes. Anyone
accused of wrongdoing is entitled to present her side of the story; as citizens in a
democracy, we are entitled to hear both sides so that we can reach an informed
opinion. In the criminal trial, we might add, Imelda Marcos was acquitted of all
charges.
One wonders whether anyone would watch if television advertisers and
politicians replaced all the slick thirty-second spots with ads that contained only
useful information. One wonders what would happen to the ratings if journalists
substituted in-depth coverage of important but possibly dull issues for the
current barrage of entertaining but often distorting visual images now seen on
the news. Advertisers, politicians, and journalists have come to rely on
entertaining images and soundbites to convey their messages—a practice that
distorts and simplifies reality by editing out all but the most entertaining
information. In the long run, our seemingly insatiable desire for entertainment
may succeed where Hitler and Pravda ultimately failed.

 

33
On the Ineffectiveness of Information Campaigns
Suppose you inherited controlling interest in a television network. Here is a
golden opportunity to influence people's opinions on important issues. Lets say
you are an enthusiastic proponent of national health insurance, and you would
like to persuade others to agree with you.
Having read about the persuasion tactics described in this book, you know how
to do it, and you are in control of a very powerful medium of communication.
How do you set about doing it?
That's simple: You choose a time slot following a highly intellectual program (in
order to be certain that well-informed people are watching) and, accordingly,
you present a two-sided argument (because two-sided arguments work best on
well-informed people). You arrange your arguments in such a manner that the
argument in favor of national health insurance is stronger and appears first (in
order to be fresh in the viewer's mind). You describe the plight of the poor, how
they get sick more frequently and die earlier for lack of affordable medical care.
You frame the need for national health care in terms of a personal loss for the
viewer—the current piecemeal system is costly and driving up taxes. You use
vivid personal examples of people you know. You discuss these events in a
manner that inspires great fear; at the same time, you offer a specific plan of
action, because this combination produces the most opinion change and the most
action in the most people. You present some of the arguments against your
position and offer strong refutation of these arguments. You arrange for the
speaker to be expert, trustworthy, and extremely likable. You make your
argument as strongly as you can, in order to maximize the discrepancy between
the argument presented and the initial attitude of the audience. And then you sit
back, relax, and wait for those opinions to start changing.
It's not that simple, however. Imagine a typical viewer: Let's say she is a forty-
five-year-old, middle-class real estate broker who believes the government
interferes too much in private life. She feels any form of social legislation
undermines the spirit of individuality, which, she believes is the essence of
democracy. She tunes in your program while looking for an evenings

entertainment. She begins to hear your arguments in favor of free health care. As
she listens, she becomes slightly less confident in her original convictions. She is
not quite as certain as she had been that the government shouldn't intervene in
matters of health. What does she do?
If
she is anything like the subjects in an experiment conducted by Lance Canon,
she would reach for the remote control, switch channels, and begin to watch
"Wheel of Fortune."1 Canon found that, as one's confidence is weakened, a
person becomes less prone to listen to arguments against his or her beliefs. Thus
the very people you most want to convince and whose opinions might be the
most susceptible to being changed are the ones least likely to continue to expose
themselves to a communication designed for that purpose.
Information campaigns frequently fail to change attitudes, a fact of persuasive
life that was observed by Herbert Hyman and Paul Sheatsley as far back as
1947.2 In explaining the frequent failure of information campaigns, Hyman and
Sheatsley noted that people tend to acquire information mostly about things that
they find of interest and tend to avoid information that does not agree with their
beliefs.
Should someone find that they have been unavoidably exposed to uninteresting
and disagreeable information, a common response is to distort and reinterpret
that information, thus ignoring its implications for updating beliefs and attitudes.
Despite these apparent psychological barriers, attempts to influence attitudes and
change behavior by providing reasonable information—whether it be a mass
mailing on the AIDS epidemic from the U.S. surgeon general, crisis information
in the front of the phone book, a Ross Perot political infomercial, or our
hypothetical health insurance documentary—are as common as ever. To the
extent that such campaigns fail to consider our tendency to expose ourselves
selectively to information and systematically to distort discrepant
communications, they are likely to fail.
Must you resign yourself to broadcasting your message to an audience composed
of viewers who already support national health insurance?
That may be the case—if you insist on airing a serious documentary devoted to

the issue. After considering your alternatives, however, you might decide to take
another approach.
You
call a meeting of your network executives. The programming director is
instructed to commission several scripts dramatizing the plight of families facing
financial ruin because of high medical costs associated with serious illness. You
order the news department to do some feature segments on the success of
national health insurance in other countries. Finally, you provide the late-night
talk show host with a couple of jokes he might tell about his inept but affluent
doctor.
Although none of these communications would match the documentary in terms
of the information provided, their cumulative impact could be more significant.
Embedded in dramas or news segments, they would not necessarily come
labeled as arguments supporting national health insurance; they seem innocuous,
but their message is clear. Not appearing to be explicit attempts at persuasion,
they should arouse little resistance, inhibiting the formation of counterarguments
by distracting the audience. Most importantly, people will probably watch them
without switching channels.
The
use of entertaining programs to disseminate a point of view has been successful
in achieving high audience ratings and in changing peoples attitudes and
behaviors.3 For example, the Harvard Alcohol Project convinced TV producers
to include "designated drivers"
in the scripts of thirty-five prime-time television series during the 1989-1990
season as a means of promoting this alternative to drinking and driving.
Subsequent research revealed an increase in the use of designated drivers as a
result of the shows.
However, must we abandon the mass media as a means of communicating
critical information and accept programs delivering only trivial entertainment?
Cy Schneider thinks so, especially when it comes to our children. Schneider has
created more than 1,000 kids' commercials for more than 400 products,
including such notables as the Barbie doll, Chatty Cathy, and Agent Zero M. He

has also been involved in the production of children's shows sponsored by the
toymaker Mattel, such as "Matty's Funday Funnies" and "Beany and
Cecil." He offers this apology for the state of children's television:
The fact is that better shows, programs with more substance, have been
tried over and over again by the commercial networks and stations.
For the most part they have not attracted a large audience and consequently are
not economically practical. There is only so much of this kind of programming
that television is willing to support.4
Although it may be difficult to use the mass media to convey information, it is
not impossible. Information campaigns can succeed if they follow these simple
rules: (1) Make the program entertaining (a principle we observed in the
previous chapter), (2) do not directly attack a viewer's attitudes and beliefs, and
(3) use the tactics described in this book to make the program persuasive.5 For
example, during World War II, a radio program hosted by singer Kate Smith was
highly successful in strengthening American commitment to the war effort and
selling $39 million worth of bonds to finance the weir.6 In 1965, CBS sought to
promote safe driving by airing "The National Drivers' Test," an involving show
on which drivers were given a quiz about how to handle road situations; the
show was viewed by 30 million Americans, 1.5 million of whom wrote to CBS
for more information.7 Both of these programs followed these rules.
Public television has attempted one of the most ambitious efforts to use the mass
media to inform and teach with such shows as "Sesame Street" (to encourage
academic achievement) and "Mister Rogers' Neighborhood" (to promote positive
social relations).
The logic behind these shows is clear: By the time a typical American child
graduates from high school, he or she will have spent more time in front of a
television set (17,000 hours) than in a classroom (11,000 hours).
The
efforts appear promising.8 "Sesame Street" has been on the air since 1969 and is
watched on a weekly basis by about half of all preschoolers in America. It
features a lovable set of characters—Bert and Ernie, Elmo, Big Bird, and Oscar

the Grouch— and a sequence of fast-moving, attention-getting segments that
teach such skills as counting, letter and number recognition, and vocabulary.
Early evaluations of the program found that preschoolers who watched "Sesame
Street" showed
significant gains on education tests measuring knowledge of letters and numbers
and on tests of matching, sorting, and classifying skills. However, there is a fly
in the ointment: In natural settings, not all children watch "Sesame Street,"
particularly those from disadvantaged homes (the originally intended audience).
However, this problem can be overcome if viewing is encouraged in the home or
through highly successful early intervention programs such as Head Start.
Positive results have also been obtained for shows such as "Mister Rogers'
Neighborhood." On this program, Fred Rogers creates an accepting atmosphere
where children can discover such things as how plants grow or how tortilla chips
are made, learn that each person (including you) is special, and take a trolley to
the "land of make-believe" where imaginations explore the social world.
Research finds that children who watch such shows on a regular basis are more
likely to be altruistic and cooperative with their peers and to engage in other
forms of pro-social behavior. Contrary to the opinion of Cy Schneider, it does
appear that TV can offer higher-quality shows that inform and teach; we can
educate as we entertain.
Although "teaching as we entertain" is a laudable goal (especially for our
children), it is often easier said than done. This is particularly the case when
dealing with "adult" issues that are complex, are rapidly developing, and require
the communication of sophisticated and detailed information. In such cases, it
may be difficult or impossible to provide the needed information in a highly
dramatic, highly personalized, and very entertaining manner.
Robert Entman argues that, although the opportunity to gain more information
about political affairs has increased dramatically in the last twenty years,
Americans' interest in and knowledge of such affairs have not increased and may
well have declined during this period.9 The public, the press, and political
leaders appear to be caught in a spiral. The communication of complex
information requires an interested and informed public. Without an educated
audience, journalists and leaders must simplify their message and package it as
"entertainment," thus reducing further the sophistication of the public at large.

The result may be, as Entman puts it in the title of his book, a democracy
without citizens. Many of us lament the unrealistic cartoon world that our
children view every day on television and demand more educational fare. We
would argue that, as adults, we should have the same laments and demands for
ourselves.
 

34
Subliminal Sorcery: Who Is Seducing Whom?
Imagine that it is the 1950s and you are off to see Picnic, one of the more
popular films of the day. However, the movie theater, located in Fort Lee, New
Jersey, is unlike any you have been in before.
Unbeknownst to you, the projectors have been equipped with a special device
capable of flashing short phrases onto the movie screen at such a rapid speed that
you are unaware that any messages have been presented. During the film, you
lean over to your companion and whisper, "Gee, I'd love a tub of buttered
popcorn and a Coke right now." To which he replies, "You're always hungry and
thirsty at movies, shhhhhh." But after a few moments he says, "You know, some
Coke and popcorn might not be a bad idea."
A short time later you find out that you and your friend weren't the only ones
desiring popcorn and Coke in the theater that day. Far from it. According to
reports in newspapers and magazines, James Vicary, an advertising expert, had
secretly flashed at 1/3,000 of a second the words eat popcorn and drink coke onto the movie
screen. He claimed that this had increased Coke sales by 18.1%
and popcorn sales by 57.7%. Upon reading their newspapers, most people were
outraged and frightened. It is a scary world indeed if advertisers can use such a
devilish technique to bypass our conscious intellect and beam subliminal
commands directly to our subconscious.
By subliminal we mean a message so faint or fast that it is presented below the
threshold of awareness.
In a 1957 article for the Saturday Review entitled "Smudging the Subconscious,"
Norman Cousins captured such feelings as he pondered the true meaning of such
a device. As he put it, "If the device is successful for putting over popcorn, why
not politicians or anything else?"1 He wondered about the character of those who
would dream up such a machine to "break into the deepest and most private parts
of the human mind and leave all sorts of scratchmarks." Cousins concluded that
the best course of action would be "to take this invention and everything

connected to it and attach it to the center of the next nuclear explosive scheduled
for testing."
Cousins was not alone in his concern about the use of subliminal techniques.
In a series of four best-selling books, Wilson Bryan Key brought to national
attention the possibility of widespread use of subliminal tactics.2 Key argues that
such techniques are not limited to television and movies. Cleverly hidden
messages aimed at inducing sexual arousal are often embedded in the pictures
and photographs of print advertisements. His concern about the use of subliminal
persuasion is clear: "Every person reading this book has been victimized and
manipulated by the use of subliminal stimuli directed into his unconscious mind
by the mass merchandisers of media. The techniques are in widespread use by
media, advertising and public relations agencies, industrial and commercial
corporations, and by the Federal government itself."3
Governments have responded to the outcries of the critics. Subliminal
advertising has been banned in Australia and Britain. In the United States, the
Federal Communications Commission has ruled that the use of subliminal
messages could result in the loss of a broadcast license.
The National Association of Broadcasters has prohibited the use of subliminal
advertising by its members. A Nevada judge has ruled that subliminal messages
are not covered by the First Amendment protection of freedom of speech. In
many ways, the furor over subliminal influence captures what many of us fear
most about persuasion in general: Persuasion is a mysterious force that cannot be
resisted.
Nevertheless, widespread media coverage and governmental rulings have not put
an end to subliminal influence practices. In fact, such practices have spread to
self-help products. Today a consumer needs only to visit the local bookstore or a
vendor on the World Wide Web to find a vast array of subliminal audio-and
videotapes designed to accomplish such worthwhile goals as increasing self-
esteem, improving memory, reducing weight, controlling anger and temper,
enhancing sexual responsiveness, and overcoming the trauma of sexual abuse. In
their search for better self and health, American consumers have spent more than
$50 million annually on subliminal tapes designed for therapeutic purposes.4 The
tapes work, according to one manufacturer, because subliminal messages bypass
the conscious mind and imprint directly on the subconscious mind, where they

create the basis for the kind of life the consumer wants.
Accusations concerning the sinister use of subliminal persuasion continue as
well. Some have claimed that rock groups such as Led Zeppelin have implanted
backward messages urging their listeners to worship Satan.
In the summer of 1990, the rock band Judas Priest was placed on trial for
allegedly recording, in one of their songs, the subliminal implant "do it." This
message supposedly caused the suicide deaths of two avid young listeners of the
group's music, Ray Belknap and James Vance.dy have not been obtained by
other researchers: The study was probably never done and can best be described
as a publicity hoax. Let us explain. Vicary's claims immediately drew the
attention of advertisers, government officials, and researchers who demanded
details of the study. To meet these demands, Vicary set up demonstrations of his
machine. Sometimes there were technical difficulties in getting the machine to
work. When the machine did work, the audience felt no compulsion to comply
with subliminal commands. In 1958, the Advertising Research Foundation
pressed Vicary to release his data and a detailed description of his procedures.
Vicary never did, and to this day the best description of his work appears in
magazines such as the Senior Scholastic—intended primarily to be used in
schools by junior high students. As negative evidence accumulated, James
Vicary finally lamented in 1962 that he had handled the subliminal affair poorly.
As he stated, "Worse than the timing, though, was the fact that we hadn't done
any research, except what was needed for filing for a patent. I had only a minor
interest in the company and a small amount of data—too small to be meaningful.
And what we had shouldn't have been used promotionally."11 This is not exactly
an affirmation of a study that supposedly ran six weeks and involved thousands
of subjects, as Vicary originally claimed.
Stuart Rogers provides additional evidence that the Vicary "experiment"
was a hoax.12 A psychology student at Hofstra University in New York at the
time, Rogers thought that a report on Vicary's claim would make an interesting
term paper.
In the 2000 U.S. presidential election, claims about the misuse of subliminal
influence surfaced once again. This time the word rats appeared for one-thirtieth
of a second in an ad sponsored by the Republican National Committee. The

supraliminal content of the ad attacked Al Gore's prescription coverage plan by
claiming that it would be managed by bureaucrats. Supposedly, the subliminal
rats reinforced this message by likening Gore and the Democrats to rodents.
Given all the media coverage, the governmental involvement, and the dollars
spent, surprisingly little public attention has been paid to a most basic question:
Does subliminal influence really work?
During the last few years, we have been collecting published works on
subliminal processes, gathering more than 150 articles from the mass media and
more than 200 academic papers on the topic (a stack nearly 2 feet tall).5 What
does this collection of articles reveal?
First, there is some evidence for subliminal perception—minimal processing of
information outside of awareness. One of the best examples of this is the cocktail
party phenomenon. Suppose you are at a party and you are paying attention to
what your friend is saying and ignoring all the other background noise. Someone
in the background says your name. Your ears perk up and you start to pay
attention to whoever said your name, even though a few minutes earlier you may
not have known that the person was in the room. Such an effect indicates that
you are doing some processing outside of awareness. Research tends to show
that unconscious processes are limited to relatively minor cognitive feats.6
Second, in none of these papers is there clear evidence in support of the
proposition that subliminal messages influence behavior. In other words, no
study has conclusively demonstrated motivational and behavioral effects similar
to those claimed by the advocates of subliminal seduction. Many of the studies
fail to find an influence effect brought about by subliminal stimulation. Those
few studies that do demonstrate an effect often either cannot be reproduced7 or
are fatally flawed on methodological grounds. For example, the studies failed to
do such things as include a control group, use a double-blind procedure to rule
out expectancy effects, and ensure that the stimuli were presented in a truly
subliminal manner. On the other hand, these studies often engaged in such
questionable practices as selectively presenting positive over negative findings,
using unreliable measures, and describing internally inconsistent results as if
they were consistent. Other reviewers of this literature have reached the same
conclusion. As the cognitive psychologist Timothy Moore puts it, "There is no
empirical documentation for stronger subliminal effects, such as inducing
particular behaviors or changing motivation. Moreover, such a notion is

contradicted by a substantial amount of research and is incompatible with
experimentally based conceptions of information processing, learning, and
motivation."8 As Jack Haberstroh tells students and practitioners of advertising:
"Does it work? No, it doesn't. The scientific research indicating subliminal
advertising doesn't work is simply overwhelming."9
Let's look at some of this evidence. After reports of Vicary's eat popcorn/drink
coke study were circulated, there were a number of attempts to confirm his
findings. For example, in one study conducted by the Canadian Broadcasting
Corporation in 1958, the message phone now was subliminally flashed 352 times
during a popular Sunday-night television show called "Close-Up."10 Telephone
use did not go up during the period. When asked to guess the message, viewers
sent in close to 500 letters, not one of which contained the correct answer. But
almost half the respondents claimed to be hungry or thirsty during the show.
Apparently, they guessed (incorrectly) that the message was aimed at getting
them to eat or drink. This not only shows that people want to believe the
phenomenon works; it also demonstrates the power of expectations created by
Vicary's theater study.
Evidence is now accruing that there is a good reason why the results Vicary
claimed to have found in his eat popcorn/drink coke stu So he drove the short
distance to Fort Lee, New Jersey, to talk with those who conducted the study. He
found that the small-town theater was very small—too small to have hosted a
test of nearly 50,000
movie-goers in six weeks. When he asked the theater manager about the study,
the manager declared that no such test had ever been conducted at his theater.
Stuart Rogers is now a marketing professor with a special interest in public
relations. He views the Vicary eat popcorn/drink coke affair as a publicity scam
intended to increase customers for Vicary's marketing consulting business.
And what of Key's evidence for the effectiveness of subliminal seduction?
Most of the studies he reports lack a control or comparison group.
Finding that 62% of all subjects feel sexual, romantic, or satisfied when they see
a gin ad with the word sex supposedly embedded in the ice cubes tells us nothing
about the effectiveness of the "sex" implant. What would happen if the word sex
was removed from the cubes? Perhaps 62% of the subjects would still feel sexy,

romantic, or satisfied. Perhaps more, perhaps less would feel this way. Without
such a comparison, we just do not know. There have, however, been controlled
experiments that have shown subjects the same print ad—with and without a
subliminally embedded message.
These experiments— which have promoted all sorts of products from beer to
cameras to Hershey bars—have failed to find evidence for Key's conjectures
concerning subliminal seduction.13
Don't worry about those backward messages in rock music either. Although
there is some evidence that some rock groups have put backward phrases on
their records (mostly as a joke and to ride the subliminal craze to sell more
records), research conclusively demonstrates that such messages have no effect
on human behavior. For example, in a series of clever experiments, John Vokey
and Don Read have played backward messages to college students.14 They
found that subjects were unable to (1) indicate whether a backward message was
a statement or a question, (2) state whether two backward sentences had the
same meaning, and (3) correctly classify a meaningful or a nonsense statement
when played backwards. In another study, Vokey and Read found that subjects
could not sort statements such as "Jesus loves me, this I know" when played
backwards into one of five content categories: nursery rhymes, Christian,
satanic, pornography, and advertising.
To illustrate further the in effectiveness of subliminal messages and to
demonstrate the power of expectations, we, along with Jay Eskenazi and
Anthony Greenwald, conducted a study of mass-market audiotapes with
subliminal messages designed to improve either self-esteem or memory
abilities.15 Both types of tapes contained the same supraliminal content—various
pieces of classical music. However, they differed in their subliminal content.
According to the manufacturer, the self-esteem tapes contained such subliminal
messages as "I have high self-worth and high self-esteem." The memory tape
contained such subliminal messages as "My ability to remember and recall is
increasing daily."
Using public posters and ads placed in local newspapers, we recruited volunteers
who were interested in the value and potential of subliminal self-help therapies
(and who would probably be similar to those people most likely to buy such
tapes). On the first day of the study, we asked our volunteers to complete various

self-esteem and memory measures. Next, they received their subliminal tape, but
with an interesting twist. Half the tapes were mislabeled, so that some of the
subjects received a memory tape but thought it was intended to improve self-
esteem, whereas other subjects received a self-esteem tape but thought it was
intended to improve memory. (Of course, half the subjects received correctly
labeled tapes.)
The volunteers took their tapes home and listened to them every day for five
weeks (the period suggested by the manufacturer for maximum effectiveness).
After five weeks, they returned to the laboratory and completed, once again,
self-esteem and memory tests; they were also asked to indicate whether they
believed the tapes were effective. The results: The subliminal tapes had no effect
(improvement or decrement) on either self-esteem or memory. But our
volunteers had a different impression. Subjects who thought they had listened to
a self-esteem tape (regardless of whether they actually had or not) were more
likely to be convinced that their self-esteem had improved, and those who
thought they had listened to a memory tape (regardless of whether they had or
not) were more likely to believe that their memory had improved. In sum, the
subliminal tapes did nothing to improve self-esteem or memory abilities, but, to
our subjects, they appeared to have had an effect. As we put it in the tide of the
article, "What you expect is what you believe (but not necessarily what you
get)."
Our results are not a fluke. We have repeated our original study on two separate
occasions, using different tapes, and have yet to find an effect of subliminal
messages on behavior as claimed by the manufacturer.16 In addition, we are
aware of six additional independent tests of subliminal self-help tapes.17 In none
of these nine studies were the manufacturer's claims for the efficacy of
subliminal therapy substantiated—prompting both the National Academy of
Sciences and the British Psychological Association to conclude that subliminal
self-help tapes have no therapeutic value.18
The history of the subliminal controversy teaches us much about persuasion—
but not of the subliminal kind. Despite the claims in books and newspapers and
on the backs of subliminal self-help tapes, subliminal influence tactics have not
been demonstrated to be effective. Of course, as with anything scientific, it may
be that someday, somehow, someone will develop a subliminal technique that
may work, just as some day a chemist may find a way to transmute lead into
gold. Indeed, some researchers continue to present new claims for the power of

the subliminal.19 In the meantime, there are many other types of effective
persuasion tactics (such as the ones described throughout this book) that warrant
more attention than subliminal persuasion.
If subliminal messages are so ineffective, why is the belief in their power so
widespread? One poll taken at the height of the subliminal hoax found that
almost 81% of the respondents who had heard of subliminal advertising believed
it to be a current practice and more than 68% believed it to be successful in
selling products.20 Most strikingly, surveys also reveal that many people learn
about subliminal influence through the mass media and through courses in high
school and college—a further indication of the need for better science education
in American schools.
A partial reason for the appeal of the concept of subliminal influence lies in the
coverage that the mass media have given subliminal persuasion. Many of the
news stories about subliminal persuasion fail to mention negative evidence.
When disconfirming evidence is presented, it is usually near the end of the
article, giving the reader the impression that, at worst, the claims for subliminal
effectiveness are somewhat controversial.
A second reason lies in our expectations, hopes, and fears. The issue of
subliminal influence first emerged as a national concern soon after the Korean
War—a time when other apparently mysterious mind-altering practices such as
"brainwashing" and hypnotic suggestion captured the nation's imagination in
films such as The Manchurian Candidate. Interest in subliminal seduction rose
again in the post-Watergate years, when many Americans felt that their leaders
were involved in devious conspiracies and massive cover-ups of the type
dramatized in the movie Network. W. B. Key rejuvenated the issue of subliminal
influence by portraying it as yet another example that big business and big
government were conspiring to get us. In the late 1980s, the issue of subliminal
messages was rejuvenated once more. This time it was linked into New Age
beliefs that claim there is a powerful hidden force in the human personality that
can be controlled for the good by magic, crystals, and subliminal commands.
Our theories of what should be may have caused us to be too uncritical of claims
for the power of subliminal influence.
Finally, a belief in subliminal persuasion serves a need for many individuals.
In our age of propaganda, citizens are provided with very little education
concerning the nature of persuasion The result is that many feel confused and

concerning the nature of persuasion. The result is that many feel confused and
bewildered by basic social processes.
Subliminal persuasion is presented as an irrational force outside the control of
the message recipient. As such, it takes on a supernatural "devil made me do it"
quality capable of justifying and explaining why Americans are often persuaded
to engage in seemingly irrational behavior. Why did I buy this worthless product
at such a high price? Subliminal sorcery.
But belief in subliminal persuasion is not without its cost. Perhaps the saddest
aspect of the subliminal affair is that it distracts our attention from more
substantive issues. By looking for subliminal influences, we may ignore more
powerful, blatant influence tactics employed by advertisers and sales agents.
Consider the tragic suicides of Ray Belknap and James Vance brought to light in
the trial of Judas Priest.* They lived troubled lives—lives of drug and alcohol
abuse, run-ins with the law, learning disabilities, family violence, and chronic
unemployment. What issues did the trial and the subsequent mass media
coverage emphasize? There was no spotlight on the need for drug treatment
centers, no evaluation of the pros and cons of America's juvenile justice system,
no investigation of the schools, no inquiry into how to prevent family violence,
no discussion of the effects of unemployment on a family. Instead, we were
mesmerized by an attempt to count the number of subliminal demons that can
dance on the end of a record needle.21
In this trial, Judge Jerry Carr Whitehead ruled in favor of Judas Priest, stating:
"The scientific research presented does not establish that subliminal stimuli,
even if perceived, may precipitate conduct of this magnitude. There exist other
factors which explain the conduct of the deceased independent of the subliminal
stimuli."22 Perhaps now is the time to lay the myth of subliminal sorcery to rest
and direct our attention to other, more scientifically documented, causes of
human behavior.
*One of us [A.R.P.] testified in this trial. His testimony consisted of much of the
evidence presented in this chapter.
 

35
Persuasion Direct
Every month the average American receives more than twenty-one pieces of
direct mail—a total of more than twenty pounds of junk mail each year. Indeed,
39% of all U.S. mail consists of unsolicited sales pitches—a whopping 72 billion
pieces of mail per year. These appeals are designed to sell everything from
books to clothes to furniture to kitchen cutlery. They collect money for every
conceivable political cause and needy charity. More than two million persons are
employed in consumer mailorder selling.
Let's look at two pieces of such mail that we received to see how they work. One
item came from Greenpeace, the liberal political organization that describes its
purpose as environmental protection.
The other came from Publishers Clearing House, which conducts a sweepstakes
with the goal of selling magazine subscriptions and other products.
Before investigating this mail further, we should note that direct marketers—
people who sell directly to the consumer via the mail or telephone or Internet—
take great pride in identifying effective selling strategies. Typically, direct
marketers receive most of their replies within a matter of weeks after posting the
appeal. As such, they are very sensitive to what works and what does not. Often,
simple split-mail experiments are conducted in which two versions of an appeal
are sent out to see which yields a higher response rate. If you want to learn about
persuasion tactics, watch what direct marketers do.1
One of the first things to notice about a direct-mail appeal is the envelope. It has
the task of breaking through the message-dense environment to attract your
attention and get you to open the piece and read on. The first line of persuasive
attack is the name and address. To cut costs and increase response, the pieces are
mailed primarily to those who would be most interested in the message. One
source of Greenpeace's mailing list is the lists of contributors to other, similar
causes. Publishers Clearing House has a larger target audience and is most
interested in mailing to those who are likely to respond to direct-mail appeals in
general (i.e., people who have purchased other direct-response items, have credit

cards, own their own homes, and so on). It is unlikely that Rush Limbaugh will
receive an appeal from Greenpeace or that a homeless person will receive an
entry blank for the Publishers Clearing House sweepstakes.
The Greenpeace envelope is large (9 by 12 inches), brown, and official-looking.
The return address features the distinctive Greenpeace whale. In bold print
across the middle of the package is the message: "Enclosed: Community Toxic
Report. Please return to Greenpeace within 10 days."
The Greenpeace envelope makes use of a number of fundamental persuasion
tactics to encourage you to open it. First, the large envelope stands out among
the smaller 4-by-9-inch envelopes that typically appear in the mailbox. Second,
the brown envelope resembles government and other official mail. The half-
mindful recipient may open it up, thinking it is something important. The
technique of packaging the appeal as something official is quite common; many
times the elderly will receive sales appeals in envelopes that look like
government checks or inquiries. (A variant of this technique is to make the
appeal look personal by using a "real" postage stamp and inscribing a
"handwritten" note in blue ink on the envelope.) Third, the symbol of a whale
serves as a heuristic for the environmentally conscious. Finally, the message
concerning community toxins piques interest with a mixture of fear and urgency
— an emotion that is further reinforced by the ten-day deadline for returning the
questionnaire.
The envelope from Publishers Clearing House takes a less subtle approach.
The 4
1
/2-by-ll-inch envelope (still larger than most) is covered, front and back,
with more than fifteen short messages and symbols. The messages are designed
to create excitement and interest: "Twelve million dollars up for grabs in our
new millionaire-a-month giveaways!"
"Introducing E-X-P-R-E-S-S entry. Details inside." "Your 12 entry tickets are
enclosed." Seemingly pasted on the envelope is a yellow note with blue lines.
This fifty-six-word message (rather long for an envelope) congratulates the
recipient on being eligible for a "SuperPrize"—implying either that you are
special or that you've already won something. The return address features the
distinctive Publishers Clearing House logo to alert the recipient that this is the
"sweepstakes you've been hearing about on TV." Also displayed is the symbol of

the Special Olympics to serve as a heuristic for the socially conscious. Needless
to say, we've guessed what's inside this envelope: a chance of a lifetime to win
millions. Let's open it immediately.
Once inside the envelope, the most striking feature is the amount of material.
Greenpeace sent 1½ ounces of paper, a total of eight pages of information plus
one reply envelope.
Publishers Clearing House sent thirteen pages (plus a reply envelope and cents-
off coupons), weighing in at 2½
ounces. Recall that message length equals message strength.
The first item of note in the Greenpeace package is a "gift" of twelve colorful
stickers featuring the Greenpeace logo and cute but threatened animals such as
kangaroos, dolphins, and penguins. The stickers are yours to use free of charge.
As a persuasion tactic, they kill two not-so-rare birds with one stone. First, the
stickers invoke the norm of reciprocity: "We've given you these nice stickers.
Now it is your turn to return the favor." Second, by using the stickers, you adopt
a "social identity" and join the Greenpeace granfalloon and thus become more
agreeable to the cause.
The next item of note from Greenpeace is a four-page appeal addressed "Dear
Friend" (another granfalloon technique). The letter begins with a request to
complete the enclosed survey. It is doubtful that a survey with such a nonrandom
sample could serve a legitimate "information-gathering" purpose. However, by
completing the survey and thinking about toxic waste issues, the target begins
the process of self-generated persuasion.
The survey is structured to produce cognitive responses sympathetic to
Greenpeace's cause. Who would disagree with the thrust of these questions (and
by default would not support the Greenpeace initiative)?
Each year, more than 300 million tons of hazardous waste are produced in
the U.S. alone. Do you believe your state, local, and federal authorities are
doing all they can to protect you and your community from these wastes?
[Are you opposed] to locating Toxic Waste Incinerators or Storage
Facilities in or near your community?
Such questions elicit knee-jerk responses; note that such appeals never include

difficult questions that might cause recipients to think twice about their answers.
For example, they wouldn't dream of asking: "How much more would you be
willing to pay for groceries that didn't use pesticides?" or "Would you be willing
to sell your family car and use mass transit to decrease the need for offshore
drilling?"
The bulk of the letter, however, uses a classic fear appeal. Recall from Chapter
24 that fear appeals are most effective when they raise high levels of fear and
suggest a doable, effective response for coping with the feeling of fear. The
Greenpeace appeal does just that. It states the problem in no uncertain terms:
"Millions of our fellow citizens now agree that toxic waste is the most serious
threat to public health today." Graphic examples of toxic pollution are included
in the letter. What's the solution to this menace?
Many people believe that the problem of toxic wastes is just too big to do
anything about. Well, we at Greenpeace don't. Greenpeace is one
organization that is taking direct action against the polluters of our water,
our air, and our land—fighting to cut off toxics at their source. And with
your help, we're going to do a whole lot more.
The letter goes on to list vivid examples of Greenpeace success stories and
future action plans. It asks you, not necessarily to become a "front-line" activist
confronting major polluters directly, but to send in your Community Toxic
Survey along with a contribution.
Note that the mention of front-line activists serves as a decoy to make the "act of
a contribution" seem less difficult and more doable. To further underscore the
threat of toxic waste and what you can do about it, Greenpeace offers, in a
separate insert, a guide to home toxins. It's free with your contribution of $15 or
more to Greenpeace.
One potential pitfall with fund-raising is that requests for money can often
appear to be simply self-serving. Greenpeace minimizes this possible response
by noting that its activists are putting their health and safety on the line for your
environment.
The last item on the survey is a request for money. The target is asked to check
the dollar amount—$15, $25, $35, $50, $100— of the contribution. Note how
puny $15 or $25 appears next to a suggested contribution of $100—an example

of contrast effects similar to those produced by decoys. A stamped, self-
addressed reply envelope is included; the fact that these good, selfless people
have already spent the money for a stamp puts additional pressure on the
recipient not to "waste it" by pitching the appeal in the trash.
Publishers Clearing House uses some of the same persuasion tactics as
Greenpeace, along with some additional ones. The goal of the communication is
to induce you to subscribe to one or more magazines.
Their reply card consists of space for ordering magazine subscriptions plus "12
lucky prize numbers" that could win you a million dollars. To order a
subscription, you must find a stamp (from a 10½-by-22-inch sheet)
corresponding to the magazine you want and paste it on your sweepstakes entry
blank. Although you may enter the sweepstakes without ordering magazines (or
else it would be illegal), ordering a subscription is encouraged with such phrases
as "Express entry! Place at least one [magazine] coupon at left for automatic
entry in all giveaways" and "If you haven't ordered lately, this may be the last
bulletin we can send to you."
In the packet, Publishers Clearing House offers a free "gift"
of coupons redeemable for more than $10 on Procter & Gamble products. As
with the Greenpeace stickers, the gift of coupons invokes the norm of
reciprocity. Further, by using the coupons one can adopt a self-image of "helpful
and concerned" because Procter & Gamble will donate 100 to the Special
Olympics for each coupon redeemed.
One insert states: "Don't throw away the number that can win you one million
dollars." Recall that earlier we noted that it is more painful to lose money than it
is pleasurable to gain the same amount.
By framing the proposition as avoiding the loss of a million dollars, Publishers
Clearing House provides extra motivation for returning an entry.
Other inserts describe possible sweepstakes prizes and past winners and, in a use
of the self-sell technique, ask you to imagine "what it would be like to win a
million dollars." Many of the inserts are personalized with the name of the
recipient to attract attention and aid in self-persuasion. Other inserts describe
magazines that can only be obtained through Publishers Clearing House or free
gifts that cannot be obtained by purchasing the magazines at the newsstand (see

the discussion of phantoms in Chapter 30). One flier even notes that you can win
an American flag by returning your order (see the discussion of heuristics and
symbols in Chapter 17).
One interesting feature of the Publishers Clearing House packet is what can be
called the "sticker-hunt game." Customers are eligible for special prizes and
bonuses if they find the right stickers and paste them in the right spots. The
version we received offered double prize money for finding ten special stamps.
How does this sticker-hunt game increase the likelihood that you will send in an
order? One way to figure this out is to keep track of your cognitive responses as
you hunt down the stickers and compare them to what your thoughts might have
been if the sticker-hunt game were not there.
We once played the sticker-hunt game. The first few stamps were easy to find.
After that, it was much tougher and we began to think: "Where's that double-
prize sticker? Hmmmm. It's not over here by the Business Week sticker or over
there by the Consumer Reports stamp.
Oh, here it is, taped to the entry form. Clever. Now, where's the bonus-prize
sticker?" After twenty minutes of such thoughts, we were able to locate all ten
stickers. Notice, however, what we weren't thinking during this time: "Gee, do I
really need a subscription to yet another magazine?" In other words, the sticker-
hunt game was distracting us from counterarguing the true persuasive message.
If you don't have anything to say, sing it! (A similar analysis can be made of the
sweepstakes itself. By concentrating attention on the long shot of winning big
prizes, thoughts are directed away from counterarguing the sales appeal.)
The sticker-hunt game offers another persuasive advantage— it invokes the need
to rationalize one's efforts. The ease with which the first few stickers are found
sucks you into the game and elicits a commitment to finding all ten. After twenty
minutes of effort, you are not likely to say, "Gee, that was stupid; I'll throw it all
in the trash." On the contrary, to justify your efforts, you are more likely to mail
the entry immediately and to increase your chances of winning by purchasing
some magazines.
Our description of direct-marketing techniques presents a rather cynical picture
of this form of persuasion. Whenever techniques are carefully scrutinized, one
can be left with a feeling of betrayal and manipulation. This might occur even if
you are dissecting a work of art, such as Dali's Last Supper or Shakespeare's The

Tempest, each of which has its own point of view. Our goal is not to cast
aspersion on the products being peddled or condemn direct marketers for using
these techniques. Indeed, the astute reader can doubtless pick out, from our own
essays, numerous examples of the use of granfalloons, decoys, vivid images, and
so on to illustrate the points of this book and, we hope, command your attention.
We are not opposed to the use of attention-getting devices per se. We are
opposed to their use in a deceptive manner that obfuscates rather than clarifies
the issues at hand. For example, a sticker-hunt game obscures legitimate reasons
for purchasing a magazine, and biased wording of questions can cloud important
environmental issues by falsely arousing emotions. Indeed, as we are writing this
chapter, Publishers Clearing House, in response to a lawsuit brought by state
attorneys general, has agreed to stop using some influence tactics and to make it
clear that your chances of winning a sweepstakes are not improved by a
purchase. Persuasion does not always need to result in deception and a confusion
of the issues at hand.
In this context, we should mention that direct marketing is often the object of
consumer complaints. The two most common objections to direct marketing are
the existence of flimflam (fly-by-night operations that offer goods and services
but either do not deliver or deliver a product far inferior to the one advertised)
and the obtrusiveness of the appeal (the mailbox is cluttered with junk mail).
Reputable direct marketers are concerned about these issues—after all, it cuts
into their sales. For that reason, they have set up an association with a members'
code of ethics and a procedure for having your name removed from members'
mailing lists.*
Despite these complaints, the use of direct-marketing techniques is on the
increase. More catalogs, mailers, 800 numbers, and dot com merchants appear
every day. Television channels such as QVC and the Home Shopping Network
now offer merchandise for purchase directly from your home. Direct marketing
does offer the consumer a number of advantages: a wide variety of goods that
cannot be profitably stocked at the local store, the ability to provide a high
degree of customer service, and a quick and convenient means of shopping for
today's time-pressed consumer. It also has the ability to offer the consumer a
"superior" form of persuasion—one based not on
irrelevant brand images and misleading "packages" but on useful information.

Consider a typical ad for a pair of sport shorts appearing in a Lands' End catalog.
The ad shows a picture of the shorts, along with available colors and sizes plus
an extensive list of features describing every detail of the shorts from fabric
quality to waist design to the construction of the pockets. Admittedly, this
information is not unbiased. No ad is. We all seek to put our best foot forward.
However, the ad provides more information about the product than can typically
be gained from a televised "image" ad featuring beautiful men and women
actively wearing a pair of shorts. (Sadly, we probably know more about the
quality of Lands' End sport shorts than we do about most political candidates.) A
consumer equipped with catalogs from other merchants (and there are more than
12 million catalogs produced each year) could conveniently engage in
comparison shopping and thus make selections with some degree of rationality.
Recall that we said earlier that direct marketers are very concerned with ensuring
high rates of customer response. This affords customers the opportunity to
influence a marketer's selection of persuasion tactics. If the merchant uses tactics
that you do not find acceptable—for example, an inappropriate use of a fear
appeal, devious use of distraction—you can throw the mail in the trash or recycle
bin. Or, better yet, call the free 800 number and explain why you will not be
buying the goods. Reputable merchants will learn from such complaints, and we
should see more and more persuasive messages containing arguments that stand
up to thoughtful scrutiny.
*To have your name removed from mailing lists, write Direct Marketing
Association, 6 East 43 Street, New York, NY 10017. In the United States,
fraudulent telemarketers can be reported to your state attorney general or to the
Federal Trade Commission at 1-800-FTC-HELP.
 

36
How to Become a Cult Leader
On November 18, 1978, not many people knew much about the small South
American country of Guyana. Even fewer outside of the San Francisco Bay Area
knew that a group of followers of the Reverend Jim Jones had set up a "model"
community of believers in the jungles of Guyana. However, on that day 914
members of Jones's People s Temple committed mass suicide. A tub of fruit
punch laced with cyanide and sedatives was brought out. Jones ordered his
people to drink, informing them that they would soon be attacked by the CIA
and that it would be better to die a revolutionary's death. Adult members induced
their children to drink first and then drank the mixture themselves.
This, of course, was not the first time that mass murder and destruction
transpired at the hands of a cult leader. Two examples from history illustrate the
point. In 1534, Jan van Leyden lead a militant group of Anabaptists in the
takeover of Minister, a German city in the throes of economic turmoil. The
group believed that the end of the world was near and that they had been called
to create the Kingdom of God on earth. Unlike other Anabaptist groups that
espoused nonviolence, van Leyden's cult of New Jerusalem sought to establish
their communist kingdom by force of arms. The result was a reign of terror in
Minister for more than a year. It ended when authorities captured the city,
resulting in mass destruction and death for many of the inhabitants.1 At the
beginning of the twentieth century in the Russian district of Kargopol, members
of the 200-year-old sect called the Brothers and Sisters of the Red Death became
convinced that the world was to end on November 13, 1900. The cult got its
name because it banned marriage; members could have sexual intercourse
provided they immediately submitted to the possibility of death by suffocation
with a large red cushion. The group also believed that God would be pleased if
they burned themselves to death before the end of the world. More than 100
members died as a sacrifice to God before czarist troops could arrive to prevent
further slaughter.2
Nor was Jonestown the scene of the last cultic mass murder. In the spring of
1993 federal agents sought to investigate rumors of child abuse and weapons

violations at the Branch Davidian compound in Waco, Texas. The members
believed that their leader, David Koresh, was the last in a line of prophets who
would open the seals of the Book of Revelation to usher in the Apocalypse and
the Kingdom of God. In the siege, shoot-out, and conflagration that followed,
eighty Branch Davidians (including twenty-one children) and four government
agents lost their lives. In October 1994, fifty-three members of the apocalyptic
Order of the Solar Temple died in a series of explosions and fires in Canada and
Switzerland. Their leader, Luc Jouret, a Belgian homeopathic doctor, taught a
New Age mishmash of astrology, ecology, and health regimes; he believed that
life on this planet was an illusion and would continue on other planets. In
December 1995, sixteen more Solar Temple members were found dead in
France. On March 19, 1995, five members of the Aum Supreme Truth cult
placed bags leaking the poisonous gas sarin on the worlds busiest subway
system, resulting in the death of twelve people and injury of more than 5,500.
The attack on the Tokyo subway was so cunning and cold-blooded that CNN
even stopped its blanket coverage of the O. J. Simpson trial to report the Tokyo
event live. Aum's leader, Shoko Asahara, taught a hightech version of Tibetan
Buddhism and worship of the Hindu god Shiva the Destroyer; the cult believed
that nuclear war was imminent.
On March 26, 1997, thirty-nine men and women of the group known as Heaven's
Gate, dressed in purple shrouds and tennis shoes, killed themselves, thinking that
they would board a UFO following the comet Hale-Bopp. This spaceship was
supposedly to take them to the Kingdom of Heaven. On March 17, 2000, more
than 500 men, women, and children perished in a church fire in Uganda
apparently as part of a murder-suicide orchestrated by the leaders of the
Movement for the Restoration of the Ten Commandments of God. The toll
climbed to around 1,000 deaths as the bodies of other victims were found buried
in graves in various locations controlled by the cult.
The behavior of cult members is as mysterious as it is frightening.
Members of Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church periodically engage in a
mass marriage, being randomly assigned by Moon and his associates to mates
whom they have never previously met. Members of David Berg's Children of
God (COG, or sometimes called Family of Love) willingly give all they own to
the church. The backyard of one COG commune was filled with automobiles,
buses, jeeps, and motorcycles that members had donated to Berg. Female
members of COG practice "flirty fishing," or going to discos and bars with the
sole aim of picking up men for sex and then trying to convert them to the cult

sole aim of picking up men for sex and then trying to convert them to the cult.
Berg called them "God's whores." The followers of Swami Rajneesh turned over
all of their worldly possessions to their leader and smiled benignly as he
accumulated eighteen Rolls Royces for his personal use. One member of the
Church of Armageddon jumped from a tree to his death believing that, because
he had purified himself, he could fly. Other members of the cult sit hand in hand
in a circle and connect themselves to electrical devices to see how much
electricity their bodies can stand because "all substances are from God."
Members of the Aum Supreme Truth paid $7,000 per month to wear a PSI, or
Perfect Salvation Initiation. What is a PSI? A cap covered with wires and
electrodes that send 6-volt shocks (3 volts for children) to synchronize the brain
waves of the wearer with those of the Master Shoko Asahara. Some of the
members of Heaven's Gate castrated themselves in a desire to reach the
Kingdom of God.
Many claim that cult members are "brainwashed." This rather frightening term
was originally used to describe the persuasion tactics used on American
prisoners in Communist Chinese prison camps during the Korean War. These
camps were totalitarian environments in which the captors came to control the
thoughts of the POWs by controlling all sources of information and by
systematically rewarding and punishing appropriate and inappropriate thought.
Since then, the term brainwashing has been used rather loosely and has taken on
a meaning surrounded by menace and mystery. It has come to refer to exotic
(and often undescribed) persuasion tactics that are assumed to be irresistible.
Victims of brainwashing are depicted on television dramas and in the movies as
if they are zombies led around by a mesmerizing leader.
This representation is extremely misleading; it suggests that only fools or those
weak of will could fall into the clutches of a cult leader.
Actually, anyone can be the target of a cult.3 Cult recruiters often look for those
who may be experiencing a vulnerable time in their lives—those who have just
lost a close relationship, are at a point in their lives where they are not sure what
they want to do next, or are feeling lonely or left out.
However, research shows that the majority of those who join cults come from
middle-class backgrounds, are fairly well educated, and are not seriously
disturbed prior to joining. Today's cults have begun recruiting the elderly

(particularly widowed women), professionals with small businesses such as
dentists and lawyers, and college students.
Just what is a cult? First, a cult is not a label to be applied to any group that we
happen not to like or that does things we think are bizarre. Using the term in this
manner raises issues of freedom of religion and expression and runs into some of
the traps we discussed in Chapter 31. Nor does the term apply only to those
groups promoting a certain form of religion. Today, cults can be centered on a
range of issues, including the occult, race, politics, therapy, and self-help, as well
as religion and spirituality.
The term cult is used to describe a pattern of social relations within a group. At
the core of these relations is dependency.4 In a cult, members are dependent on
the group and its leader for most if not all resources, including money, food and
clothing, information, decision making, and, perhaps most importantly, self-
esteem and social identity. This dependency results in a specific pattern of
relations. First, cults tend to be highly leader-oriented, since the leader is the
source of all sustenance.
Second, because the leader is so important, he or she cannot be criticized or
second-guessed. Cults are marked by little or no checks and balances on the
leader's power (that is, no court of appeal and no recourse to law for justice). The
leader is typically exempt from the rules of the cult. Communication is highly
centralized, with little information available from outside the group. The agenda,
objectives, and work tasks are set by the elite. Finally, given the importance of
the group to the individual, all influence and persuasion is directed toward
maintaining the group. Rewards and punishments are used to maintain the
leaders power. Dissent is immediately quashed. Persuasion is based on simple
images and plays on emotions and prejudices.
Although cults may seem strange and mysterious, their persuasion tactics are
nothing more or less than the same basic propaganda tactics that we have seen
throughout this book. Cults simply use these techniques in a much more
systematic and complete manner than we are normally accustomed to. Simply
because the end result is dramatic and bizarre does not require that the means to
get there be mystifying. Indeed, in case any of you would like to be a cult leader,
we can list seven mundane but nonetheless "proven-effective" tactics for
creating and maintaining a cult.5
1.

Create your own social
reality. The first
step in creating a cult is to construct your own social reality by eliminating all
sources of information other than that provided by the cult. Cult headquarters
should be isolated from the rest of the world—a farm in Oregon, a secluded
house on the outskirts of town, a jungle in Guyana, a complex in Waco, Texas, a
community at the foot of Mount Fuji. If cult members must remain in the larger
community (perhaps because income from their high-paying job is needed), then
they should be isolated psychologically by keeping them busy chanting, reading
cult literature, or working continuously for the cult. Members' mail should be
censored. Family should be prevented from visiting members. Strict boundaries
between "believers" and the "unredeemed" must be
maintained. Such censorship can be physical, that is, forcibly excluding
outsiders and physically restraining wayward members.
However, it is much more practical to teach members self-censorship by labeling
everything that is not "of the cult" as "of the devil."
The second step in constructing a social reality is to provide a cult's-eye view of
the world. This picture of the world is then used by members to interpret all
events and happenings. For example, Jim Jones taught that there is a constant
threat of nuclear war and that the world is full of racism. To be prepared to live
in this evil world, one must be ready to die. "Suicide" practice drills were
conducted to prepare members for the inevitable attack on the Temple by this
evil world. The Unification Church, which owns the Washington Times and
United Press International, teaches the Divine Principle, a doctrine claiming that
humanity must be restored to God's grace through payment of indemnity
(penance) and the advent of a new messiah (the Reverend Moon). The believer is
thus prepared to atone for sins through service to the church and to accept the
leaders word as truth. David Berg, known as Moses to his followers, creates
social reality for his Children of God through a series of "Mo Letters." These
letters purport to be revelations from God and describe the cult's theology as
well as providing guidance on how to interpret world events. For example, his
letters advise cult members that they are special and thus above the law, that the
world is rotten and thus it is acceptable to lie and steal for the church, and that
sex with Berg is a good idea. Both Shoko Asahara and David Koresh taught that

we live in the last days and that Armageddon would soon occur. The only way to
survive was to prepare to defend oneself by stockpiling weapons. The Movement
for the Restoration of the Ten Commandments of God also taught that the world
would end (first on January 1, 2000, and then, when this prophecy failed, the
date was postponed to January 1, 2001) and that the only way to salvation was
through prayer, fasting, and sexual abstinence.
To get a real feel for the full power of a cult, imagine adopting their beliefs for
just a moment. Try seeing the world as if you were a cult member. In a bizarre
way, the world makes sense, perhaps for the first time in a cult member's life.
One useful technique for constructing social reality is to create your own
language and jargon. For example, Divine Light Mission members call their
services "satsang" and "darshan." The Unification Church refers to lying to the
unredeemed as "heavenly deception." Scientology teaches that the "thetan"
(soul) is impeded in its many lives by "engrams"
(aberrations) that result from wrongdoing. Koresh believed that the Branch
Davidians were in the "fifth seal" or the last events of human history. Asahara
taught his followers that because they had entered a higher astral plane, returning
to the world would cause great pain and suffering. Heaven's Gate referred to the
body as a physical vehicle or container. Suicide meant failing to move to the
next level (as opposed to killing one's self). In these terms, their suicide was
nothing more than replacing one's present car with a new one in order to take a
trip to a new land. A good vocabulary is useful for putting the "right" spin on
things. By teaching a battery of cliches such as "bourgeois mentality,"
"Krishna consciousness," "of the world," and "in the Lord," any event is quickly
defined as good or evil and critical thinking is abruptly terminated.
When it comes to teaching your social reality, here is one additional point to
keep in mind: Repeat your message over and over and over again. Repetition
makes the heart grow fonder, and fiction, if heard frequently enough, can come
to sound like fact.
2.
Create a granfalloon. The granfalloon technique requires the creation of an in-
group of followers and an out-group of the unredeemed. The technique allows

you to control members by constantly reminding them: "If you want to be a
chosen one, then you must act like a chosen one. If you are not chosen, then you
are wicked and unredeemed. To be saved, you must act like you are supposed to
act."
Seasoned group members serve as role models and guides on how to behave for
new group members. Intense peer pressure is applied to secure conformity. The
result is a uniformity of opinion and behavior in the cult, which then serves to
further reinforce cult practices—if everyone is doing it, it must be right.
A man named Love Israel, head of the Church of Armageddon, teaches his
followers that he is the "king" and "Christ's go-between connecting the members
with heaven." He tells his followers, "Don't use your little mind inside. Use your
big mind, the collective family's mind. We're your mind." Love Israel
understands the granfalloon technique.
A new recruit is often brought into a granfalloon with a practice called "love-
bombing"—the newcomer is showered with attention, approval, and support by
cult members. Cult recruiters are taught to mirror the interests and attitudes of
the potential new member, thus making it feel as if there is rapport and
understanding between the recruit and the cult. In order to keep this support and
approval, the recruit must conform to the group.
The essential ingredient in establishing an in-group of believers is the creation of
a social identity—an image of who "we"
are. Joining a cult represents a break from the "other"
world and the acceptance of this new identity. Many cults require a "baptism" or
other initiation to indicate acceptance of the new identity. A new name can be
given; all the members of the Philadelphia-based group MOVE took as their last
name "Africa"; the members of the Church of Armageddon use the last name
"Israel."
Hare Krishnas adopt distinctive orange robes and eat a special vegetarian diet.
Early followers of Sun Myung Moon often did not possess their own clothes, but
shared among themselves; when their clothes got dirty, they turned them in to be
washed and took another set from the commune's supply. Thus a simple
indicator of one's personal identity—what one wears—belongs to the group.

The Divine Light Mission "satsang," or religious sermon, is designed to
encourage new members to start answering the question: "What is a premie [the
term for a member]?" Church of God followers adopt new biblical names. To
further increase the cohesion of the group, all new recruits must learn three Bible
verses in the morning before any of them can eat breakfast. The Branch
Davidians believed they were select martyrs who would be called to rule in the
coming Kingdom of God. Aum Supreme Truth members wore distinctive robes
and ritual costumes, ate a unique diet of Aum food (unprocessed rice, seaweed,
bean curd, and vegetable stew), and practiced purification rites such as vomiting
10 pints of water and flushing the nostrils with string and warm water.
The outward trappings of the believer—the new name, distinctive garb, a special
diet—all confirm that the member is indeed a chosen one. To retain this valued
membership, all one needs to do is continue to grow in this newfound life and, of
course, continue to obey.
The reverse side of the granfalloon tactic is the creation of an out-group to hate.
The Children of God teach members to hate their parents. One Mo letter states
that parents are evil; they are not your true family; we are your family now.
Chinese prison wardens taught American POWs that the capitalist system is
corrupt. The Unification Church teaches that only believers will be resurrected at
the final coming. The Church of Armageddon instructs that the "world"
is bad. Playing on long-held Japanese prejudices, Aum Supreme Truth taught
that Jews were the tools of Satan and that preparations were being made for a
final war between Japan and the United States (which was run by Jews). Of
course, any perceived enemy of Aum—the Japanese emperor, Madonna, and
Bill Clinton—were labeled "Jews." Heaven's Gate members believed that the
outside society consisted of angels in the making that had flunked out, just as
Lucifer had failed God. The creation of an evil out-group serves the dual purpose
of making members feel good about belonging to their own group ("I'm glad I'm
not like them") and increasing their fears about leaving and not supporting their
own group ("I don't want to be like them; I can't let them take over the world.")
If granfalloon techniques are correctly applied, then you should be successful in
creating fear of the "outside" world and the belief that the cult is the only
solution to a happy life. Life is thus impossible outside the cult—the only
solution to life's problems.

3.
Create commitment through a rationalization trap. Cults can insure members'
obedience by establishing a spiral of escalating commitment; the cult member, at
first, agrees to simple requests that becoming increasingly more demanding. Jim
Jones used such a technique, eliciting great trust from his followers one step at a
time. Some light can be shed on what led to the final mass murder if we look at
it as part of a chain of events.
Let's start at the beginning. Jim Jones was a dynamic speaker and preacher.
It is easy to understand how a charismatic leader like Jones might extract money
from the members of the church. Once they had committed themselves to
donating a small amount of money in response to his message of peace and
universal brotherhood, he was able to request and receive a great deal more.
Next he induced people to increase their tithes to support the church. Jones
would often ask his members to perform loyalty tests, such as signing a blank
confession of "sins" and admitting to feelings of homosexuality or the
commission of aberrant sexual acts. Jones would tell members, "If you were
really committed, you would be willing to do anything for the church."
Next, Jones induced members to sell their homes and turn over the proceeds to
the church. Soon, at his request, several of his followers pulled up stakes,
leaving family and friends, to start life anew in Guyana.
There they not only worked hard (thus increasing their commitment) but were
also cut off from potential dissenting opinion; they were surrounded by true
believers. The chain of events continued. Jones took sexual liberties with several
married women among his followers, who acquiesced, if reluctantly; Jones
claimed to be the father of their children. Finally, as a prelude to the climactic
event, Jones induced his followers to perform a series of mock ritual suicides as
a test of loyalty and obedience. Thus, in a step-by-step fashion, the commitment
to Jim Jones increased. Each step in and of itself was not a huge and ludicrous
leap from the one preceding it.
After making an initial commitment, one does not feel comfortable reneging on
the deal. To justify the sensibility of the initial commitment, the member is often
willing to do more and then still more—to meet increasingly demanding
commitments. In this way, the resolution of dissonance and maintenance of one's

self-image as honoring commitments form a powerful rationalization trap.
Cults employ other emotional traps as well. They often shower new recruits with
attention and gifts (for example, a free meal, fellowship, or, in the case of
Children of God, free sex with a cult member); consistent with the norm of
reciprocity, it is now time for the newcomer to do something for the group—or
at least not be rude and leave in the middle of the leader's presentation. The guilt
of a sinner can be reduced by a gift of everything one owns to the cult.
Embarrassment over forced sex with a leader can be relieved by thinking that
one needed such self-sacrificing "discipline."
Cruelty to outsiders such as parents can be justified by seeing the need for even
more cruelty. A feeling of stupidity for giving all to the cult can be overcome by
rationalizing it as devotion to a noble cause. Confessions are used to reveal
members' past undesirable behavior and feelings; with such information, the cult
leader can make the member feel like a hypocrite for not accepting the
"redemption" offered by the cult.
Note also that the member, after having done all these things, is faced with a
dilemma: "How can I explain all that I have done to those outside the group?"
This requires the creation of a sensible, coherent justification that is not easily
forthcoming. The rationalization trap is sprung.
4.
Establish the leader's credibility and attractiveness. Most cults have leader
myths—stories and legends passed from member to member concerning the life
and times of the cult leader.
Unification Church biographers compare Moon's birth in Pyung-buk, North
Korea, with Jesus' birth in Bethlehem—both were at night, both were in small
unknown villages, and both marked the dawn of a cosmic transition. When
Moon was sixteen years old, Jesus appeared and told him, "You will be the
completer of man's salvation by being the second coming of Christ." According
to Divine Light legend, Maharaj Ji, as a young child, was already a great
spiritual leader and teacher and was thus appointed to head a holy family in
India. In answer to the question, "Just who is the Guru Maharaj Ji?" premies will
often answer, "The Guru Maharaj Ji is God." After an initial period of
indoctrination, wardens in Communist Chinese prison camps strove to maintain

an image as wise and caring teachers whose job it was to instruct the wayward
prisoner in the ways of the truth. Children of God leader David Berg, blessed in
his mother's womb so he would be like Moses, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and
his namesake, David, is the fulfillment of many biblical prophesies. David Berg's
powers, described in his pamphlet "The True Story of Moses and the Children of
God," are so great that "you can even rebuke the devil in the name of David and
he will flee. No power in the world can stand against the power of David."
The Branch Davidians considered Koresh to be a second Christ or a new
messiah who would fulfill the prophecy of the Book of Revelation.
According to Aum Supreme Truth legend, Shoko Asahara had amazing powers
—he could live under water without oxygen for up to an hour and could levitate
and fly. Asahara was shown in pictures with the Dalai Lama, who supposedly
proclaimed that "he has the mind of a Buddha" and gave him his mission of
saving Japan. Further reinforcing his divine nature, a sip of Asahara's blood was
sold for $7,000 and his dirty bathwater went for $800 per quart.
What is the purpose of such myths? Cults require members to engage in extreme
behavior—giving up children and family, having sex with leaders and strangers,
practicing to murder oneself. Recall that earlier (Chapter 22) we noted that
extreme requests arouse dissonance; we are more likely to comply with extreme
requests if common means for reducing our dissonance are not available (e.g.,
derogating the requester) and we can rationalize our extreme actions—we must
do it for God and to save all humankind. It is hard to disobey a person believed
to be "the son of God"
or, at least, blessed by a divine purpose. Anybody in his or her right mind should
seek to identify with and be like such a holy person.
5.
Send members out to proselytize the unredeemed and to fund-raise for the cult.
Witnessing to the unconverted has the obvious advantage of bringing in new
members. Perhaps just as important, proselytizing can ensure that members are
constantly engaged in self-sell, or self-generated persuasion. The act of
witnessing requires the member to state anew to many different people the
positive advantages of being in a cult. In arguing to convince others, members
convince themselves. In testimonials given to other cult members, many cults

encourage members to embellish how bad they were (on drugs, sexually
permissive, living an empty life) before joining the cult. The worse you were, the
more approval you receive from the group. By constantly recounting these
stories, cult members come to believe in the power of the cult to effect change
and how hopeless they would be without it.
Evangelical activity also strengthens resolve. Each instance of witnessing or
attempt to sell the cult to outsiders is likely to elicit negative responses or an
attack on the cult. In defending their beliefs, cult members learn to refute a wide
range of attacks, thus inoculating themselves against attack and thereby
maintaining belief in the cult (see Chapter 38).
6.
Distract members from thinking "undesirable" thoughts.
Most cult doctrines are hard to take seriously, much less accept.
The cult member, especially a new recruit, is likely to question and counterargue
such basic points as the value of giving all one owns, especially a new sports car,
to the cult and the merits of working sixteen-hour shifts and turning over all
proceeds to the cult leadership. The old advertising saw "If you don't have
anything to say, sing it" probably never applied more. How, then, does a cult
leader distract a member from carefully scrutinizing and questioning the cult's
doctrine?
The Children of God use a combination of techniques. First, they never leave
new recruits alone to think for themselves. Bible verses are played continually
on a loudspeaker, and a trainer follows the new recruit around preaching Bible
verses and Mo letters—even as the new recruit goes to the bathroom. The new
recruit is deprived of food, water, and sleep. It is difficult to think when you are
hungry and thirsty and fatigued. Famed deprogrammer Ted Patrick went through
this indoctrination; having been deprived of sleep for forty-four hours, he
describes his feelings:
At first you are frantic for silence—just five minutes of peace and privacy.
Then your senses begin to get numb—you grow accustomed to the
constant noise. You also, as you get tired, stop really registering what they
tell you. You don't hear individual words anymore, just a stream of
babbling and shrieking. I guess that's when the programming starts

becoming effective—when the conscious mind stops functioning out of
weariness and all that propaganda begins to seep into your unconscious.6
There are other ways to disrupt counterarguing in a cult. Chanting and singing
prevent thinking about anything else but the chant and the song. Meditations
such as those performed by the Divine Light Mission, in which the premie
spends hours trying to visualize light, hear music, taste nectar, and speak the
primordial vibration of existence, prevent the meditator from focusing on other,
more worldly, concerns. Aum used a variety of techniques for controlling
thought, including drugs, PSIs, sleep deprivation, and meditation.
Nonstop activities such as proselytizing, working, and cooking and cleaning for
other members further limit the opportunity for careful thought and personal
reflection.
Once the recruit has accepted the cult, the task becomes one of preventing
further close scrutiny and thought about the merits of membership.
This can be done by teaching that any "disagreeable thought"
is evil and from the devil. For example, if a member doubts a leader's command
or starts to wonder about the merits of a particular theological point, he or she is
counseled that this is "out of the Lord" or "from Satan" and should be rebuked.
Hare Krishnas are required to take frequent cold showers to eliminate thoughts
about sex. Members thus become their own mind police. Should this fail, more
overt tactics may be necessary. For example, Jim Jones required a female cult
member in Jonestown to have sex in public with someone she despised as
punishment for wrong thoughts.
Because their parents disobeyed Jones, daughters were forced to masturbate in
public or have sex in public with a disliked cult member. Aum Supreme Truth
placed those who disobeyed or tried to escape into painful hot baths (of 117°F)
or into tiny cells containing only a toilet and a television blaring Asahara's voice
all day and night. Observers get the message, too: Control your own thoughts, or
at least the expression of those thoughts.
7.
Fixate members' vision on a phantom. The successful cult leader is always
dangling a notion of the promised land and a vision of a better world before the

faithful. Unification Church members follow and attend to the teachings of the
"Lord of the Second Advent" so that they can be resurrected to the perfection
state during the third and final testament stage. Jim Jones offered Jonestown to
poor residents of San Francisco as a place that would, of course, require hard
work but would also afford members the opportunity to "live comfortably—
you'll have your own home, get a good school, college, swim, fish." Similarly,
the nineteenth-century Oneida commune was working to build "heaven on
earth." Amway asks new members to decide on their "Dream"—a new Cadillac,
a summer cottage, a new ranch, or whatever they would like to get by selling
Amway products. Divine Light Mission faithful are striving to see a light during
their meditation and thus become a premie. It can be accomplished by service
and devotion to Guru Maharaj Ji. Hare Krishnas believe that their chanting and
dancing will stave off the inevitable decline and downfall of humanity. Aum and
the Branch Davidians offered survival in the upcoming destruction of the world.
In L. Ron Hubbard's Church of Scientology, members are working for a state of
"clear." To become a "clear,"
members pay a high tuition to attend Scientology classes; devoted members may
spend $10,000 to $15,000 in a matter of months.
By fixating a member's gaze on a future phantom, you provide a powerful
incentive to maintain service to the group. Believers will be afraid to stop
working, fearful that they or the world may lose the desired prize if they take
even just one break. The average Moonie puts in an estimated sixty-seven hours
a week working for the cause. It is also likely that most new recruits will be in a
state of despair. Phantoms can establish hope—a powerful motivator of human
behavior—by providing a sense of purpose and mission.
Our purpose in presenting these seven tactics is, quite obviously, not to have
readers of this book go out and start their own cults. Because "brainwashing" can
be viewed as "hocus-pocus,"
some people are apt to deny the very real power of cult tactics.
Others are likely to attribute all sorts of magical powers to cults, standing in awe
and fear of their abilities to control minds. By discussing the persuasion tactics
utilized by cults, we are attempting to remove some of the mystery and
ultimately reduce the danger of cults.7

But there is another reason for understanding the persuasion tactics of cults.
Cults use the same persuasion tactics often used by other propagandists; cults
just use them in a more thorough and total manner. It may be useful to reread
this discussion and, instead of thinking of cults, consider your everyday social
groups, such as family, church, country, or place of work, and ask, "What forms
of propaganda are present in my life? How am I dependent on the groups I live
in? Are the groups that I live in cultic and, if so, what should I do about them?"
 

37
Propaganda in the Third Reich: A Case for Uncertainty
The year was 1924 and a young aspiring artist named Adolf Hitler sat thinking in
his jail cell. Like many of his generation, he had found it painful to accept
Germany's defeat in the World War, a war in which he had served in vain as a
combat soldier. He shared his country's humiliation over the punishments
dictated by the Treaty of Versailles. Adolf Hitler considered just how it all came
about.
Hitler believed that one of the key factors in Germany's defeat was the skillful
use of propaganda by British and American governments. As Hitler put it:
But it was not until the War that it became evident what immense results
could be obtained by a correct application of propaganda. Here again,
unfortunately, all our studying had to be done on the enemy side, for the
activity on our side was modest, to say the least. . . . For what we failed to
do, the enemy did, with amazing skill and really brilliant calculation. I,
myself, learned enormously from this enemy war propaganda.1
What did Hitler learn from Allied war propaganda? Both the British and
Americans established steering committees and organizations to develop and
disseminate propaganda. For example, in the United States the Committee on
Public Information (CPI), dubbed the Creel Committee after its chair, newspaper
editor George Creel, assisted in training "Four-Minute Men," volunteers who
would speak at local gatherings on behalf of the war effort. The CPI encouraged
the film industry to make pro-war films and saw to it that "facts"
about the war were disseminated widely to the press.
The most striking aspect of British and American propaganda, however, was the
"atrocity story"—reports of alleged cruelty performed by the enemy on innocent
civilians or captured soldiers.
The purpose of such tales was to stiffen the resolve to fight (we can't let this
cruel monster win) and to convince citizens of the morality of the war (set the
rationalization trap). For example, rumors circulated that the Germans boiled the

corpses of enemy soldiers to make soap and that they mistreated the citizens of
occupied Belgium. Much was made of the execution of an English nurse serving
in Brussels for helping Allied soldiers return to the war and the German sinking
of the luxury liner Lusitania, which, incidentally, happened to be carrying arms
and war supplies. Although some of these atrocity stories contained a grain of
truth, some were greatly exaggerated and others were pure fiction.2
Hitler realized that if Germany was ever to regain its dignity and win the next
war, it would have to go the Allies one better in the war called persuasion.3 He
outlined his plan of attack in two chapters of the book he wrote in jail, Mein
Kampf ("My Struggle"). For Hitler, propaganda was a means to an end—in this
case, the promotion of the German state and the establishment and maintenance
of the rule of the Nazi party. As such, there were no ethics that governed
persuasion; there was only the rule of success or failure. As Hitler put it when
talking about propaganda, "the most cruel weapons were humane if they brought
about a quicker victory."4
Hitler was contemptuous of the ability of the masses to understand events.
If he were alive today, he might remark that the people can operate only in the
peripheral route to persuasion and that they use simple heuristics to guide their
thinking. Effective propaganda relies on heuristics and appeals to the emotions.
Hitler wrote in Mein Kampf:
Its [propaganda's] effect for the most part must be aimed at the emotions
and only to a very limited degree at the so-called intellect. We must avoid
excessive intellectual demands on our public. The receptivity of the great
masses is very limited, their intelligence is small, but their power of
forgetting is enormous. In consequence of these facts, all effective
propaganda must be limited to a very few points and must harp on these
slogans until the last member of the public understands what you want him
to understand by your slogan.5
Having learned from the Allied efforts in World War I the value of an
organization capable of coordinating and delivering effective propaganda, Hitler
established an apparatus of his own. This organization was privy to all the
dealings of the Reich and had the responsibility of selling the government's
actions to the masses. To head up this organization, Hitler selected as his
Minister of Popular Enlightenment and Propaganda Joseph Goebbels, the son of

a lower-middle-class Catholic family from a small town in the Rhineland.
Goebbels served as minister of propaganda from the time the Nazis came to
power in 1933 until he committed suicide (after first poisoning his six children)
near the end of the war. To get a flavor of what Nazi propaganda was really like,
let's look at a few of the persuasion tactics used.
One of the first, and most important, tasks of the Ministry of Popular
Enlightenment and Propaganda was to gain control of the mass media and to
attract the attention of the masses. In the United States, Hitler and Goebbels
hired public relations firms in an attempt to secure favorable press coverage of
the regime. In Germany, the Nazis controlled journalists and filmmakers through
a mixture of punishments and rewards, as we noted in Chapter 32. The Nazi
regime made certain that it was the primary source of news and easily accessible
to certain journalists. This treatment was extended to include foreign
correspondents, thus putting U.S. reporters in a quandary: Report news
unfavorable to Nazi Germany (such as the treatment of Jews) and be expelled or
sanitize the news and be able to continue reporting.
The Nazis gained the attention of the masses by making their propaganda
entertaining.6 For example, Nazi posters used eyecatching graphics such as bold
print and slashing, violent lines as well as attention-getting headlines. Radio
news programs were often packaged as entertainment, featuring famous singers
and celebrities. The 1936
Olympics, which were held in Berlin, were used as a vehicle to promote the
image of a strong "Aryan" nation and to build the self-esteem of the German
people. During the Olympic Games, foreign correspondents were treated like
royalty and given tours of the "successes" of the regime; as a result, many U.S.
journalists filed stories stating that previous reports of attacks on Jews were
either unfounded or greatly exaggerated. With such complete control of the
press, radio, theater, cinema, music, and the arts, the essential themes of the Nazi
party were repeated and repeated. It was nearly impossible in Germany during
the 1930s to read a book or newspaper, listen to a radio broadcast, or see a film
without coming into contact with the Nazi picture of the world.
Goebbels masterfully spread the Nazi agenda to the German nation by labeling
events with easily learned slogans or terms that captured Germans'

attention and directed their thinking. For example, he insisted that the word
Fuhrer ("leader") be used only to refer to Hitler. To belittle democracy, the
Nazis referred to the Weimar Parliament as Quasselbude, or "chatterbox." To
link the Russians and British as enemies of Germany, he labeled an aborted
British raid as the "Maisky Offensive," after the Russian envoy to London,
thereby creating the impression that the raid was conducted to appease the
Soviets. To provide hope in 1942, Goebbels coined the phrase schleichende
Krise ("creeping crisis") to suggest economic, social, and political unrest in
England.
Although in hindsight these phrases may seem contrived, they did create a
"picture in the head" of world reality: "The Russians and the British are in
cahoots to get us; fortunately, there is unrest in England and we have our leader."
Euphemisms were employed to lessen the sting of state-supported pillaging,
torture, murder, and genocide. For example, the Gestapo didn't arrest citizens but
took them into "protective custody"; they did not steal property, but "secured" it.
The invasion of Poland was a "police action," and the subsequent murder of its
citizens was termed "extraordinary pacification action."
The buildings in the death camps were given cheery names, such as the Happy
Nightingale, the Rose Garden, and the Baths and Inhalation Institutes. And Jews
were never gassed or murdered in Nazi Germany; they were merely led to the
final solution or given special treatment.
Goebbels also established "pictures in the head" through the use of innuendo and
rumor. A common tactic was to attack the press (especially the foreign press) as
liars and atrocity-mongers, thus leading German citizens to believe that any
report unfavorable to the regime was biased. In the years of the Nazi party's rise
to power, Goebbels would denigrate the character of members of the
"opposition"
by circulating rumors of scandals involving them. Toward the end of the war, as
Germany suffered defeats on the battlefield, rumors were circulated that German
scientists were nearing the completion of two new weapons—a U-boat capable
of traveling underwater at high speeds and an anti-aircraft gun whose missiles
were magnetically drawn to aircraft in the sky. The purpose of such rumors was
to instill the belief that Germany could still win the war and should continue the
struggle, despite a rash of defeats.

Nazi propaganda used heuristics extensively to secure agreement with its
message. For example, rallies and propaganda films always showed masses of
cheering, applauding, saluting Nazi supporters. We know this as the social
consensus heuristic—if everyone else agrees, so should I.
Nazi slogans expressed an air of confidence: "Join Our Struggle,"
"Fight with Us," "Adolf Hitler Is Victory."
Whenever Hider spoke, he spoke with confidence and certainty of the Nazi
purpose and the ability of the German people to accomplish this purpose. As we
saw earlier, a speaker's confidence serves to increase the likelihood that a
message will be accepted.
Hitler and Goebbels used historical symbols and monuments extensively to
package the regime. As Hitler was coming to power, he announced his "Twenty-
five Theses," reminiscent of the Ninety-five Theses that the German religious
reformer Martin Luther had tacked to a church door in Wittenberg. Nazi artwork
and posters often employed the style of Albrecht Durer to suggest the historical
roots of the regime. A popular genre of Nazi film was the historical biography.
In such films, the life of a national historic hero such as Friedrich Schiller or
Otto von Bismarck was depicted with an emphasis on parallels (often irrelevant)
to the life and times of Adolf Hitler.
Architecture was also used to package the Third Reich. Under the direction of
Albert Speer, the Nazis planned an extensive effort to erect public buildings of a
special nature. Due to the war effort, few were built.
Those that were served Nazi purposes. For example, priority was given to
erecting sports arenas, gigantic assembly halls, cinemas, and theaters—all of
which could be used for political purposes. The Nazi style, which might best be
termed "Nordic Hellenism,"
was classical in design, but on a gigantic scale. Public buildings were designed
to look like enlarged Greek temples, with towering steps and row upon row of
columns. The design reinforced the image of the Nazis as heirs to the great
cultures of the past. An individual who entered such an edifice would feel his or
her own stature dwarfed by the power of the state as represented by the building.
In contrast, the original Greek temples were always built to human proportions,
leaving the visitor with the feeling that, as Protagoras said, "Humans are the

measure of all things."
Another concern of Nazi propaganda was the creation of a band of supporters
loyal to the Nazi party. As he was gaining power, Hitler dressed his supporters in
brown shirts. Wearing the Nazi brown shirt in public became an act of
commitment to the cause. The response of other Germans, at first, was one of
ridicule. For many supporters, such a response likely produced even more
commitment to the cause. As a means of rationalizing this commitment, the
young brown-shirted Nazi would likely think, "This ridicule is just a small price
to pay for the noble Nazi cause," rather than admit that brown shirts and Nazi
fanaticism were rather silly. He would undoubtedly turn to fellow brown-shirters
for social support, and Hitler would add another loyal member to his band of
cohesive followers.
Without a doubt the most demonic and effective Nazi propaganda ploy
combined the fear appeal with the granfalloon tactic. After World War I,
Germany's economy was in ruins, partly as a result of the demands of the Treaty
of Versailles. The result was devastating for German citizens. A high rate of
inflation coupled with high rates of unemployment disrupted families and left
many in poverty. Many men felt humiliated because they could not support their
families. Adding to these fears were racial prejudices that had existed for
centuries in Europe. Aryans believed that they were a race of superhumans
(directly descending from Adam, Japheth, or Atiantis, depending on the specific
myth). It was their destiny to unite the Germanic people, to purify the Aryan
identity, and to subdue the lesser races (most prominently, Jews, Negroes, and
Gypsies).7 Such racial prejudice continues to exist, as witnessed by neo-Nazi,
Klan, and militia members who maintain the superiority of the white "race."8
Hitler and Goebbels were able to take advantage of the nation's fears and
prejudices by proposing a granfalloon solution. A single theme was echoed in
most, if not all, Nazi propaganda: The Jews were to blame for all the nation's
problems. Couched as a documentary about the role of Jews in history, the 1940
film The Eternal Jew, for example, portrayed the Jew as a money-grabbing
villain who not only is a drain on society but also carries diseases and lacks
proper values. Scenes from the film showed "kosher-style" ritual animal
slaughter embellished to create the illusion of sadistic practices in the Jewish
religion. In a similar vein, the film The Jew Suss vividly tells the story of a
Jewish man raping a German maiden. The image of the Jew as despicable,
inferior, and menacing was repeated over and over again in speeches, posters,

films, newspapers, and even academic treatises.
What was the solution to this Jewish menace? The German people were once a
proud nation; under the leadership of Adolf Hitler Germany can put an end to the
Jewish threat and once again return to its past grandeur.
To get this message across, Nazi propaganda first demonstrated that the party
supported traditional German values. Nazi posters often featured scenes of
traditional family life—a woman breastfeeding her child, children happily
staring off into a distant future with the Nazi banner waving in the background, a
father proudly standing next to his family.
Next, Nazi propaganda showed that a united Germany could achieve its goals.
This theme was powerfully expressed in the 1934 film by Leni Riefenstahl
entitled The Triumph of Will. The film opens with scenes of handsome young
men in preparation to become soldiers.
Hitler oversees their training. By the film's end, these young men have been
turned into a powerful Nazi war machine. The message: By working together,
we can be strong again.
Finally, Nazi propaganda located the source of this newfound achievement in
one man—Adolf Hitler. As one campaign poster put it: "Hitler, our last hope."
Goebbels's goal was to portray Hitler as a kind father whose nation had called
him to serve in its time of greatest need. Propaganda thus needed to present two
sides of Hitler. On the one hand, posters showed Hitler smiling and shaking the
hands of children; newsreels showed him awkwardly accepting the praises of his
nation. As Goebbels once wrote in a magazine article, "The simplest people
approach him with confidence because they feel he is their friend and
protector."9 The other side of Hitler was that of Fuhrer. To capture this side of
the image, posters portrayed Hitler in military garb standing erect and confident
in purpose; newsreels presented endless scenes of Hitler reviewing the nations
troops.
The success of the Nazi propaganda machine, however, was based on more than
just the use of some clever persuasion tactics. It was also due to a nearly
wholesale acceptance of the idea that persuasion was to start at the top of society
and be directed downward toward the masses. It was the responsibility of the

ruling elite to make the decisions and then inform the masses of the wisdom of
those decisions through propaganda; the responsibility of the masses was to
follow.
And what better role for the masses, since, by and large, they are ignorant and
cannot think. We have seen this model of the role of persuasion in society
before. Aristotle argued that persuasion was needed to instruct those who could
not reason fully. Propaganda is a means to communicate the "truth" to the
ignorant.
Although such a model of persuasion may more or less describe any society at a
given time, it is not an inevitable outcome. The Greek Sophist Protagoras saw a
different role for persuasion—through argument, the advantages and
disadvantages of any course of action can be made clearer. The early founders of
the U.S. government recognized that no party could be privy to the total truth; a
society consists of competing interests. The U.S. Constitution, with its system of
checks and balances, was one attempt to prevent any given group from gaining
absolute control and to provide a forum for resolving differences of opinion.
The most dangerous aspect of Nazi propaganda, however, was its assumption
that there is an absolute truth and that the ruling elite alone are privileged to
know this truth. In his film series The Ascent of Man, the eminent scholar and
humanist Jacob Bronowski catalogs the dangers of believing in this myth of
absolute truth.10 In one of the films, Bronowski looks at the culture and thought
of Germany just before World War II and finds that there were two radically
different philosophies, two fundamentally different ways of looking at the world
—one represented by some of the scientists of the time and the other by the Nazi
party.
These scientists were coming to the realization that human knowledge could
never be absolute. There is no "God's-eye view." Based on their scientific
findings, physicists such as Albert Einstein, Werner Heisenberg, and Max Born
were proposing such ideas as the theory of relativity and the uncertainty
principle, which led to the recognition that there is no absolute fixed point of
reference and that human knowledge is limited. In the social sciences, the
exploration of other cultures and other peoples was fast leading to the conclusion
that habits and beliefs differ widely and that it was becoming increasingly
difficult to say which is "best."

In the infancy of social psychology, Kurt Lewin was developing his theory of the
psychological field. His theory emphasized how an individual's psychological
needs and tasks influence his or her perception of the world. According to
Lewin, different individuals with differing needs and tasks would come to
perceive the same event differently. Ironically, the inspiration for Lewin's theory
came from his experiences as a soldier in World War I, where he noticed that, as
he approached the battlefield, his perception of the environment changed: No
longer did he see beautiful gullies and interesting rock formations, but rather
places to hide and things that could kill.
Just before World War II, Lewin, who was Jewish, was forced to flee Nazi
Germany. He came to America, where he trained many of the first generation of
American social psychologists. The irony is that Kurt Lewin and Adolf Hitler
fought on the same side in World War I. Both men experienced the same event;
each reached a different conclusion.
The alternative position was one of dogma. The Nazi party embodied the truth;
there was no need to tolerate other points of view. Hitler expressed this
alternative philosophy succinctly:
The function of propaganda is, for example, not to weigh and ponder the
rights of different people, but exclusively to emphasize the one right which
it has set out to argue for. Its task is not to make an objective study of the
truth, in so far as it favors the enemy, and then set it before the masses with
academic fairness; its task is to serve our own right, always and
unflinchingly. ... As soon as our own propaganda admits so much as a
glimmer of right on the other side, the foundation of doubt in our own right
has been laid.11
What are the fruits of the myth of absolute dogma? Six million of the 9.5
million Jews living in Europe were murdered. The Allied forces lost more than
11 million soldiers in battle, including 7.5 million Russian, 2.2 million Chinese,
and a quarter of a million U.S.
soldiers. The Axis powers lost more than 5 million soldiers in battle, including
3.5 million German and 1.2 million Japanese soldiers. Civilian casualties are
harder to estimate. Direct civilian casualties as a result of the war include 2.5
million Russian, 860,000 Japanese, 300,000 German, and 60,595 British
citizens.

c t e s.
Another estimated 10 million Russians died as a result of indirect causes, such as
famine and disease. In all, more than 36.5 million persons lost their lives. And
for what reason?
At the end of his film, Bronowski offers an antidote to this "itch for absolute
knowledge and power." There is a shallow pond just outside the concentration
camp and crematorium at Auschwitz. The ashes of some 2 million people were
flushed into this pond—an act caused by arrogance, by ignorance, by dogma. In
one of the most dramatic moments on film, Jacob Bronowski walked out into
this pond, bent down, and scooped up a handful of the ashes of some of these 2
million people. He made a simple request taken from Oliver Cromwell: "I
beseech you, in the bowels of Christ, think it possible you may be mistaken."
If there is one thing to be learned from our study of persuasion, it is that we can
be mistaken and misled. We have seen how information about our world can be
selectively edited by news and entertainment organizations or managed by
experienced political consultants. The picture of the world that emerges,
mistaken as it may be, serves to guide our thinking and our actions. We have
also seen that it is possible for a propagandist to play on our emotions and to
take advantage of our decision-making processes by invoking simple heuristics.
All of this leads to a single conclusion: As human beings, we can be wrong. Let
us keep this fact in mind whenever we make decisions—especially those that
cause damage to others.
One cannot study Nazi propaganda without passion and emotion. Both of the
authors of this book lost friends and relatives during World War II, either in
combat or in the Holocaust. We are sure that most readers of this book have
suffered similar losses or have felt pain and anguish when watching footage of
Nazi death camps or perhaps after a visit to our nations Holocaust museum in
Washington, D.C. Joseph Goebbels once boasted, "Nothing is easier than
leading the people on a leash. I just hold up a dazzling campaign poster and they
jump through it."12 We owe it to the memory of his victims and to ourselves to
learn as much as we can about the ways of propaganda and about the ways to
promote democratic discussion so that we may prove Herr Goebbels false.

 

Counteracting the Tactics of Propaganda

38
Is Forewarned Forearmed? Or How to Really Resist Propaganda
Throughout this volume we have attempted to explore the question: How
credible and effective are obvious attempts to package and sell products and
ideas (toothpaste, aspirin, presidential candidates) through clever influence
tactics? On a personal level, many people claim that such blatant attempts at
persuasion are so pitifully obvious that they are not much affected by them.
Indeed, researchers have identified what is called the "third-person effect" in
communication—a tendency to believe that the mass media will have a greater
effect on others than on oneself; in other words, it is as if we say, "I will not be
influenced, but others may very well be persuaded."1
Yet the prima facie evidence suggests such persuasion attempts are extremely
effective. Success stories abound. The sales of Benson & Hedges 100s cigarettes
increased sevenfold during a four-year period of heavy advertising. The Mattel
Toy Company increased company size twenty-four-fold after it began to
advertise extensively on television. Grape-Nuts, a venerable but nearly forgotten
cereal, experienced a sudden 30% increase in sales when a well-known natural
foods enthusiast began plugging this rather bland cereal. It appears that
tremendous numbers of consumers set aside their skepticism even though they
know the message is an obvious attempt to sell a product.
Moreover, as parents, most of us have seen our children being seduced by toy
commercials and product packages that artfully depict the most drab toys in an
irresistible way. Similarly, children watching cartoons on any Saturday morning
are deluged by fast-paced ads for sugar-coated cereal, carryout food, and candy
bars, and they in turn deluge their parents with requests for the products.
Much research confirms what every parent knows.2 More than 90%
of preschool-age children ask for toys or food they see advertised on television,
according to a survey of their mothers. In fact, almost two-thirds of the mothers
reported hearing their children sing commercial jingles they learned from
television, most by the age of three. Another survey found that children who
were frequent viewers of children's programs were more likely to want, request,
and consume advertised snacks cereals and fast foods In general children

and consume advertised snacks, cereals, and fast foods. In general, children
under the age of eight demonstrate very good recognition of advertised brand
names and poor recall of the specifics of the advertised claims, and they are
highly persuaded by advertising.
Perhaps one of the saddest demonstrations of the influence of advertising comes
from an experiment which found that four-and five-year-old children, after
watching an ad for a toy, were twice as likely to say that they would rather play
with a "not so nice boy" with the toy than a "nice boy" without the toy.
That children are highly susceptible to persuasive appeals has not gone
unrecognized by U.S. government agencies and officials. In 1934, in the case of
FTC v. R. F. Keppel & Brothers, Inc., the U.S.
Supreme Court ruled that children were a special class of consumers "unable to
protect themselves." How the government goes about protecting children
depends on the political and economic circumstances of the era. For example,
during the 1970s, pressure groups such as Action for Children's Television
(ACT) lobbied the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) for greater regulation of television
advertising directed at children. As a result of their support, the FTC
negotiated an agreement with the National Association of Broadcasters (NAB) to
establish guidelines for children's advertising. Members of the NAB, which
included the three major networks and approximately two-thirds of the local
stations, agreed to reduce the amount of advertising to nine and a half minutes
per hour for children's weekend programs and twelve minutes for weekday
shows, require a clear separation between programming and advertising, and
regulate advertising content to be consistent with values most parents endorse. In
addition, the FTC and NAB also adjudicated consumer complaints about specific
ads, often removing ads that violated the NAB standards.
However, in the early 1980s, as a result of President Reagan's deregulation
policies, the FTC and FCC abandoned their roles as watchdogs of children's
airwaves. The NAB also ceased to enforce its broadcast code of ethics, including
those portions dealing with children and television. Regulation of children's
advertising and programming was left to each individual television network and
station—a case of the foxes becoming the guardians of the henhouse.
In 1996, President Clinton took a first step toward reversing this trend by

announcing new federal rules regulating cigarette advertising directed at
children. Some of these rules included banning tobacco ads on outdoor
billboards within 1,000 feet of a school, prohibiting the sale or gift of items with
tobacco brand logos, barring the use of any imagery supporting tobacco sales in
magazines having a substantial number of readers under eighteen years of age,
and banning the use of tobacco brand names in the sponsorship of sports events.3
Clinton's goal, as he described it, was to put "Joe Camel and the Marlboro Man
out of our children's reach forever." As we noted earlier, many of these attempts
to protect children from tobacco advertising were later struck down by the U.S.
Supreme Court.
Although regulation is important, even without it, some children do eventually
catch on. We have seen our own children, after several disappointments, develop
a healthy skepticism (even, alas, a certain degree of cynicism) about the
truthfulness of commercials. One survey found that only 12% of sixth-graders
believed television commercials told the truth all or most of the time; by the
tenth grade, only 4%
felt they were truthful most of the time. In general, research shows that many
children under the age of eight find it difficult to detect a false utterance.
However, after this age, children show a growing distrust of advertisers and
come to realize that the intention of advertising is not to inform but to persuade.
Needless to say, this kind of skepticism is common among adults as well. A
public opinion poll showed that the overwhelming majority of adult respondents
believe television commercials contain untruthful arguments. Moreover, the
results indicate that the more educated the person, the more skeptical, and that
people who are skeptical believe their skepticism makes them immune to
persuasion.
This might lead us to conclude that the mere fact of knowing a communicator is
biased protects us from being influenced by the message. But as indicated
earlier, this is not always the case.
Simply because we think we are immune to persuasion does not necessarily
mean we are immune. For example, although attempts to teach children about
advertising and its purposes have led to more skepticism about advertising, this
skepticism seldom translates into less desire for advertised brands. Similarly, many

adults tend to buy a specific brand for no other reason than the fact that it is
heavily advertised. It behooves us, then, to look at just how being forewarned of
persuasive intent influences persuasion.4
Research commonly shows that, under certain, but not all, conditions, to be
forewarned is to be forearmed. In other words, members of an audience can be
made less receptive to a message if explicitly forewarned that an attempt is
going to be made to persuade them. This phenomenon was demonstrated in an
experiment by Jonathan Freedman and David Sears.5 Teenagers were told they
would be hearing a talk entitled "Why Teenagers Should Not Be Allowed to
Drive." Ten minutes later, the speaker presented them with a prepared
communication. In a control condition, the same talk was given without the ten-
minute forewarning. The subjects in the control condition were more thoroughly
convinced by the communication than were those who had been forewarned.
Why were the forewarned teenagers less persuaded? We would argue that
phrases such as "And now, a message from our sponsor" have the potential to
render the message that follows less persuasive than it would have been if the
communicator had simply glided into it without prologue. The forewarning
seems to say "Watch out, I'm going to try to persuade you," and people tend to
respond by marshaling defenses against the message. They tend to marshal their
defenses in two ways—by playing attitudinal politics and by preparing a
possible rebuttal to the anticipated communication.
By "attitudinal politics" we mean holding and expressing an opinion not because
it is believed but in order to secure some strategic purpose. For example, many
people dislike having their perceived freedom threatened by a communication
and thus seek to appear independent but consistent. When these motives are
invoked, the goal is to appear unpersuaded—regardless of the merits of the
communication. One may claim: "I knew he was out to persuade me. But I make
up my own mind. See—my opinion is unchanged."
On the other hand, there are times when one seeks to appear informed,
reasonable, and open to discussion. In such cases, a forewarning may result in
more persuasion, or at least becoming more moderate in one's opinion.6
As a result of attitudinal politics, the effects of forewarning may be short-lived.
As the audience for our beliefs or the strategic purpose for why we hold an
opinion changes, so does the opinion. For example, one study found that the

effects of forewarning wore off in about a week, resulting in little immediate
persuasion but considerable delayed impact of a message.7 Because of its often
short-lived effects, forewarning does not always provide full protection from the
tactics of persuasion. We may think skeptically about the advertisement as we
view it comfortably in our homes. However, once at the supermarket, our
skepticism may go out the window when the only information for making a
decision is that which is recalled from the ad.
The second line of defense that may be engaged by
forewarning—rebuttal—affords more protection but, alas, is not always used. By
"rebuttal" we mean preparing oneself to scrutinize and counterargue an
upcoming message. Much research indicates that a forewarning increases
message scrutiny. However, it is often difficult to think about a message and
fully prepare oneself for an influence attempt. For example, researchers have
found that delivering a forewarning of persuasive intent immediately before
delivering the message as opposed to five minutes before usually results in less
resistance to persuasion, precisely because the target has little time to think of
counterarguments. On the other hand, a forewarning has little effect when an
individual is distracted from fully thinking about the message or has little time or
opportunity to prepare a defense.
High-pressure sales agents appear to understand that forewarning can lead to a
tougher sale. For example, Amway distributors are taught to set up meetings to
recruit new Amway distributors by using a simple curiosity teaser that says
nothing about the purpose of the meeting—and without allowing much time
between this initial contact and the sales visit. Former Amway distributor
Stephen Butterfield states he would call up possible customers and merely tell
them: "Jack, listen! Money!" When Jack asked a question, Butterfield would
respond: "My house! Eight o'clock!
Bring your wife!"8 Note that such an approach limits the ability of the potential
customer to marshal defenses against the upcoming sales pitch.
Under certain conditions, even a clear forewarning will not always lead to an
attempt to refute the message. One of these conditions is when the recipient
believes the message or topic is unimportant. For example, Richard Petty and
John Cacioppo warned college students that they would be receiving a
persuasive message designed to change their beliefs about academic

regulations.9 They then heard a message arguing for the institution of an onerous
senior comprehensive exam. Some of the students were told that the change
would take place almost immediately (i.e., the onerous exam would impact them
directly). Others were told that the exam would be instituted in the distant future
or at another university.
Forewarning reduced persuasion and increased counterarguing—but only among
those students who thought they personally might be taking the exam. The other
students, who did not believe the exam would affect them, found the argument
quite convincing. Forewarning alone was not enough to induce these students to
make the effort to scrutinize and counterargue the message.
Such results present a problem to those who believe that they are immune to
persuasion just because they "know all about the advertiser's tricks." We often
watch the mass media while we are in a mindless state. The communications are
typically just not that involving or interesting. But, ironically, that often makes
them all the more persuasive. In such cases, despite knowing that the advertiser
is "out to get us," we still do not make much of an attempt to refute the message
and, as a consequence, are often persuaded.
What, then, are the best ways to reduce susceptibility to the tactics of persuasion
—recognized and otherwise? We can suggest three strategies.
One strategy, attempted by the FTC and FCC along with various consumer and
industry groups, is to regulate and legislate persuasion practices so that they are
fair and honest—for example, to forbid tactics that take advantage of special
populations, such as children, or that deviously play on our emotions, such as
lowballing. The idea is that, just as in a court of law some evidence is
inadmissible and some legal maneuvers are not permitted, so, too, certain mass
media persuasion tactics are unfair and not in society's best interest to allow.
Regulation of persuasion has potential pitfalls. One such problem is that rules
regulating persuasion may violate First Amendment protections of free speech.
Violations are especially likely to occur when content (e.g., prohibiting the
teaching of evolution or the news coverage of a controversial event, such as a
neo-Nazi rally in the United States or the effects of U.S. bombing raids on a
civilian population) is regulated, as opposed to process (e.g., outlawing
lowballing or particularly deceptive advertising). Another problem is that the
idea of regulating mass persuasion is a relatively new one in American history.

As such, the codes governing persuasion are limited in nature and can be easily
overturned, thus affording the consumer and citizen minimal protection.
Nevertheless, we would argue that it is beneficial for citizens of a society such as
ours, which depends heavily on persuasion, to engage in discussions of what
forms of persuasion are moral and what, if any, types of persuasion should be
declared illegal—a task we begin in the next chapter.
A second defense against the tactics of propaganda is to play devil's advocate—
to adopt for yourself, at least for the moment, the role of champion of the
opposite cause—the position opposing that of the propagandist. The research on
forewarning and persuasion suggests that simply knowing that you are about to
be persuaded, in and of itself, is of little use in preventing persuasion. What
matters is what you do with that forewarning— how it leads you to prepare for
the message and to evaluate its content. Just because you know there will be an
earthquake tomorrow doesn't mean you will be safe unless that forewarning
leads you to take appropriate safeguards. It is the same with persuasion. To resist
propaganda, you need to prepare for it. In the next chapter, we will look at some
ways of playing devil's advocate as a means of reducing our susceptibility to
propaganda.
A third strategy is to develop methods for resisting persuasion on a given issue
or topic. Let's look at two techniques identified by researchers for accomplishing
this goal.
Suppose you are faced with a situation in which negative information can be
revealed that will hurt your cause. What can be done to limit the impact of this
attack? One tactic for significantly reducing the impact of potentially damaging
information is stealing thunder, or revealing the negative information about
oneself or about the issue at hand before it is revealed by an opponent or others.
An experiment by Kip Williams, Martin Bourgeois, and Robert Croyle illustrates
the power of this technique.10 In this study, subjects witnessed a reenacted
criminal trial in which the defendant was accused of beating another man after a
verbal altercation. Some of the subjects were informed by the prosecutor that the
defendant had been previously convicted of the same crime twice; for other
subjects, it was the defense attorney who brought up the evidence regarding the
prior convictions and downplayed its significance.
Williams and his colleagues found that stealing thunder (or admitting the
evidence against you) significantly reduced the likelihood that the defendant

would be viewed as guilty of the crime relative to having the prosecutor reveal
the negative information.
Trial lawyers have long understood the importance of stealing thunder. As the
distinguished defense attorney Gerry Spence puts it:
I always concede at the outset whatever is true even if it is detrimental to
my argument. Be up-front with the facts that confront you. A concession
coming from your mouth is not nearly as hurtful as an exposure coming
from your opponent's. We can be forgiven for a wrongdoing we have
committed. We cannot be forgiven for a wrongdoing we have committed
and tried to cover up.11
In his analysis of the O. J. Simpson trial, Vincent Bugliosi, a former Los Angeles
County prosecutor who won 105 out of 106 felony jury trials, including the
Charles Manson case, points out that Marcia Clark, Chris Darden, and the other
prosecutors committed a number of strategic errors, including the failure to steal
the defense's thunder. As he states, "when you know the defense is going to
present evidence damaging or unfavorable to your side, you present that
evidence yourself."12 Bugliosi goes on to explain two reasons why stealing
thunder works. First, stealing thunder enhances one's credibility; it shows that
you are fair and willing to look at all the evidence regardless of its unfavorability
to your cause. Second, it indicates to the jury that the negative evidence isn't all
that bad (you're willing to admit it), and thus it takes the "sting" out of the
potentially damaging information.
Stealing thunder can be used to limit the impact of damaging information in
other domains. An interesting example comes from the U.S.
presidential election of 1884.13 Early in the campaign, rumors circulated that the
Democratic candidate, Grover Cleveland, had fathered an illegitimate son by
Mrs. Maria Halprin, the director of the cloak and lace department of a Buffalo,
New York, store.
Rather than deny or try to ignore the rumors (which were somewhat true),
Cleveland stole the press's thunder by admitting and disclosing all the facts,
presenting them in a manner that painted himself in a sympathetic manner:
Halprin had had a number of affairs, making it difficult to know who was the
real father; Cleveland accepted the responsibility for the child, including paying

child support, because he was the only bachelor among Halprin's lovers; when
Halprin began drinking heavily, Cleveland found a prominent family to adopt
and raise the child. In contrast, James Blaine, the Republican candidate, denied
rumors (which were also true) that his wife had given birth to their first child just
three months after their wedding. Blaine told an unbelievable story—that they
had had two weddings, six months apart, and had kept the first one secret
because of the death of his father. (Interestingly, an informer gave Cleveland this
information in advance of press coverage; rather than use it, Cleveland tore it up
and then set it afire). Cleveland defeated Blaine handily.
A second technique for increasing resistance to persuasion on a given topic is
inoculation. We have already seen that a two-sided (refutational) presentation is
more effective for convincing certain audiences than a one-sided presentation
(see Chapter 23). Expanding on this phenomenon, William McGuire and his
colleagues have suggested that, if people receive prior exposure to a brief
communication that they are able to refute, they then tend to become
"immunized"
against a subsequent fullblown presentation of the same argument, in much the
same way that a small amount of an attenuated virus immunizes people against a
fullblown attack by that virus.
In an experiment by McGuire and Dimitri Papageorgis, a group of people stated
their opinions; these opinions were then subjected to a mild attack—and the
attack was refuted.14 These people were subsequently subjected to a powerful
argument against their initial opinions. Members of this group showed a much
smaller tendency to change their opinions than did the members of a control
group whose opinions had not been previously subjected to mild attack. In
effect, they had been inoculated against opinion change and made relatively
immune. Thus not only is it sometimes more effective to use a two-sided
refutational presentation, but, if it is used skillfully, such a presentation tends to
increase the audience's resistance to subsequent counterpropaganda. Similarly, to
protect ourselves from persuasion, we can begin to question our own beliefs,
thereby discovering the strengths and weaknesses of the position we hold.15
In an exciting field experiment, Alfred McAlister and his colleagues inoculated
seventh-grade students against existing peer pressures to smoke cigarettes.16 For
example, the students were shown advertisements implying that truly liberated
women are smokers—"You've come a long way, baby!" They were then

inoculated by being taught that a woman couldn't possibly be liberated if she was
hooked on tobacco. Similarly, since teenagers tend to smoke because it seems
cool or "tough" (like the Marlboro man), McAlister felt that peer pressure might
take the form of being called "chicken" if one didn't smoke. Accordingly, the
seventh-graders were asked to role-play a situation in which they practiced
countering that argument by saying something like "I'd be a real chicken if I
smoked just to impress you." This inoculation against peer pressure proved to be
very effective. By the time the students were in the ninth grade, they were only
half as likely to smoke as those in a control group from a similar junior high
school.
In the war of persuasion, cigarette advertisers have also discovered the value of
inoculation. Since institution of the ban on advertising cigarettes on TV, the
percentage of Americans who have quit smoking or are trying to quit has
dramatically increased (with the exception of young women, whose rate of
smoking has increased). If tobacco companies are to maintain their sales, they
must prevent the additional conversion of smokers to nonsmokers (and, of
course, find new markets, such as children). To this end, the R. J. Reynolds
Tobacco Company ran a series of two-sided magazine ads appealing for
tolerance between smokers and nonsmokers. Half of the ad, tided "For those
who don't," contained a series of arguments in favor of allowing smoking in
public places. The other half of the ad, tided "For those who do," consisted of a
gentle presentation of the anti-smoking position. The ad thus contained the
information needed by smokers, who would probably be most interested in the
topic, on how to counterargue and resist an anti-smoking campaign.
Research has found that inoculation is most effective in producing resistance
when the belief under attack is a cultural truism—a belief accepted as
unquestionably true by most members of a society, such as "The United States is
the best country in the world to live in"
or "If people are willing to work hard, they can succeed."
Cultural truisms are rarely called into question; when they are not, it is relatively
easy for us to lose sight of why we hold these beliefs. Thus, if subjected to a
severe attack, such beliefs may crumble.17
To be motivated to bolster our beliefs, we must be made aware of their
vulnerability, and the best way to do this is to attack those beliefs mildly. Prior

exposure, in the form of a watered-down attack on our beliefs, produces
resistance to later persuasion because (1) we become motivated to defend our
beliefs and (2) we gain some practice in doing so. We are then better equipped to
resist a more serious attack.
This is an important point frequently ignored or misunderstood by policy
makers. For example, in the aftermath of the Korean War, when several
American prisoners of war were supposedly "brainwashed" by the Chinese
Communists, a Senate committee recommended that, in order to build resistance
among the people to brainwashing and other forms of Communist propaganda,
courses on "patriotism and Americanism"
should be instituted in our public school system. But the research discussed
above demonstrates that the best way to help soldiers resist anti-American
propaganda would be to challenge their belief in the American way of life, and
the best way to build resistance to pro-Communist propaganda would be to teach
courses on Communism, presenting both sides of the argument.
If such an idea had been proposed in the 1950s, when the Cold War was in full
swing and Senator Joseph McCarthy was conducting his witch hunt, it would
probably have been considered to be part of the Communist conspiracy. The
danger of susceptibility to Communist propaganda is a thing of the past, but the
general principle still holds: We cannot resist propaganda by burying our heads
in the sand. The person who is easiest to persuade is the person whose beliefs are
based on slogans that have never been seriously challenged and examined.

 

39
What We Can Do to Stop Propaganda in Its Tracks
Throughout this book, we have delineated a great many persuasion and
propaganda tactics and we have frequently discussed what we can do to
counteract unwanted forms of propaganda. What we would like to do in this
chapter is to pull together these recommendations with a simple goal in mind:
How can we prevent propaganda from impacting us in our homes, workplaces,
schools, courtrooms, and nation?
The
answer to this question is complex. And why shouldn't it be? The propaganda we
face is complex, taking a myriad of forms that often change in response to new
environments, new opportunities, and our attempts to stop it.
In
preventing propaganda, there appear to be two basic approaches we can take.
First, we can take defensive action. In other words, learn how to detect
propaganda, how to play the devil's advocate, what questions to ask about a
communication, how to debunk and deflate a bogus appeal, and how to respond
to unscrupulous propaganda attacks. Much of this book has been written with
this goal in mind.
However,
in a message-dense environment populated with propagandists of every ilk
playing on our prejudices and emotions, even the best-trained warrior could not
successfully defend against every attack. There is just too much flimflam—and
too little time and too few
resources to debunk it all. We also need to take offensive action—steps that will
identify common propaganda forms and the seeds of propaganda and stop them
at the source. Preventing propaganda from entering our homes requires both
personal and institutional responses—that we take personal steps to end it and
that we change some of the ways our society does things. In the remainder of

this chapter, we offer some suggestions on things we can do to prevent, or at
least slow, the spread of propaganda.1 We begin by looking at some ways to
defend ourselves personally and then move on to some societal actions we can
take.
□ Know the ways of persuasion and realize that you personally may be the
victim of propaganda. In a series of important experiments, Brad Sagarin and his
colleagues taught college students about the ways of persuasion.2Specifically,
the students received materials that explained how to distinguish a legitimate use
of source credibility from an illegitimate
one—materials similar to our discussion of communicator
credibility in Chapters 12-16. Next, Sagarin and his colleagues gave the students,
in an unrelated context, a series of ads that used authority figures in appropriate
and inappropriate ways. What did they find? The training alone did little to help
the students resist a dishonest ad (although, interestingly, it did increase the
influence of ads using legitimate communicators). However, the training did
result in more resistance to propaganda when it was coupled with a "gotcha"
procedure. In this case, before
receiving the training on source credibility, the students were initially shown that
they, too, could be taken in by dishonest communicators. The students were first
asked to give their opinion of an ad that used a fake stockbroker to recommend a
product, and then asked to take a look at their opinions to see whether they had
noticed that the stockbroker was a fraud. If they hadn't, they were told that they
had been fooled. Their illusion of invulnerability to propaganda weakened, the
students eagerly applied the lessons they had learned concerning source
credibility and resisted phony appeals.
Extrapolating from this experiment, reading this book is a good first step to
bolstering your resistance to propaganda. However, in order for you to gain
maximum protection from propaganda, you need to take one more step—don't
fall prey to the third-person effect
whereby you think that everyone else can be a victim of propaganda, but not
you. Try to consider yourself vulnerable and prepare yourself accordingly.
□ Monitor your emotions. If you notice you are having an emotional response to

a communication, ask "Why?" Look for things that might
induce emotions, such as a false commitment, a "free" gift
that makes you feel obligated, a scarce item that induces feelings of inferiority, a
we-they distinction that elicits the granfalloon, or speeches that make you feel
fearful or guilty. If you feel that your emotions are being played on, get out of
the situation and then analyze what is going on. If you can't physically remove
yourself from the situation, redefine the situation mentally until you can escape.
□ Explore the motivation and credibility of the source of the communication.
Ask such things as: "Why is this person telling me this
information?" "What does the source have to gain?"
"Does the communicator really have the expertise and credibility to be believed,
or is it just a manufactured image?" "Can
the expert explain the issue in terms that can be understood, or is it just mumbo-
jumbo designed to confuse and dazzle?"
□ Think rationally about any proposal or issue. Ask such things as: "What is the
issue?" "What labels and terms are used to describe
it?" "Are these labels used fairly?" "What course
or courses of action are being discussed?" "What are the
arguments in support of the advocate's position?" "What are the arguments
opposing the position?" "How cogent are these arguments?"
□ Attempt to understand the full range of options before making a decision. Ask
such questions as: "Why are these choices being presented to me in this
manner?" "Are there other options and other ways of presenting those options?"
"What would happen if I chose
something other than the recommended option?"
□ "Don't watch your leaders' lips, watch their hands."3This metaphorical piece of

advice comes from Theodor Plievier, an East German writer who has had vast
experience with the ways of
propaganda. In other words, don't base your evaluation on what someone says
("I am for the environment" "I am for education" "I
am against crime") but on what the person actually does (how has the person
protected the environment, supported education, or prevented crime?).
□ Stop to consider the possibility that any information you receive may be a
factoid. Let's take "idle" rumors and innuendo as an
example. Human nature being what it is, most people take some pleasure out of
hearing and repeating rumors. Why? As we noted before, rumors usually involve
nasty, racy, or exciting negative stories about prominent people (national
leaders, movie stars, or even well-known figures in our village, campus, or
community). There is something about a nasty rumor about a prominent person
that "takes them down a peg." The Germans have a word for it:
Schadenfreude—the secret, guilty pleasure we derive from the misfortune or
embarrassment of others. But such rumors are often untrue and are certainly not
harmless—they can be painful and destructive of the character and reputation of
the target. Accordingly, when you hear a rumor or innuendo, you might want to
ask the source: "What is the evidence for this?" "Where did you hear it?"
"Would you be willing to try to convince an impartial jury of the truth of this
story?" In other words, insist that the
repeater of the rumor put up or shut up. Each of us has a certain responsibility to
challenge rumors rather than blindly accepting and repeating them.
□ If everyone is "doing it" or you hear the same piece of "news"
repeatedly, ask "why?" We recently completed a replication
of the famous experiment by Solomon Asch in which subjects are asked to judge
the relative lengths of lines.4In some of the trials, confederates of the
experimenter intentionally agree on an obviously incorrect answer. Now it is the
subject's turn to respond. The purpose of the study is to see whether or not the

subject will conform to the erroneous opinions of the group. Inour study, more
than half of the subjects gave the wrong answer at least once just to go along
with the group. After the experiment, we asked one subject who did not conform
what she thought about the experience. She gave advice opposite to the social
consensus heuristic: When everyone is doing the same thing, use this as a cue to
ask why. This is very good advice for avoiding jumping on bandwagons that
aren't worth riding.
□ If the deal looks too good to be true, it probably is. Before making a purchase,
look for these common warning signs of a bad deal: (1) The deal is only good for
"today"; (2) the seller offers "free
gifts" in return for "minimum" effort; (3) a sale item
is suddenly unavailable but a "much better" item happens to be available for
"slightly more money" (throwing a
lowball); (4) the seller emphasizes the amount of each payment rather than the
total amount of the sale; (5) a "repair person"
discovers a "dangerous" defect in something you own that
must be repaired immediately; (6) you are given little or no time to read a
contract; (7) the seller makes you feel guilty for asking questions or asks, "Don't
you trust me?"5
□ Always ask yourself: "What are the arguments for the other side?"
"What would it take to prove me (or anyone else) wrong?"
This will help in avoiding acceptance of a position just because it is agreeable or
presented in a pleasing manner. It will also stimulate debate and may result in
improving the course of action you eventually adopt.
□ Teach your children about propaganda. Recall from Chapter 38 that one of the
best ways to prevent persuasion is through inoculation. Watch TV
with your children and help them develop counterarguments against propaganda.
For example, watch advertising with your children and ask such things as: "Do
you think that toy can really do that, or is it just TV?" "Why do you think they
make the toy look so

make the toy look so
good?" If need be, take the child to the toy store and compare the toy's real
performance with the claims made in the advertising.
When violence appears on the TV screen (and it will!) ask: "How do you think
the victim felt? Would you like that done to you?"
□ Support efforts to protect vulnerable groups such as children from
exploitative persuasion. For example, you may wish to support efforts to limit
the amount and scope of advertising directed toward children (as described in
Chapter 38). You may wish to support efforts to limit the amount of TV violence
entering the home through "family viewing hours," computer chips that you can
use to block certain channels, or letting advertisers who support violent TV
programming know that you won't be buying their products.
□ Avoid being dependent on a single source of information. One of the
hallmarks of intense propaganda (of the type found in cults and totalitarian
regimes) is centralized communications from a single perspective. As companies
in the mass media industry merge, consolidate, and buy each other out, citizens
are becoming
increasingly dependent on a handful of communications firms to deliver the
diversity of opinions needed to sustain a democracy.6Public television is a useful
alternative to commercial television and encourages the dissemination of shows
such as "Sesame Street"
and "Mister Rogers' Neighborhood." However, this is no
substitute for a return to a quaint, old-fashioned idea: The public airwaves are
owned by the public and should serve the public's interest. In distributing
broadcast licenses and approving mergers, the government's guiding principle
should be "How does this serve the community? How does this insure the
dissemination of diverse viewpoints?"—not "How much money can someone
make?"
□ Think of the news as the news and try to separate it in your own mind from
entertainment. Don't expect the news media to make every "event"

into an entertaining spectacle with the sole purpose of securing ratings. The
news media are among the few institutions that have the resources to serve as a
watchdog over political and commercial enterprises. If they fail to serve this
function, then we do not have the information we need to perform our jobs as
citizens.
□ Use communication style as one of your criteria in making decisions and
judgments. For example, we have a friend who is a lifelong
Republican; he has voted for every Republican who has run for president since
Nixon. However, when the Willie Horton ad ran in the 1988 campaign, our
friend declared, "I'll hold my nose and vote for Dukakis. I don't want a president
who talks to the American people in this manner." Our friend recognized this ad
for what it was—a cheap, mean-spirited play on emotions to get votes, and he
wanted nothing to do with it. If we all followed the lead of our friend, then
politicians and others would learn that demagoguery doesn't pay.7
□ Support campaign spending reform. Under the current matching funds
formula, the American taxpayer foots the bill for much of election-year
campaigning—for example, spending more than $170 million to finance a
typical presidential campaign. Why pay for propaganda?
Instead of giving candidates a blank check to purchase misleading thirty-second
spots featuring vivid innuendo and slick images, why not require recipients of
federal matching funds to use the money to pay for debates, open forums with
the public, press conferences, infomercials that give the viewer a chance to hear
the candidate's position in detail, and "talking head" ads such as those
used in France? (These are ads in which the candidate talks to the camera
without distracting backgrounds such as waving flags or cheering shills, thereby
focusing attention on what the candidate says and away from emotion-arousing
images.)
□ Increase your involvement with important issues. We saw in Chapter 3 that we
are all prone to propaganda when we process information in a half-mindless
state. On the other hand, when we are motivated by the personal relevance of an
issue, we think about that issue, scrutinize messages, and seek out more
information to help make our decision.
The rub is that we often find ourselves in that "tuned-out"

state of mind. One solution is to create "involvement devices"
to increase the relevance of issues facing our nation. For example, consider
something as simple as a tax receipt sent to taxpayers listing how much they paid
and how much of their money went to each major budget item. How would this
work? Imagine the Jones family, whose income is $34,000.8They would
typically pay $3,200 in federal tax, $2,600 in Social Security and Medicare
taxes, plus state, local, and sales taxes. The Jones family would receive from the
IRS a thank-you note and a breakdown of how their money was spent: $1,682 on
Social Security and Medicare, $1,102 on defense, $870 on interest on the
national debt, $348 on Medicaid. Each of the rest of the budget items cost the
Joneses less than $100, including $58 each on items such as unemployment
insurance, housing programs, and food stamps and $15 each on items such as
federal law enforcement, federal research, student aid, and foreign affairs.
Armed with such information, the next time the Jones family sees a
multimillion-dollar missile accidentally explode on the TV news they might
respond "Hey, that is my thousand bucks on fire" and might become increasingly
interested in military
procurement procedures. When a politician comes along and says "I'll save tax
money by getting rid of welfare cheats and ending our involvement in the UN,"
the Joneses might respond: "Not
likely. These are relatively small costs compared to the big-ticket items of Social
Security, the military, debt service, and
healthcare." The point is this: When armed with information that is personally
involving, citizens are in a better position to distinguish valid proposals from
poppycock.
□ Demand consumer affairs shows. A good example occurs in the Netherlands,
where Astrid Joosten hosts the hit TV show "The Seduction."9This talk show
brings together advertisers, media critics, and consumers to discuss advertising.
The program provides a forum for consumers to complain about ads and for
advertisers to respond to their
complaints. It also serves as a model for much-needed programming that would
take a critical look at the consumer advertising entering our homes.

□ Write companies asking for proof of advertised claims (as described in
Chapter 11). We found that reading through the material we received from
companies in support of their advertising claims made us much more sensitive to
hollow claims (such as "Coke is it") and
made us think about how an advertiser could support the claim (they often
couldn't if they wanted to). Perhaps if we all wrote asking for proof, advertisers
would realize that the empty promise is not an effective persuasion device.
□ Support and extend efforts to squelch deceptive advertisements. Deceptive
advertising misleads the consumer, harms competitors who must compete
against phony claims, and ultimately makes it more difficult for those with
legitimate claims to be believed by the consumer. To counter such propaganda,
we need to toughen regulations so that advertisers are held accountable for
deceptive ads (ones that he outright) and those that readily induce consumers to
draw misleading implications (such as "No other pain-reliever is proven to be
more effective"). It is reasonable to expect that the advertiser has a reasonable
basis for making a claim, and these reasons should be available on request.10
In addition, when enacting any consumer protection law we need to make sure
there are (1) enough law enforcement agents to enforce it and (2) enough of a
penalty to deter would-be criminals.
□ Support and extend efforts to eliminate misleading labels and other deceptive
practices. Action can be taken to eliminate deceptive tactics. For example, the
federal government has recently issued guidelines for labels such as "low-
calorie" or "low-fat" so that
they actually mean something. A simple law requiring a store to stock adequate
supplies of advertised sale products can serve to stop lowballing practices that
play on false commitments.11One area rife with fraud is telemarketing, where
fly-by-night companies use high-pressure sales techniques to sell beachfront
property in Fresno, California, or worthless gems at inflated prices. Here a
number of laws and regulations are needed, including (1) creating internationally
available databases for tracking fraudulent telemarketers; (2) requiring full
disclosure to the consumer of the owners of the telemarketing firm along with
the value of any prizes offered and, in cases where the telemarketer is soliciting
for charity, the percentage of the contribution that will actually go to the charity
(as opposed to the fund-raiser); (3) revising laws to make it easier for a

consumer to take a fraudulent marketer to court;12and (4) establishing a registry
of consumers who do not wish to be contacted by telemarketers, accompanied by
stiff penalties when these wishes are violated. We owe it to ourselves to look for
more areas where fraud and deception can be prevented.
□ Promote the institutions of democracy. We often take for granted the nature of
democracy, thinking that is it just "majority rule" or
"the freedom to do our own thing." A democracy is a pattern of social relations
that encourages deliberative persuasion (not propaganda) and respects the rights
and responsibilities of all citizens.13The hallmarks of a democracy (as opposed
to an autocracy) include the following: (1) Communication is decentralized, with
multiple sources of information; (2) authority and power are constrained by a
system of checks and balances; (3) agendas and goals are established through
discussion, not by leader fiat; (4) there is a reciprocity of influence between
leaders and citizens, as opposed to unidirectional influence from elites; (5) group
boundaries and roles are flexible, as opposed to there being a rigid social
structure; and (6) minority opinion is encouraged as a means of obtaining a
better decision, and the rights of those in the minority are protected. We need to
keep such characteristics in mind and promote them at every
opportunity—when we adopt a social policy, when we interact with our
neighbors, when we make decisions with consequences beyond our own self-
interest.
□ Encourage government policies aimed at maintaining a large middle class. It
may seem odd that a book on persuasion would recommend enacting policies to
ensure the growth of the middle class. However, the seeds of propaganda are
often based in dissatisfaction with oneself and with one's life chances. History
teaches that propaganda flourishes in times when citizens feel relatively deprived
—that is, getting less than they feel they deserve. Those who feel relatively
deprived are more likely to scapegoat others (for example, participate in race
riots or join militia groups) and to support demagogues.14Before Hitler came to
power, the German economy was in a shambles; in the American South from
1882 to 1930, as the price of cotton decreased, the lynching of black Americans
increased. In contrast, the feeling of participating in the economy that typifies
being in the middle class (owning a home or a car, having a bank account, or
experiencing the respect that comes from having a good job) is usually
accompanied by feelings of responsibility and concern about public issues and

thus more scrutiny of persuasive communications.
□ Finally, one of the most essential actions to take in preventing propaganda is
to follow a recommendation from the Bible— to take the plank out of one's own
eye before attempting to remove the speck from someone else's. In other words,
if we seek to promote positive, ethical persuasion and to eliminate misleading
propaganda, then we personally must practice what we preach. We will explore
this theme in our next and final chapter.
 

40
Peitho's Children
Novelists have often portrayed the dark and devious side of persuasion. In the
American classic Elmer Gantry, Sinclair Lewis tells the story of a hypocritical
preacher who delivers spellbinding sermons capable of mesmerizing the faithful
and, not inconsequentially, maintaining a tidy income for the Reverend Gantry.
In 1984, the British author George Orwell describes a totalitarian state that
successfully employs propaganda techniques to maintain its control over the
people. In A Man of the People, the African novelist Chinua Achebe chronicles
the rise to power of the Honourable M. A. Nanga through rhetoric and policy
designed to deceive and fool the masses.
Throughout this book we have seen this dark side of persuasion, whether it be
trickery on the used-car lot, misinformation in the mass media, "mind control" in
cults, or the propaganda of hate in the Third Reich.
In the hands of a demagogue, persuasion can be full of treachery and trickery,
appealing primarily to our irrational impulses.
The
ancient Greeks present another side of persuasion. During the heyday of
democracy in Athens, the Greeks worshiped Peitho, the goddess of persuasion.
In Aeschylus' play Oresteia, Peitho succeeded in calming the Furies, three
avenging spirits of retributive justice whose task it was to punish those who
commit crimes. Orestes is on trial for the murder of his mother and her lover, a
crime he freely admits he committed. But there is a twist. It is also known that
his mother and her lover had killed Orestes' father in order to assume the throne
of Mycenae. An Athenian jury must decide if young Orestes is a common
murderer or if the homicide is justified. After hearing the arguments, the jury is
split and the deciding vote must be cast by Athena, the goddess of wisdom. She
votes that Orestes should go free.
The
Furies who prosecuted the case are outraged. For them, murder is murder and

blood must be atoned by blood. To appease the Furies, Athena offers them a new
shrine on the Acropolis and a new name—the Eumenides, or the gracious ones.
In return, the Furies must recognize the majesty of Peitho. The message to the
Greek audience is clear: Wisdom dictates that persuasion must be used to
overcome the baser nature of humankind.
This
dual nature of persuasion, as a source of both human destruction and human
wisdom, raises a final but crucial question: What should be the nature and role of
persuasion in society?1 For we are not only the recipients of persuasive
communications, we are also the sources of such messages. Like it or not, we are
all Peitho's children. Sometimes we play the role innocently, recommending a
particular restaurant or a certain brand of stereo equipment to a friend.
Sometimes it's not so innocuous. Many professions demand a high degree of
persuasive skill—not just sales, law, and politics, but also medicine, science, and
teaching. Likewise, people who work for political candidates or in support of
social causes or charitable organizations depend on their persuasive abilities to
attract votes, to garner signatures for petitions, to raise funds, or to spread
information. In fact, we can be said to be engaging in attempts at persuasion any
time we praise or criticize an object, defend or attack an idea, advocate or
oppose a position.
Now
that we have discussed how to deliver persuasive messages effectively, it would
be worthwhile to consider explicitly how to decide whether or not and how to do
so. The ethical question is a complex one with many gray areas. While this is not
the place for an elaborate discussion of moral philosophy, we feel obliged to
point out the existence and importance of ethical issues and to suggest a few
ways to consider them.
Before
doing so, we should note that the &ququot;morality" of a persuasive tactic is
often based, rightly or wrongly, on its success in accomplishing a goal. For
example, an oppressed minority that achieves its goal through a tactic such as a
bus boycott is often criticized by the losing majority for its choice of tactics—"I
agree with the goal, but not the means" is a common response.

Further, history looks kindly on winners and often ignores their excesses.
"Successful" traitors, for example, are a rarity: They either fail and are labeled
"treacherous" or succeed and are called "patriotic."
One
approach is to judge the ethics of a persuasive attempt by assessing its goals; the
extreme statement of this viewpoint would be that the end justifies the means.
Suppose you are living in Poland in 1942.
The Nazis are rounding up Jews and sending them to the death camps; you are
safeguarding a Jewish family, hiding them in your cellar.
When the Nazis knock at your door asking if there are any Jews inside, you
answer that there are not. Few would argue that to lie persuasively in this
instance is immoral or unethical; lying is necessary to save the lives of innocent
people, and the more convincing you are the more likely you are to save their
lives as well as your own and those of your family and loved ones.
When the goals of a persuasive attempt are not so easily defensible, the ethical
issues become more problematic. Imagine you are employed as a salesperson at
a clothing store selling bluejeans. Your boss suggests that you tell your
customers "no jeans have been shown to wear longer than ours." This is
technically correct, though it is also true that the jeans you are selling have not
been shown to wear longer than any other brand of jeans. Furthermore, suppose
you are paid a sizable commission for every pair of jeans you sell. Would you
feel any hesitation in using the sales pitch? Would this change if you really
believed the jeans were extraordinarily durable and inexpensive? What if you
believed they weren't?
Finally, if you are reluctant to use this sales pitch, what message would you feel
comfortable with? With this last question, we have broadened our focus from the
goals of the communication to include explicitly a consideration of the content
of the message.
Another perspective on ethics is to judge the actions according to the means
employed by the source of the communication.2 Generally, it can be agreed that
one should avoid knowingly dispensing false information, hiding facts, using
specious reasoning, or falsely playing on the emotions. But problems arise from

this approach, too: What about a white lie, for example, when a person might use
deception in order to avoid hurting someone's feelings unnecessarily?
Evaluating the ethics of a persuasive attempt requires consideration of both the
goals and the content of the message. Let's say you are a staunch opponent of
nuclear power, convinced that all nuclear power plants should be shut down
immediately. You are on your way to visit a friend, and you feel it is important
to convince him to join you in your opposition. In past conversations, you have
told him that the waste generated by nuclear plants, which is highly radioactive
and currently impossible to dispose of safely, creates a serious and ever
increasing threat; he responded that "good old American
know-how" will solve the problem in time. You have argued that it is wrong for
energy to be controlled and distributed for profit by the centralized, big-business
interests necessary to finance nuclear power plants; your friend merely scoffed,
chuckling about "the Marxist stuff they keep putting on the tube these days."
So
when thinking about your upcoming visit, you admit to yourself that he will
probably remain unpersuaded by your two major reasons for opposing nuclear
power. Since you believe the threat is such that convincing him of the danger of
nuclear power is crucial, you begin to search for additional arguments to present.
Recalling that your friend is quite afraid of cancer—his father died of the disease
after a long, painful illness—you consider emphasizing the potential
carcinogenic effects of radiation emanating from the plants, although you are
aware that the risks are undocumented.
Knowing that his business relies on a dependable energy supply and that he is
concerned about costs, you plan to avoid mentioning the reduction in electricity
and increase in costs a shutdown of the nuclear plant in your area would entail.
Just
before arriving, you think about whether your attempt to convince him is ethical.
You tell yourself your cause is a vital one, you aren't telling any direct
falsehoods, and you are merely presenting your arguments in their best possible
light. On the other hand, you feel uneasy that you are not sharing all the
information as you know it.

The
judgment is not an easy one. You may believe strongly enough in an issue to
have no qualms about presenting the information in the best way to further your
cause, or you might feel uncomfortable giving anything but as complete and
neutral an account as you can. Your decision will depend in part on the situation.
For example, a trial lawyer, who is expected (and compelled) to advocate a
position, might be less constrained by some ethical considerations than a speaker
who is thought to be nonpartisan. Someone whose message is preceded or
followed by counterarguments might feel free to take more liberties than
someone who will speak uncontested. Some people would assert that important
causes justify the use of strong persuasion tactics; others would argue the
converse—that the more important the topic, the greater the necessity for
objectivity.
The
issues are complex; there are no simple ethical solutions. This is especially true
when we are the ones making the decisions and are not just passive observers
and Monday-morning quarterbacks. As Goethe once noted, "Conscience is the
virtue of observers and not of agents of action."3
At
the risk of making the issues even more complex, we would like to suggest
another way of evaluating the ethics of persuasion: The means often determine
the ends. In other words, the choice of persuasion tactics often ends up
determining the nature of our beliefs and actions. As the Chinese philosopher
Mencius put it, immediate goals may be accomplished with devices that produce
long-term evil. Suppose, for example, your friend is convinced by your cancer
argument but later finds out that it may not be wholly accurate. Suppose he reads
a rather emotional article in a magazine written by a nuclear power enthusiast
asserting that (1) the evidence linking radiation leaks to cancer is unsubstantiated
and (2) the continued use of fossil fuels and other petrochemicals might destroy
the atmosphere and result in greater penetration of harmful, cancer-causing
ultraviolet rays from the sun. The article concludes by suggesting that the risk of
cancer might actually increase if nuclear power is eliminated.
What

is your friend likely to think and feel? At best, your persuasive message is for
naught; your friend, confronted by two seemingly valid but emotional appeals,
does not know who or what to believe. At worst, your friend may feel that you
betrayed his emotions; his anger may cause him to reject your message and to
henceforth consider you to be a discredited source of information. Perhaps the
results would have been different if another type of appeal—one that did not
manipulate the emotions—had been used.
The
reliance on simplistic persuasion tactics, such as invoking heuristic devices or
setting the rationalization trap, carries an implicit danger: If you can successfully
use the technique, so can anyone else. The handicraft of one demagogue can be
easily undone by the next. The result is a great mass of people who appear fickle
and confused. Further, when we realize that we have been cheated and
manipulated, we often respond by becoming skeptical and cynical.
Historians argue that the widespread knowledge of the misuse of atrocity
propaganda by the British and Americans during World War I was one reason—
along with pro-isolation sentiments, selective news coverage, and anti-Semitism
—that much of the world did not at first believe the truth about Hitler's
atrocities.4 Similarly, contemporary analysts feel that large numbers of
Americans do not vote because they believe that all campaign rhetoric is
meaningless puffery. To paraphrase an old saw, "Live by
propaganda, die by propaganda."
What
about the consequences of withholding vital information from your friend, such
as the possible negative economic consequences of closing nuclear power
plants? Obviously, leaving your friend uninformed about this aspect of nuclear
power might backfire as well.
The advocate of nuclear power could score big points merely by stating these
possibilities. Moreover, the decision not to discuss the economics of energy has
another, perhaps more serious consequence: It leaves your friend ignorant.
If

using emotional appeals or oversimplified arguments can produce such negative
outcomes, why do people use them? Recall that our age of propaganda is
message-dense; few citizens have the time, the opportunity, or the capacity to
process the vast array of information they receive. Further, as we have seen,
news is frequently watched not so much for its information value as for its
ability to entertain. This increases the temptation of communicators to
manipulate beliefs and opinions not by reason but by appeals to emotions and
simplistic thought. Communicators seem to be relying more and more on
persuasion devices that make use of prejudices and emotions over fully informed
discussion, vivid images over thoughtful discourse, meaningless association over
reasoned causal analysis, the propaganda of the demagogue over the persuasion
of Peitho.
The
consequences for democracy can be dire. As more and more propagandists use
simplistic persuasion, the competitive urge to use simpler and simpler persuasion
devices increases. As simpler and simpler persuasion devices are used, people
become increasingly less informed and sophisticated about civic matters. As the
populace becomes less informed, the propagandist must use even more
simplistic persuasion devices. The result is an ignorance spiral—a cynical
populace bombarded with more and more thoughtless propaganda that they have
less and less skill and inclination to process and ability to understand. Adolf
Hitler's belief that the masses are ignorant thus becomes a self-fulfilling
prophecy.
We
believe that it is possible to avoid these dire consequences. That is why we wrote
this book. It is our hope that knowledge about the process of persuasion will
allow all of us to detect and resist some of the more obvious forms of trickery
and demagoguery. Perhaps, more importantly, it should encourage us to be
aware of the consequences of our selection of persuasion devices. After all, an
individuals choice of persuasion tactics reveals much about his or her character
and ability to think about the issues at hand. By giving close scrutiny to the ways
of persuasion, we can promote those techniques that lead to a full and open
discussion of the issues at hand while rebuking the antics of the demagogue. In
large measure, the responsibility for raising Peitho's children is ours.

 

REFERENCES
Why We Wrote This Book
1. Walsh, L. E. (1997). Firewall. New York: Norton.
2. Statistics about the O. J. trial are from U.S. News & World Report, October
16, 1995.
3. Statistics about the Monica Lewinsky saga are from various reports in
Advertising Age and Brill's Content.
1 Our Age of Propaganda
1. Colford, S. W. (1990, March 19). Athlete endorsers fouled by slayings.
Advertising Age, p. 64.
2. Barrett, L. T. (1990, November 19). Race-baiting wins again. Time, p. 43.
3. Statistics are from recent issues of American Demographics and Brill's
Content. Bogart, L. (1995). Commercial culture. New York: Oxford University
Press; Jacobson, M. F., & Mazur, L. A. (1995). Marketing madness. Boulder,
CO: Westview; Ries, A., & Trout, J. (1981). Positioning: The battle for your
mind. New York: Warner; Aaker, D. A., & Myers, J. G. (1987). Advertising
management. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. For a description of the mass
media, see Pratkanis, A. R. (1997). The social psychology of mass
communications: An American perspective. In D. F. Halpern &
A. Voiskounsky (Eds.), States of mind: American and post-Soviet perspectives
on contemporary issues in psychology (pp. 126-159). New York: Oxford
University Press.
4. Holifield, E. B. (1989). Era of persuasion: American thought and culture,
1521-1680. Boston: Twayne.
5. Bahne, C. (1990). The complete guide to Boston's Freedom Trail. Cambridge,
MA: Newtowne.
6. For an excellent history of advertising, see Fox, S. (1984). The mirror makers.

New York: Morrow.
7. See Adams, H. F. (1916). Advertising and its mental laws. New York:
Macmillan; Poffenberger, A. T. (1932). Psychology in advertising. New York:
McGraw-Hill; Scott, W. D. (1917). The psychology of advertising. Boston:
Small, Maynard, & Co.; Starch, D. (1923). Principles of advertising. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
8. Creel, G. (1920). How we advertised America. New York: Harper & Brothers.
9. For a discussion of the nature of propaganda and persuasion in a democracy,
see Pratkanis, A. R., & Turner, M. E. (1996). Persuasion and democracy:
Strategies for increasing deliberative participation and enacting social change.
Journal of Social Issues, 52, 187-205; Sproule, J. M. (1994). Channels of
propaganda. Bloomington, IN: EDINFO; Sproule, J. M. (1997). Propaganda
and democracy: The American experience of media and mass persuasion. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
10. Marcus, J. (1992). Mesoamerican writing systems. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
11. Of course, only a limited number of Greeks (mostly males who owned
property) could be citizens. For excellent discussions of persuasion in the Greek
and Roman eras, see Billig, M. (1987). Arguing and thinking. New York:
Cambridge University Press; Kennedy, G. A. (1963). The art of persuasion in
Greece. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; Kennedy, G. A. (1972). The
art of rhetoric in the Roman world. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press;
Kennedy, G. A. (1980). Classical rhetoric. Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press; Maccoby, N. (1963). The new science of rhetoric. In W.
Schramm (Ed.), The science of human communication, New York: Basic Books.
12. Cicero. (1949). De inventione. Cambridge, MA: Loeb Classics, p. 3.
13. Ries & Trout (1981), see note 3.
14. See also Cialdini, R. B. (1984). Influence. New York: Morrow.
2 Mysterious Influence
1. For excellent histories of Mesmer's influence on American thought, see Fuller,

R. C. (1982). Mesmerism and the American cure of souls. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press; Fuller, R. C. (1986). Americans and the
unconscious. New York: Oxford University Press.
2. See Darnton, R. (1986). Mesmerism and the end of the Enlightenment in
France. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; Gould, S. J. (1991). Bully
for brontosaurus. New York: Norton.
3. For a discussion of the facts concerning hypnosis, see Baker, R. A. (1990).
They call it hypnosis. Buffalo, NY: Prometheus; Spanos, N. P., & Chaves, J. F.
(Eds.). (1989). Hypnosis: The cognitive-behavioral perspective. Buffalo, NY:
Prometheus.
4. Toennies, F. (1971). On sociology: Pure, applied, and empirical. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. (Original work published 1887.)
5. For an excellent review of the "magic bullet" theory of the mass media (or
what has also been termed the "hypodermic needle" or "transmission belt"
theory), see DeFleur, M. L., & Ball-Rokeach, S. (1989). Theories of mass
communication. White Plains, NY: Longman.
6. Watson, J. B. (1919). Psychology from the standpoint of a behaviorist.
Philadelphia: Lippincott.
7. Scott, W. D. (1917). The psychology of advertising. Boston: Small, Maynard,
& Co.
8. Le Bon, G. (1960). The crowd. New York: Viking. (Original work published
1895.) For the first presentation of this hypothesis, see Sighele, S. (1891). La
folia delinquente [The criminal crowd]. Turin, Italy: Fratelli Bocca. For a recent
discussion, see McPhail, C. (1991). The myth of the maddening crowd. New
York: Aldine de Gruyter; van Ginneken, J. (1992). Crowds, psychology, and
politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
9. Packard, V. (1957). The hidden persuaders. New York: MacKay.
10. Dichter, E. (1964). Handbook of consumer motivations. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
11. Lazarsfeld, P., Berelson, B., & Gaudet, H. (1948). The people's choice. New

York: Columbia University Press. See also Berelson, B., Lazarsfeld, P., &
McPhee, W. (1954). Voting. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
12. Klapper, J. (1960). The effects of mass communication. Glencoe, IL: Free
Press; McGuire, W. J. (1986). The myth of massive media impact: Savagings
and salvagings. In G. Comstock (Ed.), Public communication and behavior (Vol.
1, pp. 175-257). San Diego, CA: Academic Press; Schudson, M. (1984).
Advertising, the uneasy persuasion. New York: Basic Books.
13. Garcia, J., & Koelling, R. A. (1966). Relation of cue to consequence in
avoidance learning. Psychometric Science, 4, 123-124; Festinger, L., &
Carlsmith, J. M. (1959). Cognitive consequences of forced compliance. Journal
of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 58, 203-210.
14. Marks, J. (1979). The search for the "Manchurian candidate." New York:
Norton.
15. Politz, A. (1957). "Motivation research" from a research viewpoint. Public
Opinion Quarterly, 20, 663-667.
16. Hovland, C. I., Lumsdaine, A. A., & Sheffield, F. D. (1949). Experiments on
mass communication. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; Hovland, C. I.,
Janis, I. L., & Kelley, H. H. (1953). Communication and persuasion. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press; Hovland, C. I. (1957). The order of
presentation in persuasion. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press; Hovland, C.
I., & Janis, I. L. (1959). Personality and persuasibility. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press; Hovland, C. I., & Rosenberg, M. J. (1960). Attitude
organization and change. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press; Sherif, M., &
Hovland, C. I. (1961). Social judgment. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
For a review, see McGuire, W. J. (1969). The nature of attitudes and attitude
change. In G. Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology
(2nd ed., Vol. 3, pp. 136-314). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
17. Gerbner, G., Gross, L., Morgan, M., & Signorielli, N. (1982). Living with
television: The dynamics of the cultivation process. In J. Byrant & D. Zillman
(Eds.), Perspectives on media effects (pp. 17-40). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum;
Iyengar, S., & Kinder, D. R. (1987). News that matters. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
18. Jones, J. P. (1995). When ads work: New proof that advertising triggers

sales. New York: Lexington.
19. Zaller, J. (1996). The myth of massive media impact revived: New support
for a discredited idea. In D. C. Mutz, P. M. Sniderman, &
R. A. Brody (Eds.), Political persuasion and attitude change (pp. 17-78). Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
20. See Greenwald, A. G., Brock, T. C, & Ostrom, T. M. (Eds.). (1968).
Psychological foundations of attitudes. New York: Academic Press; Petty, R. E.,
& Cacioppo, J. T. (1981). Attitudes and persuasion: Classic and contemporary
approaches. Dubuque, IA: Brown; Petty, R. E., Ostrom, T. M., & Brock, T. C.
(Eds.). (1981). Cognitive responses in persuasion. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum; Petty,
R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). Communication and persuasion. New York:
Springer-Verlag; Pratkanis, A. R., Breckler, S. J., & Greenwald, A. G. (Eds.).
(1989). Attitude structure and function. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
21. Liddy, G. G. (1980). Will. New York: St. Martins.
22. For more details on these principles, see (especially chapters 4 and 5)
Aronson, E. (1999). Social animal (8th ed.). New York: Worth.
3 Mindless Propaganda, Thoughtful Persuasion
1. Burton, P. W. (1981). Which ad pulled best? Chicago: Crain; Caples, J.
(1974). Tested advertising methods. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall;
Loudon, D. L., & Delia Bitta, A. J. (1984). Consumer behavior. New York:
McGraw-Hill; Howard, D. J. (1990). The influence of verbal responses to
common greetings on compliance behavior: The foot-in-the-mouth effect.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 20, 1185-1196; Ogilvy, D. (1983). Ogilvy
on advertising. New York: Crown.
2. Loudon & Delia Bitta (1984), see note 1.
3. Langer, E., Blank, A., & Chanowitz, B. (1978). The mindlessness of
ostensibly thoughtful action: The role of "placebic" information in interpersonal
interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 635-642.
4. Preston, I. L. (1994). The tangled web they weave: Truth, falsity, and
advertisers. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

5. Santos, M., Leve, C, & Pratkanis, A. R. (1994). Hey buddy, can you spare 17
cents? Mindful persuasion and the pique technique. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 24, 755-764.
6. Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). The elaboration likelihood model of
persuasion. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology
(Vol. 19, pp. 123-205). New York: Academic Press; Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J.
T. (1986). Communication and persuasion: Central and peripheral routes to
attitude change. New York: Springer-Verlag. See also Chaiken, S. (1980).
Heuristic versus systematic information processing and the use of source versus
message cues in persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39,
752-766; Chaiken, S., Liberman, A., & Eagly, A. (1989). Heuristic versus
systematic information processing within and beyond the persuasion context. In
J. S. Uleman & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), Unintended thought (pp. 212-252). New
York: Guilford.
7. Jamieson, K. H. (1992). Dirty politics. New York: Oxford University Press.
8. Petty, R. E., Cacioppo, J. T, & Goldman, R. (1981). Personal involvement as a
determinant of argument-based persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 41, 847-855.
9. Fiske, S. T., & Taylor, S. E. (1991). Social cognition. New York: McGraw-
Hill.
4 The Rationalizing Animal
1. Festinger, L., Riecken, H. W., & Schachter, S. (1956). When prophecy fails.
New York: Harper & Row.
2. Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
3. Aronson, E. (1969). The theory of cognitive dissonance: A current
perspective. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology
(Vol. 4, pp. 1-34). New York: Academic Press.
4. Pratkanis, A. R., & Turner, M. E. (1999). Groupthink and preparedness for the
Loma Prieta earthquake: A social identity maintenance analysis of causes and
preventions. In B. Mannix, M. Neale, & R. Wageman (Eds.), Research on

groups and teams: Groups in context (Vol. 2, pp. 115-136). Greenwich, CT: JAI
Press. For a laboratory demonstration, see Turner, M. E., Pratkanis, A. R.,
Probasco, P., & Leve, C. (1992). Threat, cohesion, and group effectiveness:
Testing a social identity maintenance perspective on groupthink. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 781-796.
5. Cialdini, R. B., & Schroeder, D. (1976). Increasing compliance by
legitimizing paltry contributions: When even a penny helps. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 599-604.
6. Harris, J. (1970). Hiroshima: A study of science, politics, and the ethics of
war. Menlo Park, CA: Addison-Wesley.
7. For discussions on how to prevent and reduce the harmful effects of collective
dissonance reduction, see Turner, M. E., & Pratkanis,
A. R. (1994). Social identity maintenance prescriptions for preventing
groupthink: Reducing identity protection and enhancing intellectual conflict.
International Journal of Conflict Management, 5, 254-270; Turner, M. E., &
Pratkanis, A. R. (1997). Mitigating groupthink by stimulating constructive
conflict. In C. K. W. De Dreu & E. Van de Vliert (Eds.), Using conflict in
organizations (pp. 53-71). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
5 The Four Stratagems of Influence
1. For an excellent discussion of Lincoln's Gettysburg Address, see Wills, G.
(1992). Lincoln at Gettysburg: Words that remade America. New York: Simon
& Schuster. For a discussion of Abraham Lincoln's life and times, see Bursey, L.
G. (1988). Abraham Lincoln. In W. C. Spragens (Ed.), Popular images of
American presidents (pp. 67-103). New York: Greenwood; Hofstadter, R.
(1948). The American political tradition. New York: Knopf; O'Reilly, K (1995).
Nixon's piano: Presidents and racial politics from Washington to Clinton. New
York: Free Press; Tebbel, J.,
& Watts, S. M. (1985). The press and the presidency. New York: Oxford
University Press; Zarefsky, D. (1990). Lincoln, Douglas, and slavery: In the
crucible of public debate. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
2. Quoted in Colford, P. D. (1993). The Rush Limbaugh story. New York: St.
Martins, p. 287. For a discussion of Rush Limbaugh's life and influence tactics,

see Brokaw, T., Fallows, J., Jamieson, K. H., Matalin, M., & Russert, T. (1997).
Talk show democracy. Press/Politics, 2, 4-12; Colford, P. D. (1993). The Rush
Limbaugh story. New York: St. Martin's; Franken, A. (1996). Rush Limbaugh is
a big fat idiot. New York: Delacorte; Laufer, P. (1995). Inside talk radio. New
York: Birch Lane Press; Limbaugh, R. (1992). The way things ought to be. New
York: Pocket Books; Limbaugh, R. (1993). See, I told you so. New York: Pocket
Books; Perkins, R. (1995). Logic and Mr. Limbaugh. Chicago: Open Court;
Rendall, S., Naureckas, J., & Cohen, J. (1995). The way things aren't: Rush
Limbaugh's reign of error. New York: New Press; Sturgeon, A. L., Blair, C, &
Merriam, J., The Rush Limbaugh Show: A content analysis. Unpublished
manuscript, University of California, Santa Cruz.
3. For details of the Ingram incident, see Ofshe, R., & Watters, E. (1994).
Making monsters. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons; Wright, L. (1994).
Remembering Satan. New York: Knopf.
4. Aristotle. (1954). Rhetoric. In W Roberts (Trans.), Aristotle, rhetoric and
poetics. New York: Modern Library.
5. For a fascinating example of the use of the Declaration of Independence to
refute slavery, see Douglass, F. (1992). Frederick Douglass's greatest speeches:
The meaning of 4th of July for the Negro. [Recorded by Fred Morsell]. (Cassette
Recording No. TBM CDJ0011). New Canaan, CT: TBM Records. (Originally
delivered on July 5, 1852.) Frederick Douglass, an ex-slave, developed many of
the themes that later appeared in Lincoln's Gettysburg Address.
6. Quoted in Wills (1992), pp. 38-39, see note 1.
7. Wills (1992), p. 100, see note 1.
8. Quoted in Colford (1993), p. 156, see note 2.
9. For a description of how false memories can be created during therapy and the
effect on families and communities, see Gardner, M. (1994). The tragedies of
false memories. Skeptical Inquirer, 18, 464-470; Goldstein, E. (1994).
Confabulations. Boca Raton, FL: Upton Books; Johnston, M. (1997). Spectral
evidence: The Ramona case: Incest, memory, and truth on trial in Napa Valley.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin; Loftus, E. E, & Ketcham, K. (1994). The myth of
repressed memories. New York: St. Martins; Ofshe & Watters (1994), see note
3; Spanos, N. P. (1997). Multiple identities and memories: A sociocognitive

perspective. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association; Victor, J. S.
(1993). Satanic panic: The creation of a contemporary legend. Chicago: Open
Court; Wakefield, H., & Underwager, R. (1994). Return of the furies. Chicago:
Open Court; Wright (1994), see note 3.
10. Bass, E., & Davis, L. (1988). The courage to heat A guide to women
survivors of child sexual abuse. New York: Harper & Row; Fredrickson, R.
(1992). Repressed memories. New York: Fireside/Parkside; Smith, M., &
Pazder, L. (1980). Michelle remembers. New York: Pocket Books.
11. Quoted in Victor (1993), p. 195, see note 9.
12. Loftus, E. E, & Ketcham, K. (1994), see note 9; Loftus, E. F. (1993). The
reality of repressed memories. American Psychologist, 48, 518-537; Loftus, E. F,
& Loftus, G. R. (1980). On the permanence of stored memories. American
Psychologist, 35, 409-420.
13. Janes, L. M., & Olson, J. M. (2000). Jeer pressures: The behavioral effects of
observing ridicule of others. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26,
474-485.
14. For a discussion of what is appropriate in therapy, see Kramer, J., & Alstad,
D. (1993). The guru papers: Mask of authoritarian power. Berkeley, CA: North
Atlantic Books/Frog Ltd.; Singer, M. T, & Lalich, J. (1996). Crazy therapies.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
15. Hobden, K. L., & Olson, J. M. (1994). From jest to antipathy: Disparagement
humor as a source of dissonance-motivated attitude change. Basic and Applied
Social Psychology, 15, 239-249; Maio, G. R., Olson, J. M., & Bush, J. E. (1997).
Telling jokes that disparage social groups: Effects on the joke teller's
stereotypes. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 27, 1986-2000.
16. Quoted in Laufer (1995), p. 245, see note 2.
6 Words of Influence
1. Bern, D. (1970). Beliefs, attitudes, and human affairs. Belmont, CA:
Brooks/Cole.
2. Levin, I. P., & Gaeth, G. J. (1988). How consumers are affected by the frame

of attribute information before and after consuming the product. Journal of
Consumer Research, 15, 374-378.
3. Lee, A. M., & Lee, E. B. (1939). The fine art of propaganda. New York:
Harcourt, Brace; Institute for Propaganda Analysis. (1937). How to detect
propaganda. Propaganda Analysis, 1, reprinted in Jackall, R.
(1995). Propaganda. New York: New York University Press; Werkmeister, W.
H. (1948). An introduction to critical thinking. Lincoln, NB: Johnsen.
4. Fox, S. (1984). The mirror makers. New York: Morrow.
5. For a history of the use of labels in American politics, see Green, D. (1987).
Shaping political consciousness: The language of politics in America from McKinlev tn Reason. Ithaca.
NY: Cornell University Press.
6. Lutz, W. (1989). Doublespeak. New York: Harper & Row.
7. Bromley, D. G., & Silver, E. D. (1995). The Davidian tradition. In S. A.
Wright (Ed.), Armageddon in Waco (pp. 43-72). Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
8. Orwell, G. (1949). 1984. New York: New American Library, p. 246.
9. Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley.
10. Bern, S. L., & Bern, D. J. (1973). Does sex-biased job advertising "aid and
abet" sex discrimination? Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 3, 6-18. For
more examples of the effects of sex bias in language, see Henley, N. (1989).
Molehill or mountain? What we know and don't know about sex bias in
language. In M. Crawford &
M. Gentry (Eds.), Gender and thought (pp. 59-78). New York: Springer-Verlag.
11. Ries, A., & Trout, J. (1981). Positioning: The battle for your mind. New
York: Warner.
12. Miller, R. L., Brickman, P., & Bolin, D. (1975). Attribution versus
persuasion as a means for modifying behavior. Journal of Personality and Social

Psychology, 31, 430-441.
13. Miller, Brickman, & Bolin (1975), see note 12.
14. Snyder, M., Tanke, E. D., & Berscheid, E. (1977). Social perceptions and
interpersonal behavior: On the self-fulfilling nature of social stereotypes.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 656-666.
15. Cited in Thomson, O. (1977). Mass persuasion in history. Edinburgh: Paul
Harris, p. 111.
7 Pictures in Our Heads
1. Lippmann, W. (1922). Public opinion. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
2. Evans, W. (1996). Science and reason in film and television. Skeptical
Inquirer, 20, 45—48, 58; Gerbner, G. (1987). Science on television: How it
affects public conceptions. Issues in Science and Technology, 3, 109-115;
Gerbner, G., Gross, L., Morgan, M., & Signorielli, N. (1986). Living with
television: The dynamics of the cultivation process. In J. Bryant & D. Zillman
(Eds.), Perspectives on media effects (pp. 17-40). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
3. Quoted in Newsweek, December 6, 1982, p. 40.
4. Haney, C, & Manzolati, J. (1981). Television criminology: Network illusions
on criminal justice realities. In E. Aronson (Ed.), Readings about the social
animal (3rd ed., pp. 125-136). New York: Freeman.
5. See Heath, L. (1984). Impact of newspaper crime reports on fear of crime:
Multimethodological investigation. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 47, 263-276; Linz, D. G., Donnerstein, E., & Penrod, S. (1988).
Effects of long-term exposure to violent and sexually degrading depictions of
women. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55, 758-768; Lavine, H.,
Sweeney, D., & Wagner,
S. H. (1999). Depicting women as sex objects in television advertising: Effects
on body dissatisfaction. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 1049-
1058; Hennigan, K., Heath, L., Wharton, J. D., Del Rosario, M., Cook, T. D., &
Calder, B. (1982). Impact of the introduction of television on crime in the United
States: Empirical findings and theoretical implications. Journal of Personality

and Social Psychology, 42, 461-477.
6. Iyengar, S., & Kinder, D. R. (1987). News that matters. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
7. Rogers, E. M., & Dearing, J. W. (1988). Agenda-setting research: Where has
it been, where is it going? In J. A. Anderson (Ed.), Communication yearbook 11
(pp. 555-594). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. For an excellent review of research on
agenda setting, see Dearing, J. W, & Rogers, E. M. (1996). Agenda-setting.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
8. McCombs, M. E., & Shaw, D. L. (1972). The agenda setting function of mass
media. Public Opinion Quarterly, 36, 176-187.
9. Quoted in Dilenschneider, R. L. (1990). Power and influence. New York:
Prentice Hall.
10. Iyengar, S. (1991). Is anyone responsible? How television frames political
issues. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. See also Strange, J. J., & Leung,
C. C. (1999). How anecdotal accounts in news and fiction can influence
judgments of a social problem's urgency, causes, and cures. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 436-449.
11. Hart, R. P. (1987). The sound of leadership. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
12. Pratkanis, A. R. (1993). Propaganda and persuasion in the 1992 U.S.
presidential election: What are the implications for a democracy? Current World
Leaders, 36, 341-362.
13. Pfeffer, J. (1981). Power in organizations. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
14. Cited in Jacobson, M. E, & Mazur, L. A. (1995). Marketing madness.
Boulder, CO: Westview, p. 15.
15. Cited in Rogers and Dearing (1988), see note 7.
8 Saddam Hussein: The Hitler of Baghdad?
1. For descriptions of metaphors used during the Persian Gulf war of 1991, see

Conners, J. L. (1998). Hussein as enemy: The Persian Gulf war in political
cartoons. Press/Politics, 3, 96-114; Rohrer, T. (1995). The metaphorical logic of
(political) rape: The new wor(l)d order. Metaphor and Symbolic Activity, 10,
115-137.
2. Gilovich, T. (1981). Seeing the past in the present: The effects of associations
to familiar events on judgments and decisions. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 40, 797-808.
3. For a discussion of metaphors and thought, see Bowers, J. W., & Osborn, M.
M. (1966). Attitudinal effects of selected types of concluding metaphors in
persuasive speeches. Speech Monographs, 33, 147-155; Gibbs, R. W. (1994).
The poetics of mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; Johnson, J. T, &
Taylor, S. E. (1981). The effect of metaphor on political attitudes. Basic and
Applied Social Psychology, 2, 305-316; Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and
dangerous things. Chicago: University of Chicago Press; Lakoff, G., & Johnson,
M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago: University of Chicago Press; Mio, J.
S. (1996). Metaphor, politics, and persuasion. In J. S. Mio &
A. N. Katz (Eds.), Metaphor: Implications and applications (pp. 127-146).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
4. Kennedy, P. (1991, January 24). A declining empire goes to war. Wall Street
Journal.
5. Corbett, E. P. J. (1990). Classical rhetoric for the modem student. New York:
Oxford University Press, p. 105.
6. Quoted in U.S. News & World Report, May 6, 1991, p. 19.
7. What did Bush win? Newsweek, May 13, 1991, p. 27.
8. For another example, see Lyndon Johnsons use of the war metaphor in his
"war on poverty." The metaphor was useful for mobilizing the nation and
stemming criticism, but it ultimately failed when poverty refused to surrender.
See Zarefsky, D. (1986). President Johnson's war on poverty. Tuscaloosa:
University of Alabama Press.
9 A Questionable Persuasion

1. Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1984). Choices, values, and frames. American
Psychologist, 39, 341-350.
2. Meyerowitz, B. E., & Chaiken, S. (1987). The effect of message framing on
breast self-examination attitudes, intentions, and behavior. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 500-510. For an analysis of how
message framing works in persuasion, see Smith, S. M., & Petty, R. E. (1996).
Message framing and persuasion: A message processing analysis. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22, 257-268.
3. Lockerbie, B., & Borrelli, S. A. (1990). Question wording and public support
for Contra aid, 1983-1986. Public Opinion Quarterly, 54, 195-208. See also
Payne, S. L. (1951). The art of asking questions. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press. For other examples of how subtle changes in wording can
produce dramatic changes in results, see Birnbaum, M. H. (1999). How to show
that 9 > 221: Collect judgments in a between-subjects design. Psychological
Methods, 4, 243-249; Salancik, G. R., & Conway, M. (1975). Attitude inferences
from salient and relevant cognitive content about behavior. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 32, 829-840; Steele, C. M., & Ostrom, T. M.
(1974). Perspective mediated attitude change: When is indirect persuasion more
effective than direct persuasion? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
29, 737—741.
4. Mitofsky, W. J. (1999, May). Making sense of the polls. Brill's Content, p. 34.
5. Spence, G. (1986). Trial by fire. New York: Morrow.
6. Loftus, E. E, & Palmer, J. C. (1974). Reconstruction of automobile
destruction: An example of the interaction between language and memory.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13, 585-589; Loftus, E. F.
(1977). Shifting human color memory. Memory and Cognition, 5, 696-699.
7. Institute for Propaganda Analysis. (1937). How to detect propaganda.
Propaganda Analysis, 1, reprinted in Jackall, R. (1995). Propaganda. New
York: New York University Press.
8. For an example of how to use rhetorical questions to prompt thought about an
issue, see Petty, R. E., Cacioppo, J. T., & Heesacker, M. (1981). The use of
rhetorical questions in persuasion: A cognitive response analysis. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 40, 432-40.

10 The Power of Decoys
1. Pratkanis, A. R., Farquhar, P. H., Silbert, S., & Hearst, J. (1989). Decoys
produce contrast effects and alter choice probabilities. Unpublished manuscript.
University of California, Santa Cruz. For additional examples, see Huber, J.,
Payne, J. W, & Puto, C. (1982). Adding asymmetrically dominated alternatives:
Violations of regularity
and similarity. Journal of Consumer Research, 9, 90-98; Tyszka, T. (1983).
Contextual multiattribute decision rules. In L. Sjoberg, T. Tyszka, & J. Wise
(Eds.), Human decision making. Lund, Sweden: Doxa.
2. Kenrick, D. T, & Gutierres, S. E. (1980). Contrast effects in judgments of
attractiveness: When beauty becomes a social problem. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 38, 131-140.
3. Sedikides, C, Ariely, D., & Olsen, N. (1999). Contextual and procedural
determinants of partner selection: Of asymmetric dominance and prominence.
Social Cognition, 17, 118-139.
11 The Psychology of Factoids
1. Johnson, D. M. (1945). The "phantom anesthetist" of Mattoon: A field study
of mass hysteria. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 40, 175-186.
2. Mailer, N. (1973). Marilyn. New York: Galahad Books, p. 18.
3. For discussions of the psychology of rumors, see Allport, G. W., & Postman,
L. (1947). The psychology of rumor. New York: Holt; Cantril, H. (1940). The
invasion from Mars. New York: Harper & Row; Rosnow, R. L. (1980).
Psychology of rumor reconsidered. Psychological Bulletin, 87, 578-591;
Rosnow, R. L., & Fine, G. A. (1976). Rumor and gossip. New York: Elsevier;
Shibutani, T. (1966). Improvised news. Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill; Sifakis,
C. (1993). Hoaxes and scams. New York: Facts on File.
4. Patterson, R. G. (1998). The walrus was Paul. New York: Simon & Schuster;
Oxfeld, J. (2000, October). Paul was dead. Brill's Content, pp. 108-111, 144;
Reeve, A. J. (1994). Turn me on, dead man: The complete story of the Paul
McCartney death hoax. Ann Arbor, MI: Popular Culture Ink.

5. Bartholomew, R. E., & Howard, G. S. (1998). UFOs & alien contact.
Amherst, NY: Prometheus; Klass, P. J. (1989). UFO abductions: A dangerous
game. Amherst, NY: Prometheus; Korff, K. K. (1997). The Roswell UFO crash:
What they don't want you to know. Amherst,
NY: Prometheus.
6. Dezenhall, E. (1999). Nail 'em. Amherst, NY: Prometheus.
7. For details, see Dezenhall (1999), note 6.
8. Wegner, D. M., Wenzalaff, R, Kerker, R. M., & Beattie, A. E. (1981).
Incrimination through innuendo: Can media questions become public answers?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 40, 822-832.
9. Rucker, D. D., & Pratkanis, A. R. (2001). Projection as an interpersonal
influence tactic: On the effects of the pot calling the kettle black. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin.
10. Webb, C. C., & Chapian, M. (1985). Forgive me. Old Tappan, NJ: F. H.
Revell.
11. Falsely accused. (1999). [Videotape]. New York: A & E for the History
Channel.
12. Kassin, S. M., Williams, L. N., & Saunders, C. L. (1990). Dirty tricks of
cross-examination: The influence of conjectural evidence on the jury. Law and
Human Behavior, 14, 373-384; Sue, S., Smith, R. E., & Caldwell, C. (1973).
Effects of inadmissible evidence on the decisions of simulated jurors: A moral
dilemma. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 3, 345-353; Carroll, J. S., Kerr,
N. L., Alfini, J. J., Weaver, F. M., MacCoun, R. J., & Feldman, V. (1986). Free
press and fair trial: The role of behavioral research. Law and Human Behavior,
10, 187-201.
13. Kapferer, J. N. (1989). A mass poisoning rumor in Europe. Public Opinion
Quarterly, 53, 467-481.
14. Loh, W. D. (1985). The evidence and trial procedure: The law, social policy,
and psychological research. In S. M. Kassin & L. S. Wrightsman (Eds.), The
psychology of evidence and trial procedure (pp. 13-39). Beverly Hills, CA:

Sage.
15. See Francois, W. E. (1978). Mass media law and regulation. Columbus, OH:
Grid; Preston, I. L. (1996). The great American blowup: Puffery in advertising
and selling (rev. ed.). Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
12 The Credible Communicator
1. Aristotie. (1954). Rhetoric. In W. Roberts (Trans.), Aristotle, rhetoric and
poetics. New York: Modern Library, p. 25.
2. Hovland, C, & Weiss, W. (1951). The influence of source credibility on
communication effectiveness. Public Opinion Quarterly, 15, 635-650.
3. Aronson, E., & Golden, B. (1962). The effect of relevant and irrelevant
aspects of communicator credibility on opinion change. Journal of Personality,
30, 135-146.
4. White, P. H., & Harkins, S. G. (1994). Race of source effects in the
elaboration likelihood model. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67,
790-807. For additional details, see Petty, R. E., Herning, M. A., & White, P. H.
(1999). Stigmatized sources and persuasion: Prejudice as a determinant of
argument scrutiny. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 19-34.
5. Pratkanis, A. R. (2001). Propaganda and deliberative persuasion: The
implications of Americanized mass media for established and emerging
democracies. In W. Wosinski, R. B. Cialdini, J. Reykowski, & D. W. Barrett
(Eds.), The practice of social influence in multiple cultures (pp. 259-285).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
6. Walton, D. N. (1997). Appeal to expert opinion: Arguments from authority.
University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
7. Fromm, E. (1997). What I do not like about contemporary society. In On
being human. New York: Continuum. (Original work published 1972.)
13 Breakfast of Champions, Junk Food for the Self
1. Mills, J., & Aronson, E. (1965). Opinion change as a function of
communicator's attractiveness and desire to influence. Journal of Personality

and Social Psychology, 1, 173-177.
2. Eagly, A., & Chaiken, S. (1975). An attribution analysis of the effect of
communicator characteristics on opinion change: The case of communicator
attractiveness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 32, 136-144.
3. Herbert, B. (1996, August 23). Teen smokers, read this. New York Times.
4. Petty, R. E., Cacioppo, J. T, & Schumann, D. (1983). Central and peripheral
routes to advertising effectiveness: The moderating role of involvement. Journal
of Consumer Research, 10, 134-148.
14 How Do You Persuade if Everyone Knows You Are Untrustworthy, Unbelievable, and Disliked?
1. Oliver, R. T. (1971). Communication and culture in ancient India and China.
Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.
2. Walster (Hatfield), E., Aronson, E., & Abrahams, D. (1966). On increasing
the persuasiveness of a low prestige communicator. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 2, 325-342.
3. Eagly, A., Wood, W, & Chaiken, S. (1978). Causal inferences about
communicators and their effect on opinion change. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 36, 424-435.
4. Santa Cruz Sentinel, January 13, 1987, p. A8.
5. Herbert, B. (1996, August 23). Teen smokers, read this. New York Times.
6. Oliver (1971), see note 1.
7. Walster (Hatfield), E., & Festinger, L. (1962). The effectiveness of "overheard
" persuasive communications. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 65,
395-402.
15 The Manufacture of Credibility
1. McGinness, J. (1970). The selling of the president: 1968. New York: Pocket
Books, p. 160.

2. Quoted in Portraits of American presidents, (no date). (Version 1.0) Great
Bear [CD-ROM].
3. Riechmann, D. (1999, July 23). Praise for Nixon talk was phony, ex-aide
recalls. San Jose Mercury News, p. 19A.
4. Jamieson, K. H. (1984). Packaging the presidency. New York: Oxford
University Press.
5. Ansolabehere, S., Behr, R., & Iyengar, S. (1993). The media game. New
York: Macmillan.
6. Butterfield, S. (1985). Amway: The cult of free enterprise. Boston: South End
Press.
7. Boorstin, D. J. (1961). The image: A guide to pseudo-events in America. New
York: Atheneum.
8. Shapiro, R. J. (1994, July 10). Tricks of the trade: How to use the media to
your advantage. San Jose Mercury News, pp. II, 41. (Reprint of a 1993 article
appearing in Champion magazine.)
9. Saffir, L. (1993). Power public relations. Lincolnwood, IL: NTC Business
Books.
10. Ailes, R. (1988). You are the message. New York: Doubleday, p. 81.
11. Dilenschneider, R. L. (1990). Power and influence. New York: Prentice Hall.
12. Matalin, M., & Carville, J. (1994). All's fair: Love, war, and running for
president. New York: Simon & Schuster/Random House.
13. Once elected, you can hire an opinion pollster to make sure your image stays
strong and positive; for an excellent discussion of how U.S. presidents use
opinion polls, see Brace, P., & Hinckley, B. (1992). Follow the leader. New
York: Basic Books.
16 Prizefighter Slays Eleven with One Look The Influence of Mass Media Models
1. See National Examiner, January 2, 1996, pp. 26-27.

2. Phillips, D. P. (1986). Natural experiments on the effects of mass media
violence on fatal aggression: Strengths and weaknesses of a new approach. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 19, pp. 207-
250). New York: Academic Press.
3. Bandura, A. (1973). Aggression: A social learning analysis. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
4. For discussions of the causes of violence and aggression, see Baron, R. A.
(1977). Human aggression. New York: Plenum; Berkowitz, L. (1993).
Aggression: Its causes, consequences, and control. New York: McGraw-Hill;
Geen, R. G. (1990). Human aggression. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
5. Schneider, C. (1987). Children's television: The art, the business, and how it
works. Lincolnwood, IL: NTC Business Books.
6. Bryan, J. H., & Test, M. A. (1967). Models and helping: Naturalistic studies
in aiding behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 6, 400-407.
7. Baron, R. A., & Kepner, C. R. (1970). Model's behavior and attraction toward
the model as determinants of adult aggresssive behavior. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 14, 335-344.
8. Bryan, J. H., Redfield, J., & Mader, S. (1971). Words and deeds about
altruism and the subsequent reinforcement power of the model. Child
Development, 42, 1501-1508; Bryan, J. H., & Walbek, N. H. (1970). Preaching
and practicing generosity: Children's actions and reactions. Child Development,
41, 329-353.
9. Aronson, E. (2000). Nobody left to hate: Teaching compassion after
Columbine. New York: Worth.
10. For a description of mass media role models and violence, see National
Television Violence Study (1997-1998) (Vols. 1-3). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
17 Packages
1. Which cereal for breakfast? (1981, February). Consumer Reports, pp. 68-75.
2. Comparison based on Eating to lower your high blood cholesterol. (1987).

NIH Publication No. 87-2920. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services. Saturated fats, such as animal fat, and some vegetable fats,
such as coconut oil, cocoa butter, palm oil, and hydrogenated oil, have been
shown to raise cholesterol levels. Cereal manufacturers sometimes use such fats,
especially coconut, palm, and hydrogenated oils, in their products. Some
manufacturers are in the process of reformulating their cereals to remove such
oils, so check the label before making a final decision.
3. Lempinen, E. W. (1996, May 17). All-natural smokes in a health-conscious
market. San Francisco Chronicle, pp. 1, A6.
4. Caples, J. (1974). Tested advertising methods. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall; Ogilvy, D. (1983). Ogilvy on advertising. New York: Crown; Petty, R. E.,
& Cacioppo, J. T. (1984). The effects of involvement on responses to argument
quantity and quality: Central and peripheral routes to persuasion. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 46, 69-81.
5. Axsom, D., Yates, S., & Chaiken, S. (1987). Audience response as a heuristic
cue in persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 30-40.
6. See, for example, Leippe, M. R., Manion, A. P., & Romanczyk, A. (1992).
Eyewitness persuasion: How and how well do fact finders judge the accuracy of
adults' and children's memory reports. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 63, 191-197.
7. Cooley, A., Bess, C, & Rubin-Jackson, M. (1995). Madam foreman: A rush to
judgment? Beverly Hills, CA: Dove, p. 97.
8. Fierman, J. (1991, June 3). The big muddle in green marketing. Fortune, pp.
91-101; Hume, S. (1991, January 29). McDonald's. Advertising Age, p. 32.
9. Pratkanis, A. R. (1989). The cognitive representation of attitudes. In A. R.
Pratkanis, S. J. Breckler, & A. G. Greenwald (Eds.), Attitude structure and
function (pp. 71-98). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
10. For a discussion of when it is appropriate to use heuristics, see Gigerenzer,
G., Todd, P. M., & the ABC Research Group. (1999). Simple heuristics that
make us smart. New York: Oxford University Press.
18 Self-Sell

1. Lewin, K. (1947). Group decision and social change. In T. M. Newcomb & E.
L. Hartley (Eds.), Readings in social psychology (pp. 330-344). New York: Holt.
2. For a detailed discussion of self-persuasion, see Aronson, E. (1999). The
power of self-persuasion. American Psychologist, 54, 875-884.
3. Boninger, D. S., Brock, T. S., Cook, T. D., Gruder, C. L., & Romer, D.
(1990). Discovery of reliable attitude change persistence resulting from a
transmitter tuning set. Psychological Science, 1, 268-271.
4. Gregory, W. L., Cialdini, R. B., & Carpenter, K. M. (1982). Self-relevant
scenarios as mediators of likelihood estimates and compliance: Does imagining
make it so? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 43, 89-99.
19 Naked Attics and Neighborhood War Heroes: On Vividness in Communication
1. Gonzales, M. H., Aronson, E., & Costanzo, M. (1988). Increasing the
effectiveness of energy auditors: A field experiment. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 18, 1049-1066; Aronson, E. (1990). Applying social psychology to
prejudice reduction and energy conservation. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 16, 118-132.
2. Another condition is when the vivid appeal distracts attention from an
argument by being irrelevant to the issues at hand or causes the message
recipient to think about issues unrelated or counter to the goal of the
communicator. See, for example, Frey, K P., & Eagly, A. H. (1993). Vividness
can undermine the persuasiveness of messages. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 65, 32-44; Smith, S. M., & Shaffer, D. R. (2000). Vividness
can undermine or enhance message processing: The moderating role of vividness
congruency. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 769-779.
3. Nisbett, R., & Ross, L. (1980). Human inference: Strategies and shortcomings
of social judgment. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. (We also borrowed
their definition of vividness used at the beginning of this chapter.) For an
experimental demonstration of their example, see Herr, P. M., Kardes, F. R., &
Kim, J. (1991). Effects of word-of-mouth and product-attribute information on
persuasion: An accessibility-diagnosticity perspective. Journal of Consumer
Research, 17, 454-462.
4. Jamieson, K. H. (1988). Eloquence in an electronic age: The transformation

of political speechmaking. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
5. Cited in Nisbett & Ross (1980), see note 3.
6. Carville, J. (1996). We're right, they're wrong. New York: Simon &
Schuster/Random House.
7. It should be noted that many of the jurors began to see the lawyers' theatrics as
cheap tricks that were at best annoying and at worst indicated that they thought
the jurors could not be trusted with the facts. This is especially true of the
prosecution case, which failed to link their vivid images with a compelling story
of how Simpson did it (i.e., a specific timeline for how he moved from Bundy to
Rockingham after the murders). Thus, as with the Dukakis tank ad, these vivid
images may not have been effective and may even have backfired with the
highly involved jurors, although they made for wonderfully entertaining TV. For
a description of jurors' reactions, see Cooley, A., Bess, C, & Rubin-Jackson, M.
(1995). Madam Foreman: A rush to judgment? Beverly Hills, CA: Dove.
8. Spence, G. (1995). How to argue and win every time. New York: St. Martin's,
p. 130.
9. Ibayan, L. E, & Pratkanis, A. R. (1996). The effects of victim impact
statements on jury decision making. Unpublished manuscript, University of
California, Santa Cruz.
10. For an alternative perspective on the role played by the mass media in the
Vietnam war, see Hallin, D. C. (1989). The "uncensored war": The media and
Vietnam. Berkeley: University of California Press.
20 Why Do They Keep Repeating the Same Ads?
1. These examples are found in Fox, S. (1984). The mirror makers. New York:
Morrow.
2. Zajonc, R. B. (1968). The attitudinal effects of mere exposure. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology (monograph supplement), 9, 1-27.
3. Grush, J., McKeough, K., & Ahlering, R. (1978). Extrapolating laboratory
exposure research to actual political elections. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 36, 257-270; Grush, J. E. (1980). Impact of candidate expenditures,

regionality, and prior outcomes on the 1976 presidential primaries. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 38, 337-347.
4. Kinder, D. R., & Sears, D. O. (1985). Public opinion and political action. In
G. Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (3rd ed., pp.
659-742). New York: Random House.
5. Quoted in Herzstein, R. E. (1987). The war that Hitler won. New York:
Paragon House, p. 31.
6. Arkes, H. R., Boehm, L. E., & Xu, G. (1991). Determinants of judged
validity. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 27, 576-605; Bacon, F. T.
(1979). Credibility of repeated statements: Memory for trivia. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 5, 241-252; Boehm,
L. E. (1994). The validity effect: A search for mediating variables. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 20, 285-293; Hasher, L., Goldstein, D., &
Toppino, T. (1977). Frequency and the conference of referential validity.
Journal of Verbal teaming and Verbal Behavior, 16, 107-112; Schwartz, M.
(1982). Repetition and rated truth value of statements. American Journal of
Psychology, 95, 393^07.
7. Described in Harrison, A. A. (1977). Mere exposure. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 10, pp. 39-83). New York:
Academic Press.
8. Described in Cacioppo, J. T., & Petty, R. E. (1985). Central and peripheral
routes to persuasion: The role of message repetition. In A. Mitchell & L. Alwitt
(Eds.), Psychological processes and advertising effects (pp. 91-111). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum. For a recent extension, see Schumann, D. W., Petty, R. E., &
Clemons, D. S. (1990). Predicting the effectiveness of different strategies of
advertising variation: A test of the repetition-variation hypotheses. Journal of
Consumer Research, 17, 192-202.
21 If You Have Nothing to Say—Distract Them
1. In general, researchers have found that a positive mood can result in positive
evaluations of an object direcdy (when we have litde motivation to process
information) and by making our thoughts more positive (when we are motivated
to think). In addition, most of us want to stay in a positive mood. Thus, positive
affect produces more message scrutiny when message processing is useful for

maintaining the mood and less processing when scrutiny may put us in a less
positive mood. For an excellent discussion of positive affect and persuasion, see
Petty, R. E., Schumann, D. W., Richman, S. A., & Strathman, A. J. (1993).
Positive mood and persuasion: Different roles for affect under high-and low-
elaboration conditions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 5-20;
Wegener, D. T, Petty, R. E., & Smith, S. M. (1995). Positive mood can increase
or decrease message scrutiny: The hedonic contingency view of mood and
message processing. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 40, 822-832.
2. Festinger, L., & Maccoby, N. (1964). On resistance to persuasive
communications. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 68, 359-366.
3. Osterhouse, R. A., & Brock, T. C. (1970). Distraction increases yielding to
propaganda by inhibiting counterargvung- Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 15, 344—358.
4. Ogilvy, D. (1983). Ogilvy on advertising. New York: Crown.
5. Petty, R. E., Wells, G. L., & Brock, T. C. (1976). Distraction can enhance and
reduce yielding to propaganda: Thought disruption versus effort justification.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 874-884.
6. Moore, D. L., Hausknecht, D., & Thamodaran, K. (1986). Time compression,
response opportunity, and persuasion. Journal of Consumer Research, 13, 85-99.
22 If You Want to Gain an Inch, Ask for a Mile—Sometimes!
1. Spence, G. (1995). How to argue and win every time. New York: St. Martin's,
p. 63. See also Spence, G. (1986). Trial by fire. New York: Morrow.
2. Zimbardo, P. (1960). Involvement and communication discrepancy as
determinants of opinion conformity. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 60, 86-94.
3. Hovland, C, Harvey, O. J., & Sherif, M. (1957). Assimilation and contrast
effects in reaction to commimication and attitude change. Journal of Abnormal
and Social Psychology, 55, 244—252.
4. Aronson, E., Turner, J., & Carlsmith, J. M. (1963). Communication credibility
and communication discrepancy as determinants of opinion change. Journal of

Abnormal and Social Psychology, 67, 31-36.
23 Protagoras' Ideal: One-Sided Puffery versus Two-Sided Debate
1. Herodotus. (1942). The Persian Wars (G. Rawlinson, Trans.). New York:
Modern Library, p. 499.
2. Aristode. (1954). Rhetoric. In W. Roberts (Trans.), Aristotle, rhetoric and
poetics. New York: Modern Library, p. 185.
3. Lippmann, W. (1939, August). The indispensable opposition. The Atlantic, pp.
186-190.
4. For a discussion of comparative advertising, see Aaker, D., & Myers, J. G.
(1986). Advertising management. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, pp. 305-
310.
5. Fox, S. (1984). The mirror makers. New York: Morrow.
6. Ries, A., & Trout, J. (1981). Positioning: The battle for your mind. New York:
Warner.
7. Hovland, C. I., Lumsdaine, A. A., & Sheffield, F. D. (1949). Experiments on
mass communications. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
8. Pfau, M., & Kenski, H. C. (1990). Attack politics. New York: Praeger. See
also Jamieson, K. H. (1992). Dirty politics. New York: Oxford University Press.
9. Pratkanis, A. R. (1993). Propaganda and persuasion in the 1992 U.S.
presidential election: What are the implications for a democracy? Current World
Leaders, 35, 341-362.
24 The Fear Appeal
1. Quoted in Faust, C. H., & Johnson, T. H. (1935). Jonathan Edwards. New
York: American Book, p. 161.
2. Taken from speeches given by Hitler in Munich on April 12, 1922, April 20,
1923, and May 23, 1926, and in Berlin on May 10, 1933. For full text, see
Prange, G. W. (Ed.). (1944). Hitler's words. Washington, DC: American Council

on Public Affairs, especially pp. 71, 251-254; Baynes, N. H. (1942). The
speeches of Adolf Hitler April 22-August 1939. New York: Oxford University
Press, especially p. 59. We thank those who wrote to us pointing out that the
quote from Hitler used in our first edition may not actually have been spoken by
him (although the anti-Communist and anti-Jewish sentiments were certainly
major components of Hitlers rhetoric). Interested readers should see George, J.,
& Wilcox, L. (1992). Nazis, Communists, and others on the fringe. Buffalo, NY:
Prometheus.
3. Sapolsky, H. M. (Ed.). (1986). Consuming fears. New York: Basic Books.
4. Dolinski, D., & Nawrat, R. (1998). "Fear-then-relief" procedure for producing
compliance: Beware when the danger is over. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 34, 27-50.
5. Leventhal, H. (1970). Findings and theory in the study of fear
communications. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
psychology (Vol. 5, pp. 119-186). New York: Academic Press.
6. Chu, G. C. (1966). Fear arousal, efficacy and imminency. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 4, 517-524; Rogers, R. W. (1983). Cognitive
and physiological processes in fear appeals and attitude change: A revised theory
of protection motivation. In J. T. Cacioppo & R. E. Petty (Eds.), Social
psychophysiology: A sourcebook (pp. 153-176). New York: Guilford.
25 The Granfalloon Technique
Is For reviews and discussion, see Hogg, M. A., & Abrams, D. (1988). Social identifications. New York: Roudedge; Tajfel,
H. (1981). Human groups and social categories. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press; Turner, J. C. (1987). Rediscovering the social group. New
York: Blackwell.
2. Vonnegut, K. (1963). Cat's cradle. New York: Dell.
3. For illustrative studies, see Wetherell, M. (1983). Social identification, social
influence, and group polarization. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University
of Bristol, Bristol, UK; Abrams, D., Wetherell, ML, Cochrane, S., Hogg, M. A., &
Turner, J. C. (1990). Knowing what to think by knowing who you are: Self-
categorization and the nature of norm formation, conformity, and group
polarization. British Journal of Social Psychology, 29, 97-119.

4. Cialdini, R. B., Borden, R. J., Thorne, A., Walker, M. R., Freeman, S., &
Sloan, L. R. (1976). Basking in reflected glory: Three (football) field studies.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 463-476.
5. Cialdini, R. B., Finch, J. F, & De Nicholas, M. E. (1990). Strategic self-
presentation: The indirect route. In M. J. Cody & M. L. McLaughlin (Eds.), The
psychology of tactical communication (pp. 194-206). Clevedon, UK:
Multilingual Matters; Finch, J. F, & Cialdini, R. B. (1989). Another indirect
tactic of (self-) image management: Boosting. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 15, 222-232.
6. Miller, D. T, Downs, J. S., & Prentice, D. A. (1998). Minimum conditions for
the creation of a unit relationship: The social bond between birthdaymates.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 28, 475-481.
7. See, for example, Weiss, M. J. (1988). The clustering of America. New York:
Harper & Row; Mitchell, A. (1983). The nine American lifestyles. New York:
Warner; Riche, M. F. (1989, July). Psychographics for the 1990s. American
Demographics, pp. 24-31, 53-55.
8. Don't fall for a telephone line. (1997). [Videotape]. Washington, DC:
American Association of Retired Persons.
9. Jamieson, K. H. (1988). Eloquence in an electronic age. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
10. For descriptions, see Abelman, R., & Neuendorf, K. (1985). How religious is
religious television programming? Journal of Communication, 35, 98-110;
Hoover, S. M. (1988). Mass media religion: The social sources of the electronic
church. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
11. For a discussion of how pseudoscience—those folks who sell everything
from crystals to cancer cures to opportunities to hear the wisdom of a channeled
dolphin—creates and uses granfalloons, see Pratkanis, A. R. (1995). How to sell
a pseudoscience. Skeptical Inquirer, 19, 19-25.
26 Guilt Sells
1. Kassin, S. M., & Keichel, K. L. (1996). The social psychology of false
confessions: Compliance, internalization, and confabulation. Psychological

Science, 7, 125-128.
2. For reviews and discussions of criminal confessions, see Gudjonsson, G.
(1992). The psychology of interrogations, confessions, and testimony. New
York: Wiley; Inbau, F. E., Reid, J. E., & Buckley, J. P (1986). Criminal
interrogation and confessions. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; Lassiter, G. D.,
Geers, A. L., Munhall, P. J., Handley, I. M., & Beers, M. J. (in press).
Videotaped confessions: Is guilt in the eye of the camera? In M. P. Zanna (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press;
Leo, R. A. (1996). Miranda's revenge: Police interrogation as a confidence game.
Law and Society, 30, 259-288; Rogge, O. J. (1959)..Wfcy men confess. New
York: Nelson; Shuy, R. W. (1998). The language of confession, interrogation,
and deception. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; Wrightsman, L. S., & Kassin, S. M.
(1993). Confessions in the courtroom. Newbury Park, CA: Sage; Zimbardo, P.
G. (1968). Coercion and compliance: The psychology of police confessions. In
R. Perruci & M. Pilisuk (Eds.), The triple revolution: Social problems in depth
(pp. 550-570). Boston: Little, Brown. We should also note that some police
interrogation guides strongly recommend against making false statements about
possessing incriminating evidence if none has been obtained; see Macdonald, J.
M., & Michaud, D. L. (1992). Criminal interrogation. Denver, CO: Apache.
3. I Confess. (1996). [Videotape]. New York: A & E for the History Channel.
4. Carlsmith, J. M., & Gross, A. E. (1969). Some effects of guilt on compliance.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 11, 232-239. See also Freedman,
J. L., Wallington, S. A., & Bless, E. (1967). Compliance without pressure: The
effect of guilt. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 7, 117-124.
5. Kelln, B. R. C, & Ellard, J. H. (1999). An equity theory analysis of the impact
of forgiveness and retribution on transgressor compliance. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 864—872.
6. Davis, K., & Jones, E. E. (1960). Changes in interpersonal perception as a
means of reducing dissonance. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 61,
402-410. See also Glass, D. (1964). Changes in liking as a means of reducing
cognitive discrepancies between self-esteem and aggression. Journal of
Personality, 32, 531-549.
27 What Is the Influence of One Flower Given?

1. For a history, see Rochford, E. B. (1985). Hare Krishna in America. New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
2. Cialdini, R. B. (1984). Influence. New York: Morrow.
3. For a discussion of the use of norms in social control, see Cialdini, R. B.,
Kallgren, C. A., & Reno, R. R. (1991). A focus theory of normative conduct: A
theoretical refinement and reevaluation of the role of norms in human behavior.
In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 24, pp.
201-234). San Diego, CA: Academic Press; Kallgren, C. A., Reno, R. R., &
Cialdini, R. B. (2000). A focus theory of normative conduct: When norms do
and do not affect behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26,
1002-1012.
4. Regan, D. T. (1971). Effects of a favor and liking on compliance. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 7, 627-639. For another demonstration of the
power of the norm of reciprocity, see Cialdini, R. B., Green, B. L., & Rusch, A.
J. (1992). When tactical pronouncements of change become real change: The
case of reciprocal persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63,
30-40.
5. Cialdini, R. B., & Ascani, K. (1976). Test of a concession procedure for
inducing verbal, behavioral, and further compliance with a request to give blood.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 61, 295-300.
6. Burger, J. M. (1986). Increasing compliance by improving the deal: The
that's-not-all technique. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 277-
283.
28 The Committed Heart
1. Freedman, J., & Fraser, S. (1966). Compliance without pressure: The foot-in-
the-door technique. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4, 195-202.
2. Pliner, P., Hart, H., Kohl, J., & Saari, D. (1974). Compliance without
pressure: Some further data on the foot-in-the-door technique. Journal
ofExperimental Social Psychology, 10, 17-22.
3. Greenwald, A. G., Carnot, C. G., Beach, R., & Young, B. (1987). Increasing
voting behavior by asking people if they expect to vote. Journal of Applied

Psychology, 72, 315-318.
4. Cialdini, R. B., Cacioppo, J. X, Bassett, R., & Miller, J. (1978). Low-ball
procedure for compliance: Commitment then cost. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 36, 463-476.
5. McNamara, R. S. (1996). In retrospect. New York: Vintage, p. 29.
6. McNamara (1996), pp. 174-175, see note 5.
7. Pentagon papers: The secret war. (1971, June 28). Time, p. 12.
8. White, R. (1971, November). Selective inattention. Psychology Today, pp. 47-
50, 78-84. For an excellent discussion of the social psychology of decision
making in the Vietnam war, see White, R. K (1968). Nobody wanted war.
Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
9. For a discussion of the ease of commitments, see Salancik, G. R. (1977).
Commitment is too easy. Organizational Dynamics, 6, 62-80.
29 To Practice What You Preach
1. Aronson, E., Fried, C, & Stone, J. (1991). Overcoming denial and increasing
the intention to use condoms through the induction of hypocrisy. American
Journal of Public Health, 81, 1636-1638; Stone, J., Aronson, E., Crain, A. L.,
Winslow, M. P., & Fried, C. B. (1994). Inducing hypocrisy as a means of
encouraging young adults to use condoms. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 20, 116-128.
2. Fried, C. B., & Aronson, E. (1995). Hypocrisy, misattribution, and dissonance
reduction. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 925-933.
3. Dickerson, C. A., Thibodeau, R., Aronson, E., & Miller, D. (1992). Using
cognitive dissonance to encourage water conservation. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 22, 841-854.
4. Franken, A. (1996). Rush Limbaugh is a big fat idiot. New York: Delacorte, p.
71.
5. Batson, C. D., Kobrynowicz, D., Dinnerstein, J. L., Kampf, H. C, & Wilson,

A. D. (1997). In a very different voice: Unmasking moral hypocrisy. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 1335-1348; Batson, C. D., Thompson, E.
R., Seuferling, G., Whitney, H, & Strongman, J. A. (1999). Moral hypocrisy:
Appearing moral to oneself without being so. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 77, 525-537.
30 The Psychology of Scarcity and the Mystique of Phantoms
1. Volokh, A. (1983). The art of Russian cuisine. New York: Collier.
2. See Fromkin, H. L., Olson, J. C, Dipboye, R. L., & Barnaby, D. A. (1971). A
commodity theory analysis of consumer preferences for scarce products. Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the American Psychological Association,
Washington, DC; Worchel, S., Lee, J., & Adewole, A. (1975). Effects of supply
and demand on ratings of object value. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 32, 906-914; Knishinsky, A. (1982). The effects of scarcity of
material and exclusivity of information on industrial buyer perceived risk in
provoking a purchase decision. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Arizona State
University, Tempe. For reviews, see Lynn, M. (1991). Scarcity effects on value:
A quantitative review of commodity theory literature. Psychology & Marketing,
8, 43-57; Lynn, M. (1992). Scarcity's enhancement of desirability: The role of
naive economic theories. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 13, 67-78.
3. Farquhar, P. H., Pratkanis, A. R., & Calvin, D. (1995). Phantom choices: The
effects of unavailable alternatives on decision making. Unpublished manuscript,
University of California, Santa Cruz.
4. Pratkanis, A. R., & Farquhar, P. H. (1992). A brief history of research on
phantom alternatives: Evidence for seven empirical generalizations about
phantoms. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 13, 103-122.
5. Mischel, W. (1974). Processes in delay of gratification. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 7, pp. 249-292). New York:
Academic Press.
6. Holifield, E. B. (1989). Era of persuasion. Boston: Twayne, pp. 18-38.
7. Freeman, K., Pratkanis, A. R., & Farquhar, P. H. (1990). Phantoms as
psychological motivation: Evidence for compliance and reactance processes.
Unpublished manuscript, University of California, Santa Cruz.

8. Snyder, C. R. (1990, August). Scarce experiences and possessions: A source
of uniqueness. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American
Psychological Association, Boston; Snyder, C. R., & Fromkin, H. L. (1980).
Uniqueness: The human pursuit of difference. New York: Plenum.
9. Fromm, E. (1976). To have or to be? New York: Harper & Row.
10. Zellinger, D. A., Fromkin, H. L., Speller, D. E., & Kohn, C. A. (1975). A
commodity theory analysis of the effects of age restrictions upon pornographic
materials. Journal of Applied Psychology, 60, 94-99.
11. Farquhar, P. H., & Pratkanis, A. R. (1993). Decision structuring with
phantom alternatives. Management Science, 39, 1214-1226.
31 Education or Propaganda?
1. For an excellent discussion of the politics of textbooks, see Kahane, H.
(1992). Logic and contemporary rhetoric: The use of reason in everyday life.
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. To evaluate the portrayal of American minority
groups in history books, compare any official textbook with books that describe
history from a non-European perspective, such as Templeton, J. W. (1991). Our
roots run deep: The black experience in California, 1500-1900. San Jose, CA:
Electron Access. For example, while many of us know that places such as
Virginia and the College of William and Mary were named for British monarchs,
we suspect that few Americans realize that California was named for a black
queen.
2. Freeman, E. (1937). Social psychology. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston,
especially pp. 263-266; Zimbardo, P. G., Ebbesen, E., & Maslach, C. (1977).
Influencing attitudes and changing behavior. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
3. For related examples, see Freeman (1937), note 2; Luchins, A. S., & Luchins,
E. H. (1978). Revisiting Wertheimer's seminars (Vol. 1). Lewisburg, PA:
Bucknell University Press, p. 277.
4. Knupfer, N. N., & Hayes, P. (1994). The effects of the Channel One broadcast
on students' knowledge of current events. In A. De Vaney (Ed.), Watching
Channel One (pp. 42-60). Albany: State University of New York Press. For a
general discussion of Channel One, see De Vaney, A. (Ed.). (1994). Watching
Channel One. Albany: State University of New York Press.

5. Vallone, R. P., Ross, L., & Lepper, M. R. (1985). The hostile media
phenomenon: Biased perception and perceptions of media bias in coverage of
the Beirut massacre. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 577-585.
This is an example of a more general tendency to use one's attitude as a heuristic
in problem solving; see Pratkanis, A. R. (1988). The attitude heuristic and
selective fact identification. British Journal of Social Psychology, 27, 257-263;
Pratkanis, A. R., & Greenwald, A. G. (1989). A sociocognitive model of attitude
structure and function. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
psychology (Vol. 22, pp. 245-295). New York: Academic Press.
6. Comstock, G. (1980). Television in America. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
7. Fallows, J. (1997). Breaking the news. New York: Vintage.
8. See Luchins & Luchins (1978), note 3.
9. Maier, N. R. F. (1952). Principles of human relations. New York: Wiley;
Maier, N. R. F. (1963). Problem-solving discussions and conferences. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
10. Turner, M. E., & Pratkanis, A. R. (1994). Social identity maintenance
prescriptions for preventing groupdiink: Reducing identity protection and
enhancing intellectual conflict. International Journal of Conflict Management, 5,
254-270; Turner, M. E., & Pratkanis, A. R. (1997). Mitigating groupthink by
stimulating constructive conflict. In C. K. W. De Dreu & E. Van de Vliert
(Eds.), Using conflict in organizations (pp. 53-71). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage;
Turner, M. E., & Pratkanis, A. R. (1996). Mitigating the negative consequences
of groupthink: Further implications of a social identity maintenance model.
Unpublished manuscript, San Jose State University.
32 What Is News?
1. Lippmann, W. (1922). Public opinion. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
2. Hale, O. J. (1964). The captive press in the Third Reich. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
3. Benn, D. W. (1989). Persuasion and Soviet politics. New York: Blackwell;
Mickiewicz, E. (1988). Split signals. New York: Oxford University Press;
Roxburgh, A. (1987). Pravda: Inside the Soviet news machine. New York:

Braziller.
4. Steele, R. W. (1985). Propaganda in an open society: The Roosevelt
administration and the media, 1933-1941. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
5. DeParle, J. (1991, May 6). Keeping the news in step. Are the Pentagon's Gulf
War rules here to stay? New York Times, p. A9.
6. Fishman, M. (1980). Manufacturing the news. Austin: University of Texas
Press; Fallows, J. (1997). Breaking the news. New York: Vintage; Gans, H. J.
(1979). Deciding what's news. New York: Vintage; Jamieson, K. H., &
Campbell, K. K. (1992). The interplay of influence. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth;
Kaniss, P. (1991). Making local news. Chicago: University of Chicago Press;
Nelkin, D. (1987). Selling science. New York: Freeman; Pratkanis, A. R. (1997).
The social psychology of mass communications: An American perspective. In D.
F. Halpern & A. Voiskounsky (Eds.), States of mind: American and post-Soviet
perspectives on contemporary issues in psychology (pp. 126-159). New York:
Oxford University Press; Tuchman, G. (1978). Making news. New York: Free
Press.
7. Sigal, L. V. (1973). Reporters and officials: The organization and politics of
newsmaking. Lexington, MA: Heath.
8. Croteau, D., & Hoynes, W. (1994). By invitation only. Monroe, ME: Common
Courage.
9. Bagdikian, B. H. (1992). The media monopoly. Boston: Beacon. The figures
on media monopolies may be out of date before you read them—the mergers
keep occurring at a frantic pace. For more information, see Brill, S. (2000,
April). The mega threat. Brill's Content, pp. 23, 26-27; Rosenwein, R. (2000,
January). Why media mergers matter. Brill's Content, pp. 92-95.
10. Mark Levy, quoted in Time, October 1, 1979, p. 83. See also Bogart, L.
(1995). Commercial culture. New York: Oxford University Press; Rubin, A. M.
(1994). Media uses and effects: A uses-and-gratifications perspective. In J.
Bryant & D. Zillman (Eds.), Media effects. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
11. Ernst, S. W. (1972). Baseball or brickbats: A content analysis of community
development. Journalism Quarterly, 49, 86-90.

12. Koppel, T, & Gibson, K. (1996). Nightline. New York: Random House, p.
230.
13. Mann, P., & Iscoe, I. (1971). Mass behavior and community organization:
Reflections on a peaceful demonstration. American Psychologist, 26, 108-113.
For other examples of how eyewitness reports differ from news accounts, see
Dershowitz, A. M. (1996). Reasonable doubts. New York: Simon & Schuster;
Lang, K., & Lang, G. E. (1968). Politics & television. Chicago: Quadrangle
Books, especially the chapter entided "MacArthur Day in Chicago."
14. Gaveling the deadbeats. (1995, July 31). U.S. News & World Report, p. 14.
15. For a description of how U.S. presidents control the news, see Maltese, J. A.
(1992). Spin control. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
16. Spence, G. (1995). How to argue and win every time. New York: St.
Martin's, especially p. 95.
33 On the Ineffectiveness of Information Campaigns
1. Canon, L. (1964). Self-confidence and selective exposure to information. In L.
Festinger (Ed.), Conflict, decision, and dissonance (pp. 83-96). Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press. For a review, see Frey, D. (1986). Recent research on
selective exposure to information. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in
experimental social psychology (Vol. 19, pp. 41-80). New York: Academic
Press.
2. Hyman, H., & Sheatsley, P. B. (1947). Some reasons why information
campaigns fail. Public Opinion Quarterly, 11, 412-423.
3. Example from Backer, T. E., Rogers, E. M., & Sopory, P. (1992). Designing
health communication campaigns: What works? Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
4. Schneider, C. (1987). Children's television: The art, the business, and how it
works. Lincolnwood, IL: NTC Business Books, p. 9.
5. Pratkanis, A. R. (1997). The social psychology of mass communications: An
American perspective. In D. F. Halpern & A. Voiskounsky (Eds.), States of
mind: American and post-Soviet perspectives on contemporary issues in
psychology (pp. 126-159). New York: Oxford University Press. For a list of

techniques for improving the effectiveness of information campaigns, see
Backer, Rogers, & Sopory (1992), note 3, pp. 30-32; Kotler, P., & Roberto, E. L.
(1989). Social marketing. New York: Free Press.
6. Merton, R. K. (1946). Mass persuasion: The social psychology of a war bond
drive. New York: Harper & Brothers.
7. Mendelsohn, H. (1973). Some reasons why information campaigns can
succeed. Public Opinion Quarterly, 37, 50-61.
8. Ball, S., & Bogatz, G. A. (1970). The first year of Sesame Street. Princeton,
NJ: Educational Testing Service; Bogatz, G. A., & Ball, S. (1972). The second
year of Sesame Street. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service; Cook, T. D.,
Appleton, H., Conner, R. F, Shaffer, A., Tabkin, G., & Weber, J. S. (1975).
Sesame Street revisited. New York: Russell Sage; Liebert, R. M., & Sprafkin, J.
(1988). The early window. New York: Pergamon; Stein, A. H., & Friedrich, L.
K. (1972). Television content and young children's behavior. In J. P. Murray, E.
A. Rubinstein, & G. A. Comstock (Eds.), Television and social behavior (Vol. 2,
pp. 202-317). DHEW Publication No. HSM 72-9057. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
9. Entman, R. M. (1989). Democracy without citizens. New York: Oxford
University Press.
34 Subliminal Sorcery: Who Is Seducing Whom?
1. Cousins, N. (1957, October 5). Smudging the subconscious. Saturday Review,
p. 20.
2. Key, W. B. (1973). Subliminal seduction. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Signet; Key,
W. B. (1976). Media sexploitation. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Signet; Key, W. B.
(1980). The clam-plate orgy. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Signet; Key, W. B. (1989).
The age of manipulation. New York: Holt.
3. Key (1973), p. 1, see note 2.
4. Natale, J. A. (1988, September). Are you open to suggestion? Psychology
Today, pp. 28-30.
5. Pratkanis, A. R., & Greenwald, A. G. (1988). Recent perspectives on

unconscious processing: Still no marketing applications. Psychology and
Marketing, 5, 339-355. For a description of the history of this research, see
Pratkanis, A. R. (1992). The cargo-cult science of subliminal persuasion.
Skeptical Inquirer, 16, 260-272.
6. For an excellent review of scientific findings on unconscious processes, see
Greenwald, A. G. (1992). New look 3: Unconscious cognition reclaimed.
American Psychologist, 47, 766-779.
7. For example, Hawkins originally reported that subliminal messages could
affect physiological drives such as hunger or thirst. However, later he was
unable to reproduce this effect. See Hawkins, D. I. (1970). The effects of
subliminal stimulation on drive level and brand preference. Journal of Marketing
Research, 7, 322-326; Beatty,
S. E., & Hawkins, D. I. (1989). Subliminal stimulation: Some new data and
interpretation. Journal of Advertising, 18, 4-8.
8. Moore, T. E. (1982). Subliminal advertising: What you see is what you get.
Journal of Marketing, 46, 38-47.
9. Haberstroh, J. (1994). Ice cube sex: The truth about subliminal advertising.
Notre Dame, IN: Cross Roads Books. This book represents one of the best
popular efforts to describe and debunk the subhminal affair and is highly
recommended to those interested in more information on this topic.
10. "Phone now," said CBC subliminally—but nobody did. (1958, February 10).
Advertising Age, p. 8.
11. Quoted in Danzig, F. (1962, September 17). Subliminal advertising—Today
it's just an historical flashback for researcher Vicary. Advertising Age, pp. 73-74.
See also Weir, W. (1984, October 15). Another look at subliminal "facts."
Advertising Age, p. 46.
12. Rogers, S. (1992-1993). How a publicity blitz created the myth of subliminal
advertising. Public Relations Quarterly, 37, 12-17.
13. See, for example. Gable, M., Wilkens, H. T, Harris, L., & Feinberg, R.
(1987). An evaluation of subliminally embedded sexual stimuli in graphics.
Journal of Advertising, 16, 26-31; George, S. G., & Jennings, L. B. (1975).

Effects of subliminal stimuli on consumer behavior: Negative evidence.
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 41, 847-854.
14. Vokey, J. R., & Read, J. D. (1985). Subh'minal messages: Between the devil
and the media. American Psychologist, 40, 1231-1239.
15. Pratkanis, A. R., Eskenazi, J., & Greenwald, A. G. (1994). What you expect
is what you believe (but not necessarily what you get): A test of the effectiveness
of subliminal self-help audiotapes. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 15,
251-276.
16. Greenwald, A. G., Spangenberg, E. R., Pratkanis, A. R., & Eskenazi, J.
(1991). Double-blind tests of subliminal self-help audiotapes. Psychological
Science, 2, 119-122.
17. See Pratkanis, Eskenazi, & Greenwald (1994), note 15, pp. 268-269.
18. British Psychological Society. (1992). Subliminal messages. Leicester,
England. Eich, E., & Hyman, R. (1991). Subliminal self-help. In D. Druckman
& R. A. Bjork (Eds.), In the mind's eye: Enhancing human performance (pp.
107-119). Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
19. For a description of recent studies claiming subhminal effects, see Epley, N,
Savitsky, K., & Kachelski, R. A. (1999). What every skeptic should know about
subliminal persuasion. Skeptical Inquirer, 23(5), 40-45, 58. It will be interesting
to see if the claims made in this research will go the same course as past claims.
20. Zanot, E. J., Pincus, J. D., & Lamp, E. J. (1983). Public perceptions of
subliminal advertising. Journal of Advertising, 12, 37-45. For more recent poll
results, see Haberstroh (1994), note 9.
21. For a description of the trial, see Moore, T. E. (1996). Scientific consensus
and expert testimony: Lessons from the Judas Priest trial. Skeptical Inquirer,
20(6), 32-38, 60.
22. In Re Vance and Belknap v. Judas Priest and CBS Records. 86-5844/86-
3939. Second District Court of Nevada. August 24, 1990, p. 31.
35 Persuasion Direct

1. See Baier, M. (1983). Elements of direct marketing. New York: McGraw-Hill;
Caples, J. (1974). Tested advertising methods. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall; Harper, R. (1986). Mailing list strategies. New York: McGraw-Hill;
Popeil, R. (1995). The salesman of the century. New York: Delacorte;
Schumann, D. W., & Thorson, E. (Eds.). (1999). Advertising and the World
Wide Web. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum; Stone, B. (1986). Successful direct marketing
methods. Lincolnwood, IL: Crain; Wunderman, L. (1997). Being direct. New
York: Random House; Zeff, R., & Aronson, B. (1999). Advertising on the
Internet. New York: Wiley.
36 How to Become a Cult Leader
1. Hosteder, J. A. (1974). Hutterite society. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press; Redekop, C. (1989). Mennonite society. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press; Strayer, J. R., Gatzke, H. W, & Harbison, E. H. (1974). The
mainstream of civilization. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
2. Sifakis, C. (1993). Hoaxes and scams. New York: Facts on File.
3. Singer, M. T, & Lalich, J. (1995). Cults in our midst. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass. This book is highly recommended to those seeking a more in-depth
treatment of cults.
4. See Singer & Lalich (1995), note 3.
5. Examples and details are from Butterfield, S. (1985). Amway: The cult of free
enterprise. Boston: South End Press; Galanter, M. (1989). Cults: Faith, healing,
and coercion. New York: Oxford University Press; Hassan, S. (1990).
Combatting cult mind control. Rochester, VT: Park Street Press; Kanter, R. M.
(1972). Commitment and community: Communes and Utopias in sociological
perspective. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; Kaplan, D. E., &
Marshall, A. (1996). The cult at the end of the world. New York: Crown;
Kramer, J., & Alstad, D. (1993). The guru papers. Berkeley, CA: North Adantic
Books/Frog Ltd.; Lifton, R. J. (1963). Thought reform and the psychology of
totalism: A study of "brainwashing" in China. New York: Norton; Osherow, N.
(1988). Making sense of the nonsensical: An analysis of Jonestown. In E.
Aronson (Ed.), Readings about the social animal (pp. 68-86). New York:
Freeman; Patrick, T, & Dulack, T. (1976). Let our children go! New York:
Ballantine; Ritchie, J. (1991). The secret world of cults. London: Angus &

Robertson; Schein, E. H. (1961). Coercive persuasion. New York: Norton;
Stoner, C, & Parke, J. A. (1977). All God's children. Radnor, PA: Chilton Book
Co.; Tabor, J. D., & Gallagher, E. V. (1995). Why Waco? Berkeley: University
of California Press; Tobias, M. L., & Lalich, J. (1994). Captive hearts, captive
minds. Alameda, CA: Hunter House; Weightman, J. M. (1983). Making sense of
the Jonestown suicides. New York: Mellen. For another example of the use of
these tactics, see Pratkanis, A. R. (1995). How to sell a pseudoscience. Skeptical
Inquirer, 19(4), 19-25.
6. Patrick & Dulack (1976), p. 45, see note 5.
7. For discussions on how to leave destructive cultic groups, see Hassan, S.
(2000). Releasing the bonds: Empowering people to think for themselves.
Somerville, MA: Freedom of Mind Press; Lagone, M. D. (Ed.). (1993). Recovery
from cults. New York: Norton.
37 Propaganda in the Third Reich: A Case for Uncertainty
1. Hitler, A. (1925). Mein Kampf. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, p. 176.
2. Jowett, G. S., & O'Donnell, V. (1986). Persuasion and propaganda. Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage; Peterson, H. C. (1939). Propaganda for war: The campaign
against American neutrality, 1914-1917. Norman: University of Oklahoma
Press.
3. For excellent discussions of Nazi and World War II propaganda, see Childers,
T. (1983). The Nazi voter. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press;
Doob, L. W. (1950). Goebbels' principles of propaganda. Public Opinion
Quarterly, 14, 419-422; Hale, O. J. (1964). The captive press in the Third Reich.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; Herzstein, R. E. (1978). The war that
Hitler won. New York: Paragon House; Lipstadt, D. E. (1986). Beyond belief.
New York: Free Press; Rhodes, A. (1987). Propaganda: The art of persuasion:
World War II. Secaucus, NJ: Wellfleet; Rutherford, W. (1978). Hitler's
propaganda machine. London: Bison; Welch, D. (1983). Nazi propaganda.
Beckenham, UK: Croom Helm; Young, J, W. (1991). Totalitarian language.
Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press; Zeman, Z. A. B. (1964). Nazi
propaganda. London: Oxford University Press.
4. Hitler (1925), p. 178, see note 1

5. Hitler (1925), pp. 180-181, see note 1.
6. Bergmeier, H. J. P., & Lotz, R. E. (1997). Hitler's airwaves: The inside story
of Nazi radio broadcasting and propaganda swing. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press. This analysis of the Nazi use of entertainment as propaganda
also contains a CD-ROM with Nazi propaganda through music directed at the
Allies. 393
7. Poliakov, L. (1971). The Aryan myth. New York: Barnes & Noble.
8. Corcoran, J. (1995). Bitter harvest. New York: Penguin; Dees, M. (1996).
Gathering storm. New York: HarperCollins; Ezekiel, R. S. (1995). The racist
mind. New York: Viking.
9. Quoted in Rhodes (1987), p. 13, see note 3.
10. Bronowski, J. (1973). The ascent of man. Boston: Little, Brown.
11. Hider (1925), pp. 182-183, see note 1.
12. Quoted in Rhodes (1987), p. 90, see note 3.
38 is Forewarned Forearmed? Or How to Really Resist Propaganda
1. Davidson, W. P. (1983). The third-person effect in communication. Public
Opinion Quarterly, 47, 1-15. For an explication of the psychological processes
underlying this effect, see Duck, J. M., Hogg, M. A., & Terry, D. J. (1995). Me,
us, and them: Political identification and the third-person effect in the 1993
Australian federal election. European Journal of Social Psychology, 25, 195-
215; Duck, J. M., Terry, D. J., & Hogg, M. A. (1995). The perceived influence
of AIDS advertising: Third-person effects in the context of positive media
content. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 17, 305-325; Hoorens, V, &
Ruiter, S. (1996). The optimal impact phenomenon: Beyond the third-person
effect. European Journal of Social Psychology, 26, 599-610.
2. Liebert, R. M., & Sprafkin, J. (1988). The early window. New York:
Pergamon. See also Macklin, M. C, & Carlson, L. (Eds.). (1999). Advertising to
children. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
3. Teinowitz, I. (1996, August 26). "Historic" attack on cig marketing.

Advertising Age, pp. 1, 28.
4. For a review, see Cialdini, R. B., & Petty, R. E. (1981). Anticipatory opinion
effects. In R. E. Petty, T. M. Ostrom, & T. C. Brock (Eds.), Cognitive responses
in persuasion (pp. 217-235). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
5. Freedman, J. L., & Sears, D. O. (1965). Warning, distraction, and resistance to
influence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1, 262-266.
6. Cialdini, R. B., Levy, A., Herman, C. P., & Evenbeck, S. (1973). Attitudinal
politics: The strategy of moderation. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 25, 100-108; Cialdini, R. B., Levy, A., Herman, C. P., Kozlowski,
L. T., & Petty, R. E. (1976). Elastic shifts of opinion: Determinants of direction
and durability. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 663-672.
7. Watts, W. A., & Holt, L. E. (1979). Persistence of opinion change induced
under conditions of forewarning and distraction. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 37, 778-789.
8. Butterfield, S. (1985). Amway: The cult of free enterprise. Boston: South End
Press, p. 11.
9. Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1979). Effect of forewarning of persuasive
intent and involvement on cognitive responses and persuasion. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 5, 173—176.
10. Williams, K. D., Bourgeois, M. J., & Croyle, R. T. (1993). The effects of
stealing thunder in criminal and civil trials. Law and Human Behavior, 17, 597-
609.
11. Spence, G. (1995). How to argue and win every time. New York: St.
Martin's, p. 131.
12. Bugliosi, V. (1996). Outrage: The five reasons why O. J. Simpson got away
with murder. New York: Norton, p. 117.
13. Ross, S. (1988). Fall from grace. New York: Ballantine.
14. McGuire, W. J., & Papageorgis, D. (1961). The relative efficacy of various
types of prior belief-defense in producing immunity against persuasion. Journal

of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 62, 327-337. See also McGuire, W. J.
(1964). Inducing resistance to change: Some contemporary approaches. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 191-
229). New York: Academic Press.
15. For a discussion of the use of inoculation in politics, see Pfau, M., & Kenski,
H. C. (1990). Attack politics. New York: Praeger; Pratkanis, A. R. (1993).
Propaganda and persuasion in the 1992 U.S. presidential election: What are the
implications for a democracy? Current World Leaders, 35, 341-362.
16. McAlister, A., Perry, C., Killen, J., Slinkard, L. A., & Maccoby, N. (1980).
Pilot study of smoking, alcohol and drug abuse prevention. American Journal of
Public Health, 70, 719-721.
17. Pryor, B., & Steinfatt, T. (1978). The effects of initial belief level on
inoculation theory and its proposed mechanisms. Human Communications
Research, 4, 217-230.
39 What We Can Do to Stop Propaganda in Its Tracks
1. Further discussion of ways to stop propaganda can be found in Anderson, S.,
& Zimbardo, P. G. (1984). On resisting social influence. Cultic Studies Journal,
1, 196-219; Bogart, L. (1995). Commercial culture. New York: Oxford
University Press; Capaldi, N. (1987). The art of deception. Buffalo, NY:
Prometheus; Cialdini, R. B. (1984). Influence. New York: Morrow; Eiler, A.
(1984). The consumer protection manual. New York: Facts on File; Gilbert, M.
A. (1996). How to win an argument. New York: Wiley; Green, M. (1995). The
consumer bible. New York: Workman; Jacobson, M. E, & Mazur, L. A. (1995).
Marketing madness. Boulder, CO: Westview; Pratkanis, A. R. (1993).
Propaganda and persuasion in the 1992 U.S. presidential election: What are the
implications for a democracy? Current World Leaders, 35, 341-362; Pratkanis,
A. R., & Turner, M. E. (1996). Persuasion and democracy: Strategies for
increasing deliberative participation and enacting social change. Journal of
Social Issues, 52, 187-205; Preston, I. L. (1994). The tangled web they weave.
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press; Sabato, L. J., & Simpson, G. R. (1996).
Dirty little secrets: The persistence of corruption in American politics. New
York: Random House; Schulte, F. (1995). Fleeced! Amherst, NY: Prometheus;
Zimbardo, P. G., & Anderson, S. (1993). Understanding mind control: Exotic
and mundane mental manipulations. In M. D. Lagone (Ed.), Recovery from cults

(pp. 104-125). New York: Norton.
2. Sagarin, B. J., Cialdini, R. B., Rice, W. E., & Serna, S. B. (2000). Dispelling
the illusion of invulnerability: The motivations and mechanisms of resistance to
persuasion. Unpublished manuscript, Northern Illinois University.
3. Quoted in Young, J. W. (1991). Totalitarian language. Charlottesville:
University of Virginia Press, p. 225.
4. Asch, S. E. (1955). Opinions and social pressure. Scientific American, 193,
31-35; Pratkanis, A. R., Horvitz, T, & Gliner, M. (1996). A replication of the
Asch line experiment for NBC Dateline. Unpublished data, University of
California, Santa Cruz.
5. See Eiler (1984), note 1, for a complete list and excellent advice on consumer
issues.
6. Brill, S. (2000, April). The mega threat. Brill's Content, pp. 23, 26-27;
Rosenwein, R. (2000, January). Why media mergers matter. Brill's Content, pp.
92-95.
7. For more ways to stop negative campaigning, see Jamieson, K. H. (1992).
Dirty politics. New York: Oxford University Press. For a discussion of how to
improve media coverage of elections, see Pratkanis, A. R. (2001). Propaganda
and deliberative persuasion: The implications of Americanized mass media for
established and emerging democracies. In W. Wosinski, R. B. Cialdini, J.
Reykowski, & D. W. Barrett (Eds.), The practice of social influence in multiple
cultures (pp. 259-285). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
8. These numbers are based on a typical federal budget during the 1990s; the
Jones's contribution to each item is merely the percent of the budget for that item
applied to the Jones's tax contribution.
9. Suchard, D. (1993, February 15). "The seduction" of TV ads: Popular Dutch
talk show focuses on and reviews commercials. Advertising Age, 1-3,1-22.
10. See Preston (1994), note 1, for an excellent discussion of deception in
advertising and what can be done about it.
11. We thank Peter Farquhar and Naveen Goyal for discussions on consumer

regulations involving unavailability.
12. See Schulte (1995), note 1, for an excellent discussion of telemarketing
fraud.
13. Lewin, K., & Lippitt, R. (1938). An experimental approach to the study of
autocracy and democracy: A preliminary note. Sociometry, 1, 292-300; Lewin,
K., Lippitt, R., & White, R. K. (1939). Patterns of aggressive behavior in
experimentally created climates. Journal of Social Psychology, 10, 271-299;
Pratkanis (2001), see note 7; Pratkanis & Turner (1996), see note 1; White, R.
K., & Lippitt, R. (1960). Autocracy and democracy: An experimental inquiry.
New York: Harper & Brothers.
14. Beck, E. M., & Tolnay, S. E. (1990). The killing fields of the deep South:
The market for cotton and the lynching of blacks, 1882-1930. American
Sociological Review, 55, 526-539; Ezekiel, R. S. (1995). The racist mind. New
York: Viking; Pettigrew, T. F. (1971). Racially separate or together? New
York: McGraw-Hill; Pratkanis, A. R., & Turner, M. E. (1999). The significance
of affirmative action for the souls of white folk: Further implications of a
helping model. Journal of Social Issues, 55, 787-815; Senechal, R. (1990). The
sociogenesis of a race riot. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
40 Peitho's Children
1. For discussions of the ethics and role of persuasion in society, see Alinsky, S.
D. (1971). Rules for radicals. New York: Vintage; Entman, R. M. (1989).
Democracy without citizens. New York: Oxford University Press; Cialdini, R. B.
(1996). Social influence and the triple tumor structure of organizational
dishonesty. In D. M. Messick & A. E. Tenbrunsel (Eds.), Codes of conduct (pp.
44-58). New York: Russell Sage; Fisher, R, Ury, W., & Patton, B. (1991).
Getting to yes. New York: Penguin; Freire, P. (1968). Pedagogy of the
oppressed. New York: Seabury; Johannesen, R. L. (1967). Ethics and
persuasion. New York: Random House; Pratkanis, A. R., & Turner, M. E.
(1996). Persuasion and democracy: Strategies for increasing deliberative
participation and enacting social change. Journal of Social Issues, 52, 187-205;
Quaker, T. H. (1962). Propaganda and psychological warfare. New York:
Random House; Spence, G. (1995). How to argue and win every time. New
York: St. Martin's; Stone, I. F. (1988). The trial of Socrates. Boston: Little,
Brown; Zimbardo, P. G. (1972). The tactics and ethics of persuasion. In B. T.

King & E. McGinnies (Eds.), Attitudes, conflict, and social change (pp. 81-99).
New York: Academic Press. For an example of the prosocial use of persuasion,
see Pratkanis, A. R., & Turner, M. E. (1994). Nine principles of successful
affirmative action: Mr. Branch Rickey, Mr. Jackie Robinson, and the integration
of baseball. Nine: A Journal of Baseball History and Social Policy Perspectives,
3, 36-65.
2. For an example of one set of rules governing the means of persuasion, see
Cialdini (1996), note 1.
3. Quoted in Alinsky (1971), p. 25, see note 1.
4. For an excellent discussion of press coverage of the Holocaust, see Lipstadt,
D. E. (1986). Beyond belief: The American press and the coming of the
Holocaust 1933-1945. New York: Free Press.

ABOUT
THE AUTHORS
ANTHONY
PRATKANIS is Professor of Psychology at the University of California, Santa
Cruz, where he studies social psychology, social influence, and prejudice
reduction. An engaging classroom teacher, he began his career in the business
school at Carnegie-Mellon University, where he taught popular courses in
advertising and consumer behavior. Dr.
Pratkanis's expertise is sought by both public and private enterprises. His
testimony on subliminal persuasion at the trial of CBS Records/Judas Priest was
instrumental in winning that case for the defense. Currently, he is working with
various civic groups and law enforcement agencies on strategies for preventing
economic fraud crimes. He has appeared in the mass media more than 200 times,
including the "Oprah Winfrey Show," "Dateline NBC,"
"CBS News," C-Span, and CNN, and his research has been
translated into eight languages. A frequent contributor to scientific journals and
the popular press on the topics of persuasion and influence, he is a co-editor of
Attitude Structure and Function and of Social Psychology, as well as a past
associate editor of the Journal of Consumer Psychology. In 1995, he was elected
a fellow of the American Psychological Association.
ELLIOT
ARONSON is Research Professor of Psychology at the University of California,
Santa Cruz, and Visiting Professor of Psychology at Stanford University. He is
generally considered to be one of the world's most versatile and distinguished
social psychologists. His research on the topics of persuasion, social attraction,
prejudice reduction, and cognitive dissonance represents some of the most
important and seminal experiments conducted in the field of social psychology.
He is the recipient of the American Psychological Association's Distinguished
Scientific Career Award. In 1970 he won the American Association for the
Advancement of Science prize for distinguished basic research in social

psychology. A gifted teacher, he has received numerous teaching awards,
including awards from the American Psychological Association, the American
Council for the Advancement and Support of Education, the University of
California, and the University of Texas. He is the only person in the history of
the American Psychological Association to have won all three of its major
academic awards: for Distinguished Teaching, for Distinguished Research, and
for Distinguished Writing. Dr. Aronson is the author of many books, including
The Jigsaw Classroom, Methods of Research in Social Psychology, The Social
Animal, and Nobody Left to Hate; and, for some twenty-five years, he was the
co-editor of The Handbook of Social Psychology. Inducted in 1992, Aronson is a
fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
 

