SA MEDICAL JOURNAL 27 MARCHi982
485
The mlcro-
teaching aid
study
or home computer as a
in postgraduate medical
P. DU. P. LA GRANGE,
Summary
D. J. COUPER
the form of a floppy (plastic) disc which is inserted into the disc
drive before switching on the computer. The machine is then
ready for use according to the supplied instructions.
The
home computer 'magic'
portrayed
by the
advertising media, supposed to bring computer
science to the fingertips of every man, woman cnd
child, is assessed by a practical medical lecturer.
Reviewable data banks from which data can be
retrieved almost instantaneously, the elimination of
filing cabinets and stockpiles of notes, and the
efficient storage of clinical patient data together
with the relatively low cost and ease of operation
make the
compu~er one of the
most exciting
additions to modern teaching aids.
S. Atr. med. J.. 61,485 (1982).
What is a home computer?
The modern microcomputer advertised regularly in the lay press
usually consists of the computer as such, a viewing screen, adisc
drive or tape recorder and preferably also a printer. It can do as
much as or more than the large computers prevalent about 10
years ago. Whereas the microcomputer is about the size ofa type-
writer with a very similar keyboard and costs only a fraction ofits
bigger brother, whether the modern or old version, 'true'
computers are big and usually have to be kept in special air-
conditioned rooms where they can be operated only by specially
trained technicians. However, the microcomputer can be kept in
any clean, habitable room -
office, laboratory or library. The
fact that the microcomputer has a very limited memory necessi-
tates the use of an extension to its memory facilities, for which
purpose either a tape recorder or a disc drive can be employed.
To use a microcomputer for the purposes described in this article
one needs no knowledge ofcomputer languages or the writing of
programmes,
although
the
writing
of
highly
technical
programmes is well within the capability of the microcomputer.
This
is
very
useful
if one is trained
to write computer
programmes, but creates no problem as professional programme
writers
are available and are
more than willing to write
programmes to order.
With a microcomputer system one would normally buy the
'software' or 'pack', as these finished programmes are called, in
Department of Anaesthesia, Medical University ofSouthern
Africa, Pretoria
P. DU P. LA GRANGE, ARTS EXAMEN(NEDERLAND),M.MED.(ANAES.),
Professor
Department
of Statistics
and Operations Research,
University of South Mrica, Pretoria
D. J. COUPER, B.sc. HONS., Leccurer
Date received: 5 June 1981.
Reprint requests ro: Prof. P. du P. la Grange, [mernal Box 205, Medunsa, 0204 RSA.
The microcomputer
Buying the microcomputer
Although one need not know much about computer science to
operate a microcomputer it is of the utmost importance to select a
dealer knowledgeable about what he sells. One should insist on
the dealer demonstrating his claims for a specific microcomputer
and also on his ability to coach the buyer in reproducing on the
machine the results claimed. This will give the buyer an
opportunity to judge whether the programme is indeed what is
wanted. In other words, expert advice is needed before buying
either a microcomputer or its accompanying software. As we
shall see later, a sophisticated subject like statistics can cause
considerable embarrassment if the microcomputer and software
are used without the necessary insight.
After reading this, one could seriously doubt the rational use
of microcomputers by the average householder and it is indeed
surprising that professional people make so little use of them,
especially of their function as word processors. Perhaps the name
'home computer' puts them off!
Learning to use a home computer
One
of
the
authors
bought
a
well-known
make
of
microcomputer
with a screen,
printer and
the
necessary
software, and took about 3 weeks to learn to operate the system,
mainly at night. The initial reason for buying it was to write,edit
and store lectures and talks as well as to store and retrieve
relevant data for the preparation ofthe above. As experience was
gained, it surprised the author more and more that this system
was not generally used by all teaching departments, whatever
their subjects, especially as it is so simple that any reasonably
intelligent person can learn to use it within days or weeks,
depending on the amount of time spent in practice.
When an editing programme is used, a trained typist learning
how to operate one already has an advantage because reasonably
good typing is more than half the art of mastering the system.
Owing to the special characteristics of the microcomputer
editing system even typing is easy for a beginner as one can
correct errors immediately, or at a later more convenient stage,
the computer automatically respacing lines and paragraphs
whenever any lener is removed or inserted, right down to the end
of the text.
Cost of purchase and installation
Lest people get the idea that these computers are prohibitively
expensive, let me hasten to point out that, including the necessary
software, the author's system cost less than a good hi-fi set and
weighs at most 5 kg., including the screen, printer and disc drive,
while it occupies roughly 40 X 50 cm of desk space with the

486
SA MEDIESE TYDSKRIF 27 MAART 1982
highest point being 35 cm. The author's set conslsong of
computer, screen (ordinary portable black and white TV set),
disc drive and printer cost less than R4 000. Installation consists
only of simple electrical connection by plugs.
Data storage and retrieval on a disc drive
One item needing some explanation is the so-called disc drive
which can be compared with a superfast tape recorder which,
instead of storing information on a tape, stores it on a disc made
of material similar to the tape of an ordinary tape recorder. The
main difference is that a disc is more fragile and therefore needs a
little more care than a normal tape. It will, for instance, not
withstand the high temperatures of a car's cubbyhole, or sand,
fingerprints or bending. The size is about 13 cm in diameter and
it can store 140000 characters. Depending on the style oftyping,
between 50 and 70 typed pages can be stored on one disc costing
R7,00. For reasons of safety it is advisable to duplicate the discs,
so that one can store 50 - 70 pages at a cost of RI4,00. Once this
disc is in the machine, or as they say in programmer's jargon 'the
DOSS is booted', which takes about a minute, one can retrieve
any information from that disc within a matter of seconds. The
tape recorder, which could also be used for this purpose, is much
cheaper but also much slower and really unsuitable for serious
work. As the discs are so small, they can be stored in a minute
space. The author stores his in an envelope glued to the inside
hard cover of an exercise book measuring 21 X 15 X 0,5 cm, the
book serving as index or catalogue for the subjects recorded on
those particular discs.
Once the information is retrieved and scrutinized on the
monitor screen, in our case a portable TV set, it can be printed if
desired. Depending on the type ofprinter used, this takes at most
a few minutes (the manuscript of this article was printed in 10
minutes on the cheapest available printer). It eliminates the need
for stacks of notes awaiting rewriting and retyping for editing
purposes. The saving in writing and typing paper speaks for
itself, not to mention the saving in time.
Student involvement and teaching with the
microcomputer
The normal practice in teaching departments is to stockpile
lecture reprints for the benefit of students; this can also be done
away with, as retrieval and printing ofthe exactamount ofcopies
required is a simple matter of typing a code into the computer
which takes no more than a few minutes to deliver exactly what is
asked for. The previously mentioned ability of entering and
changing the text at any time or place by insertion or deletion of
letters, words or sentences without the necessity of retyping the
whole text, while the computer automatically corrects spacing,
lines and paragraphs, opens up yet another possibility, namely
that of the teaching staff having access to written material
prepared by students. They can either edit the text on the screen
or retrieve the wanted manuscript, have it printed, then correct it
and then let the typist delete the wrong information. Note that
the text is not retyped as a whole. Letters, words or sentences are
merely inserted. Better still, mistakes can be left where they are
and corrections inserted in brackets next to the original text. The
edited version is then stored again on the same disc area where
the pre-edited text formerly was. From here it is again available
for students to learn from their mistakes with no disc space
wasted and no filing cabinet disturbed or even used for that
matter (one exercise book was taken offa shelfand a disc inserted
into a machine).
The. obvious question is how students get their notes onto the
computer. With a little effort they soon learn to type notes in,
and could even buy and keep their own discs. The less ambitious
ones can let the secretary type theirs into the computer, but this
will naturally rob them of the opportunity of editing their work
as they go along. Whichever way the student uses the system to
feed in information, he or she can always print from any disc as
well as obtaining as many copies of a disc as are required.
Building up and updating a data bank
It needs little imagination'to realize what a vast data pool can
be built up on one corner ofan ordinary office desk anywhere in a
laboratory, library or office, be it that of the consultant or
secretary, where it can be revised and updated continually with
no rearrangement of fIles or books. The responsible person
merely enters the text changes needed and stores the re-edited
version on the same disc space as before, from which it is
immediately available for use by the whole dep~rtment.
Scanning, sifting and comment on journal
articles
The idea becomes even more attractive in relation to journals,
as one can keep track of a certain subject, updating it as new
articles appear, keeping afull record offacts, reference dates plus
whatever other information is required. However, this cannot
serve as a substitute for' retrieval systems like MEDLARS,
which are used to scan world literature.
The
system
described
lends
itself
ideally
to
use
by
postgraduate
medical
students
who
specialize
in
certain
directions. We have a limited number of students with common
interests and problems, the biggest ofwhich is gathering material
from a wide variety of journals, too many to be scanned
effectively by one person and often containing material which
cannot be evaluated properly by the inexperienced. The
solution? Pooled data by a limited group which can be edited by
the leading opinion-makers (heads of the departments) of
particular study-groups. For the consultant whose task it is to
review this work, I can think of no easier way of being kept
informed on the latest trends in a particular specialty. With the
minimum of time and effort, it is more than likely that many
departments will have enough senior people willing to be
involved in a. 'computer word-processing system' like the one
described.
Limited scanning and data retrieval from
selected journals
Another fascinating possibility with journals would be to have
a secretary type in summaries of articles from the most popular
journals read by a departmental group, under a common
heading.
The following question will naturally be asked -
how can one
retrieve specific information? This is simply a matter of typing a
code on the keyboard; the computer will then search for all words
or phrases linked to this code. The information retrieved in this
way can, by use ofanother code, be transferred and saved under a
new heading on the same disc, and can be re-edited and printed if
necessaty. The information so transferred is not cannibalized,
but remains in the original text.
Writing a thesis
For postgraduate students wntmg a thesis, the use of a
microcomputer word-processor will probably more than pay for
itselfif typist's wages, cost of paper, time and cost ofprinting are
considered. The possibility of storing references and facts to
which the student can come back constantly, with the facility to
take often-used paragraphs or parts of the text and insert these
into the main text without retyping the whole section, should in
itself be a tremendous boon.

Storage of patient data
The word 'computer' naturally conjures up visions of research
for which one needs clinical data. This, as we all know only too
well, is where most intended research dies a natural death, even
that needing computers and technicians. The breakdown seems
to be due to an unavoidable communications gap. With a
microcomputer the person who wants the data also operates the
computer and sees to it that the information wanted is fed in.
m this field packages are available with which data can be
processed and retrieved at will. One of these is the Visicalc
System designed for accounting which enables storage of whole'
sheets of information such as anaesthetic charts. With this
system one can also incorporate formulae for instantaneous
processing of data. Retrieval of data is simple and effective with
the normal printing facilities available. The Data Base is another
package ideally suited for use in this situation.
For the private practitioner who wants the microcomputer not
only as a word-processor to keep up with his reading, the
Visicalc System can also be used as a perfect book- keeping
system. This commercial use of the microcomputer by medical
practitioners will not be discussed here except to say that
packages are available with which the private practitioner can do
anything, from mailing accounts to storing and retrieving clinical
data regarding patients.
Statistics and microcomputers
Microcomputers can alleviate problems with statIstIcs, but
owing to a worldwide shortage of programmers, especially those
with a sound knowledge of statistics, this potential is unlikely to
be realized in the foreseeable future.
In this field the most useful programmes are those produced
by statistical groups at universities and research establishments
which develop sets of programmes (packages) on their large
computers and then make these available to other groups with
suitable computing facilities. Unfortunately the cost of these
packages and the types of computers for which they are
developed make them unsuitable for use on microcomputers.
The statistical package available locally for microcomputers is
not particularly useful and is open to abuse of statistics, as
untrained users are not warned of the assumptions that must be
made about data and how to check whether these assumptions
are met before manipulating the data if the results are to have any
meaning. The programmes on larger computers have this
problem to a lesser extent, as they are usually well documented
and are less likely to be used by amateur statisticians.
One way to partially overcome this pmblem is to provide a
practical course in statistics for medical researchers. Most
statistics
courses concentrate on mathematical theory and
SA MEDICAL JOURNAL 27 MARCH 1982
487
numerical calculation. What is needed is a course run on the lines
of one presented at the University of Kentucky, USA. There
statistics is taught as a language. 1-3 The students are taught some
terminology without being taught formulae or theory and,
among other things, they are taught to criticize the use of
statistics by the media. In our context the statistical theory can be
left to the programmer and the microcomputer can evaluate the
formulae, but students must be taught the terminology, as they
can converse more constructively with statisticians and can
understand what to feed into, and what comes out of the
computer. Students could also be taught to criticize the use of
statistics in journal articles. Users of statistics should note,
however, that a statistician is more valuable (but least often used)
during the planning stage ofan experiment and that a statistician
consulted then may be able to recommend the use of particular
programmes so that the experiment can be carried out and the
data analysed without his further assistance.
Conclusion
In the above context one can safely say that microcomputers in
their capacity as word-processors should be a common sight in
all teaching departments, regardless of the subject taught.
The low-cost home computer should find a wide variety of
uses
in postgraduate medical teaching, both as an easily
updateable data bank through which opinion makers can
influence their departments effectively, even where junior staff
cannot always be present at all lectures and discussions as a result
of their normal hospital duties.
Libraries are ideally suited to the housing of one or more
microcomputer
systems
where
trained
assistance
can
be
provided. Laboratories and departmental offices should likewise
be ideal stations.
Intensive care wards, where patients undergoing specialized
surgery are nursed, should really be considered underequipped
without a system like the one described. Proper note-keeping
and
clinical
research
will
be
aided
immensely
by
a
microcomputer. It can be operated by the secretary, ward
matron or the doctor, and can serve all the patients in a particular
intensive care unit, while costing less than an ECG monitor with
channels for temperature and pressure monitoring.
The uses mentioned in the article will probably multiply a
hundred-fold as the awareness of its uses and applications
increases within the different specialties.
REFERENCES
1. Haack, D. G. (1977): Communications in Statistics, AS, 943.
2. Idem (1979): Teaching Statistics, 1,74.
3. Idem (1980): Ibid., 2, 22.

