
The International Library ofPsychology
ALFRED ADLER: PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSIS
Founded by C, K, Ogden

The International Library ofPsychology
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES
In 21 Volumes
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XI
XII
XIII
XIV
XV
XVI
XVII
XVIII
XIX
XX
XXI
The Practice and Theory of Individual
Psychology
The Neurotic Constitution
Duality
Problems of Personality
An Introduction to Individual Psychology
The Psychology of Alfred Adler and the
Development of the Child
Personality
The Art of Interrogation
Appraising Personality
Physique and Character
The Psychology of Men of Genius
Handreading
On Shame and the Search for Identity
ABC of Adler's Psychology
Alfred Adler: Problems of Neurosis
Principles of Experimental Psychology
The Psychology of Character
The Hands of Children
The Nature of Intelligence
Alfred Adler: The Pattern ofLife
The Psychology of Intelligence and Will
Adler
Adler
Bradley
Carnpbell et al
Dreikurs
Ganz
Gordon
Hamilton
Harrower
Kretschmer
Kretschmer
Laffan
Lynd
Mairet
Mairet
Pieron
Roback
Spier
Thurstone
Wolfe
Wyatt
I

ALFRED ADLER: PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSIS
A Book of Case Histories
Edited by PHILIPPE MAIRET
Prefatory Essay by F G Crookshank

First published in 1929 by
Routledge, Trench, Trubner & Co., Ltd.
Reprinted 1999, 2000, 2001 by
Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Transferred to Digital Printing 2007
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
© 1929 Editorial Selection and Preface Philippe Mairet,
Chapters Alfred Adler
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced
or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means,
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying
and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publishers.
The publishers have made every effort to contact authors/copyright holders
of the works reprinted in the International Library ofPsychology.
This has not been possible in every case, however, and we would
welcome correspondence from those individuals/companies
we have been unable to trace.
These reprints are taken from original copies of each book. In many cases
the condition of these originals is not perfect. The publisher has gone to
great lengths to ensure the quality of these reprints, but wishes to point
out that certain characteristics of the original copies will, of necessity, be
apparent in reprints thereof.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP catalogue record for this book
is available from the British Library
Alfred Adler: Problems of Neurosis
ISBN 0415-21065-8
Individual Differences: 21 Volumes
ISBN 0415-21130-1
The International Library of Psychology: 204 Volumes
ISBN 0415-19132-7

CONTENTS
PAGE
PREFACE by F. G. Crookshank, M.D.
vii
CHAPTER I
I
The Concealment of the Feelings of Inferiority-Anxiety
Neurosis-The Theory
of
Heredity-Dream of
Anxiety
Neurotic-The Style of Life-Suicidal Impulse-Organic
Effects
of
Neurotic
Tension-A
Compulsion-neurosis-
Critical Point in the Development of Neurosis-The Dream
as a Rehearsal
CHAPTER II
18
S,chizophrenia and its Preparation-The Three Problems of
Life-The Function of th~ ,Mot.her-Psychosis-Melancholia
-Feelings of Guilt-Indirect Treatment of Melancholia-
ManiC-depressive Insanity
CHAPTER III -
29
The Psychological Standpoint-Character-Social Feeling
and the Mother-Inferiority-Organically Defective Children
-Spoiled and Hated Children-Unsocial Types-Guilt as a
Form of Superiority-The Art of the Psycho-therapist-The
Masculine Protest
CHAPTER IV -
46
The Prototype in Love and Marriage-Love and Social
Feeling-Evasions of
Love-Drunkenness in
Marriage-
Drug Habits and their Treatment-Neurotic Striving to get
Married -
Anger
and
Headaches -
Aversion to
Bearing
Children-Love and the Life-Goal
CHAPTER V
63
Organic
Symptoms -
Vomiting -
Fainting -
Stuttering-
Left-handedness-Imperfect Sight-Compensatory Activi-
ties-The Sexual Role-Sex Equality-Masculine Protest-
U Prophet II Fantasies in Neurotics-First Methods of Treat-
ment-Verification of Diagnosis-" Transference II to the
Psychologist-True Understanding of a Neurosis-Drunken-
ness-Patients who need Supervision-Criterion of the Value
of Action-The Value of Social Feeling-Neurosis as the
vVeapon of the Weak-Case of Suicidallmpulse
CHAPTER VI -
Depression as a Superiority-device-Guilt Complexes-The
Begging Style of Life-Polygamous Desires-Another case
of Begging-The Emotions in Neurosis-Agoraphobia-A
Development
towards
Homosexuality-Air
Swallowing
(Aerophagia)
v

vi
CONTENTS
169
PAGE
CHAPTER VII
96
The Psychology of Family Position-The First Child-Its
Dethronement-A
Second Child unable to overtake the
First-The Eldest a Conservative-The Second Child-A
Second Child's Neurosis-Second Child a Revolutionary-
The Youngest Child-Youngest Child a Conquerer in Myth
and Folk-Iore-A Spoiled Youngest Child with Imaginary
Cancer-The
Only Child-Its
Educational
Problem-
Development
of
Homosexuality-Self-Perversion-Dis-
astrous Cases-Influence of Other Factors in Home Environ-
ment-Effect of Superstit~onsor Fanatical Ideas
CHAPTER VIII
12I
Early Recollections and their Significance-Recollection of
a Visual Type-Recollections of Movement-Of Danger-
Case of Erythrophobia
CHAP~ER IX -
128
The Highest Goals-Goals in Insanity and Crime-In Per-
version-The Masochistic Attitude-Irritating Behaviour-
The
Goal
in
Day-Dreams -
Day-Dreams
of
Vicarious
Satisfaction-Case of Suicide-Red Hair as Inferiority-
Heart-trouble
and
Aerophagia-Masculine
Protest
and
Marriage with a Relative-Jealousy and Superiority-Case
of Jealous Hallucinations-Unconscious Jealousy-Case of
Syphilophobia-Preparation for the Sexual Role-Homo-
sexual Tendency-Masochistic Tendency the Reverse of
Submissive
CHAPTER X
-
145
The Fear of Death: In Children: Its true Compensations-
Desire to become a Physician-Religious Compensations-
Choice of Occupations in General-Vocational Guidance-
Goal
of
the
Working
Life-Fantastic
Choices-Bodily
Postures in Waking and Sleeping-All Postures are Purposive
CHAPTER XI -
154
Cases in which Treatment is resisted-Anxiety Neurosis-
Compulsion-Neurosis-Organ-Jargon-Dialect of the Sexual
Organs-Free Sex-relations as Revenge-Resistance to Mar-
riage expressed by Dream:
By Melancholy-Relation of
Sleeping to \Vaking-Hypnotism-Limitations of Hypnotic
Treatment-Dream Interpretation-Absence of Dreams-
Dream expressing Conflict in l\Iarriage-Self-Deception of
Dreams also observable in Waking Life
BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEX
I71

PREFACE
BY
F. G. CROOKSHANK
INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY:
A RETROSPECT (AND A VALUATION)
'fHE science of Individual Psychology teaches us that the
leit-motiJ
4 of all neurosis and conflict is a sense of discourage-
ment and inferiority. But the key-note of the practice of
Individual Psychology is that (( 'benevolent comradeship II
which Adler tells us should characterise the attitude of the
physician towards his patient.
The sincerity of this utterance, and its full significance,
can hardly be better known than by the Pupil, who has been
asked, by the Teacher, to write some foreword to the latter's
own work. Perhaps in such case the Pupil may be thought
to fulfil his duty best in attempting to set out something he
has learned, which others may wish to know.
I
INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY AND GENERAL MEDICINE
We are, of course, living in an age of paradox, for, as'
thinking people have always found, without paradox there
is no comprehensive view of life.
The explanation, like that
vii

viii
PROBLEMS -OF NEUROSIS
of most paradoxes, even the most strange, is very simple
Reality is not that which is flashed instantaneously on the
screen of experience as the film of events slips by the slot,
but the mentally continuous picture of that which was, of
that \vhich now is, and of that which, coming, will presently
be past.
Only those who see the now as the very knife-edge
separating the futttre from the past are aware of things as
they really are.
That is why, in the philosophy of medicine,
true diagnosis-in Galen's phrase,
II the thorough under-
standing of things present "-comprehends and implies the
right understanding of etiology (or what has been) and of
prognosis (or what will be).
But academies, whether of art,
of literature, or of science, vainly attempt to fix, to crystal-
lise, not merely that which flows, but that which is
of the very essence of being-the flux, or change itself.
And academies of medicine form no exception to
the
rule.
It has been said recently by Biot, of Lyon, that there
are only two orthodox Schools of medical thought-the
Necrological and the Veterinary! Of these, the first, which
we may call the Post-Mortem, or Mortuary School, is
now a little demode.
It arose first in France more than a
century and a quarter ago, and owed its juvenile activity
to the opportunities afforded by "Var and the Guillotine
during the Age of Reason and Liberty.
It was fostered in
France by Laennec and his pupils, including Andral, in spite
of the jeers of Broussais;
in England, a little later,
several London hospitals became, as it were, chapels-of-
ease for the propagation of the new and lugubrious creed,
being directed to this end by severa] eminent necrologists
whose names we still commemorate in the " diseases" that
they invented.

PREFACE
ix
Medicine everywhere ambles a generation in the rear of
the philosophic zeitgeist, though in France the ct lag" is less
evident, and less pronounced, than in England.
This
mortuary school of medicine, whose devotees are not yet
extinct, corresponds, philosophically and logically, to the
eighteenth-century funerary school of art, religion and
thought: to the era of cypresses, willows, wreaths, vaults,
sermons, Night Thoughts and Miditations sur la mort.
But, just as to the divines of the urn and cypress period
life was a mere preparation for death, so, to the doctors
of the mortuary school disease was, and is, a mere prelude
to the diagnostic autopsy, and therapeutic effort as dis-
credited as the attempt to gain Heaven by good works.
These doctors have always sought the living amongst the
dead, and to-day reserve what they deem the sterll reproach
of
ct metaphysician" for him who considers the art
of
medicine to have concern with living, willing, feeling and
thinking individuals.
On the other hand,
physicians
of
the Veterinary or
Analogical School-the second of the t\VO orthodoxies, and
that most in present favour-though frankly hoping to
explain life away in terms of some chemical or physical
formula, do nevertheless admit the advisability of study-
ing it in living objects.
But, holding all things
It sub-
jective," and therefore contemptible, that are not revealed
at the scalpel's point or by the scratching of a needle on a
smoked drum, they are not prepared to allow "what the
patient says" to be heard in evidence. They ,viTI not allow
that the making of a statement-whether true or false-by
any patient is a datum at least as " objective" and as worthy
of interpretation, as the making of a noise-whether systolic
or diastolic-by any heart!
On the contrary, they choose

x
PROBIJEl\fS Of"' }TEUI{OSIS
to reason analogically from a rabbit or a rat rather than to
observe directly at the bedside, or to discuss analytically in
the consulting-rooIne
The foundation of this analogical or veterinary school
-whereof the bio-chemical and physical sects represent the
iatro-chemical
and
jatro-mechanical
physicians
of
the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries-is, by surgeons,
generally credited to the immortal John Hunter who (they
say) taught his pupils not to think, but to try.
Certainly
none will be eager to assert that the first part of the
injunction has not been sufficiently obeyed I
Physicians,
however,
somewhat
unfairly
ascribe
the
achievement to the no less, but sooner immortal William
Harvey.
Perhaps they are, after all, not entirely wrong,
for there is something more deadly than malice in the shafted
epigram of Harvey's greater contemporary, Sir Thomas
Browne, that" a Man may come unto the Pericardiun1" but
not unto the Heart of Truth."
But so it is and, during the dithyrambic outpouring of
ceremonial oratory which recently celebrated the tercen-
tenary of the
ct De ~Iotu Cordis," not even the most enthu-
siastic of Harvey's panegyrists dared claim that, as a result
of Harvey's triumph and the subsequent work of the
veterinary and analogical school, one single step has been
made in the understanding and cure of It functional" dis-
orders of the heart, in the three hundred years since the
discovery of the circulation of the blood.
Indeed, not one speaker made allusion,
~ven for one
moment, to the "new methods," thanks to which the
cardiac neuroses-sourc.es of a volume of suffering and
wastage far greater than that due to the so-called H organic"
heart diseases-are now, after centuries of neglect since

PREFACE
xi
Harvey's time, more certainly amenable to treatment than
are fibrillation, heart-block and flutter!
The fact is that this great therapeutic advance has been
II unofficial," and is therefore unheeded by those Bourbons
of Analogical Medicine who, careless of the Introduction to
the It De Generatione," have praised the.imaginary tt casting
off the trammels of Aristotle" by Harvey, and have riveted
the more firmly on their own shrunk shanks the rusty fetters
of pre-Socratic materialism and early scholastic realism.
Yet it is not in the treatment of the cardiac neuroses only
that such successes have to be recorded.
Very many are
now quickly eased of their own and their friends' tortures,
who, a few years ago, would have been subjected, as some
still are, to a surgical game of musical chairs until, in the
end, organ after organ having been removed seriatim, the
neurosis would have been left, solus, like the grin of the
Cheshire cat.
These almost unannounced, unacknowledged and un-
appreciated triumphs in a field from which psychiatrists are
still excluded by the orthodox (as concerned only with
It diseases of the mind ") are due to the work of a third and
oncoming Psychological School, which refuses to confine its
efforts to the specialist domain of the psychoses and is
pursuing with active and increasing success the treatment of
the neuroses and of many maladies deemed
tc organic" by
the Old Guard.
The rapid advance made by this psychological school of
medical thought-of which, truly, there are several sects-
allows us now to envisage definitely that complete, real, or
Human Medicine which, occupied with the study of the
Inclividual-in-the-Community, and neith~r basing its theory
and practice upon the exclusive study of corpses in the

xii
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
mortuary, or barnyard denizens in the laboratory, nor
turning"the back upon what has been learned by those who
have seen the part of things rather than the whole, will
gather up and synthesise all that is best in the medicine of
the-past,
a'S-~f the present, and will incorporate what is of
most value in that whicl1 the future brings to us.
In the immortal words of Baglivi, the mission of this
medicine will be :
Novi veteribus opponendi, sed quoad fieri patest, perpetuo
'jungendi foedere.
Biot of Lyon has well said, that Human, as opposed to
Mortuary and Veterinary Medicine, must recognize that the
healing art, in its application to the human race, ne peut
pas separer matiere et esprit, and has to do with l'homme tout
entier.
It will affirm plainly the validity of the principle of
tt psychic determi'msm," not only. for those maladies called
psychical,
but
for
those
physical
disorders
called
tt functional," and, in increasing measure, for many of those
now called
tf organic."
Certes, it will not affirm the
exclusively psychic determination of all forms of disorder,
at all times for all persons.
But it will oppose decisively
the barbarous and ignorant dogma that every
U disease"
must have an cc organic" basis, and it will refuse to admit
the categorical distinctions between physical and psychical"
functional and organic, as other than dubious expedients or
conventions of temporary usefulness.
Human Medicine,
in this sense, will not disdain the'teachings of the deadhouse
and the laboratory, of the test-tube and the fluorescent
screen.
It will welcome them as invaluable, so far as they
are relevant.
But it will declare frankly that those occupied
only in the'laboratory are not tIle best fitted to judge between

PREFACE
xiii
the applications of medicine to human and to veterinary
purPoses, holding that even the natural history of disease is
not to be learned so well in hospital as in the market-place.
For, again to quote Biot, the knowledge we gain in hospital
concerning the patient is depouillee de tout ce qui individualise
en lui la maladie.
So we must aim at the integration of all relevant data.
It must be asserted and re-asserted that, in order to achieve
a correct
~agnosis, we must bring into account not only
reflexes and reactions, pulse-beats and pyrexias, but actions,
feelings, thoughts, emotions, dreams, fears and desires,
declaring, with Sigaud, that disease is no
tc entity" that
attacks us, but a dissociation of the functional unity of the
individual.
Human medicine will have diverse origins-for
it will be synthetic: it will display diverse tendencies-for it
will be living, tentative and creative.
But if we will, we
may speak of it as Socratic, for
It Socrates in Plato," as
B:urton of the
Ct Anatomy" quaintly said, "would prescribe
no Physicke for Charmides' headache' till first he had eas~d his
troublesome mind; ,body and soul must be cured together, as
head and eyes."
.
To this Socratic medicine perhaps the most important
contribution in our time will prove to have been the
Individual Psychology of Alfred Adler of Vienna, whose
unceasing injunction is the Socratic ·ct Know Thyself" 'and
who (like Socrates by Masson-Oursel) has been compared by
Mairet to Confucius, "in his realistic grasp of the social
nature of the individual's problem and his inexorable
demonstration of the unity of health and harmonious
behaviour."
Adler himself1 with characteristic modesty and comrade-
ship, would ,be the first to admit the extent to which even

xiv
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
his work has been it presentation of converging stream-lines
of thought: his pupils must say no more than he would wish.
But many of us are eager to acclaim the lucidity, insight,
and power, with which he has integrated what others have at
most seen dimly, formlessly and uselessly.
There must be
many more, to whom Individual Psychology is but a name,
\vho will be helped to better work when they find how
fruitful already has been the harvest in a field that they
have longed to explore, but from which they have with-
drawn, perhaps in dread of
fail~re, and fearful, though
jealous, of their own capabilities.
II
INDIVIDUAL
PSYCHOLOGY
AND
ORGAN-INFERIORITIES
If we are to understand this Individual Psychology we
must turn in retrospect to the year 1907 when Adler, then a
neurological physician practising in Vienna, gave to the
world his Studie uber Minderwertigkeit von Organen, which
was not translated until 1917, when it appeared in America
as Study of Organ Inferiority and its Psychical Compensation
(Nervous and Mental Disease Monograph Series, No. 24).
The object of this essay (which is now practically unobtain-
able in its American, if not its German form) was said by
Adler, in his Preface, to be the giving of a new method, or
principle, to clinical medicine.
tc This work," he declared,
" is to count as a beginning."
He felt sure that he had
opened up new and fertile fields of research and" having
observedhumanpathologyin the making," he anticipatedtIle
imminent dissolution of our academic philosophy of disease.

PREFACE
xv
But the' Great "Var interposed an obstacle between the
original publication of the book and its appreciation in our
slowly-moving medical circles, and this obstacle was hardly
removed by the issue of the now inaccessible American
~ersion.
Nevertheless, the
U new principle" that it ex-
pounds is gradually permeating both theory and practice,
and shaping the development of that Socratic medicine
which shall have regard to the individual-in-the-community,
rather than to the conventional concepts put forward as
" entities" for study by students.
It is a development of
an approach which, in -many of its aspects, was first taught
by Hippocrates, the actual contemporary of the Athenian
philosopher.
This" ne\v principle," this doctrine, or notion, succinctly
symbolised by the term" organ-inferiority," and which has
so changed and is still so changing the secular channels of
medical thought, may be stated in the first place as the
thesis that weaknesses of organs, tissues and systems of
organs and tissues (whether inherited, predestined, imposed
'during intra-uterine life, or acquired during early childhood)
do account for disease, as defined by Sigaud (vide supra)
without intervention of any extrinsic etiological factor.
Organ-inferiorities, as these weaknesses are called, are of
many kinds, or grades.
There
a~e crude morphological
inferiorities, of developmental origin (such as the persistence
of a foramen ovale or a defective interventricular septum)
which carry with them obvious functional disabilities. There
are also certain morphological inferiorities of developmental
origin, of no obvious significance, such as the imperfect
differentiation of the upper
lo~e of the right lung from
the middle, ,vhich, however, carries with it, as I have shown,
a definite liability to death from broncho-pneumonia. There

xvi
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
are such inferiorities as a moveable kidney, or badly-placed
renal vessels, and the
like;
so often associated with
albuminuria, with calculus, with hydronephrosis and with
Dietl's crises.
But again, although an inferiority-such as
the persistence of sinus arrhythmia in adult life-may
appear as a functional weakness only, yet post-mortem
examination will reveal that the peccant organ has been
always small, or of an infantile or (( unfinished" type.
So, too, sexual disfunction of childish type is found to be
associated often enough with such inferiorities of the sexual
organs as phimosis, hydrocele, an infantile uterus.. and
the like.
Perhaps even more important are certain functional
inferiorities recognised by Adler as
(( insufficiencies of
effectiveness."
Such are anomalies of excretion, secretion
and growth, and simple tendencies to break down under
normal stress.
The
It inborn errors of metabolism" to
which Sir Archibald Garrod has devoted so much attention
are striking familiar (and familial) (( inferiorities" of this
type.
Now it makes no undue demand upon our imagination to
suppose that inferiorities of a less obvious kind must, in
many instances, underlie what we ha've be~n accustomed to
regard as symptomatic of it organic disease," and we have
lately learnt how probable it is that rheumatic endocarditis
Inost frequently develops on a valve that is congenitally
inferior.
Some of these inferiorIties, in which, as almost
alwa~ys, morphological as \vell as functional elements are to
be observed, are regarded by Adler as "relative": these
are only recognisable" under increased demands or following
upon systematic tests."
But the recognition of the importance of organ-inferiorities

PREFACE
11
XVII
in general is only a part of the tt ne'\v principle."
We are
all familiar with the physiological doctrine of
(( com-
pensation " which teaches us, for example, that if one kidney
be removed, the other hypertrophies; and so on.
Here we
are concerned with vicarious action by one organ of a pair,
in consequence of damage to the other.
But sometimes we
have to do with the compensation of an
cc inferior" organ
-such as a kidney-by the over-activity of another-such
as the heart-with which it is not" paired."
Less com-
monly we recognise, as Adler pointed out, that not only are
'carcinomata apt to occur in
It inferior organs" but their
development may be preceded by years of functional dis-
turbance, or even neurosis.
Now it was as a result of close observation, in the light
of these and other preliminary generalisations, that Adler
was led to formulate the second part of his It new principle,"
namely, the doctrine of the development of the neuroses and
psycho-neuroses in connection with organ-inferiorities.
Full discussion of this
tC new principle" as
a
whole
\vould necessarily traverse all that Adler has since written,
and only th~ most imperfect outline can here be attempted.
But it may be said that, according to Adler's teaching, the
individual, confronted with his own "organ-inferiorities"
-whether"morphological or functional-has three courses of
action open to him, in what is called the psychical, as well
as in the physical sphere.
It is in accordance with the choice
made by the individual that the result for him is either (i)
overcorning, success, or even the triumph of genius;
(ii)
neurosis, psychoneurosis, or psychosis itself; or (iii) disease,
degeneration and decay.
For body as for soul there is the
effort that overcomes weakness and leads to strength: the
hesitation and c01npromise that means evasion of difficulty
B

~viii
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
and leads to neurosis; and the despairing retreat that entaiis
frank disaster.
It was on arrival at this point in his Study of Organ-
Inferiority that Adler left,
fo~, the moment, his analysis of
the psychic compensations for physical inferiority while he
elaborated his theory on the biological side, laying stress on
the significance of cutaneous and other abnormalities as
indicative of segmental inferiorities involving the viscera and
predicating liability to visceral disease, and on such defects
as spina bijida occulta as significant of imperfect organisation
of the central nervous system in cases of neurasthenia,
enuresis, and the like.
But he emphasised the psychical-
aspect of " compensation " by discussion of such classical
instances as the stuttering Demosthenes, and by many
others gleaned from his own case-book.
Although the whole theory of organ-inferiorities, both
directly and by reason of its implications, was and is of the
greatest importance to the philosophy of medicine, it· is in
the recognition, at this stage in the development of
Individual Psychology, of the psychical reactions, compen-
sations, and disturbances provoked by or connected with the
organ-inferiorities, that we find the greatest value of the work
of Adler in relation to the neurotic constitution and the
treatment of the neuroses, psychoneuroses and psychoses.
As Dr. W. A. White, of Washington, well says, the
distinctive feature of this part of Adler's work is that it
constitutes an approach to the .problem of tne neurotic
character from the standpoint of ordinary clinical medicine.
It brings together in a common field-if I may say so---.:the
proper doctor and the crystal-gazer as, in the irreverent ?ays
of the Great \Var, the soldiers used to call the clinician and
the psychotherapist! It provides a Golden Bridge on which

PREFACE
xix
may meet (i) those who see, in the neuroses and psych<;>ses,
the effects upon the mind of bodily changes, and (ii) those
who, in the same conditions, see no bodily changes other
than those which are It imaginary" or the effects of mental
alienatiori:1
Abov~ dil, however, it constitutes a challenge, at one and
the same time, to:
(i) the physicians of the mortuary and
analogical schools who see in every patient either a candidate
for autopsy or a merely physiological organism:
(ii) those
who, like the Freudians, hold
II simultaneous organic and
psy~hical treatment ... inadvisable as a rule," and so
limit, perhaps wisely, their own activities, and; (iii) the
ambiguous persons who, in any given case, consider the
'tl diagnosis" to lie between
tl psychical" and
It physical,"
or II organic" and
lC functional" alternatives, but never in
a
It combination of the two."
III
INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY AND THE FREUDIAN SYSTEM
Although in 1907, at the time that he wrote his Study of
Organ-Inferiorities, Adler was in full practice as a clinical
I?-eurologist, nevertheless, strange as
it
may sound in
British ears, he was fully aware of the new trend introduced
into psychology and psychological medicine by Freud in
development of the position taken up by the latter in 1893,
the date of his fruitful collaboration with Breuer, concerning
which Rickman's
recent authoritative and documented
account (1929) should be consulted.
It was only. natural then that Adler, having realised the

xx
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
striking psychological implications of his own. doctrine of
psychical compensations for organ-inferiorities, should have
Cl entered into close relations with Sigmund Freud, and the
then unimportant psycho-analytical school," \vhose views,
as Wexberg says, he
tt in part adopted, without however
yielding his independence withil1 the realm of psycho-
analysis."
His
chief
interest,
naturally,
lay
in
the
application of his It new principle" to the study of psycho-
pathology.
He defined this as the making use of empirical
observations to establish a tt fi~tive standard of normality"
-or yardstick, as Mr. Hoover would say-by which grades
of individual deviation could be measured.
Regarding
pathological processes, in the organic or physical sphere, as
the result of conflict under " compulsion of the struggle for
existence," for the purpose of balance and adjustment
bet\veen organism and environment, he proceeded to find, in
neurosis and in the psychical sphere, a conflict for adjust-
ment no less acute but in the presence of organ-inferiorities
and under the compulsion of a " fictitious" personality-idea.
Of the acceptance by Adler of great part of Freud's work
and teaching in carrying this out, there can be no question.
But a parting of the ways became inevitable and, in 1912,
Adler retired from association \vith Freud, proposing to
pursue further still the line of enquiry already opened up,
and beginning to be known as Individual
Psy~hology, in
distinction from the orthodox Psycho-analysis of Freud and
the then, as yet hardly developed, Analytical Psychology of
lung.
Freud himself, in These Eventful Years, has said that
It bet"veen 1911 and 1913, C. G. lung, of Zurich, and Alfred
Adler, of Vienna, caused a certain amount of disturbance by
their attempts to misinterpret the analytic facts," and that

PREFACE
xxi
II the temporary success of
th~ir ventures can easily be
explained by the readiness of the crowd to free itself from the
pressure of the psycho-analytic demands by whatever roads
might be open to ~hem."
But the
(C temporary success"
continues, at any rate so far as Individual Psychology is
concerned, and though, without doubt, to Freudians the
explanation is as easy and acceptable as Freud says it is, it
is by no means certain that, to tllose who are not Freudians,
it seems as adequate as the Freudians could wish.
However this may be, some appreciation of the points of
divergence between Individual Psychology and the ,Psycho-
analysis of 1913 is necessary, if the present position of the
fonner is to be understood.
For Psycho-analysis, the year 1913, according to Rickman,
marks the approaching end of a first epoch, " characterised
by a simplicity not found in later work," and during which
(C the psychoses were viewed from the aspect of libido
development."
Individual Psychology in 1913 was to a very
large extent devoted to psychopathology and psychotherapy
and in harmony with some, if not all, of the doctrines of
Freud, to whose original work Adler would render all tribute.
That Individual Psychology has developed since then is not
to be disputed, for it is a living organ and not a doctrinal
corpse and, as was said at the outset, only that which changes
is permanent.
To-day, the term connotes something more:
it stands for a psychology, a pedagogy and a movement
characterised by Wexberg as affecting life very profoundly
within its radius of activity and effecting reform in respect
of individual, and therefore social, or communal life, without
assumption of any political, economic, ethical or moral
doctrine.
Now the original claim of the Freudian system to accep-

xxii
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
tance was based upon the alleged
v~lidity
o~ two theses,
reckoned revolutionary thirty years ago, but nowadays,
save by the die-hards of the mortuary and analogical schools,
found little sho~t of commonplace.
These twin theses are those of:
(i)
(l psychic deter-
minism," and (ii) the" explicability of all mental expres-
sions."
The evidence alleged in support of these was, and
is, derived from the use of the Freudian technique in dream
investigation, in free association, in respect of the It psycho-
pathology of every-day life," and in the investig~tionof the
neuroses.
Speaking broadly, not only these twin theses,
but the Freudian methods of investigation are frankly
accepted by Adler-:pace the Report on Psycho-analysis
recently
issued
by
the
British
Medical Association-
although in the matter of psychotherapeutic technique
there are specific differences, admirably described by Wex-
berg in his invaluable little manual of I ndividual Psycho-
logical Treatment.
However, as we have seen already, the
Adlerian determination of psychic
It compensations" by
" organ-inferiorities" differs widely from the psychic deter-
minations conceived by Freud; and Adler, whilst thorough-
ly in accord with the Freudian doctrine of the explicability of
all
mental
or
psychical
expressions
it including
those
apparently independent of the will," came to seek-and to
find-
cc explanations of mental expressions by no means in
harmony with those given by Freud in terms of the instinct1
the libido, and pan-sexualism."
It was for this reason that Adler dissociated from the
Psycho-analytic Union. His objection to the doctrine that
the libido is the motive force behind the phenomena of
neurosis is the uncompromising one that, in each neurosis,
there is a
tC guiding fiction,"
an unacknowledged goal or

PREFACE
xxiii
aim, as if expressed by the formula,
It I want to be a com-
plete man."
The individual aim, or goal, then, is com-
pliance with a
U fictive standard" of superiority.
The
vagaries of the libido and of the sex-impulses are, in neurosis,
secondary to this
aim~comparable to Nietzsche's Will to
Power,. or Will to Seem-at a completeness, a masculinity, a
superiority, which, though the more desirable, is apparently
the less attainable, by reason of the consciously or uncon-
sciously recognised organ-inferiority.
It follows from this that, for those who accept Individual
Psychology, Freud's notion of the sexual etiology of the
neuroses and psychoses loses all claim to universal validity,
and is automatically relegated to the subsidiary position of
an expression of a special case that is better subsumed by a
wide generalisation more conveniently sheltering the whole
of the relevant data.
Lastly, Adler formally rejected ..the so-called
it instinct-
theory"-the assumption that the neurotic is inv,ariably
under the influence of infantile wishes that come nightly to
the surface in dreams-in favour of the doctrine-implicit
in the notions of will to superiority and compensation for
defect-of the purpose-force, or life-goal, colouring and
determini-ng every detail of the psychic life.
In a sentence, Individual Psychology recognises, in every
psychical datum, the impress and the symbol of a con-
sistently pursued life-plan which comes to be clearly evident
in the neuroses and the psychoses.
It is not perhaps necessary here to enter into any dis-
cussion of the relation between the teachings of Jung (known
as l\nalytical Psychology) and Individual Psychology, for,
as a matter of historical fact, Jung parted company with
the Psycho-analytic Union at a later date than did Adler.

xxiv
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
But the libido of the facile and superficial student for a
mnemonic may be satisfied if, aftef consulting'the German
dictionary; he cares to think of Freud's conception of psychic
motivation in general as that of a reaching after joy, or
ecstasy: of Jung's as that of a striving for the expression of
what has been stored up, as myths, in the racial unconscious
since the youth of mankind; and of Adler's
II as if" the
up-soaring ambition of the eagle.
But this is not all.
For the Freudians, neurosis and
psychosis are effects of frustrated motivation in the past I·
for the followers of Jung, they are due to frustration in the
present,· and for those who profess Individual Psychology
with Adler, they are "arrangements"
and "compen-
sations "-we might almost say, insurances-in fear of
the failure to attain the future success that each neurotic
feels is his due meed.
IV
INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY AND THE
NEUROTIC
CHARACTER
The definite divergences from the Freudian system here
stated in sketchiest outline .having been settled, Adler
became free to turn his attention, in pragmatic fashion, to
the development of his method in Psychotherapy.
To this
end he devoted the years immediately following what a
Scottish theologian would call
U the disruption," to a
necessary study of the Neurotic Constitution.
During this
period a series of papers was written, dealing with the
results obtained, and it is hoped that, in the not very distant
future, these important contributions to the literature of

PREFACE
xxv
Individual Psychology may become available for English
'readers, in a suitable form.
The importance to the student and to the practitioner
of Individual Psychology, of obtaining a clear notion of the
structure of the neurotic mind can hardly be over-estimated:
it is as necessary to the psychotherapist as is a knowledge
of the anatomy' of the brain and spinal cord to the clinical
neurologist and surgeon.
But such a clear notion is no less necessary to the socio-
logist who is interested in the teachings of Individual
Psychology, and who desires to apply them to the healing of
social and
national neuroses and psychoses.
For the
structure of the mind of a social group, or a nation in
neurosis, can only be comprehended properly after study of
the mind of the neurotic, individual:
just as there is no
right way of learning the structure of the aggregate of cells
that we call the human body unless that of the constituent
elements has first been examined.
Whilst it does not fall within the scope of this essay to
give an account, however inadequate, of the structure of
the neurotic mind and its workings, some points at least may
be mentioned, so that the orderly development of the science
of Individual Psychology may be made clear.
Perhaps it should first be emphasised, as characteristic of
Adler's good-fellowship with other \vorkers, as well as of
the unifying nature of his thought, that he himself has
declared his own teachings in respect of the
neurotic
character to be but an extension of Janet's insistence on the
sentiment d'incompletude from which the neurotic indiVIdual
cannot escape.
The perception of an organ-inferiority by its possessor
is, of course, itself a sentiment d'incompletude, but it was

xxvi
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
reserved for Adler to proceed much further a~d to show how
the neurotic life is compounded of consequent evasions,
arrangements,
compromises,
hesitations,
(C fraudulent
devices,"
bogus insurances and confidence tricks
(f put
across" oneself, which give the neurotic, if not the security
and success for which he yearns, at any rate a feeling of
security and of deserved, if unattained, success by means of
which he safeguards himself against the loss in self-esteem
that he fears almost more than failure itself: which com-
pensate him for the victories he does not and will not gain;
which enable him to glow with' self-satisfaction and pride
as he dreams of what he could have achieved had not illness,
fate, and a froward world, as well as his own nobility of
character and Christ-like altruism, conspired to deprive him
of the palm, and leave him only the dust of the arena; and
which, finally, serve as excuses for the deliberate refusal to
grasp the prize so nearly and so often within his reach, just
because he dreads the responsibility to the community
entailed by the triumph that he prefers to dream of as having
eluded him to his greater glory.
Let two examples of the working of the neurotic character
be given: the one of it in its beginnings; the other, when
nearing final exhaustion and realised defeat.
A charming and cultivated woman, a life-long sufferer
from migraine, told the writer recently that her earliest
recollection "vas that of lying on the hearthrug when aged
about five, and praying to God to send her many such
sick-headaches as that from which she was then suffering,
for so, she said,
(t people will be always kind to me."
The other, and no less charming and cultivated woman,
still suffering from constantly recurring migraine at sixty,
told me that her life had been entirely happy, but for

PREFACE
xxvii
II these dreadful headaches II that had cursed her since
marriage.
There was nothing else, she assured me, that she
would wish altered.
A quarter of an hour later, she told me
that her husband-a man of position-had the " defects of
his qualities."
She added, with perfect simplicity: "But
yOll know, when I have a headache, he is delightfully kind
to me and I forget them."
In Adler's maturer work, published in England during
1924 under the title The Practice and Theory of Individual
Psychology, a series of papers, for the most part written
during the War, is comprised.
This important volume may
be considered as of two parts:
The first, occupying the
earlier portion and of some fifty pages only, admirably
resumes Adler's studies of the neurotic character (largely
in an aphoristic form that renders it of the greatest value to
all Individual Psychologists) and goes on to give practical
injunctions for the conduct of the psychotherapy that is
based on this anatomy and physiology of neurosis and
psychosis.
These aphorisms should be ever present to the mind of the
Individual Psychologist, and no physician, to whateverschool
he owes allegiance, has the right to ignore them!
The
compactness of the statement that, " Every neurosis can be
understood as an attempt to free oneself from a feeling of
inferiority, to gain a feeling of superiority," is only equalled
by its intrinsic forcefulness.
The insight of the dictum tha:t,
"The neurotic automatically turns against allowing any
community-feeling to develop," is obvious as soon as the
words are read, and it is but a natural progression to come
to believe that "the demonstration of illness and its con-
tingent arrangements" by the neurotic are specifically
necessary to him, in order that:
(i) they may serve as

xxviii
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
~xcuses when life denies the longed-for triumphs; (ii) that
all decisions may be postponed;
and (iii) 'that what is
gained may appear more nobly gained since gained in spite
of adversity.
In these and other pregnant sentences the psychic
mechanism of the neurotic and its functioning are displayed,
and the path is made clear for the practice of a rational
psychotherapy.
But, in the second, and by far the
lon~er portion of
The Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology we see how
Adler proceeded, from statement of his theory of the
neurotic character and his exposition of the consequent
therapeutic method, to a refusal to " explain" phenomena
otherwise than in relation to the setting \vith which they
make up a unity.
He proposed, formally, to consider
Individual Psychology as " a defined science with a defined
subject-matter, treating of phenomena as mutually related."
So much being postulated, it clearly became necessary for
him (in consequence of his recognition of the anti-community
feeling of the neurotic) to deal with the individual jn relation
to, and as part of, the family: with the family in relation to
and as part of the social milieu, or community;
and,
ultimately, with communities in relation to and as a. part of
mankind.
In this holistic way of dealing with the data,
sociological investigation became inevitable.
Inevitably,
too, it became clear that social, and even
II national" and
international neuroses and conflicts were explicable, or
understandable, in the light of conclusions already reached
concerning the " inferiority-sense" of individuals.
In this
way it is seen that, just as the neurosis of any individual
appears to the doctor as an arrangement for the purpose of
securing attainment of a fictive goal, and is understood

PREFACE
xxix
by the psychological sociologist as anescapefrom compliance
with the demands of the community, so the neurosis of a
nation may be understood as, at one and the same time, an
arrangement to secure superiority, and a turning away from
the world-need for
Cl benevolent comradeship."
And this
under guise of a love of peace as well as in the provocation
of ,var !
The Individual Psychologist, indeed, sees little difference
between, on the one hand, the attitude of a nation that
withdraws from communion within the comity of nations,
and defends herself by a network of prohibitions and
inhibitions and, on the other, that of the schizophrene who
disguises his lack of comradeship by withdrawal into the
isolation of what he thinks his self, forgetting that, in so
doing, in retiring from the endeavour to adjust inner
relations to outer relations, he is suffering loss of his own
personality and effecting dissociation of its unity!
So, in this volume, after a resume of the doctrines of
organ-inferiority, of compensation, and of neurotic over-
compensation, and of the life-goal, and after a discussion of
the neurotic individual and his treatment of Individual
Psychology-after all this, we find Adler discussing, not so
much the Individual himself, but-to make a terminological
theft from high politics-the Individual-in-the-Community
-as different from the Individual as is the King-in-Council
from the King himself!
And it is at this stage that the
student of Individual Psychology, if he be a
cc general
reader "-as not every medical man is-will begin to recog-
nise the truly amazing extent to which Adler, in complete
independence of thought, has reached conclusions already
formulated by the acutest intellects of all ages and has
incorporated harmoniously, in a defined, yet plastic and

xxx
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
accreting synthesis, that is organised but expansile, and
consistent though protean, much of what is best in ancient
and modern thought.
The recent influence of Nietzsche and
of Darwin is already evident to the readers of this sketch.
Not less evident is the utilisation of the biological thought
of Goethe, and Adler himself )las somewhere spoken of the
eagerness with which, not so very long ago, he welcomed
acquaintance with the philosophy of AS IF, expounded by
Vaihinger in our time, but in long line of descent, through
Bentham, Hume, Locke and Hobbes, from William of
Ockham,
t~e little Surrey choirboy and the greatest of
'English philosophers.
But then we remember that William
of Ockham died expatriate in Germany, leaving, through
Martin Luther and many others, his mark on German
thQ~ght and action; and we, as Englishmen, justifiably feel a
little proud of the double connection that links his con-
~eptualism with that of Alfred Adler, manifest in almost
every line the latter has written.
We may now appreciate
the full implication of the phrasing when Adler says that,
" Every neurosis can be understood AS IF an attempt to free
oneself from a feeling of inferiority," of being the
II under-
dog," in some relation of life.
It is this feeling AS IF the
under-dog which Adler, in his discussion of neurosis in
women, finds reflected in every case.
It is the allied and
consequent horror of the supposed. feminine role and the
shirking of the tasks of wife and mot4er that, in Adler's
view, are "shaking our civilisation to its foundations."
And so, all through his consideration of the effect of this
"masculine protest,"
the talks on demoralised children,
pedagogy, prostitution and homosexuality, we follow the
workings of Adler's mind towards the problems raised by
the study of the neuroses, not merely from the sta~dpoint

· PREFACE
XXXI
ot the physician concerned with the patient in the isolation
of the
clinic, but from that of the physician-in-the-
community-and-of-the-community who is concerned with
the prevention of social discontent and conflict, and \vho has
a vision of harmonious relations between individuals-in-the-
community-aye, and between communities-in-the-world-
on the non-competitive basis of " benevolent comradeship,"
with avoidance of discouragements, and disparagements as
the" onlie begetters" of jealousies, aims at conquest, and
protests against fancied grievances in t~e effort to j~stify a
wrong self-valuation.
We see,..too, and as a beginning of social stability, his
glimpse of abolition of the sex war, on the just basis of the
recognition of man and woman as different, with different
social parts to play, and with different, but NOT unequcil,
social values.
v
INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY AND UNDERSTANDING HUMAN
NATURE
The ever-widening circles of thought provoked by Adler's
master-t:lotion of
tc organ-inferiorities" do not, however,
exhaust their momentum in the discussion of social disorder.
In an important volume, still more recently issued than his
Individual Psychology, Adler appears to us not so much the
neurologist, the psychotherapist, the characterologist, the
psychologist, and the sociologist, as the benevolent and
comradely philosophiser, the kindlier Socrates, the more
humorous Confucius who, in easy, pleasant, simple sentences
helps us to solve the greatest and most import(lnt problem

xxxii -
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
of all, that of Understanding Human Nature.
In Wolfe's
admirable translation,
bearing this title
(1928), Adler,
gathering together the fruits of a lIfetime's experience and
meditation, sets it out before us in such encouraging,
refreshing and assuaging fashion that we realise anew the
profound verity that, unless we become as little children, we
cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven, and the great paradox
that the highest philosophy, the deepest thought, if pursued
in sincerity and simplicity of heart lead us surely to what is
hid from the wise and prudent and revealed unto babes.
One of the most pretentious of our many Zoilist reviewers
has said that Adler's view of human nature, as set out in this
book, is that of a commercial traveller.
Well, commercial
travellers are, after all, very good, kindly, simple, industrious
fellows, who often understand human nature-the nature
bf the average sensual man with his weaknesses and his
strong points-remarkably well.
The commercial travellers
successfully link up men and cities, and even nations, to
mutual advantage, and to the promotion of good feeling and
easy, natural relations.
They know how to stand together
when common action is necessary, and how to give a friendly
hand, not only to a colleague, but to a rival in distress, like
the ordinary plain men of goodwill that they are, pursuing
their every-day, commonplace, necessary and excellent
avocations. ,I protest I would rather live in a purgatory of
average men in the street, like commercial travellers, than
in .a paradise of reviewers recruited from the Cheapside
Weekly Journal! Surely the commercial traveller's view of
human nature (if such it be) given to us by Adler, come::;
nearer to
cc the heart of truth " than does the bird's-eye
squint from cloud-cuckoo land of those philosophers whose
philosophies, as Herzberg has lately shown
~SJ are them-

PREFACE
xxxiii
selves by ~ay of escape from the realities of a correct
self-valuation !
But, above all, perhaps the greatest feature in Under-
standing Human Nature is its revelation of a lively sympathy
with the child whose character and personality are yet in the
making-a sympathy that finds, in every heart, an echoing
condemnation of thgse
tt who shall offend one of these litt.le
ones."
*
*
*
*
*
Many years ago, when a very recently qualified medical
man (or, rather, youth), I was struck poignantly with the
bitterness of heart revealed by a little girl of five-I was
her father's locum tenens-who refused to believe that, as
I declared in fun, I was at least seventy years old.
cc "lhy,"
she exclaimed,
cc you aren't even grown up!";
adding
reflectively, " I hope I shall never be grown up, for thel1: I
shall have to be unkind to little children.""
There was
neurosis-or perhaps genius-in the making!
There is even now-and it is beginning to be recognised-
a form of cruelty, practised in thousands of god-fearing
homes
throughout
the
land,
a
thousand
times
more
disastrous in its effects than any of the phy~ical cruelties so
earnestly fought down by societies for the protection of
children.
This cruelty, possibly less widely spread than a
generation or t\VO ago, but still devastatingly diffused, is the
cruelty of discouragement and terrorisation exercised by
well-meaning parents who \vould nourish a child's soul and
mind upon the mouldy crusts of Hebraic legality and the
putrid scraps of demonology and superstition saved from
medireval hagiologies.
This cruelty, this terrorisation.. this
fear and sense of sin even in innocence, is one of the most
stimulating foods of neurosis and disease, and the most
C

,
XXXIV
PROBLEMS OF ~EUROSrS
deadly poison to a simple, joyous, active, natural, intelligent
and sympathetic life in relation to the community.
It is
not excused if we say that, now and again, its foulness has
been the forcing-bed of a Heine or a Goethe.
Still, though
Individual Psychology lays so much stress on the plain duty
of the family or community to the individual young recruits
who make it what it will be, no lesser stress is laid upon the
responsive duty of each individual to the community of
which he forms a part.
Personal effort on the part of the
individual, as stressed by Hobhouse, is always to be en-
couraged, and is to be directed into channels of usefulness
for the greater community-individual of which he forms a
part no less truly than does each red blood corpu~cle exist
as an integer of that whole organism to whose well-being its
own healthy life is, in a measure, contributory.
Heaven, too, helps those who help ~e·mselves.
So much
is of the essence of Adler's teaching~, for what is important
is the nature of the purposive element in the response of each
individual to circumsta~ce. We do not abandon the theory
of psychic determinism, as an objective account, if we say
that, subjectively, each individual must accept responsibility
for his own, logically necessary, participation in the course of
events.
Active work, in a measure psychiatric, in a measure
sociological, in a measure educational, but always pedagogic,
is now being carried on with increasing success in children's
clinics in Vienna and in other cities and towns abroad.
It is
earnestly hop~d that, before long, initiative will come to
similar fruition in New York and in London.
It is possible
that in London the foundation of such a clinic will be
organised in connection with the small band of Individual
Psychologists vvho, by reason of their common interest in

PREFACE
xxxv
Individual Psychology, constitute the Society of Individual
Psychology in London.
It is, on the other hand, quite
possible that such clinics may be founded independently.
In either case, the event will certainly be welcomed by all
who have the cause of psychotherapy at heart.
For it must
not be supposed that the small band, or society, to \vhich
reference has been made, although active and welcoming
accretion, exists to systematise or standardise either theory
or practice.
In a sense, Individual Psychology is not sus-
ceptible of system. It will certainly never be standardised
or systematise4 after the' manner of the
Scribes and
Pharisees.
Yet, on the other hand, it is sufficiently sys-
tematised, in its own fashion, by reason of the very lack of
formalism that allows it tocontinue, as a living, growing and
urganic whole.
Panta rhei: all things flow.
Individual Psychology has, of course, its epistemological,
ontological, metaphysical and cosmological aspects, con-
notations and implications, which must be reckoned with,
which perhaps have not yet been fully developed and which
cannot here be even lightly touched upon.
And Individual
Psychology is of universal significance, for it deals with
secular problems and has recumenical applicability.
Nevertheless, as a
cc Weltanschauung," and particularly
as giving an approach to the understanding of human
conduct, it is susceptible of comprehension by the simplest
and least sophisticated, and there is not one of us who
cannot, from the deep well of childish memories, draw many
instances of the evils of disparagement:
the sense of
inferiority: the competitive struggle for the upper place
and the bigger share: the neurotic flight from reality and
the blighting injustice of the more powerful; and the refuge
in compromise, fantasy and illusion, if not in darkness and

xxxvi
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
despair, that so effectually strangles in its birththe tendency
to draw nearer and into the community.
VI
The book to which this foreword has been written, at
Adler's own request, marks in some degree a return by him
to consideration of the original neurological and psycho-
therapeutic problems in which he has never lost interest.
But it is a return in the light of an even riper wisdom and
a more mellowed thought and experience.
We have here no
formal treatise, but rather the revealing and intimate dis-
courses of the peripatetic and philosophic physician and
psychotherapist.
The
bqok itself has
been editorially
revised-for it was written, or constructed in English-by
Mr. Philippe Mairet, whose A.B.C. of Adler's Psychology
serves as such an excellent introduction to Individual
Psychology, particularly in its sociological function, and
whose knowledge of Adler's wide d9ctrines is so singularly
complete.
In the preparation of the book in its original
form invaluable help was given-so Dr. Adler desires me to
state-by Miss Marx, and this help is here gratefully
acknowledged by him.
Of the book itself it is unnecessary and would be an
impertinence for me to speak, but a bibliography compiled
by Mr. Mairet has been added which cannot fail to be of the
greatest assistance to the many who, whether physicians or
laymen, may vvish to pursue the further study of one of the
most important and yet most modest intellectual and social
movements of the present century.
This movement is one
which, incontent andintent mayfairly be compared"-though

PREFACE
xxxvii
not for the first time-to those whose initiation we ascribe,
in the East to Confucius, and in the West to Socrates.
Yet not every avenue explored by Adler is mentioned
even in the list of books and papers thus set out.
Much of
what we call Individual Psychology has been thrown into
the common store in the course of those simple, comrad~ly
talks which Adler has held and still holds, in Vienna and
elsewhere, with patients, with pupils and with colleagues.
Much, too, has been put into circulation by the countless
letters that Adler, with indefatigable goodwill, has written
to his far-scattered corres'pondents:
much more stands
printed in his <?wn Internationale Zeitschrift fur Individttal-
Psychologie, which may come to have its counterpart in
England and in America.
But, when all is said and done, it is of paramount impor-
tance to the study of Individual Psychology that everyone
-and particularly every medical man-should remember
that the genesis of this movement which" without assump-
tion of any moral, ethical, political, or economic doctrine,"
nevertheless touches so closely all the moods of life, is
found in the profound consideration, by Adler the practising
physician, of those sometimes si:qlple and often derided
physical abnormalities that we have learned to call organ-
inferiorities, and their psychical compensations.
London, W.
JUly,1929

This page intentionally left blank

PROBLEMS OF
NEUROSIS
CHAPTER I
The Concealment of the Feelings of Inferiority.-Anxiety Neurosis.-
The Theory of Heredity.-Dream of Anxiety Neurotic.-The Style of
Life.-Suicidal
Impulse.-Organic
Effects
of
Neurotic
Tension.-A
Compulsion-neurosis.-Critical Point in the Development of Neurosis.-
The Dream as a Rehearsal.
THE problem of every neurosis is, for the patient, the difficult
-maintenance of a style of acting, thinking and perceiving
which distorts and denies the demands of reality. Usually,
it is not until this way of life has become difficult to the
verge of breakdown that the case is brought to the physi-
cian, whose task is to find the right method for its correc-
t~on. The common problem, therefore, of both patient and
physician, and the basis of their co-operation, is to under-
stand the nature of the patient's mistakes, and this demands
not only a true outline of his essential history, but a percep-
tion of the dynamic unity of that history as a continual
tension towards an implied conception of superiority.
As the work of Individual Psychologists has abundantly
proved, an individual goal of superiority is the determining
factor in every neurosis, but the goal itself always originates
in-and is strictly conditioned by-the actual experiences
of inferiority.
The
physi~ian's first line of approach is to
identify the real causes of the feelings of inferiority" which
the patient disguises from himself in various degrees and
I

2
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
in his individual manner.
Since the feeling of inferiority
is generally regarded as a sign of weakness and as some-
thing shameful, there is :q.aturally a strong tendency to
conceal it.
Indeed, the effort of concealment may be so
great that the person himself ceases to be aware of his
inferiority as such, being wholly preoccupied with the
consequences of the feeling and with all the objective
details
that
subserve
its
concealment.
So
efficiently
mayan individual train his whole mentality for this task
that the entire current of his psychic life flowing ceaselessly
from below to above-that is, from the feeling of inferiority
to that of superiority-occurs automatically and escapes his
own notice.
It is not surprising, therefore, that we often receive a
negative reply when we ask a person whether he has a
feeling of inferiority.
It is better not to press the point,
but to observe his mental and psychic movements, in which
the attitude and individual aim can always be discerned.
In this way we soon perceive a greaJer or lesser degree of
the feeling of inferiority in everyone, together with a com-
pensatory striving towards a goal of superiority.
Such a
universal feeling is not in itself indictable: its meaning and
value depend entirely upon how it is used:
The most
important discovery of Individual Psychology is that it
may be used as a stimulus to continue upon the useful side
of life.
These general observations apply closely to the case of a
seventeen-year-old boy, the second child in the family,
who was brought to me because he suffered from anxiety,
and became extremely angry when confronted with diffi-

CASE
HISTORIES
3
culties.
He also had stomach trouble and diarrhcea when
he went mountaineering, a sport which he sometimes shared
with his comrades.
His mother was intelligent, and liked
him, but apparently preferred his elder brother who gave
her less trouble.
This elder brother was much stronger,
taller and a good sportsman.
The father was a capable
man, and the patient esteemed him highly.
This boy was afraid of making any decisions because his
feeling of inferiority was too great for him to trust himself.
He was unwilling, however, to admit that this feeling was
due to any cause within his control.
He insisted that he
,vas born such as he was, and his nature was no responsi-
bility of his.
This patient's attitude to life was one of hesitation.
When confronted with problems he always made difficulties,
but though he thus
It slowed down" he did not stop
altogether.
He was a very good pupil at school, but in
constant fear of losing even this advantage, and he could
not decide at all what to do upon leaving the High School.
He made no friends; did not like girls, and was afraid of
sexual experiences.
He believed some of his difficulties
to be the result of masturbation and pollutions.
All this
shows typical indecision and lack of confidence in regard
t<;> the three problems of lif~~ociety, occupation, and love.
To all three questions the answer was evaded or postponed.
He disguised his sense of general inadequacy by making
various causes responsible, and thus he reassured and con-
vinced himself of worth.
It is notable, however, that the
patient went on in spite of difficulties.
He studied well,
and he climbed mountains-which
la~ter activity, by the
way, is a common device of persons who feel themselves
overburdened with life, to give themselves
feelings of

PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
superiority.
To review and emphasise the difficulties of life
from the vantage-ground of a superior feeling is the next
best thing to b~ing able to boast that one has overcome
them 1
It was in order to escape from the consciousness of
his inferiority-feeling that this patient blamed his weakness
upo~ natural difficulties and masturbation, and especially
upon inherited deficiencies.
The theory of heredity must never be emphasised in educa-
tion or in the theory and practice of psychology.
Except
in cases of sub-nonnal children and congenital idiots it is
proper to assume that everyone can do everything necess-
ary.. This is not, of course, to deny the differences of
inherited material, but what is important is always the
use .which is made of it.
In this way only do we see the
enormous significance of education.
Right education is
the method of developing the individual, with all his
inherited abilities and disabilities.
By courage and training
disabilities may be so compensated that they even become
great abilities.
When correctly encountered, a disability
becomes the stimulus that impels towards a higher achieve-
ment.
We are no longer surprised to find that those who
have attained remarkable successes in life have 'often been
handicapped in the beginning with disabilities and with
great feelings of inferiority.
On the other hand, we find
that a person who believes himself to be the victim of
inherited deficiencies and disabilities, lessens his efforts
with a feeling of hopelessness, and his development is thus
permanently retarded.
Teachers exaggerate the maleficience of hereditary factors
to excuse the inefficiency of their o\vn methods.
It is
interesting to read in Einhardt's biography of Charlemagne
that this great Emperor could learn neither rea~g nor
8

CASE HISTORIES
5
writing, from sheer lack of talent for such things I
Now,
with the development of educational method, no normal
child finds these tasks beyond it.
From this and many
another example it appears that whenever authors, teachers
or parents fail to find a method to correct errors by educ?-tion
they blame the inherited deficiencies.
The.superstition
which this habit engenders is one of the greatest difficulties
and the most commonly encountered in education and in
handling It problem children," not to mention the treatment
of criminals, neurotics and psychotics.
Yet for the treat-
ment of these conditions the only reasonable assumption is
that which is'made by Individual Psychology-that ~very­
one is equal to his life-task.
This does not mean that the
results are or can be equal, for, of course, inequalities of
training, method, and above all the degree of courage shown
must be taken into consideration.
To return to the case in question: the ability of this boy's
father was an additional reason for his feeling that he could
not make good in life.
It is well known that the children
of great men are very often unsuccessful: they feel incapable
of ever attaining positions as high as their fathers held, and
therefore do not seriously attempt anything at all.
In the
case of this patient, the high achievements of his elder
brother also lengthened his distance from the goal of
superiority in the family circle.
He felt himself hopelessly
surpassed.
The neurosis which he developed was a pro-
tection from the painful consciousness ~of this inferiority.
It was the adoption of an attitude which signified to him :-
" If I were not anxious, if I were not ill, I should be able to
do as well as the others.
If mjT life were not full of terrible
difficulties, I should be the first."
By this attitude a person
is able still to feel superior, for the decision of his worth and

6
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
value, is placed beyond proof, in the realm of possibilities.
His chief occupation in life is to look for difficulties, to
:find means of increasing them, or at least of increasing his
own sense of their gravity.
The most ordinary difficulties
of life, common to everybody, are carefully collected by
him and kept upon exhibition.
He does this more to
impress himself than others, but naturally other people
take his burdens into account and do not expect so much
of him.
Any success he may have, moreover, is magnified
by this heavily-advertised handicap, so that it becomes
his most useful possession.
By it he wins his way to a
p~:vileged life, judged by a more lenient standard than
others.
At the same time, he pays the costs of it with his
I1;eurosis.
Another case of anxiety neurosis, taking the form of
agoraphobia, and accompanied by heart symptoms, occurred
in a
man
of thirty-five.
Anxiety neurosis is
always
symptomatic
of
a
timid
attitude
towards
the
three
problems of life, and those who suffer from it are invari-
ably" spoiled II children.
This man dreamt,
It I crossed the limit of the botder
between Austria and Hungary, and they wanted to imprison
me."
(Such short dreams, by the way, are the best for
analysis.)
This dream indicated the man's desire to come
to a standstill, due to the fear that he would be defeated
if he went on.
Its interpretation very well confinns our
understanding of anxiety neuroses.
The man wanted to
limit the scope of his activity in life, to
H mark time" so
as to gain time.
He came to see me because he wished to
marry, and the imminent prospect of doing so had brought

CASE HISTORIES
7
him to a halt.
This fact itself, that he came to consult me
about his marriage, clearly indicated his attitude towards it.
Similarly, the way that he would behave in marriage was
mirrored in the dream, in which he commanded himself-
H Do not pass the limit !"
The prison in the dream also
reflected
the
dreamer's
view
of marriage.
We
often
deceive ourselves by such images in dreams.
We use
them to train ourselves to tackle the problems of the
near future in a manner consistent with our own style
of life-but not
in accordance with the logic of the
situation.
The style of life is founded in the first fOUf or five years of
childhood.
This period closes with the full development
of the ego and the consequent fixation of its attitude to life.
From this time onward the ans,vers to the questions put by
life are dictated, not by the truth of relations in themselves,
but by certain automatised, attitudes, which we call the
style of the individual.
Thus we explain the fact that a
certain mistake of adaptation-such as the desire to be the
centre, to be overburdened, not to be forced, not to be
curtailed, etc.-may persistently continue throughout a
life-time.
A very successful man, forty years old, complained that
he could not go up into a high building without having an
impulse to jump out of a window.
He said he had always
been afraid of everything.
He had been the youngest of
six children, and very much spoiled by his mother.
This
case reveals at a glance the wish to be thought over-
burdened and in danger.
The patient cannot avoid going
upstairs, but he colours this procedure with his desire to

8
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
be in a dangerous situation, clinching the danger ~y develop-
ing an impulse to jump.
In this case and the two previously cited, the goal of
superiority is similar, as regards the motive of being over-
burdened.
But this man goes further.
He has a desire
to jump from a window, but 10! he overcomes it and still
lives.
He is stronger even than himself.
In support of this diagnosis I will add a recollection
from the patient's childhood.
tc I went to school when I
was six years old.
I was not very happy.
The very first
day a boy attacked me.
I
wCl:s dreadfully afraid and
trembled but ... I sprang at him and threw him down."
This fragment of memory records the two typical motives
of the man's life-style.
He trembles at first, but only to
overcome.
And that- little word
Cl but" holds the rich
meaning of his compensation for feelings of inferiority.
A girl of twenty-seven came to consult me. after five
.years of suffering.
She said:
Cl I have seen so many
doctors that you are my last hope in life."
lC No," I
answered, "not the last hope.
Perhaps the last but ·one.
There may be others who can help you too."
Her words
were a challenge to me; she was daring me not to cure her,
so as to make me feel bound in duty to do so.
This is the
type of patient who wishes to shift responsibility upon others,
a common development of spoiled children.
It is safe to
assume that in childhood she constantly contrived to keep
another person occupied with her; and we may infer that
it was probably her mother.
We need additional facts to
verify this impression, but there are methods by which it
can be done even in the first interview.

CASE HISTORIES
9
It is important, by the way, to evade such a challenge as
the one I have recorded here.
The patient may have
\vorked up a ,high tension of feeling about the idea that the
doctor is his "last hope," but we must accept no such
distinction.
To do so would prepare the way for grave
disappointment, or even suicide.
This girl was a second child, whose elder sister was more
beautiful than herself, besides being very clever and popular;
so that the patient's life had been like a breathless race to
overtake her rival.
The
sister married happily.
The
'patient also developed well, especially intellectually, out-
doing her elder sister in school work.. However, the sister
was much more charming and attractive, and made friends
far more readily.
The life of the older sister had been
smoother and pleasanter, giving her greater self-confidence.
The younger, from a sense of insecurity, felt a need to
assert herself against others, which repulsed their friendship.
Doubtless none of these two girls' acquaintances recognised
the true nature and origin of this difference between them;
but they all felt it unconsciously. and they were attracted
to the one and repelled by the other.
The patient had been in love at the age of fourteen, when
she ,vas ridiculed for it, so she had ever since declined to
play the part of a loving woman.
When her sister married
she fell in love with a married man.
Such an attachment
cannot, in itself, be dogmatically estimated.
Nobody can
be sure if such a love will tum out well or not.
But we
cannot ignore the fact that every girl in such a situation
sees the great difficulties it involves quite as clearly as her
parents or anybody else can see them.
And a girl going
through such an experience tells herself ,., This is what
love is like."
Her selection of such a troublesome love is

10
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
prima facie ground for suspicion that she does, not wish to
see love and marriage through.
In this case we see the
patient adopted, towards this new life-problem of love, the
same hesitant, non-committal attitude she had exhibited
in the past.
There were reasons.
She was less attractive
than her sister, and she had been ridiculed in her first love-
affair.
A girl of such a competitive nature, bent towards
the goal of superiority, is always in danger of losing courage
and self-confidence by marriage.
She will usually feel
marriage to be a menace to her sense of superiority.
The
happy marriage of this girl's sister fed these fears: so did the
unhappymarriage of her parents and her mother's inferiority.
The girl's hesitating attitude to love and marriage came
out during frank discussion with her.
She said:
tC I am
sure my husband would leave me two weeks after our
marriage."
When I hinted at the deep feeling of inferiority
which was the cause of her evasion of marriage she tried to
retract this statement: but the mere fact that such an
idea could appear at all, even in a joke, showed that her-
mind had been occupied with that specific problem. -
Even when the man with whom she was in love wanted
to kiss her she ran away from his caresses.
In such ways
she established her distance from the demands of love and
marriage, and sacrificed everything to her neurotic goal of
superiority.
U If this man were not .married I would
marry him " was her answer to this problem of life.
tt If" is usually the Zeit-motif of the neurotic drama.
It Il " is the last res~rt in every neurotic dilemma, and the
one sure way of escape.
For the will to escape there is only
one reason, and that is fear of defeat, which is the hardest of
all reasons to admit.
At this point, therefore, we frequently
finel some fictitious form of anxiety, which the' patient

CASE HISTORIES
II
interprets to himself variously but never truly-never, that
is, as the simple fear of being beaten.
Agoraphobia, anxiety
neurosis~ and all the forms of phobia may o~iginate at this
point, but, whichever it may be, it fulfils its purpose of
blocking the way to further activity.
Thus what was
desired is attained-namely, the ordeal is evaded without
disclosing, even to its owner, the hated feeling of inferiority.
All the other neurotic symptoms, such as compulsion ideas,
fits, fatigue, sleeplessness, functional disturbances such as
neurotic lleart, headaches, migraine and so on, develop out
of the severe tension of this very difficult concealment.
The organs most di?turbed by this tension are those
\vhich have been made susceptible by some inherited weak-
ness.
Hence, we find, where a whole family is liable to a
particular organic weakness, that several members suffer
from organic illnesses, and others from neurotic symptoms of
that same organ.
In such cases we must not overlook the
contributory factor of imitation.
vVe' find, however, in
distinction from other psychologists, that the o~ysymptoms
imitated are- those which are alignable to the neurotic goal
of superiority.
This patient had held a position in an office, where she
played a leading role and was much appreciated, but, like
all people with an excessive feeling of inferiority, she was
insatiable of appreciati6n, and always striving for more.
At the age of nineteen she changed her position, and lost
the admiration she had formerly enjoyed.
Reviewing her
case, we may nate-
I.
She was hopeless of competing ",ith her sister, either
in making friends or in making a successful marriage.
2.
She feared to face the problems of love and marriage.
3.
She had lost a favourable position in her work.
D

12
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
In Sllort, all the defeats she had feared had now befallen
her; her intense feeling of inferiority had be'en justified.
She did not reason out the situation in this way, but showed,
by the appropriate mood, that this was how she felt it.
We may note in passing a typical concentration upon, and
exaggeration of, one point in the life-problem, namely, the
fear of defeat.
While occupied upon the useful side of life
one has always to reckon with possibilities of defeat, which
we normally minimise by regarding occasional reverses, as
incidental to every human enterprise.
But in such a case
as we are now -reviewing, the possibility of defeat has
become the focus of life.
The patient subordinates his
\vhole life to it, just as a person with a cleaning mania makes
her life revolve around the idea of dirt and the normal and
useful act of washing becomes exaggerated into a ceaseless
search for dirt, either upon her own person or upon furniture,
floors or elsewhere, until it has no meaning or value for life.
Such a mistaken focus of attention is typical of neurosis in
general, and in the case of this girl her earlier life-purpose on
the useless side-to surpass her sister-was developing into
the still narrower and more negative aim of escaping from
any sort of defeat whatever.
It is at such a critical point in a life-history that neurotic
symptoms are developed.
There is no change in the style
of life with its characteristic halt at every possibility of
defeat:
but the individual now fixes this attitude of
stoppage, by demanding impossible securities.
If he has
no means of proving superiority on the useful side he
becomes a problem child, or a cri!Jrinal, or he may commit
suicide.
If he has some activity, but an insufficient one,
and more hope, he deceives himself that he is blocked by a
fatal hindrance, such as an illness.
He selects certain

CASE
HISTORIES
13
symptoms and develops them until they impress him as
real obstacles.
His state of tension readily provides the
initial mental or bodily disturbances, which are of various
kinds according to the style of life and the native organic
weaknesses.
Behind
his
barricade
of
symptoms
the
patient feels hidden and secure.
To the question, "What
use are you making of your talents? " he answers,
II This
thing stops me;
I cannot go ahead," and points to his
self-erected barricade.
We must never neglect the patient's
own use of his symptoms.
Not only does he use them in
,this way, but-as happens still more in psychosis-they
also modify his perception of every vital question of life.
To be already overworked by grappling with his own
neurotic difficulties is not only an extenuating circumstance"
it is also a patient's inner relief from his striving for super-
iority-he really expects less of himself.
Such a self-
protective style of life may also take the form of being
overwhelmed with social difficulties.
The best 'Yay to understand a neurotic patient is to set
aside all his neurotic symptoms, and to study his style of
life and his individual goal of superiority.
Only by a firm
grasp of these two things can we come to a full understand-
ing of the neurosis itself, the development of which they
entirely control.
It is the fear of a defeat, real or imaginary,
which occasions the outbreak of the so-called neurotic
symptoms.
Life and custom drag the man along in appar-
ent agreement, but in reality a sense of utter abasement
has divided him from life, and he is trying to stop or escape.
My experience proves that psychoses such as schizophrenia,
mania, melancholia, and paranoia, appear when the patient
feels absolutely checkmated, with no hope of going on-
which means that he gives up all attempts to answer the

I4
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
three questions of life.
A neurotic person,. however, is
willing to consider one or two of these questions, but has
broken down in face of some new and overwhelming reverse.
The cases I have been describing exhibit such incomplete
stoppage.
In the one immediately under consideration,
the girl appeared to be quite healthy until she suffered the
setback in her occupation.
Then, more deeply intimidated
by the difficulty of life, she began to shelve its problems
more and more, and strove for a new kind of superiority
in the fonn of compulsion-ideas.
One day she had a fear that her handbag had come open
and that some coins, covered with verdigris, had dropped
into the basket of vegetables which she had been carrying
for another woman.
She feared she had poisoned this
woman's entire family!
Another compulsion-idea that she
ha~, was that the dust of the street was on her hands and
would soil her mother's Bible if she touched it, which of
course she could not avoid doing from time to time.
So
after each imaginary soiling of the Bible she surreptitiously
bought another and replaced it, till she had bought a
dozen of them.
She attributed this exaggerated holiness to
the books in order that she might profane them;
and
wasted her money on them so that she could be held irre-
sponsible.
Thus also, she became a martyr, misunderstood,
and a soul degraded by the fouling of sacred things.
If the girl's sole ambition in life had been to become
more conspicuous than her sister, she was well on the way
to realise it.
But this neurotic aim was involving her in
such practical defeats that it was clearly advisable for her
to renounce it for another.
The goal of her striving was to
escape the dreaded decision-" My sister is superior to me."
Closely examined, this escape from a decision also reveals

CASE HISTORIES
IS
itself as a goal of superiority.
As she will not mix with
people she cannot be defeated socially.
As long as she
avoids love and marriage she is not measured with her
sister's happy marriage.
Whatever happens, she can say-
It But then I am fully occupied with my compulsion-
ideas."
She must be occupied with something.
Time,
the circumstances, and whatever logic her neurosis has not
destroyed, demand some occupation, so she busies herself
on the useless side with this compulsion-neurosis.
Her
activity is actually free from competition, and fictitiously
superior.
This illusion of superiority is shown by her
striving, in compulsion-ideas, to make hers~lf feel respons-
ible for the lives of others, or for their purity.
This effort
to show a superior conscientiousness is her occupation, for
she has not stopped.
If she had, she would be in a state
of stupor, as in catatonia.
Before referring to this patient's dreams a few general
remarks are advisable.
A psychology which could not
understand and interpret dreams would exclude a great
part of the mental life, and would therefore be a most
imperfect psychology.
Thus the Freudian conception of
dreams is an important contribution.
Unfortunately its
author overlooked the most vital principles of dream-
fonnation owing to his mistaken assumption of the domin-
ance of the sexual factor.
This prevented him from seeing
that the sexual attitude in life is determined by the goal of
totality or superiority.
We must always interpret abnormal
sexual tendencies as expressions of the entire style of life,
looking for the deeper movements \vhich underlie them.
The understanding of dreams owes its furthest practical

16
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
'progress to a contribution of Individual
Psyc~ology-the
recognition, namely, that every dream creates its mood.
To cope with a specific situation, in accordance with the
goal of superiority, the dream insinuates a mood.
This
alone explains the mysterious fact that" people do not under-
stand their own dreams.
Dreaming is a process of turning
away, in sleep, from reality and common sense towards the
individual's goal of superiority.
To relate our present
problems to this goal by logical planning and thinking is
very difficult;
but by the feelings it is easy, and their
(C short cut" is the dream.
As I have shown elsewhere, the dream is a dress rehearsal,
a trial performance of a step towards the fictive goal.
It
produces, in an automatic way, an illusory picture of how
to succeed in disregard of the logic of the situation.
This patient dreamt that she fell down.,
No one can deny
that such a dream connotes unpleasant feelings as of defeat,
and we could not but assume that she was diminishing her
impuise to proceed.
Presumably there was a present
question which she wanted to answer in a discouraged
manner.
That present question proved to be an invitation
by the married man in the case, to a rendezvous.
She
responded by giving herself, through the dream, the hope-
less mood she wanted-the impulse to denial and escape.
In case the critical reader is unconvinced, I will cite
another dream of the patient's upon the same night.
She
was terrified by noticing some blue and red spots on her skin.
Was this a good preparation for a meeting with a lover?
That the spots signified the result of a luetic infection was
not only obvious to me but was suggested quite independ-
ently by the patient herself.
In discussing this matter she
expressed the opinion that all men were untrue an'd poly-

CASE
HISTORIES
gamous.
"I am
sure,~' she exclaimed-and this I have
already quoted-II that my husband would leave me a fort-
night after the
w~dding.
What is the good of marriage,
if I constantly expect to be deceived and also infected by
my husband?"
This clinches the .proof of her motive to
escape.
She added,
I( I should become less than my sister,
whose husband is faithfuI."
Thus her goal has changed.
She no longer wishes directly to surpass her sister, but
barricades that way, and looks for another superiority-on
the useless side.
She was going to avoid all defeat, and to
be nobler than anyone else.
Everyone's goal is one of superiority, 1ll:lt in the case of
those who lose their courage and self-confidence, it is
diverted from the useful to the useless side of life.
)'his
escape into a life of unrealities takes place in an automatic
way: the fear of defeat itself arranges the emotions, and
through them the actions, until a situation is reached which
allays it.
This escape is always felt as a relief, but is not
understood as such.
If it were, the patient would enjoy it,
which would spoil the whole ~rrangement by removing the
justification for his hesitation and escape.
He must pay
the costs with suffering in order to be excusable.
And the
neurotic symptoms, being built upon the pattern of an
illness, really resemble illness, and efficiently safeguard the
patient's sense of superiority by enabling him to think,
I( I
could be the first if my suffering did not postpone it."
From such a style of life happiness is excluded a priori and
quite independently of any adjustment to circumstances.
IS

CHAPTER II
Schizophrenia and its Preparation.-The Three Problems of Life.-The
Function of the Mother.-Psychosis.-Melancholia.-Feelings of Guilt.
-Indirect Treatment of Melancholia.-Manic-Depressive Insanity.
EVERY development in an individual's life is conditioned
by his life-aim, by which the successive phases of his life
are organically connected.
When a mother, whose son has
suddenly become schizophrenic at the age of eighteen, says
that he was perfectly normal until that age, we cannot
agree with her.
And we find, upon enquiry into the bqy's
past life, that he was of a domineering disposition and dJ.d
not play with his schoolmates.
Such a childhood is a bad
preparation for facing the real problems of life.
In this
case it was a preparation for schizophrenia, which was not a
sudden development but the result of a life-attitude, and
only showed itself when he had to face a really difficult
situation.
At the age of eighteen he was faced with the
three questions of society, occupation, and love, and felt
unable to answer them.
A patient's unpreparedness for life
does not always show itself in favourable circumstances,
nor when he is shielded from the real demands of life,
which are always of a social nature and demand social
feeling.
Childhood is normally a
shelter~d period of life,
but it may be passed in such a way that the social feeling
is undeveloped, as it was in the case under consideration
and also in the case previously described where a girl was in
18

CASE HISTORIES
competition with an elder sister, felt her prestige endangered
all the time and was therefore preoccupied with herself.
Such 'a conception of its situation hinders a child's develop-
ment of social feeling.
The circumstances of early life, such as those of the
nursery, kindergarten, school, and companionship, are the
first training and test in social behaviour.
When a neurosis
is developed we always find that the individual's difficulties
were foreshadowed in these relations of childhood.
He did
not care to do things with others, or he did so with some
queer or noticeable difference from others.
And a neurotic
generally remembers his peculiarities and difficulties of
adaptation in early life as a justification for keeping his
distance from the present social environment.
When he is
driven -by necessity or by his own demands, to approach
more nearly to an accepted standard of behaviour, the
neurotic may apparently try to adapt himself, but in reality
he does nothing of the kind: he answers the new demands
~th automatic responses and trained attitudes of long
standing under cover of which he escapes from any real
contact.
He may mix with others superficially, in conversa-
tion and customary kinds of co-operation, but he does so
according to his own established mechanisms, and behind
this screen his psyche slips back into its own secret strong-
hold.
In this behaviour of neurotics, psychotics, and
problem-children we must recognise a certain inevitability, a
necessary result of their past.
The artificial attitudes
which they have elaborated are the logical consequence of
faulty training, and we can do very little good by trying to
correct these consequences.
We must make a change in
the deeper motive, in the underlying style of life, and
then the patientwill see all his life-tasks in a newperspective.
IS

20
PROBLEMS OF
NEUROSIS
The three problems of life which I have alrea~y described
must be solved somehow or other by every human being,
for the individual's relation with the world is a three-fold
relation.
No one can escape a definite answer to the
question of society, or of occupation, or of sex.
And who-
ever can make friends with society, can pursue- a useful
occupation with faith and courage, and can adjust his sexual
life in accordance with good social fe.eling, is immune from
neurotic infection.
But when an individual fails to square
himself with one or more of these three inexorable demands
of life, beware of feelings of abasement, beware of the conse-
quent neurosis.
Schizophrenia is the result of a failure in
all three directions at once.
The boy whose case we are considering was unprepared
to grapple with these inevitable problems.
From our point
of view, it is evident that he needed re-education at this
late stage of his development, a process which demands a
special method.
It is well for the practitioner to realise
at the outset that nothing can be done by force.
The patient
must be appealed to in a friendly way, coaxed into a recept-
ive frame of mind.
Indeed, the task of the physician 9r
psychologist is to give the patient the experience of contact
with a fellow-man, and then to enable him to transfer this
awakened social feeling to others.
This method, of winning the patient's good will, and then
transferring it to his environment, is strictly analogous to
the maternal function.
The social duty of motherhood i..s
to interpret society to the individual, and if the mother fails
in this the duty is likely to devolve much later upon the
physician who is heavily handicapped for the task.
The

CASE HISTORIES
21
mother has the enormous advantage of the physical and
psychic relation; she is the greatest experience of love and
fellowship that the child will ever have.
Her duty is
mentally to relate the growing child to herself, as it was
formerly related to her physically, nourishing the child's
growing consciousness with 'true a~d normal conceptions of
society, of work, and of love.
In this way she gradually
transforms the child's love for her and dependence upon her
into a
benevolent, confident, and responsible attitude
towards society and the whole environment.
This is the
two-fold function of motherhood, to give the child the
completest possible experience of human fellowship, and
then to widen it into a life-attitude towards others.
It is always after a prolonged struggle to hold one's ground
that what we call psychosis is liable to supervene.
The
individual then breaks down before all the three questions
of life, and every step he takes is made in defiance of logic.
. In this connection, what we mean by logical is that which
is intelligible as an attempt to solve a real problem of life.
An example of psychotic development may be given in the
life of an elderly woman, excluded from occupation and
from love.
She is offended because society, her children
and sons-in-law do not take enough interest in her.
If
she has not developed sufficient social feeling to take a keen
interest in the lives of others, her case is indeed a difficult
one; for the goal of superiority still attracts her as much
as anyone, and keeps her striving without any definite object-
ive.
But she finds it possible to impress others by exploit-
ing her weakness.
She can become a focus of attention
again, and once more an actress on the stage of life, by

PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSIS
taking up the role of an entirely hopeless person.
She will
forestall the destruction of her personality by 'identifying
herself with a lost person, and, rather than allow that others
should make her miserable by neglect she will plunge
herself into excessive gloom, a -procedure which also giv,es
her a little dismal power over other people's feelings.
We
find that the pride and ambition of neurotic persons prohibits
their confessing that. they feel neglected, so that they are
unable directly to accuse others.
The anger and rage
which we should expect to find in this phase of life is,
therefore, generally suppressed and hidden, though it may
break out occasionally, and they rationalise their hopeless
attitude by turning all their accusation against themselves.
In cases of melancholia many persons actually kill them-
selves, in an excess of self-condemnation, while sometimes
ostentatiously exonerating others.
Averyintelligentwoman, forty-sixyearsof age, hadsuffered
from melancholia for three years, eight years before she
came to me.
She had been married at the age of sixteell" and
having no children for the first ten years of her married life,
she adopted a child, but did not tell the child that she was
not its real mother.
This situation is one which usually
leads to unhappiness for the child later on.
Afterwards the
woman had two daughters of her own.
She worked in her
husband's office after marriage" so that she knew all about
his affairs, and when, after some years, he took a partner
into his business, she did not care to be in the office because
of her diminished importance.
She quarrelled continually
with the partner until her father fell ill, when she Withdrew
from the business to nurse him. and as soon as the father's
IS

CASE HISTORIES
23
health
was
restored
she
developed
melancholia.
She
suspected her husband of concealing his business affairs
from'her, and cried if he did not immediately tell her every-
thing she wanted to know.
She wanted to dominate her
husband, and crying was a means by which she sought to
subdue him.
Crying is usually an accusation against
another person.
Her husband's business was financially
-satisfactory, and it was not necessary for her to know all
the details of its working, but she felt herself excluded and
inferior if she did not know all about it.
This was a strong woman who had married a weak man
in order to rule him, and, of course, the choice of an equal
mate
generally indicates a
higher degree of courage.
Marriage is a constructive task for two persons who are
determined to live together in order to relieve and to enrich
each other's lives;
and when anyone chooses a weaker
partner-lower in the social scale, or with vices such as
alcoholism,
morphinism,
or
laziness-in
the
hope
of
It saving " him, he betrays the hidden desire for superiority•
. This woman showed the principal signs of a true melan-
cholia.
She decreased steadily in weight, was unable to
sleep, and was always more depressed in the morning than
in the evening.
She feared that the whole family would
come to poverty and starvation.
In treating the case my
first objective was to reconcile her with her husband.
I
tried to show her that her husband was getting older, that
she should not be angry with him, but handle him more
diplomatically
It I explained that there were better methods
of making him subservient than crying; that the weaker
always puts up some kind of resistance, as no one can endure
constant domination, and that people must treat each other
as equals if they are to live harmoniously together.

24
PROBLEMS
OF
NEUROSIS
I always use the simplest and most direct met~od possible
in the treatment of neurotics, but it would be of no use to
t,ell the patient in this case,
CI You are a domineering
woman, and you are now trying to rule by means of illness,"
for she would be offended.
I must win her first, and take
her part as far as possible.
Exery .neuroti~is."par.tl~_w.~.~,.tM
..
right.
If this woman did not feel deprived of value by her
advancing age-a real privation of women in our present
culture-she would not cling to her prestige in such unseemly
ways.
But it is only very gradually that I can bring her to
face the truth about what she is doing.
At the same time this patient developed a guilt complex-
which often happens in such a situation.
She remembered
that she had deceived her husband with another man some
twenty-five years before, during all which time this event
had played no further part in her life, but all at once she
told her husband and accused herself.
This so-called
guilt-complex, which we should wholly misunderstand by
·the Freudian interpretation, was quite clearly an attack
upon the husband who was no longer ob~dient.
She could
hurt him by confession and self-accusation.
Who is so
simple as to think that it is a case of the majesty of the
truth vindicating itself after a quarter of a century?
The
truth is often a terrible weapon of aggression.
It is possible
to lie, and even to murder, with the truth.
Nietzsche, with a most penetrating vision and from the
same standpoint as we take for Individual Psychology,
described the feeling of guilt as mere wickedness.
And in
the majority of neurotic cases the fact is that a guilt complex
is used as a means to fix its maker on the useless side of life.

CASE HISTORIES
25
This is 'often seen in the case of a child, who tells a lie and
gets a complex about it, by which arrangement he can play
a role of distinguished uselessness.
Everyone will be
struck by his honesty if he worries so much about having
told a fib.
To return to the indirect method of treatment: I recom-
mend it especially in melancholia.
After establishing a
sympathetic relation I give suggestions for a change of
conduct in two stages.
In the first stage my suggestion is
It Only do what is agreeable to yo~."
The patient usually
answers,
It Nothing is agreeable."
"Then at least,"
I
respond, " do not exert yourself to do what is disagreeable."
The patient, who has ·usually been exhorted to do various
uncongenial things to remedy his condition, finds a rather
flattering novelty in my advice, and may improve .in
behaviour.
Later I insinuate the second rule of conduct,
saying that " it is much more difficult and I do not know
if you can follow it."
After saying this I am silent, and
look doubtfully at the patient.
In this way I excite his
curiosity and ensure his attention, and then proceed,
U If
you could follow this second rule you would be cured in
fourteen days.
It is-to consider from time to time how you
can give another person pleasure.
It would very soon enable
you to sleep and would chase away all your sad thoughts.
You would feel yourself to be useful and worth while."
I receive various replies to my suggestion, but every
patient thinks it is too difficult to act upon.
If the answer
is,
II How can I give pleasure to others when I have none
myself? " I relieve the prospect by saying, II Then you will
need four weeks."
The more transparent response,
H Who
gives me pleasure? " I encounter with what is probably the
strongest move in the game, by saying,
H Perhaps you had

26
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
better train yourself a little thus: do
not
actually
do
anything to please anyone else, but just think out how you
could do it."
Melancholy subjects who reply, " Oh, that is quite easy;
it is what I have always done," are to be suspected of
dispensing favours in order to get the upper hand of others.
To them I say,
It Do you think the people you favoured
were really pleased by it ?"
I sometimes give in, admitting
that it is too difficult at present because the patient needs
practice and training, by which compromise I carry a milder
measure in these terms :_tt Remember all the ideas you have
in the night, and give me pleasure by telling them to me the
next day."
The next day such a patient quite probably replies,: (t I
slept all night," when asked for his midnight reflections,
even though he had not previously slept for many days!
But let the physician beware lest he triumph too soon.
He
should continue industriously to collect all the useful facts
and reconstruct the patient's style of life.
In treating these cases I have never had a suicide, the
disaster which so commonly occurs, and I believe this is due
to the fact that this indirect treatment reduces the acute
tension.
But all those who are in the patient's environment
must be made to understand that they cannot scold, force,
or criticise, but must assist the patient into a more favour-
able situation.
1vlelancholia is an illness in which the people
in the environment suffer more than the patient, and there
are moments when the relatives can no longer endure the
strain.
My advice is, "Five minutes -before you feel you
can no longer control the patient, put him in charge of one
or two attendants."
This is the phase in which suicide is
threatening.

CASE HisTORIES
Mania, in common with melancholia and the severer
neuroses, is a barricade erected by the patient to block his
own approach to the real business of life, and it is some-
times preliminary to the establishment of psychosis in the
form of manic-depressive insanity.
The first formidable
phase of mental disorder, as we have seen, is invariably when
some urgent problem presses for solution and the patient
'has lost courage.
In mania there is an effort to overcome
this cowardice of the soul, and the patient pushes himself
forward, exaggerates his actions, and talks and laughs with
needless excitement.
He is high-spirited and irritable, has
great projects, is very superior and boastful of his power,
and displays strong sexual inclinations.
These patients
nee~d watching or they may do damage, but this phase of
their illness is a sudden blaze which soon consumes its fuel.
The natural and usual sequel is a phase of melancholia in
which the patient must on no account be restrained as he
barricades himself from expression all too surely.
Such
alternations in manic-depressive insanity are shown by
individuals who showed slight phases of conduct of the
same pattern in their earlier life.
They begin with an-eXClfe-
ment \vhich rapidly wanes into a depression.
This tendency
is shown even in their handwriting, in which the first letter
of a word is written very large, while the others decrease in
size and droop below the line.
Brilliant beginnings and
sudden anti-climaxes are repeated at intervals throughout
their life-histories.
ManiC-depressive "insanity, like a cyclothymia beginning
late in life, may yield an appearance so similar to general
paralysis as to cause confusion in diagnosis.
In such a case
the clinical symptoms must be supplemented by an examina-
tion of the spinal fluid.
This is important, as there are many
E
IS

PRODLItMS OF NEUROSIS
cases of only a single attack of paralysis, whereas cyclothy-
mea is, of course, recurrent.
I once hacl a patient of this kind
whose mania stopped very quickly.
I was visiting him
at the asylum when he begged me to take him home, as the
attendants had treated him roughly a few days before.
He
had begun to recover and his condition was improving every
hour, so I took him home.
As we sat down at table he
remarked with satisfaction,
tt You see, it has always been
like this in my life.
I have always got whatever I wanted."
\JVhile I was thinking only of the hard knocks he had
suffered, he was thinking of nothing but having got out of
the asylum.
That is the difference between the objectivity
of common sense and the sort of
te private intelligence"
which is the basis of mania.
IS

CHAPTER III
The Psychological Standpoint.-Character.-Social Feeling and the
Mother.-Inferiority.-Organically
Defective
Children.-Spoiled
and
Hated Children.-Unsocial Types.-Guilt as· a Form of Superiority.-The
Art of the Psycho-therapist.-The Masculine Protest.
INDIVIDUAL Psychology distinguishes in the conscious and
the unconscious, not separate and conflicting entities, but
complementary and co-operating parts of one and the same
reality.
That reality
is not
of a
physiological or
biological nature, and it eludes any chemical or technical
tests.
The fact that anxiety, for instance, affects the
sympathetic
and
para-sympathetic
nerves
does
not
reveal the cause of an anxiety.
The origin of anxiety
is in the psychic and not in the somatic realm: we attribute
~t neither to the suppression of sexuality nor to the con-
ditions of childhood, although we have given all due import-
ance to these factors.
What appears to us most important
is such a fact as this, for instance; that a child will make
use of anxie(y in order to arrive at its goal of superiority-
of control over the mother.
The most exact physiological
and neurological description of anger appears to us to be of
almost negligible practical value compared with our actual
experience of how anger is used to dominate a person or
a situation.
In this respect we claim to have taken up the
only standpoint which is correctly and purely a psycholog-
ical one; and we believe that the---ascription of feelings,
emotions and thoughts to bodily conditions and inherited
instincts-which is the basis of almost all other psycholo-
29

30
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
gies-always leads to exaggerations and mistake~.
We are
f~r from disputing- that every mental a~d bodily function is
necessarily conditioned by inherited material, but what we
see in all psychic activity is the use which is made of this
material to attain a certain goal.
In all the cases I have
hitherto described, the feelings and emotions were developed
in the direction and to the degree required for the attain-
ment of a particular goal, which in these instances was of
neurotic character.
Anxiety, sadness, and every other
manifestation took the line we could have predicted from
the style of life; and we have seen how dreams also played
their part in ~rranging the feelings into conformity with the
general striving, their action giving us a remarkable insight
into the workshop of the soul.
If sadness is necessary to the attainment of his goal, an
individual is naturally incapable of happiness, for he can
only be happy when miserable.
But we notice that feelings
appear and disappear as required.
A person suffering fro~
agoraphobia loses the feeling of anxiety when at home, or
when he successfully subdues another person to himself.
The tendency of the neurotic is to exclude from his experi-
ence the whole sphere of life except those parts of it in
which he has the sense of being a conqueror.
By manu-
facturing certain moods or emotions in himself he finds he
can repel and shut out the undesirable, unconquerable
remainder of his world.
He even comes vainly to hide his
head in the moods themselves, like an ostrich.
Beneath all fluctuations of mood, however, and ruling
them, lies the real charact,er, which i~ relatively unchange-
able.
A coward, for example, even though he shows arro-
gance against a
~eaker person or courage in a shielded
position, still remains a coward;
and his freedom from

CASE HISTORIES
·3I
anxiety, when surround~d by watchdogs, guns and police-
men, does not deceive us.
His character is indicated by
the 'excessive protection he demands.
The proud man may
even be very gracious and yielding, but we note that he
surrounds himself by inferiors.
To estimate the true
character of an individual we must always give full signi-
ficance to the environment he has chosen or permitted for
himself.
That which \ye call social feeling in Individual Psychology
is the true .and inevitable compensation for all the natural
weaknesses of individual human beings.
The human being,
even biologically considered, is clearly a social being,
needing a much longer period of dependence upon others
before its maturity than any animal:
and the human
mother also is more dependent before, during, and after
giving birth.
The high degree of co-operation and social
culture which man needs for his very existence demands
spontaneous social effort, and the dominant purpose of
education is to evoke it.
Social feeling is not inborn; but
it is an innate potentiality which has to be consciously
developed.
We are unable to trust any so-called social
"instinct," for its expression depends upon the child's
conception or vision of the environment.
In the growth of
this vision of society the most vital factor is the mother,
as we have seen, for it is in its mother that every child makes
its first contact with a trustworthy fellow-man. In the four or
five earliest years of life the child builds up its own proto-
type, by adjusting its inherited abilities to its earliest
impressions, and lays the irrevocable foundation of its style
of life.
It is this which develops later into the more formu-

PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
32
lated life-style, and conditions the answers 'to the three
questions of life.
In the former, or earliest.. period, the
psychic soundness of the mother is what is essential; in
the second period, her mentality and breadth of outlook
are very important.
The mother brings about the first important and specific-
ally human change in the child's behaviour.
Under her
influence the child first inhibits its desires and organic
impulses, and introduces delays and circuitous methods
into its striving for what it wants.
The goal of all striving,
which is to overcome the difficulties of life and to gain
superiority, is also the sti~ulus of childhood, which begins
with a sense of almost total practical impotence.
It is the
attentive, benevolent mother who is, to the child, the
guardian of its goal-even largely the goal itself in concrete
form.
But such a goal is not pennanently possible: and
the art of motherhood is to give the child freedom and oppor-
tunity for success by its own efforts, so that it can establish
its style of life and seek for its superiority in increasingly
useful ways..
Then gradually she must interest the child
in other persons and in the wider environment of life.
So far
as she can discharge these two functions-of bestowing
independence and of imparting a true initial understanding
of the surrounding situation in the home and in the world-
she will see the child develop social feeling, independence.
and courage.
And so far also will the child find its own goal
in being a fellow-man and friend, a good worker and a true
partner in love..
With such· an initiation into life, the
ineradicable will to superiority is united with social feeling,
and issues in courageous and optimistic activity upon the
useful side of life.
All the feelings of an individual, through-
out his life, are modified by the amount of communal

CASE HISTORIES
33
feeling that is involved in his
individual striving for
prestige.
Every kind of action upon the useless side of life, such as
the behaviour of problem-children, neurotics, criminals,
sexual perverts, prostitutes, and suicides, can be more or
less precisely traced to lack of social Jeeling, with the conse-
quent· loss of confidence.
For we must realise that every
adaptation we have to make in life, from kindergarten to
business management, from school chums to marriage is,
\<lirectly or indirectly, a social action.
From the earliest
times, we face new thoughts and events in a manner which
is dominantly social or antisocial, it cannot be neutral.
Suppose, for instance, that a boy is terrified by illness and
death in his environment.
He may allay his fears by the
determination to be a doctor, and to fight against death.
This is obviously a more social idea than that of being a
grave-digger, the one w~ buries the others-a reaction
which I have also foundin a boy in that situation.
When
social feeling has been from the first instilled into the
'upward strivings of the psyche it acts with automatic
certainty, colouring every thought and action, and where
this automatised social feeling is deficient, the individual's
interest is too self-centred, and he feels that he is impotent
or a nobody.
With this feeling all his other feelings are
more or less directly connected:
they do not exist su·i
generis, nor do they control action, although they are often
used to do so-and, of course, they influence our secondary
decisions from time to time.
The sense of impotence, or the "feeling of inferiority,"
is the root-conception of Individual Psychology.
Whatever

34
PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSJS
form it may take, it can only be correctly estimated from an
adequate study of the individual's actions.
Its accurate
diagnosis is perhaps more difficult in early life, where we see
many efforts to circumvent the instincts and to conceal the
feeling itself from its possessor, but most of these early
expressions are connected with the strength or weakness of
the organs and the friendliness or hostility of the environ-
ment.
Yet neither the inherited organism nor the environ-
ment is wholly responsible for tIle sense of impotence, nor
is it caused by both together.
The degree to which it is
felt is due to both these factors plus the reaction of the
child.
As a conscious relation between its organism and
environment, the child's psyche seems to have an indefinite
causal power: so that, normal or abnormal, it never reacts
with anything like mathematical exactitude.
Life,
as
opposed to dead material, always reacts thus, in a more or
less inaccurate-and spontaneous-manner.
For convenience, however, we may classify certain
typical variations of the sense of impotence, according to
typical causes.
Thus there are three types of neurotic
children-those with defective organs, those who are spoiled
and those who are
hated.
Physical defects,
\vhether
congenital or acquired, invariably cause feelings of inferior-
ity, and we can generally trace a special effort to compensate
.for the specific defect.
For example, many who are
naturally left-handed and who have been trained to use the
right hand only, conceal their sense of manual inadequacy
by taking to the arts.
Extreme dexterity and finesse of
handling such as that of an instrumentalist or a painter,
be~omes an integral factor in their life-goal.
There are also
many painters and poets whose choice of their vocation was
influenced by bad eyesight.
Milton and Homer are con-

CASE HISTORIES
35
spicuous examples of this latter compensation.
In the
deafness of Beethoven and in the stuttering of Demosthenes
also, we see the points upon which their strivings were
concentrated.
Many persons have resented the attention that I and my
colleagues have drawn to this compensatory factor in the
work of artists of genius or of high talent, and they attempt
to deny vvhat our experience is constantly confirming.
But
their objection is due to a misunderstanding of the findings
of Individual Psychology.
We are not so foolish as to
suppose that organic imperfection is the efficient cause of
genius.
Many of the Freudians have indeed supposed that
the sublimest works of human genius were directly caused
by sexual repressions.. but we make no such eccentric
generalisation. In our view, a man of genius is primarily a
man of supreme usefulness.
If he is an artist he is useful
to culture, giving distinction and value by his work to the
recreative life of many thousands.
And this value, where
it is genuine, and not merely empty brilliance, depends
upon a high degree of courage and communal intuition.
The
origin of genius li~_~__neither in the inherited organism nor in
tIle environmental influences, but in that third sphere of
individual reaction to which I have already referred, which
includes the possibility of
so~ially affirmative action.
In
the choice of its specialised .expression, however, the highest
talent is conditioned by the organism with which it is
endowed, from the greatest defect of which it gains its
particular mode of concentration,
A knowledge of this principle, which can only be rightly
gained by much observation, is of the greatest service in
the treatment of organically defective children, as it enables
us to protect them from many dangers of over-compensation.

PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSIS
The spoiled child, being in a position where it receives
too much from others, never proves its own powers to itself.
Its goal, formed in accordance with its experience, is to be
the centre of the family, the focus of attention and care.
The usual symptoms are: anger, discontent, disorderliness,
anxiety, enuresis, a struggle to avoid isolation, and un-
willingness to go to school.
Treatment readily suggests
itself;
but we have often to take into account a. quite
unusually intense feeling of insecurity.
The hated child is in the worse position of never having
been spoiled by anyone.
Its goal is to escape and to get
at a safe distance from others.
Cru·elty, slyness, and
co,vardliness are some of the symptoms.
Such a child is
often unable to look one straight in the eyeR, cannot speak,
and hides its feelings in fear of abasement.
Its constant
tendency to find fault may in some instances be developed
in the direction of useful criticism.
No soul develops in freedom.
Each one is in mental,
emotional and nutritive dependence upon his immediate
environment on the earth and in the COS1I10S, yet so far
independent that he must take up these relations con-
sciously: he must answer them as the questions of life.
Everything he does is an answer-no doubt it is tIle best
he can give.
We are not blest \vith omniscience, and our
greatest reasonable hope is not to answer with a great
mistake, so that we had better test all views, including
that of
Individual Psychology,
and prove them care-
fully.
Our best science must be applied with common
sense.
Hated children also take life as they find it, respond to it
with the best reactions they can devise, and graqually fix
these reactions into a mechanical pattern of life.
The three
IS

CASE
HISTORIES
37
life-problems, in whatever successive forms they present
themselves, will thenceforward be encountered by that
fixed pattern of behaviour, hovvever it may be elaborated by
experience.
The unusual tension of their life makes these
children postulate a higher goal of security and superiority
than that of the average child.
All their impressions,
perceptions and attitudes are conditioned by the perspective
of their prejudiced situation: so that what they learn from
life is seldom any new aspect but only how to fill in the old
one with more detail.
In these three types <:>f children we encounter the three
typical accentuations of the feeling of inferiority.
They
all weaken the social contact, and tend to isolate the
individual in an ever-narrowing sphere of interest. Unsocial
types take on very deceptive appearances at times.
I once
called to see an old lady I knew, who was well known for
benevolent actions, and found her crying while an old man,
also in tears, stood before her.
H "Vhat is the matter? "
I asked.
tt Look at this poor old man," she sobbed.
"He
has five starving children, and is to be turned out of his
house if he doesn't pay the ten shillings he owes-and I
have only five to give him I""
'e Don't cry," I replied.
,e Let me add to your generous gift a little gift of five
shillings."
She thanked me effusively, saying she had
always known me to be a good man.
Now I knew that this
old lady was not only very rich but she had no real social
interest; she consorted only with her own relatives, and
even with them in a very dominating spirit.
Her charitable
action was no contradic~ionto her character: her pity and
sadness over this poor man gave her the kind of feeling of
superiority she lived for.
It is of no use to judge an isolated
demonstration of feeling, apart from the ,vhole style of life.

PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
For a psychological understanding we must perceive the
goal towards which all the feelings tend.
I have already called attention to the lIse of guilty feelings
in building up a neurotic and imagillary superiority.
One
of the clearest examples in my experience was the case
of a boy, the second child in the family, whose father and
elder brother were both notable for honesty of character.
As is usual with second children, this boy's striving was
largely concentrated upon the effort to surpass the elder
brother.
At the age of seven he lied to his teacher, pretend-
ing that a piece of work in which his brother had helped
him,.was all his own.
This gave him a feeling of guilt which
he concealed for three years, after \vhich he went to the
teacher and confessed that he had lied.
The teacher refused
to take the matter seriously, but only laughed, so the boy
went and unburdened himself to his father, with great
emotion an'd sadness.
The father was gratified by what he
took to be a profound. love of truth, and consoled and
praised his son.
But the boy's depression did not vanisll
with this paternal absolution.
He continued to think,
with a neurotic compulsion, that he was a liar.
The high
moral atmosphere of the home l and the feeling that he
was worse than his brother, botll in school work anti in
"-
popularity, had combined to set him striving for excellente
in the supreme family virtue.
He was secretly dedicated to
proving even by the life-long expiation of a trifling trans-
gression, that his integrity was greater than anyone's.
The boy's neurosis developed.
He acquired other self-
reproaches, for not being entirely honest in work and, as is
usnall for masturbation
I These always became Il!ost acute
IS

CASE HISTORIES
39
just ~fore an examination.
By amassing difficulties in this
way he felt excused for not surpassing his brother.
He
planned a course of technical training after leaving the
university, but by that time his compulsion neurosis had
increased so much that most of his time was employed in
prayer to God to forgive him, which, of course, put work Ollt
of the question.
He was admitted to an asylum, where
they supposed him incurable, but his condition improved
and he left the asylum, asking, however, to be re-admitted
if he should have a relapse.
At this point he changed his
occupation and began to study the History of Art.
Before
sitting for an examination in this subject, however, he put
it beyond the bounds of possibility by a piece'of extraordin-
ary behaviour. Hewent to church on a special dayof festival,
when the building was crowded, and prostrated himself pub-
licly, crying out that he was the greatest of sinners.
In this. striking achievement of a central position in a
large public assembly, we can detect an ambition of the
same pattern as he had in childhood.
To be the greatest
penitent among all the worshippers in a church is the same
kind of distinction as to have the softest conscience for a
lie in a family of supreme honesty..
It is to be better than
the best.
He made another exhibition of himself when he
returned to the asylum, by coming to lunch one day entirely
naked.
He was a well-built man and quite equal to the
rest of his family in bodily appearance.
'
This patient's escape from work and examinations was
due to fear that he would not shine in these normal situa-
tions.
The
guilty
feeling,
specially
intensified
when
required, must be regarded as an intentional exclusion of
activities in which he had no confidence of success.
There
was also a tendency to score a cheap success of notoriety

40
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
which is not at all out of keeping with his gen.eral aim, and
it was this which prompted him to appear naked at the meal,
and to other eccentricities of behaviour.
The task of the physiciaIl is to enable such a patient to
realise what he is doing, and to transfer l1is egocentric inter-
est to social life and tlseful activity.
This is an art, in which
the Individual Psychologist must train himself by practice
and collaboration, for science and the knowledge of prin-
ciples alone will never enable him to win the complete
confidence which is required.
In the case I have just
described, for example, I had to recognise correctly, in the
first quarter of an hour of the patient's visit, the kind of
superiority for which this style of life was designed.
If
I had failed to do so I should certainly have provoked
prompt resistance.
Step by step I had to induce his correct
statement of his difficulties in childhood, to make him
reveal, with less and less reluctance, his deep feelings of
worthlessness compared with his brother.
Then it was
easier for him to admit to himself how he impressed his
father with his honest~y and ho\v he had manreuvred himself
into limelight positions.
1'he method of Individual Psychology, because it requires
the admission and correction of mistakes still dear to the
patient, involves the utmost art and craft of the practitioner.
We are far from denying that other schools of psychiatry
have their successes in dealing with neuroses, but in our
experience they do so less by their methods than when they
happen to give the patient a good human relation \vith the
physician, or above all, to give him encoura.gement.
It is
a fact that a quack or an osteopath sometimes improves a
person's attitude to life to a considerable extent; so also
maya St. Anne de Beaupre, a Christian Scientist, or a Coue,

CASE
HISTO~IES
4I
or a visit to Lourdes.' But we remain convinced that the
cure of all mental disorder lies in the simpler, if more
laborious process of making the patient understand his
own mistakes.
As we have already seen, the style of life of most of our
patients can be traced to three typical positions of inferi-
ority in childhood.
There are certain mistakes of adapta-
tiot! which prevent the establishment of a normal style of
life, and which are evident even before the child faces its
first social problems beyond the home.
One of these
lnistakes of childhood is a refusal to accept the sexual role,
in ,vhich case a boy grows up like a girl-or vice versa.
Such errors are very comnlon, and indeed nearly everyone
shows some slight tendencies towards them.
Perhaps
ev-ery man has something in
eitl~er body or behaviour
which we feel to be feminine, and women often have very
masculine traits of a physical character without always show-
ing a corresponding masculinity of mind. More often, how-
ever, the wrong sexuality is in the mind and not in the body.
The sex glands, it is true, have an extensiv'e influence on
the body.
But they have a very limited po\ver to determine
the
individual's
conception
of superiority.
It is this
individual goal of supremacy which is chiefly responsible for
a person's confusion about his true sexual function.
\Vhen
we are dealing,vith the mental symptomsof inverted sexual-
ity we must remember this and not blame too much upon
the glands.
It is probably equally true that the nlental
striving affects the glands themselves in the long run.
We nlust see first of all how the patient relates his ideas of
sexuality to his goal

42
PROBLEMS OF NEUROsIS
The goal of superiority is always more or less identified
with the masculine role owing to the privileges,' both real and
imaginary, with which our present civilisation has invested
the male.
A girl's feeling of inferiority may be markedly
increased when she realises that she is a female, and a
boy's also when he doubts his maleness.
Both compensate
by an exaggeration of what they imagine to be masculine
beha\iour.
This form of compensation, which may have the
most varied and intricate consequences according to cir-
cumstances, is what I have called the masculine protest.
Its
chief symptom both in mind and in outward conduct is a
needlessly domineering attitude to\vards the opposite sex
It is always noticeably connected with a very ambitious
style of life, with a goal of super-man or of a very much
pampered woman.
The behaviour is over-strained, a fact
which may be veiled in favourable situations but is revealed
clearly in times of defeat. The masculine protest is indicated
to a certain degree in some of the cases I have quoted, but I
will give a more typical instance.
A neurotic woman, twenty-six years old, who came to
consult DIe, had lost her mother at six, after whicll she lived
with an indulgent father Ulltil she was thirteen. Her earliest
memory was:
(, I hated to play with dolls."
This was a
sign of her unwillingness to develop in a normal manner :
she preferred to play with toy railway-trains.
She always
wanted to be \vild in conduct, and only played with boys,
like a typical hoyden.
If she did play with girls, she pulled
their hair and annoyed t?em in other ,vays.
To my ques-
tion, ,( 'Wnat do you think about men and women? " she
replied, " Women are always intriguing; men are straight-
forward."
This is a
still more definite sign of a will
to"\vards masculine development.

CASE
HISTORIES
43
In parenthes15, I may say that I should never forbid a girl
to play with trains, to climb trees, or to play any boys'
games, but I an1 fully convinced that much trouble would
be saved in the later life of children if they ,vere brought
up from the first in knowledge and preparation for their
right sexual role.
This is impossible, of course, if the
atmosphere is charged with suggestions of feminine dis-
ability and of masculine privilege, as so often is the
case.
::AII those who disesteem women as a sex incur certain
punishment, because they develop an attitude which is in
contradiction to truth and reality.
I asked my patient to tell me about her feelings towards
men and women.
She said that when she was thirteen she
laughed when she heard that persons fell in love.
She
knew nothing of love llntil her twentieth year.
This,
together with the fact that she was a keen athlete, con-
firmed the ostrich-like flight from her sexual role:
she
wanted to laugh love out of the question and to deny her
feminity by excelling in athletics.
I expected to find
difficulty in menstruation, which is often experienced by
girls who have a grudge against their feminine nature,
giving them great pain and tendencies to anger, but this
vIas not the case with her.
At the age of thirteen, when
her indulgent father
married again,
one
would have
expected her to show signs of anger, but she did not.
She
scorned to do anything so womanly, but said she was glad
her father ",~as married so that she could be free.
However,
trouble with her father began from that time, and she
fought in the horrle, saying that she wanted to be free to
leave home and to become a social worker.
She \vanted
to conquer her father by financial independence.
Her
F

44
PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSIS
desire to be a social worker was coloured by t~e thought of
fuling over children
We are familiar, of course, with the desire that patients
so often express, not to take any money from their families.
When a patient tells me he does not intend to take any
more nloney from his family I often say:
II Better take it.
It will be cheaper for them in the end."
This patient had many men friends, bllt was never in
love.
It is usual for boys and girls to fall in love about
twelve or thirteen, and not uncommon when they are five
or six.
An individual who reaches the age of twenty-three
without any such experience is not prepared for it.
Love.is a
necessary life-task for which an early preparation is needed,
and training for love is an integral part of one's education for
life.
Both normal love and all its perversions such as
homosexuality are a matter of training and education.
At the age of twenty·-three this girl had a feeling which
she thought was love; she liked a man better than she had
ever liked anyone before, and the affair fed to intercourse.
This free sex-relation was a part of her striving for inde-
pendence, expressing her opposition to her father, and
her
determination to be manlike.
The man's feelings
changed, and he disappeared for a time.
Unable to bear
this defeat the girl tried to follow him, with the result one
might expect in our civilisation, where men are taught to
think it in,fra dig. to be wooed, and are afraid of having it
too easily.
The man cooled off more and more, and she saw
him at last with another girl, for which she reproached him,
and in quarrel with her the man told her she was a common
girl.
After this he disappeared entirely and married the
other one.
For some time after this my patient only kept up her

CASE HISTORIES
45
sporting and athletic relations with men, and was frightened
if they made any other advances: she ran away when a
man friend wanted to kiss her.
Later on she became the
mistress of. a second man, but she was unhappy, fought
with him constantly, and would not consent to marry him.
The man took a voyage to Africa, thinking it would be
better to absent himself for a while, but her unhappiness
continued, and w~s now fraught with memories of her first
lover.
In her continual quarrels we see her excuse for not
mCarrying, as also in her return to the image of the married
and therefore unattainable lover.
A typical ~ymptom was
that sex relations did not satisfy her.
She had not been
prepared for marriage.
To this girl the thought of being a woman was iden'tified
with defeat.
Thus, if she behaved like a girl and con-
sidered the prospect of marriage, she could not endure it ;
it was easier to go on playing at being a boy by keeping up
her athletic pursuits.
On the other hand she felt that
marriage was a natural and logical social demand.
In this
conflicting situation she -was further discouraged by two
great defeats:
firstly, by her father, when he ceased to
spoil her and married again, and secondly, by the desertion
of her first lover.
To safeguard herself against another
defeat she put love and marriage at the greatest possible
distance, and to justify her halt before this problem and to
ensure it, she persuaded herself that it was impossible for
a girl to keep a man's love.
The fundamental difficulty in
this case, as in many others, was the idea that the feminine
function is of definitely second-rate importance, and there-
fore not really worth while.
This is one of the chief causes
of unhappiness in love and marriage, and it is the illusion
which is the basis of the masculine protest.

CHAPTER IV
The Prototype in Love and Marriage.-Love and Social Feeling.-
Evasions of Love.-Drunkenness in Marriage.-Drug -Habits and their
Treatment.-Neurotic Striving to get Married.-Anger and Headaches.
-Aversion to Bearing Children.-Love and the Life-Goal.
AT the end of all my lectures I have to reply to questions
about love and marriage, and my questioners often appear
to have been misled by some psychological reading into
believing that the sexual impulse is the central motive to
which every other activity is related.
I have never seen
the reason for placing this unnatural emphasis upon one
single function of life.
I admit, of course, its great but very
variable importance.
But the
detection of transposed
sexual elements in a variety of manifestations is not very
practically useful, even if it is possible: and our experience
is that the sexual components cannot even be correctly
estimated except in relation to the individual style of life.
The erotic phases are functions of this individual life-
style, and we can only gain insight into the erotic life, with
all its waywardness, hesitation and elusive subtleties, so
far as we can grasp the individual's style in the prototype.
By the prototype I mean the original form of an individual's
adaptation to life.
The psychic prototype is a finished being
by the time the child is four years old.
It is the baby in
the man or woman, whicll never grows up any further, but
rules the whole life to its end.
It is no wonder that certain
religions have worshipped an infant, for this prototypic
46

CASE HISTORIES
47
being is the greatest power in human life.
The prototype
is the constant factor, although we may improve its later
manifestations to an indefinite extent when we come to
recognise and understand it.
. This prototype in each one is the baby Cupid who rules
his behaviour as a lover.
If the prototype is sociable and
interested in others, the personality into whom it develops
will solve all love-problems with loyalty to the partner and
responsibility to society.
If the prototype is struggling
to attract nop,ce and to suppress others, its later manifest-
ation will include the use of sexuality towards the same
ends: tliat person- will establish sex-~elationshipsin order to
rule.
A prototype formed by attaining superiority in a
limited sphere of activity which excludes the opposite sex
"viTI tend later to produce homosexuality or other perver-
sions.
The main outlines of the erotic life are thus strictly
pre-conditioned.
By the goal, therefore, especially in its most prototypic
form, we can interpret the various sexual urges, while the
converse does not hold good.
The study of instincts or
urges will never enable us to understand the structure of an
individual psyche: and it is interesting to note that psycho-
logists who endeavour to explain the mind's working from
such observations instinctively presuppose a style of life
without noticing that they have done so.
Love and marriage, from the standpoint of Individual
Psychology, are the normal responses to the sexual question
-one of the three vital questions of life-and our task is to
understand the special difficulties they present to individuals.
An individual who has been well prepared for social life in
childhood will not have great difficulties in the sexual life.
Courage, an optimistic attitude, common sense, and the

PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSIS
feeling of being at home upon the crust of the earth, will
enable him to face advantages and disadvantages with equal
firmness.
His goal of superiority will be identified with
ideas of serving the human race and of overconring its
difficulties by his creative power.
Deviations from the
norm of sexual expression will be instinctively excluded as
unattractive.
His useful goal will so arrange all his enIO-
tions and actions that he will approach love in a feasible
form; whilst adolescent love-affairs and the experiences of
his friends will train him for love and strengthen his position.
The literature of unhappy love and disastrous marriage (a
common source of mischief) will be unable to mislead him;
and even if he has disagreeable experiences with an unsuit-
able marriage-partner, it will not corrupt his course of life.
His ideals of social life, of work and of beauty will survive
ordinary defeats, and the sense of beauty itself be transferred
to the beauty of adaptation to life.
Entirely different is the fate of those whose so~ial contact
is poor, who have lost real interest in the lives of others.
They approach love without the right preparation-for
every love-problem is a social problem in the sense that it
is a question of behaviour towards another,who is sexually
attractive-and their unprepared souls feel as if the diffi-
culty is insuperable \vhen it comes to marriage, which is
the most intimately and intensely social of all situations.
Such a person has been educating himself for an isolated
life, and does not really want to share life with another:
so that he tends to shut his partner out from all but a few
activities in which partnership seems necessary or advant-
ageous.
He does not conceive marriage as a complete
human relationship.
His difficulties are increased, very
often, by having learnt about love and marriage from parents
IS

CASE
HISTORIES
49
who were not happily united: and he gathers confirmation
from his environment and from literature.
In popular
fiction the marriage situations are usually portrayed as
unhappy; unhappy love-stories are probably in a majority,
because of the use which readers are making of them.
One of the chief obstacles to marriage lies in the prevail-
ing opinion that the man is functionally superior, which
leads men into vain expectations of rulership and makes
girls rebel against their feminine function: they naturally
reject a role of 5ervitude in a
(C man-made world."
Much
suspicion, jealousy, and quarrelling springs directly from
this antagonism, for if an individual feels victimised by
love or marriage it disturbs every association of life.
If a
girl, for instance, feels that the fenlinine position is worse
or lower than the masculine, she will enter into some sort
of competition with the man in her striving to show super-
iority.
If either of the 'partners is looking for a weaker
mate in order to rule, disappointment is certain, for this is
an expectant attitude: and it appears to be an immutable
law of love and marriage that it can only succeed where
the attitude is one of giving.
When an individual's attitude
towards love and marriage is hesitative, halting, or expect-
ant, it indicates a general unpreparedness for social life, and
we may safely infer a tendency to exclude a large part of
the potentialities of life.
In such cases the individual will
always justify his actions, but his real purpose appears in
the result, which is that love and marriage are indefinitely
postponed.
In this goal of evasion or exclusion, the means
taken are interesting: they include all the neurotic symp-
toms which are more or less connected with sexual functions.
The individual is like a stammerer in the sexual sphere.
Ejacula/if) praecox, lack of sex interest and satisfaction,

50
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
vaginismus and frigidity, are all signs of a determination to
exclude actions w~ch the individual is apparently willing to
perform.
Normally, of course, the sexual objective is in harmony
with the life-goal, is indeed one aspect of it, and as soon as
approach to this objective becomes possible it produces
the thoughts and feelings which are appropriate, excluding
all contradictions and conflicting tasks.
But in the case
of the neurotic, thoughts and feelings are produced which be-
long to other duties or functions of life; irrelevant consider-
ations are admitted which inhibit, traverse, or pervert normal
conduct along the sexualline.
The inlpotence or whatever
sexual disability is thus produced is dictated by a neurotic
goal of superiority and a mistaken style of life: and investi-
gation always reveals a fixed intention to receive without
giving, with a lack of social feeling, courage and optimistic
activity.
There are other ways of excluding sexual partnership, of
course, besides the functional disability.
Exclusion is often
contrived by an exaggerated and unpractical ideal of
marriage: and sometimes by a desire to mate with persons
obviously ineligible-much older, incurably diseased, or
below the age of consent. When the patient has postponed
marriage for a long period, perhaps attributing the indecision
to polygamous tendencies, investigation will often disclose
the under-structure of a perversion, which must not be mis-
taken for the motive, but recognised as a co-ordinate of the
hesitative attitude.
The efforts to exclude love and marriage, either before or
after the contract, are modelled upon the prototypic or
infantile pattern of adaptation, a fact which may be seen in
the marriage-history of a yOUIlg man who was twenty-three

CASE HISTORIES
51
at the time when he first came to see me, without occupation
and without friends.
A y'ear before this he had married a
girl with whom he had relations for two years.
His attitude
towards her was one of continual jealousy, advice, and
criticism.
The girl appeared to be very docile while she
was hoping to be married, and the man enjoyed a sense of
superiority in this and in the knowledge that the marriage
would antagonise his mother.
After marriage, however, his
wife was not so obedient, and he occasionally showed high
te.mper.
He behaved as he had behaved in childhood to
his mother and his elder sister when they failed to gratify
his wishes.
Then he had screamed, run away from lessons,
broken toys, torn his clothes, and in every possible way
assailed his mother by attacks upon himself or his own
occupations
Now, after scenes with his wife, he would
drink heavily and come home intoxicated.
This man was a spoiled child, who lost his father at the
age of two years, and was pampered by- the mother.
He
became the tyrant of the family, as children in SUCll a position
are likely to do: and from eight years old to thirteen he
suffered from fainting-fits.
The connection between fainting and anger may in certain
cases have an organic basis.
I have found a type of patient
who loses consciousness in a rage, and suspect
some
peculiarities in the blood-circulation of the brain.
In such
·cases it is possible that an epileptoid fit occurs in varying
degrees-petit mal, for example.
If, as in this case, an
outlet presents itself, there may be a discontinuance of the
fits, and, as it happened, this patient was not obliged to
repress his rages.
.
~n accordance \vith the view of Individual Psychology,
we should predict the repetition of this behaviour in child-

52
PROBLEMS
OF
NEUROSIS
hood and expect the patient to take the same direction in any
vital conflict with others-to hurt them by damaging him-
self.
As such behaviour breeds callousness in the environ-
ment,
the resentment and injury are
correspondingly
increased.
In this case, when drunkenness ceased to punish
the \vife sufficiently, the man attempted suicide after a
quarrel with her.
He hurt himself severely and recovered
very slowly.
The inheritance of a large fortune from his
father had lessened the patient's necessity for self-control.
He could never keep a position in his occupation, a failure
which he justified by complaining of terrible working con-
ditions.
This case illustrates very well the inability of a pampered
child to seize upon the best means to become a conqueror
It also confirms the insufficiency of treating such conditions
as drunkenness without recognition of the psychic proto-
type, for the latter can assimilate any change of conditions
to its individual kind of striving.
It is not interest in
drink, but in himself and his own superiority that misleads
such a patient towards the useless side of life.
The object
of treatment must be to quicken the social interest in what-
ever way is possible.
The use of love and marriage as a means of domination is,
of course, intolerable to the marriage partner; so this man's
wife gradually lost all interest in him.
He obtained a
divorce and married again twice. He took as his third wife a
divorced woman who had attempted suicide during her
first marriage, an attempt which she made when she ·was
found out to have been unfaithful to her first husband
because of his neglect of her.
Her mother had been very
critical and cold to her, failing in both of the two maternal
functions: so that she had turned. as is usual. to the kinder

CASE
HISTORIES
53
father, and he had spoiled her with favour.
This woman
seemed to be of a very gentle disposition, but it did not
stand the test of unfavourable situations.
At school she
had constantly made trouble in the class.
She had <?nly one
friend, and was not sociable.
Her second husband was a youngest child, left-handed,
and with a clumsiness which drew upon him the constant
derision of his elder brothers.
He was, however, very
ambitious and anxious to surpass the brothers, who ~n child-
hood had beaten him by his handicap, and this stimulated
him to the conquest of wealth: he became rich and highly
esteemed.
Fear of defeat and escape from derision made
up his prototype, so that he liked and sought isolation.
His
first two marriages were brought about by women who
flattered him.
The second of them had appeared when he
had lost a great part of his fortune-the money which, to
him, stood for superiority -over his brothers.
This woman
had tried to console him with morphia, which he continued
to take after she died.
The third wife, described above, married him with a deter-
mination to save him from the drug habit, and her first
efforts revealed her inability to do so.
Like the spoilt
child she was, she was infuriated at her lack of power over
him, and began taking to morphia herself in order to punish
him.
She had the idea that he would reform himself if he
saw the terrible consequences of his action; but as nothing
of the kind happened, botll continued the abuse of the drug,
and soon each of them noticed that the other was looking
about for another partner.
This couple tried several morphia cures without success,
which is not surprising when we review the complex of
motives at work.
One was the man's childish goal of

54
PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSIS
superiority, to escape derision or disesteem.
Another lay
in his attitude to his business worries, from which he not
only found partial relief in morphia, but also a subjectively
valid excuse.
His diminished success could be blamed
upon the morphia, without which, he could still believe, he
would have triumphed over everything.
He sometimes
spoke of the habit in both ways, as a relief and as an excuse,
without understanding the connection or the contradiction
between them.
To do this he would have had to relate these
manifestations to his style of life, to understand his exagger-
ated demand for esteem, in which case he might have taken
better means to attain it.
His polygamous tendencies,
and his exclusion of friends,' showed a lack of social adjust-
ment: and he could not possibly have been cured by taking
away the morphia.
It was the whole personality. which
needed to be changed, by the recognition of its prototype.
It is true, that, in lighter cases, a patient with very varied
symptoms may lose them before he himself or the doctor
have corne to grasp their coherence.
When this happens
it is either because of a favourable change in the patient's
situation or because the doctor, by encouragement or by
chance, renews the patient's interest in others.
The wife was far from being cured of the drug.
Feeling
in danger of losing her second husband she gave up attempts
to cure him, and being indifferent to the criticism of others,
and if anything courting the displeasure of her mother, she
increased her own doses of morphia to the most dangerous
excesses.
This was a repetition of her condllct in her first
marriage where she was neglected.
This drug habit was
a kind of suicide.
Being a youngest child and the father's
favourite, both her desire for conquest and her feeling of
inadequacy were intense: and she lived according'to the

CASE HISTORIES
55
neurotic formula-
tl All or nothing."
In these cases, when
the hope of gaining all begins to fade, nothing is left; and
this must be expressed by very bad habits, suicide or
insanity.
The feeling that suicide gives mastery over life
and death is the supreme expression of the goal of superior-
ity on the useless side of life.
But we must note, of course,
that the patient began to be watched with apprehension
by her father and husband.
Everybody became more
t~nder towards her: giving her a sense of augmented power
and importance.
Such are the underlying difficulties which obstruct so
many attempts to cure drunkenness, drug-habits, and
suicidal tendencies.
There is a method for everything in
life: and to solve any problem we must find the right one.
There are t\VO ways, for instance, of trying to pass through
a doorway only five feet high.
One of them is to walk
erect, and the other is to bend one's back. If I try the first
method I not only bump my head on the lintel but have to
fall back UpOIl the second method after all.
I call this the
law of the low doorway.
Nothing compels me to stoop, but
if I do not realise the relation between my height and the
aperture I cannot possibly pass through it.
We stand in
an equally definite relatIon to the critical personal problems
of life.
If we do not realise the fact and adapt our method
accordingly we come into collision with reality.
Every child is confronted with reality, and finds its
method> more or less successfully, in its prototype.
These
individual responses to reality are so wonderfully varied
that the ancient poets and fable-writers compared them
with species of animals such as the hare, the fox, the stork,
and the snake.
Prototypes are indeed like animal souls I

PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
moving each toviards its own goal, in its own interest and
its own characteristic manner.
The tension between the child and its environment-\vhich
is ne,,·er entirely absent-is never exactly calculable, for
besides the many possibilities of variation in the family
constellation, each child has its individual sensitiveness
and an original responsiveness.
Thus, against a fairly
typical position of inferiority, different children will erect
most diverse concrete goals of superiority.
There are many
children, for example, who are at a similar disadvantage
through weak muscles and poor eyesight, but they may
compensate in directions which will lead them to be acrobats
or artists or towards a hundred other developments, accord-
ing to the originality of their reaction, the degree of their
courage, and their social feeling.
Moreover, the defects
,vhich they have to compensate are full of subtle individual
differences.
It is for this reason that a child which has deviated from
a normal line of life cannot be re-educated by normal
methods.
The method must be specially adapted:
for
the child with an abnormal endowment or development
will feel suppressed in perfectly normal situations.
A
child with stomach trouble, for example, may fail to gain
in weight, and develop poorly: and if the circumstances
are not carefully adapted the usual consequences will ensue-
a pessimistic and hostile attitude, perhaps with pugnacity
and irritability. Such a child is liable to contract an envious
disposition by comparing itself with others: it may show
an abnormal interest in eating and eatables, and its tendency
to collect and hoard things may develop in later life into a
concentration upon money-making.
It is common to find
troubles in early nutrition in families which produce success-
IS

CASE
HISTORIES
57
ful money-makers.
As a rule, when a child displays exag-
gerated consciousness of its stomach and a tendency to
anxiety, we should do something about it, for it is a common
beginning of neurosis.
There is a feeling of curtailmen.t
and a loss of interest in others, which bode ill for the child's
future.
Children with stomach troubles are a well-known source
of trouble to parents and physicians, but the difficulties are
due far more to imperfect methods than to the constitutional
deficiency.
This is the case with other physical disabilities:
the better we understand their connection with the general
line of life the better the methods we can devise.
We cannot
claim that we have found the universally perfect method,
but the continued search for right methods according to the
principles of Individual Psychology certainly enables us
to avoid many mistakes
The dominance of the prototypic attitude in love and
marriage is exemplified in the following case.
As a girl,
the patient was the second child of the falnily, very weak,
very pretty, spoiled by her mother and ill-used by a drunken
father
She lost the mother's favouritism at the age of
three, when a baby sister was born, and protested by
becoming truculent and high-tempered.
She was supposed
to inherit bad temper from her father, and some psycholo-
gists would uphold this mistaken opinion, but any child
might take this line of development in such an unfavourable
turn of circumstances.
Indeed, from the attitudes of
aggressive, disobedient, or domineering children we are
often able to guess correctly at some salient feature of the
home environment, such as this displacement by a younger
child.

PROBLEMS
OF
NEUROSIS
This girl became an actress and had many love-affairs,
which culminated in her becoming the mistress' of an elderly
man.
Such an obvious exploitation of advantage indicates
deep feelings of insecurity and cowardice.
This relation-
ship, however, brought her trouble: her mother reproached
her, and although the man loved her he could not get a
divorce.
During this time her younger sister became
engaged.
In the face of this competition, she began to suffer from
headaches and palpitation, and became very irritable
towards the man.
This was a neurotic impatience, and it
was the cause of her coming to consult me.
In a certain
type we find that headaches are regularly produced by
severe tensions of anger.
The emotion accumulates so to
speak during a period in which the patient shows no symp-
toms.
The emotional tension may actually result in
circulatory changes producing attacks of trigeminal neural-
gia, migraine and epileptiform seizures.
An illustration
of such circulatory disturbances is provided by the well-
kno\vn
respiratory
spasms
and
sensations
of
choking
induced by violent rage.
In those cases of trigeminal neuralgia which have no
organic basis I have already emphasised (1910) the import-
ance of psychological factors
These nlay, of course, act
through vascular disturbances induced by emotion, and the
frequent repetition of such interferences with the blood
supply may in the end cause organic damage to the tissues
of the nervous system.
The tendency to anger is related to excessive ambition:
both of which originate in a competitive striving to escape
from a sense of being overcome.
They occur in unsocial
natures1 "rho feel uncertain of attaining their· goal by

CASE HISTORIES
patient strivirlg, and often try to escape to the useless sid~
upon an outburst of temper.
Children make use of such
explosions to conquer by terrifying, or at least to feel
superior: and in a similar way they use the consequences-
their headaches.
The neurotic origin of headaches was not
known to the scientific world when I first spoke of it in 1910,
but it must have been well known in antiquity.
Horace,
in an ode to Mrecenas, wrote of those ambitious persons who
do not want to alter themselves but only to change others;
and he refers to their headaches and sleeplessness.
To return to the case: the girl's condition was the result
of a. neurotic method of striving to hasten her marriage,
and was not at all ineffective.
The married man was
greatly worried by her continuous headaches, and made
efforts to get a divorce, but he was not very courageous, and
made slow progress against the opposition to it.
The girl
then broke with him and wanted to marry another man;
but she soon discovered he was too uncultured, so she
returned to her former lover.
He (the married man), then
came to see me about my patient, and said that he would
hurry on the divorce and marry her.
Treatment of the immediate illness was easy-in fact, it
would have cleared up without me, for the girl was powerful
enough to succeed with the help of her headaches.
Her
goal was to force the man to get a divorce quickly; it was
the ,goal of her childhood, not to be surpassed by her
younger sister:
and as soon as the divorce proceedings
began the headaches disappeared.
I explained to her the connection bet\veen her headaches
and the competitive attitude to her sister.
She felt incap-
able of attaining her goal of superiority by normal means,
for she was one of those children whose interest has become
G

60
PR013Ll!MS OF NEUROSIS
absorbed in themselves, and who tremble for fear that they
will not succeed.
She admitted that she only cared for
herself and did not like the man she was about to marry.
Her palpitation was due to the fact that she had twice
been pregnant and both times had resorted to abortion,
when she justified herself to the doctor by saying that her
heart was too weak for her to bear children.
It was true
that her heart was irritated by tense situations and sup-
pressed anger, but she used this symptom increasingly and
exaggerated it to justify her - intention never to have
children.
Self-absorbed \yomen generally show their lack
of human and social interest by an unwillingness to have
children: but sometimes, of course, they desire children for
reasons of ambition or for fear of being considered inferior.
A dream of this patient is vvorth recording.
She dreamed
that she was ,veIl dressed and held a naked baby in her arms.
She said to the baby, which was of a brown and jolly
complexion, II I cannot take care of you, I must give you up."
The b~by answered, tc Yes, you are right."
Then she began
crying in her dream, and a man passed her, but she turned
her head to avoid being seen.
The man, however, wished
to see her and looked at her.
By the nakedness of the baby she meant that she was
too poor to have children.
Her sister was to be married
to a rich man, whereas she had only enough money for her
own clothes, none to spare for a child.
The baby's brown
complexion meant that she could have a healthy child, but
the dream-child reassured her, by agreeing with her, that
everyone could see. it was impossible for her to have
children.
The patient said at this time that she felt per-
fectly well, but suffered from palpitation of, the heart
night and morning, which showed she was clinging to the

CASE HISTORIES
61
idea that her weak heart would excuse her from having
children.
She was too egoistical and much too eager to
keep in the centre of the stage of life, to entertain the
prospect of children, and moreover she felt the child as a
potential rival, because the tragedy of her infantile life was
one of rivalry \vith her baby sister.
The man who passed
by her in the dream fillst have been myself, and her turning
away was a sign that she did not wish to be entirely open
with me: she was afraid that I would blame her, and as
she knew I wished to develop her social feeling she thought
I should wish her to have a child.
The decision whether a 'woman should or should not have
a child, should rest entirely with the woman-such at least
is my personal belief.
I cannot see the use of forcing a
child upon a woman who is without social interest or love
for children: for she is almost certain to bring it up badly.
In such cases I prefer to adjust the woman socially, and then,
I am sure she will wish to have a baby without suggestion
or pressure from anyone else.
It is, or used to be, the almost invariable conclusion of
Freudian psychologists, that the person who excludes love
is repressing his libido, but it is a vast improvement both
in diagnosis and treatment when we relate this exclusion
to the individual's goal of superiority.
If the exclusion of
normal possibilities of mating is very persistent and obstin-
ate it is always a sign that the person is neurotic in other
relations also, and does not want to see marriage in the
obvious light of social necessity beca~se of a more general
exclusion of social behaviour.
vVe then see a hesitating
or evasive attitude before the love-problem, or an unnatural
tendency in the love-relation, both of which proceed from a

62
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
mistake in understanding the relation between the individ-
ual's prototypic neec;1s and the possibilities of his situation.
A better understanding would produce better behaviour.
For individual goals are not unattainable, nor are they
attainable in one way only, but every way of attainment has
its own sequence of necessary obligations.
The neurotic
is paying the price of taking the most difficult, lonely, and
impracticable way to the sumnlit of his ambitions, when
there are much easier and better paths.
In a sense it may be
said that the prototype never relinquishes his rule over the
individual's life, but there are better and better \vays of
fulfilling its laV'l.
We must regard the love-problem as the most intimate
and organically-determined form of the problem of social
behaviour, a vie\v which acts as a continual corrective of
mistakes.
This view of Individual Psychology may not
bless us with an absolute truth; it may not enable us to
foresee the future of a marriage as accurately as we can
calculate the path of a falling stone.
But the stone lies in
a world of truth, whereas we live in the realm of human
mistakes.
Our method enables us to replace the great
mistakes by small ones, and that is our justification for
believing that we can often help others to approach their
own goals with fl method which, if perhaps not infallible, is
better than theirs in social direction.
In the world of the
psyche there is no principle of individual orientation beyond
our OWl1 beliefs.
Very great are the consequences of our
real beliefs.
Big mistakes can produce neuroses but little
mistakes a nearly normal person.

CHAPTER V
Organic Symptoms.-Vomiting.-Fainting.-Stuttering.-Left-handed-
ness.-Imperfect Sight.-Compensatory Activities.-The
Sexual Role.
Sex EquaIity.-Masculine Protest.-" Prophet 11 Fantasies in Neurotics.-
First Methods of Treatment.-Verification of Diagnosis.-" Transfer-
ence" to the Psychologist.-True Understanding of a Neurosis.-Drunk-
enness.-Patients who need .Supervision.-Criterion of the Value of
Action.-The Value of Social Feeling.-Neurosis as the Weapon of the
Weak.-Case of Suicidal Impulse.
IT is natural for an individual to express himself with his
whole body, so that it is often more instructive to watch a
person's movements-how he walks, sits, smiles or fidgets
-than to hear what he says.
We may go further, and apply
this to the valuation of symptoms.
Vomiting, for example,
is commonly a sign that the person who vomits does not
wish to agree. It is an attack upon another, or the rejection
of an approach.
Fainting may also be the effective
rejection of a situation in which a person feels entirely
powerless.
How could I cure a stutterer if I believed stuttering to
be caused by some subtle and unkno\vn organic deficiencies?
I have plenty of evidence that the stutterer does not
want to join with others, and
he can ,generally talk
quite well when he is alone:
he may even be able to
read or recite excellently:
so that I
can only inter-
pret his stammer as the expression of his attitude towards
others.
IS

PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
There is some point, however, in the belief~ common in
America, that stuttering is caused by training left-handed
children to use the right hand, although this is only because
wrong methods are used, which give the child an anti-
social bias in reaction to unsympathetic criticism
A
mechanical and competitive method of teaching makes no
prqper allowance for the fact that the left-handed child has
more actual difficulty in adapting itself, and the
ch~ld
retaliates with an impediment which worries or irritates its
teachers.
There is no physical reason ,vhy children should
not be taught to use the right hand.
Since we are living in
a right-handed culture, left-handedness may sometimes be
felt as if it were an inferiority in later periods of life.
In
many technical and commercial positions and even in social
life left-handedness may be a noticeable disability
~r
hindrance.
But the training of these people for a right-
handed world should be done with the correct method,
for they are a large minority whose rights should be pro-
tected.
In early life the left-handed child has certainly
greater difficulties, for often the pecllliarity is not recog-
nised, and blame is incurred for clumsiness.
Such a cllild
connects its imperfect dexterity with all other difficulties
at home and at school, and suffers from a depression which
centres its interest too much in itself.
Thus left-handed
children often acquire the feeling that the world is a
dangerous place, and become more liable to neurosis than
others.
I believe about thirty-five per cent. of all persons are left-
handed, and most of them unconscious of the fact.
There
are several ways of detecting the left-handed: the best-
kno'vn and simplest is to ask the person in question to clasp
his hands together; tIle left-handed subject ,viII instinct-
IS

CASE HISTORIES
ively do this so that the left thumb is over the right thumb.
The eyebrow on the left side is frequently higher in a left-
handed person, and the whole symmetry of the body more
developed on the left side.
Even in the cradle we can see
when a baby tends to use the left side of the body more than
the right.
The adaptation to right-handedness is a some-
what severe test for these children.
Generally, when I see
a very bad handwriting I know it is that of a left-handed
person whose courage is below par.
On the other hand, if
I see excellent hand~riting I know it is a left-handed person
also, but one who has successfully grappled with his diffi-
culties. The left-handed who 9-evelop their right hands tend
to some artistic or craftsmanlike powers.
Among painters
we find not a few left-handed persons \vho paint equally
well with either hand.
It is not generally known that left-handed children very
often have considerable difficulty in learning to read because
they spell reversely from right to left; a mistake whicll they
can correct if it is properly explained to them.1
Imperfections in the sense-organs limit the means which
a child has of sharing in the life of others.
They impose
necessary differences of behaviour which may be felt a$ a
burden if we do not meet the case with wise measures of
encouragement.
Children
with
imperfect
sight
walk
cautiously, as they are conscious of danger in movement.
They are more interested in seeing because it is difficult for
them, and if they compensate well they ,viti become visual
1 These and other facts are collected and discussed by Dr. Alice
Friedman
in
an
article published in
the International ] oumal of
Individual Psychology, 5th year: published by S. Herzl, Leipzig, 1927.
IS

66
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
types.
There are corresponding compensations for poor
hearing and for handicaps in movement.
Gustow Freytag, for example, was very short-sighted and
did not wear glasses.
Not being able to see much, his
attention was focussed upon imagining what his environ-
ment was like, and the high development of his fancy was
his great quality as a writer.
Goethe, Schiller,- Milton, and
many other fine poets were afflicted with poor sight, and also
many of the greatest painters.
A child with perfectly
normal sight is not likely to concentrate his attention upon
the phenomena of visibility but takes them for granted.
It
must never be assumed, however, that defective visual
powers will be necessarily compensated with talent or
brilliance, or indeed in any socially useful way.
A good
compensation will only be made where there is courage and
a favourable situation: then we may count upon a special
development, either relative to the same sense function, or
to another, such as hearing.
If the situation is unfavour-
able and courage fails, there will be a negative-compensation
-e.g., the child will not want to see anytIling.
Those whose eyes are normal sometimes develop interests
which depend upon visual powers, but not unless they have
at some time beell confronted with the necessity to see.
No
advance is ever made without the consciousness of a hind-
rance.
It is the thing which appears to be a deterrent \\r-hich
acts as the incentive whenever there is a courageous struggle
for success.
I have already referred to the aural difficulties
of Beethoven, Smetana, Dvorak, and other musicians.
Our civilisation is not only a right-handed but also a
masculine one: so that the striving for superiority tends to
IS

CASE HISTORIES
elaborate an over-mascul1ne attitude.
Several great philoso-
phers have remarked this, as Kant did when he said et No man
ever wants to be a woman. II I do not entirely agree with this,
for I have knowri cases in which men wished to be women. A
bow-legged man, for instance, told me he wished he were a
woman with skirts to cover his unshapely legs, and there are
spoiled boyswhowould liketo be women inorder to be petted.
I should never oppose \vomen for taking their place in the
world upon an equal Jooting with men, but I have seen that
it is better to bring up boys and girls from the earliest age
to be reconciled with their respective social roles.
When
a girl believes that she may change into a boy it is because
the female role has not been presented to her in an aspect
of equality.
She rebels against what she feels to be a
prospect of permanent inferiority.
The Freudians have
interpreted this fact as the so-called
U castration complex,"
because girls frequently have the fantasy that the male
organs have been surgically removed from them: but this
is to mistake the effect for the cause.
Almost every girl
wishes at times to be a boy, even when she says that she
prefers to be a woman, because the masculine position
appears to be safer. She shows that she has weighed up the
advantages and
disadvantages
of
both.
In
Herder's
collection of songs of brides, we cannot help being struck by
the fact that they are all sad songs; showing the girl's
apprehension that she will not be appreciated or esteemed
in marriage.
In the crisis between girlhood and woman-
hood she fears the loss of virginity as if it were the loss of
potentiality or dignity.
It is this feeling which accounts
for various manifestations in women,
such as a
sus-
picious attitude) desire to escape from love and marriag"e,
vaginismus, shyness before pregnancy, and also perversions.
IS

68
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
. Girls often want to dress as boys, to play like boys, and
even to be called by boys' names.
I was once walking with
a five-year-old girl, and she led me to a store with boys'
clothing displayed in the window.
She asked me to buy
her a boy's suit.
I resorted to artfulness and said, yes, I
would buy it for her if she wanted it, but no boy would want
to wear a girl's dress.
She was silent for a while and then
pointed to a boy's overcoat and said: "Please, won't you
at least buy me that coat."
In such a child we may infer that at the age of two 'or
three there had been uncertainty of the unchangeable nature
of the sexual role, and this uncertainty had influenced the
formation of the psychic prototype.
If a girl is stimulated
to imitate boys by her environment or her education it will
increase her difficulties later when she has to face her problem
as a human being.
Girls should be educated, not as if for a
lower function, but with a view and .a sense of their special
social responsibilities and possibilities.
Without this pre-
paration, girls are likely to show the need of it later, especi-
ally in adolescence, \vhen they first enter into a ~ttle free-
dom and independence; then they often like to exaggerate
masculine ways and manners, and especially to imitate the
bad ones, such as drinking and sexual liberties.
At the
present time, the masculine protest is rampant and \videly
displayed by women of all ages, who smoke, wear short
skirts and short hair and do everything possible to approx-
imate to masculine manners.
A boy of fifteen years old was brought to me from a sana-
torium, after having been treated by many physiGians for
having made unaccountable motions with his hands, con-

CASE HISTORIES
69
tortioris of- facial expression and abnormalities of speech:
he often screamed without any apparent reason.
His
symptoms resembled schizophrenia,
but
eventually he
told me his secret.
U I know it is rubbish," he said, " but
I believe I am a prophet.
No one must know it."
In a
few days I was able to cure him.
He did not wish to
associate with others, and he was isolating himself by his
extraordinary behaviour.
He had a younger sister, wllich
is always a difficult position for the older boy.
Although
his school record was a good one-in fact, he was the best
pupil in the school-his determination to playa unique part
in life had brought him into. universal dislike.
His flight
into the world of unreality, where alone he could feel a
sufficient degree of superiority, was only caused by cow~rd­
ice.
Finally it had become necessary for him to speak a
different language from the others, and to regard all his
schoolmates together as one victorious and foreign nation,
for they had teased and beaten him J
Meanwhile at home
he felt more and more that his sister was advancing and
that for the second time 11e would lose his superiority, and
this upset him altogether.
He had no courage to tell his
parents that he felt suppressed, and at school he escaped
into fancy.
In his dream-world, therefore, he made himself
a prophet.
The singular contortions and grimaces which
he had begun to use were modelled upon gestures \vhich he
had originally in'vented to attract his parents' attention to
himself.
He was able to take an optimistic line with me, because
he felt able to reveal to me only the secret of his greatness.
On the basis of this mutual confidence he could discuss and
reconsider his relations with others, and with the help of
my explanation and
encouragement he recovered
tIle

70
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
natural desire to adapt himself to life.
I have had similar
cases, in which spoiled children have suffered much from
(he cruelty of their comrades.
Another case in which neurosis was involved with a pro-
phetic role was that of a merch~nt, forty years old, who came
to me for help because he found himself unable to speak to
people.
In social surroundings he was overcome by a
tension like stage-fright ; he trembled, was abashed, and
felt a sensation of choking.
He had married a widow
twelve years his senior, who spoiled him very much as his
mother had done before.
With her and with a very few
intimate friends, as well as with his customers, he could
converse without any difficulty, but his behaviour could not
stand the test of any wider circle of society.
I could not find the clue to this strange situation until the
man mentioned that lle had prophetic dreams.
Then I
suspected at once that his goal of superiority was to be a
prophet, in a privileged and unique relationship with God.
I
cautiously hinted at this idea to him, beginning with a
(. perhaps," and he at once replied, " All nlY friends know
that I am a clairvoyant, and so does my wife. Many cases
have proved it."
This, of course, was the cause of his
difficulty.
If he spoke freely in society he would be in
danger of betraying some error in his knowledge, which
might ruin his fame as a clairvoyant.
In the tension of
facing this possibility of defeat he choked, and his clairvoy-
ance was thus defended by a mysterious speechlessness.
In the first. interviews with a patient we have to make
sure \vhether the case is really one of neurosis.
My own
practice, after hearing the patient's complaints, is to proceed

CASE HISTORIES
71
in one
of~two ways.
If I suspect that there is no real
organic derangement, I
may temporarily exclude that
aspect of the case fronl consideration, and proceed to
investigate the circumstances and style of life.
If, on the
other hand, there is evident organic disturbance, I consider
whether the complaint and suffering is greater than the
illness itself would justify, i.e., whether there is present a
combination of organic and psychic illness.
I have often
found more pain than the illness warrants, for instance,
and
also
unaccountable
excitement
accompanying
an
injurious illness, which may increase the course of the fever.
In organic illness also the appetite varies according to the
general outlook, and a serious illness may be prolonged or
even fatally influenced if the patient turns pessimistic or
becomes psychically lethargic.
In these cases the most urgent need is to find out whether
the patient is confronted with a problem which he feels
unable to solve.
Hardly ever, of course, can we get at this
directly.
If possible, I discuss the course of the patient's
life with him from earliest childhood, noting especially the
incidents or phases which reveal or conceal the most painful
sense of weakness and impotence: and at the same time I
keep myself alert to the signs of organic inferiority.
Wher-
ever we can surely detect a disposition to hesitate, halt,
or escape, we have a clue to the present position also.
When the illness proves to be both organic and psychic the
treatment must proceed upon both lines at the same time.
If the disturbance is dominantly or entirely of a psychic
nature, I explain to the patient \vhat I have discovered
from the first conversation, but in such a way that it cannot
be discouraging, and taking the greatest care not to tell the
patient anything he is not yet able to understand.

72
PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSIS
To verify my findings, I check one indication by another,
eliciting information of most various kinds.
I ask, for
instance, It What would you do if I cured you immediately? "
a question which I may expect will draw a reference to some
present problem not hitherto discussed.
I ask for the
patient's earliest remembrance to get a hint as to the domin-
allt interest in life.
I try to understand what is happening
by noting what activities, of a kind normally to be expected,
are being excluded by the patient.
At the same time I am
careful to ask myself if I should have been of the same type
as I think I have before me if I were in the same circum-
stances and follo\ving the same style of life.
As soon as I
feel I have grasped his circumstances, I enquire whether the
patient's thoughts, feelings, actions, and characteristics are
all working in the same direction, towards the exclusion or
at least the postponement of the present problem.
The
accumulated experiences of Individual Psychologists justify
us in looking for this unity in the life-plan, and a wide
knowledge of tIle literature and working tradition of Individ-
ual Psychology is of great value in diagnosis, as it helps us
to identify the typical neurotic factors, such as the lack of
social interest, failure in courage and self-confidence, and
rejection of commo~ sense.
We can thus more easily com-
prehend the style of life: and if we always check and verify
each impression by others, we shall not be misled into mere
generalisations.
The discussion invariably reveals an accented
ce if."
t( I
would marry if";
H I \vould resume my work if"; or
t( I
would sit for my examination if" ; and so on.
The neurotic
has always collected some more or less plausible reasons to
justify his escape froill the challenge of life, but he dpes not
realise what he is doing.
The patient must be led very

CASE HISTORIES
73
carefully, and it is the duty of the psychologist to train his
patient in the faculty of simple and direct explanation.
The psycho-therapist must lose all thought of himself and
all sensitiveness about his ascendancy, and must never
demand anything of the patient.
His is a belated assump-
tion of the maternal function, and he must work \vith a
corresponding devoti'on to the patient's needs.
What the
t-
Freudians call transference (so far as \ve can discuss it apart
from sexual implications) is merely
soci~~ feeling.
The
patient's social feeling, which is always present in some
'degree, finds its best possible expression in the relation with
the psychologist.
The so-called
It resistance" is only lack
of courage to return to the useful side of life: which causes
the patient to put up a defence against treatment, for fear
that his relation with the psychologist should force him into
some useful activity in which he will be defeated.
For
this reason we must never force a patient, but guide him very
gently towards his easiest approach to usefulness.. If we
apply force he is certain to escape.
My own practice, also,
is never to advise marriage or free relations.
I find it
always leads to bad results.
A person ,vho is told that
he should marry or seek sexual experience is quite likely
to develop impotence.
The first rule in treatment is
to ,vin the patient; the second is for the psychologist
never to worry about his own success: if he does so he
forfeits it.
The- elimination of all constraint, the freest possible
relationship-these are the indispensable conditions between
patient and physician.
For a cure depends upon their unity
in understanding the patient's goal \vhich has been hitherto

74
PROBLEMS OF
NEUROSIS
a heavily-guarded secret.
I have already
aIlu~ed to this
necessity for the truth underlying the individual life-style
in reference to the treatment of drunkenness, morphia-taking,
and similar habits.
Merely to take away the poison and
say some encouraging words is useless.
The patient must
realise why he took to drink.
Insufficient also would be
his recognition of the general principles of Individual
Psychology, that those who turn inebriate have lost social
courage and interest, or succumbed to fear of an imminent
defeat.
It is easy for the physician to say, and even for the
patient to believe, that he turned to drink because of a
sense of inferiority which originated in childhood, but
nothing will come out of the mere phraseology.
The
physician must grasp the special structure and development
of that individual life with such accuracy, and express it
with such lucidity, that the patient knows he is plainly
understood and recognises his own mistake.
When patients
or practitioners come to me and say: "We have explained
everything," or " We quite understand, and yet we cannot
succeed," I consider their statements ridiculous.
Always
if I go into such a case of failure I find that neither physician
nor patient have understood the matter nor explained
an~ything.
Sometimes the patient has felt inferior and
suppressed by the physician, and resisted all true explana-
tion.
Occasionally the tables have been turned and the
patient has been treating the doctor!
Not infrequently
an inexperienced practitioner teaches the
patient the
theories of Individual Psychology, in such phrases as (( You
lack social courage, you are not interested in others, you
feel inferior," and so forth, which may be worse than useless.
A real explanation must be so clear that the patient kno\vs
and feels his own experience in it instantly.

CASE HISTORIES
75
I treated::;a case of drunkenness in a man thirty-two
years of age, very intelligent, well-educated and perfectly
healthy, who had regular bouts of drinking at intervals
of four weeks.
He had had many treatnlents and remedies,
including injections of the extracts of various glands.
He
had spent months in the lock-up, but nothing had cha:r:ged
his habits.
The man was very shy, trembled and smoked cigarettes
incessantly.
This behaviour confirmed the impression I had
formed at the first glance, that he felt me as a superior and
an enemy: and he clung to his cigarette, not to be sub-
merged by his feeling- of comparative worthlessness.
In
answer to my questions he said he had no friends and did
not go into society, had no occupation, and was not in love.
He preferred to remain alone, and if he was urged to join
in any social gathering he became highly excited.
He lived
extravagantly at the expense of his parents, paying the
highest prices for more or less useless things whenever he
chose to do so.
We can guess his answer to the sexual
problem: it was masturbation, which is the style of sexual
life adapted to confirm isolation and to avoid love and
marriage.
Such a way of living usually originates in the prototypic
attitude of a pampered child, who feels obliged to keep out
of the firing-line of life because he is not prepared for it.
This man made his escape by being a drunkard.
When he
came to face the problems of society, work, and love,
unsupported by others, strained situations and tense atti-
tudes were his intermittent and periodical experiences,
so that uncontrollable bouts of drunkenness were an
appropriate solution of his problem on the useless side of
life.
R

PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
The usual tensions of every day were not severe enough
to drive him to drink, and he was able to use his sober
intervals to display good intentions of giving up the habit
altogether.
He did not strive to make his environment
hopeless, as the fighting type -of child often does, but
was able to continue in his own line of error by means of
these intervals of remorse and repentance, which always
induced others to give him another chance and to hope that
H this time really was the last."
The drunkenness would
begin sometimes when he was expected to go into society,
and sometimes when actually in company with others or at
a party.
It appeared when there was a demand of duty,
or if he met a girl who regarded him as a possible husband;
and when he was short of money and his parents did not wire
a remittance to him quickly enough, he also resorted immedi-
ately to drink.
He was partly conscious of the use he was
making of his indulgence, but he never understood its general
tendency as an escape, nor that he was always ready to
compromise himself and make himself impossible.
His evident aim was to be relieved of every duty and to
be supported for his own sake alone.
Self-centred and
wholly lacking social adjustment, he llad nevertheless
attained a goal of superiority by the elimination of defeat.
He had no defeat in society for he did not enter it; no defeat
in work, for he had no occupation; no defeat in love-he
aVQided it.
Subjectively, he triumphed over life, lived it
upon his own terms entirely: but objectively, of course,
the terms he obtained were almost the worst possible.
He proved to have been a spoilt child, who wanted to face
every situation by means of parental support.
He was an
only boy among three sisters.
He was carefully educated
and succeeded at school because the teachers \vere persuaded
IS

CASE HISTORIES
77
by the parents to pamper him.
When he grew out of his
sheltered years life looked impossible to him, so he made
his escape. This patient's father used to drink, and he knew
from an early age how this habit worried his mother and
occupied her thoughts with the father.
One day before a
school examination he got drunk for the first time.
His
mother was much worried, believing that this was a heredit-
ary taint in his disposition, and took greater care of him
in the hope of curing him.
Not to lose this success, the
patient continued to drink.
This man's earliest memory referred to a time when his
parents were away·, and he was left to the care of his grand-
"mother.
He did not feel well during this period.
Once,
when his grandmother criticised him, he packed up some of
his belongings and ran away, and the grandmother had to
foDow him.
He was four years old at the time, and this
recollection indicates his prototypic attitude to life. When-
ever he did not feel spoilt he escaped into drunkenness.
All neurotic persons who have de,,"'eloped from a pampered
prototype expect to be appreciated before they will do
anything of social value instead of after having done it,
thus expecting the natural course of things to be reversed
in their own favour.
This patient had to be trained to feel at home in the
wider environment of the world, and encouraged until he
could afford to recognise its real and necessary demands.
This, as I have said before, involves the assumption by the
psychologist of the two maternal functions: first, winning
the patient's trust as a fellow-tnan, and then, directing this
new confidence towards other persons and towards the
advantages and disadvantages of real life: his mother had
failed in the second function and it had devolved upon me.

PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
In the beginning of the treatment there was ~ possibility
that he might hurt himself or others with a more desperate
escape into intoxication than ever, and steps had to be
taken to watch him.
No rule can be giveIl ho\v best to do
this, but whatever is done must be arranged with the agree-
ment of the patient.
Otherwise the patient would fight the
physician in the same way that he fought the parents, by
exploiting his own weakness-the drunkenness.
If 'it is
necessary to keep him under supervision again'st his will-
in an asylum, for instance-let someone else place him there.
The physician must in no way interfere with him, and then
he will not be hindered by his antagonism.
In relation to Nature as a whole, man is in an inferior
position, so that he is obliged to develop on the side of
strategy and trickery.
In our over-intellectualised civilisa-
tion especially, practically everyone is wonderfully adept
in the use of his own individual tricks: the really important
differences of conduct are not those of individual cleverness
but of usefulness or uselessness.
By useful I mean in the
interests of mankind generally.
The most sensible estimate
of the value of any activity is its helpfulness to all mankind,
present and future, a criterion that applies not only to that
which subserves the immediate preservation of life, but also
to higher activities such as religion, science, and art.
It
is true that we cannot always decide what is strictly worth
while from this point of view.
But we know when we are
guided by the impulse to act usefully, and the better a
person's social adjustment is, the nearer he approaches to
true perception.
A person who is on the path of self-
isolation and withdrawal may perhaps get to Imow or

CASE HISTORIES
79
acquire valuable potentialities, but even then society does
not benefit by these new possibilities until they are realised
through the socially directed activity of himself or of
others.
Whether a given line of life is really due to a social or an
a-social impulse is shown by contact with reality.
A life
may develop remarkably well or ill, perhaps at a late stage,
and people are astonished by it, and try to explain it by
chance, by inherited tendencies, or by destiny, when it is
really due to the inherent social or anti-social feeling in the
goal of the individual.
And the a-social tendencies and
mistakes which we can trace in the early life oof a child are
also to be seen in the behaviour of a whole family or in the
thought of.a nation.
The only way in which we can hope
to avoid these mistakes is by learning to increase our social
feeling, which alone can save us from worthless and injur-
ious activities.
It is almost impossible to exaggerate the value of an
increase in social feeling.
The mind improves, for intelli-
gence is a communal function.
The feeling of worth and
value is heightened, giving courage and an optimistic view,
and there is a sense of acquiescence in the common advant-
ages and drawbacks of our lot.
The individual feels at
home in life and feels his existence to be worth while just
so far as he is useful to others and is overcoming comnlon
instead of private feelings of inferiority.
Not only the
ethical nature, but the right attitude in resthetics, the best
understanding of the beautiful and the ugly will alwa,ys be
founded upon the truest social feeling.
Whilst the child is wholly embedded in the family group
it is not easy to be sure whether it is developing social
feeling and useful interest: this only appears with certainty

80
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
when the first new situation is encountered.
~his is gener-
ally the arrival of a baby brother or sister, or the entrance
into kindergarten or school.
In one or another of"these
situations the child either passes or fails in llis first examin-
ation in fitness for life.
A child who refuses to go to school,
does not pay attention when it is there, works badly or will
not associate with its schoolfellows, shows the inadequacy
of its preparation.
If allowed to develop such a plan of
life it may very probably be unable to take its place in
society.
Neurosis invariably gives relief to the subject, not, of
course, in the light of objectivity and common sense, but
according to his own private logic: it secures some triumph
or at least it allays the fear of defeat.
Thus neurosis is
the weapon of the coward, and the weapon most used by the
weak.
We cannot ignore the heavily-veiled aggressive or
vindictive element in most neuroses.
I had a case of a medical student who wanted to commit
suicide, an undersized man, who consequently wanted to
be tall.
He was very much spoiled by his mother, who was
the wife of a physician, a tyrannical husband with whom
she was not happy.
One day the cook came into the room
screaming and crying out that the father had made a sexual
assault upon her.
From this time the mother went into
depression and cried continually.
The boy could not
understand this, and wanted me to explain it to him.
He
had already asked his mother how she could be so much
depressed by the unfaithfulness of a husband for whom she
neither had nor professed any affection: but she interrupted
his question by screaming,
H You cannot possibly understand

CASE HISTORIES
8I
this I"
The student said, in answer to my enquiry whether
the father's behaviour was as brutal or rough as before,
that on the contrary he was very quiet, calm, and con-
siderate.
Il Do you think? " I then asked, " that your mother will
give up her only means of taming this tyrant?
She pays
the price with her depression, but she feels that she is the
conqueror.
You are doing something very similar.
You
used to be your mother's favourite, but now you are alone
in a foreign city, deprived of the attentions of your mother,
\vho is so busy taming your father.
You are failing in your
work at the university, and are not prepared to be independ-
ent, so you wish to impress your mother with your suicidal
impulses j~st as your mother impresses your father with her
depression.
You have been trained, as pampered children
often are, to succeed by a display of weakness."
In the investigation of a neurotic style of life we must
always suspect an opponent, and note who suffers most
because of the patient's condition. Usually this is a member
of the family, and sometimes a person of the other sex,
though there are cases in which the illness is an attack upon
society as a whole.
There is always this element of con-
cealed accusation in neurosis, the patient feeling as though
he \vere deprived of his right-i.e., of the centre of attention
-and wanting to fix the responsibility and blame upon
someone.
By such hidden vengeance and accusation, by
excluding social activity whilst fighting against persons and
rules, the problem-child and the neurotic find some relief
from their dissatisfaction.
There are cases in which the
revenge-motive is fairly obvious, as it was with a neurotic
woman I treated whose marriage was entirely unhappy,

82
PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSIS
and yet she would never divorce her husband, preferring to
.remain a continual accusation against him.. It must be
remembered, however, that neurotics generally, like per-
verts, drunkards, and morphia-maniacs, have not wholly
denied their social feeling, whicb. still keeps them from
crime and suicide.

CHAPTER VI
Depression as a Superiority-device.-Guilt Complexes.-The Begging
Style of Life.-Polygamous Desires.-Another Case of Begging.-The
Emotions in Neurosis.-Agoraphobia.-A Development towards Homo-
sexuality.-Air-swallowing (Aerophagia).
A CURIOUS case of depression which I once treated illus-
trates very clearly how sadness may be used to heighten the
feeling of superiority.
This was the case of a man of fifty,
who said .he felt perfectly healthy except when he was in a
notably comfortable situation.
It was when he was at a
concert or theatre with his family, for instance, that a fit of
melancholy would descend upon him: and in such depres-
sion he always remembered an intimate friend who had died
when he was twenty-five.
This friend had been his rival,
not onlJ7 in business but as a suitor for the hand of his wife-
an unsuccessful rival, however, for by the time he contracted
his fatal illness, my patient already had the advantage over
him both in love and in business.
Success had been his lot, both before and after the friend's
death; he was the favourite of his parents, unsurpassed by
brothers and sisters, and prosperous in the world.
His wife,
however, was an ambitious character who strove to solve
every domestic problem by a personal triumph or conquest,
moral or otherwise: and between two such persons, the
struggle was naturally continuous and severe.
The wife
sometimes gained the ascendancy very cleverly, not by
quarrelling or domineering in any way, but by becoming
83

PROBLEMS
OF
NEUROSIS
very nervous in disadvantageous situations, and conquering
him by her painful condition.
She never expressed her
excessive jealousies, but sought to shackle him as required
by her fits of anxiety.
Thus, successful as he was in all but
one relation of life, the man felt uncertain of having reached
his goal of superiority, and his excessive ambition was
denlanding compensation.
I know that many psychologists would seek for a
II guilt
complex" to explain this depression.
They would investi-
gate the patient's childhood to :find out a very early desire
to kill someone--probably the father.
This patient, how-
ever, had been the favourite of his father, and there was not
the least reason why he should ever have desired his death,
as he had
alway~ been able to manage him in his own
interest.
Such a mistaken search for a
II guilt complex"
might also lead a psychologist to think that the patient had
secretly wished to murder his friend and rival: and that
after having triumphed over him and having had the death-
wish granted by fate, he remained still unsatisfied.
If that
were so, the guilt complex might be developed by the striv-
ing of the patient to see himself in an intenser light.
He
would want to express his good feeling and liking for his
fornler rival with the highest sincerity and honesty; and
at the same time he would be shaken by the memory of his
rival's fatal end and the thoughts which he had been
unable wholly to dismiss before it happened.
This would
amount to the complicated state of self-accusation and
repentance at the same time, which we call a guilt complex,
which is always a superiority-striving on the useless side of
life. As I have already observed, it means: "I have reached
the summit of error" or
II My virtue is so lofty that this
slight stain upon it is killing me."
IS

'CASE HISTORIES
85
However, in this case I found no indications of the kind,
and the man's valuation of honesty as a virtue was not
abnormally developed.
His depressions were an attempt to
show himself superior to his wife.
To be depressed in very
favourable situations called attention to his good fortune
much more than if he had allowed himself to enjoy them.
Everyone was surprised at his depression, and he constantly
asked himself,
It You happy being, why are you depressed
when you have everything you want?"
The unmanage-
able wife was the one sorrow in his comfortable life, and he
compensated for this by remembering his victory in the most
difficult phase of his history-when he outstripped his friend
. and won the woman from him.
Loyalty forbade him to
rejoice in the memory of his dead friend:
but he could
nevertheless feed upon this ancient triumph by being
depressed in the box of the theatre.
The more melancholy
he \vas and upon the brighter the occasion, the more he was
able to think of his past conquest and to elevate the con-
sciousness of his estate.
Deeper enquiries confirmed my
conclusion.
His
friend had
died from
paralysis after
syphilis, a disease which they had both contracted at the
same time.
My patient was cured, however;
and now,
surrounded b~y his healthy wife and six children, could not
but recall, together with the triumph over his friend, his
conquest of the disease.
Such, then, were his consolations.
In his marriage this
man did not feel superior; but at least his wife was the
woman his friend had desired, and she had chosen him
instead.
By contemplating his friend's disaster in a dis-
creet gloom he heightened the sense of victory.
Consola-
tion of this nature is on the useless side, however, and
tends, as we see, towards disease.

86
PROBLEMS
OF
NEUROSIS
A man of thirty-six came to me for advice about sexual
impotence after having tried various treatments.
He was
a self-made man, it; a good position, and physically healthy,
but not very well educated: and he had a love relation
with a well-educated girl.
He was a second child between
two girls, and had lost both parents at the age of five.
He
remembered that his family had been very poor, but that he
had been a spoilt child, very pretty and quiet, to whom the
neighbours liked to give presents.: and that he exploited
their generosity, behaving like a beggar.
One of his
earliest remembrances was of walking the streets on Christ-
mas Eve and looking into the shop windows at the Christmas
trees destined for others.
In the orphanage, to which he
was transferred at the age of five, he was strictly treated,
but his habitual docility and the striving nature he possessed
as a second child enabled him to surpass others.
His
servility stood him in good stead, for he was promoted to
be the principal servant of the institution.
In this occupa-
tion he had sometimes to wait for a long time at an old and
deserted rail,vay station in the counfry; and at these times,
when only the humming of the telegraph wires relieved the
dead stillness of the night, he felt utterl:y isolated and alone
in a friendless world.
He preserved strong memories of
this experience.
Often, in later life, he complained of buzzing in the ears,
for which no aurist could find the cause.
It proved, how-
ever, to be quite coherent with his style of life.
When he
felt isolated, which happened very often, the memory of the
humming
wires returned
with all the liveliness of a
hallucination.
After this had been explained to him,
and he had been a little more socially reconciled and
encouraged to marry his sweetheart, the humming ceased.

CASE HISTORIES
It is quite usual for children who are brought up in an
orphanage to make the strongest efforts to hide the fact,
as though it were a disgrace.
This man justified his con-
cealment by asserting that many orphans do not succeed in
later 'life.
He regarded failure in life as the inexorable
fate of orphans, which gave him his tense and striving
attitude in business.
For the
same
reason he
halted
before the problem of love and marriage, and his neurotic
impotence
was the
immediate
result of this profound
hesitatio14
This man's style of life, as we have seen, was to be a
beggar.
In business, however (as previously in the orphan-
age), begging had paved the way to domination.
In
business he enjoyed nothing more than a begging attitude on
the part of his subordinates.
He was only a beggar until
he could be a conqueror, and he played the second role as
heartily as the first.
There is no need to drag in the idea
of
H ambivalent" characteristics, as some psychologists
would do immediately.
Rightly understood, the whole of
this mental process-working from below to above, express-
ing an inferiority but compensating with a superiority-
is not ambivalence but a dynamic unity.
Only if it is not
understood as a whole do we see it as two contradictory
and warring entities.
In his business we find the man with
a t( superiority complex": but if he were to lose his position
and have to start again he would promptly go back to the
expression of inferiority and make capital out of it.
In his
love-problem he was, for the time being, upon the submissive
line of action, begging for love, but trying to reach domina-
tion.
His sweetheart liked him and wanted to marry him,
so~she responded to his hesitancy by taking up more and
more..-of a begging attitude towards him!
He 'vas well on
IS

88
PROBLEMS
OF
NEUROSIS
the ,va)", in fact, towards getting the upper hanq. with her,
and frequently did so in minor matters.
He had still not overcome his hesitant attitude:
but
after having had his style of life explained to him and
having been encouraged, his state improved and his impo-
tence disappeared.
He then set up a second resistance,
which was that every woman attracted him, and these
polygamous desires were an escape from marriage.
At
this time he dreamt that he was lying upon a
couch
in my room, and he became sexually excited and had a
pollution.
'There is no couch in my consulting room.
My patients
sit, stand, or move about as they please; but the couch
in this dream was in the room of a doctor who had formerly
treated him for a few months.
This dream extracted a
confession ,vhich he had never made before.
He believed
that both the other doctor and I belonged to a secret
society, the object of which was to cure patients such as
himself by providing sexual intercourse for them.
For
this reason he had been trying to find out which of my
woman patients would' be chosen for him.
The fact that
he missed the couch in my room was like an accusation
against me.
I was not the right doctor.
He had come to
me begging, expecting me to settle his difficulties, take over
his responsibilities, and to assist him to escape from
marriage.
My collusion in stopping his marriage was to
go to the length of being his procurer) a fantasy to which
his fright, his impotence and his polygamous tendencies
were all contributory.
Failing that, he would solve his
sexual problem by pollutions, as others might resort to
masturbation or perversion.
He married, but it was difficult to prevent him from

CASE
HISTORIES
89
developing ca tyrannical attitude towards his conciliatory
\vife.
Another case of the begging attitude was brought to me
by a man fifty years old, the youngest of a very poor family.
He had been indulged by his mother and the neighbours
because of an apparent weakness, and early developed a
very timid manner.
He always tried to lean upon his
mother and to appeal to the ~ympathies of weak persons,
especially in difficult times when he exhibited great depres-
sion and cried until help came.
We have already.seen
the use which is made of crying by both children and adults.
This man's earliest memory was that he had fallen down
and hurt himself.
The choice of this incident to treasure
in the memory out of all possible recollections is explained
only by his desire to impress himself with the danger of life.
His technique of life was to perfect himself in the role of a
beggar, to attract support, consolation and favour by
calling attention to his infirmities.
Every incident was
made into a matter for tears.
As a child the man had been very backward in learning
to talk, and his mother, as always happens in such cases,
had to attend all the more carefully to him to find out what
he
,van~ed.
In this way he was able to feel like a little
king.
As Lessing said, "The real beggar is the only real
king."
He became a master of the begging art, expressing
his inferiority in the power of his plight over others.
It How
can I make the poor weak child a king? " was the problem
of life as he saw it, and he answered it by elaborating his own
individual and essentially mendicant style.
This is one way of living, and so early an apprentice
becomes a past master of its technique.
He will not change

go
PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSIS
it, unless the cost becomes clearly too great, when he may be
brought to see that his childish method is inadequate for
present problems.
Othernise change is impossible for him,
because he has all his life ascribed every success to the
begging art and every failure to lack of proficiency in it.
Such a goal as this is not calculable from the inheritance or
the environmental stimuli, for the child's individual con-
ception of the future is. the dominant causal factor, and this
patient's conception was such that whenever he wanted to
attain superiority he had to make a mistake or get himself
into a mess of some kind.
All his feelings were appropri-
ately ordered towards the goal of thus getting something
for nothing.
After a few days' treatment this man was very much
impressed by what I told him; and he sent me a pamphlet
he had written some years before.
It was entitled" An
Association of Beggars."
Habitual criticism, anger, and envy are indications of a
useless striving for superiority: they are motions towards
the suppression of others, either in reality or fancy, so as to
be supreme..
Useful criticism of a constructive tendency
is always in some comprehensible relation with social feeling,
but where the motive is merely relative self-elevation by
lowering or degrading others the tendency is neurotic.
Neurotics often make use of the truth in order to undervalue
others, and it is important, when checking a neurotic
criticism, not to overlook the element of truth in the
observation.
Anger is usually a sign that the person who is angry feels
at a disadvantage-at least temporarily.
Neurotics use it

CASE HISTORIES
91
freely ~s a 'weapon to intimidate those who are responsible
for them.
Although occasional anger is an understandable
attitude in certain critical relations, when it is habitual
it is a sign of anxiety, of impatience, or of feelings of help-
lessness or suppression.
Patients of this habit are often
very clever in the selection of vulnerable points to attack in
others, and are also great strategists in preparing such
situations that they put others slightly in the wrong before
they begin a fight.
Envy is universally an expression of inferiority, though it
may sometimes be a stimulus to useful action.
In neurosis,
however, envy of another's good does not go so far as
'practical emulation.
It stops like a tram before the
journey's end, leaving the patient irritable and depressed.
In a certain popular music-hall turn the " strong man"
comes on and lifts an enormous ,veight with care and
immense difficulty, and then, during the hearty applause
of the audience, a child comes in and gives away the fraud
by carrying the dummy weight off with one hand.
There
are plenty of neurotics who swindle us ,vith such weights,
and who are adepts in the art of appearing over-burdened.
They could really dance with the load under which they
stagger like Atlas bearing the world on his shoulders.
Yet it cannot be denied that neurotics feel their burden
very keenly.
They may be continually tired.
They may
sonletimes perspire very freely, and their symptoms may
suggest the possibility of tuberculosis.
Every movement is
very tiring, and they often suffer from palpitation of the
heart.
Usually depressed,
the~y continually demand more
zealous care from others, and yet find it continually insuffi-
cient
I

PROBLEMS OF
N~UROSiS
-
I had a case of agoraphobia in a man of fifty-three, who
found that he could not breathe properly when he was in
company with others.
He was living with his sister, and
had a son whose characteristics were very much like his
own.
When I investigated the cause of this man's unusual
concentration of interest upon himself, I found that he had
been orphaned at ten years of age, and there were two
elder brothers in the home.
It was when they quarrelled
that he had had his first attack.
This indicates the ten-
dency to meet a difficult situation by breakdown.
The man
was the youngest of a family of eight, and educated by his
grandfather.
A grand-parent is almost invariably a spoiling
foster-parent.
The patient's father and mother had been
happily married; the father was superior and the mother
rather cold, so the boy was attracted to his father.
, A child's first good-fellowship in life is always with the
mother if she is present, so that if it inclines more towards
the father we may assume that the mother does not give th~
child
sufficient
attention:
she
is
probably
unkind,
otherwise occupied, or more attentive to a younger child.
In such circumstances the child turns to the father if possible,
and in this case the resistance to the mother was very
marked.
People are often unable correctly to remember their
earliest situations, but experience enables us to reconstruct
their circumstances from comparatively slight indications.
One man said he could only remember three incidents from
early childhood -w-hich had deeply impressed his memory.
The first of these occurred at the age of three, when his
brother ·died.
He was with his grandfather on the day of
the funeral, when his mother returned from the cemetery,
sorrowful and sobbing, and when the grandfather kissed her,
IS

CASE HISTORIES
93
whispering some words of kindness and consolation, the boy
saw that his mother smiled a little.
He was very much upset
by this, and for long afterwards resented his mother's smile
on the day that her child was buried.
A second memory
that he had preserved was of a friendly reproof from his
uncle, who had asked him,
(C Why are you always so rough
to\vards your mother?"
A third remembrance from the
same period of his life related to a quarrel between his
parents, after which he turned to his father, saying,
(C You
were brave, daddy, like a soldier ("
He depended much
upon his father, and was pampered by him: and he always
admired his father more than his mother, although he
realised that his mother's
charac.ter was
of a
better
type.
All these memories, which appeared to date from his third
or fourth year, showed the fighting attitude towards the
mother.
The first and the third remembrances were clearly
ruled by his goal, which was to criticise the mother and to
justify him in turning towards the father.
His reason for
turning away from the mother is easy to guess: he had
been too much spoilt by her to be able to put up with the
:younger brother's appearance upon the scene,-that same
younger brother who figures in an apparently innocent
manner in the first recollection.
This patient had married at the age of twenty-four, and
marriage had disappointed him, because of his wife's
demands upon him.
Marriage between t,vo spoilt children
is always unhappy, because both remain in the expectant
attitude and neither begins to give. This man went through
varied experiences and tried different occupations without
success.
His wife was not sympathetic, and complained
that she would rather be the mistress of a rich man than

94
PROBLEMS
OF
NEUROSIS
the wife of a poor one, and the union ende~ in a divorce.
Although the man was not really poor, he was very stingy
towards his wife, and she divorced him by way of revenge.
After his divorce he turned misogynistic, and developed
homosexual tendencies;
he had no actual relationships
with men, but felt a desire to embrace men.
This homo-
sexual trend was as usual a kind of cowardliness.
He had
been twice defeated and baulked by women-first by his
mother and afterwards by his wife-and he was now trying
to divert his sexuality towards men so as to evade women
and further possibilities of humiliation.
To confirm himself
in such a tendency a man can easily falsify the past by
recollecting and magnifying the importance of certain
common experiellces which are then taken by him as proofs
of inborn homosexual tenderlcies. Thus, this patient remem-
bered that he had been in love with a schoolmaster, and that
in his youth a boy friend had seduced him into mutual
masturbation.
The determining factor in this man's behaviour was that
he was a spoiled child who wanted everything for nothing.
His agoraphobia resulted from the fear of meeting wonlen
on the one hand, and on the other hand it was also dangerous
to meet men, because of possible erotic inclination towards
them.
In this tension of feelings about going out of
doors he
developed stomach
and respiratory troubles.
Many nervous people begin to swallow air whell they get
into a state of tension, which causes flatulence, stomacll
trouble,
anxiety and palpitation, besides affecting the
breathing.
"Vhen I made him realise that this was his con-
dition he asked the usual question: "What shall I do not
to swallo\v air?"
Sometimes I reply: (( I can tell you how
to mount a horse, but I can't tell you how not to mount a

CASE HISTORIES
95
horse.." "Orosometimes I advise:
lC If you want to go Ollt,
and feel in a conflict about it, swallow some air quickly."
This man, like some other patients, swallowed air even in
sleep, but after my advice he began to control himself, and
discontinued
the
habit.
Air-swallowing at
night
and
vomiting upon waking occur in these patients' who suffer
from stomach trouble and anxiety when they are bothered
by a difficulty which must be confronted upon the following
day.
The patient in question began to recuperate when he
came to understand that, as a pampered child, he expected
continually to take without giving.
He now realised that
he had first .stopped his normal sexual life, looking for some-
thing easier, and afterwards adopted a fictitious homosexual-
ity in which he also stopped short of danger, the whole
process being an elaborate way of coming to a standstill.
The last obstacle to be removed was his fear of mixing with
strangers who did not care for hinl, such as the people in the
streets.
This fear is produced by the deeper motive of
agoraphobia, \vhich is to exclude all situations in which
one is not the centre of attention.

CHAPTER VII
The Psychology of Family Position.-The First Child.-Its Dethrone-
ment.-A Second Child unable to overtake the First.-The Eldest a
Conservative.-The Second Child.-A Second Child's Neu'rosis.-Second
Child a Revolutionary.-The Youngest Child.-Youngest Child a Con-
queror in Myth and Folk-lore.-A Spoiled Youngest Child with Imaginary
Cancer.-The Only Child.-Its Educational Problem.-Development of
Homosexuality.-Self-Perversion.-Disastrous Cases.-Influence of Other
Factors in Home Environment.-Effect of Superstitions or Fanatical
Ideas.
IT is a common fallacy to imagine that children of the
same family are formed in the same environment.
Of course
there is much which is the same for all in the ,same home,
but the psychic situation of each child is individual and
differs from that of others, because of the order of their
succession.
There has been some misunderstanding of my custom of
classification according to position in the family.
It is not,
of course, the child's number in the order of successive
births which influences its character, but. the situation into
which it is born.
Thus, if the eldest child is feeble-minded
or suppressed, the second child may acquire a style of life
similar to that of an eldest child; and in a large family, if
two are born much later than the rest, and grow up together
separated from the older children, the older of these may
develop like a first child.
This also happens sometimes in
the case of twins.
The first child has the unique position of having been
96

CASE
HISTORIES
97
alone at the beginning. ' Being thus a central interest he is
generally spoiled.
In this he resembles the only child, and
spoiling is almost inevitable in both cases.
The first child,
however, usually suffers an important change of situation,
being dethroned when the second baby is born.
The child
is generally quite unprepared for this change, and feels
that he has lost his position as the centre of love and atten-
tion.
Great tension then arises in his mind, and a striving
to regain favour.
He uses all the means by which he has
hitherto attracted notice.
Of course he would like to go
the best way about it, to be beloved for his goodness: but
this is apt to pass unnoticed when everyone is busied with the
ne'Y-comer; aIld he is then likely to change his tactics, to
resort to old activities which attracted even unfavourable
attention, and to increase these more and more.
If intelli-
gent, he acts intelligently, but not in harmony with the
family's demands.
Antagonism, disobedience, attacks on
the baby, or even attempts to play the part of a baby, com-
pel the parents to reconsider his existence.
He must have
the spot-light upon himself, even at the cost of expressing
weakness or imitating a return to babyhood.
Thus, hypno-
tised by the past, he attains his goal in the present by
unsuitable means: suddenly showing inability to function
alone, needing assistance in eating and excretio~and requir-
ing to be constantly watched, or compelling solicitude
by getting into danger and terrifying the parents.
The
appearance of such characteristics as jealousy, envy or
egoism has an obvious relation to the circumstances, but
he may also indulge in-or prolong-illnesses such as asthma
and whooping-cough.
The tension in certain types may
produce headache, migraine, stomach trouble, petit mal,
and hysterical chorea.
Slighter symptoms are evinced

98
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
in a tired appearance and a general change of behaviour
for the worse, with which the child impresses his parents.
Naturally, the
la~er the rival baby is
born, the more
intelligent and
understandable will be the first child's
change in behaviour.
If dethroned very early, the eldest
child's efforts are of a more instinctive character.
The
style of his striving will in any case be conditioned by the
reaction of others in the environment and the way in which
he estimates it.
If, for instance, the dethroned child finds
that he can win in a fight, he will become a fighting child:
if fighting does not pay, he may lose hope, become depressed,
and score a success by worrying alld frightening the parents,
after \vhich he will resort to ever more subtle uses of
misfortune to gain his end.
The activity of such a prototype in later life was shown in
the case of a man who became afraid to swallow for fear of
choking.
Why did he select this syInpt0!D- instead of
another?
The patient had an immediate social difficulty
in the behaviour of an intimate frierld, who attacked him
violently.
Both the patient and his wife had come to the
conclusion that he must put up with it no l<?nger, but he did
not feel strong enough to face the struggle.
Upon enquiry
into his childhood, it appeared that he had had such a
difficulty about swallowing before~
He was the eldest child,
and had been surpassed by his younger brother, and then he
had been able, by this difficulty in eating, to make his father
and mother \vatch over him.
Now faced with a personal
defeat in later life, and not knowing what to do about it, he
fell back upon this old line of defence, as though it might
make someone watch over him and help him.
The dethronement of the first child by another may make
it turn away from the mother towards the father, and.a very

CASE HISTORIES
99
critical attitude towards the mother will then persist ever
after.
A person of this type is always afraid of being put
back in life; and we notice that in all his affairs he likes to
make one step forward and then one backward, so that
nothing decisive can happen.
He al\vays feels justified in
fearing that a favourable situation will change.
Towards
all the three life-questions he will take up a hesitative
attitude, with certain problematic and neurotic tendencies.
The latter will be felt by him as a help and a security.
He
will approach society, for example, with a hostile attitude;
in regard to his occupation, he will be always changing;
and in his erotic life he will find lack of function, and poly-
gamous tendencies-if he falls in love ~ith one person he
very quickly falls in love with another.
Dubious and
unwilling to decide anything, he becomes a great procrastin-
ator. I had a very perfect example of this type once, and his
earliest remembrance was this:
it At three years of age I
caught scarlet fever.
My mother gave me the carbolic acid
in mistake for a gargle, and I nearly died."
He had a
younger sister ,vho was the favourite of his mother.
Later
in life this patie.nt had developed a curious fantasy of a
young girl ruling and bullying an older one.
Sometimes he
imagined her ricling the old woman like a horse.
The eldest child may, however, be so firmly fixed in the
parents' favour that he cannot be supplanted.
This may be
either by virtue of his own good endowment and develop-
ment, or by the second child's inferiority, if the latter is
ugly, organically handicapped, or -badly brought up.
In
such a case it is the second child who becomes the problem,
and the eldest may have a very satisfactory development,
as in the following case :-
Of two brothers, differing four years in age, the older had

.roo
PROBLEMS
OF
NEUROSIS
been much attached to the .mother, and when the younger
was born the father had been ill for some time; which took
the entire time and most of the attention of the mother.
The older boy, trained in friendship and obedience to her,
tried to help and relieve her, and the younger boy was put
into the care of a nurse, who spoiled him.
This situation
lasted for some years, so that the younger child had no
reasonable chance to compete with the older for the love of
the mother; and he soon abandoned the useful side of life,
and became wild and disobedient.
His behaviour became
still worse four years later, when a little sister was born, to
whom the mother was able to devote herself owing to the
death of the father.
Thus twice excluded from the mother's
attention and spoiled by the nurse, we need not be surprised
that this second child was the worst pupil in his class,
whilst the elder boy was always the best.
Feeling hopelessly
handicapped in competition with his brother, unloved at
home, and reproached at the school (from which he was
finally expelled), this second sari could find no goal in life
but to worry his mother.
Being physically stronger than
both the brother and the sister, he took to tyrannising over
them.
He trifled a\vay his time, and at puberty he began
to waste money and to incur debts.
His honest and well-
meaning parents provided a very strict tutor for him who did
not, of course, grasp the situation, and dealt with it super-
ficially by punishments.
So the boy grew into a man who
strove to get rich quickly and easily. He fell an easy prey to
unscrupulous advisers, followed them into fruitless enter-
prises, and not only lost his money but involved his parents
in his dishonourable debts.
The facts of the case clearly showed that all the courage
this man ever had was dictated by his unsatisfied Qesire to

CASE HISTORIES
lOI
conquer.
This was most clearly shown in a queer game
which he played from time to time, especially when things
went against him.
His nurse was now an old woman, earn-
ing her living in the family as a superior servant, and she
still worshipped the second boy and always interceded for
him in his numerous scrapes.
The odd sport in which he
indulged was to lock her in a room with him and make her
play at soldiers with him, commanding her to march, to fall
and to jump up again at his orders; and sometimes he
quickened her obedience by beating her ,vitIl a stick.
She
always obeyed although she screamed and resisted.
This singular sport revealed what he really wanted, the
completest dominatiol1 in the easiest way.
Some writers
would describe this as sadistic conduct, but I demur at the
use of a word which implies a sexual interest, for I could
disco\"er nothing of the kind in it.
In sexual matters the
man was practically normal, except that he changed his
objective
too
frequently
and
always
chose
inferiors.
Genuine sadism itself is a domineering tendency availing
itself of the sexual urge for its expression, owing to the
discouragement of the individual in other spheres.
In the end this man brought himself into very bad cir-
cumstances, while the elder brother became very successful
and highly respected.
The eldest child, partly because he often finds hinlself
acting as representative of the parental authority, is norm-
ally a great believer in power and the laws.
The intllitive
perception of this fact is shown in the ancient and persistent
custom of primogeniture. It is often observable in literature.
Thus Theodore Fontane wrote of his perplexity at his father's
pleasure in hearing that ten thousand Poles had defeated
twenty thousand Russians.
His father was a French

102
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
emigrant who had sided with the Poles, but to the writer it
was an inconceivable idea that the stronger could be beaten;
he felt that might must, and ought to, succeed.
This was
because Theodore Fontane was a first child.
Irl any case
the eldest child is readier than others to recognise power, and
likes to support it.
This is shown in the lives of scientists,
politicians, and artists, as well as in those of simpler people.
Even if the person is a revolutionary we find a conservative
tendency, as in the case of Robespjerre.
1"'he second child is in a very different situation, never
having had the experience of being the only one.
Though
he is also petted at first, he is never the sale centre of
attention.
Life fronl the first is more or less of a race; the
first child sets the pace, and the second tries to surpass him.
What results from the competition between two such
children depends on their courage and self-confidence.
If
the elder becomes discouraged he will be in a serious situa-
tion, especially if the younger is really strong and outstrips
him.
If the second child loses hope of equality he will try to
sh1~ne more rather than to be more.
That is, if the elder is
too strong for him, the ~Toungerwill tend to escape to the
useless side of life, and in our problem cases laziness, lying
or stealing will begin to pave the way to\vards neurosis,
crime and self-destruction.
As a rule, however, the second child is in a better position
than the first.
His pace-maker stimulates hinI to effort.
Also, it is a common thing for the first child to hasten his
own dethronement by fighting against it with envy, jealousy
and truculence, which lower him in the parental favour. It

CASE HISTORIES
103
is when the first child is brilliant that the second child is in
the worst situation.
But the elder child is not always the worst sufferer, even
,vhen dethroned.
I saw this in the case of a girl who had
been the centre of attention and extremely spoiled until she
reached the age of three, when a sister was born.
After
the birth of her sister she became very jealous and developed
into a problem-child.
The younger sister grew up with sweet
and charming manners, and was much the more beloved of
the two.
But \vhen this younger sister came to school the
situation was not to her taste: she was no longer spoiled,
and being unprepared to encounter difficulties was fright-
ened and tried to withdra,v.
To escape defeat both in fact
and in appearance, she adopted a device verycommon among
the discouraged-she never finished anything she was doing,
so that it always escaped final judgment, and she wasted as
much time as possible.
We find that time is the great enemy
of such people, for under social conditions they feel as if
time were persecuting them continually with the question,
tl How will you use me ?"
Hence their strange efforts to
tl kill time" \vith silly actiVIties.
This girl always came
late and postponed every action.
She did not antagonise
anyone, even if reproved, but her charm and s\veetness,
which were maintained as before, did not prevent her
from being a greater worry and burden than her fighting
sister.
vYnen the elder sister became engaged to be married the
younger was desperately unhappy.
Though she had won
the first stage of the race with her rival by gentleness and
obedience, she had given up in the later stages of school and
social life.
She felt her sister's marriage as a defeat, and
that her only hope of regaining ground would be to marry

t04
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
also.
However, she had not courage enough to choose a
suitable partner, and instinctively sought a second-best.
First she fell in love with a man suffering seriously from
tuberculosis.
Can we regard this as a step forward?
Does
it contradict her pre-established custom of leaving every
task unfinished?
Not at all: the poor health of her lover
and her parents' natural resistance to the match were sure
causes of delay and frustration.
She preferred an element
of impossibility in her choice.
Another scarcely eligible
partner appeared later in her life, in a man thirty years older
than herself and apparently senile.
However, this one did
not die, and the marriage took place: but it was not a great
success for her, as the attitude of hopelessness in which she
had trained herself did not allow her any useful activity.
It
also inhibited her sexual life which she considered disgust-
ing, and felt humiliated and soiled by it. She used her usual
methods to evade love and postpone relations at the appro-
priate times.
She did not quite succeed in this, however,
and becamepregnant, which sheregarded as anoth-er hopeless
event, and from that time onward not only rejected caresses
but complained that she felt soiled, and began to wash and
clean all day long. She not only ,vashed herself, but cleaned
everything that had been touched by her husband, by the
maidservant or the visitors, including furniture, linen, and
shoes.
Soon she allowed no one to touch any of the objects
in her room, and lived in a neurosis of washing-compulsion.
Thus she was excused from the solution of her problems, and
attained a very lofty goal of superiority-she felt more
fastidiously clean than anyone else.
Exaggerated striving for a lofty goal of high distinctive-
ness is well expressed in the neurosis of "washing-com-
pulsion."
As far as I have been able to ascertain, this

CASE HISTORIES
illness is always used as a means of avoiding sexual relations,
and invariably gives the fantastic compensation of feeling
cleaner than everybody else.
By this feeling for life as a race, however, the second child
usually trains himself more stiffly, and if his courage holds
is well on the way to overcome the eldest on his own ground.
If he has a little less courage he will choose to surpass the
eldest in another field, and if still less, he will become more
critical and antagonistic than usual, not in an objective but
in a personal manner.
In childhood this attitude appears
towards trifles: he will want the window shut when the
elder opens it, turn on the light when the other wants it
extinguished, and be consistently contrary and opposite.
This situation is well described in the Biblical story of
Esau and Jacob, where Jacob succeeds in usurping the
privileges of the eldest.
The second child's condition is
like that of an engine under a constantly excessive head of
steam.
It was, well expressed by a little boy of four, who
cried out, weeping,
cc I am so unhappy because I can never
be as old as my brother."
The fact that children repeat the psychic behaviour of
older brothers and sisters and of parents is referred by some
writers to an instinct of imitation or to cc identification" of
the self with another: but it is better explained as a way of
asserting an equality which is denied on other grounds.
Psychic resemblances to the conduct of ancestors or even
of savages do not signify that the pattern of psychic reaction
is hereditary, but that many individuals use the same means
of offence and defence in similar situations.
When we find
so much resemblance between all first children, all second
and all youngest children, we may well ask what part is left
103

106
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
for heredity to play.
Thus we have also no us~, as psycholo-
gists, for the theory that the mental development of .the
individual ought to repeat the development of the race of
mankind in successive stages.
In later development, the second child is rarely able to
endure the strict leadership of others or to accept the idea of
It eternal laws."
He will be much more inclined to belie'7e,
rightly or ,vrongly, that there is no power in the world which
cannot
be
overthrown.
Beware
of
his
revolutionary
subtleties!
I have known quite a few cases in which the
second child has availed himself of the strangest means to
undermine the power of ruling persons or traditions:
Not
everybody, certainly not these rebels themselves, would
easily agree \vith my view of their behaviour.
For though
it is possible to endanger a ruling power with slander, there
are more insidious ways-for example, by means of excessive
praise-you may idealise and glorify a man or a method
until the reality cannot stand up to it.
Both methods are
employed iT! Mark Antony's oration in It Julius Cresar," and
I have shown elsewhere how Fedor Dostoievsky made
masterly use of the latter means, perhaps unconsciously, to
undermine the pillars of old Russia.
Those who remember
his representation of Father Zosima in
(c The Brothers
Karamazov," and also recall the fact that he ,vas a second
son, will allow the force of my suggestion.
I need hardly say that the style of life of a second child,
like that of the first, may also appear in another child if the
situation is of a similar pattern.
The youngest child is also, a distinct type, exhibitirlg
certain characteristics of style which we never fail to find.

CASE
HISTORIES
I07
He has always been the baby of the family, and has never
known the tragedy of being dispossessed by a younger,
which is more or less the fate of all other children.
In this
respect his situation is a favoured one, and his education is
often relatively better, as the economic position of the family
is likely to be more secure in its later years.
The grown-up
children not infrequently join with the parents in spoiling
the youngest child, who is thus liable to be too much
indulged.
On the other hand the youngest may also be too
much stimulated by elders-both mistakes are well known
t~ our educationists.
In the former case (of over-indulg-
ence) the child 'wi=ll strive throughout life to be supported
by others.
In the latter case the child will rather resemble
a second child, proceeding competitively, _striving to over-
take all those who set the pace for him, and in most cases
failing to do so.
Often, therefore, he looks for a field of
activity remote from that of the other members of the
family-in which, I believe, he gives a sign of hidden coward-
ice.
If the family is commercial, for instance, the youngest
inclines to Art or Poetry; if scientific, he wants to be a
salesman.
I have remarked elsewhere that many of the
most successful men of our time were youngest children, and
I am convinced this is also the case in any other age.
In
Biblical history we find a remarkable number of youngest
children among the leading characters, such as David, Saul,
and Joseph.
The story of Joseph is a particularly good
example, and illustrates manyof the viewswe have advanced.
His younger brother Benjamin was seventeen years his
junior, and when he reached the height of his powers
Joseph did not know of the existence of this younger
brother.
His psychological position, therefore, was that of
a youngest child.
K

I08
PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSIS
It is interesting to note how well Joseph's brethren
understood his dreams.
More precisely, I should say that
they understood the feeling and emotion of the dreamer, a
point to which I shall return later.
The purpose of a
dream is not to be understood but to create a mood and a
tension of feeling.
In the fairy tales of all ages and peoples the youngest
child plays the role of a conqueror.
I infer that in earlier
times, when both circumstances and men's apprehension of
them \vere simpler, it was easier to c~llect experiences and
to understand the coherent current of the life of the latest-
born.
This traditional grasp of character survives in folk-
lore when the actual experiences are forgotten.
A strange case of the type of youngest child who is spoiled
is that which I have alreadygiven, of a man with a It begging"
style of life.
I came across another in the difficulties of a
physician who had for twenty years been unable to swallow
normally and could take only liquid food.
He had recently
had a dental plate made for him, which he was continually
pushing up and down with his tongue, a habit which caused
pain and soreness of the tongue, so that he feared he was
developing cancer.
He was the youngest of a family of three, with two older
sisters, and had been weakly and much indulged.
At the
age of forty he could only eat alone or with his sisters.
This
is a clear indication that he was only comfortable in his
favourite situation-of being spoiled by the sisters.
Every
approach to society had been difficult, and he had no friends,
and only a few associates whom he met weekly in a restau-
rant.
His attitude towards the three questions of life being
one of fear and trembling, we can understand that his

CASE
HISTORIES
rog
tension with other people made him unable to swallo\v food.
Re lived in a kind of stage fright, fearful that he was not
making a sufficiently good impression.
This man answered the second life-question (of occupa-
tion) with tolerable competence, because his origin was a
poor one and he could not live without earning, but he
suffered exceedingly in his profession, and nearly fainted
when he had to take his examinations.
His ambition, as a
general practitioner, was to obtain a position with a fixed
salary, and, later
o~, a pension.
This attraction to an
official position is a.. sign of insecurity, and people with a
deep sense of inadequacy commonly aspire to the It safe job."
For years he gave himself up to his symptoms.
When he
became older he lost some of his teeth, and decided to
have a plate made, which became the occasion of his latest
symptom.
When he came to me, the patient was sixty years of age,
and still living in, the care of his two sisters.
Both were
suffering from their age, and it was clear to me that this
man, ageing, and spoiled by two unmarried and much older
women, was facing a new situation.
He was very much
afraid his sisters would die.
What should he do in that
case-he who needed to be continually noticed and watched
over?
He' had never been in love, for he could never find
a woman whom he could trust with his fragile happiness!
How could he believe that anyone would spoil him as his
mother and elder sisters had done?
It was easy to guess
the form of his sexuality-masturbation, and some petting
affairs with girls; but recently an older woman had wanted
to marry him; and he wished to appear more pleasant and
attractive in behaviour.
The beginmng of a struggle seemed
imminent, but his new dental plate came to the rescue.
In

110
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
the nick of time he became anxious about contJ;acting cancer
of the tongue.
He himself, as a doctor, was very much in doubt about the
reality of this cancer.
The many surgeons and physicians
he consulted all tried to dissuade him from belief in it, but
he persisted in his uncertainty, continued to press his tongue
against the plate until he hurt it, and then consulted another
doctor.
Such pre-occupations-" over-valued ideas," as Wernicke
calls them-are carefully cherished in the arrangement of a
neurosis.
The patient shies away from the right objective
by fixing his glances more and more firmly upon a point
somewhere off his course.
He does this in order to swerve
out of a direction which is beginning to be indicated by
logical necessity.
The logical solution of his problem would
be antagonistic to his style of life, and as the style of life
must rule he has to establish emotions and feelings \vhich
will ensure his escape.
In spite of the fact that this man was sixty years old, the
only logical solution of his problem was to find a trust\vorthy
substitute for his spoiling sisters before their departure.
His distrustful mind could not rise to the hope of its possi-
bility; nor could his doubts be dissipated by logic, because
he had built up his whole life with a definite resistance to
marriage.
The dental plate, which should have been a help
to\vards marriage, became an insuperable impediment to it.
In the treatment of this case it was useless to attack the
belief if! the cancer.
When he understood the coherence of
his behaviour the patient's symptoms were very much alle-
viated.
The next day he told me of a dream: "I was sitting
in the house of a third sister at a birthday celebration of her
thirteen-year-old son.
I was entirely healthy, felt no pain,

CASE HISTORIES
Itl
and could swallow anything."
But this dream was related
to an episode in his life which took place fifteen years before.
Its meaning is very obvious:
U If o'nly I were fifteen years
younger."
Thus is the style maintained.
The only child also has his typical difficulties.
Retaining
the centre of the stage without effort, and generally pamp-
ered, he forms such a style of life that he will be supported by
others and at the same time rule them.
Very often he grows
up in an intimate environment.
The parents may be afraid
to have more children, and sometimes the mother, neurotic
before his advent, does not feel equal to rearing more
children, and develops such behaviour that everyone must
say, " It is a blessing that this woman has no more children."
Birth-control may absorb much of the attention of the
family, in which case we may infer tension, and the two
parents uni~ed to carryon their life in anxiety.
The care
then devoted to the only child never ceases by day or night,
and often impresses the childwith a belief that it isan almost
mortal danger not to be watched and guarded.
Such
children often grow up cautious, and sooner or later they
are often successful and gain the esteem and attention they
desire. But if they come into \vholly different conditions of
life they may show striking insufficiency.
Only children are often very sweet and affectionate, and
later in life they may develop charming manners in order to
appeal to others, as they train themselves in this way,
both in early life and later.
They are usually closer to the
more indulgent parent, which is generally the mother; and
in some cases develop a hostile attitude towards the other
parent.

II2
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
The education of the only child is not easy, but it is
possible to understand the individual problem and to solve
it correctly.
We do not regard the only child's situation as
dangerous, but we find that, in the absence of the best
educational methods, very bad results occur which would
have been avoided if there had been brothers and sisters.
I will give a case of the development of an only child, a
boy whose attachment was entirely to the mother.
The
father was of no importance in the family; he maintained
them, but was obviously without interest in the child.
The
mother was a dressmaker who worked at home, and the
little boy spent all his time with her, sitting or playing
beside her.
He played at sewing, imitating his mother's
activity, and ultimately became very proficient in it, but he
never took any part in boys' games.
The mother left the
house each day at :five p.m. to deliver her work, and returned
punctually at six, and during that time the boy was left
alone or with an older niece, and played with sewing
materials.
He became interested in timepieces, because he
was always looking for his mother's return.
He could tell
the time at three years old.
The older niece played games with him in which she was
the bridegroom and he was the bride, and it is noteworthy
that he looked more like a girl than she did.
When he came
to school he was quite unprepared to associate with boys,
but he was able to establish himself as a favoured exception,
for others liked his mild and courteous disposition.
He
began to approach the goal of superiority by being attractive,
especially so towards boys and men.
At fourteen years of
age he acted the part of a girl in a school play. The audience
had not the slightest doubt that he was a girl, a young fellow

CASE
HISTORIES
1I3
began to flirt with him, and he was much pleased to 'have
excited such admiration.
He declared that he had only known the difference of sex
for a short time.
He had worn girlish dress for four years,
and until the age of ten he did not know whether he was a
boy or a girl.
When his sex was explained to him he began
to masturbate, and in his fantasy he soon connected sexual
desire with what he had felt when boys touched him or
ki~sed him.
To be admired and wooed was the goal in life
to which he accommodated all his characteristics, so that he
might be admired by boys.
His older niece was the only
girl he had known, and she was ge~tle and s~veet, but she
played the man's role in their games'and otherwise she ruled
him like his mother.
A great feeling of inferiority was his
legacy from his mother's over-indulgent and excessive care.
She had married late, at the age of thirty-eight, and she did
not wish to have more children by the husband she dis-
liked.
Her anxiety, then, was' doubtless of earlier origin,
and her latemarriage indicative of a hesitant attitude to life.
Very strict in sexual matters, she wanted her child to be
educated in ignorance of sex.
At the age of sixteen this patient looked and walked like
a flirtatious girl, and he soon fell into the snare of homo-
sexuality.
In order to comprehend this development we
must remember that he had had, in a psychological sense,
the education of a girl, and that the difference between the
sexes was realised too late in his development.
Also he had
his triumphs in the feminine role, and no certainty of gaining
as much by playing the man.
In the imitation of girlish
behaviour he could not but see an open road to his goal of
superiority.
It is my experience that boys who have this type of educa-

1I4
PROBLEMS
OF
NEUROSIS
tion always look like girls.
The growth of the organs and
probably also of the glands is partially ruled by the environ-
ment and adapted to it;
so that if such an early bent
towards feminity is succeeded by a personal goal of the same
tendency, the wish to be a favoured girl will influence not
only the mind, but also the carriage and even the body.
This case illustrates very clearly how a pervert trains
himself mentally into his abnormal attitude towards sex.
There is no necessity to postulate an inborn or hereditary
constitution.
This
patient's
exclusion
of
all
normal
sexual activity, both mental and physical, in favour of mas-
turbation and homosexuality, might cause suspicion of an
inherited component except that we can catch him in the
very act of perverting himself.
In the homosexual circles
of different localities there are different traditions, and this
boy had to adapt his taste to the custonlary practice of his
homosexual associates.
Nearly all those in his city prac-
tised fellatio.
At first he resisted this, but one night he
woke up with a queer taste in his mouth.
On the table by
his bed he found a glass partly filled with urine, and was not
sure how it came to be there.
Probably during sleep, but
there was no doubt about \vhat had happened.
From this
time onward he conformed with his friends: he had over-
come his resistance.
When he came to TIle he was involved with another boy
who ,vas the neglected second child of a very domineering
mother: this boy's striving ,vas to overcome men by his
personal charm, in '\vhich he actllally succeeded in his
relationship with a weak father.
When he reached the age
of sexual expression he was shocked.
His notion of women
was founded upon experience of his domineering mother,
who neglected him; so he turned homosexual.
Consider

CASE HISTORIES
lIS
then the hopeless situation of my patient!
He wanted to
conquer by female means-by having the charm of a girl-
but his friend wanted to be a conqueror of men.
I was able to make my patient realise that, whatever he
himself thought or felt in this liaison, his friend felt himself
to be a conquering man-charmer.
My patient, therefore,
could not be sure that his was the real conquest, and his
homosexuality was accordingly checked.
By this means
I was able to break off the relationship, -for he saw that
it was stupid to enter into such a fruitless competition.
This also made it easier for him to understand that his
abnormality was due to a lack of interest in others, and
that his feeling of inadequacy, as a pampered child, had led
him to measure everything in terms of personal triumph.
He then left me for some months, and when he visited me
again he had had sexual relations with a girl, but had tried
to play a masochistic part towards her.
He obviously
wished to experience with her the same inferiority that he
had felt with his mother and the niece.
This masochistic
attitude was shown in the fact that his goal of superiority
required that the girl should do to him '\\-hat he commanded,
and he wished to complete the act at this point, \vithout
achieving sexual intercourse, so that the normal was still
excluded
The great difficulty of changing a homosexual lies not
only in his lack of social" adjustment, but in the invariable
absence of the right training, which ought to begin in early
childhood.
The attitude towards the other sex is strained in
a mistaken direction almost from the beginning of life.
In
order to realise this fact one must note the kind of intelli-
gence, of behctviour, and of expectations which a case
exhibits.
Compare normal persons walking in the street or

116
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
mixing in society with a homosexual in the same situations!
The normal are chiefly interested in the opposite sex, the
homosexual only in their own.
The latter evade normal
sexuality not only in behaviour but even in dreams.
The
patient I have just described used frequently to dream that
he was climbing a mountain, and ascending it by a serpen-
tine road.
The dream expresses his discouraged and
circuitous approach to life.
He moved ra.ther like a snake,
bending his head and shoulders at every step.
In conclusion I will recall the most disastrous cases I have
known in the development of only children.
A woman
asked me to help her and her husband in the case of their
only boy, who tyrannised over them terribly.
He was then
sixteen, a very good pupil at school, but quarrelsome and
insulting in behaviour.
He specially affronted his father,
who had been stricter with him than the molher.
He
antagonised both parents continually, and if he could not
get what he wanted he was openly injurious, sometimes
wrestling with his father, spitting at him, and using bad
language.
Such a development is possible to a pampered
and only child who is trained to expect everything-and
gets it, 'until the time comes when indulgence can go on no
longer.
In such cases it is difficult to treat the patient in
his old environment, because too many old recollections are
revived, which disturb the harmoIly of the family.
Another ·case was brought to me, of a boy of eighteen,
who ,had been accused of murdering his father.
He was
an only child, and spoiled, who had stopped his education
and wasted all the money he could extort from his parents
in bad company.
One day when his father refused to give
him money, the boy killed him by hitting him on the head

CASE
HISTORIES
II7
with a hammer.
No one but the lawyer who was defending
him knew that he had killed another person several months
before. It was obvious that he felt perfectly sure of
escaping discovery this second time.
In yet another case of criminal development, an only boy
was brought up by a very well-educated woman who
wanted him to be a genius.
At her death another experi-
enced woman continued his nurture in the same way, until
she became
aware
of his
tyrannical
tendencies.
She
believed it to be due to sexual repression, and analysed him.
His tyrannical attitude did not cease, however, and she then
wished to be rid of him.
But he broke into her house one
night intending to rob her, and throttled her.
All the characteristics which I have described as typical
of certain positions in the family are liable to modification
by other circumstances. With all their possibilities of varia-
tion, however, the outlines of these patterns of behaviour
will be found to be substantially correct.
Amongst other
possibilities, one may mention the position of a boy growing
up among girls.
If he is older than they are he develops
very much the same as an older brother close to a younger
sister.
Differences in age, in the affection of the parents,
and in the preparation for life, are all reflected in the
individual pattern of behaviour.
Where a female majority dominates the whole environ-
ment, a single boy is likely to have a goal of superiority and
a style of life which are directed towards the female.
This
occurs in various degr:ees: in a humble devotion to women
and worship of them, in an imitative attitude, tending
towards homosexuality, or in a tyrannical attitude towards
women.
People usually avoid educating boys in a too

lIB
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
female environment, and it is a matter of general experience
that such children develop towards two extremes-either
exaggerated vanity or audacity.
In the story of Achilles
there are manJ7 points from which we may assume that the
latter case was well understood in antiquity.
We find the same contradictory possibilities in the cases
of girls who grow up among boys or in a wholly masculine
environment.
In such circumstances a girl may be spoiled
with too much affection, of course, but she may also adopt
boys' attitudes and wish to avoid looking like a girl.
In
any case, what happens is largely dependent upon how men
and women are valued in the environment. There is always
a prevailing attitude of mind in regard to this question,
largely in accordance with which the child will wish to
assume the role of a man or of a woman.
Other views of life which prevail in the family may also
influence the pattern of a child's behaviour, or bring it into
difficulties, as for e'xample the superstition about inherited
characteristics, and the belief in fancy methods of education.
Any exaggerated method of education is liable to cause
injury to the child, a fact we can often trace in the children
of teachers, psychologists, doctors, and people engaged in
the administration of laws-policemen, lawyers, officers, and
clergymen.
Such educational exaggerations often come to
light in the anamnesis of problem-children, delinquents,
and neurotics.
The influence of both factors-the heredity
superstition and a fanatical mode of training-appear in
the following case.
A woman came to me with a daughter of nine, both of
them in tears and desperation.
The mother told me that
the girl had only recently come to live with her, after having
spent years under the care of foster-parents in the country.

CASE HISTORIES
II9
There she had completed the third grade of her schooling,
and she entered the fourth grade in the city school, but her
work became so bad that her teacher had her put back
into the third grade.
Soon afterwards her \vork had become
still worse, and she was graded still lower and put in the
second.
The mother was thoroughly upset at this, and
obsessed with the idea that her daughter's deficiency was
inherited from the father.
At first sight it was evident to me that the mother was
treating the child with exaggerated educational insistence,
which in this case was particularly unfortunate, because the
girl had been brought up in a congenial environment and
expected still greater kindness from the mother.
But in
her anxiety that ller child should not be a failure the mother
\vas over-strict,
and this gave the
child the
keenest
disappointment.
She developed a great emotional tension
which effectually blocked her progress both at school and
at home.
Exhortation, reproaches, criticism, and spanking
only intensified the emotion, with consequent hopelessness
on both sides.
To confirm my impression, I spoke with the
girl alone about her foster-parents.
She told me how happy
her life ,vith them had been: and then, bursting into tears,
told me also how she had at first enjoyed being with her
mother.
I had to make the mother understand the mistakes in
which she had become involved.
The girl could not be
expected to put up \vith such a hard training; and putting
myself in her place I could perfectly understand her conduct
as an intelligent reaction-that is, as a form of accusation
and revenge.
In a situation of this type, but \vhere there is
less social feeling, it is perfectly possible for a child to turn
delinquent, neurotic, or even to attempt Sllicide.
But in

I20
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
this case I was sure it would not be difficult for the girl to
inlprove if the mother could be convinced of the trllth, and
impress the child with a sufficiently definite change of
attitude.
I therefore took the mother in hand, and explained
to her that the belief in inheritance was nothing but a
nuisance, after which I made her realise what her daughter
had not unreasonably expected when she came to live with
her, and how she must have been disappointed and shaken
by such disciplinary treatment, to the poin~ of utter inability
to do what was expected of her.
I wanted the mother to
confess to the child that she had been mistaken and would
like to reform her method, so I told her I did not really
believe she could bring herself to do it, but it
",·a~ what I
would do in the circumstances.
She answered decidedly, " I
will do it. H
In my presence and with my help, she explained
her mistake to the child, and they kissed and embraced and
cried together.
Two weeks later they both visited me, gay
and smiling and very well satisfied.
The mother brought
me a message from the third-grade teacher:
,e A miracle
must have happened. The girl is the best pupil in the class."

CHAPTER VIII
Early Recollections and their Significance.-Recollection of a Visual
Type.-Recollections of Movement.-Of Danger.-ease of Erythrophobia.
THE significance of early recoll~ctions is one of the most
important discoveries of Individual Psychology, for it has
demonstrated the llnconscious purpose in the choice of what
is longest remembered, though the memory itself is quite
conscious or easily remembered upon enquiry.
Rightly
understood, these conscious memories give us glimpses of
depths just as profound as those which are more or less
suddenly released from the unconscious during treatment.
We do not, of course, believe that all early recollections
are correct records of the facts.
Many are even fancied,
and most perhaps are changed or distorted at a later time;
but this does not always diminish their significance.
What
is altered or imagined is also expressive of the patient's goal,
and although there is a difference between the work of
fantasy and that of memory, we can safely make use of both
by relating them to our knowledge of other factors.
Their
worth and meaning, however, cannot be rightly estimated
until we relate them to the total style of life, and recognise
their unity with the individual's main line of striving towards
a goal of superiority.
In recollections dating from the
first four or five years we find chiefly fragments of the proto-
type of the individual, or useful hints as to why the life-plan
was elaborated in its own particular form.
Here also we
121

122
PROBLEMS
OF
NEUROSIS
may gather the surest indications of self-training to overcome
deficiencies or organic difficulties in the early environment.
Signs of the degree of courage and social feeling are also
evident in many cases.
Owing to the great number of
spoiled children who come under treatment the image of the
mother is rarely absent from the earliest remembrance;
indeed, if I suspect the life-style of a pampered child, I can
invariably guess that the patient will recall something
about his mother.
He will never have understood the
meaning of this remembrance.
For instance, he may answer
to my question:
H I was sitting in a room playing with a
~, ..
toy, and my mother was sitting close to me."
He regards
this recollection as if it were a thing in itself, and never
thinks of its coherence in the whole structure of his psychic
life; and unfortunately many psychologists do the same.
To estimate its meaning we have to relate this early pattern
of perception to all we can discover of his present attitude,
until we find how the one clearly mirrors the other.
In this
example we should begin to see this if the patient suffered
from anxiety when alone.
The interest in being connected
with the mother may even appear in the form of fictitious
remembrances, as in the patient who said to me, " You will
not believe me, but I can remember being born, when my
mother held me in her arms."
Very often the earliest memory of a spoilt child refers to
its dispossession by the birth of a YO'unger brother or sister,
and these vary from slight and innocent statements, such
as,
H I recollected when my younger sister was born," to
anecdotes highly significant of the attitude of the patient.
A woman told me:
H I remember having to watch my
younger sister, who was lying on a table.
She was restless
and threw off the coverlets.
I wanted to adjust them and

CASE
HISTORIES
:I23
pulled them away from her, upon which she fell aI;ld was
hurt."
This woman was forty-five when she came to me ;
at school, in marriage, and throughout life she felt herself
disregarded, just as in her first childhood, when she had been
dethroned.
A similar case, more expressive of suspicion
and mistrust, was expressed by a man who said: "I was
going with my mother and little brother to market.
Sud-
denly it began to rain, and my mother took me in her arms,
and then, remembering that I was the older, she put me
down and took up my younger brother."
Successful as he
was in his life, this man distrusted everybody, especially
women.
A student thirty years of age came to me in trouble because
he could not face his examinations: he was in such a state
of strain that he could neither sleep nor concentrate.
The
symptoms indicate his lack of preparation and of courage,
and his age sho\vs the distance at which he stood from the
solution of the problem of occupation.
He had no friends
and had never fallen in love, because of his lack of social
adjustment, and his sexuality was expressed in masturbation
and pollutions.
His earliest memory was of lying in a cot,
looking
round
at
the
wallpaper
and
curtains.
This
recollection reflects the isolation of his later life, and also his
interest in visual activity.
He was astigmatic, and striving
to
compensate
for
this
organic
deficier.lcy.
We must
remember, however, that every function which is strongly
developed apart from any social interest may disturb the
harmony' of life
To \vatch is really a worth-\vhile activity,
but it is possible for watching to become a compulsion-
neurosis, when the patient barricades himself against all
other activities and wants to be gratifying his eyes all day.
There is a type which is only interes~ed in seeing, but there
L

124
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
are only a few activities in which this interest ca~ be usefully
employed, and even these cannot be found by a person who
is socially maladjusted.
This patient, as we have
~een,
had not been a real fellow-man to anyone, so that·he had
found no use for his peculiar interest.
The earliest remembrances not infrequently disclose an
interest in movements;
such as in travelling, running,
motoring or jumping.
So far as we can see this is character-
istic of individuals who encounter difficulties when they
begin to work.
I found this in the case of a man of twenty-
five, the eldest son of a very religious family, who was
brought to me because of misbehaviour.
He was disobed-
ient, idle, and a liar, and he had contracted debts and stolen.
His sister, three years younger than himself, was a familiar
type, striving, capable and well-educated, an easy winner
in the race with him.
His misconduct began ,vith his
adolescence, and I am aware that ma~y psychologists would
ascribe it to some sort of emotional
cc flare-up" caused by
the growth of the sexual glands; a theory which is all the
more plausible because of the existence of premature and
mischievous sexual relations in this, as in other cases.
But
we ask, why should the perfectly natural crisis of puberty be
the cause of moral disaster in this case and not in another-
not in the sister's case, for example?
We answer, because
the sisterwas in a more favourable position, and the brother's
situation was one which ,ve know, from experience of very
many cases, to be one of special danger.
Furthermore,
when we go more deeply into the history of this case, we find
that adolescence did not create any change in the style of
life.
Before that time the boy had been gradually losing

CASE
HISTORIES
I25
hope of being the first in a life of social usefulness, and the
more hopeless he grew, the more he had wandered into the
easie~ ways of useless compensation.
This young man's earliest remembrance was:
II I was
running round the whole day in a kitty car."
When he was
cured he was taken back into his father's office, but he
finally adapted himself to life as a travelling salesman.
Many first remembrances are concerned with situations of
danger, and they are usually told by persons with whom the
use of fears is an important factor in the style of life.
A
married woman once came to ask me why she was terrified
whenever she passed a phannacy.
Some years previously
she had spent a long time in a sanatorium undergoing treat-
ment for tuberculosis, and a few months before I saw her
a specialist had pronounced her cured, entirely healthy, ·and
fit to have children.
Shortly after this plenary absolution
by the doctor she began to suffer from her obsession.
The
connection is obvious.
The pharmacy ",-as a warning
reminder of her illness, an employment of the past to make
the future ominous.
She was connecting the possibility of
a child with danger to her health.
Though she and her
husband had agreed that they wanted a child, her behaviour
clearly showed her secret opposition.
Her objection was
stronger than any logical reasons, which latter the doctor as
an expert could minimise, but he could not remove the
symptom of fear.
In this as in many similar cases we know
in advance that the real reasons lie deeper, and are only to
be found if we can discover the most important strivings in
the style of life.
Seldom, if ever, is it true that resistance to
having children is based upon objective fears of childbirth or

I26
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
illness.
In this case it was easy to discover that the woman
had been a pampered child who wanted to be in the centre
of the stage.
Such women do not wish to bring a little
rival on to the scene, and argue against it with every variety
of reason and unreason.
This woman had trained herself
perfectly in the expression of weakness and in perceiving
opportunities to take the centre of attention.
Asked for
her earliest recollection she said:
H I was playing before our
little house on the outskirts of the town, and my mother
was terrified when she saw me jumping on the boards that
covered the well."
A student of philosophy came to consult me about his
erYthrophobia.
From
earliest
childhood he
had
been
teased because he blushed so easily, and for the past two
months this had so much increased that he was afraid to
go to a restaurant, to attend his lectures, or even to go out
of his room.
I found that he was about to sit for an examin-
ation.
He was a faint-hearted man, timid and bashful, and
whether he was visiting in society, working, or in company
with a girl he suffered alike from acute tensions of feeling.
Being a sympatheticotonic type, 1 this tension irritated the
vegetative nervous
system:
his blushing had latterly
worried him more, and he began to use it as a pretext for
retreat.
From childhood this man had had a strong
antipathy
toward~ his mother, who was partial to his
younger brother; and he now no longer believed that he
could achieve any success if he went on.
Here is his earliest
remembrance:
It When I was five years old I went out with
1 An attempt has been made to describe two types of neurotics :-the
vagotonic and the sympatheticotonic-according as one or other division
of the vegeta.tive nervous system with its associated glands tends to
overact.
Sympatheticotonia is associated with increased metabolism.

CASE
HISTORIES
I27
my three-year-old brother.
My parents were much excited
when they found we had left the house, because there was
a lake near by, and they were afraid that we had fallen into
it.
When we returned I was slapped."
I understood this
to mean that he did not like his home, where he felt that he
was slighted, and this opinion was corroborated when he
added,
H I was slapped, but not my brother."
But the
discovery that he had been in a dangerous situation had no
less impressed him, and this was reflected in his present
behaviour, which was dominated by the notion-not to go
out, not to venture too far.
Such persons feel as though
life were a trap; and it is easy to imagine this patient's
painful experience when in contact with a girl, being teased
and blushing, annoyed and annoying.

CHAPTER IX
The Highest Goals.-Goals in Insanity and' Crime.-In Perversion.-
The
~Iasochistic Attitude.-Irritating Behaviour.-The Goal in Day-
dreams.-Day-dreams of Vicarious Satisfaction.-Case of Suicide.-Red
Hair as Inferiority.-Heart-trouble and Aerophagia.-Masculine Protest
and Marriage with a Relative.-Jealousy and Superiority.-Case of
Jealous Hallucinations.-Unconscious Jealousy.-ease of Syphilophobia.
-Preparation for the Sexual Role.-Homosexu~lTendency.-1Iasochistic
Tendency the Reverse of Submissive.
THE loftiest goals are to be found in the most pathological
cases-that is, in the psychoses.
In cases of schizophrenia
we often find the desire to be Jesus Christ.
In manic-
depressive cases also, in the manic phases, the patient
frequently wishes to be the saviour of mankind, whilst in the
depressive phases he often complains of being the greatest
evil on earth.
In paranoia the patient not only strives to
be the centre of attention, but actually believes he is that
already.
Individual Psychology has shown that the goal of
superiority can only be fixed at such .altitudes when the
individual has, by losing all interest in others, also lost
interest in his own reason and understanding.
Moreover
the height of the goal nowconfronts the individualwith such
difficulties that common sense has become useless to him-
incapable of solving them.
This goal of personal supremacy blocks the approach to
reality.
The more reality presents him with real, or even
alluring possibilities of action, the greater is the effort which
a maladjusted person will make to avoid it, because his
128

C~L\.SE
HISTORIES
129
feel£ng of supremacy is proportionately increased thereby.
The end result, and logical culmination of such a life-line is,
of course, total isolation in an asylum.
Perhaps the most audacious goals of superiority are found
in cases of general paralysis, in wh~ch there is generally the
nlost marked loss of social feeling and mental control.
But
all cases of Cresarian madness exhibit the sanIe goal of
godlikeness with an absence of social feeling; moreover-
and this is consistent with all our findings-there is always
a high degree of cowardice.
Similarly, whenever we find a
marked insensibility to the pains of others, or under-
valuation of others' lives-as in..nlurderers and certain other
criminals-we can trace the preparation for their develop-
mellt:
they do it" by deliberately breaking through the
limits of social feeling, impelled by cowardice to seek relief
on the useless side of life. . Ev'ery
~urderer is a coward
intoxicated with the idea of being a hero.
I believe that
the true psychology of these tendencies ought to be
explain~d to all mankind, and that such instruction would
do much to prevent" crime ~aves."
For criminals derive
some incentive from the prevalent superstition that crime
is at least courageous:
whereas in truth even the most
audacious crime is deeply motivated by fear.
The development of a criminal tendency has something in
common with the fascination of useless sports; the desire
to break a record is sometin1es apparent, and one of the
greatest inducements to crime is the sense of overcoming
the law and the police.
This is a very considerable grati-
fication upon the useless side, since the individual can give
himself a feeling of having beaten the world single-handed.
And as, according to certain statistics, about forty per cent.
of all punishable crimes pass without the detection of the

13°
PROBLEMS
OF
NEUROSIS
criminal, nearly every criminal has had the experience of
committing a crime without being found out. .The chance
of making a long nose at the police is very alluring to a
cowardly soul.
The goal of personal superiority is such that it invariably
magnifies one of the three questions of life out of all pro-
portion.
We :find that a person's ideal of success becomes
unnaturally limited to social notoriety, to business success,
or to sexual conquest.
Thus we see the social careerist,
fighting and jealous; the business -magnate, extending his
interests at the expense of all others; and the amorous
intriguer, the would-be Don Juan.
Each disturbs the
harmony of his life by thus leaving many necessary demands
unsatisfied, and then tries to compensate by still more
frantic strivings in his narrowed sphere of action.
In the realm of sexual perversion we find the goal
expressed in a purely fictitious form..
This is especially
evident in the sadistic type, by which I mean the type whose
will to dominate is connected with sexual irritation.
It
was a notable advance in the understanding of the psychic
structure of perversion when we could prove that the
symptoms of masochistic cases are also governed by a
personal goal of superiority.
In the fantasies of masochists
as well as in their actions, the egoistic tendency has been
clearly diagnosed.
The masochistic attitude signifies: "I
am not governed by your power of attraction; it is you who
must do what I would have you do."
Although the
tendency which this implies is more fully expressed in
sadism, the demands of the sadist are obviously harder for
him to enforce than the masochist's
II demand to be

CASE HISTORIES
13I
bullied."
But we find individuals who exhibit a mixture of
masochistic and sadistic behaviour.
I have found that the purpose of most masochistic subjects
is to escape love and marriage, because they do not feel
strong enough to risk a defeat.
They will regard the avoid-
ance of defeat, even through ignominious escape, exactly
as if it were a goal of superiority.
By means of their maso-
chistic tendencies they are able to exclude all the really
eligible members of the other sex.
In the case of a man
whom I cured of homosexuality, the patient went so far as
to have a masochistic relation with a prostitute.
By means
of homosexuality he e\xcluded all women, and in his periods
of masochism he excluded all worth-while women.
Similarly, among girls who indulge in masochistic fan-
tasies, we often note that the superior goal towards which
they strive takes the form of celibacy.
They can only
imagine love and marriage as a torture, and this fantasy of
celibacy is itself a gratification which is consistent with their
masochistic tendencies.
In masturbation, whether physical
or mental, a certain consistency is always apparent: it is
the sexual attitude which is appropriate to the isolated
individual.
Correctly interpreted, it is the wish to exclude
sexual partnership.
In such cases the patient will always
tend to regard a partner as the author of his or her humilia-
tion: al1d this idea, even though avoided in reality, ,vilI be
expressed in fantasy.
One way of attaining superior-feelings is by the irritation
of others.
Parents or teachers, husbands or wives, as the
case may be, will be more or less subtly exasperated until
they burst into a rage, and begin to attack or punish.
To
many children this proof of their power over others is a
great satisfaction, and they often desist when they have

132
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
produced the desired reaction.
Still more anti-social is the
goal of superiority through the injury of another.
In its
service every trifle of evidence against another person will
be·collected with malicious valuation, such as difference in
nationality, standard of living, advancing age in the case of
women, and any unusual features such as red,hair'or prom-
inent nose or teeth: upon all these disadvantages of another,
real or imputed, the neurotic feeling of inferiority feeds
voraciously, as if it could fill its own emptiness by the
contemplation of yet greater vacuity elsewhere.
And by
such activity, of course, feelings of inferiority lllay be
induced in the person who is attacked.·
The height of the goal is freely revealed in waking
fantasies, where the desire to be the richest man, an emperor,
or a pioneer finds imaginary gratification, always an image of
supremacy in the subject's own line of life, whatever it may
be.
The degree of social interest also finds expression in these
imaginings.
For instance,
fantasies
of saving life,
of
stopping runaway horses and rescuing the drowning indicate
a more social tendency than images of torturing or being
tortured.
Common among children is the fantasy that
they do not really belong to their parents.
It indicates
dissatisfaction with their own parents for some reason or
other, and enables them to believe that they are the secret
offspring of noble parents.
This particular tendency of the
fantasy is evinced in mass-psychology, by the fact that in
myths and legends the heroes are invariably the sons and
daughters of gods or demi-gods, or at least, while no one
knows it, they are of z:oyal parentage and the heirs to great
power and estates.

CASE HISTORIES
I33
Day-dreams of a true sadistic or masochistic nature occur
in which the dreamer participates only as an observer and
not as an actor; enjoying the sight of the power of the
conqueror, or identifying his own feelings with the weaker
person. This dreaming of vicarious satisfaction is, of course,
a double remove from reality, and indicates a still greater
lack of cpurage.
Such was the case of a man of thirty-two
who suffered from erythrophobia.
He believed that people
could not help looking at him wherever he went, and so he
blushed continually.
He was short, cross-eyed, and also
suffered from lameness, one leg being shorter than the other.
He had been spoiled by his mother, but his brothers and
sisters had disliked and repressed him.
Thus, \vhen he went
to school, he assuDled a wrong attitude to his schoolmates,
bu~ tried to maintain his personal ascendancy by becoming
an excellent gymnast.
Even this achievement, however,
did not maintain him sufficiently in the height of general
attention, and he endeavoured to supplement it by exciting
the compassion of others: when this also failed to satisfy
him, he drew attention to himself by clowning and playing
the fool.
Finally, despairing of winning the high esteem he
wanted, he gave up and tried to escape both from society
and from love.
Wherever he met people, in the street, in
restaurants, or in theatres, he experienced acute mental
tension, and, being a vaso-motor type, he expressed it by
blushing and feeling afraid.
At the same time he acquired
a paranoid fear that every policeman was watching him as a
suspected person.
The effect of all these symptoms was to
make him isolate himself to a great extent and only to carry
on the lightest and most occasional occupations.
This man's day-dreams, which are ~he point of this narra-
tive, \vere largely sexual fantasies.
His sexual life was,

134
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
naturally, one of masturbation, but in these fantasies his
great distance from the solution of the sex-problem was
expressed by visualising boys beating each other, whilst he
himself was only a
(t smiling third."
As a last resort he tried to tal\:e to business, but again
finding that he was not appreciated, he developed another
paranoid fancy, that all his comrades conspired against him.
He went from his office into a sanatorium, where he met
a woman who showed great sympathy for him.
Although
'Up to this point he had retreated from every problem of life
he now felt the urge to go forward in the matter of love.
But the old feeling of hopelessness and lack of courage
persisted.
He had long ago fixed his position as an observer
of the struggle of life, and now a situation had arisen
which challenged th.is position.
And so, one day,· he shot
himself.
Red hair is sometimes taken as a sufficient basis for a
feeling of inferiority, and the part it may play in building up
a neurosis is illustrated in the following case.
A man of
forty-five complained of heart-trouble, which had been
first diagnosed as organic and later as a neurotic disturb-
ance.
As a child he had been greatly pampered by his
mother, and because of his efforts to rule over his comrades
he had been unpopular with them, and they had always
teased him al.?out his (t copper nob."
He was too unsociable
to make friends, but very successful in his school-work.
Later on, he was treated psycho-allalytically for two years,
and the doctor who treated him advised him to marry
another of his patients.
Natl1rally, with such a lack of
social interest, he could not make a success of marriage.
He
tried to rule his wife in an absurd manner. and when she

CASE 'HISTORIES
I35
resisted him in any way he became very tense and his pulse
increased to a hundred and fifty a minute.
S~ch heart troubles may often be observed as the result of
swallowing air.
This habit is also connected with asthma,
stomach trouble, tympanites, and even pseudo-pregnancy.
Usually the patient knows nothing about it, and my
experience leads me to believe that it often takes place in
sleep
I t is to be suspected in cases of morning sickness
and particularly in hysterical emesis.
The air-swallow-
ing habit is caused by a great psychic tension, due to exagger-
ated feelings of inadequacy.
It is probably due to some
tendency deeply laid in human nature since it so commonly
appears in times of crisis, such as during an examination,
and while courting.
Air-swallowing was the trouble in this case also.
After
the psychic mechanism of it had been explained to him, the
man had a dream.
He said:
tl I saw a red frog, bloated
with air."
It is interesting to see how easily the attention
of a patient is diverted from the real coherence of the case.
He treated this dream as if it were a mystery which he could
not understand.
I interpreted it to him, explaining to him
that while he was asleep he perfectly understood what he
was doing, and that his dream was a way of saying: "I
am
like
that red
frog,
suffering from my
abnormal
colouring and trying to
blow myself up into a bigger
being than I am."
In his criticism of my explanation,
however, it was evident that the patient did not wish to
understand.
The masculine protest is often apparent in the loftiest
goals of personal supremacy.
A man of fortYlcame to me
in a state of nervous irritation because he felt impelled, as if

PROBLEMS
OF
NEUROSIS
in a fit of irresponsibility, to marry a
cousin~
Marriage
,vith a near relative, either in reality or in fantasy, generally
indicates fear of the opposite sex, for incest is opposed to
common sense, which demands a courageous mixing of blood.
Incestuous inclinations are to be traced to cowardice and a
sense of social inadequacy.
This patient had always resisted
impulses towards love and marriage.
He denied himself
various gratifications, such as playgoing and eating meat-
he had lately become a vegetarian-attached the highest
importance to chastity, and became greatly disturbed if he
had to do business with a lady client in his own office.
He
was an eldest son, who had resented his deposition by a
younger brother, and had also felt that he ,vas slighted and
pushed into the background by his mother, for which reason
he had leaned more towards his father.
His criticism of his
mother, and later on of all women, was very bitter.
His
earliest memory was this:
U When I was four years old we
moved.
I met a strange woman near the new apartment
whom I tried to push into a ditch."
He also remem-
bered that his feeling for his grandmother had been very
hostile.
This man had now come to an age at which it was natural
for him to marlY, and he felt the urge to do so, but not in a
normal way, so he sought a near relative as a sort of half-
measure.
At the same time his irresponsibility and sudden
regret disclose something deeper in the whole arrangement.
What he really wanted was to give himself a deep warning
never again to approach a girl as long as he lived.
So he
staged this little warning interlude, in which, of course, I was
cast for the part of the sage counsellor who was to tell him
not to marry, and that his desire to do so was only a neurotic
manifestation.
134

CASE
HISTORIES
I37
Jealousy is very often employed in order to establish a
relation of superiority.
The j~alous partner lays down rules
for the behaviour of the other, and enforces them ,vith
reproaches and in terms of moral reprobation.
The person
against whnm such conduct is directed is thereby degraded
from the position of a partner to that of a dishonourable
servitor, which gives th'e jealous one a sense of relative super-
iority.
Jealousy is also found in connection with paranoia
and. alcoholism, where its use is fundamentally similar.
In
either case an acute lack of self-confidence drives the patient
10 strive for superiority by the fictitious method of torturing
the sexual partner.
It is not true, as it is often stated, that
alcoholism causes impotence in these cases.
In these
nlanifestations the alcoholism,
the impotence and the
jealousy are co-ordinated in. the useless striving to com-
pensate for the absence of social adjustment, courage,. and
'self-confidence;
and, as a
whole, they indicate a pro-
gressively egoistic attitude.
Paranoia of the truest type, originating late in life, some-
times yields cases of jealousy which is really a hallucination,
created to compensate for the state of helplessness.
A case
in point was that of a woman who had once been very
wealthy and had had every luxury, but afterwards became
very poor.
Her two married daughters supported her and
her husband, and kept them in the luxury to which they
had been accustomed.
She felt deserted, however, and
unable to adapt herself to her new limitations, for she had
been too much used to extravagance and power.
Her
daughters, occupied with their families, paid her little
attention, and all that was left to her was her husband, in
whom she tried to find compensation for all that she had
lost.
Naturally, it was impossible for him to accept such

PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSIS
a position: nothing short of his entire obedience and servi-
tude would have maintained the sense of personal super-
iority that she required, and his submission to her fell far
short of her demands.
This intensified her already wounded
dignity, and in the effort to enforce her ascendancy she
accused her husband of unfaithfulness, although he was
seventy years of age and she was sixty.
There was a young
maid living in the house, and the wife interpreted her
husband's kindness to this girl ;as a sign of intimacy.
Thenceforth she fancied that every sound she heard in the
house by day or night was ·a confirmation of her belief.
The servant finally le!~ and took a situation in another city,
but the patient could not be convinced that she was not
still in the neighbourhood, believed that she heard her
knock at the door at night, and suspected that she was still
communicating with her husband by adyertisements in
the newspapers.-
It is not difficult to understand why she could not do
without her jealousy.
Her husband's and her daughters'
attitude towards her had changed since the time when she
had lived in the focus of their attention.
She now despaired
of reality, but she still had the same goal of supremacy:
and this jealousy enabled her, by an attitude of accusation,
still to keep the circumstances revolving around the question
of her personal prerogative.
There are many cases, however, in which patients indulge
in jealousy without for a moment admitting the fact to
themselves.
This is probably because jealousy is itself
felt to be an inferior feeling, and so conflicts with the
conscious self-valuation.
134

CASE HISTORIES
139
A certain patient complained of pains in the heart which
recurred from time to time, especially when she felt dis-
contented.
She had bee~ married for nearly twenty years,
and the marriage was supposed to be a very happy one.
The husband was a kind man, although weak, they had an
accomplished daughter as their only child, and were living
in very good circumstances.
For a year the patient had
been suffering from these pains, which radiated from the
breasts into both arms,' and angina pectoris had been
suspected.
But as
110 organic symptoms could be dis-
covered, and as the pains always occurred after a mental
disturbance, the diagnosis of a neurosis (pseudo-angina)
was justifiable.
Some time before the appearance of these
symptoms, she had had a peculiar feeling in the legs, as
though they were tied and she was unable to move them.
The later symptoms she described as very painful, lasting
for several
minutes and
ending
with
emesis.
Closer
enquiry revealed the fact that the pai~s reached the throat
from the sternal region, and were associated with frequent
emesis,
flatulence
and
occasional
tympanites.
Where
we find such complications of symptoms I -would always
recommend the practitioner to look for rerophagia, a condi-
tion which, in the present case, I could observe while I spoke
to the patient.
This patient had come to me from abroad, and after arriv-
ing in Vienna her husband left her to spend some time in
Berlin.
On the night of his departure she could not sleep,
and when I asked her what thoughts passed throug~ her
mind while she lay awake, she answered: "I kept on figur-
ing out how far my husband was from Berlin."
'fhis
remark convinced me that the woman \vas constantly
thinking where her husband was-and wondering \vhat he
M

PROBLEMS OF NEUROStS
was doing.
The fact that her marriage w~s a fortunate
one made it all the more likely that she kept a sharp look-out.
Such conditions are a fertile ground for jealous fears, especi-
ally in the case of a woman so ambitious as this one proved
to be.
After the second night she related the following dream:
U Someone sho\ved me a calf which was lame and unable to
walk.
This person commanded me to slaughter it:'
The
inability to walk was reminiscent of some of her own
symptoms, so it was justifiable to suppose that she identified
herself with the calf.
In this connection the slaughter of
the calf represented suicide, probably in this case by cutting
the throat, but there was more in the lameness.
In this she
helped me a great deal by telling me that a friend of her
husband suffered from ankylosis of the knees as a result
of gonorrheal arthritis.
How wounded jealousy may be used in the service of the
neurotic goal is illustrated in the case of a man of thirty-
eight who suffered from agoraphobia.
He was fairly intelli-
gent, but this weakness precluded both work and social
relations.
The neurosis followed a disappointment, when
the girl to whom he was engaged became unfaithful to him.
He was then advised to take a good situation in another
part of the country so that he might forget his calamity,
and he did so, but after a few days' work he had his first fit
of anxiety, was scared to death, and hurried back to his
mother, with whom he lived from that time until I saw him.
He told me that for some days before the first fit of anxiety
he had been thinking continually of syphilis and of how
easily he could become infected with it.
This must be
understood as a self-preparation, by the appropriate medita-
3:42

CASE
HISTORIES
14I
tion, to keep at a distance from all women and to live only
under the care of his mother.
His behaviour was that of a
pampered child, readily taking to flight from the world, and
only sure of safety with his mother.
His earliest recollec-
tion was an epitome of his life-plan:
II When I was four
years old I was in a room with my mother ; and I remember
looking out of the window and looking at people working
in the street."
This fragment of memory conveys his
abnormal need of a sheltered position and his interest in
watching (he was shortsighted) tt how others work."
To be
with his mother and observe others working was his only
idea of escape from tension and anxiety.
When he was
cured he started in business as an interior decorator.
Early memories often furnish significant hints of the way
in which the sexual attitude has been built up.
This was
well illustrated in the case of a pampered boy of fourteen
with a very expectant attitude to life, a bad sport who.made
great difficulties in learning to swim, and was disinclined to
work or to learn anything, especially mathematics. Mathe-
matics is often the chief difficulty with this type, probably
because it demands special power of independent applica-
tion to work.
He confessed to his mother, who was his best
companion, that for some time he had been liable to feel
sexual excitement at the sight of a man's muscles in the
swimming bath or elsewhere.
The earliest experience he
could recall was of walking out with his mother, when people
often said, looking at his fair and curly hair, cc What a pretty
girl!"
When he was asked. if he would like to be a girl,
however, he denied it emphatically.
In his conscious
opinion it was better to be a man than a woman, but since

3:42
PROBLEMS
OF
NEUROSIS
he really wanted to have everything more easily he instinct-
ively shirked the necessary preparation for a masculine role,
and his goal was to be wooed and to receive attention as
though he had been a girl.
This appeared possible because
he was pretty to look at, but in all other ways success looked
difficult and doubtful, so he took refuge ill laziness or
incapacity.
Such a style of life, it mllst be clearly under-
stood, actually gives the patient a sense of relative power or
rulership.
It goes with a .great aversion to all situations
which one is unable to dominate, so that we need not be
surprised at this boy's exaggerated fear of thunderstorms... A
thunderstorm is a supreme example of a thing which ,you
cannot manage or control.
With the lofty ambition of a
second and youngest child, this boy's obvious defeats had
made him incapable of conceiving an adequate success as a
man:
hence the attempt to form a homosexual goal, to
govern passively by being loved and worshipped.'
In many cases a fragment of the prototype is revealed,
when in a dream, fantasy or early recollection, the patient
discloses some notion of a high superiority.
Thus, a girl of
twenty once said to me:
't I had an old and, of COllrse,
imaginary memory of having once been high up in a cloud."
She had been a very pretty child, spoilt by her father, who
had committed suicide when she was fourteen.
As we know,
to lean upon the father is always a second-best alternative
and indicates discontent with the mother, so that as I
expected the patient had a younger sister.
She changed in
appearance at the father's death, losing her good looks.
The younger sister was now more attractive than herself,
and the mother was expending all her care upon an elder
brother who had been ill for some time, so this pampered
girl was left ,vith no one to spoil her, and she began to fight

CASE
HISTORIES
1:43
for attention, especially as her brother was hostile to her.
About this time she experienced a nasty shock; she was
returning from school one day when she passed a man who
exhibited himself, and she ran home screaming with fear.
Such experiences with exhibitionists occur much more
often than is generally known.
There are many men who
are too cowardly to strive for a real solution of the 1ife-
problem of sex and who, looking for a relief or substitute,
stop short at some partial manifestation of sexuality.
If
they are visual types, and their vision is not transferred to
other objects, they become voyeurs or exhibitionists.
Their
cowardice is confirmed- by the fact that they generally
approach children.
My patient's shock from the exhibitionist marked the
beginning of agoraphobia.
We must recognise, however,
that she was training herself to attain the foremost position
along a rlon-sexualline of life as in the earlier relation with
her father.
The height of her ambition is indicated by the
early recollection, and it had become still more neurotically
exalted because the sister had s·urpassed and the brother
had repressed her, as well as by her mother's neglect.
Such
a goal of personal superiority was in danger from love a?d
marriage, and she was naturally trying to exclude these
possibilities.
She made the most of this first experience of
actual sexuality in order to justify herself in an overt
rejection of sexual life altogether.
I found that she ,vas
training
he~self in this attitude by means of certain
day-dreams which were calculated to intoxicate her with
the same idea.
In one of these which recurred very often,
especially when she had a sexual feeling, she fancied that a
man resembling her brother threw her down and spat upon
her, upon which she experienced gratification.

144
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
It is my experience that such masochistic
f~ntasies are
very commonly indulged by girls, and if ever disclosed they
are taken to indicate an inclination to be subdued, which is
supposed to be a female characteristic.
On the contrary,
such a day-dream is a more or less complex fulfilment of a
desire which is fundamentally quite simple but is the reverse
of submissive-namely, the desire to exclude a realistic
sexual objective with its possibilities of defeat and humilia-
tion.
We see the fantasy building up the day-dreamer's
resistance to love at the same time as it gratifies the sensa-
tional need; firstly, because to be satisfied in a fancy is to
teach oneself, "It is not necessary to have a real relation-
ship," and secondly because satisfaction mixed with the
imagination of a defeat (in this case degradation by a brother
who disliked her) teaches one to feel that a real experience
would be highly objectionable.
Thus the fantasy is an
appropriate meditation like a sort of prayer, in which the
individual soul trains itself, in the first respect, to lose
interest in others, and in the second, ardently to desire escape
from marriage.
Where masochism is actually expressed in
attempts to form masochistic relations the aim is fundament-
ally tIle same-to establish a great distance from normal
behaviour and natural conditions.
Nothing, then, could be further from the truth than the
idea that masochistic fancies indicate a desire for subjection.
This patient of mine had been looking round to find someone
whom she could rule, had fastened upon her younger sister
to be her obedient slave, and had finally prevailed upon her
to accompany her in everything.
Her breakdown revealed
her intolerance of the slightest real control over her: she
was given a situation, and when her employer told her to
write something at his dictation, she could not do it.

CHAPTER X
The Fear of Death: In Children: Its True Compensations.-Desire
to become a Physician.-Religiolls Compensations.-ehoice of Occupa...
tions in General.-Vocational Guidance.-Goal of the Working Life.-
Fantastic Choices.-Bodily Postures in Waking and
Sleeping.-All
Posture~are Purposive.
THE
earliest
recollections, as we have seen, are often
involved with ideas of danger, and they are no less frequently
connected with deep impressions of illness and death.
It is
easy to understand how the first experiences of these events,
especially if connected with danger and fear, may oppress
a child with inferior feelings.
In all probability none but
human beings are conscious of the fact that death is in the
destiny of life, and this consciousness alone is enough to give
mankind a sense of being terribly overpowered by Nature.
If a child experiences a brusque contact with death at an
early age, the whole s(yle of life may be largely moulded by
that single impression.
In such. a case the importance of
death to life is invariably over-valued, and \ve can often
perceive how the child's actions and reactions are so directed
as to find relief fronl this oppressive idea, or compensation
for it.
Children adopt various tricks in their struggle
against death.
Some take an ostrich's refuge, avoiding
every possible reminder of the subject, some develop ot4er
anxieties which keep the real terror out of consciousness,
and there are others, more actively disposed, who strive ·to
protect and arm themselves, and to overcome death.
In
145

PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
all of these the so-called instinct of self-preserva~ion is more
than normally evident.
There are two methods of.fighting death with some cer-
tainty of victory.
The first is to preserve the race, by pro-
ducing and rearing children.
In so struggling to conquer
the destiny of the individual, the strongest instincts may be
allies, and the mind's
inter~st may be quickened towards
society and the future of mankind.
This common-sense
compensation for the fear of death naturally involves the
healthiest conceptions of love, and the exclusion of all per-
versions.
The second method, suited to more individual
ambitions, is to live so as to influence the life of the future.
This has been the ruling motive of many great men, who
have done enduring work in art and science, and it is a pur-
pose most clearly visible in the lives of poets.
Both in the
procreation of the race and in the progres,s of its culture, a
leading part is played by this psychic striving to conquer
death.
The fact that the work of many poets and philosophers
has been largely motivated by the desire to overcome death
is shown by the power of death in their reflections.
We see
it in Horace's" Exegi monumentum aere perennius," and
in Heine's
C( Nicht in Dusseldorf am Rhein will ich stehn auf
taubem Stein."
And Tolstoy writes: "If I do not know
how to act in any situation, I imagine-What should I do if
I were going to die to-morrow? "
The early fear of death may provoke a striving rather
worse than useless, even though efficient.
I have already
made passing reference to the case of a boy of fifteen who
had been deeply impressed by the death of an older sister,
and often talked about death.
When I asked him what he
wanted to be, I thought he would say. " l\. doctor."
But he
3:42

CASE
HISTORIES
147
answered: "A grave-digger, because I don't want to be the
one who is buried.
I w..:-nt to bury the others."
And he
did so, in his own way, for he became a merchant, a hard
man of business who " buried" his competitors.
Quite another \vay of life is very commonly taken by
children who have had some sharp experience of death.
They form an early desire to become physicians, and to
master all medical knowledge in order to survive.
In a
discussion which I once opened in a medical society, nearly
everyone present recounted memories of the death, mortal
danger, or illness of some nlember of the family.
A pro-
fessional psycho-analyst who was present objected to my
interpretation of this similarity of their experiences, which
I could relate to many other cases of the earliest memories
of physicians; he insisted that his o\vn first recollection was
of quite a different character.
He remembered saying to
his sick mother, \vhen he was four years old,
Ie Wait a little,
and when I am gro\vn up I will buy you all the best and
most expensive medicines."
~""ailing all three of these con1pensations, the fear of death
may find a religious relief by faith in the immortality of the
soul.
This may appear in complicated forn1S such as re-
incarnation, or more directly, as in spiritualism.
The
latter is fO~lnded upon the value of the assumption that the
spirits of the dead can still move, act, and speak-a value
which we must fully admit, in the absence of more realistic
hopes of conquering mortality.
Not only in physicians, but in all workers, the choice of
the occupation is foreshadowed by some dominant interest
of the psychic prototype. The development of this interest

148
PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSIS
into the concrete realisation of work is often
~ lengthy
process of self-training in which we can see the same idea
adapting itself successively to various material possibilities.
Thus a great interest in playing with toy soldiers, which may
be a preparation for military life, may also be the prelude to
success as the director of a Department Store.
To play at
sewing with needle and thread need not reveal a future
tailor; it may just as well b~ the first step towards the
career of a surgeon.
Playing with dolls is the sign of an
interest which may well develop into marriage and family
lif~, and it may also be the sign of a future nurse ,or teacher.
Both marriage and occupation demand power of independ-
ent action, and readiness to accept the division of labour.
These qualities cannot exist without a certain degree of social
feeling and adaptation, and it is often at the time when the
choice of an occupation becomes necessary that the lack of
social adjustment appears.
I believe that the attention of
children should be drawn fairly early in their schooldays
towards the question:
H What do I want to do later in life,
and why do I want it ?"
The ideas which are thus elicited,
taken together with their organic deficiencies or peculiarities,
are our best help in the vocational guidance of pupils. vVe
should not only look for the most highly-trained interest,
but seek to understand its root in the psychic prototype.
Wherever we find an ability it is the result of an interest in
which the child has trained itself, stimulated by the totality
of its circumstances.
So clearly does this appear, that we
are justified in believing that anyone could accomplish any-
thing, given the right training and the correct method.
By the way in which the child thinks and behaves and by
its characteristic perceptio!ls, its interest is being special-
ised for its future occup.ation.
The illterest as a' whole,

CASE
HISTORIES
149
however, is increased or decreased by its sense of the attain-
ability of its goal of superiority.
In the course of its develop-
ment, the child will concretise its goal in various unattain-
able forms, which it must be able to abandon without any
fundamental discouragement.
Our task, therefore, is to
support the child in soul al1d not iIi consciousness.
The
closer its social contact remains, the more common-sense
conceptions of superiority will it develop.
A child's idea of superiority is, of course, very often
influenced by desire to surpass the father in his occupation.
Thus, if his father is a public-school teacher, a boy may want
to be a don. As a rule we find that the more the choice of
the profession changes, the more the child understands
reality: but in each choice we can always detect the impulse
towards domination, the determination to attain a goal of
importance or of security, or at the least to escape difficulty
or defeat.
The child paints a new picture of its future action
from time to time; 'but always conditioned by the same
prototype motive.
When the actual choice of the profession
has to be made the child is confronted by the reality which
it has long been approaching, and that reality·may come in
circumstances either hostile or friendly to its own striving.
The goal of the working life has now to be fixed, however, and
the youth strikes his bargain with reality by taking up work
in an individual manner.
Whatever latitude of choice may
present itself, he decides how he will confront this necess-
ity for action in accordance with all the facts as he under-
stands them.
It is not to be expected that his conclusions
are perfectly correct.
More or less of an individual mistake
is invariably involved in his choice.
The conception of his
function, in its ideal final form, is distorted by irrelevant
factors.
Money is one of these, which in our present civilisa-

150
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
tion has an altogether exaggerated importance.
This final
form may be obscured also by an interest in long life and
health, security, or social ambition, or be warped by domin-
eering and critical tendencies.
In discouraged children there is generally a doubtful or
despairing attitude, and every struggle reveals movement
towards escape from the necessity of a decision.
Very often
this is shown in the selection of various and inconsistent
professions, preference for no profession at all, empty ideals,
lack of adventure, or by delinquent tendencies.
It is well worth while to compare all the selections of a
profession which a child makes in the course of its develop-
ment, for, taken as a whole, they disclose the line of action
and the degree of social interest and courage.
We should
not ignore the queerest and most fantastic choices, for they
are related in a metaphorical way to the attitude a child is
preparing to assume towards the demands of realit)7.
One
boy, for instance, when I asked what he wanted to be later
in life, replied, cc A·horse."
He was always trying to imitate
both the movements and the speed of a horse.
In his baby-
hood he had suffered from endocarditis and had been obliged
to lie very still in bed for a long period.
Later on he
expressed his choice of a profession more realistically by
becoming an automobile engineer.
Another boy seven
years old also symbolised his ambition by wanting to be a
horse.
When asked for the reason, he said,
cc My father is
ill, anq as I am the eldest I shall have to support the family."
In either of these cases it would be ridiculous to seek for
the cause of the fantasy in phylogenetic influences or in
sexual motives.
The first boy was interested in movement,
because the confinement of his illness had given him a specific
feeling of inferiority.
The second boy's use of the idea of

CASE HISTORIES
lSI
the horse was entirely different.
He was considering how
best to replace and surpass his father, and the horse was
the symbol of his future as the bearer of a heavy burden.
I
found another of these animal-fantasies in a boy of ten,
who wanted to be a buffalo, and used to charge home from
school in a posture imitative of an advancing bull.
He
developed into a bully: and his ideal character in history
was Achilles.
The bodily postures and attitudes always. indicate the
n1anl1er in which an individual approaches his goal.
A
person who goes straight on shows courage, whereas an adult
who is anxious and hesitant has a style of life that prohibits
direct action, and something of a detour appears in every
action.
Vie can always detect by the way in which an
individual gives his hand whether he has social feeling and
likes to be connected with others.
A perfectly normal
hand,shake is rather rare; it is usually overdone, underdone,
or betrays a pushing-off or pulling-to tendency.
It is
noticeable in a tramcar that some people lean sideways;
they wish to be supported and are quite oblivious of others'
convenience.
The same social insensibility is seen in those
who cough in front of others, quite thoughtless of infecting
them.
Some, in entering a room, seem to keep instinctively
at the greatest possible distance from everyone else.
All
these things reveal, more directly than their conversation,
the attitudes that individuals assume towards life.
The a~titudes ad'opted in sleep are as significant as the
postures and movements of daily life.
Very little children
sleep upon their backs., \vith the arms raised; and when we
see a child sleeping in this position ,ve may assume that it

152
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
is llealthy.
If the child changes this position and sleeps with
the arms down, for example, some illness is to be suspected.
Similarly, if an adult is accustomed to sleep in a certain
position, and suddenly
change~ it, we may assume that
something is altered in his mental attitude.
Organic defects
play their part, of course, in conditioning the sleeping
posture.
A person suffering from pneumonia or pleurisy
will always sleep upon the defective side, sometimes without
knowing why he does so.
He does it unconsciously because
it eases the breathing.
Some persons who have heart
trouble, <;>r think they have, believe that they cannot sleep
upon the left side.
There is no organic reason for this, but
they feel that they must be careful of the side which is the
weaker.
When we see a person sleeping upon the back, stretched
out like a soldier at attention, it is a sign that he wishes to
appear as great as possible.
One who lies curled up like a
hedgehog with the sheet drawn over his head is not likely to
be astrivingorcourageouscharacterbut isprobablycowardly.
We should be careful not to give him a difficult task until
we have found out how to give him courage.
A person who
sleeps on his stomach betrays stubbornness and negativity.
By comparing the sleeping postures of patients in various
hospitals with the reports of their daily life, I have concluded
that the mental attitude is consistently expressed in both
modes of life, sleeping and waking.
Some people turn a gradual somersault in sleep, and awake
with their heads at the bottom of the bed and their feet on
the bolster.
Such people are psychically in an attitude of
unusually strong opposition to the world, of the neurotic
type which will often answer
tt No" before having under-
stood the question. There are also patients who make a half-

CASE HISTORIES
153
turn and sleep with their heads hanging down over the edge
of the mattress.
They develop headaches from this practice,
which are generally used to escape the demands of the follow-
ing day.
I was considerably puzzled by the discovery that some
children sleep in a crouching position, resting on their knees
and elbows like animals; but I finally found out that this
is the best position in which to hear what is happening in
tIle next roQ,Ill.
It is adopted by children who have more
than the normal desir~ to keep in contact with others, even
in sleep, and they generally want to go to bed with the door
open.
Thus all postures have a purposive nature.
I once treated
a man who had become blind, and since then had always
wanted to hold his wife's hand while he slept, which pre-
vented her from moving. This was a pathetic disguise for a
tyrannical tendency.
When she resisted it he developed
hallucinations at night, and imagined that burglars had
caught her and carried her off.
This hallucination was a
development of the same line of action, to keep her in his
power.
Restless sleepers, who keep moving all night, show that
they are dissatisfied and want to be doing something more.
It may also be a sign that they want to be watched by
another person, usually by the mother. When children cry
in sleep it is for the same reason; that they do not want to
be alone but would like to ensure notice and protection. The
quietest sleepers are those who are most settled in their
attitude to the problems of life.
Their lives being well
organised by day they can use the night for its proper pur-
pose of :r:est and recreation, and their sleep is generally free
from dreaming.

CHAPTER XI
Cases in which Treatment is Resisted.-Anxiety-Neurosis.-Compulsion-
Neurosis.-Organ ]argon.-Dialect of the Sexual Organs.-Free Sex-
relations as Revenge.-Resistance to Marriage Expressed by Dream: By
Melancholy.-Relation of Sleeping to Waking.-Hypnotism.-Limitations
of Hypnotic Treatment.-Dream-Interpretation.-Absence of Dreams.-
Dream Expressing Conflict in Marriage.-Self-Deception of Dreams also
Observable in Waking Life.
IN cases where the patient begins with a feeling that treat-
ment will of itself endanger the goal of superiority it is often
difficult to make a start.
I had such a case in a married
woman of twenty-five, who suffered from an anxiety-neurosis.
At the first intenriew I asked her to take a chair beside me,
and she went and sat down at the other side of the room.
Her violent attacks of anxiety occurred when her husband
was delayed in coming home.
She had felt curtailed in her
life with her family, and her husband was the first person
who had treated her with over-indulgence, but no\v his
business obligations made it impossible for him to devote
himself so much to her.
She now wanted to be connected
only with her husband and to exclude everyone else, and by
the development of an anxiety-neurosis she was hindering
her husband's business.
No one else could demand any-
thing from her, and her husband had to obey, but she paid
for this success by very painf?l anxieties, and her husband
had been able to persllade her to come and see me.
Not unnaturally, the situation was an impasse.
She felt
before coming that I was a danger to her" and symbolised
154

CASE
HISTORIES
155
her attitude in her behaviour over the chair.
If I freed her
from her neurosis she would have no weapon with which to
face her husband.
Another such case was that ot a married ,voman who had
been the yo~ngest of a very competitive family.
She had
been reproached and teased as the inferior member of the
family, and as a girl had found no way of compensating for
this unfortunate position, except to prove that other people
were not in the right.
'This habit won her the nickname
of it the judge."
When sne n1arried it was in orde~ to get even with her
married sisters.
She was not in love \vlth her husband,
but was afraid of being despised if she did not prove herself
capable of a happy marriage.
But although she had three
children she could never feel equal to others, so she defended
herself against society by roughness, arrogance, and critic-
ism.
Such behaviour is often nothing but a neurotic safe-
guard against disappointment, and it is a complete mis-
judgment to call it the result of inherited psychopathic
conditions.
She felt sure that she could not equal her eldest sister in
the art of housekeeping, and her husband made a mistake
when they were first married, by asking her if she would be
as orderly as her sister.
This touched her on the sensitive
spot, and from that time onward she wanted to avoid house-
keeping, or at least to fail in it under extenuating circum-
stances.
A form of compulsion-neurosis ensued, which took
the form of devoting herself to the linen and laundry work
until her care and accuracy were a nuisance and a \vaste of
time.
As this left her no time for anything else she had an
excuse if the marriage developed unhappily.
N

PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
She had another device by which to defend herself which is
not uncommonly used by neurotics; she used to judge other
people by their likeness or unlikeness to Jesus Christ.
Thus,
after setting anyone on a pedestal for admiration, it was
easy for' her to discover faults in him, to prove that he was
not a Christ-like character, and then to cast him off.
She
used this defence against the many doctors to whom she went
for treatment, and frustrated their efforts because of her
prototypic feeling that if she were understood she would be
" put back" to her inferior position of the youngest.
She
had, therefore, to prove the doctors wrong, always tried to
forestall their opinions, and constantly worried and re-
proached, so that they were unable to speak, and the time
of the consultations passed ineffectually.
As we have seen in a variety of cases~ the organic functions
are dominated by the style of life.
This is notably' the case
wi~h the lungs, the heart, the stomach, the organs of excre-
tion and the sexual organs.
The disturbance of these
functions expresses the direction which an individual is
taking to attain his goal.
I have called these distu~bances
the organ dialect, or organ jargon, since the orga~ are
revealing in their own most expressive language the inten-
tion of the individual totality.
The dialect of the sexual-organs is especially expressive
~nd very often leads the patient to the doctor.
Each case
has its peculiarities, but in practically everyone the
patient is expressing by a disorder of tIle sexual functioning,
a stoppage, hesitation, or escape in the face of the three life-
problems.
Whatever
partial
sexual
satisfactions
the
patient may be providing for himself are of the nature of an
3:42

CASE
HISTORIES
I57
escape from the real problem, and the remainder which is
. left over for a normal expression has to be excluded.
In
this way the various forms of impotence are traceable to a
common root in a disinclination and lack of trainin& for
relations with other persons.
This is always demonstrable
when we leave the sexual symptoms temporarily out of
account, and study the nature of the patient's social contacts.
Most of the cases which I have known, of this specific func-
tional failure, concerned patients faced with the problem of
marriage.
Ejaculatio prrecox varies much in its individual
meaning, but I have found it to be a sign of an egoistic
character and a fee~Ilg of impotence, and it invariably goes
\vith a very poor social adjustment.
Failure to ejaculate
occurs in egoistical men who are afraid of having children,
generally because of their possi,ble rivalry.
Nobody who has understood anything of Individual
.Psychology would attempt to cure such cases as these by
upbraiding the patients with the \vords I have used, as if we
could do good by taking up a moralistic attitude.
A patient
has to be brought into such a state of feeling that he likes
to listen, and wants to understand.
Only then can he be
influenced to live what he has understood.
In women the same dialect appears as vaginismus.
This
is an avoidance of man,' \vhich is accompanied by other
mental symptoms signifying the woman's aversion either to
a certain man or to men in general.
Besides tllis active
avoidance there are the passive forms of sexual rejection,
frigidity and a display of passivity.
This lack of function
mirrors an idea in the \voman's mind of not being present in
intercourse, as though the event were only the man's affair.
In all cases of frigidity I have found that the woman felt the
female role as one of humiliation and curtailment.
It is

158
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
important to verify this precisely and apart from the sexual
life.
Ambitious girls who have been too much spoilt may easily
lose confidence in regard to sexual relations.
This was the
case with a very beautiful girl whom I treated, the youngest
of the family and spoiled by everyone, especially by the
father until he married a second time.
His re-marriage
undermined her self-confidence.
It is very difficult for a
step-mother to take her place in relation to her husband's
children without exciting their antagonism.
I do not know
if others have t~e same experience, but I have found that
it is the girls who make the most trouble in these cases, and
if an opportunity offers, they begin free sexual relations as
if in revenge.
"Vhen they are intelligent and sensitive
enough to feel the full difficulty of the situation, they are
conscious of a lack of love from both sides, and often
become frigid and elude marriage, which was the case with
my patient.
We nlight well ask why this girl continued to
enter into sexual relations at all, if we reckon up all that she
had against it.
She had the memory of being deserted by
her father, the experience that a lover did not pamper her
as her father did, and in addition to these things she had the
gruesome experiences of undesired pregnancy and artificial
abortion without physical gratification in love.
To set
against all these disadvantages she had nothing but a secret
sense of being revenged upon her father
Ii
An individual can never settle down into such an unsatis-
factory style of life, which excludes marriage and is ill-
adapted to social relations or to work.
What happens is a
state of continual tension, which becomes acute in the face
of every real problem that may present itself; and \vhich
often appears in headache and fatigue.

CASE
HISTORIES
159
My patient dreamed: " Jesus Christ appeared to me, and
invited me to go to Heaven with Him, where my task would
be to amuse all tIle other people
If I did not choose to do
this I \vas to go to Hell.
Then I found myself in Heaven,
and saw many angels who looked like the penguins in
Anatole France's satire, and I also saw God, shaving His
beard and looking and moving like the nlan in the advertise-
ments in the chemist's shop-windows.
I felt a great despair
and wanted to go away."
This dream is difficult to interpret unless we relate it to
the general line of the girl's development; indeed we should
not make any sense of it if we could not estimate, from her
history and its involved line of action, what was the emo-
tional idea with which she was trying all the time to intoxi-
cate herself.
This was an idea of rejecting virtue and
taking to vice, motivated by revenge against the father,
who wanted virtue of her.
Having grasped this funda-
mental agreement of the dream with everything else the
patient is doing we can proceed to interpret:
tI To amuse the
other people" corresponds to her notion of the humiliation
of the female role, which she conceives as only an amuse-
ment for men.
Jesus Christ is her supreme symbol of a
man of very earnest and unselfish character \vho proposed
to marry her: He had said to her, " I want to sacrifice
myself to make you happy."
Heaven, therefore, is the
heaven He promised her in marriage.
But as we have seen,
she is fearful of defeat in marriage, so that married life
cannot be allowed to seem attractive, upon the same
principle that the grapes wInch are too high to reach must
be suspected of being sour.
So in her dream, this man
in his little village appeared to her in the contemplative
mood of the Viennese satirist, Nestroy, \vhen he wrote:

160
PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSIS
It What is a man?
Getting up, shaving and going to
sleep again !"
A much-spoiled girl, the YOllngest of eleven sisters and
hrothers, and correspondingly ambitious, had another way ot
making the grapes of marriage sour.
She had a few sexual
intimacies, but onl~y with married men.
I am always sus-
picious if a girl begins with married men, because the
difficulties are obviously so nlllch greater, and an impractic-
able choice is not to be simply explained a\vay by insisting
upon the uncontrollable power of love.
It was easy in
this case, to find out that the patient had been intimidated
by her pampered upbringing, and was especially nervous
of the issue of nlarriage because two older sisters had been
happily married and she feared she \vould fail to surpass
them. She had always beel1 conscious of this, but was not
so well aware of what she was doing in her successive
liaisons.
If one of her lovers \\J·anted to get a divorce
and marry"her, she left him-depressed and crying a little, of
course, but always firm because of the poor \\rife, who was
usually a personal friend of hers.
The depression soon
ceased with the beginning of another affair, but finally, after
breaking off an intimacy in these circumstances, she "vent
into a melancholy that lasted for months.
It was then that she came to me:
she was thirty-six
years old and living with a brother who "vas a widower and
who pampered her very much.
But in their first months
together he had spoken of marrying again, and suggested
that she should marry too.
Faced with this undesirable
prospect, and in the act of breaking off a relationship, her
illness was a device to " kill two birds ,vith one stone! "
It gave the brother a warning to take more care of her, and

CASE
HISTORIES
I6I
herself a lesson not to begin again with another man because
of new and more dangerous consequences.
Sleeping is another kind of waking.
We could, of course,
be equally justified in saying that waking is a variant of
sleeping, the truth being that in order to understand them,
either psychologically or biologically, we must give up the
idea tllat
the~y' are contradictory states.
Biologically con-
sidered, sleep is only a partial cessation of the organism's
contact with its environnlent, a lessening of its functional
activity.
In sleep our attention retains a certain amount of
contact with reality through feeling, hearing, and thinking,
but we exclude the greater part of the connections between
them.
We observe the limits of our movements in bed and
do not fallout.
We select some noises as important enough
to a\vaken us and neglect others, and we can even wake
ourselves up at stated hours.
All these activities which
sleep does not exclude are also carried on in the waking
state, often hardly any more consciously.
Hypnotism is also a variety of waking, but it differs from
sleep by excluding a different class of activities.
The
hypnotised subject excludes whatever the hypnotist wishes
him to exclude, having first agreed (whether he admits it or
not) to accept only the hypnotist's commands.
Thus
hypnotism may be called sleeping to order.
Apart from
hypnotism this sleeping to order is not uncommon, especi-
ally among children.
Thus hypnotism is a proof of very
great obedience.
It is often regarded as a justifiable method
of medical or psychic treatment, but Individual Psycholo-
gists naturally avoid it, knowing that the essence of success-
ful treatment is an increased courage and self-control.
A

162
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
patient must prove these qualities by using them himself,
not by abdicating control to another.
The frequent failures
which follow hypnotic methods of treatment are the patient's
revenge for having been unexpectedly attacked by sugges-
tion during the hypnosis.
There is nothing surpfising in the fact that hypnosis can
remove or mitigate certain symptoms, though without per-
manent benefit.
I have alre~dy pointed out that the same
is true of man)' suggestive methods, which the patient
regards in a magical or semi-religious light, but these things
do not of themselves teach a better adaptation to life.
Thus
they give transitory alleviations, and seem to be most
effective in reducing the neurotic symptoms accompanying
certain organic diseases, such as apoplexy, after-effects of
syphilis and multiple sclerosis.
As Ludwig Stein has shown,
nearly all organic illnesses produce more symptoms than
are
necessary.
These
nervous
complications
are
best
treated by the method of Individual Psychology, which,
though it cannot cure pneumonia or heart disease, may very
much relieve these conditions by encouraging the patient.
Our distinctive method of dream-interpretation is founded
upon this recognition of the unity of the waking and sleeping
life.
This is an advance upon the valuable discoveries of
Lichtenberg and of
Freud,
that
dreams
always
con-
tain signs
of vital problems which the dreamer never
recognises in his waking life, discoveries which our work
amply confirms.
But the dream is not merely the sub-
stitutionary satisfaction of wishes unfulfilled in waking-
especially not of Freud's
tc infantile sexual desires "-but
it is a function of the entire style of life, more dynamically
related to the future than to the past-a fact intuitively
known in antiquity when dreams were regarded as prophetic

CASE HISTORIES
and not as historical.
The dreamer is engaged in moulding
his attitude and disposition to the coming events of his life,
storing up a certain reserve of feeling and emotion which
could not be acquired in the day-time by contact with reality
and by logical thinking.
He thus accumulates a certain
irrational force to sustain him in the pursuit of his own goal
of superiority in the problems he anticipates, to solve
them in his own way and against the demands of common
sense.
In dreanls, therefore, we never find any other tendencies
or movements than those manifested in the style of the
waking life when the latter is coherently grasped.
We
cannot oppose
It consciousness " to "unconsciousness"
as
if they were two antagonistic halves of an individual's exist-
ence.
The conscious life becomes unconscious as soon as we
fail to understand it-and as soon as we understand an
unconscious tendency it has already become conscious.
The dream strives to pave the way towards solving a
problem by a metaphorical expression of it, and in itself it
is a sign that the dreamer feels inadequate to solve it by
common
sense.
A
metaphorical
conception
of
one's
situation is a way of escape from it, as it may be used to
support almost any kind of practical action.
This is best
exemplified in the dreams which create the feelings and
emotions of success, as they produce a kind of intoxication
which perfectly resists the logic of communal life.
Natur-
ally the dreamer does not recognise his own metaphor for
what it is.
If he understood it, it would be ineffective for
its purpose.
It is essentially a self-deception, in the
interest of l1is own individual goal.
We should expect,
therefore, that the more the individual goal agrees with
reality the less a person dreams, and we find that it is so
3:42

PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSIS
Very courageous people dream rarely, for they deal ade-
quately with their situation in the day-time.
There are problematic cases, of course.
An absence of
dreams may prove later on to be only an absence of their
contents, which are entirely forgotten so that only the
emotion remains.
That is but a further step in the self-
deceptive process of which dreaming is one of the functions,
and its purpose is to prevent the individual from getting
insight into his dreams.
Or the absence of dreams may
be a sign that the patient has come to a point of rest in his
neurosis and established a neurotic situation which he does
not wish to change.
Short dreams indicate that the
present problems are such that the dreamer desires to find
a
H short cut" bet\veen them and the individual style of
life.
Dreams which are long or very complicated are
dreamed by patients who are seeking excessive security in
their lives, and they generally indicate hesitation and a
desire on the part of the patient to postpone even his own
self-deception in case it should not work out rightly.
The
style of life isbest shown bydreams which are often repeated,
or which have remained in the memory for many years.
The methods of self-deception which we use in dreams can
be seen not only in the abuse of comparisons, metaphors and
symbols, but also in a tendency to narrow or foreshorten a
pres~nt problem until only a part of it is visible-a part
which cannot be judged by the same standards as the whole.
The urgent and necessary decision of a vital problem, for
example, may be dreamed of in the form of an unimportant
school-examination.
A case in \vhich dreams played an important part was
that of a man who had been married eight years and had two
children, but was disappointed in his wife.
His great com-
3:42

CASE
HISTORIES
plaint against her was that she did not take sufficient care
of the children.
The accentuation of the duty to the child-
ren in marriage is always the sign of a deeper-lying dis-
agreement with the partner.
Whether this man was right
or wrong about his wife's neglect of the children, he used his
criticism of it to;,express a deeper reproach, and held it as a
stronghold against ller.
This was evident from other
details of his behaviour, which showed that he worried about
her manageluent of matters other than the children, such as
her housekeeping.
The real source of his antagonism was
his belief that she had not married him for love, and he
found confirmation in the fact that his wife had been frigid.
I have always found that long-continued frigidity offends
the husband in the highest degree, and both partners become
more or less irritated.
In order to ha\7e a powerful proof
of his wife's guilt, instead of the real and humiliating reason
for his condemnation of her, he developed this exaggerated
fear for the children, and subsequently came to me because
of headaches and a distaste for work.
He was not courage-
ous enough to get a divorce or to seek another woman, having
grown up with the feeling that in childhood he had been put
back by his mother.
This man became very jealous and lost all faith in women.
One night he dreamed, it I was in a battle in the streets of a
city, and in the midst of the shooting and burning many
women were thrown into the air as if by an explosion."
He
afterwards suffered much from pity in remembering this
picture, until my treatment enabled him to understand it.
It agreed with his attitude to his marriage-problem, for in
this dream he gratified his rage by picturing a general
extermination of women,
which he was compelled to
repudiate because he was not without social feeling and

166
PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSIS
compassion.
We can see how· this pitying after-thought
enabled him to maintain the daily attitude he assumed
towards his wife-that he was not at all angry with her, but
only solicitous for the children.
I should analyse the
structure of his dream as follows :-He selected some
terrible pictures from his memories of the war-we call this,
the selection of an adapted thought-and then compared
the relations between the sexes to such warfare.
In this
way he minimised the whole problem of the sexes to a small
part of it-a battle-leaving out all the more important
factors.
'Wb.en he recovered from his fright, and when his
self-deception and self-intoxication were explained and
understood by him he became quieter and the headaches
ceased.. but he did not wish to be reconciled to his wife.
He
then had another dream:
II The youngest of my three
children got lost and could not be found."
As we know he
had only two children, but he was very frightened both in
the dream and after awakening from it.
The line of reproach which this patient had always taken
against his wife was the accusation of neglecting the
children. So if he imagined a third child lost it was a warning
not to have more children and thus increase the danger.
By
this detour he could avoid resuming relations with his wife.
Again we see how the selection of an adapted thought
enables him to \vork up a comparison which minimises the
whole problem of educating and protecting children to one
detail of it.
Nevertheless, a very acute psychologist may
detect, in the selection of the fiction of a third child, the
beginning of a movement towards reconciliation.
For it is
as though the patient glimpsed the possibility of another,
but withdrew, saying, It She may be careful eno~gh for two,
but surely not for three."

CASE
HISTORIES
167
The self-deception practised in dreams is very often trace-
able in the waking state, a fact of which I once had a very
interesting proof.
I was about to leave Vienna when a
former patient rang TIle up and asked me to see his sick wife.
He had consulted two physicians and neither could decide
what was thesqurse ~f the fever.
I was in a hurry and tried
to excuse myself, saying that I was not a specialist in
organic illnesses, but I finally yielded to his insistence.
I
found the patient was suffering from typhus, and recom-
mended a consultant who was skilful in such cases.
He still
resisted, saying that no physician could tell him more than I
could, and I had difficulty in getting away with a promise
that I would visit him as a friend as soon as I returned to
Vienna.
He kept on saying (l But he could not tell me more
than you have told me."
At last I persuaded him to call in
the expert, and went away.
When I returned to visit him
a few weeks later his wife was recovering, and he told me
he was very well satisfied with the doctor I had recom-
mended.
Then, in a very positive tone, he observed,
U Of
course, you told me when you came that Dr. W. had died
that morning."
I had told him nothing of the kind, so I denied it.
I had
only read the news myself in my vacation the day after
leaving Vienna.
He would not believe this, however, and
stoutly maintained that I had spoken of Dr. W.'s death.
When I asked him what made him think I had told him, he
answered, "Why, you must have done so.
For when the
consultant came to see my wife the next day, he had no
sooner greeted everyone present than he turned to the
doctors and said,
I Do you know my friend, Dr. 'tV. J is dead? '
I Yes,' I interposed,
I Dr. Adler told me so yesterday.'
The
specialist looked surprised and said, I I know Dr. Adler very

168
PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSIS
well, but I did not know he was blessed with the gift of
prophecy.'
There must be some mistake" and I wonder if
you can explain it."
I t was not so difficult to explain.
This man had almost
unlimited faith in me, and when I saw him before my
departure he had repeatedly said, U The specialist cannot tell
me anything that you haven't said."
He had intoxicated
himself ,vith this idea, so that he received the new doctor
with an emotional determination that \\"hatever he said, it
would be something I had already told him.
Thus he spon-
taneously took the first piece of information which the
specialist uttered and firmly, and with perfect self-deception,
ascribed it to me.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
THE following are the principal works bearing upon Individual
Psychology that have been published in English :-
DR. ALFRED ADLER.
Study of Organ Inferiority and its Psychical Compensations.
A ..cpntribution to Clinical Medicine.
Nervous and Mental
Disease Monograph Series No. 24.
Nervous and Mental Disease
Publishing Co.
1917.
The Neurotic Constitution.
Outlines of a Comparative In-
dividualistic Psychology and Psycho-therapy.
Kegan Paul &
Co.
I8s.
1921.
Individual Psychology, the practice and theory of.
Inter-
national Library of Psychology,
Philosophy and Scientific
Method.
Kegan Paul & Co.
I8s.
1924.
Understanding Human Nature.
Geo. Allen & Unwin, Ltd.
12S. 6d.
1928.
The Case of Miss R.
The Interpretation of a Life Story.
Greenberg:
New York.
$3-50.
1929.
F. G. CROOKSHANK, F.R.C.P.
lrligrai1te and Other Common Neuroses.
Psyche
~liniatures
Medical Series.
Kegan Paul & Co.
2S. 6d.
1926.
PHILIPPE MAIRET.
ABC of Adler's Psychology.
Uniform ,vith ABC of lung's
Psychology, by J. Corrie.
Kegan Paul & Co.
3s. 6d.
1928.
169

PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
ERWIN WEXBERG, M.D.
Individual
Psychological
Treatment.
Psychic
Methods
of
Cure Series.
C. W. Daniel Co.
6s. I929.
Your Nervous Child.
A. C. Boni (New York).
8s. I927.
HANS VAIHINGER.
The Philosophy of As If. International Library of Psychology,
Philosophy and Scientific Method.
Kegan Paul & Co.
25s.
1924.
3:42

INDEX
ACHILLES, 118, 151
Adopted
child,
situation of the,
22
.-\.erophagia (air-swallowing), 94, 95,
135, 139
Aggression, truth as
weapon
of,
24
Agoraphobia, 6, II, 30, 92, 94, 95,
113, 140, 143
Alcoholism (see Drunkenness), 137
It All or nothing," neurotic formula,
55
Ambition, 22, 39, 42, 58, 59, 62, 84,
142, 158, 160
Ambivalence refuted, 87
Anamnesis, 118
Anger, and fainting, 5r
--, and headaches, 58, 59
--, and masculine protest, 43
--, suppression of, 22, 60
--, use of, 29, 90, 91
Angina pectoris, 139
Animal characteristics and the pro-
totype, 55, 116, 150, 15 T,
152 ,
153 (aniInal fantasies, IS0, lSI)
Ankylosis of the knees, 140
Antagonism, in marriage, 165, 166
-- to family, 97, 116, 127
-- to society, 99, 152 , 155
Anxiety, and stoDlach trouble, 57
--, fictitious form of, 10
--, use of, 29, 84, 91, 122, 165
Anxiety neurosis, 2, 6, I I, 108-1 I I,
139-140 , 154
Apoplexy, 162
Appreciation, neurotic striving for,
II
Art, human value of, 78
Arthritis, gonorrheal, 140
Asthma, 97, 135
Astigmatism, 123
Athletics, as denial of femininity,
43,45
Attachment to one parent, 92-93,
98.. III, 112, 142
Audacity, 118
o
BACKWARD child, 89
Beethoven, 35, 66
Begging attitude, 86-89, 108
Behaviour, changes in, 98
--, in love and society, 48
--, insulting, 116
--, not hereditary, 105
-- pattern, 19, 36,
37, 39, 42
5 1,75,89, 105, 117
Beliefs, consequences of real, 62
Benjamin, 107
Biblical
history,
examples
from
105, 107, 108
Birth control, I I I
Blushing, 126, 127, 133
Brain
and
blood
circulation
peculiarities of, 51
" Brothers Karamazov, The," 106
Buzzing in the ears, 86
CAESARIAN madness, 129
Cancer, fear of, 108, 109
Castration complex, 67
Catatonia, 15
Celibacy, as goal of superiority, 131
Character,
basic,
relatively
un-
changeable, 30, 31
Charity, spurious, 37
Charlemagne, 4, 5
Child-bearing, attitudes to, 60, 61,
125
Children of great men, 5
Chorea, hysterical, 97
Civilisation, masculine role in,
24,
44,66,67
--, money over-valued in,
149,
15°
,
over-intellectualised, 78
--, right-handed, 66
f f Clairvoyance," neurotic's belief in
his, 70
Cleaning mania, 12, 104
Clumsiness, 55, 64
54,

I72
PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
Coherence of life-current (see Life
plan), 108
Common sense, and science, 36
--, neurotic rejection of, 72
--, objectivity of, 28, 47, 48
Compen5ation, and social feeling,
31, 122, 133
-- for defects,
4,
34,
3.1, 56,
65-67
-- for fear of death, 33,
145,
146
--, genius, and talent, 35, 146
--, negative, 66
Compensatory striving, 2, 35
Competitive striving, 58, 59, 155
Compulsion ideas and feelings, II,
14, 15, 135, 136
Compulsion neurosis, 8, IS, 38, 39,
1°4, 123, 155
Contrariness, 105
Courage, degree of,S, 32 , 35, 47,
48, 66, 102, 105, 164-
-- in choice of mate, 23, 104
Cowardice, 27, 30, 33, 36, 58, 69, 80,
94, 107, 129, 130 , 152
Crime, and criminal development,
82, 116, 117, 129, 130
Criminal statistics, 129, 130
Crisis, earliest in life, 80
-- in middle age, log
-- of school life, 103
-- of vocational choice, 14-9
Cruelty, 36, 70
Crying, an accusation, 23, 8g
Cure, conditions of, 73
Cyclothymia, 27, 28
DANGER, neurotic emphasis on, 111
David, 107
Daydreams, 132 , 133, 143, 144
Deafness, 35
Death, fear of, attitudes to, and
compensations for, 33, 145-147
Death wish, theory of infantile, 84
Decisions, fear of, 3, 14, 99
--, Tolstoy's method, 146
Deficiencies, inherited, 4, 5, 34, 122
--, compensation for (see C)
Delinquents, educational factor in,
118
Demands of life, 18
Demosthenes, 35
Depression, 38, 64, 80, 81, 83, 85,
89, 91, 98, 160
Destiny (see Fate)
Dethroned child, 57; 97, 98, 102,
103, 107, 122
Diagnosis, 8, 27, 34, 139
-- and treatment, 61, 71, 72
Diarrhoea, and mountaineering, 3
Disastrous cases, 116
Discontent, 36, 8I
Discouragement, avoidance of, 149
--, synlptoms of, g8, 102, 150
Disobedience, 97, 100, 124
Disorderliness, 36
Distance from others, 36
Domineering disposition, 18
Don Juan type, 130
.
Dostoevsky, Fedor, 106
Dreams, as mirror of behaviour,
'7
_1_, as self deception and intoxi-
cation, 7, 163, 164
-- as prophetic, 70, 162, 163
--, attitude
to
in
Antiquity,
108, 162
--, forgotten, 164
--, freedom
from,
153,
163,
164
--, Freudian conception of, 15.
162
--, Joseph's, 108
--, length of, 6, 164
--, patients', describec:I,
6,
16.
60, 88, 135, 140, 159, 165, 166
--, principles of formation of, 6J
15, 164, 165
--, recurrent, 164
--, in
Individual
Psychology)
15, 16, 162--165
Dream-moods and the goal, 16, 30j
108, 163
Drug habit, 53, 55
Drunkenness, 51, 52, 55, 82, 137
Duty, evasion of, 76
Dvorak, 66
Dynamic unity of mental process
87
EARLIEST memories, 72, 86, 89, 92
93, 99, 121, 126, 141, 142, I45
-- of physicians, 147
Eating, abnormal interest in, 56
Education of boys, 117
--, effect of,
on impediments
63
-
---- of girls, 68

INDEX
173
Education, improved methods of, 5
-- for life, 44, 48, 49, 115
-- of the only child, IlfZ
--, methods of, 4,5, 112, 118
--, mistakes in, 107, 118, 120
Ego, development of the, 7'
Ego-centric interest, and egoism, 40,
60, 61, 81, 95, 97, 126, 13S
Ejaculatio praecox, 49, 157
Eldest child, 96-99, 101-103, 124,
136
Emesis, 135. 139
Emotion and circulatory disturb-
ances,58
--, and nervous system, 126
--
of
dreams
(see
Dream-
moods)
Emotional arrangements, 17, 30
Endocarditis, 150
Enuresis, symptomatic use of, 36
Environment, cosmic, 36
--, family differences of, 96
--, relations ,vith, chosen or per-
mitted, 1,31
Envy, 56, 90,91,97, 102
Epileptoid fits, 1 1, 5 I, 58
Erythrophobia (see Blushing), 126,
133
Escape into fancy, 69
-- from life, 71
Examinations, fear of, 123
Exasperation, 131
Exhibitionists, 143
Extravagance, 75
FACIAL contortions, 69
Fainting, 63
Fainting fits and anger, 51
Family constellation, 56, 76, 96, 97,
l0S, 1°7, 108, I I 7
-- competition, 100, 102
Fatalistic failure, 87
Fate (and Destiny), 79, 84
Father Zosima, 106
Fatigue, r I, 158
Fault finding and useful criticism,
36
Favourite child, 84
Fear, 13, 145
-- of death, in children, 33, 145
-- of defeat,
10, 12, 13, 17, 36,
94, 98, 99, 103, 144
Fear of thunderstorms, 142
Feeling of inferiority, 1, 2, 8, 33,
36, 37, 54, 58, 64, 71, 79, 87, 91,
1°9, 113, 115, 132
--, sexual basis of, 24, 42 , 44,
66,67
--, three-fold cause of, 34
Fellatio, 114
Fellow-man, first experience of, 2 I,
92
----, good, 3 1 , 32,93,124
Feminine environment, effects of,
117
Flatulence, 94, 139
Folk-lore, character in, 108
Fontane, Theodore (an eldest child),
101, 102
Freedom of child's psyche, 34
Freudian conception of dreams (see
Dreams)
-- interpretation
of the
guilt
complex, 24
-- psychologists on love, 61
-- view of woman's feeling of
inferiority (see
(C Castration com-
plex "), 67
Friedman, Dr.
Alice, article by,
65
Frigidity, 50, 157, 165
Freytag, Gustow, 66
Function, individual's conception of
his (see Prototype motive), 149
Functional distur,bances, II
GENIUS, 35
Girlish appearance and upbringing,
112-114, 141, 142
Glandular development, 114, 124
Goal, childish methods of attaining,
90, 97
--, individual, 13, 32 , 41 , 56, 62,
73, 74, go
--, neurotic, 10, 11,3°,90, 117
--, prototypic form of, 46-47,
55-57
-- of superiority, 1,5, 16, 17, 37,
42, 61, t04, 128-132 , 149
--, useful and useless, 2, 12, 15,
17,33,48,55,59,79,13 1
Goethe, 66
Grandparents, influence of, 92
Great men, ruling motive of, 146
Guilt complex, 24, 25, 38, 39, 83

174
PROBLEMS
OF
NEUROSIS
HALLUCINATIONS, 153
IIandshake, and style of life, 151
Handwriting, tendencies shown in,
27,65
Hated
child
(see
Unloved
child,
case of), 36
Headaches, I I, 58, 59, 97, 153, 158
Hearing, deficient, 66
Heart troubles,
I I, 134, 135, 152 ,
162
Heine, quoted, 146
Hereditary factors, 4, 5, 57, 77, 105,
106
Heredity, Theory of, in education
and in psychology, 4
Hero-fantasies, in mythology, 132
Hesitation, 3, 10, 50, 61, 71, 87, 88,
99, 15 1
Homer, 34
Homosexuality, 44, 47, 113,
114,
115, 116, 131
Homosexual tendencies, 42 , 94, 95,
117, 142
Horace, quoted, 59, 146
Hypnosis (see Sleep)
Iiypnotic
treatment,
reasons
against, 161, 16z
IDEALS of life, 48
Ideals of success, limited forms of,
13°
" Identification"
theory
refuted,
105
Idleness (see Laziness), 124
)
" If, II the neurotic, 5, 10, 72 , I I I
Illness, production or prolongation
of, 71 , 97
--, psychic and organic, 71
Imitation as a factor in neurosis, I I
Immortality of the soul, forms of
belief in, 147
Impotence, 50, 73, 86, 87, 137, 157
Incestuous inclinations, 136
Independence, development of, 32
Indirect method of treatment, 24-
26
Individual and community, 32 , 33
-- psyche, structure of, 47
Individnal Psychology an art, 40
--, root-concept of, 33
--, theory and practice of, 74
--, views, tested, 36
Individual
Psychologists,
experi-
ences of, 72
Infection, neurotic fear of, 17
Inferiority feelings (see Feelings of
inferiority)
Inferiority-position
of
man
in
Universe, 78
Inferiority positions, three typical,
4 1
Inherited characteristics and ten-
dencies, belief in, 79, 118, 120
-- instincts, theory of, 29
-- material, use of, 30
-- psychopathic conditions, mis-
judgment of, 155
Insanity, 55
---, manic-depressive, 27
Insomnia, 123, 139
Instinct of self-preservation, 146
Irritability, 56
Isolation, 36, 37, 48, 53, 75, 78, 86,
129, 131
JACOB, 105
jealousy, 49, 51, 84, 97, 102, 103,
137, 140, 165
--, imaginary, 80, 137, 138
--, unconscious, 138
joseph, 107, 108
" Julius Caesar," Mark Antony's
oration in, 106 .
KA~T,. 67
" Killing time," 103
(, LAST hope," doctor as, 9
Law of the low doorw'ay, 55
Laziness, 102, 124, 142
Left-hanc\edness, 34, 53, 63-65
Lessing, 89
Libido, theory of repression of, 61
Lichtenberg, 162
Life as a race, 9, 102, 103, lOS
Life-goal and sex, 50
Life-plan,
development
of
(see
Behaviour pattern), 80, 87
--, unity of, 72,108,121,122
Life-problem of love (sex) (see Love,
life-problem of)
-- of
occupation (see Occupa-
tion)
-- of
society (see Society)

INDEX
:I75
Logic and communal life, 163
-- and neurosis, 15, 16, 21, 28,
110
-- v. private intelligence, 28, 80
Love, adolescent training for, 44, 48
--,
life-problem
of
(see
also
Three problems of life), 3, 9, 10,
18,20,21,47,61,62,75
--, normal, 44, 48, 50
--, perversions of, 44, 50
--, relation to goal, 46, 47, 61
Love
and
marriage
(see
also
Marriage), 46-49, 52, 62, 165
---, avoidance of, 10, 11,44-46,
49, 50, 61,
67,
104,
10 9, 131 ,
143, 144
--, in literature, 48
Lovers; case of unequal education,
86
Lying, 24, 25,38, 102, 124
MALE superiority, 49
Mania, 13,27,28
Manic-depressive insanity, 27, 128
Marriage
(see
also
Love
and
Marriage), 45, 48, 50, 51, 6]', 73,
85, 93, 110, 155, 165
-- as a Task, 23, 61, 1°4, 148
--, case of drunkenness in, 51
-- with a relative, 136
Masculine environment, 118
Masculine protest, 4 1 , 42, 43, 45, 49,
135, 136, 142
1\1asochistic role, I IS, 130, 131 , 133,
144
Mass psychology, fantasy in, 132
Maternal functions, 20, 2 I, 3 I, 32
--, assumption of by physician,
73,77
1Iasturbation, 3, 4, 38, 75, 88, 94,
113, 1 2 3, 13 1 , 134
Mathematics as a difficulty, 141
Melancholia, indirect treatment of
(see also Depression), 13, 22, 23,
26,27, 83
Memones, choice of, 12 I
J\tlenstruation difficulties, 43
Metaphorical conceptions, use of,
163, 164
Migraine, 11,97
Milton, 34, 66
1\1isogynist, 94
Money-making and nutrition, 56
Morning sickness, 135
~Iorphia, 53, 54, 74, 82
Mother, resistance to the, 92
Mountain-climbing, significance of,
3, 116
Movement, handicaps in, 66, 124,
IS°
Movements and postures in sleep,
15 1- 153
--, gestures, and postures, mean ..
ing of, 63, 151-153
Multiple sclerosis, 162
NESTROY, satirical quotation from,
159-160
Nietzsche, and individual psycho-
logical view of guilt-feeling, 24
Neurosis a relief, 80, 8 I
--, as weapon of aggression, 80,
81, 155
--, first signs of, 57, 64
--, roots of, 13, 19, 40, 102
--,
understanding
of
the,
13,
4°
Neurotic children, three types of,
34, 37
-- choice of
experiences,
30,
89
-- goal and emotions, II, 14, 30,
50
-- heart, 30, 60, 61, 139
--
infection,
immunity
from,
20
-- symptoms,
II,
12,
13,
17,
49, 9 1 , 92, 97, 109, 125, 133, 135,
139, 162
Neurotics as strategists, 91
--, behaviour of, 19, 33
--, degree of social feeling in,
82
--,
educational
factor
in de-
velopment of, 5, 118
OCCUPATION (life problem of), 3, 14,
109, 123, 125, 141 , 148- 150
Official position, attraction to, log
Only boy among girls, 76, 117
Only child, position of, 112
Optimism, 47, 50
Organic
defects
and
bodily
positions, 97,
I I I, 116
-- disturbances, I I, 156
-- handicaps, effect of, 99
--
illness,
symptoms
in,
63,
71, 162

PROBLEMS
OF NEUROSIS
Organic inferiority, signs of, 71
-- \veakness, I I, 13
Organically
defective
children
(treatment of), 35
Organ-jargon, 156
Orientation, individual, 62
Orphan, 86, 87, 92
U Over-valued ideas,," 110
PALPITATIONS, 58, 60,94
Pampered child (see Spoiled child)
Paralysis, diagnosis of, 27, 28, 85,
129
Paranoia, 13, 128
Paranoid fears, 133, 134
Para-sympathetic nerves, 29
Patricide and murder, case of, 116
.Perversion, 67, 88, 130
Pervert;:;, 33, 82, 114
Petit mal, 51, 97
Philogenetic influences, 150
Phobia, II
Physical defects (compensation for),
34
Pneumonia, 162
Pollutions, 3, 88, 123
Polygamous tendencies, 54, 88,99
Postures (see Movements)
Pregnancy, defence against, 60, 67,
104
--, undesired, 158
Preparation for life, 18, 47, 118
Pride, 22, 3I
Primogeniture, custom of, 101
'c Private intelligence', (see Logic),
28
Problem
children,
5,
12, 19, 33,
8r, 103, lIS
Problems excluded by patient, 72
Problems of life, the three, 14, 20,
2 r, 36, 37, 75, 76, 99
Problems of life, relation to, 55,
153, J 58
Procrastination, 90
Prophetic fantasies, 69, 70
Profligacy, 100
Prostitutes, 33
Prototype as pattern of adaptation,
50, 98, 147, 148
Prototypic la\v, 62
--
method
in
love
and mar-
riage, 55, 57, 77
Pseudo-angina, 139
Psychiatry, other schools of, ,10
Psychic prototypea 46, 52, 53, 54,
62, 68, 142, 149
-- situation, individual, 96
Psychosis, 13,21, 128
Psychotherapist, function of, 73
Psychotics, 5, 19
Puberty, natural crisis of, 124
Pugnacity, 56, 98, 103
RACE, procreation and culture of
the, 146
Racial repetition theory, 106
Rage, 22, 51, 58, 165
Reality, demands of, I, 128, 130
Recollection of childhood, 8
Red hair, as inferiority, 132 , 134
Re-education of patient, I, 20
--, special methods of, 56
Reincarnation, I4P
Religion, human value of, 78
Remorse and repentance, neurotic
use of, 76, 84
'c Resistance "
to
psychological
treatment, 73
Respiratory troubles, 84, 94
Responsibility, 3, 8, 47, 81, 88
Revenge motive, cases of, 9, 15, 81
Riches, desire for, 53, 100
Rivalry in infancy, 61, 98
Robespierre, 102
SADISM, 101, 130, 13 1 , 133
Saul, 107
Saviour fantasies, 23, 128
Schiller, 66
Schizophrenia., 13, r8, 20, 69, 128
Science, human value of, 78
Security, desire for, 109
Second child, 2, 3, 9, 38, 86, 97, 99,
Ioo-r03, Iq5-107, 114, 14 2
SeIf-deception
in
"\vaking
life,
example of, 168
Self-denials, neurotic, 136
Self-exhibition, 3!}, 40
Sense Iunctions ann special develop-
ments,66
Sex differences, ignorance of, 113
-- ~quality, 67
-- glands, influence of, 41
Sex relations, free, 44, 45, 49, 73,
158, ISQ
--, premature, 124
Sexual factor in dreams, 15
-- fantasies, 133, 134, 143
3:42

INDEX
177
Sexual
functions
and
neurotic
symptoms, 49
-- life,
evasion of normal,
95,
104, 115, 116, 13 T, 156, 157
-- life, norm of. 48, 49
-- impulse,
functional relation
of, 46
-- role, 7, 29, 4 1, 43, 67, 68
Sight, imperfections of, 65, 66, 141
Sleep and hypnotism, 161
-- and nocturnal recreation, 153
--, a'\vareness during, r61
--, biologically considered, 161
--, movements and postures in,
15 1- 153
Sleeping and waking
lif~, unity of,
152, 161, 167
Sleeplessness, I I, 59
Smetana, 66
Smoking as defence, 75
Social activity, evasion of, 81
-- effort, spontaneous, 31
-- feeling, biological basis of, 31
-- life, transference to, 40
Society (life problem of), 3, 41
Speech, abnormalities of, 69
Speechlessness as defence, 70
Spelling, tendency to reversal of, 65
Spiritualism (see Immortality)
Spoiled child,
51,
75, 76, 81, 94,
103, 107, 122
Stage-fright, 70, log
Stealing, 102
Stein, Ludwig, r62
Stepmothers' difficulties, 158
Stomach trouble, 3, 5, 6, 54, 57, 94,
95, 135, 197
Strictness, effects of, 100
14 Strong-man" fraud, 91
Stuttering, 35-63
Style of life, I, 7, 8, 13, 19, 30-32 ,
74,
8 I ,
86-87,
106,
I 10,
I I I,
117, 142
--, revealed in dreams, 151
,
and
inferiority positions,
34-37, 4 1
--, and related manifestations,
54, 121
--, and sexual tendencies, 15,42,
46,47, 124
Sub-normal children, 4
Suggestion and hypnotism, 162
Suicidal tendencies, 55, 80, 81, 119
Suicide, 7, 8, 12, 22, 26, 33, 52, 81,
102
-- and drug-habit, 54
Suicide, case of, 134
Superiority, common sense concep-
tion of, 14<;)
" Superiority complex, H 87
Suspicion, 49, 67, 123
Swallowing, fear of, 98, 108
Syntmetry of body and face, 65
Sympathetic nerves, 29
Sympatheticotonic type, 126
Symptoms, co-ordinated, 54, 137
--, use of, I I, 12, 13, 36
--, diagnosis of, 71
Syphilis, 85, 162
Syphilophobia, 140
TALKING learned late, 89
Tension, neurotic, I, I I, 56, 58, 97,
108, III, 135
Three problems of life
(see Pro-
blems of life)
Tolstoy, 146
" Transference JJ and social feeling,
73
Treatment, methods of, 16, 24, 25,
26, 35, 36, 70, 71 , 73, 110, 157,
162
--,
resistance to
(see
Resist-
ance)
-- of homosexuality, 115
Trigeminal neuralgia, 58
Truth as a weapon, 24, 90
T\vins,96
Tympanites, 135, 139
Typical neurotic factors, 72
Tyrannical attitude, 89, 117, 153
UGLY child, 99
Unconscious and conscious, unity of,
29, 163
Undersized man, 80
Unfinished work, habit of, 103
Uniqueness, desire for, 69·
Unloved child, case of, 100
Unpunctuality, 103
Unsocial types, deceptiveness of, 37
Useless sports, psychology of, 129
-VAGINISMUS, 50, 67, 157
Vagotonic type, 126
Value, criterion of, 78
--, personal, 6, 24

PROBLEMS OF NEUROSIS
Vanit}·, lIS
Vasa-motor type, 133
Vegetative nervous system, 126
Vengeance, hidden, 81, IS8
Vicarious satisfaction, 133
Virginity, fear of loss of, 67
Visual ~ypes, 143
Vocational choice, 34, 150, 125, 141,
149, IS0
Vocational guidance, factors in, 148
Vomiting (see Emesis), 6, 95
Voyeurs, 143
WASHING compulsion, 104, 105
Weakness, use of, 81
Wealth,
stimulus
to
gain
(see
Riches, desire for), 53, 100
Wernicke, 110
Whooping cough, 97
Woman, danger of despising" 43
--, attitudes to,
24,
49, .117,
136, 141, 165
YOUNGEST child, 53, 54, 89, 92, 106,
107, 108, 142 , 155, 156, 158, 159
3:42

