129
The Life of Adler (1870–1937)
Childhood and Adolescence
Adulthood
Inferiority Feelings: The Source of Human Striving
The Inferiority Complex
The Superiority Complex
Striving for Superiority, or Perfection
Fictional Finalism
The Style of Life
The Creative Power of the Self
Dominant, Getting, Avoiding, and Socially Useful Styles
Social Interest
Birth Order
The First-Born Child
The Second-Born Child
The Youngest Child
The Only Child
Questions About Human Nature
Assessment in Adler’s Theory
Early Recollections
Dream Analysis
Measures of Social Interest
Research on Adler’s Theory
Reﬂ ections on Adler’s Theory
Chapter Summary
Review Questions
Suggested Readings
The goal of the human soul is conquest, perfection, security, superiority. Every 
child is faced with so many obstacles in life that no child ever grows up with-
out striving for some form of signiﬁ cance.
—ALFRED ADLER
C H A P T E R  3
Alfred Adler: 
Individual Psychology
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   129
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   129
1/30/08   1:07:35 PM
1/30/08   1:07:35 PM

130 
PART TWO The Neopsychoanalytic Approach
Alfred Adler fashioned an image of human nature that did not depict people as 
victimized by instincts and conﬂ ict and doomed by biological forces and childhood 
experiences. He called his approach individual psychology because it focused on 
the uniqueness of each person and denied the universality of biological motives and 
goals ascribed to us by Sigmund Freud.
In Adler’s opinion, each individual is primarily a social being. Our personalities 
are shaped by our unique social environments and interactions, not by our efforts 
to satisfy biological needs. Although sex was of primary importance to Freud as a 
determining factor in personality, Adler minimized the role of sex in his system. To 
Adler, the conscious, not the unconscious, was at the core of personality. Rather than 
being driven by forces we cannot see and control, we are actively involved in creat-
ing our selves and directing our future.
With Adler and Freud, we see two vastly different theories created by two men 
brought up in the same city in the same era and educated as physicians at the same 
university. There was only a 14-year difference in their ages. And as with Freud, 
aspects of Adler’s childhood may have inﬂ uenced his way of looking at human 
nature.
The Life of Adler (1870–1937)
Childhood and Adolescence
Adler’s early childhood was marked by illness, an awareness of death, and jealousy 
of his older brother. He suffered from rickets (a vitamin D deﬁ ciency characterized 
by softening of the bones), which kept him from playing with other children. At the 
age of 3, his younger brother died in the bed next to his. At 4, Adler himself was 
close to death from pneumonia. When he heard the doctor tell his father, “Your boy 
is lost,” he decided to become a doctor (Orgler, 1963, p. 16).
Pampered by his mother because of his sickness, the young Adler was de-
throned at the age of 2 by the arrival of another baby. Biographers have suggested 
that Adler’s mother may then have rejected him, but he was clearly his father’s 
favorite. Therefore, his childhood relations with his parents were different from 
Freud’s. (Freud was closer to his mother than to his father.) As an adult, Adler dis-
carded the Freudian concept of the Oedipus complex because it was so foreign to 
his childhood experiences.
Adler was jealous of his older brother, who was vigorous and healthy and could 
engage in the physical activities and sports in which Alfred could not take part. 
“I remember sitting on a bench, bandaged up on account of rickets, with my healthy 
elder brother sitting opposite me. He could run, jump, and move about quite effort-
lessly, while for me, movement of any sort was a strain and an effort” (Adler quoted 
in Bottome, 1939, pp. 30–31).
Adler felt inferior to this brother and to other neighborhood children, who 
all seemed healthier and more athletic. As a result, he resolved to work hard to 
overcome his feelings of inferiority and to compensate for his physical limitations. 
Despite his small stature, clumsiness, and unattractiveness, the legacies of his ill-
ness, he forced himself to join in games and sports. Gradually he won his victory 
individual psychology
Adler’s theory of 
personality.
individual psychology
Adler’s theory of 
personality.
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   130
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   130
1/29/08   5:41:16 PM
1/29/08   5:41:16 PM

 
CHAPTER 3 Alfred Adler: Individual Psychology 
131
and achieved a sense of self-esteem and social acceptance. He developed a fondness 
for the company of other people and retained this sociability all his life. In his per-
sonality theory, Adler emphasized the importance of the peer group and suggested 
that childhood relationships with siblings and with children outside the family were 
much more signiﬁ cant than Freud believed.
In school (the same school Freud had attended), Adler was initially unhappy 
and was only a mediocre student. Believing the boy unﬁ t for anything else, a teacher 
advised Adler’s father to apprentice him to a shoemaker, a prospect Adler found 
frightening. He was particularly bad in mathematics, but he persisted and eventually 
rose from being a failing student to the top of his class.
In many ways, the story of Adler’s childhood reads like a tragedy, but it is also a 
textbook example of his personality theory, of overcoming childhood weakness and 
inferiority to shape his destiny. The theorist who would give the world the notion 
of inferiority feelings spoke from the depths of his own childhood. “Those who are 
familiar with my life work will clearly see the accord existing between the facts of 
my childhood and the views I expressed” (quoted in Bottome, 1939, p. 9).
Adulthood
Fulﬁ lling his childhood ambition, Adler studied medicine at the University of  Vienna 
but graduated with no better than a mediocre academic record. He entered private 
practice as an ophthalmologist but soon shifted to general medicine. He was inter-
ested in incurable diseases but became so distressed at his helplessness to prevent 
death, particularly in younger patients, that he chose to specialize in neurology and 
psychiatry.
Adler’s 9-year association with Freud began in 1902, when Freud invited Adler 
and three others to meet once a week at Freud’s home to discuss psychoanalysis. Al-
though their relationship never became close, Freud initially thought highly of Adler 
and praised his skill as a physician who was able to gain the trust of his patients. It 
is important to remember that Adler was never a student or disciple of Freud’s and 
was not psychoanalyzed by him. One of Freud’s colleagues charged that Adler did 
not have the ability to probe the unconscious mind and psychoanalyze people. It is 
interesting to speculate on whether this supposed lack led Adler to base his personal-
ity theory on the more easily accessible consciousness and to minimize the role of 
the unconscious.
By 1910, although Adler was president of the Vienna Psychoanalytical Society 
and co-editor of its journal, he was also an increasingly vocal critic of Freudian the-
ory. He soon severed all connection with psychoanalysis and went on to develop his 
own approach to personality. Freud reacted angrily to Adler’s defection. He belittled 
Adler’s physical stature (Adler was ﬁ ve inches shorter than Freud) and called Adler 
loathsome, abnormal, driven mad by ambition, ﬁ lled with venom and meanness, 
paranoid, intensely jealous, and sadistic. He described Adler’s theory as worthless 
(Fiebert, 1997; Gay, 1988; Wittels, 1924).
Adler showed similar hostility toward Freud, calling him a swindler and denounc-
ing psychoanalysis as ﬁ lth (Roazen, 1975). Adler became irate whenever he was 
introduced or referred to as a student of Freud’s. In his later years Adler appeared as 
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   131
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   131
1/29/08   5:41:16 PM
1/29/08   5:41:16 PM

132 
PART TWO The Neopsychoanalytic Approach
embittered toward defectors from his own approach as Freud had toward those, like 
Adler, who deviated from psychoanalysis. Adler was known to “ﬂ are suddenly into 
heated anger when he felt his authority challenged” (Hoffman, 1994, p. 148).
In 1912, Adler founded the Society for Individual Psychology. He served in the 
Austrian army during World War I (1914–1918) and later organized government 
sponsored child-counseling clinics in Vienna. In his clinics, Adler introduced group 
training and guidance procedures, forerunners of modern group therapy techniques. 
In 1926, he made the ﬁ rst of several visits to the United States, where he taught and 
gave popular lecture tours.
He moved to the United States in 1929, settling in New York City, where he 
continued his work to develop and promote his individual psychology. A biographer 
noted that Adler’s “personal traits of geniality, optimism, and warmth coupled with 
an intensely ambitious drive . . . soon catapulted him to American prominence as a 
psychological expert” (Hoffman, 1994, p. 160).
Adler’s books and lectures brought him recognition on a national scale, and he 
became America’s ﬁ rst popular psychologist, a celebrity of the day. In 1937, while 
on an exhausting 56-lecture tour of Europe, Adler suffered a heart attack and died 
in Scotland.
 
 LOG ON
Classical Adlerian Psychology
The Alfred Adler Institute of San Francisco offers a comprehensive ﬁ le of writings, 
videos, ﬁ lm clips, and recordings of everything you might want to know about 
Adler.
Personality Theories: Alfred Adler
An overview of Adler’s life and work.
For direct links to these sites, log on to the student companion site for this book at 
http://www.academic.cengage.com/psychology/Schultz and choose Chapter 3.
Inferiority Feelings: The Source of Human Striving
Adler believed that inferiority feelings are always present as a motivating force 
in behavior. “To be a human being means to feel oneself inferior,” Adler wrote 
(1933/1939, p. 96). Because this condition is common to all of us, then, it is not a 
sign of weakness or abnormality.
Adler proposed that inferiority feelings are the source of all human striving. 
Individual growth results from compensation, from our attempts to overcome our 
real or imagined inferiorities. Throughout our lives, we are driven by the need to 
overcome this sense of inferiority and to strive for increasingly higher levels of 
development.
inferiority feelings
The normal condition of 
all people; the source of 
all human striving.
inferiority feelings
The normal condition of 
all people; the source of 
all human striving.
compensation
A motivation to 
overcome inferiority, to 
strive for higher levels 
of development.
compensation
A motivation to 
overcome inferiority, to 
strive for higher levels 
of development.
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   132
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   132
1/29/08   5:41:17 PM
1/29/08   5:41:17 PM

 
CHAPTER 3 Alfred Adler: Individual Psychology 
133
The process begins in infancy. Infants are small and helpless and are totally 
dependent on adults. Adler believed that the infant is aware of his or her parents’ 
greater power and strength and of the hopelessness of trying to resist or challenge 
that power. As a result, the infant develops feelings of inferiority relative to the 
larger, stronger people around him or her.
Although this initial experience of inferiority applies to everyone in infancy, it 
is not genetically determined. Rather, it is a function of the environment, which is 
the same for all infants—an environment of helplessness and dependency on adults. 
Thus, inferiority feelings are inescapable, but more important, they are necessary 
because they provide the motivation to strive and grow.
The Inferiority Complex
Suppose a child does not grow and develop. What happens when the child is unable 
to compensate for his or her feelings of inferiority? An inability to overcome infe-
riority feelings intensiﬁ es them, leading to the development of an inferiority com-
plex. People with an inferiority complex have a poor opinion of themselves and feel 
helpless and unable to cope with the demands of life. Adler found such a complex 
in the childhood of many adults who came to him for treatment.
An inferiority complex can arise from three sources in childhood: organic 
inferiority, spoiling, and neglect. The investigation of organic inferiority, Adler’s 
inferiority complex
A condition that 
develops when a person 
is unable to compensate 
for normal inferiority 
feelings.
inferiority complex
A condition that 
develops when a person 
is unable to compensate 
for normal inferiority 
feelings.
Many people with 
physical disabilities strive 
to compensate for their 
weaknesses.
© CORBIS. All Rights Reserved.
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   133
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   133
1/29/08   5:41:20 PM
1/29/08   5:41:20 PM

134 
PART TWO The Neopsychoanalytic Approach
ﬁ rst major research effort, was carried out while he was still associated with Freud, 
who approved of the notion. Adler concluded that defective parts or organs of the 
body shape personality through the person’s efforts to compensate for the defect or 
weakness, just as Adler had compensated for rickets, the physical inferiority of his 
childhood years. For instance, a child who is physically weak might focus on that 
weakness and work to develop superior athletic ability.
History records many examples of such compensation: In ancient times the 
Greek statesman Demosthenes overcame a stutter to become a great orator. The 
sickly Theodore Roosevelt, 26th president of the United States, became a model 
of physical ﬁ tness as an adult. Efforts to overcome organic inferiority can result in 
striking artistic, athletic, and social accomplishments, but if these efforts fail, they 
can lead to an inferiority complex.
Adler’s work is another example of a conception of personality developed along 
intuitive lines, drawn from the theorist’s personal experience, and later conﬁ rmed 
by data from patients. Adler’s ofﬁ ce in Vienna was near an amusement park, and 
his patients included circus performers and gymnasts. They possessed extraordinary 
physical skills that, in many cases, were developed as a result of hard work to over-
come childhood disabilities.
Spoiling or pampering a child can also bring about an inferiority complex. 
Spoiled children are the center of attention in the home. Their every need or whim 
is satisﬁ ed, and little is denied them. Under the circumstances, these children 
naturally develop the idea that they are the most important persons in any situ-
ation and that other people should always defer to them. The ﬁ rst experience at 
school, where these children are no longer the focus of attention, comes as a shock 
for which they are unprepared. Spoiled children have little social feeling and are 
impatient with others. They have never learned to wait for what they want, nor 
have they learned to overcome difﬁ culties or adjust to others’ needs. When con-
fronted with obstacles to gratiﬁ cation, spoiled children come to believe that they 
must have some personal deﬁ ciency that is thwarting them; hence, an inferiority 
complex develops.
It is easy to understand how neglected, unwanted, and rejected children can 
develop an inferiority complex. Their infancy and childhood are characterized by a 
lack of love and security because their parents are indifferent or hostile. As a result, 
these children develop feelings of worthlessness, or even anger, and view others 
with distrust.
The Superiority Complex
Whatever the source of the complex, a person may tend to overcompensate and 
so develop what Adler called a superiority complex. This involves an exagger-
ated opinion of one’s abilities and accomplishments. Such a person may feel 
inwardly self-satisﬁ ed and superior and show no need to demonstrate his or 
her superiority with accomplishments. Or the person may feel such a need and 
work to become extremely successful. In both cases, persons with a superior-
ity complex are given to boasting, vanity, self-centeredness, and a tendency to 
denigrate others.
superiority complex
A condition that 
develops when a person 
overcompensates for 
normal inferiority 
feelings.
superiority complex
A condition that 
develops when a person 
overcompensates for 
normal inferiority 
feelings.
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   134
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   134
1/29/08   5:41:21 PM
1/29/08   5:41:21 PM

 
CHAPTER 3 Alfred Adler: Individual Psychology 
135
Striving for Superiority, or Perfection
Inferiority feelings are the source of motivation and striving, but to what end? Are 
we motivated simply to be rid of inferiority feelings? Adler believed that we work 
for something more; however, his view of our ultimate goal in life changed over the 
years.
At ﬁ rst, he identiﬁ ed inferiority with a general feeling of weakness or of femi-
ninity, in recognition of the inferior standing of women in the society of his day. 
He spoke of compensation for this feeling as the masculine protest. The goal of the 
compensation was a will or a drive toward power in which aggression, a supposedly 
masculine characteristic, played a large part. Later he rejected the idea of equating 
inferiority feelings with femininity and developed a broader viewpoint in which we 
strive for superiority, or perfection.
Adler described his notion of striving for superiority as the fundamental fact 
of life (Adler, 1930). Superiority is the ultimate goal toward which we strive. He 
did not mean superiority in the usual sense of the word, nor did the concept relate to 
the superiority complex. Striving for superiority is not an attempt to be better than 
everyone else, nor is it an arrogant or domineering tendency or an inﬂ ated opinion 
of our abilities and accomplishments. What Adler meant was a drive for perfection. 
The word perfection is derived from a Latin word meaning to complete or to ﬁ nish. 
Thus, Adler suggested that we strive for superiority in an effort to perfect ourselves, 
to make ourselves complete or whole.
This innate goal, the drive toward wholeness or completion, is oriented toward 
the future. Whereas Freud proposed that human behavior is determined by the past 
(that is, by the instincts and by our childhood experiences), Adler saw human mo-
tivation in terms of expectations for the future. He argued that instincts and primal 
impulses were insufﬁ cient as explanatory principles. Only the ultimate goal of supe-
riority or perfection could explain personality and behavior.
Fictional Finalism
Adler applied the term ﬁ nalism to the idea that we have an ultimate goal, a ﬁ nal state 
of being, and a need to move toward it. The goals for which we strive, however, 
are potentialities, not actualities. In other words, we strive for ideals that exist in us 
subjectively. Adler believed that our goals are ﬁ ctional or imagined ideals that can-
not be tested against reality. We live our lives around ideals such as the belief that 
all people are created equal or that all people are basically good. Adler’s life goal 
was to conquer death; his way of striving for that goal was to become a physician 
(Hoffman, 1994).
These beliefs inﬂ uence the ways we perceive and interact with other people. For 
example, if we believe that behaving a certain way will bring us rewards in a heaven 
or an afterlife, we will try to act according to that belief. Belief in the existence of 
an afterlife is not based on objective reality, but it is real to the person who holds 
that view.
Adler formalized this concept as fictional finalism, the notion that fic-
tional ideas guide our behavior as we strive toward a complete or whole state 
striving for superiority
The urge toward 
perfection or completion 
that motivates each of 
us.
striving for superiority
The urge toward 
perfection or completion 
that motivates each of 
us.
ﬁ ctional ﬁ nalism
The idea that there is an 
imagined or potential 
goal that guides our 
behavior.
ﬁ ctional ﬁ nalism
The idea that there is an 
imagined or potential 
goal that guides our 
behavior.
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   135
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   135
1/29/08   5:41:21 PM
1/29/08   5:41:21 PM

136 
PART TWO The Neopsychoanalytic Approach
of being. We direct the course of our lives by many such fictions, but the most 
pervasive one is the ideal of perfection. He suggested that the best formulation 
of this ideal developed by human beings so far is the concept of God. Adler 
preferred the terms “subjective final goal” or “guiding self-ideal” to describe 
this concept, but it continues to be known as “fictional finalism” (Watts & 
Holden, 1994).
There are two additional points about striving for superiority. First, it in-
creases rather than reduces tension. Unlike Freud, Adler did not believe that 
our sole motivation was to reduce tension. Striving for perfection requires great 
expenditures of energy and effort, a condition quite different from equilibrium or 
a tension-free state. Second, the striving for superiority is manifested both by the 
individual and by society. Most of us are social beings. We strive for superiority 
or perfection not only as individuals but also as members of a group. We try to 
achieve the perfection of our culture. In Adler’s view, individuals and society are 
interrelated and interdependent. People must function constructively with others 
for the good of all.
Thus, to Adler, human beings perpetually strive for the ﬁ ctional, ideal goal of 
perfection. How in our daily lives do we try to attain this goal? Adler answered this 
question with his concept of the style of life.
The Style of Life
The ultimate goal for each of us is superiority or perfection, but we try to attain that 
goal through many different behavior patterns. Each of us expresses the striving dif-
ferently. We develop a unique pattern of characteristics, behaviors, and habits, which 
Adler called a distinctive character, or style of life.
To understand how the style of life develops, we return to the concepts of infe-
riority feelings and compensation. Infants are afﬂ icted with inferiority feelings that 
motivate them to compensate for helplessness and dependency. In these attempts at 
compensation, children acquire a set of behaviors. For example, the sickly child may 
strive to increase physical prowess by running or lifting weights. These behaviors 
become part of the style of life, a pattern of behaviors designed to compensate for 
inferiority.
Everything we do is shaped and deﬁ ned by our unique style of life. It determines 
which aspects of our environment we attend to or ignore and what attitudes we hold. 
The style of life is learned from social interactions that occur in the early years of 
life. Adler suggested that the style of life is so ﬁ rmly crystallized by the age of 4 or 
5 that it is difﬁ cult to change thereafter.
The style of life becomes the guiding framework for all later behaviors. As 
we noted, its nature depends on social interactions, especially the person’s order 
of birth within the family and the nature of the parent–child relationship. Recall 
that one condition that can lead to an inferiority complex is neglect. Neglected 
children may feel inferior in coping with the demands of life and therefore may 
become distrustful and hostile toward others. As a result, their style of life may 
involve seeking revenge, resenting others’ success, and taking whatever they feel 
is their due.
style of life
A unique character 
structure or pattern 
of personal behaviors 
and characteristics by 
which each of us strives 
for perfection. Basic 
styles of life include 
the dominant, getting, 
avoiding, and socially 
useful types.
style of life
A unique character 
structure or pattern 
of personal behaviors 
and characteristics by 
which each of us strives 
for perfection. Basic 
styles of life include 
the dominant, getting, 
avoiding, and socially 
useful types.
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   136
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   136
1/29/08   5:41:22 PM
1/29/08   5:41:22 PM

 
CHAPTER 3 Alfred Adler: Individual Psychology 
137
The Creative Power of the Self
You may have spotted an apparent inconsistency between Adler’s notion of style 
of life and our earlier observation that his theory is less deterministic than Freud’s. 
Adler said we are in control of our fate, not victims of it. But now we ﬁ nd that the 
style of life is determined by social relationships in the early years and subject to 
little change after that. This seems almost as deterministic as the Freudian view, 
which emphasized the importance of early childhood in the formation of the adult 
personality. However, Adler’s theory is not as deterministic as it may seem at ﬁ rst. 
He resolved the dilemma by proposing a concept he described as the creative power 
of the self.
Adler believed that the individual creates the style of life. We create our selves, 
our personality, our character; these are all terms Adler used interchangeably with 
style of life. We are not passively shaped by childhood experiences. Those experi-
ences themselves are not as important as our conscious attitude toward them. Adler 
argued that neither heredity nor environment provides a complete explanation for 
personality development. Instead, the way we interpret these inﬂ uences forms the 
basis for the creative construction of our attitude toward life.
Adler argued for the existence of individual free will that allows each of us to cre-
ate an appropriate style of life from the abilities and experiences given us by both our 
genetic endowment and our social environment. Although unclear on speciﬁ cs, Adler 
insisted that our style of life is not determined for us; we are free to choose and create it 
ourselves. Once created, however, the style of life remains constant throughout life.
Dominant, Getting, Avoiding, and Socially Useful Styles
Adler described several universal problems and grouped them in three categories:
1. Problems involving our behavior toward others
2. Problems of occupation
3. Problems of love
He proposed four basic styles of life for dealing with these problems:
1. The dominant type
2. The getting type
3. The avoiding type
4. The socially useful type
The ﬁ rst type displays a dominant or ruling attitude with little social aware-
ness. Such a person behaves without regard for others. The more extreme of this 
type attack others and become sadists, delinquents, or sociopaths. The less virulent 
become alcoholics, drug addicts, or suicides; they believe they hurt others by attack-
ing themselves.
The getting type (to Adler, the most common human type) expects to receive 
satisfaction from other people and so becomes dependent on them.
The avoiding type makes no attempt to face life’s problems. By avoiding dif-
ﬁ culties, the person avoids any possibility of failure.
creative power of the 
self
The ability to create an 
appropriate style of life.
creative power of the 
self
The ability to create an 
appropriate style of life.
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   137
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   137
1/29/08   5:41:22 PM
1/29/08   5:41:22 PM

138 
PART TWO The Neopsychoanalytic Approach
These three types are not prepared to cope with the problems of everyday life. 
They are unable to cooperate with other people and the clash between their style of 
life and the real world results in abnormal behavior, which is manifested in neuroses 
and psychoses. They lack what Adler came to call social interest.
The socially useful type cooperates with others and acts in accordance with 
their needs. Such persons cope with problems within a well-developed framework 
of social interest.
Adler was generally opposed to rigidly classifying or typing people in this way, 
stating that he proposed these four styles of life solely for teaching purposes. He 
cautioned therapists to avoid the mistake of assigning people to mutually exclusive 
categories.
Social Interest
Adler believed that getting along with others is the ﬁ rst task we encounter in life. Our 
subsequent level of social adjustment, which is part of our style of life, inﬂ uences 
our approach to all of life’s problems. He proposed the concept of social interest, 
which he deﬁ ned as the individual’s innate potential to cooperate with other people 
to achieve personal and societal goals. Adler’s term for this concept in the original 
German, Gemeinschaftsgefuhl, is best translated as “community feeling” (Stepansky, 
1983, p. xiii). However, social interest has become the accepted term in English.
Although we are inﬂ uenced more strongly by social than biological forces, in 
Adler’s view, the potential for social interest is innate. In that limited sense, then, 
Adler’s approach has a biological element. However, the extent to which our innate 
potential for social interest is realized depends on our early social experiences.
No one can avoid entirely other people or obligations toward them. From earli-
est times, people have congregated in families, tribes, and nations. Communities are 
indispensable to human beings for protection and survival. Thus, it has always been 
necessary for people to cooperate, to express their social interest. The individual must 
cooperate with and contribute to society to realize personal and communal goals.
The newborn is in a situation that requires cooperation, initially from the mother 
or primary caregiver, then from other family members and people at day care or 
school. Adler noted the importance of the mother as the ﬁ rst person with whom the 
baby comes in contact. Through her behavior toward the child, the mother can either 
foster social interest or thwart its development.
Adler believed the mother’s role was vital in developing the child’s social inter-
est as well as other aspects of the personality. He wrote:
This connection [between mother and child] is so intimate and far reaching that we are 
never able in later years to point to any characteristic as the effect of heredity. Every 
tendency which might be inherited has been adapted, trained, educated and made over 
again by the mother. Her skill or lack of skill will inﬂ uence all the child’s potentiality. 
(Adler quoted in Grey, 1998, p. 71)
The mother must teach the child cooperation, companionship, and courage. 
Only if children feel kinship with others can they act with courage in attempting 
to cope with life’s demands. Children (and later, adults) who look upon others with 
social interest
Our innate potential to 
cooperate with other 
people to achieve 
personal and societal 
goals.
social interest
Our innate potential to 
cooperate with other 
people to achieve 
personal and societal 
goals.
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   138
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   138
1/29/08   5:41:23 PM
1/29/08   5:41:23 PM

 
CHAPTER 3 Alfred Adler: Individual Psychology 
139
suspicion and hostility will approach life with the same attitude. Those who have no 
feeling of social interest may become neurotics or even criminals. Adler noted that 
evils ranging from war to racial hatred to public drunkenness stemmed from a lack 
of community feeling.
It is interesting to note that early in his career, Adler suggested that people were 
driven by a lust for power and a need to dominate. He proposed this idea at the time 
he was struggling to establish his own point of view within the Freudian circle. 
After he broke with Freud and achieved recognition for his own work, he proposed 
that people are motivated more by social interest than by the needs for power and 
dominance.
When Adler was part of Freud’s group, he was considered cantankerous and 
ambitious, quarreling over the priority of his ideas. But in later years, he mel-
lowed and his system also changed, from emphasizing power and dominance 
as motivating forces to stressing the more benign force of social or community 
interest. (Here we see another example of how Adler’s theory reﬂ ected his own 
life experiences.)
Birth Order
One of Adler’s most enduring contributions is the idea that order of birth is a ma-
jor social inﬂ uence in childhood, one from which we create our style of life. Even 
though siblings have the same parents and live in the same house, they do not have 
identical social environments. Being older or younger than one’s siblings and being 
exposed to differing parental attitudes create different childhood conditions that help 
determine personality. Adler liked to amaze lecture audiences and dinner guests by 
guessing a person’s order of birth on the basis of his or her behavior. He wrote about 
four situations: the ﬁ rst-born child, the second-born child, the youngest child, and 
the only child.
The First-Born Child
At least for a while, ﬁ rst-born children are in a unique and enviable situation. Usu-
ally the parents are happy at the birth of the ﬁ rst child and devote considerable time 
and attention to the new baby. First-borns typically receive their parents’ instant and 
undivided attention. As a result, ﬁ rst-borns have a happy, secure existence—until the 
second-born child appears.
Suddenly, no longer the focus of attention, no longer receiving constant love 
and care, ﬁ rst-borns are, in a sense, dethroned. The affection ﬁ rst-borns received 
during their reign must now be shared. They must often submit to the outrage of 
waiting until after the newborn’s needs have been met, and they are admonished to 
be quiet so as not to disturb the new baby.
No one could expect ﬁ rst-borns to suffer this drastic displacement without 
putting up a ﬁ ght. They will try to recapture their former position of power and 
privilege. The ﬁ rst-born’s battle to regain supremacy in the family is lost from the 
beginning, however. Things will never be the same, no matter how hard the ﬁ rst-
born tries.
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   139
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   139
1/29/08   5:41:23 PM
1/29/08   5:41:23 PM

140 
PART TWO The Neopsychoanalytic Approach
For a time, ﬁ rst-borns may become stubborn, ill behaved, and destructive and 
may refuse to eat or go to bed. They are striking out in anger, but the parents will 
probably strike back, and their weapons are far more powerful. When ﬁ rst-borns are 
punished for their troublesome behavior, they may interpret the punishment as ad-
ditional evidence of their fall and may come to hate the second child, who is, after 
all, the cause of the problem.
Adler believed all ﬁ rst-borns feel the shock of their changed status in the family, 
but those who have been excessively pampered feel a greater loss. Also, the extent 
of the loss depends on the ﬁ rst-born’s age at the time the rival appears. In general, 
the older a ﬁ rst-born child is when the second child arrives, the less dethronement 
the ﬁ rst-born will experience. For example, an 8-year-old will be less upset by the 
birth of a sibling than will a 2-year-old.
Adler found that ﬁ rst-borns are often oriented toward the past, locked in nostal-
gia and pessimistic about the future. Having learned the advantages of power at one 
time, they remain concerned with it throughout life. They can exercise some power 
over younger siblings, but at the same time they are more subject to the power of 
their parents because more is expected of them.
There are advantages to being the ﬁ rst-born child, however. As the children age, 
the ﬁ rst-born often plays the role of teacher, tutor, leader, and disciplinarian, ex-
pected by parents to help care for younger siblings. These experiences often enable 
the ﬁ rst-born to mature intellectually to a higher degree than the younger children. 
One researcher described the situation as follows:
Second-born children might ask older siblings about the meanings of words, about how some 
things work and why, about the whereabouts of candy or of a parent who is late in coming 
back home, and about countless other matters that older siblings must now explain. . . . In 
One’s order of birth 
within the family—being 
older or younger than 
one’s siblings—creates 
different conditions 
of childhood that can 
affect personality.
© Brooklyn Productions/The Image Bank/Getty Images
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   140
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   140
1/29/08   5:41:23 PM
1/29/08   5:41:23 PM

 
CHAPTER 3 Alfred Adler: Individual Psychology 
141
this role of tutor, ﬁ rst-born children gain an intellectual advantage. By virtue of rehearsal, by 
virtue of having to articulate an explanation or offer the meaning of a word, ﬁ rstborns gain 
more verbal ﬂ uency more quickly than the second-borns. (Zajonc, 2001, p. 491)
Adler believed that ﬁ rst-borns also take an unusual interest in maintaining 
order and authority. They become good organizers, conscientious and scrupulous 
about detail, authoritarian and conservative in attitude. Sigmund Freud was a ﬁ rst-
born; Adler described him as a typical eldest son. First-borns may also grow up to 
feel insecure and hostile toward others. Adler believed that neurotics, perverts, and 
criminals were often ﬁ rst-borns.
The Second-Born Child
Second-born children, the ones who caused such upheaval in the lives of ﬁ rst-borns, are 
also in a unique situation. They never experience the powerful position once occupied 
by the ﬁ rst-borns. Even if another child is brought into the family, second-borns do not 
suffer the sense of dethronement felt by the ﬁ rst-borns. Furthermore, by this time the 
parents have usually changed their child-rearing attitudes and practices. A second baby 
is not the novelty the ﬁ rst was; parents may be less concerned and anxious about their 
own behavior and may take a more relaxed approach to the second child.
From the beginning, second-borns have a pacesetter in the older sibling. The 
second child always has the example of the older child’s behavior as a model, a 
threat, or a source of competition. Adler was a second-born child who had a lifelong 
competitive relationship with his older brother (whose name was Sigmund). Even 
when Adler became a famous analyst, he still felt overshadowed by his brother.
Alfred [Adler] always felt eclipsed by his “model brother” and resented his favored sta-
tus in the family. . . . Even in middle age, he would feel moved to comment wearily that 
wealthy businessman Sigmund, “a good industrious fellow [who] was always ahead of 
me—is still ahead of me!” (Hoffman, 1994, p. 11)
Competition with the ﬁ rst-born may serve to motivate the second-born, who 
may strive to catch up to and surpass the older sibling, a goal that spurs language 
and motor development in the second-born. Not having experienced power, second-
borns are not as concerned with it. They are more optimistic about the future and are 
likely to be competitive and ambitious, as Adler was.
Other less beneﬁ cial outcomes may arise from the relationship between ﬁ rst-
borns and second-borns. If, for example, the older sibling excels in sports or schol-
arship, the second-born may feel that he or she can never surpass the ﬁ rst-born and 
may give up trying. In this case, competitiveness would not become part of the 
second-born’s style of life, and he or she may become an underachiever, performing 
below his or her abilities in many facets of life.
The Youngest Child
Youngest or last-born children never face the shock of dethronement by another 
child and often become the pet of the family, particularly if the siblings are more 
than a few years older. Driven by the need to surpass older siblings, youngest 
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   141
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   141
1/29/08   5:41:29 PM
1/29/08   5:41:29 PM

142 
PART TWO The Neopsychoanalytic Approach
children often develop at a remarkably fast rate. Last-borns are often high achiev-
ers in whatever work they undertake as adults.
The opposite can occur, however, if the youngest children are excessively pam-
pered and come to believe they needn’t learn to do anything for themselves. As they 
grow older, such children may retain the helplessness and dependency of childhood. 
Unaccustomed to striving and struggling, used to being cared for, these people ﬁ nd 
it difﬁ cult to adjust to adulthood.
The Only Child
Only children never lose the position of primacy and power they hold in the family; 
they remain the focus and center of attention. Spending more time in the company 
of adults than a child with siblings, only children often mature early and manifest 
adult behaviors and attitudes.
Only children are likely to experience difﬁ culties when they ﬁ nd that in areas of 
life outside the home, such as school, they are not the center of attention. Only chil-
dren have learned neither to share nor to compete. If their abilities do not bring them 
sufﬁ cient recognition and attention, they are likely to feel keenly disappointed.
With his ideas about order of birth, Adler was not proposing ﬁ rm rules of child-
hood development. A child will not automatically acquire a particular kind of char-
acter based solely on his or her position in the family. What Adler was suggesting 
was the likelihood that certain styles of life will develop as a function of order of 
birth combined with one’s early social interactions. The creative self in constructing 
the style of life uses both inﬂ uences.
Questions About Human Nature
Adler’s system provides a hopeful, ﬂ attering picture of human nature that is the 
antithesis of Freud’s dreary, pessimistic view. Certainly it is more satisfying to our 
sense of self-worth to consider ourselves capable of consciously shaping our devel-
opment and destiny rather than being dominated by instinctual forces and childhood 
experiences over which we have no control.
Adler’s image is an optimistic one, simply that people are not driven by uncon-
scious forces. We possess the free will to shape the social forces that inﬂ uence us and 
to use them creatively to construct a unique style of life. This uniqueness is another 
aspect of Adler’s ﬂ attering picture; Freud’s system offered a depressing universality 
and sameness in human nature.
Although, in Adler’s view, some aspects of human nature are innate—for exam-
ple, the potential for social interest and striving for perfection—it is experience that 
determines how these inherited tendencies will be realized. Childhood inﬂ uences 
are important, particularly order of birth and interactions with our parents, but we are 
not victims of childhood events. Instead, we use them to create our style of life.
Adler saw each person as striving to achieve perfection, and he viewed human-
ity in similar terms; he was optimistic about social progress. He was attracted to 
socialism and was involved in school guidance clinics and prison reform, expressing 
his belief in the creative power of the individual.
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   142
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   142
1/29/08   5:41:29 PM
1/29/08   5:41:29 PM

 
CHAPTER 3 Alfred Adler: Individual Psychology 
143
Assessment in Adler’s Theory
Like Freud, Adler developed his theory by analyzing his patients; that is, by evaluat-
ing their verbalizations and behavior during therapy sessions. Adler’s approach was 
more relaxed and informal than Freud’s. Whereas Freud’s patients lay on a couch 
while he sat behind them, Adler and his patients sat in comfortable chairs facing 
each other. The sessions were more like chats between friends than like the formal 
relationships maintained by Freud.
Adler also liked to use humor in his therapy, sometimes teasing his patients in 
a lighthearted, friendly way. He had a storehouse of jokes appropriate for various 
neuroses and believed that making a joke would sometimes lead a patient to “see 
how ridiculous his sickness is.” When an adolescent patient told Adler he felt guilty 
when he masturbated, Adler replied: “You mean to say you masturbate and feel 
guilty? That is too much. One would be enough: either masturbate or feel guilty. But 
both is too much” (Hoffman, 1994, pp. 209, 273).
Adler assessed the personalities of his patients by observing everything about 
them: the way they walked and sat, their manner of shaking hands, even their choice 
of which chair to sit in. He suggested that the way we use our bodies indicates 
something of our style of life. Even the position in which we sleep is revealing. For 
example, according to Adler, restless sleepers and those who sleep ﬂ at on their back 
want to seem more important than they are. Sleeping on one’s stomach shows a stub-
born and negative personality. Curling in the fetal position shows that the person is 
fearful of interacting with others. Sleeping with the arms outstretched reveals a need 
to be nurtured and supported.
Adler’s primary methods of assessment, which he referred to as the entrance 
gates to mental life, are order of birth (discussed above), early recollections, and 
dream analysis. In addition, contemporary psychologists have developed psycho-
logical assessment tests based on Adler’s concept of social interest. Adler’s purpose 
in assessing personality was to discover the patient’s style of life and to determine 
whether it was the most appropriate one for that person.
Early Recollections
According to Adler, our personality is created during the ﬁ rst 4 or 5 years of life. 
Our early recollections, our memories from that period, indicate the style of life 
that continues to characterize us as adults. Adler found that it made little difference 
whether his clients’ early recollections were of real events or were fantasies. In ei-
ther case, the primary interest of the person’s life revolved around the remembered 
incidents and so, in Adler’s view, early recollections are “the most satisfactory single 
indicators of lifestyle” (Manaster & Mays, 2004, p. 114).
Adler asked more than 100 physicians to describe their early memories. A ma-
jority of the recollections were concerned with illness or with a death in the family, 
which apparently led them to pursue a career in medicine, as was the case with Adler 
himself.
An early memory Adler recalled as an adult was that when he was 5 years old 
and had just started school, he was fearful because the path to school led through a 
early recollections
A personality assessment 
technique in which 
our earliest memories, 
whether of real events or 
fantasies, are assumed 
to reveal the primary 
interest of our life.
early recollections
A personality assessment 
technique in which 
our earliest memories, 
whether of real events or 
fantasies, are assumed 
to reveal the primary 
interest of our life.
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   143
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   143
1/29/08   5:41:30 PM
1/29/08   5:41:30 PM

144 
PART TWO The Neopsychoanalytic Approach
cemetery (Adler, 1924/1963). He said he became terriﬁ ed every time he walked to 
school, but he was also confused because other children seemed not to notice the 
cemetery. He was the only one who was afraid, and this experience heightened 
his sense of inferiority. One day, Adler decided to put an end to his fears. He ran 
through the cemetery a dozen times, until he felt he had overcome his feelings. 
Thereafter, he was able to attend school without being frightened whenever he 
passed the cemetery.
Thirty years later Adler met a former schoolmate and, in the course of their 
conversation, asked if the old cemetery was still there. The man expressed surprise 
and told Adler there had never been a cemetery near the school. Adler was shocked; 
his recollection had been so vivid! He sought out other classmates and questioned 
them about the cemetery. They all told him the same thing: There had been no cem-
etery. Adler ﬁ nally accepted that his memory of the incident was faulty. Nonethe-
less, it symbolized the fear and inferiority, and his efforts to overcome them, which 
characterized his style of life. That early recollection thus revealed an important and 
inﬂ uential aspect of his personality.
Although Adler believed that each early memory should be interpreted within 
the context of the patient’s style of life, he found commonalities among them. He 
suggested that memories involving danger or punishment indicated a tendency to-
ward hostility. Those concerning the birth of a sibling showed a continued sense of 
dethronement. Memories that focused on one parent showed a preference for that 
parent. Recollections of improper behavior warned against any attempt to repeat the 
behavior.
Adler believed that
[p]eople remember from early childhood (a) only images that conﬁ rm and support their 
current views of themselves in the world . . . and (b) only those memories that support 
their direction of striving for signiﬁ cance and security. [His] focus on selective memory 
and lifestyle emphasize what is remembered. In contrast, Freud’s approach to interpret-
ing early memories emphasizes what is forgotten through the mechanism of repression. 
(Kopp & Eckstein, 2004, p. 165)
Dream Analysis
Adler agreed with Freud about the value of dreams in understanding personality but 
disagreed on the way in which dreams should be interpreted. Adler did not believe 
that dreams fulﬁ ll wishes or reveal hidden conﬂ icts. Rather, dreams involve our feel-
ings about a current problem and what we intend to do about it.
One of Adler’s own dreams illustrates this point. Before his ﬁ rst visit to the 
United States, Adler felt anxious and worried, concerned about how he and his theory 
of personality would be received. The night before he was scheduled to cross the At-
lantic Ocean by ship, he dreamed that the ship, with him aboard, capsized and sank.
All of Adler’s worldly possessions were on it and were destroyed by the raging waves. 
Hurled into the ocean, Adler was forced to swim for his life. Alone he thrashed and 
struggled through the choppy waters. But through the force of will and determination, 
he ﬁ nally reached land in safety. (Hoffman, 1994, p. 151)
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   144
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   144
1/29/08   5:41:30 PM
1/29/08   5:41:30 PM

 
CHAPTER 3 Alfred Adler: Individual Psychology 
145
This dream revealed Adler’s fear about what he would face in the United States 
and his intention to land safely—in other words, to achieve success for himself and 
for his theory of individual psychology.
In the fantasies of our dreams (both night dreams and daydreams), we believe 
we can surmount the most difﬁ cult obstacle or simplify the most complex problem. 
Thus, dreams are oriented toward the present and future, not toward conﬂ icts from 
the past.
Dreams should never be interpreted without knowledge of the person and his 
or her situation. The dream is a manifestation of a person’s style of life and so is 
unique to the individual. Adler did ﬁ nd common interpretations for some dreams, 
however. Many people reported dreams involving falling or ﬂ ying. Freud interpreted 
such dreams in sexual terms.
According to Adler, a dream of falling indicates that the person’s emotional 
view involves a demotion or loss, such as the fear of losing self-esteem or prestige. A 
ﬂ ying dream indicates a sense of striving upward, an ambitious style of life in which 
the person desires to be above or better than others. Dreams that combine ﬂ ying 
and falling involve a fear of being too ambitious and thus failing. A dream of being 
chased suggests a feeling of weakness in relation to other people. Dreaming one is 
naked indicates a fear of giving oneself away. Additional Adlerian dream interpreta-
tions are shown in Table 3.1.
Measures of Social Interest
Adler had no desire to use psychological tests to assess personality. He argued that 
tests create artiﬁ cial situations that provide ambiguous results. Instead of relying on 
tests, Adler thought therapists should develop their intuition. He did, however, sup-
port tests of memory and intelligence; it was tests of personality he criticized.
Psychologists have developed tests to measure Adler’s concepts of social inter-
est and style of life. The Social Interest Scale (SIS) consists of pairs of adjectives 
(Crandall, 1981). Research participants choose the word in each pair that best de-
scribes an attribute they would like to possess. Words such as helpful, sympathetic, 
and considerate are thought to indicate one’s degree of social interest. The Social 
Interest Index (SII) is a self-report inventory in which research participants judge 
Table 3.1 Dream events and their latent meanings
Dream event
Adlerian interpretation
Being paralyzed
Facing insoluble problems
School exams
Being unprepared for situations
Wearing the wrong clothes
Being disturbed by one’s faults
Sexual themes
Retreating from sex or inadequate information about sex
Rage
An angry or hostile style of life
Death
Unresolved issues about the dead person
source: Adapted from Grey, 1998, p. 93.
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   145
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   145
1/29/08   5:41:30 PM
1/29/08   5:41:30 PM

146 
PART TWO The Neopsychoanalytic Approach
the degree to which statements represent themselves or their personal characteristics 
(Greever, Tseng, & Friedland, 1973). The items, such as I don’t mind helping out 
friends, were selected to reﬂ ect Adler’s ideas and to indicate a person’s ability to 
accept and cooperate with others.
Research has shown that people who score high on the SII, indicating a high 
degree of social interest, tend to be high in friendliness, empathy, cooperation with 
others, tolerance, and independence. They have also been found to be lower in anxi-
ety, hostility, depression, and neuroticism (Leak, 2006a, 2006b).
The Basic Adlerian Scales for Interpersonal Success (BASIS-A), is a 65-item 
self-report inventory designed to assess lifestyle as well as degree of social interest. 
The ﬁ ve personality dimensions measured are social interest, going along, taking 
charge, wanting recognition, and being cautious (Peluso, Peluso, Buckner, Curlette, 
& Kern, 2004).
Research on Adler’s Theory
Adler’s primary research method was the case study. Unfortunately, little of Adler’s 
data survived. He did not publish case histories except for two fragments: one writ-
ten by a patient, the other written by a patient’s physician. Adler did not know the 
patients involved, but he analyzed their personalities by examining their writings.
Adler’s data and research method are subject to the same criticisms we dis-
cussed for Freud and Jung. His observations cannot be repeated and duplicated, nor 
were they conducted in a controlled and systematic fashion. Adler did not attempt 
to verify the accuracy of his patients’ reports or explain the procedures he used to 
analyze the data, and he had no interest in applying the experimental method. A 
follower wrote: “Adler wanted his psychology to be a science, but it has not been a 
psychology easily veriﬁ ed by the scientiﬁ c method” (Manaster, 2006, p. 6).
Although most of Adler’s propositions have resisted attempts at scientiﬁ c 
validation, several topics have been the subject of research. These include dreams, 
inferiority feelings, early recollections, pampering and neglect in childhood, social 
interest, and order of birth.
Dreams. Adler’s belief that dreams help us solve current problems was investigated 
by exposing research participants to situations in which the failure to solve a puzzle 
was considered a threat to the personality. The research participants were then al-
lowed to sleep. Some were permitted to dream; they were awakened only during 
non-rapid-eye-movement (NREM) sleep. Others were awakened during rapid-eye-
movement (REM) sleep so that they could not dream. Research participants who 
dreamed recalled signiﬁ cantly more of the uncompleted puzzle than those who did 
not dream. The researchers concluded that dreaming enabled research participants 
to deal effectively with the current threatening situation—that is, the failure to solve 
the puzzle (Grieser, Greenberg, & Harrison, 1972).
In another study, the dreams of two groups of research participants were re-
ported (Breger, Hunter, & Lane, 1971). One group consisted of college students 
who were anticipating a stressful psychotherapy session. The other group consisted 
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   146
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   146
1/29/08   5:41:31 PM
1/29/08   5:41:31 PM

 
CHAPTER 3 Alfred Adler: Individual Psychology 
147
of patients about to undergo major surgery. For both groups, the recalled dreams 
focused on their conscious worries, fears, and hopes. Both types of research partici-
pants dreamed about the current problems they were facing.
Inferiority feelings. Research on Adler’s concept of inferiority feelings has found 
that adults who scored low on inferiority feelings tended to be more successful 
and self-conﬁ dent and to be more persistent in trying to achieve their goals than 
adults who scored high on inferiority feelings. A study of American college students 
showed that those with moderate inferiority feelings had higher grade-point aver-
ages than those with low or high inferiority feelings (Strano & Petrocelli, 2005).
Early recollections. Classic research showed that early memories of people diag-
nosed as anxiety neurotics were concerned with fear; early memories of depressed 
persons centered on abandonment; and early memories of those with psychosomatic 
complaints involved illness (Jackson & Sechrest, 1962). Early memories of alcohol-
ics contained threatening events, as well as situations in which they were controlled 
by external circumstances rather than by their own decisions. The early memories of 
a control group of nonalcoholics showed neither of these themes (Hafner, Fakouri, 
& Labrentz, 1982).
Early recollections of adult criminals dealt with disturbing or aggressive inter-
actions with other people. They contained more unpleasant events than the early 
Our earliest memories 
of childhood help reveal 
our lifestyle.
© Topham/The Image Works
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   147
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   147
1/29/08   5:41:31 PM
1/29/08   5:41:31 PM

148 
PART TWO The Neopsychoanalytic Approach
recollections of a control group (Hankoff, 1987). The early memories of adolescent 
delinquents involved breaking rules, having difﬁ culty forming social relationships, 
and being unable to cope with life on their own. They also perceived their parents as 
untrustworthy and as more likely to hurt than to help. These themes were not present 
in the early memories of a control group (Davidow & Bruhn, 1990).
Recollections of psychiatric patients considered dangerous to themselves and to 
others showed more aggressive early memories than did recollections of nondanger-
ous psychiatric patients. The recollections of the dangerous patients revealed that 
they felt vulnerable and powerless and saw others as hostile and abusive (Tobey & 
Bruhn, 1992).
Research using objective scoring systems for early recollections has shown that 
these memories tend to be subjective re-creations rather than events that actually oc-
curred, much like Adler’s memory of the cemetery (Statton & Wilborn, 1991).
One study reported that when research participants were asked to make up early 
recollections that might have happened to someone else, the themes were similar to 
those revealed by their own recollections (Buchanan, Kern, & Bell-Dumas, 1991). 
This study also provided research support for Adler’s contention that early recol-
lections reveal one’s current style of life and therefore can be used as a therapeutic 
device. (Table 3.2 summarizes possible themes of early recollections.)
Early recollections studied in adults in the United States and in Israel have been 
shown to predict career preferences. For example, the early memories of physicists, 
mathematicians, and psychologists included themes such as curiosity, independent 
thought, and skepticism about information from authority ﬁ gures (Clark, 2005; 
Kasler & Nevo, 2005).
Neglect in childhood. Adler suggested that children who were neglected or rejected 
by their parents developed feelings of worthlessness. A study of 714 adults hospital-
ized for depression found that the patients rated their parents as having been hostile, 
detached, and rejecting (Crook, Raskin, & Eliot, 1981). Interviews with siblings, 
Table 3.2 Early recollections and style of life themes
Recollection
Possible theme
First school memory
Attitudes toward achievement, mastery, and 
independence
First punishment memory
Attitude toward authority ﬁ gures
First sibling memory
Evidence of sibling rivalry
First family memory
Functioning in social situations
Clearest memory of mother
Attitudes toward women
Clearest memory of father
Attitudes toward men
Memory of person you admire
Basis for role models
Happiest memory
Basis for how your strongest needs are best gratiﬁ ed
source: Adapted from A. R. Bruhn (1992a). The early memories procedure. Journal of Personality 
Assessment, 58(1), 1–15.
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   148
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   148
1/30/08   1:07:37 PM
1/30/08   1:07:37 PM

 
CHAPTER 3 Alfred Adler: Individual Psychology 
149
relatives, and friends of the patients conﬁ rmed that the parents had indeed behaved 
in hostile and neglectful ways.
In another study, parents of 8-year-old children completed a questionnaire to 
assess their child-rearing behaviors and their level of satisfaction with their children 
(Lefkowitz & Tesiny, 1984). Ten years later the children, then age 18, were given 
the depression scale of the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI). 
Research participants whose test scores showed they were more depressed had been 
neglected in childhood by their parents. Those whose parents had not been indiffer-
ent or unloving scored lower on the depression scale.
Pampering in childhood. Adler noted that pampering in childhood could lead to 
a pampered style of life in which the person would demonstrate little or no social 
feelings for others. Research supports this idea and also suggests that pampering 
can lead to excessive narcissism, which involves a lack of responsibility or empathy 
for other people, an exaggerated sense of self-importance, and a tendency to exploit 
others. Studies have identiﬁ ed four types of pampering.
■  Overindulgence, which involves the persistent parental gratiﬁ cation of a 
child’s needs and desires, leading to feelings of entitlement as well as tyran-
nical and manipulative behavior
■  Overpermissiveness, which involves allowing children to behave as they 
please with no consideration for the effects of their behavior on other people, 
leading to a disregard of social rules and the rights of others
■  Overdomination, which involves exclusive parental decision-making, leading 
to a child’s lack of self-conﬁ dence and a tendency to become dependent on 
others in adulthood
■  Overprotection, which involves parental caution, excessively warning chil-
dren of potential dangers in their environment, leading to generalized anxiety 
and a tendency to avoid or hide from social situations
Studies with college students found that children of overdomineering mothers 
were more likely to seek psychotherapy while in college. Students who rated their 
parents as both overindulgent and overprotective tended to be low in self-esteem. 
Students whose parents were considered to be both overindulgent and overdomi-
neering scored high in narcissism (Capron, 2004).
Social interest. Research using the SIS showed that persons high in social interest 
reported less stress, depression, anxiety, and hostility than persons low in social 
interest. High social interest scorers scored higher on tests assessing cooperation 
with others, empathy, responsibility, and popularity (Crandall, 1984; Watkins, 1994; 
Watkins & St. John, 1994). Research with 105 college students found that those high 
in social interest scored high in spirituality and religiosity. However, their spirituality 
was of a positive, tolerant, and helping nature, not necessarily religious ethnocen-
trism or fundamentalism (Leak, 2006a). Another study of college students showed 
that those high in social interest were high in subjective well-being, agreeableness, 
self-identify, self-determination, and a strong sense of purpose in life (Leak & Leak, 
2006).
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   149
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   149
1/29/08   5:41:33 PM
1/29/08   5:41:33 PM

150 
PART TWO The Neopsychoanalytic Approach
A study of high-school adolescents in grades 9 to 12 found that those high in 
social interest scored signiﬁ cantly higher in overall life satisfaction, as well as sat-
isfaction with friends and family, than did those who scored low in social interest 
(R. Gilman, 2001). Other research, conducted with male criminal offenders ranging 
in age from 18 to 40, showed that those who scored high in social interest were far 
less likely to commit additional crimes following their release from jail than were 
those who scored low in social interest (Daugherty, Murphy, & Paugh, 2001).
Studies with the SII showed that women who scored high in social interest were 
signiﬁ cantly higher in self-actualization, a characteristic of the healthy personality 
described by Abraham Maslow. Other research found that social interest was higher 
in women than in men and that it increased with age for both sexes (Greever, Tseng, 
& Friedland, 1973).
A study of 313 Latino men and women currently living in the United States 
found that research participants who were bicultural (well adjusted to living in both 
cultures) scored higher on social interest measures than research participants who 
were primarily acculturated to either the Latino lifestyle or the U.S. lifestyle alone 
(Miranda, Frevert, & Kern, 1998).
High social interest may also be good for your health. Social interest, with its 
related feelings of belonging, cooperation, and a sense of contributing to or receiv-
ing support from a social network has been positively associated with physical and 
mental well-being. For example, people who scored high in social interest tended 
to have stronger immune systems, fewer colds, lower blood pressure, and greater 
subjective well-being (Nikelly, 2005).
Birth order. Much research has been conducted on the effects of one’s order of birth 
within the family. Obviously, being the ﬁ rst-born, second-born, last-born, or an only 
child inﬂ uences personality in a variety of ways. Simply having older or younger 
siblings, regardless of one’s own order of birth, can also affect personality. For ex-
ample, studies of 18,876 people in England, Scotland, and Wales, and 3,432 people 
in the United States, found that the number of older brothers a man had could predict 
his sexual orientation. Boys who had older brothers were more sexually attracted 
to men than were boys who did not have older brothers. The more older brothers a 
man had, the greater was the attraction to the same sex. Having older sisters did not 
predict sexual orientation in women (Bogaert, 2003).
According to Adler, ﬁ rst-borns are concerned with power and authority. One 
way for ﬁ rst-borns to gain power and authority as adults is through achievement in 
their work. If Adler was correct, then ﬁ rst-borns should score high on measures of 
achievement, an idea that has received much research support. In many areas, from 
college attendance to high-level management, ﬁ rst-borns have been found to be 
overrepresented relative to their proportion of the population. More ﬁ rst-borns than 
later-borns become eminent, and they tend to attain greater intellectual achievement 
in academic settings and greater power and prestige in their careers (Breland, 1974; 
Schachter, 1963).
Studies conducted in the United States and in Poland found that ﬁ rst-borns 
scored higher in measures of intelligence, completed more years of formal education, 
and worked in more prestigious occupations than did later-borns (Herrera, Zajonc, 
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   150
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   150
1/29/08   5:41:34 PM
1/29/08   5:41:34 PM

 
CHAPTER 3 Alfred Adler: Individual Psychology 
151
Wieczorkowska, & Cichomski, 2003). Research on adults in Sweden showed that 
ﬁ rst-borns scored higher than later-borns on tests of managerial or executive func-
tioning. However, the ﬁ rst-borns in this study did not score higher than later-borns 
on intelligence tests (Holmgren, Molander, & Nilsson, 2006). A large-scale study of 
more than 240,000 male army recruits in Norway showed that older siblings scored 
higher on an IQ test than did younger siblings (Kristensen & Bjerkedal, 2007).
In general, then, evidence suggests that ﬁ rst-borns might be more intelligent 
than later-borns, although not all researchers agree (see, for example, Rodgers, 
2001). The IQ scores of 400,000 European men were analyzed with respect to birth 
order (Belmont & Marolla, 1973). The results showed that ﬁ rst-borns had higher 
IQ scores than second-borns, second-borns had higher scores than third-borns, 
and so on. These ﬁ ndings were conﬁ rmed for men and women in several countries 
(Zajonc, Markus, & Markus, 1979). A possible explanation for the apparent higher 
intelligence of ﬁ rst-borns relates not to genetic differences but to the ﬁ rst-born’s 
exclusive exposure to adults. Consequently, ﬁ rst-borns may have a more stimulating 
intellectual environment than later-borns.
Vocational preferences for ﬁ rst-borns were found to include teaching, medicine, 
science, and management (Bryant, 1987). First-borns’ scores on an occupational 
interest inventory indicated a preference for socially oriented careers requiring good 
interpersonal skills (White, Campbell, Stewart, Davies, & Pilkington, 1997).
First-borns tend to be more dependent on other people and more suggestible. 
They are anxious in stressful situations and have a higher need for social relation-
ships (Schachter, 1963, 1964). These ﬁ ndings could be predicted from Adler’s 
theory. He noted that ﬁ rst-borns are made anxious when dethroned by a sibling, 
and they attempt to regain their position by eventually conforming to their parents’ 
expectations. Accordingly, ﬁ rst-borns depend more than later-borns on the standards 
of others, including their parents, to guide their behavior and form the basis of their 
self-evaluations (Newman, Higgins, & Vookles, 1992).
Other research found that ﬁ rst-borns scored lower than later-borns on tests of 
depression and anxiety and higher on self-esteem (Gates, Lineberger, Crockett, & 
Hubbard, 1988). First-borns may also be more extraverted and conscientious than 
later-borns (Sulloway, 1995).
First-born girls were found to be more obedient and socially responsible than 
later-borns and tended to feel closer to their parents (Sutton-Smith & Rosenberg, 
1970). Studies conducted in France, Croatia, Canada, and England showed that ﬁ rst-
borns tended to be more closely supervised in childhood, were rated by their mothers 
as less fearful, reported more frightening childhood dreams, and scored higher in 
measures of dominance in college (Beck, Burnet, & Vosper, 2006; Begue & Roche, 
2005; Kerestes, 2006; McCann, Stewin, & Short, 1990).
Less research has been conducted on second-born children. There appears to be 
no support for Adler’s contention that they are more competitive and ambitious than 
their siblings. One study found second-borns to be lower in self-esteem than ﬁ rst-
borns or last-borns, particularly if the age difference between them and the other 
siblings was approximately 2 years (Kidwell, 1982).
A study of 198 ﬁ rst-born and second-born siblings, conducted over a period of 
3 years, found that the attitudes, personalities, and leisure activities of the  second-born 
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   151
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   151
1/30/08   1:07:37 PM
1/30/08   1:07:37 PM

152 
PART TWO The Neopsychoanalytic Approach
children were inﬂ uenced more by their older siblings than by their parents (McHale, 
Updegraff, Helms-Erikson, & Crouter, 2001).
Adler predicted that last-born children, if excessively pampered, would have ad-
justment problems as adults. One frequently suggested reason for alcoholism is that 
some people cannot cope with the demands of everyday life. If so, then according 
to Adler’s theory, more last-borns than early-borns would become alcoholics. This 
prediction has been supported by many studies dealing with alcoholism and order 
of birth. Also, binge drinking in college has been found to be signiﬁ cantly higher 
among last-borns than among ﬁ rst-borns (Laird & Shelton, 2006).
To Adler, only-born adults are overly concerned with being the center of atten-
tion, as they were in childhood. He also considered only-borns to be more selﬁ sh 
than children reared with siblings. Research has not consistently supported this con-
tention. One study found that only-borns demonstrated more cooperative behaviors 
than ﬁ rst-borns or last-borns (Falbo, 1978). Another study found that only-borns 
were more self-centered and less popular than were children with siblings (Jiao, Ji, 
& Jing, 1986).
An analysis of 115 studies of only-borns reported higher levels of achievement 
and intelligence than, and comparable social and emotional adjustment with, people 
who have siblings (Falbo & Polit, 1986). Other research (Mellor, 1990) conﬁ rmed 
those results and found that only children had higher levels of initiative, aspiration, 
industriousness, and self-esteem.
It has also been suggested that only-borns earn better grades in school. The 
results of an analysis of several studies show that the number of siblings is a con-
sistent predictor of educational success; “individuals with the fewest siblings do the 
best” (Downey, 2001, p. 497). Only-borns may have more opportunities and parental 
resources, enabling them to perform better than children with siblings.
Reﬂ ections on Adler’s Theory
Adler’s inﬂ uence within psychology has been substantial. In later chapters we see 
examples of his ideas in the work of other personality theorists. These contribu-
tions make Adler’s personality theory one of the most enduring. He was ahead of 
his time, and his cognitive and social emphases are more compatible with trends 
in psychology today than with the psychology of his own day. Abraham Maslow 
wrote: “Alfred Adler becomes more and more correct year by year. . . . As the facts 
come in, they give stronger and stronger support to his image of man” (Maslow, 
1970a, p. 13).
Adler’s emphasis on social forces in personality can be seen in the theory of 
Karen Horney. His focus on the whole person and the unity of personality is reﬂ ected 
in the work of Gordon Allport. The creative power of the individual in shaping his 
or her style of life, and the insistence that future goals are more important than past 
events, inﬂ uenced the work of Abraham Maslow. A social-learning theorist, Julian 
Rotter, wrote that he “was and continues to be impressed by Adler’s insights into 
human nature” (Rotter, 1982, pp. 1–2).
Adler’s ideas also reached into Freudian psychoanalysis. It was Adler who 
proposed the aggressive drive more than 12 years before Freud included aggression 
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   152
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   152
1/29/08   5:41:34 PM
1/29/08   5:41:34 PM

 
CHAPTER 3 Alfred Adler: Individual Psychology 
153
with sex as primary motivating forces. The neo-Freudian ego psychologists, who 
focus more on conscious and rational processes and less on the unconscious, follow 
Adler’s lead.
Adler disputed Freud’s views on women, arguing that there was no biological ba-
sis, such as penis envy, for women’s alleged sense of inferiority. Such a notion, Adler 
charged, was a myth invented by men to maintain their alleged sense of superiority. He 
acknowledged that women may feel inferior but believed that was attributable to social 
conditioning and sex-role stereotyping. He also believed in the idea of equality for the 
sexes and supported the women’s emancipation movements of the day.
Speciﬁ c Adlerian concepts of lasting importance to psychology include the 
early work on organic inferiority, which has inﬂ uenced the study of psychosomatic 
disorders; the inferiority complex; compensation; and order of birth. Adler is also 
considered a forerunner of social psychology and group therapy.
Although his ideas have been widely accepted, Adler’s public recognition de-
clined after his death in 1937, and he has received relatively little subsequent praise 
or credit for his contributions. Many concepts have been borrowed from his theory 
without acknowledgment. A typical instance of this lack of recognition can be found 
in Sigmund Freud’s obituary in the Times newspaper of London, which named Freud 
as the originator of the term inferiority complex. When Carl Jung died, the New York 
Times said he had coined the term. Neither newspaper mentioned Adler, the origina-
tor of the concept. However, Adler did receive one unique honor: a British composer 
named a string quartet for him.
As inﬂ uential as Adler’s work has been, it does have its critics. Freud charged 
that Adler’s psychology was oversimpliﬁ ed and would therefore appeal to many 
people because it eliminated the complicated nature of the unconscious, had no dif-
ﬁ cult concepts, and ignored the problems of sex. Freud remarked that it could take 
2 years or more to learn about his psychoanalysis, but “Adler’s ideas and technique 
can be easily learned in two weeks, because with Adler there is so little to know” 
(quoted in Sterba, 1982, p. 156).
It is true that Adler’s theory seems simpler than Freud’s or Jung’s, but that was 
Adler’s intention. He wrote that it had taken him 40 years to make his psychology 
simple. One point that reinforces the charge of oversimpliﬁ cation is that his books 
are easy to read because he wrote for the general public and because some of them 
were compiled from his popular lectures. (Figure 3.1) A related charge is that Adler’s 
concepts appear to rely heavily on commonsense observations from everyday life. 
A book reviewer in the New York Times noted: “Although [Adler] is one of the most 
eminent psychologists in the world, when he writes about psychology there is no 
other who can equal him in simplicity and non-technicality of language” (quoted in 
Hoffman, 1994, p. 276).
Critics allege that Adler was inconsistent and unsystematic in his thinking and 
that his theory contains gaps and unanswered questions. Are inferiority feelings the 
only problem we face in life? Do all people strive primarily for perfection? Can 
we become reconciled to a degree of inferiority and no longer attempt to compen-
sate for it? These and other questions that have been posed cannot all be answered 
adequately by Adler’s system; most theorists, however, leave us with unanswered 
questions.
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   153
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   153
1/29/08   5:41:35 PM
1/29/08   5:41:35 PM

154 
PART TWO The Neopsychoanalytic Approach
Some psychologists dispute Adler’s position on the issue of determinism versus 
free will. Early in his career, Adler did not oppose the notion of determinism. It was 
broadly accepted in science at the time, and it characterized Freud’s psychoanalytic 
theory. Later, Adler felt the need to grant more autonomy to the self, and his ﬁ nal 
formulation rejected determinism. His concept of the creative self proposes that 
before the age of 5 we fashion a style of life using material provided by our hered-
ity and our environment. However, it is not clear how a child is able to make such 
momentous decisions. We know that Adler favored free will and opposed the idea 
that we are victims of innate forces and childhood events. That position is clear, but 
the speciﬁ cs of forming the style of life are not.
Adler’s followers claim that individual psychology remains popular among 
psychologists, psychiatrists, social workers, and educators. Individual Psychology: 
The Journal of Adlerian Theory, Research and Practice is published quarterly by the 
North American Society of Adlerian Psychology. Other Adlerian journals are pub-
lished in Germany, Italy, and France. Adlerian training institutes have been estab-
lished in New York, Chicago, and other cities. Adlerian counseling techniques have 
been developed by Rudolph Dreikurs and others, and this work has inﬂ uenced new 
Figure 3.1 
Adler’s books achieved 
considerable popularity 
in the United States and 
spawned the genre of 
self-help books.
source: Edward Hoffman 
(1994). The drive for self: 
Alfred Adler and the founding 
of individual psychology. 
Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley.
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   154
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   154
1/29/08   5:41:35 PM
1/29/08   5:41:35 PM

 
CHAPTER 3 Alfred Adler: Individual Psychology 
155
generations of Adlerian clinicians in what Dreikurs calls family education centers. 
Dreikurs’s work on child-rearing practices applies Adler’s views to contemporary 
problems not only in child development, but also in the treatment of the family as 
a whole.
Chapter Summary
Adler’s childhood was marked by intense efforts to compensate for his feelings of 
inferiority. His system of individual psychology differs from Freudian psychoanaly-
sis in its focus on the uniqueness of the individual, on consciousness, and on social 
rather than biological forces. It minimizes the role of sex.
Inferiority feelings are the source of all human striving, which results from our 
attempts to compensate for these feelings. Inferiority feelings are universal and are 
determined by the infant’s helplessness and dependency on adults. An inferiority 
complex (that is, an inability to solve life’s problems) results from being unable to 
compensate for inferiority feelings. An inferiority complex can originate in child-
hood through organic inferiority, spoiling, or neglect. A superiority complex (an 
exaggerated opinion of one’s abilities and accomplishments) results from overcom-
pensation.
Our ultimate goal is superiority or perfection; that is, making the personality 
whole or complete. Fictional ﬁ nalism refers to ﬁ ctional ideas, such as perfection, 
that guide our behavior. Style of life refers to unique patterns of characteristics and 
behaviors by which we strive for perfection. The creative power of the self refers 
to our ability to create our selves from the materials provided by our heredity and 
environment. Four basic styles of life are the dominant or ruling type, the getting 
type, the avoiding type, and the socially useful type. Social interest is innate but the 
extent to which it is realized depends on early social experiences.
Order of birth is a major social inﬂ uence in childhood from which one’s style of 
life is created. First-borns are oriented toward the past, pessimistic about the future, 
and concerned with maintaining order and authority. Second-borns compete with 
ﬁ rst-borns and are apt to be ambitious. Last-borns, spurred by the need to surpass 
older siblings, may become high achievers. Only children may mature early but are 
apt to face a shock in school when they are no longer the center of attention.
Adler’s image of human nature is more hopeful than is Freud’s. In Adler’s view, 
people are unique, and they possess free will and the ability to shape their own 
development. Although childhood experiences are important, we are not victims of 
them.
Adler’s methods of assessment are order of birth, early recollections, and dream 
analysis. Research has provided support for Adler’s views on the following: dreams, 
early memories, and childhood neglect and pampering; his belief that social interest 
is related to emotional well-being; the idea that ﬁ rst-borns are high achievers, depen-
dent on others, suggestible, and anxious under stress; and the notion that last-borns 
are more likely to become alcoholics.
Adler’s emphasis on cognitive and social factors in personality, the unity of 
personality, the creative power of the self, the importance of goals, and cognitive 
factors has inﬂ uenced many personality theorists.
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   155
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   155
1/29/08   5:41:37 PM
1/29/08   5:41:37 PM

156 
PART TWO The Neopsychoanalytic Approach
Review Questions
 1. Explain how Adler’s theory of personality is at 
least partly a reﬂ ection of his own childhood 
experiences.
 2. On what points did Adler differ with Freud?
 3. What is the difference between inferiority feel-
ings and the inferiority complex? How does each 
develop?
 4. How does the superiority complex differ from 
the idea of striving for superiority? How did 
Adler deﬁ ne superiority?
 5. Describe the concept of ﬁ ctional ﬁ nalism. Ex-
plain how ﬁ ctional ﬁ nalism relates to the notion 
of striving for superiority.
 6. How does the self develop? Do people play an 
active or a passive role in the development of the 
self?
 7. What are the four basic styles of life, according 
to Adler?
 8. What parental behaviors may foster a child’s 
development of social interest? Which basic style 
of life is identiﬁ ed with social interest?
 9. Describe the personality characteristics proposed 
by Adler that may develop in ﬁ rst-born, second-
born, and youngest children as a result of their 
order of birth within the family.
 10. According to Adler, what are the advantages and 
disadvantages of being an only child?
 11. If it were possible to choose, which birth order 
position would you select for yourself in your 
family? Why?
 12. Describe research on the personality of ﬁ rst-born 
and only-born children. Do the results support 
Adler’s predictions?
 13. How does Adler’s image of human nature differ 
from Freud’s?
 14. Describe the approaches Adler used to assess the 
personalities of his patients.
 15. What is the importance of early recollections in 
personality assessment? Give an example of how 
one of Adler’s recollections revealed an aspect of 
his personality.
 16. What is the purpose of dreams? Does contem-
porary research on sleep and dreaming support 
Adler’s views?
 17. How do people who score high in social interest 
differ from people who score low?
 18. Discuss the criticisms and contributions of 
Adler’s system within psychology today.
Suggested Readings
Adler, A. (1930). Individual psychology. In C. Mur-
chison (Ed.). Psychologies of 1930 (pp. 395–405). 
Worcester, MA: Clark University Press. Offers a 
clear exposition of the basic principles of Adler’s 
individual psychology.
Ansbacher, H. L. (1990). Alfred Adler’s inﬂ uence on the 
three leading cofounders of humanistic psychology. 
Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 30(4), 45–53. Traces 
Adler’s inﬂ uence, in person and through his writings, 
on the development of humanistic psychology in the 
United States, most notably through his contact with 
Maslow and Rogers.
Ansbacher, R. R. (1997). Alfred Adler, the man, seen by a 
student and friend. Individual Psychology, 53, 270–274. 
Using Adler’s technique of early recollections, the au-
thor evaluates her memories of Adler’s lectures and 
therapy sessions in New York and Vienna.
Clark, A. J. (2005). An early recollection of Albert Einstein: 
Perspectives on its meaning and his life. Journal of Indi-
vidual Psychology, 61, 126–136. Uses an Adlerian per-
spective to evaluate the ﬁ rst memory of the great physicist 
Albert Einstein within the historical context of his life.
Ellenberger, H. F. (1970). The discovery of the unconscious: 
The history and evolution of dynamic psychiatry. New 
York: Basic Books. Traces the study of the unconscious 
from primitive times to Freudian psychoanalysis and its 
derivatives. See Chapter 8, “Alfred Adler and Individual 
Psychology.”
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   156
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   156
1/29/08   5:41:38 PM
1/29/08   5:41:38 PM

 
CHAPTER 3 Alfred Adler: Individual Psychology 
157
Fiebert, M. S. (1997). In and out of Freud’s shadow: A 
chronology of Adler’s relationship with Freud. Indi-
vidual Psychology, 53, 241–269. Reviews the 7-year 
correspondence between Adler and Freud describing 
changes in their personal and professional relationships 
and their acrimonious breakup.
Grey, L. (1998). Alfred Adler, the forgotten prophet: A 
vision for the 21st century. Westport, CT: Praeger. A bi-
ography and an assessment of the continuing inﬂ uence 
of Adler’s ideas.
Hoffman, E. (1994). The drive for self: Alfred Adler and the 
founding of individual psychology. Reading, MA:  Addison-
Wesley. Discusses Adler’s contributions to personality 
theory, psychoanalysis, and popular psychology. Recounts 
events in his life as the basis for familiar  concepts such as 
inferiority complex, overcompensation, and lifestyle.
Kasler, J., & Nevo, O. (2005). Early recollections as 
predictors of study area choice. Journal of Individual 
Psychology, 61, 217–232. Research using Adler’s con-
cept of early memories to reveal career interests and 
preferences of pre-college young adults shows cred-
ibility for social, realistic, and artistic ﬁ elds.
Rule, W., & Bishop, M. (2005). Adlerian lifestyle coun-
seling. London: Routledge. Describes research on 
Adler’s individual psychology and applications to 
behavioral, mental health, interpersonal, and goal-
oriented counseling.
Sulloway, F. J. (1996). Born to rebel: Birth order, family 
dynamics, and creative lives. New York: Pantheon. 
Analyzes revolutions in social, scientiﬁ c, and po-
litical thought, dating back to the 16th century, to 
demonstrate the inﬂ uence of birth order on person-
ality development. Suggests that birth-order effects 
transcend gender, social class, race, national origin, 
and time.
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   157
06257_04_ch3_p129-157.indd   157
1/29/08   5:41:38 PM
1/29/08   5:41:38 PM

