XX
ALGEBRA: DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
Beginnings learnt from Egypt.
IN algebra, as in geometry, the Greeks learnt the beginnings
from the Egyptians. Familiarity on the part of the Greeks
with Egyptian methods of calculation is well attested. , (1)
These methods are found in operation in the Heronian writings
and collections. (2) Psellus in the letter published by Tannery
in his edition of Diophantus speaks of ' the method of arith-
metical calculations used by the Egyptians, by which problems
in analysis are handled'; he adds details, doubtless taken
from Anatolius, of the technical terms used for different kinds
of numbers, including the powers of the unknown quantity.
(3) The scholiast to Plato's Charmides 165 E says that 'parts
of XoyiaTLKr}, the science of calculation, are the so-called Greek
and Egyptian methods in multiplications and divisions, and
the additions and subtractions of fractions \ (4) Plato himself
in the Laws 819 A-c says that free-born boys should, as is the
practice in Egypt, learn, side by side with reading, simple
mathematical calculations adapted to their age, which should
be put into a form such as to combine amusement with
instruction: problems about the distribution of, say, apples or
garlands, the calculation of mixtures, and other questions
arising in military or civil life.
' Hau '-calculations.
The Egyptian calculations here in point (apart from their
method of writing and calculating in fractions, which, with
the exception of §, were always decomposed and written
as the sum of a diminishing series of aliquot parts or sub-
multiples) are the Aau-calculations. Hau, meaning a heap, is
the term denoting the unknown quantity, and the calculations
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

< HAU '-CALCULATIONS 
441
in terms of it are equivalent to the solutions of simple equations
with one unknown quantity. Examples from the Papyrus
Rhind correspond to the following equations:
— 19,
- 33,
x)= 10.
The Egyptians anticipated, though only in an elementary
form, a favourite method of Diophantus, that of the 'false
supposition' or 'regula falsi\ 
An arbrtrary assumption is
made as to the value of the unknown, and the true value
is afterwards found by a comparison of the result of sub-
stituting the wrong value in the original expression with the
actual data. Two examples may be given. The first, from
the Papyrus Rhind, is the problem of dividing 100 loaves
among five persons in such a way that the snares are in
arithmetical progression, and one-seventh of the sum of the
first three shares is equal to the sum of the other two. If
a + idy a+3d, a + 2d, a + d, a be the shares, then
or 
d = 
\
Ahmes says, without any explanation, ' make the difference,
as it is, 5^3, and then, assuming a = 1, writes the series
23, 17|, 12, 6^, 1. The addition of these gives 60, and 100 is
1| times 60. Ahmes says simply 'multiply If times' and
thus gets the correct values 38§, 29f, 20, 10§§, 1§.
The second example (taken from the Berlin Papyrus 6619)
is the solution of the equations
X2+y2 = 100,
x : y — 1: |, or y = %x.
x is first assumed to be 1, and x2 + y2 is thus found to be f§.
In order to make 100, ff has to be multiplied by 64 or 82.
The true value of x is therefore 8 times 1, or 8.
Arithmetical,epigrams in the Greek Anthology.
The simple equations solved in the Papyrus Rhind are just
the kind of equations of which we find many examples in the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

442 ALGEBRA: DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
arithmetical epigrams contained in the Greek Anthology. Most
of these appear under the name of Metrodorus, a grammarian,
probably of the time of the Emperors Anastasius I (A.D. 491-
518) and Justin I (A.D. 518-27). They were obviously only
collected by Metrodorus, from ancient as well as more recent
sources. Many of the epigrams (46 in number) lead to simple
equations, and several of them are problems of dividing a num-
ber of apples or nuts among a certain number of persons, that
is to say, the very type of problem mentioned by Plato. For
example, a number of apples has to be determined such that,
if four persons out of six receive one-third, one-eighth, one-
fourth and one-fifth respectively of the whole number, while
the fifth person receives 10 apples, there is one apple left over
for the sixth person, i.e.
Just as Plato alludes to bowls ((/>id\cu) of different metals,
there are problems in which the weights of bowls have to
be found. We are thus enabled to understand the allusions of
Proclus and the scholiast on Charmides 165 E to fjLTjXdrai
and faaXtTcu dpid/ioi, 'numbers of apples or of bowls'.
It is evident from Plato's allusions that the origin of such
simple algebraical problems dates back, at least, to the fifth
century B.C.
The following is a classification of the problems in the
Anthology. (1) Twenty-three are simple equations in one
unknown and of the type shown above; one of these is an
epigram on the age of Diophantus and certain incidents of
his life (xiv. 126). (2) Twelve are easy simultaneous equations
with two unknowns, like Dioph. I. 6; they can of course be
reduced to a simple equation with one unknown by means of
an easy elimination. One other (xiv. 51) gives simultaneous
equations in three unknowns
and one (xiv. 49) gives four equations in four unknowns,
x + y = 40, x + z=45, 
x + u = 36, x + y + z + u = 60.
With these may be compared Dioph. I. 16-21, as well as the
general solution of any number of simultaneous linear equa-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EPIGRAMS IN THE GREEK ANTHOLOGY 
443
fcions of this type with the same number of unknown quantities
which was given by Thymaridas, an early Pythagorean, and
was called the e7rdv6rjna, ' flower ' or ' bloom' of Thymaridas
(see vol. i, pp. 94-6). (3) Six more are problems of the usual
type about the filling and emptying of vessels by pipes; e.g.
(xiv. 130) one pipe fills the vessel in one day, a second in two
and a third in three; how long will all three running together
take to fill it? 
Another about brickmakers (xiv. 136) is of
the same sort.
Indeterminate equations of the first degree.
The Anthology contains (4) two indeterminate equations of
the first degree which can be solved in positive integers in an
infinite number of ways (xiv. 48, 144); the first is a distribu-
tion of apples, 3x in number, into parts satisfying the equation
x — 3y = yy where y is not less than 2; the second leads to
three equations connecting four unknown quantities:
x= 2yv
the general solution of which is x — 4/c, y = k, x1 = 3lc,
yx = 2 k. These very equations, which, however, are made
determinate by assuming that x + y = xx + y1 = 100, are solved
in Dioph. I. 12.
Enough has been said to show that Diophantus was not
the inventor of Algebra. Nor was he the first to solve inde-
terminate problems of the second degree.
Indeterminate equations of second degree before
Diophantus.
Take first the problem (Dioph. II. 8) of dividing a square
number into two squares, or of finding a right-angled triangle
with sides in rational numbers. We have already seen that
Pythagoras is credited with the discovery of a general formula
for finding such triangles, namely,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

444 ALGEBRA: DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
where n is any odd number, and Plato with another formula
of the same sort, namely (2n)2 + (n2 — I)2 = (n2+l)2. 
Euclid
(Lemma following X. 28) finds the following more general
formula
m2 n2p2 q2 — {\ (mnfj2 + mnq2)}2 — {•§ (mnp2 — mnq2)}2.
The Pythagoreans too, as we have seen (vol. i, pp. 91-3),
solved another indeterminate problem, discovering, by means
of the series of ' side-J and ' diameter-numbers', any number
of successive integral solutions of the equations
2x2-y2 = ±1.
Diophantus does not particularly mention this equation,
but from the Lemma to VI. 15 it is clear that he knew how
to find any number of solutions when one is known. Thus,
seeing that 2 a;2— 1 = y2 is satisfied by x = 1, y = 1, he would
put
2 (1 + x)2 — 1 = a square
= (pz-1)2, say;
whence 
x = (4+2 p)/(p2 
— 2).
Take the value p = 2, and we have x = 4, and x+l = 5 ;
in this case 2 . 52— 1 = 49 = 72. Putting x + 5 in place of %,
we can find a still higher value, and so on.
Indeterminate equations in the Heronian collections.
Some further Greek examples of indeterminate analysis are
now available. They come from the Constantinople manuscript
(probably of the twelfth century) from which Schone edited'
the Metrica of Heron; they have been published and translated
by Heiberg, with comments by Zeuthen.1 Two of the problems
(thirteen in number) had been published in a less complete
form in Hultsch's Heron (Geeponicus, 78, 79); the others
are new.
I. The first problem is to find two rectangles such that the
perimeter of the second is three times that of the first, and
the area of the first is three times that of the second. The
1 Bibliotheca mathematica, viii3, 1907-8, pp. 118-34. See
24. 1-13 in Heron, vol. iv (ed. Heiberg), pp. 414-26.
now Geotn.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HERONIAN INDETERMINATE EQUATIONS 
445
number 3 is of course only an illustration, and the problem is
equivalent to the solution of the equations
(1) u + v= n(x + y))
(2) 
xy = n.uv 
j
The solution given in the text is equivalent to
x = 2n3 — 1, 
y =
u — n^n3— 
2), 
v — n
Zeuthen suggests that the solution may have been obtained
thus. As the problem is indeterminate, it would be natural
to start with some hypothesis, e.g. to put v — n. It would
follow from equation (1) that u is a multiple of n, say nz.
We have then
x + y = 1+c,
while, by (2), 
xy = nzz>
whence 
xy = ns(x + y) — n3,
or 
(x — n3) (y — n3) = nz (n3 — 1).
An obvious solution is
x — n3 = 7i3 — 1, y — n3 = n3,
which gives z — 2nz— 1 + 2?^3— 1 = 4n3 — 2, so that
u = nz — n{4tnz— 2).
II. The second is a similar problem about two rectangles,
equivalent to the solution of the equations
(1) x + y =
(2) xy 
=n. uv)
and the solution given in the text is
x + y — u + v = nz— 1, 
(3)
In this case trial may have been made of the assumptions
v = nx, 
y = TI2U,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

446 ALGEBRA: DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
when equation (1) would give
(n — \)x = (n2 — l)u,
a solution of which is x = n2— 1, u = n— 1.
III. The fifth problem is interesting in one respect. We are
asked to find a right-angled triangle (in rational numbers)
with area of 5 feet. We are told to multiply 5 by some
square containing 6 as a factor, e.g. 36. This makes 180,
and this is the area of the triangle (9, 40, 41). Dividing each
side by 6, we have the triangle required. 
The author, then,
is aware that the area of a right-angled triangle with sides in
whole numbers is divisible by 6. If we take the Euclidean
formula for a right-angled triangle, making the sides a. mn,
a . ^(m2—n2), a . -|(m2 + n2), where a is any number, and m, n
are numbers which are both odd or both even, the area is
\mn(m — n) (m -h n)a2,
and, as a matter of fact, the number mn(m — ri) (m + ri) is
divisible by 24, as was proved later (for another purpose) by
Leonardo of Pisa.
IV. The last four problems (10 to 13) are of great interest.
They are different particular cases of one problem, that of
finding a rational right-angled triangle such that the numerical
sum of its area and its perimeter is a given number. The
author's solution depends on the following formulae, where
a, b are the perpendiculars, and c the hypotenuse, of a right-
angled triangle, S its area, r the radius of the inscribed circle,
and s = \ (a + b + c);
S = rs = %ab, r + s— a + by c = s — r.
(The proof of these formulae by means of the usual figure,
namely that used by Heron to prove the formula
S=V{s(s-a)(s-b)(s-c)}}
is easy.)
Solving the first two equations, in order to find a and ft,
we have
which formula is actually used by the author for finding a
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HERONIAN INDETERMINATE EQUATIONS 
447
and b. The method employed is to take the sum of the area
and the perimeter 8+ 2 s, separated into its two obvious
factors s(r+2), to put s(r+2) = A (the given number), and
then to separate A into suitable factors to which s and r + 2
may be equated. They must obviously be such that sr, the
area, is divisible by 6. To take the first example where
A = 280: the possible factors are 2 x 140, 4 x 70, 5 x 56, 7 x 40,
8 x 35, 10 x 28, 14 x 20. The suitable factors in this case are
r+2 = 8, s = 35, because r is then equal to 6, and rs is
a multiple of 6.
The author then says that
d= £ [6+ 3 5 - 7{ (6 + 35)2 - 8 . 6. 35}] = i(41-l) = 20,
c = 35-6 = 29.
The triangle is therefore (20, 21, 29) in this case. The
triangles found in the other three cases, by the same method,
are (9, 40, 41), (8, 15, 17) and (9, 12, 15).
Unfortunately there is no guide to the date of the problems
just given. The probability is that the original formulation
of the most important of the problems belongs to the period
between Euclid and Diophantus. This supposition best agrees
with the fact that the problems include nothing taken from
the great collection in the Arithmetica. 
On the other hand,
it is strange that none of the seven problems above mentioned
is found in Diophantus. The five relating to rational right-
angled triangles might well have been included by him; thus
he finds rational right-angled triangles such that the area plus
or minus one of the perpendiculars is a given number, but not
the rational triangle which has a given area; and he finds
rational right-angled triangles such that the axes, plus or minus
the sum of two sides is a given number, but not the rational
triangle such that the sum of the area and the three sides is
a given number. The omitted problems might, it is true, have
come in the lost Books; but, on the other hand, Book VI would
have been the appropriate place for them.
The crowning example of a difficult indeterminate problem
propounded before Diophantus's time is the Cattle-Problem
attributed to Archimedes, described above (pp. 97-8).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

448 ALGEBRA: DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
Numerical solution of quadratic equations.
The geometrical algebra of the Greeks has been in evidence
all through our history from the Pythagoreans downwards,
and no more need be said of it here except that its arithmetical
application was no new thing in Diophantus. It is probable,
for example, that the solution of the quadratic equation,
discovered first by geometry, was applied for the purpose of
finding numerical values for the unknown as early as Euclid,
if not earlier still. 
In Heron the numerical solution of
equations is well established, so that Diophantus was not the
first to treat equations algebraically. 
What he did was to
take a step forward towards an algebraic notation.
The date of DIOPHANTUS can now be fixed with fair certainty.
He was later than Hypsicles, from whom he quotes a definition
of a polygonal number, and earlier than Theon of Alexandria,
who has a quotation from Diophantus's definitions. The
possible limits of date are therefore, say, 150 B.C. to A.D. 350.
But the letter of Psellus already mentioned says that Anatolius
(Bishop of Laodicea about A.D. 280) dedicated to Diophantus
a concise treatise on the Egyptian method of reckoning;
hence Diophantus must have been a contemporary, so that he
probably flourished A.D. 250 or not much later.
An epigram in the Anthology gives some personal particulars:
his boyhood lasted ^th of his life; his beard grew after T^th
more; he married after \th more, and his son was born 5 years
later; the son lived to half his father's age, and the father
died 4 years after his son. Thus, if x was his age when
he died,
Ja? + 3^a5 + ^a5+5 + -|o5+4 = x,
which gives x = 84.
Works of Diophantus.
The works on which the fame of Diophantus rests are:
(1) the Arithmetica (originally in thirteen Books),
(2) a tract On Polygonal Numbers.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

WORKS 
449
Six Books only of the former and a fragment of the latter
survive.
Allusions in the Arithmetica imply the existence of
(3) A collection of propositions under the title of Porisms;
in three propositions (3, 5, 16) of Book V, Diophantus quotes
as known certain propositions in the Theory of Numbers,
prefixing to the statement of them the words ' We have it in
the Porisms that...'
A scholium on a passage of Iamblichus, where Iamblichus
cites a dictum of certain Pythagoreans about the unit being
the dividing line (fieOopiov) between number and aliquot parts,
says ' thus Diophantus in the Moriastica.... 
for he describes
as "parts" the progression without limit in the direction of
less than the unit \ 
The Moriastica may be a separate work
by Diophantus giving rules for reckoning with fractions; but
I do not feel sure that the reference may not simply be to the
definitions at the beginning of the Arithmetica.
The Arithmetica.
The seven lost Books and their 
'place.
None of the manuscripts which we possess contain more
than six Books of the Arithmetica, the only variations being
that some few divide the six Books into seven, while one or
two give the fragment on Polygonal Numbers as VIII. The
missing Books were evidently lost at a very early date.
Tannery suggests that Hypatia's commentary extended only
to the first six Books, and that she left untouched the remain-
ing seven, which, partly as a consequence, were first forgotten
and then lost (cf. the case of Apollonius's Conies, where the
only Books which have survived in Greek, I-IV, are those
on which Eutocius commented). There is no sign that even
the Arabians ever possessed the missing Books. The Fakhri,
an algebraical treatise by Abu Bekr Muh. b. al-Hasan al-
Karkhi (d. about 1029), contains a collection of problems in
determinate and indeterminate analysis which not only show
that their author had deeply studied Diophantus but in many
cases are taken direct from the Arithmetica, sometimes with
a change in constants; in the fourth section of the work,
1623.2 
G g
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

450 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
between problems corresponding to problems in Dioph. II
and III, are 25 problems not found in Diophantus, but
internal evidence, and especially the admission of irrational
results (which are always avoided by Diophantus), exclude
the hypothesis that we have here one of the lost Books.
Nor is there any sign that more of the work than we possess
was known to Abu'l Waia al-Buzjani (A.D. 940-98) who wrote
a 'commentary on the algebra of Diophantus', as well as
a ' Book of proofs of propositions used by Diophantus in his
work'. These facts again point to the conclusion that the
lost Books were lost before the tenth century.
The old view of the place originally occupied by the lost
seven Books is that of Nesselmann, who argued it with great
ability.1 According to him (l) much less of Diophantus is
wanting than' would naturally be supposed on the basis of
the numerical proportion of 7 lost to 6 extant Books, (2) the
missing portion came, not at the end, but in the middle of
the work, and indeed mostly between the first and second
Books. Nesselmann's general argument is that, if we care-
fully read the last four Books, from the third to the sixth,
we shall find that Diophantus moves in a rigidly defined and
limited circle of methods and artifices, and seems in fact to be
at the end of his resources. As regards the possible contents
of the lost portion on this hypothesis, Nesselmann can only
point to (1) topics which we should expect to find treated,
either because foreshadowed by, the author himself or as
necessary for the elucidation or completion of the whole
subject, (2) the Porisms; under head (1) come, (a) deter-
minate equations of the second degree, and (6) indeterminate
equations of the first degree. Diophantus does indeed promise
to show how to solve the general quadratic ax2±bx±c = 0 so
far as it has rational and positive solutions; the suitable place
for this would have been between Books I and II. But there
is nothing whatever to show that indeterminate equations
of the first degree formed part of the writer's plan. Hence
Nesselmann is far from accounting for the contents of seven
whole Books; and he is forced to the conjecture that the six
Books may originally have been divided into even more than
seven Books; there is, hpwever, no evidence to support this.
1 Nesselmann, Algebra der Griechen, pp. 264-73.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

RELATION OF WORKS 
451
Relation of the ' Porisms' to the Arithmetica.
Did the Porisms form part of the Arithmetica in its original
form ? The phrase in which they are alluded to, and which
occurs three times, 'We have it in the Porisms that.. .3 suggests
that they were a distinct collection of propositions concerning
the properties of certain numbers, their divisibility into a
certain number of squares, and so on; and it is possible that
it was from the same collection that Diophantus took the
numerous other propositions which he assumes, explicitly or
implicitly. If the collection was part of the Arithmetica, it
would be strange to quote the propositions under a separate
title 'The Porisms3 when it would have been more natural
to refer to particular propositions of particular Books, and
more natural still to say TOVTO yap wpoSeSeiKTca, or some such
phrase, ' for this has been proved', without any reference to
the particular place where the proof occurred. The expression
'We have it in the Porisms' (in the plural) would be still
more inappropriate if the Porisms had been, as Tannery
supposed, not collected together as one or more Books of the
Arithmetica, but scattered about in the work as corollaries to
particular propositions. Hence I agree with the view of
Hultsch that the *Porisms were not included in the Arith-
metica at all, but formed a separate work.
If this is right, we cannot any longer hold to the view of
Nesselmann that the lost Books were in the middle and not at
the end of the treatise; indeed Tannery produces strong
arguments in favour of the contrary view, that it is the last
and most difficult Books which are lost. He replies first to
the assumption that Diophantus could not have proceeded
to problems more difficult than those of Book V. 'If the
fifth or the sixth Book of the Arithmetica had been lost, who,
pray, among us would have believed that such problems had.
ever been attempted by the Greeks ?> It would be the greatest
error, in any case in wThich a thing cannot clearly be proved
to have been unknown to all the ancients, to maintain that
it could not have been known to some Greek mathematician.
If we do not know to what lengths Archimedes brought the
theory of numbers (to say nothing of other things), let us
admit our ignorance. But, between the famous problem of the
Gg2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

452 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
cattle and the most difficult of Diophantus's problems, is there
not a sufficient gap to require seven Books to fill it? And,
without attributing to the ancients what modern mathe-
maticians have discovered, may not a- number of the things
attributed to the Indians and Arabs have been drawn from
Greek sources? May not the same be said of a problem
solved by Leonardo of Pisa, which is very similar to those of
Diophantus but is not now to be found in the Arithmetica ?
In fact, it may fairly be said that, when Ohasles made his
reasonably probable restitution of the Porisms of Euclid, he,
notwithstanding that he had Pappus's lemmas to help him,
undertook a more difficult task than he would have undertaken
if he had attempted to fill up seven Diophantine Books with
numerical problems which the Greeks may reasonably be
supposed to have solved/l
It is not so easy to agree with Tannery's view of the relation
of the treatise On Polygonal Numbers to the Arithmetica.
According to him, just as Serenus's treatise on the sections
of cones and cylinders was added to the mutilated Conies of
Apollonius consisting of four Books only, in order to make up
a convenient volume, so the tract on Polygonal Numbers was
added to the remains of the Arithmetica, though forming no
part of the larger work.2 Thus Tannery would seem to deny
the genuineness of the whole tract on Polygonal Numbers,
though in his text he only signalizes the portion beginning
with the enunciation of the problem ' Given a number, to find
in how many ways it can be a polygonal number' as ' a vain
attempt by a commentator' to solve this problem. Hultsch,
on the other hand, thinks that we may conclude that Dio-
phantus really solved the problem. 
The tract begins, like
Book I of the Arithmetica, with definitions and preliminary
propositions; then comes the difficult problem quoted, the
discussion of which breaks off in our text after a few pages,
and to these it would be easy to tack on a great variety of
other problems.
The name of Diophantus was used, as were the names of
Euclid, Archimedes and Heron in their tarn, for the pur-
pose of palming off the compilations of much later authors.
1 Diophantus, ed. Tannery, vol. ii, p. xx.
2 Ib., p. xviii.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

RELATION OF WORKS 
453
Tannery includes in his edition three fragments under the
heading ' Diophantus Pseudepigraphus '. The first, which is
not' from the Arithmetic of Diophantus' as its heading states,
is worth notice as containing some particulars of one of ' two
methods of finding the square root of any square number';
we are told to begin by writing the number 'according to
the arrangement of the Indian method', i.e. in the Indian
numerical notation which reached us through the Arabs. The
second fragment is the work edited by C. Henry in 1879 as
Opusculum de multiplications et divisione sexagesimalibus
Diophanto vel Pappo attribuendum. 
The third, beginning
with Ato(/>dpTou €7ri7r€8ofM€TpiKd is a Byzantine compilation
from later reproductions of the yewfieTpov/xeua and arepeo-
fieTpovfieva of Heron. Not one of the three fragments has
anything to do with Diophantus.
Commentators from Hypatia downwards.
The first commentator on Diophantus of whom we hear
is Hypatia, the daughter of Theon of Alexandria; she
was murdered by Christian fanatics in A.D. 415. I have
already mentioned the attractive hypothesis of Tannery that
Hypatia's commentary extended only to our six Books, and
that this accounts for their survival when the rest were lost.
It is possible that the remarks of Psellus (eleventh century) at
the beginning of his letter about Diophantus, Anatolius and
the Egyptian method of arithmetical reckoning were taken
from Hypatia's commentary.
Georgius Pachymeres (1240 to about 1310) wrote in Greek
a paraphrase of at least a portion of Diophantus. Sections
25-44 of this commentary relating to Book I, Def. 1 to Prop.
11, survive. Maximus Planudes (about 1260-1310) also wrote
a systematic commentary on Books I, II. Arabian commen-
tators were Abu'l Wafa al-Buzjanl (940-98), Qusta b. Luqa
al-Ba'labakki (d. about 912) and probably Ibn al-Haitham
(about 965-1039).
Translations and editions.
To Regiomontanus belongs the credit of being the first to
call attention to the work of Diophantus as being extant in
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

454 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
Greek. In an Oratio delivered at the end of 1463 as an
introduction to a course of lectures on astronomy which he
gave at Padua in 1403-4 he observed: 'No one has yet
translated from the Greek into Latin the fine thirteen Books
of Diophantus, in which the very flower of the whole of
arithmetic lies hid, the ars rei et census which to-day they
call by the Arabic name of Algebra.3 Again, in a letter dated
February 5, 1464, to Bianchini, he writes that he has found at
Venice 'Diofantus, a Greek arithmetician who has not yet
been translated into Latin \ 
Rafael Bombelli was the first to
find a manuscript in the Vatican and to conceive the idea of
publishing the work; this was towards 1570, and, with
Antonio Maria Pazzi, he translated five Books out of the
seven into which the manuscript was divided. The translation
was not published, but Bombelli took all the problems of the
first four Books and some of those of the fifth* and embodied
them in his Algebra (1572), interspersing them with his own
problems.
The next writer on Diophantus was Wilhelm Holzmann,
who called himself Xylander, and who with extraordinary
industry and care produced a very meritorious Latin trans-
lation with commentary (1575). Xylander was an enthusiast
for Diophantus, and his preface and notes are often delightful
reading. Unfortunately the book is now very rare. The
standard edition of Diophantus till recent years was that of
Bachet, who in 1621 published for the first time the Greek
text with Latin translation and notes. A second edition
(1670) was carelessly printed and is untrustworthy as regards
the text; on the other hand it contained the epoch-making
notes of Fermat; the editor was S. Fermat, his son. The
great blot on the work of Bachet is his attitude to Xylander,
to whose translation he owed more than he was willing to
avow. Unfortunately neither Bachet nor Xylander was able
to use the best manuscripts; that used by Bachet was Parisinus
2379 (of the middle of the sixteenth century), with the help
of a transcription of part of a Vatican MS. (Vat. gr. 304 of
the sixteenth century), while Xylander's manuscript was the
Wolfenbiittel MS. Guelferbytanus Gudianus 1 (fifteenth cen-
tury). The best and most ancient manuscript is that of
Madrid (Matritensis 48 of the thirteenth century) which was
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

TRANSLATIONS AND EDITIONS 
455
unfortunately spoiled by corrections made, especially in Books
I, II, from some manuscript of the ' Planudean' class; where
this is the case recourse must be had to Vat. gr. 191 which
was copied from it before it had suffered the general alteration
referred to: these are the first two of the manuscripts used by
Tannery in his definitive edition of the Greek text (Teubner,
1893, 1895).
Other editors can only be shortly enumerated. In 1585
Simon Stevin published a French version of the first four
Books, based on Xylander. Albert Girard added the fifth and
sixth Books, the complete edition appearing in 1625. German
translations were brought out by Otto Schulz in 1822 and by
G. Wertheim in 1890. Poselger translated the fragment on
Polygonal Numbers in 1810. All these translations depended
on the text of Bachet.
A reproduction of Diophantus in modern notation with
introduction and notes by the present writer (second edition
1910) is based on the text of Tannery and may claim to be the
most complete and up-to-date edition.
My account of the Arithmetica of Diophantus will be most
conveniently arranged under three main headings (1) the
notation and definitions, (2) the principal methods employed,
so far as they can be generally stated, (3) the nature of the
contents, including the assumed Porisms, with indications of
the devices by which the problems are solved.
Notation and definitions.
In his work Die Algebra der Griechen Nesselmann distin-
guishes three stages in the evolution of algebra. 
(1) The
first stage he calls 'Rhetorical Algebra' or reckoning by
means of complete words. The characteristic of this stage
is the absolute want of all symbols, the whole of the calcula-
tion being carried on by means of complete words and forming
in fact continuous prose. This first stage is represented by
such writers as Iamblichus, all Arabian and Persian algebraists,
and the oldest Italian algebraists and their followers, including
Regiomontanus. (2) The second stage Nesselmann calls the
'Syncopated Algebra', essentially like the first as regards
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

456 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
literary style, but marked by the use of certain abbreviational
symbols for constantly recurring quantities and operations.
To this stage belong Diophantus and, after him, all the later
Europeans until about the middle of the seventeenth century
(with the exception of Vieta, who was the first to establish,
under the name of Logistica speciosa, as distinct from Logistica
numerosa, a regular system of reckoning with letters denoting
magnitudes as well as numbers). (3) To the third stage
Nesselmann gives the name of 'Symbolic Algebra', which
uses a complete system of notation by signs having no visible
connexion with the words or things which they represent,
a complete language of symbols, which entirely supplants the
'rhetorical' system, it being possible to work out a solution
without using a single word of ordinary language with the
exception of a connecting word or two here and there used for
clearness' sake.
Sign for the unknown (= x), and its origin.
Diophantus's system of notation then is merely abbrevia-
tional. 
We will consider first the representation of the
unknown quantity (our x). Diophantus defines the unknown
quantity as ' containing an indeterminate or undefined multi-
tude of units' (nXrjOos jiovaSoav ddpiarov), adding that it is
called dpiO/jLos, i.e. number simply, and is denoted by a certain
sign. This sign is then used all through the book. In the
earliest (the Madrid) MS. the sign takes the form ^, in
Marcianus 308 it appears as S. In the printed editions of
Diophantus before Tannery's it was represented by the final
sigma with an accent, /, which is sufficiently like the second
of the two forms. Where the symbol takes the place of
inflected forms dpiOfiov, dpiO/iov, &c, the termination was put
above and to the right of the sign like an exponent, e.g. yv for
dpidfjiov as r* for TOP, y°° for dpid/iov; the symbol was, in
addition, doubled in the plural cases, thus yyot', yyous, &c. The
coefficient is expressed by putting the required Greek numeral
immediately after it; thus y?°l ta = 11 dpiQyioU equivalent
to 11 x, y' oc — x, and so on. Tannery gives reasons for think-
ing that in the archetype the case-endings did not appear, and
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

NOTATION AND DEFINITIONS 
457
that the sign was not duplicated for the plural, although such
duplication was the practice of the Byzantines. 
That the
sign was merely an abbreviation for the word dpiO^ios tod no
algebraical symbol is shown by the fact that it occurs in the
manuscripts for dpidfios in the ordinary sense as well as for
apiOfios in the technical sense of the unknown quantity. Nor
is it confined to Diophantus. It appears in more or less
similar forms in the manuscripts of other Greek mathe-
maticians, e.g. in the Bodleian MS. of Euclid (D'Orville 301)
of the ninth century (in the forms 9 99, or as a curved line
similar to the abbreviation for /ecu),'in the manuscripts of
the Sand-reckoner of Archimedes (in a form approximat-
ing to y), where again there is confusion caused by the
similarity of the signs for dpi0/ji6$ and KCLI, in a manuscript
of the Geodaesia included in the Heronian collections edited
by Hultsch (where it appears in various forms resembling
sometimes £ sometimes p, sometimes o, and once £, with
case-endings superposed) and in a manuscript of Theon of
Smyrna.
What is the origin of tlie sign? It is certainly not the
final sigma, as is proved by several of the forms which it
takes. I found that in the Bodleian manuscript of Diophantus
it is written in the form 7<L|, larger than and quite unlike the
final sigma. This form, combined with the fact that in one
place Xylander's manuscript read ap for the full word, suggested
to me that the sign might be a simple contraction of the first
two letters of dptOfios. This seemed to be confirmed by
Gardthausen's mention of a contraction for ap, in the form up
occurring in a papyrus of A.D. 154, since the transition to the
form found in the manuscripts of Diophantus might easily
have been made through an intermediate form <p. The loss of
the downward stroke, or of the loop, would give a close
approximation to the forms which we know. This hypothesis
as to the origin of the sign has not, so far as I know, been
improved upon. It has the immense advantage that it makes
the sign for dpiOjios similar to the signs for the powers of
the unknown, e.g. AY for Svva/its, KY for Kvfios, and to the
o
sign M for the unit, the sole difference being that the two
letters coalesce into one instead of being separate.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

458 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
Signs for the powers of the unknown and their reciprocals.
The powers of the unknown, corresponding to our x2,x3... x6
are defined and denoted as follows:
x2 is Svvafiis and is denoted by AY,
Xs 
„ KVJ3O$ 
„ 
„ 
„ 
KY,
x* „ SvvafioSvvafjits 
„ 
„ A A,
a?5 „ 8vvafj.6Kv(3o9 
„ 
„ AK ,
„ 
„ K K.
Beyond the sixth power ,Diophantus does not go. It should
be noted that, while the terms from KV(3O$ onwards may be
used for the powers of any ordinary known number as well as
for the powers of the unknown, Siva fits is restricted to the
square of the unknown; wherever a particular square number
is spoken of, the term is reTpdyo&vos dpiO/ios. The term
8vva[io8vvanL$ occurs once in another author, namely in the
Metrica of Heron,1 where it is used for the fourth power pf
the side of a triangle.
Diophantus has also terms and signs for the reciprocals of
the various powers of the unknown, i.e. for l/x, 
l/x2....
As an aliquot part was ordinarily denoted by the corresponding
numeral sign with an accent, e.g. y'= •§, ia'= ^ , Diophantus
has a mark appended to the symbols for x, x2 ... to denote the
reciprocals; this, which is used for aliquot parts as well, is
printed by Tannery thus, *. With Diophantus then
ois, denoted by $*, is equivalent to l/x,
„ 
A^ 
„ 
„ 
l/x2,
and so on.
The coefficient of the term in x, x2... or l/x, l/x2... 
is
expressed by the ordinary numeral immediately following,
e.g. AKY K? = 26x5, AY* <TI> = 250/a2.
Diophantus does not need any signs for the operations of
multiplication and division. Addition is indicated by mere
juxtaposition; thus KY a AY iy y e corresponds toxd+l3x2 + 5x.
1 Heron, Metrica, p. 48. 11, 19, Schone.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

NOTATION AND DEFINITIONS 
459
When there are units in addition, the units are indicated by
° 
Y 
°
the abbreviation M ; t h u s K a A Y t y s e M / 3 corresponds t o
The sign (A) for minus and its meaning.
For subtraction alone is a sign used. The full term for
wanting is Aen/r*y, as opposed to virapgis, a forthcoming,
which denotes a positive term. The symbol used to indicate
a wanting, corresponding to our sign for minus, is A, which
is described in the text as a ' | turned downwards and
truncated' (¥ iXXnrh Kara vtvov). The description is evidently
interpolated, and it is now certain that the sign has nothing
to do with yjr. Nor is it confined to Diophantus, for it appears
in practically the same form in Heron's Metrical where in one
place the reading of the manuscript is [xovaScdv oS T t'8*,
74—Y1^. In the manuscripts of Diophantus, when the sign
is resolved by writing the full word instead of it, it is
generally resolved into Aen/re*, the dative of Aen/r*y, but in
other places the symbol is used instead of parts of the verb
Xdirtiv, namely XLTTCOU or Aenjra? and once even XITTGMTI ;
sometimes Aenjrei in the manuscripts is followed by the
accusative, which shows that in these cases the sign was
wrongly resolved. It is therefore a question whether'Dio-
phantus himself ever used the dative Aenjm for minus at all.
The use is certainly foreign to classical Greek. Ptolemy has
in two places Xeiyjrav and Xdirovaav respectively followed,
properly, by the accusative, and in one case he has TO ano
Trjs FA XeiQOev vnb rod dirb rfjs ZT (where the meaning is
Zr2 — 1^A2). Hence Heron would probably have written a
participle where the T occurs in the expression quoted above,
say fiov&Scov 08 Xeityacrcov reaaapaKaiSeKarov. 
On the whole,
therefore, it is probable that in Diophantus, and wherever else
it occurred, A is a compendium for the root of the verb XetweLy,
in fact a A with I placed in the middle (cf. A, an abbreviation
for rdXavTov).* This is the hypothesis which I put forward
in 1885, and it seems to be confirmed by the fresh evidence
now available as shown above.
1 Heron, Metrica, p. 156. 8, 10.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

460 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
Attached to the definition of minus is the statement that
'a wanting (i.e. a minus) multiplied by a wanting makes
a forthcoming (i.e. a ^>lus); and a wanting (a minus) multi-
plied by a, forthcoming (a plus) makes a wanting (a minus)'.
Since Diophantus uses no sign for plus, he has to put all
the positive terms in an expression together and write all the
negative terms together after the sign for minus; e.g. for
Y 
Y 
°
xs—5x2 + Sx—l he necessarily writes K a y 77 A A e M a.
The Diophantine notation for fractions as well as for large
numbers has been fully explained with many illustrations
in Chapter II above. It is only necessary to add here that,
when the numerator and denominator consist of composite
expressions in terms of the unknown and its powers, he puts
the numerator first followed by kv popi® or fiopiov and the
denominator.
Thus 
AY £ M fi<f>K kv fjLopicp AYA oc M "^ A AY |
[VI. 12]
o 
o
and 
AY te /I\ M A<r kv fxopicp AYA oc M A9 A AY *j8
[VI. 14].
For a term in an algebraical expression, i.e. a power of x
with a certain coefficient, and the term containing a certain
number of units, Diophantus uses the word e?5oy, 'species',
which primarily means the particular power of thk variable
without the coefficient. At the end of the definitions he gives
directions for simplifying equations until each side contains
positive terms only, by the addition or subtraction of coeffi-
cients, and by getting rid of the negative terms (which is done
by adding the necessary quantities to both sides); the object,
he says, is to reduce the equation until one term only is left
on each side; 'but', he adds, ' I will show you later how, in
the case also where two terms are left equal to one term,
such a problem is solved'. We find in fact that, when he has
to solve a quadratic equation, he endeavours by means of
suitable assumptions to reduce it either to a simple equation
or a pure quadratic. The solution of the mixed quadratic
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

NOTATION AND DEFINITIONS 
461
in three terms is clearly assumed in several places of the
Arithmetica, but Diophantus never gives the necessary ex-
planation of this case as promised in the preface.
Before leaving the notation of Diophantus, we may observe
that the form of it limits him to the use of one unknown at
a time. The disadvantage is obvious. For example, where
we can begin with any number of unknown quantities and
gradually eliminate all but one, Diophantus has practically to
perform his eliminations beforehand so as to express every
quantity occurring in the problem in terms of only one
unknown. When he handles problems which are by nature
indeterminate and would lead in our notation to an inde-
terminate equation containing two or three unknowns, he has
to assume for one or other of these some particular number
arbitrarily "chosen, the effect being to make the problem
determinate. However, in doing so, Diophantus is careful
to say that we may for such and such a quantity put any
number whatever, say feuch and such a number; there is
therefore (as a rule) no real loss of generality. The particular
devices by which he contrives to express all his unknowns
in terms of one unknown are extraordinarily various and
clever. He can, of course, use the same variable y in the
same problem with different significations successively, as
when it is necessary in the course of the problem to solve
a subsidiary problem in order to enable him to make the
coefficients of the different terms of expressions in x such
as will answer his purpose and enable the original problem
to be solved. There are, however, two cases, II. 28, 29, where
for the proper working-out of the problem two unknowns are
imperatively necessary. We should of course use x and y\
Diophantus calls the first y as usual; the second, for want
of a term, he agrees to call in the first instance l one unit \
i.e. 1. Then later, having completed the part of the solution
necessary to find x> he substitutes its value and uses y over
again for what he had originally called 1. That is, he has to
put his finger on the place to which the 1 has passed, so as
to substitute y for it. This is a tour deforce in the particular
cases, and would be difficult or impossible in more complicated
problems.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

462 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
The methods of Diophantus.
It should be premised that Diophantus will have in his
solutions no numbers whatever except 'rational' numbers;
he admits fractional solutions as well as integral, but he
excludes not only surds and imaginary quantities but also
negative quantities. Of a negative quantity per se, i.e. with-
out some greater positive quantity to subtract it from, he
had apparently no conception. Such equations then as lead
to imaginary or negative roots he regards as useless for his
purpose; the solution is in these cases dSvvaros, impossible.
So we find him (V. 2) describing the equation 4 = 4#-f 20 as
aroiros, absurd, because it would give x = — 4. He does, it is
true, make occasional use of a quadratic which would give
a root which is positive but a surd, but only for the purpose
of obtaining limits to the root which are integers or numerical
fractions ; he never uses or tries to express the actual root of
such an equation. When therefore he arrives in the course
of solution at an equation which would give an 'irrational'
result, he retraces his steps, finds out how his equation has
arisen, and how he may, by altering the previous work,
substitute for it another which shall give a rational result.
This gives rise in general to a subsidiary problem the solution
of which ensures a rational result for the problem itself.
It is difficult to give a complete account of Diophantus's
methods without setting out the whole book, so great is the
variety of devices and artifices employed in the different
problems. There are, however, a few general methods which
do admit of differentiation and description, and these we pro-
ceed to set out under subjects.
I. Diophantus's treatment of equations.
(A) Determinate equations.
Diophantus solved without difficulty determinate equations
of the first and second degrees; of a cubic we find only one
example in the Arithmetica, and that is a very special case.
(1) Pure determinate equations.
Diophantus gives a general rule for this case without regard
to degree. We have to take like from like on both sides of an
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DETERMINATE EQUATIONS 
463
equation and neutralize negative terms by adding to both
sides, then take like from like again, until we have one term
left equal to one term. After these operations have been
performed, the equation (after dividing out, if both sides
contain a power of x, by the lesser power) reduces to Axm = B,
and is considered solved. Diophantus regards this as giving
one root only, excluding any negative value as 'impossible'.
No equation of the kind is admitted which does not give
a * rational' value, integral or fractional. The value x = 0 is
ignored in the case where the degree of the equation is reduced
by dividing out by any power of x.
(2) Mixed quadratic equations.
Diophantus never gives the explanation of the method of
solution which he promises in the preface. That he had
a definite method like that used in the Geometry of Heron
is proved by clear verbal explanations in different propositions.
As he requires the equation to be in the form of two positive
terms being equal to one positive term, the possible forms for
Diophantus are
(a) mx2 +px = q, 
(b) mx2 — px + q, 
(c) Tax2 + q = px.
It does not appear that Diophantus divided by m in order to
make the first term a square; rather he multiplied by m for
this purpose. It is clear that he stated the roots in the above
cases in a form equivalent to
^ 
jp
\C)
The explanations which show this are to be found in VI. 6,
in IV. 39 and 31, and in V. 10 and VI. 22 respectively. For
example in V. 10 he has the equation 17x2+17 < 7 2 a?,- and he
says ' Multiply half the coefficient of x into itself and we have
1296; subtract the product of the coefficient of x2 and the
term in units, or 289. The remainder is 1007, the square root
of which is not greater than 31. Add half the coefficient of x
and the result is not greater than 67. Divide by the coefficient
of x2
f and x is not greater than f f 
In IV. 39 he has the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

464 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
equation 2&2>6a?+18 and says, 'To solve this, take the square
of half the coefficient of x, i.e. 9, and the product of the unit-
term and the coefficient of x2, i.e. 36. Adding, we have 45,
the square root of which is not less than 7. Add half the
coefficient of x [and divide by the coefficient of x2]; whence x
is not less than 5/ In these cases it will be observed that 31
and 7 are not accurate limits, but are the nearest integral
limits which will serve his purpose.
Diophantus always uses the positive sign with the radical,
and there has been much discussion as to whether he knew
that a quadratic equation has two roots. The evidence of the
text is inconclusive because his only object, in every case, is to
get one solution; in some cases the other root would be
negative, and would therefore naturally be ignored as 'absurd5
or ' impossible'. In yet other cases where the second root is
possible it can be shown to be useless from Diophantus's point
of view. For my part, I find it difficult or impossible to
believe that Diophantus was unaware of the existence of two
real roots in such cases. It is so obvious from the geometrical
form of solution based on Eucl. II. 5, 6 and that contained in
Eucl. VI. 27-9; the construction of VI. 28, too, corresponds
in fact to the negative sign before the radical in the case of the
particular equation there solved, while a quite obvious and
slight variation of the construction would give the solution
corresponding to the positive sign.
The following particular cases of quadratics occurring in
the Arithmetica may be quoted, with the results stated by
Diophantus.
x2 = 4 # - 4 ; therefore x = 2. 
(IV. 22)
325^ = 3a+18; x = ^ 
or •%%. 
(IV. 31)
84:X2 + 7x= 7; x = J. 
(VI. 6)
84x2-7x = 7; x = £. 
(VI. 7)
630ic2-73iC = 6; x = -£T. 
(VI. 9)
630a;2 + 73# = 6 ; x is rational. 
(VI. 8)
5x < x2 — 60 < 8x, x not < 11 and not > 12. (V. 30)
17x2+17 < 72a<19a32+19; a not >f£ arid not <f|. (V. 10)
< a?2+60 < 24#; x not < 19 but < 21. 
(V. 30)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DETERMINATE EQUATIONS 
465
In the first and third of the last three cases the limits are not
accurate, but are integral limits which are a fortiori safe.
In the second f| should have been § J;- and it would have been
more correct to say that, if x is not greater than f ^ and not
less than f|, the given conditions are a fortiori satisfied.
For comparison with Diophantus's solutions of quadratic
equation^ we may refer to a few of his solutions of
(3) Simultaneous equations involving quadratics.
In I. 27, 28, and 30 we have the following pairs of equations.
(a) £ + rj = 2a) 
(fi) 
£ + v = 2a] 
(y) g-rj = 2a\
I use the Greek letters for the numbers required to be found
as distinct from the one unknown which Diophantus uses, and
which I shall call x.
In (a), he says, let £ — rj = 2x (£ > rj).
It follows, by addition and subtraction, that £ = a + x,
rj = a — x\
therefore 
£rj — (a + x) (a — x) = a2 — x2 = B,
and x is found from the pure quadratic equation.
In (/3) similarly he assumes £ — rj = 2x, and the resulting
equation is £2 + ry2 = (a + xf + (a - xf = 2 (a2 + x2) = B.
In (y) he puts £ + rj = 2x and solves as in the case of (a).
(4) Cubic equation.
Only one very particular case occurs. In VI. 17 the problem
leads to the equation
Diophantus says simply ' whence x is found to be 4 \ 
In fact
the equation reduces to
Diophantus no doubt detected, and divided out by, the common
factor x2+ 1, leaving x = 4.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

466 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
(B) Indeterminate equations.
Diophantus says nothing of indeterminate equations of the
first degree. The reason is perhaps that it is a principle with
him to admit rational fractional as well as integral solutions,
whereas the whole point of indeterminate equations of the
first degree is to obtain a solution in integral numbers.
Without this limitation (foreign to Diophantus) such equa-
tions have no significance.
(a) Indeterminate equations of the second degree.
T'he form in which these equations occur is invariably this:
one or two (but never more) functions of x of the form
Ax2 + Bx + C or simpler forms are to be made rational square
numbers by finding a suitable value for x. That is, we have
to solve, in the most general case, one or two equations of the
form Ax2 + Bx + C = y2.
(1) Single equation.
The solutions take different forms according to the particular
values of the coefficients. Special cases arise when one or
more of them vanish or they satisfy certain conditions.
1. When A or 0 or both vanish, the equation can always
be solved rationally.
Form Bx = y2.
Form Bx + C=y2.
Diophantus puts for y2 any determinate square m2, and x is
immediately found.
Form Ax2 + Bx = y2.
Diophantus puts for y any multiple of x> as — x.
2. The equation Ax2 + C = y2 can be rationally solved accord-
ing to Diophantus:
(a) when A is positive and a square, say a2;
in this case we put a2x2 + G = (ax ± m)2, whence
C-m2
x= + —
— 2 via
(m and the sign being so chosen as to give x a positive value);
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INDETERMINATE EQUATIONS 
467
(j8) when G is positive and a square, say c2;
in this case Diophantus puts Ax2 + c2 — (mx + cf, and obtains
_ 
2mc
X — -f- —j 
z» •
(y) When one solution is known, any number of other
solutions can be found. 
This is stated in the Lemma to
VI. 15. It would be true not only of the cases + Ax2 + C = y2,
but of the general case Ax2 + Bx + G — y2. Diophantus, how-
ever, only states it of the case Ax2 — C — y2.
His method of finding other (greater) values of x satisfy-
ing the equation when one (x0) is known is as follows. If
Axo
2 — C = q2, he substitutes in the original equation (xo + x)
for x and (q — kx) for y, where k is some integer.
Then, since A(x0 + xf-G 
= (q-kxfy while Axo
2-C = q2,
it follows by subtraction that
2x(Axo + Jcq) = 
x2(k2-A),
whence 
x — 2(Axo + kq)/(k2 — A),
U L 
i 
£ - 
2(Axo + lcq)
and the new value ot x is xQ-\ 
72 
.— •
Form Ax2-c2 = y\
Diophantus says (VI. 14) that a rational solution of this
case is only possible when A is the sum of two squares.
[In fact, if x = p/q satisfies the equation, and Ax2 — c2 = k2,
we have 
Ap* = c2q2 + k2 q2,
Form 
y
Diophantus proves in the Lemma to VI. 12 that this equa-
tion has an infinite number of solutions when A + C is a square,
i.e. in the particular case where x = 1 is a solution. (He does
not, however, always bear this in mind, for in III. 10 he
regards the equation 52x2+12 = y2 as impossible though
52 + 12 = 64 is a square, just as, in III. 11, 266a2-10 = y2
is regarded as impossible.)
Suppose that A + C = q2; the equation is then solved by
H h 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

468 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
substituting in the original equation 1 + x for x and (q — kx)
for y, where k is some integer.
3. Form Ax2 + Bx+C = y2.
This can be reduced to the form in which the second term is
wanting by replacing x by z— —j -
Diophantus, however, treats this case separately and less
fully. According to him, a rational solution of the equation
Ax2 + Bx + C = y2 is only possible
(a) when A is positive and a square, say a2;
(j8) when G is positive and a square, say c2;
(y) when \B2 — AC is positive and a square.
In case (a) y is put equal to (ax — m), and in case (j8) y is put
equal to (mx—c).
Case (y) is not expressly enunciated, but occurs, as .it
were, accidentally (IV. 31). The equation to be solved is
3 x + 18 — x2 — y2. Diophantus first assumes 3 x + 18 — x2 = 4 x2,
which gives the quadratic 3&+18 = hx2\ but this 'is not
rational \ Therefore the assumption of 4 x2 for y2 will not do,
' and we must find a square [to replace 4] such that 18 times
(this square-hl) +(|)2 may be a square'. 
The auxiliary
equation is therefore 18(m2+ 1) +f = y2, or 7 2 m2+ 81= a
square, and Diophantus assumes 72 m2 + 81 = (8 m 4- 9)2, whence
m= 18. Then, assuming 3^+18 — x2 = (18)2x2, he obtains the
equation 325#2— 3x— 18 = 0, whence x = ^ \ , that is, ^
(2) Double equation.
The Greek term is SiirXoiaoT-qs, 8nr\r\ loroTrjs or SnrXfj LO-COCTLS.
Two different functions of the unknown have to be made
simultaneously squares. 
The general case is to solve in
rational numbers the equations
2 
a = u2)
b = w2}
The necessary preliminary condition is that each of the two
expressions can be made a square. This is always possible
when the first term (in x2) is wanting. We take this simplest
case first.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INDETERMINATE EQUATIONS 
469
1. Double equation of the first degree.
The equations are
a x + a =
Diophantus has one general method taking slightly different
forms according to the nature of the coefficients.
(a) First method of solution.
This depends upon the identity
If the difference between the two expressions in x can be
separated into two factors p, q, the expressions themselves
are equated to {^(p + q)}2 and {^ (p — q)}2 respectively. As
Diophantus himself says in II. 11, we ' equate either the square
of half the difference of the two factors to the lesser of the
expressions, or the square of half the sum to the greater'.
We will consider the general case and investigate to what
particular classes of cases the method is applicable from
Diophantus's point of view, remembering that the final quad-
ratic in x must always reduce to a single equation.
Subtracting, we have (a — fi) x + (a — b) = u2 — w2.
Separate (a — (3)x + (a — b) into the factors
p, {(<x-P)x + (a-b)}/p.
We write accordingly
(a— B)x + (a — b)
— 
— 
S
P
= p.
a — b)
Thus v? =zocx + a = i j
therefore 
{(a - /3) x + a - b +p2 }2 = 4jp2 (a x + a).
This reduces to
*= 
0.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

470 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
In order that this equation may reduce to a simple equation,
either
(1) the coefficient of x2 must vanish, or OL — {} = 0,
or (2) the absolute term must vanish, that is,
or 
{p*
so that ab must be a square number.
As regards condition (1) we observe that it is really sufficient
if ocn2 = (3m2, since, if ax + a is a square, (ocx + a)n2 is equally
a square, and, if /?# + & is a square, so is (/3x + b)m2, and
vice versa.
That is, (1) we can solve any pair of equations of the form
ocn2xx -f b = w2)
Multiply by n2, m2 respectively, and we have to solve the
equations
ocm2n2
a m2n2x + bm2
= uf2}
= %v'2\
Separate the difference, an2 —bra2, into two factors p, q and
put
therefore 
u/2 = i(p + q)2, w'2 = \ (p - q)\
and
and from either of these equations we get
hq2) — ^ (an2 + 6m2)
ot m* ri*
since 
pq — an2 — bm2.
Any factors p, q can be chosen provided that the resulting
value of x is positive.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INDETERMINATE EQUATIONS 
471
Ex. from Diophantus:
6 5 - 6x = u2 ) 
/TTr 
x
o \ 5 
( I V- 
3 2 )
65-24aj = w2 J 
v 
J
therefore 
260 - 24 x = u
The difference = 195 = 15 .13, say;
therefore J(15- 13)2 = 65-24#; that is, 24# = 64, and x = §.
Taking now the condition (2) that a& is a square, we see
that the equations can be solved in the cases where either
a and b are both squares, or the ratio of a to b is the ratio of
a square to a square. If the equations are
CLX+ C2 = 
U2,
and factors are taken of the difference between the expressions
as they stand, then, since one factor p, as we saw, satisfies the
equation 
{ p
2 — (c2 + d?)}2 = 4 c2d-\
we must have 
p = c +
Ex. from Diophantus:
The difference is 5x+5 = 5(x+ 1); the solution is given by
d# -f- 3)2 = 1 Ox + 9, and x = 28.
Another method is to multiply the equations by squares
such that, when the expressions are subtracted, the absolute
term vanishes. The case can be worked out generally, thus.
Multiply by d2 and c2 respectively, and we have to solve
Difference = (ad2 — l3c2)x = px .q say.
Then x is found from the equation
which gives p2x2 + 2 x (pq — 2 a d2) + q2 - 4 c2d2 = 0,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

472 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
or, since 
pq = ocd2 — (3c2,
fx2-2x(otd2 
+ t3c2) + q2-4c2d2 = 0.
In order that this may reduce to a simple equation, as
Diophantus requires, the absolute term must vanish, so that
q = 2cd. The method therefore only gives one solution, since
q is restricted to the value 2cd.
Ex. from Diophantus:
Difference 2 x; q necessarily taken to be 2 A/4 or 4; factors
therefore \x, 4. Therefore 8x + 4 = ±(±x + 4)2, and x = 112.
(/3) Second method of solution of a double equation of the
first degree.
There is only one case of this in Diophantus, the equations
being of the form
hx + n2 = u2)
Suppose hx + n2 = (y + n)2; therefore hx = y2 + 2 ny,
f
and
It only remains to make the latter expression a square,
which is done by equating it to (py — n)2.
The case in Diophantus is the same as that last mentioned
(IV. 39). Where I have used y, Diophantus as usual contrives
to use his one unknown a second time.
2. Double equations of the second degree.
The general form is
Ax2 +Bx +C =
but only three types appear in Diophantus, namely
p2x2 + ocx + a = u2)
(1) 
a o 
^ 
7 
OK where, except in one case, a = o.
p2x2 + @x + b — w2)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INDETERMINATE EQUATIONS 
473
(The case where the absolute terms are in the ratio of a square
to a square reduces to this.)
In all examples of these cases the usual method of solution
applies.
ax2 + ax = u2)
(3)
The usual method does not here serve, and a special artifice
is required.
Diophantus assumes 
u2 — m2x2.
Then x = a/(m2 — a) and, by substitution in the second
equation, we have
5 
3 which must be made a square,
m2 —a 
^
or 
a2j8 + 6a(m2 —a) must be a square.
We have therefore to solve the equation
abm2 + a(a/3 — otb) = y2,
which can or cannot be solved by Diophantus's methods
according to the nature of the coefficients. Thus it can be
solved if (a/3 — ocb)/a is a square, or if a/b is a square.
Examples in VI. 12, 14.
(b) Indeterminate equations of a degree higher than the
second.
(1) Single equations.
There are two classes, namely those in which expressions
in x have to be made squares or cubes respectively. The
general form is therefore
AxK + Bx71'1 + ... +Kx — L = y2 or y3.
In Diophantus n does not exceed 6, and in the second class
of cases, where the expression has to be made a cube, n does
not generally exceed 3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

474 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
The species of the first class found in the Arithmetica are
as follows.
1. Equation Ax* + Bx2 + Cxf d2 = y2.
As the absolute term is a square, we can assume
v = •&
or we might assume y = m2x2 + nx + d and determine m, nso
that the coefficients of x, x2 in the resulting equation both
vanish.
Diophantus has only one case, x3 - 3 x2 + 3 x + 1 = y2 (VI. 18),
and uses the first method.
2. Equation Ax* + Bx3 + Cx2 + Dx + E = y2, where either A or
E is a square.
If A is a square (= a2), we may assume y = ax2+ —-
determining n so that the term in x2 in the resulting equa-
tion may vanish. If E is a square (= e2), we may assume
y = mx2 + —x + e, determining m so that the term in x2 in the
resulting equation may vanish. We shall then, in either case,
obtain a simple equation in x.
3. Equation Ax* + Cx2 + E = y2, but in special cases only where
all the coefficients are squares.
4. Equation Ax* + E = y2.
The case occurring in Diophantus is &4 + 97 — y2 (V. 29).
Diophantus tries one assumption, y = x2 — 10, and finds that
this gives x2 = -£Q, which leads to no rational result. He
therefore goes back and alters his assumptions so that he
is able to replace the refractory equation by x* + 337 = y2,
and at the same time to find a suitable value for y, namely
y = x2 — 25, which produces a rational result, x = -^2-.
5. Equation of sixth degree in the special form
xQ- Axz + Bx + c2 = y2.
Putting 
y ~ xz + c, we 
have 
- Ax2 + B = 2 cx2, and
B 
B
x2 
, which gives a rational solution if -. 
is
' 
& 
A + 2c
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INDETERMINATE EQUATIONS 
475
a square. Where this does not hold (in IV. 18) Diophantus
harks back and replaces the equation &G—16#:3 + & + 64 = y2
by another, as6-128a?3 + a? + 4096 = y2.
Of expressions which have to be friade cubes, we have the
following cases.
There are only two cases of this. First, in VI. 1, x2— 4x + 4
has to be made a cube, being already a square. Diophantus
naturally makes x — 2 a cube.
Secondly, a peculiar case occurs in VI. 17, where a cube has
to be found exceeding a square by 2. Diophantus assumes
(x-1)3 for the cube and (x + I)2 for the square. This gives
xs-3x2+3x 
— 1 = x2 + 2x-\-3t
or ar + # = 4a;2 + 4. We divide out by x2 + 1, and as = 4. It
seems evident that the assumptions were made with knowledge
and intention. That is, Diophantus knew of the solution 27
and 25 and deliberately led up to it. It is unlikely that he was
aware of the fact, observed by Fermat, that 27 and 25 are the
only integral numbers satisfying the condition.
2. Axs + Bx2 + Cx + D — y3, where either A or D is a cube
number, or both are cube numbers. Where A is a cube (a3),
we have only to assume y = ax+ —%, and where D is a cube
(d3), y= ——x + d. Where A = a3 and Z) = d!3, we can use
either assumption, or put y = ax + d. Apparently Diophantus
used the last assumption only in this case, for in IV. 27 he
rejects as impossible the equation Sxd — x2-\-Sx—l =y*,
because the assumption y = 2x—l gives a negative value
x= — T^-} whereas either of the above assumptions gives
a rational value.
(2) Double equations.
Here one expression has to be made a square and another
a cube. The cases are mostly very simple, e.g. (VI. 19)
20+1 =
thus yz = 202, and z = 2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

476 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
More complicated is the case in VI. 21 :
Diophantus assumes y = mx, whence x = 2 / (m2 — 2), and
(— 
'
2 m4
or
(??i2 — 2) 3
We have only to make 2 m4, or 2 m, a cube.
II. Method of Limits.
As Diophantus often has to find a series of numbers in
order of magnitude, and as he does not admit negative
solutions, it is often necessary for him to reject a solution
found in the usual course because it does not satisfy the
necessary conditions; he is then obliged, in many cases, to
find solutions lying within certain limits in place of those
rejected. 
For example:
1. It is required to finda value of x such that some power of
it, xn, shall lie between two given numbers; say a and b.
Diophantus multiplies both a and b by 2n, 3W, and so on,
successively, until some nth power is seen which lies between
the two products. 
Suppose that cn lies between apn and bpn;
then we can put x = c/p, for (c/p)n lies between a and b.
Ex. To find a square between 1^ and 2. 
Diophantus
multiplies by a square 64; this gives 80 and 128, between
which lies 100. Therefore (^g0-)2 or ff solves the problem
(IV. 31 (2)).
To find a sixth power between 8 and 16. The sixth powers
of 1, 2, 3, 4 are 1, 64, 729, 4096. Multiply 8 and 16 by 64
and we have 512 and 1024, between which 729 lies; ?•££- is
therefore a solution (VI. 21).
2. Sometimes a value of x has to be found which will give
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

METHOD OF LIMITS 
477
some function of x a value intermediate between the values
of two other functions of x.
Ex. 1. In IV. 25 a value of x is required such that S/(x2 + x)
shall lie between x and x + 1.
One part of the condition gives 8 > x6 + x2. 
Diophantus
accordingly assumes 8 = (cc + -§)3 = ^-\-x2-\-^x-{-^f> which is
> xd + x2. 
Thus x + $ = 2 or as = f satisfies one part of
the condition. 
Incidentally it satisfies the other, namely
S/(x2 + x) < x+1. 
This is a piece of luck, and Diophantus
is satisfied with it, saying nothing more.
Ex. 2. We have seen how Diophantus concludes that, if
!(a2-60) > x > |(a 2-60),
then x is not less than 11 and not greater than 12 (V. 30).
The problem further requires that x2 — 60 shall be a square.
Assuming x2— 60 = (x—m)2, we find x = (m2 + 60)/2m.
Since x > 11 and < 12, says Diophantus, it follows that
24m > m2 + 60 > 22 m;
from which he concludes that m lies between 19 and 21.
Putting m =20, he finds x— 
\\\.
III. Method of approximation to Limits.
Here we have a very distinctive method called by Diophantus
napio-oTTjs or 7rapio-oTr)Tos dycoyrj. The object is to solve such
problems as that of finding two or three square numbers the
sum of which is a given number, while each of them either
approximates to one and the same number, or is subject to
limits which may be the same or different.
Two examples will best show the method.
Ex. 1. Divide 13 into two squares each of which > 6 (V. 9).
Take half of 13, i.e. 6^, and find what small fraction 1 /x2
added to it will give a square;
thus 
6f + — 3 or 26 + — > must be a square.
x 
y
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

478 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
Diophantus assumes
26+ 1 = (5+ \)\ 
or 26^+1 = (6y+ I)2,
y 
J
whence
2/ = 10, and l / y a = Tfo, i.e.
[The assumption of 5 -f- - as the side is not haphazard: 5 is
chosen because it is the most suitable as giving the largest
rational value for y.]
We have now, says Diophantus, to divide 13 into two
squares each of which is as nearly as possible equal to (fjj)2.
Now 13 = 32 + 22 [it is necessary that the original number
shall be capable of being expressed as the sum of two squares];
and 
3 > §£ by ^0-,
while 
2 < | J by J-J-.
But if we took 3—^%, 2+-|£ as the sides of two squares,
their sum would be 2(§§)2 = ~5^2-y which is > 13.
Accordingly we assume 3 — 9x, 2 + \\x as the sides of the
required squares (so that x is not exactly •£§ but near it).
Thus 
£3-9a)2 + (2 + llx)2 = 13,
and we find x = xfy-
The sides of the required squares are fff, fff.
Ex. 2. Divide 10 into three squares each of which > 3
(V. 11).
[The original number, here 10, must of course be expressible
as the sum of three squares.]
Take one-third of 10, i.e. 3§, and find what small fraction
l/x2 added to it will make a square; i.e. we have to make
1
9 
1
H+ ~2 a square, >i.e. 30+ —% must be a square, or 30+ —2
x
x 
y
= a square, where 3 /x = 1 /y.
Diophantus assumes
the coefficient of y, i.e. 5, being so chosen as to make 1 /y as
small as possible;
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

METHOD OF APPROXIMATION TO LIMITS 479
therefore y = 2, and 1 /x% = 3^; and 3^ + 3^ = ±£j--, a square.
We have now, says Diophantus, to divide 10 into three
squares with sides as near as may be to -1/-.
Now 
10 = 9 + 1 = 3 2 + ( | ) H ( | ) 2 .
Bringing 3, §, f and -^ to a common denominator, we have
§§,!§, I t and U,
and 
3 > ||- by | | ,
I < M by U,
If now we took 3 — §£, f + §J, ± + §£ as the sides of squares,
the sum of the squares would be 3 (V)2 o r "W"» which is > 10.
Accordingly we assume as the sides 3 — 35 &, f + 37#,
where x must therefore be not exactly •£§ but near it.
Solving 
(3-35^)2 + ( | + 37^)2 + (l + 31aj)2= 10,
or 
10-116^ + 3555^2= 10,
we find x = ££&;
-VTT5-
thus the sides of the required squares are -VTTS -VTT5->
the squares themselves are
Other instances of the application of the method will be
found in Y. 10, 12, 13, 14.
Porisms and propositions in the Theory of Numbers.
I. Three propositions are quoted as occurring in the Porisms
(' We have it in the Porisms that...'); and some other pro-
positions assumed without proof may very likely have come
from the same collection. The three propositions from the
Porisms are to the following effect.
1. If a is a given number and x, y numbers such that
x + a = m2, y + a = n2
} then, if xy + a is also a square, m and n
differ by unity (V. 3).
[From the first two equations we obtain easily
xy + a = m2n2-a(ni2 + n2—l) + a2,
and this is obviously a square if m2 + n2— \ — 2mn} or
m-n 
= ±1.]
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

480 
DIOPHAJSTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
2. If m2, (m+ I)2 be consecutive squares and a third number
be taken equal to 2{m2 + (m+ I)2} + 2, or 4(m2 + m + l), the
three numbers have the property that the product of any two
plus either the sum of those two or the remaining number
gives a square (V. 5).
[In fact, if X, F, Z denote the numbers respectively,
( 
)2, 
XY+Z = (ma
YZ+Y+Z= 
(2m- + 3m + 3)2, YZ+X = (2 
)
ZX + Z + X = (2m2 + m+2)2, 
ZX + F = (2m2 + m + I)2*]
3. The difference of any two cubes is also the sum of two
cubes, i.e. can be transformed into the sum of two cubes
(V. 16).
[Diophantus merely states this without proving it or show-
ing how to make the transformation. 
The subject of the
transformation of sums and differences of cubes was investi-
gated by Vieta, Bachet and Fermat.]
II. Of the many other propositions assumed or implied by
Diophantus which are not referred to the Porisms we may
distinguish two classes.
1. The first class are of two sorts; some are more or less
of the nature of identical formulae, e.g. the facts that the
expressions {%(a + b)}2-ab 
and a2(a+ l)2 + a2+ (a+ I)2 are
respectively squares, that a(a2 — a) + a + (a2 — a) is always a
cube, and that 8 times a triangular number plus 1 gives
a square, i.e. S ,^x(x+l)-\-l 
= (2x+ I)2. Others are of the
same kind as the first two propositions quoted from the
Porisms, e.g.
(1) If X = a2x+2a, 
Y— (a+l)2x+2(a+l) 
or, in other
words, if xX+1 = (ax + 1)* and xY+ 1 = {(a+ l)x+ I}2,
then XY+ 1 is a square'(IV. 20). In fact
XF+1 = {
(2) If X±a = m\ Y±a= 
(m+l)2,and £ =
then 
YZ+a, ZX±a, XY+a 
are all squares (V. 3, 4).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PORISMS AND PROPOSITIONS ASSUMED 481
In fact 
YZ±a= 
{(m + 1) (2m + l) + 2a}2,
ZX±a= {m
(3) H
X = m2 + 2, 7 = (m+l)2 + 2, # = 2{m2+ (m+ 1)2+ 1} +2,
then the six expressions
YZ-(Y+Z), ZX-(Z+X), XY~(X+Y),
YZ-X, 
ZX-Y, 
XY-Z
are all squares (V. 6).
In fact
7 # - ( 7 + # ) = (2m2 + 3m + 3)2, YZ-X= 
(2m2 + 3m+ 4)2, &c.
2. The second class is much more important, consisting of
propositions in the Theory of Numbers which we find first
stated or assumed in the Arithmetica. 
It was in explana-
tion or extension of these that Fermat's most famous notes
were written. 
How far Diophantus possessed scientific proofs
of the theorems which he assumes must remain largely a
matter of speculation.
(a) Theorems on the composition of numbers as the sum
of two squares.
(1) Any square number can be resolved into two squares in
any number of ways (II. 8).
(2) Any number which is the sum of two squares can be
resolved into two other squares in any number of ways (II. 9).
(It is implied throughout that the squares may be fractional
as well as integral.)
(3) If there are two whole numbers each of which is the
sum of two squares, the product of the numbers can be
resolved into the sum of two squares in two ways.
In fact 
(a2 + b2) (c2 + d2) = (ac± bd)2 + {ad T be)2.
This proposition is used in III. 19, where the problem is
to find four rational right-angled triangles with the same
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

482 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
hypotenuse. The method is this. Form two right-angled
triangles from (a, b) and (c, d) respectively, by which Dio-
phantus means, form the right-angled triangles
(a
2 + b2, a2~b2, 
2ab) and (c2 + d2
} c2-d2, 
2cd).
Multiply all the sides in each triangle by the hypotenuse of
the other; we have then two rational right-angled triangles
with the same hypotenuse {a2 + b2) (c2 4- d2).
Two others are furnished by the formula above; for we
have only to ' form two right-angled triangles' from (ac -f bd,
ad — be) and from (ac — bd, ad + be) respectively. The method
fails if certain relations hold between a, b, c, d. They must
not be such that one number of either pair vanishes, i.e. such
that ad = be or ac = bd, or such that the numbers in either
pair are equal to one another, for then the triangles are
illusory.
In the case taken by Diophantus a2 + b2 — 22+ I2 = 5,
c2 + d2 = 32 + 22 = 13, and the four right-angled triangles are
(65, 52, 39), (65, 60, 25), (65, 63, 16) and (65, 56, 33).
On this proposition Fermat has a long and interesting note
as to the number of ways in which a prime number of the
form 4^+1 and its powers can be (a) the hypotenuse of
a rational right-angled triangle, (b) the sum of two squares.
He also extends theorem (3) above : ' If a prime number which
is the sum of two squares be multiplied by another prime
number which is also the sum of two squares, the product
will be the sum of two squares in two ways; if the first prime
be multiplied by the square of the second, the product will be
the sum of two squares in three ways; the product of the first
and the cube of the second will be the sum of two squares
in four ways, and so on ad infinitum.'
Although the hypotenuses selected by Diophantus, 5 and 13,
are prime numbers of the form 4TI+ 1, it is unlikely that he
was aware that prime numbers of the form 4 n +1 and
numbers arising from the multiplication of such numbers are
the only classes of numbers which are always the sum of two
squares; this was first proved by Euler.
(4) More remarkable is a condition of possibility of solution
prefixed to V. 9, f To divide 1 into two parts such that, if
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

NUMBERS AS THE SUMS OF SQUARES 
483
a given number is added to either part, the result will be a
square.' The condition is in two parts. There is no doubt as
to the first, 'The given number must not be odd' [i.e. no
number of the form 471 + 3 or 4^—1 can be the sum of two
squares] ; the text of the second part is corrupt, but the words
actually found in the text make it quite likely that corrections
made by Hankel and Tannery give the real meaning of the
original, ' nor must the double of the given number plus 1 be
measured by any prime number which is less by 1 than a
multiple of 4'. This is tolerably near the true condition
stated by Fermat,' The given number must not be odd, and
the double of it increased by 1, when divided by the greatest
square which measures it, must not be divisible by a prime
number of the form 4^—1/
(|8) On numbers which are the sum of three squares.
In V. 11 the number 3a + l has to be divisible into three
squares. Diophantus says that a 'must not be 2 or any
multiple of 8 increased by 2 \ 
That is, ' a number of the
form Mn + 7 cannot be the sum of three squares \ As a matter
of fact, the factor 3 in the 24 is irrelevant here, and Diophantus
might have said that a number of the form 8 n + 7 cannot be
the sum of three squares. The latter condition is true, but
does not include all the numbers which cannot be the sum of
three squares. Fermat gives the-conditions to which a must be
subject, proving that 3<x+ 1 cannot be of the form 471 (24 7c 4 7)
or 4:n(8k+ 7), where k — 0 or any integer.
(y) Composition of numbers as the sum of four squares.
There are three problems, IV. 29, 30 jand V. 14, in which it
is required to divide a number into four squares. Diophantus
states no necessary condition in this case, as he does when
it is a question of dividing a number into three or tivo squares.
Now every number is either a square or the sum of two, three
or four squares (a theorem enunciated by Fermat and proved
by Lagrange who followed up results obtained by Euler), and
this shows that any number can be divided into four squares
(admitting fractional as well as integral squares), since any
square number can be divided into two other squares, integral
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

484 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
or fractional. It is possible, therefore, that Diophantus was
empirically aware of the truth of the theorem of Fermat, but
we cannot be sure of this.
Conspectus of the Arithmetical with typical solutions.
There seems to be no means of conveying an idea of the
extent of the problems solved by Diophantus except by giving
a conspectus of the whole of the six Books. Fortunately this
can be done by the help of modern notation without occupying
too many pages.
It will be best to classify the propositions according to their
character rather than to give them in Diophantus's order. It
should be premised that x9 y, z ... indicating the first, second
and third ... numbers required do not mean that Diophantus
indicates any of them by his unknown (y); he gives his un-
known in each case the signification which is most convenient,
his object being to express all his required numbers at once in
terms of the one unknown (where possible), thereby avoiding the
necessity for eliminations. Where I have occasion to specify
Diophantus's unknown, I shall as a rule call it £, except when
a problem includes a subsidiary problem and it is convenient
to use different letters for the unknown in the original and
subsidiary problems respectively, in order to mark clearly the
distinction between them. When in the equations expressions
are- said to be = vl2, v2, w2, t2... this means simply that they
are to be made squares. Given numbers will be indicated by
a,b,c...m,n... 
and will take the place of the numbers used
by Diophantus, which are always specific numbers.
Where the solutions, or particular devices employed, are
specially ingenious or interesting, the methods of solution will
be shortly indicated. The character of the book will be best
appreciated by means of such illustrations.
[The problems marked with an asterisk are probably
spurious.]
(i) Equations of the first degree with one unknown.
I. 7. x — a = m(x — b).
I. 8. x + a =
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DETERMINATE EQUATIONS 
485
I. 9. a — x = m(b — x).
I. 10. x + b = m(a —cc).
I. 11. x + b = m(# — a).
1.39. (a + x)b+(b + x)a - 2(a+b)xi
or (a + 6)# + (b + x)a = 2(a + x)b9 (cob)
or (a + b)x+(a + x)b = 2(h + x)a.
Diophantus states this problem in this form, 'Given
two numbers (a, 6), to find a third number (x) such that
the numbers
(a + x)b, (b + x)a, (a+b)x
are in arithmetical progression.'
The result is of course different according to the order
of magnitude of the three expressions. If a>b (5 and 3
are the numbers in Diophantus), then (a + x)b < (b + x)a;
there are consequently three alternatives, since (a + x)b
must be either the least or the middle, and (b + x)a either
the middle or the greatest of the three products. We may
have
(a + x) b < (a + b)x < (b + x)a,
or 
(a + b) x < (a + x) b < (b + x) a,
or 
(a + x)b < (b + x)a < (a + b)x,
and the corresponding equations are as set out above.
(ii) Determinate systems of equations of the first degree.
I. 1. x + y = a, x — y = b.
I. %. x + y = a, x = my,
I. 4. x — y = a, x = my.
I. 3. x + y = a, x = my + b.
I. 5. x + y = a, — x -f- - y=b, subject to necessary condition.
T 
1 
1 
-L
1. 6. x + y = a, — x- 
-y=o,
711 
71
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

486 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
I. 15. x + a = m(y — a), y + b = n(x—b).
[Diophantus puts y — £ + a, where £ is his unknown.]
I. 16.
I. 17. y 
,
[03 + ^ + 3 + 10 = £.]
I. 18. y + z—x = a, z-\-x — y = b, x + y — z = c.
[Dioph. puts 2g = x + y + z.]
I. 19. ^/-f^-fw — ^ — a, z + w + x — y — b, w + x + y — z=c,
x + y + z — w = d.
[2£ = x + y + z + w.]
I. 20. # + ;?/ + £ = a, x + y = mz, y + z = MJ.
I. 21. ^ = 7/4- — 0, T/ = 2:H— aj, 0 = aH— -?/(wherex>y>z),
a 
Til 
To 
p 
or
with necessary condition.
II. 18*. x- (—x + a) + (-z + c) = y- (-y + b) + (—x + a)
p
[Solution wanting.]
(iii) Determinate systems of equations reducible to the
first degree.
I. 26. ax = oc2, bx = a.
I. 29. x + y — a, x2-y2 
— 6. [Dioph. puts 2£ = x-y.]
I. 31. x = my, x2 + y2 = n(x + y).
I. 32. x = my, x2 + y2 = n(x — y).
I. 33. x = my, x2 — y2 = n(x + y).
I. 34. aj = my, x2—y2 = n(x — y).
I. 34. Cor. 1. x — my, xy = n(x + y).
Cor. 2. x = my, #£/ = n(x — y).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DETERMINATE EQUATIONS 
487
(
I. 35. x = my, y2 = itx.
I. 36. x = my, y2 = ny.
I. 37. x = my, y2 = n(x + y).
I. 38. x = my, y2 = n(x — y).
I. 38. Cor. x = myf x2 = ny.
„ 
a> = my, #2 = nx.
„ 
& = my, x2 = n(x—y).
II. 6*. x — y — a, x2—y2 = x — y + b.
IV. 36. 2/0 = ni(y + z), zx = n(z + x), xy = f
[Solved by means of Lemma: see under (vi) Inde-
terminate equations of the first degree.]
(iv) Determinate systems reducible to equations of
second degree.
I. 27. x + y = a, xy = b.
[Dioph. states the necessary condition, namely that
%a2 — b must be a square, with the words ecrri Se TOVTO
irXacriiaTLKOv, which no doubt means 'this is of the
nature of a formula (easily obtained)'. 
He puts
x-y=2g.]
I. 30. x—y =• a, xy = b.
[Necessary condition (with the same words) 4 b + a2 =
a square, x + y is put = 2£.]
I. 28. x + y = a, x2 + y2 = 6.
[Necessary condition 2b — a2 = a square. x — y — 2g.]
IV. 
1. #3 + 2/3 = a, x + y — b.
[Dioph. puts x — y=2g, whence x = \b + g, y = ib — g.
The numbers a, b are so chosen that (a — ±bz)/3b is
a square.]
IV. 2. &3- y* = a, x — y = b.
[x + y =21]
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

488 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
IV. 15. (y + z)x = a, (z + x)y = b, (x + y)z = c.
[Dioph. takes the third number z as his unknown;
thus 
x + y = c/z.
Assume x = p/z, 
y = q/z. 
Then
pa
& +p = a,
These equations are inconsistent unless p — q = a—b.
We have therefore to determine p, q by dividing c into
two parts such that their difference = a — b (cf. I. 1).
A very interesting use of the ' false hypothesis'
(Diophantus first takes two arbitrary numbers for p, q
such that p + q = c, and finds that the values taken have
to be corrected).
The final equation being ^ +p = a, where p, qt are
determined in the way described, z2 = pq/(a~2J>) 
o r
pq/(b — q), and the numbers a, b, c have to be such that
either of these expressions gives a square.]
IV. 34. yz + (y + z) = a2— 1, zx + (z + x) = 62— 1,
) = c2— 1.
[Dioph. states as the necessary condition for a rational
solution that each of the three constants to which the
three expressions are to be equal must be some square
diminished by 1. The true condition is seen in our
notation by transforming the equations
zx + (z + x) — /?, xy + (x + y) —y into
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DETERMINATE EQUATIONS 
489
whence 
a + i = 
l{£±l>Ml>} &c.;
and it is only necessary that (a + 1) (/3 +1) (y + 1) should
be a square, not that each of the expressions a + 1, j8+ 1,
y + 1 should be a square.
Dioph. finds in a Lemma (see under (vi) below) a solu-
tion kv dopLCTcp (indeterminately) of xy + (x + y) = k,
which practically means finding y in terms of x.]
IV. 35. yz-{y + z) = a2-l, 
zx-(z 
+ x) = 
b2-!,
- c 2-l.
[The remarks on the last proposition apply mutatis
mutandis. 
The lemma in this case is the indeterminate
solution of xy — (x + y) = &.]
IV. 37. yz = a(x + y + z), zx —
[Another interesting case of ' false hypothesis'. Dioph.
first gives x + y-\~z an arbitrary value, then finds that
the result is not rational, and proceeds to solve the new
problem of finding a value of x + y + z to take the place of
the first value.
If w = x +y +0, we have x = cw./y, z — aw/y, so that
(K C
zx — acw2/y2 = bw by hypothesis; therefore y2 = -=- w.
For a rational solution this last expression must be
ct c
a square. Suppose, therefore, that w = -j- £2, and we have
ac 
fiO 
ac . 
. 
.
ft y 
^ z 
a& x 
ci
Eliminating x, y, z, we obtain g = (bc + ca + ab)/ac,
and
x — {be + ca + ab)/a, y = (be + ca + a6)/6,
Lemma to V. 8. yz = a2, zx = 62, ^ = c2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

490 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
(v) Systems of equations apparently indeterminate but
really reduced, by arbitrary assumptions, to deter-
minate equations of the first degree.
I. 14. xy = m(x + y). 
[Value of y arbitrarily assumed.]
II. 3*. xy = m(# + 2/), and xy — m(x—y).
II. 1*. (cf. I. 31). x2 + y2 = m(x + y).
{II. 2*. (cf. I. 34). x2 — y2 = m(x — y). 
j- [x assumed = 2y.]
II. 4*. (cf. I. 32). x2 + y2 
=m(x-y).
[II. 5*. (cf. I. 33). x2-y2 
= m(x + y).
II. 7*. x2 — y2=zm(x — y)+a. 
[Dioph. assumes x — y— 2.]
1
1 
1
1 
1
1
I. 22. x 
x+ -z = y — -y •] 
x = z— - z+ -y.
m 
p 
n 
m 
p 
n
[Value of y assumed.]
1
1 
1
1 
1 1
I. 23. x 
-x+ -w — y 
y -\ 
x = z 
z+ -y
m 
q 
n ° 
m 
p 
n
= w 
w-\—0. [Value of y assumed.]
1.24. «+ I ' 
- 
- 1
[Value of y + z assumed.]
I. 25. x+ —(y + z + tv) — y+ -(z + w + x)
= z + - (w + x + y) = w + -(x + y + z).
[Value of y + z + w assumed.]
II. 17*. (cf. I. 22). 
x-(^x+
[Ratio of x to y assumed.]
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

IV
INDETERMINATE ANALYSIS 
491
1 
/ 
1 \ 
1 
/ 
1 \
. 33. x+ -y = mly — -y)> 
y + -x = nlx — -#)•
Z 
\ 
Z 
s 
2> 
\ 
Z 
f
[Dioph. assumes- y = 1.]
(vi) Indeterminate equations of the first degree.
Lemma to IV. 34. Qcy + (x + y) = a.\
. 35. xy-{x + y) = a.
„ IV. 36. xy — m(x + y).
y practically found
in terms of cc.]
(vii) Indeterminate analysis of the second degree.
II. 8. a? + y* = a*.
[y2 = a2 — x2 must be a square = (mx — a)2, say.]
II. 9. x2 + y2 = ct2 + 62. [Put x = g + a, y = 
mg-b.]
II. 10. x2-y2 
= a.
[Put x = y + m, choosing m such that m2 < a.]
/II. 11. x + a = i62, as + 6 = v2.
•III. 12. a - # = u2, 6-aj = v2.
III. 13. x-a 
= u2, cc-6 = v2.
[Dioph. solves II. 11 and 13, (1) by means of the
1 double equation' (see p. 469 above), (2) without a double
equation by putting x = £2 + a and equating (£2±a)±b
to d-m)\ 
In II. 12 he puts aj = a-£ 2.]
II. 14 = III. 21. x + y = a5 x + ^2 = u2, 2/ + ^2 = v2.
[Diophantus takes 0 as the unknown, and puts
u2 = (0 + m)2, i;2 = (0 + ^)2. 
Therefore x = 2ms; + m2,
2/ = 2wsf+7i,2, and 0 is found, by substitution in the first
equation, to be 
7 
^ 
In order that the solution
^ 
2(m + n)
may be rational, m, n must satisfy a certain condition.
Dioph. takes them such that m2 + n2 < a, but it is suffi-
cient, if m > n, that a + mn should be > n2.]
II. 15 = III. 20. x + y = a, 3 2-a = u2, ^ 2 - y = ^2.
[The solution is similar, and a similar remark applies
to Diophantus's implied condition.]
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

492 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
II. 16. x = my, a2 + x = u2, a2 + y — v2.
II. 19. x2-y2 = m(y2~z2).
II. 20. x2 + y = u2, y2 + x = v2.
[Assume y = 2mx + on2> and one condition is satisfied.]
II. 21. #2-2/ = u2, y2-x 
- v2.
[Assume x = g + m, y = 2m£ + m2, and one condition
is satisfied.]
II. 22. x2 + (x + y) = u2, y2 + (x + y) = v2.
[Put
11.23. ^ 2-(
II. 24. (x + l
[Assume x = (m2 — 1)£2, y = fa2— •
II. 25. (# + 2/)2-^ = u2, (x + y)2—y = v2.
II. 26. xy + x = u2, xy + y = v2, u + v = a.
[Put 2/ = m2^-l.]
II. 27. xy — x = i&2, xy — y =• v2, u + v = a.
("11. 28. x2y2 + x2 = u2, x2y2 + y2 = v2.
III. 29. x2y2~x2 = u2, x2y2-y2 
= v2.
II. 30. #2/+(# + 2/) = u2, xy — (x + y) = v2.
[Since m,2 + w2 + 2 m?i is a square, assume
#2/ = (m2-f/rc,2)£2 and aj + 2/ = 2m/ft,£2;
put ^ = ^9^, y — qg, where pq = m2 + 7i2; then
II. 31. xy + (x + y) — u2, xy — (x + y) = v2, ^ + y = ty2.
[Suppose w2 — 2.2m,m, which is a square, and use
formula (2 m)2 + m2 ± 2 . 2 m. m = a square.]
/IL 32. ^ ^ ^ = u2, z2jrX 
= v2 aJ2 + ?/ = it?2.
III. 33. 2/2-z = U2, 02-rc = v2, iC2-2/ = W2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INDETERMINATE ANALYSIS 
493
11.34. x2 + (x + y + z) = u2, y* + (x + y + z) = v2,
z2 +(x + y + z) = w2.
[Since {-|(m—ri)}2 + mn is a square, take any number
separable into two factors (m, n) in three ways. This
gives three values, say, p, q, r for %(m — n). Put
x = i 9^ 2/ = ?& ^ = r £> a n (l x + 2/ + ^ = ww|2 j therefore
(^ + 2+ r)^ =: ™n£2> and | is found.]
11.35. as2 — (a + y + s) =tt2, 2/2 — (x + y + z) = v2,
2?2 — (a? + 2/ + ^) = ^2.
[Use the formula {^(m + ti)}2 — m7i = a square and
proceed similarly.]
III. 1* (x + y + z)-x2 = u2, (a + 2/ + z)-2/2 = ?;2,
(^ + 2/ + z) ~ z2> = ^2-
III. 2*. (# + 2/ + s)2-f-a;= it2, (a3 + 2/ + ^)a + y=!W2,
(a? + y + z)2 + z = tv2.
III. 3*
( 
y 
)2~z = w2.
III. 4*. o;-(cc + 2/ + ^)2 = u2, y-(x + y + z)2 = v2,
z —(x + y + z)2 = w2.
III. 5. x + y + z = ^2, j/4-^ — ^ = u2, ^ + a^ — 2/ = v2}
x + y — z = iv2.
[The first solution of this problem assumes
t* = x + y + z = (g + l)2, w*= 1, u2 = g\
whence x, y, z are found in terms of £, and z + x — y
is then made a square.
The alternative solution, however, is much more ele-
gant, and can be generalized thus.
We have to find x, y, z so that
— x + y + z — a square
x — y + z = a square
x + y — z = a square
# + y + z = a square
Equate the first three expressions to a2, 62, c2, being
squares such that their sum is also a square = k2, say.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

494 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
Then, since the sum of the first three expressions is
itself equal to x + y + z, we have
III. 6. x + y + z = t2, y + z = u2, z + x = v2
y
III, 
8.
III. 9. x + y + z-a = t2, y + z-a — u2
x + y — a — w2.
III. 10. yz + a = u2, zx + a = v2, xy + a = w2.
[Suppose yz + a — m2, and let y = (m2 - a) g, z = 1 /£:
also let zx + a = ^2; therefore x = (n2 — a)g.
We have therefore to make
(m2 — a) (n2 — a) £2 + a a square.
Diophantus takes m2 =25, a = 12, TI2 = 16, and
arrives at 52£2 + 12, which is to be made a square.
Although 52.1 2+12isa square, and it follows that any
number of other solutions giving a square are possible
by substituting 1 + 77 for £ in the expression, and so on,
Diophantus says that the equation could easily be solved
if 52 was a square, and proceeds to solve the problem of
finding two squares such that each increased by 12 will
give a square, in which case their product also will be
a square. In other words, we have to find m2 and n2
such that m2 — a, n2 — a are both squares, which, as he
says, is easy. We have to find two pairs of squares
differing by a. If
and 
{•!(/
let, then, m2 = &{p + q)}\ n2 =
III. 11, yz — a = n2, zx — a = v2, xy — a = w2.
[The solution is like that of III. 10 mutatis mutandis.]
III. 12. yz + x = u2, zx + y — v2, xy + z = iv2.
III. 13. yz — x = u2
} zx — y — v2, xy — z = w2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INDETERMINATE ANALYSIS 
495
III. 14. yz + x2 = u2, zx + y2 = v2, xy-\-z2 — w2.
III. 15. yz + (y + z) = u2, zx + (z + x) = v2, xy + (x + y) = w2.
[Lemma. If a, a +1 be two consecutive numbers,
a2(a + I)2 + a2 + (a + I)2 is a square. Let
2/ = m2, 0 = (m + I)2.
Therefore 
(m2 + 2 m + 2) a? + (m + 1)2j
and 
(m2
have to be made squares. This is solved as a double-
equation; in Diophantus's problem m = 2.
Second solution. 
Let & be the first number, m the
second; then (m+l)# + m is a square = n2, say; there-
fore x = (n2 — m)/(7n+ 1), while y = m. 
We have then
(m+l)z + m = & square 
\
, 
/?i2 + l \ 
n2 — m 
r *
and 
( 
10 H 
— = a square
\m+1 / 
m+1 
J
Diophantus has m = 3, n = 5, so that the expressions
to be made squares are with him
40 + 3 |
This is not possible because, of the corresponding coeffi-
cients, neither pair are in the ratio of squares. In order to
substitute, for 6J, 4, coefficients which are in the ratio
of a square to a square he then finds two numbers, say,
p, q to replace 5J, 3 such that £>g+£> + 2 = a square, and
(p+ l)/(q + 1) = a square. He assumes £ and 4 £ + 3,
which satisfies the second condition, and then solves for £,
which must satisfy
_ a square = (2£-3)a, say,
which gives £ = T%, 4 | + 3 — 4-|.
He then solves, for 0, the third number, the double-
equation
5|0 + 4 | = square]
TO-2+TO = square)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

496 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
after multiplying by 25 and 100 respectively, making
expressions
130&+105
30
In the above equations we should only have to make
w? + 1 a square, and then multiply the first by n2 + 1 and
the second by (m + I)2.
Diophantus, with his notation, was hardly in a position
to solve, as we should, by writing
which gives x + 1 = V {(b2 + 1) (c2 + l)/(a2 + 1)}, &c]
III. 16. yz — (y + z) = u2, zx— (z + x) = v2, xy — (x + y) =w2.
[The method is the same mutatis mutandis as the
second of the above solutions.]
(III. 17. xy + (x + y) = u2, xy + x = v2, xy + y = w2.
[HI. 18. xy — (x + y) = u2, ^2/ — ^ = 'W2, ^2/~2/ = ^2-
III. 19.
±^ = {t,
+ x2
w'2
[Diophantus finds, in the way we have seen (p. 482),
four different rational right-angled triangles with the
same hypotenuse, namely (65, 52, 39), (65, 60, 25), (65,
56, 33), (65, 63, 16), or, what is the same thing, a square
which is divisible into two squares in four different ways;
this will solve the problem, since, if h, p, b be the three
sides of a right-angled triangle, h2±2pb are both squares.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INDETERMINATE ANALYSIS 
497
Put therefore 
xx + x2 + x3 + #4 = 6 5 g.
and #! = 2.39.52g2, x% = 2.25.60g2, #3 = 2 . 33 . 56g2,
#4 = 2.16.63g2;
this gives 12768 g2 = 65 g, and g = TaVeg.]
IV. 4. x2 + y = u2, # -f 2/ = u.
IV. 5. x2 + y = u, x + y = u2.
IV. 13. x+1 = t2, y+1 = u2, a + y + l = v2, 3/ —aj+ 1 = w2.
[Put a? = (m£ + I ) 2 - 1 = m2^2 + 2m^; the second and
third conditions require us to find two squares with x as
difference. 
The difference m2g2 + 2mg is separated into
the factors m2£ + 2m, ^; the square of half the differ-
ence = {^(m2— ^ l + ^u}2 
Put this equal to 2/+l> so
that y = i (m2-1)2£2 + m(m 2- 1) g + m 2 - 1, and the
first three conditions are satisfied. 
The fourth gives
£(m4 — 6m2 + 1) | 2 + (m3 — 3 m) £ + m2 = a square, which
we can equate to (ng — m)2.]
IV. 14. x2 + y2 + z2 = (x2 — y2) + (y2 — z2) + (x2~z2). 
(x>y>z.)
IV. 16. x + y + z = t2, x2 + y = u2, y2 + z = v2, z2 + x = w2.
[Put 4m g for 2/, and by means of the factors 2mg, 2
we can satisfy the second condition by making x equal
to half the difference, or rag — 1. The third condition
is satisfied by subtracting (4mg)2 from some square, say
(4mg+l)2; therefore 2 = 8mg + l. 
By the first con-
dition 13mg must be a square. Let it be 169 r\2\ the
numbers are therefore 13iy2—1, 52?72, 104iy2+l, and
the last condition gives 10816?74 + 221#2 = a square,
i.e. 10816?72-f221 = a square = (104?; +I)2, say. 
This
gives the value of rj, and solves the problem.]
IV. 17. x + y + z = t2, x2-y 
= u2, y2-z 
= v\ z2-x = w2.
IV. 19. yz+l = u2, zx+ 1 = v2, xy+1 = w2.
[We are asked to solve this indeterminately {kv r<3
aopicTTCd). Put for yz some square minus 1, say m2g2
4-2mg; one condition is now satisfied. Put z = g, so
that y = m2g + 2 m.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

498 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
Similarly we satisfy the second condition by assuming
zx = n2g2 + 2ng; therefore x = n2g + 2n. To satisfy the
third condition, we must have
(m2n2£2 + 2win. m + n£ + 4m%) +1 a square.
We must therefore have Imn+l 
a square and also
mn (m + w) = mn V (4 mw, -f 1). 
The first condition is
satisfied by n = m +1, which incidentally satisfies the
second condition also. We put therefore yz = (ra£ +1)2 — 1
and zx— {(ra + 1)£ + 1 }2— 1, and assume that z = £, so that
2/ = m2£ + 2m, x — (m+ l)2£ + 2(m+ 1), and we have
shown that the third condition is also satisfied. Thus we
have a solution in terms of the undetermined unknown £.
The above is only slightly generalized from Diophantus.]
IV. 20. x2xs+ 1 = r2, xzxY + 1 = s2, a51aj2+ 1 = t2,
x±x4+ 1 = u2, x2x4:+ 1 = v2, x3x±+ 1 = w2.
[This proposition depends on the last, x19 x2, xz being
determined as in that proposition. If xz corresponds to z
in that proposition, we satisfy the condition x3x4+ 1 = w2
by putting xzx± — {(m + 2)^+ I}2— 1, and so find x± in
terms of £, after which we have only two conditions more
to satisfy. 
The condition xxx±+1 = square is auto-
matically satisfied, since
is a square, and it only remains to satisfy x^x±+\ = square.
That is,
has to be made a square, which is easy, since the coefficient
of | 2 is a square.
With Diophantus m = 1, so that xx — 4 £ + 4, #2 = £ + 2,
a53 = £, as4 = 9£ + 6, and 9£2 + 24£+13 has to be made
a square. He equates this to (3£— 4)2, giving £ = TV]
IV. 21. %z = y2, x — y — u2, x — z = v2, y — z = w2. 
(x>y>z)
(IV. 22. xyz + x = u2, xyz + y = v2, xyz + z = w2.
llV. 23. xyz — x = u2, xyz — y = z;2, xyz — z — w2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INDETERMINATE ANALYSIS 
499
IV. 29. x2 + yl + z* + wz + x + y + z + w = a.
[Since x2 + x + % is a square,
(#2 + x) + (y2 + 2/) + (22 + 0) + (w2 + w) + l
is the sum of four squares, and we only have to separate
a + 1 into four squares.]
IV. 30. x2 + y2 + z2 + %v2 — (x + y + z + ^y) = a.
IV. 31. x + y = 1, (a + a) (y+ 6) = u2.
IV. 32. x + y + z = a, xy + z = tt2, xy—z = ?;2.
IV. 39. « — 2/ = m(y—z), 
y + z = u2, z + x = v2,
V. 
1. ^^ = y2,\x — a = u2, y — a = ?;2, 0 —a = ^ 2 .
V. 2. xz = y2
7 x + a = u2, y + a = v2, z + a= w2,
V. 3. a; + a = r2, ?/ + a = s2, ^ + a = ^2,
yz + a—iju2, zx + a = v2, xy + a = iu2.
V . 
rt. 
IAJ — Kit — 
I 
) 
*J — \M — 
o j 
A/ — (JO — 
L ,
yz — a = u2, 0^ —a =v2, xy — a = w2.
[Solved by means of the Porisms that, if a be the
given number, the numbers m2 — a, (m+l)2 — a satisfy
the conditions of V 3, and the numbers m2 + af
(nd +\)2 + a the conditions of V. 4 (see p. 479 above). The
third number is taken to be 2{<m2 + a+(m+ l)2 + a} — 1,
and the three numbers automatically satisfy two more
conditions (see p. 480 above). It only remains to make
2 {m2 + a + (m +\)2 + a} — 1 +a a square,
or 
4m2 + 4m + 3a + 1 = a square,
which is easily solved.
With Diophantus £ + 3 takes the place of m in V. 3
and I takes its place in V. 4, while a is 5 in V. 3 and 6
in V. 4.]
. 5. 2/z£J + #r = r , 0 SB +2/ = S , ^2/ • ^ == ^ >
y2z2 + y2 + z2=u2, z2x2 + z2 + x2=v2, x2y2 + x2 + y2 = t(;2
[Solved by means of the Porism numbered 2 on p. 480.
K k 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

500 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
V. 6. x-2 = r2, y-2 = s2,z-2 
= t2,
yz—y — z = u2, zx—z—x = v2, xy — x—y = w2,
yz — x = vf2, zx—y = v'2, xy—z = w'2.
[Solved by means of the proposition numbered (3) on
p. 481.]
Lemma 1 to V. 7. xy + x2 + y2 = u2.
V. 7.
[Solved by means of the subsidiary problem (Lemma 2)
of finding three rational right-angled triangles with
equal area. If m, n satisfy the condition in Lemma 1,
i. e. if ran + m2 + n2 = p2, the triangles are c formed' from
the pairs of numbers (p, m), (p, n), (p, m + n) respec-
tively. Diophantus assumes this, but it is easy to prove.
In his case m = 3, n = 5, so that p = 7. Now, in
a right-angled triangle, (hypotenuse)2 ± four times area
is a square. 
We equate, therefore, x + y + z to four
times the common area multiplied by £2, and the several
numbers x, y, z to the three hypotenuses multiplied by £,
and equate the two values. In Diophantus's case the
triangles are (40, 42, 58), (24, 70, 74) and (15, 112, 113),
and 245£ = 3360£2.]
(u2 
[v2
V. 8. yz±(x + y + z) = | 
> zx±(x + y + z) = \ ,2>
[Solved by means of the same three rational right-
angled triangles found in the Lemma to V. 7, together
with the Lemma that we can solve the equations yz=a2,
zx = b2, xy = c2.]
V. 9. (Cf. II. 11). x + y= 1, x + a = u2, y + a = v2.
V. 11. x + y + z= 1, x + a = u2, y + a= v2, z + a = w2.
[These are the problems of irapKTorrjTos dycoyrj
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INDETERMINATE ANALYSIS 
501
described above (pp. 477-9). The problem is 'to divide
unity into two (or three) parts such that, if one and the
same given number be added to each part, the results are
all squares'.]
V. 10. x + y = 1, x + a = u2, y + b — v2.
V. 12. x + y + z = 1, x + a — u2, y + b = v2, z + c = w2.
[These problems are like the preceding except that
different given numbers are added. The second of the
two problems is not worked out, but the first is worth
reproducing. We must take the particular figures used
by Diophantus, namely a = 2, b = 6. We have then to
divide 9 into two squares such that one of them lies
between 2 and 3. Take two squares lying between 2
and 3, say fff, ff^. 
We have then to find a square £2
lying between them; if we can do this, we can make
9 — £2 a square, and so solve the problem.
Put 9-£ 2 = (3 -m£)2, say, so that £ = 6m/(m 2+l);
and m has to be determined so that £ lies between
17 Qrirq 19
12 
a n C l T2 •
mU 
£ 
1 7 
6
m 
1 9
Therefore 
— < —T} 
< — •
12 
m 2+l 
12
Diophantus, as we have seen, finds a fortiori integral
limits for m by solving these inequalities, making m not
greater than f ^ and not less than f | (see pp. 463-5 above).
He then takes m = 3 | and puts 9 - f = (3-3i£)2,
which gives £ = ff.]
.13. x + y + z = a, y + z = u2, z + x — v2, x + y = w2.
jV. 14. #-i-2/-}-0 + w = a, # + 2/ + 2 = s2, ^ + 3 + w = $2
9
0 + w + x — u2, w + x + y = v2.
[The method is the same.]
(V. 21. x2y2z2 + x2 = u2, x2y2z2 + y2 = v2, x2y2z2 + z2 = iy2.
V. 22. x2y2z2-x2 
= u2, x2y2z2-y2 
= v2, x2y2z2-z2 
= w2.
[V. 23. #2-£22/2s2 = u2
3 y2-x2y2z2 
= v2, z2-x2y2z2 
= w2.
[Solved by means of right-angled triangles in rational
numbers.]
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

502 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
V. 24. 2/V+ 1 = u\ z2x2+\ 
= v2, x2y2+ 1 = w\
V. 25. 2/202- 1 = u2, z2x2- 
1 = v2, x2y2-1 
= w2.
V. 26. l-y*z2 
= u2, l-z2x2 
= v2, l-x2y2 
= w2.
[These reduce to the preceding set of three problems.]
V. 27. y2 + z2 + a = u2, z2 + x2 + a = v2, x2 + y2 + a = iv2.
V. 28. y2 + z2-a = u2, z2 + x2-a = v\ x2 + y2-a = w2.
V. 30. mx + ny = u2, u2 + a= (x + y)2.
[This problem is enunciated thus. 
CA man buys a
certain number of measures of wine, some at 8 drachmas,
some at 5 drachmas each. He pays for them a square
number of drachmas; and if 60 is added to this number,
the result is a square, the side of which is equal to the
whole number of measures. Find the number bought at
each price/
Let | = the whole number of measures; therefore
£2 — 60 was the number of drachmas paid, and | 2 — 60
= a square, say (£ — m)2; hence £ = (m2 + 60)/2m.
Now % of the price of the five-drachma measures + J
of that of the eight-drachma measures = £; therefore
£2 — 60, the total price, has to be divided into two parts
such that |- of one +1 of the other = £.
We cannot have a real solution of this unless
£ > i « 2 - 6 0 ) and
therefore 
5 £ < £ 2 - 6 0 < 8 £ .
Diophantus concludes, as we have seen (p. 464 above),
that | is not less than 11 and not greater than 12.
Therefore, from above, since £ = (m2 + 60)/2m,
22m < m2 + 60 < 24m;
and Diophantus concludes that m is not less than 19 and
not greater than 21. He therefore puts m = 20.
Therefore g = (ra2 + 60)/2m = ll£, g2 = 132J, and
|2—60 = 72J.
We have now to divide 72J into two parts such that
| of one part +§ of the other = 11J.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INDETERMINATE ANALYSIS 
503
Let the first part = 5 z; therefore | (second part)
= \\\ — z, or second part = 92 — 82;.
Therefore 
5z + 92 - Sz = 72J, and « = f15
therefore the number of five-drachma measures is f § and
the number of eight-drachma measures ff.]
Lemma 2 to VI. 12. ax2 + b = u2 (where a + 6 = c2). j /gee p 4 6 7
Lemma to VI. 15. ax2-b = u2 (where ad2-b = c2).) 
above.)
[[III. 16]. xy- 
^
[IV. 32]. «+l=£V-l).
[V. 21]. cc2+ 1 = it2, 2/2+ 1 = ^2, 22+ 1 = ^f;2.
(viii) Indeterminate analysis of the third degree.
IV. 3. x2y — u, xy = u3.
IV. 6. 
2 
2
lV. 7.
IV. 8. 
2/
3 = u, ^ + y ==
the same problem.
(really reducible
to the second
degree.)
[We may give as examples the solutions of IV. 7,
IV. 8, IV. 11.
IV. 7. Since z2 + y2 = a cube, suppose z2 + y2 — xz.
To make x3 + y2 a square, put &3 = a2 + 62, y2 = 2ab,
which also satisfies x3 — y2 = z2. We have then to make
2 ab a square. Let a = £, 6 = 2 £; therefore a2 + 62 = 5 £2,
2a& = 4£2, 2/ = 2 £ 3 = £> a n (i w e n a v e only ^ 
k
5 f a cube. £ = 5, and a3 = 125, / = 100, s2 = 25.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

504 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
IV. 8. Suppose 05=f, 2/3=m3£3; therefore u= (m
must be the side of the cube m3£3 + £, and
= (m3
To solve this, we must have 3m2 + 3m+l (the difference
between consecutive cubes) a square. Put
3ra2 + 3m+l = {l-nmf, and m= (3 + 2n)/(n2-3).
IV. 11. Assume x = (m+ 1)£, 2/ = wi£, and we have
to make (3m3-h3m2+1)£2 equal to 1, i.e. we have
only to make 3m2 + 3m+ 1 a square.]
IV. 18. xz + y = t(/3, 2/2 + ^ = ^
IV. 24. o?4-2/ = a, xy = ^3 —^.
[?/ = a — #; therefore ax — x2 has to be made a cube
"minus its side, say (m&— I)3— (mx— 1).
Therefore <z# — a?2 = m3 £3 — 3 m2 ^2 + 2 m#.
To reduce this to a simple equation, we have only to
put m = Ja.]
IV. 25. a? + 2/ + z = a, ^2/^ = {(x — y) + (x — z) + (2/-^)}3.
(a; > 2/ > z)
[The cube = 8(# — zf. 
Let a; = (m+ 1)|, « = mf, so
that y = 8 £/ (m2 + m), and we have only to contrive that
8/(m2 + m) lies between m and m + 1. Dioph. takes the
first limit 8 > m3 + m2, and puts
8 = (m + |) 3 or m3 + m2 + Jm + ^ ,
whence m = | ; therefore x — |^, y — f g, 0 = |^. Or,
multiplying by 15, we have fl3 = 40|, 2/ = 27£, 0 = 25^.
The first equation then gives £.]
(IV. 26. xy + x = v?, xy + y = v3.
(IV. 27. xy — x = uz, xy — y = vz.
IV. 28. ^2/ + ( ^ + 2/) = w3, xy — (x + y) = v3.
[a;+ 2/ = i(^ 3 —v3), ^2/ = 4(w3 + v3); therefore
(a> - 2/)2 = i (^3 ~ ^3)2 - 2 (u3 +1;3),
which latter expression has to be made a square.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INDETERMINATE ANALYSIS 
505
Diophantus assumes u = £ + 1, v = £—1, whence
must be a square, or
9£4-4£3 + 6£ 2-12£+l = a square = (3 £ 2-6£ + I)2, say;
therefore 32£3 = 36£2, and £ = §. Thus u, v are found,
and then x, y.
The second (alternative) solution uses the formula that
i(e-i) + d2
Ti) + i = a cube. Put x = £ y = ?-&
and one condition is satisfied. We then only have to
make £(£ 2-£)-£-(£ 2-£) or £3-2£2 a cube (less than
IV. 38. (x + y + z)x = ±u(u + l), (x + y + z)y = v2,
(x + y + z)z = w3, [x + y + z — t2].
[Suppose x + y + z = £2; then
72 > 0 = 
72
therefore 
| 4 = ^u(u + 1) + v2 + voz.
Diophantus puts 8 for wz, but we may take any cube, as
m3; and he assumes v2 = (£2— I)2, for which we might
substitute (£2 — ^2)2. 
We then have the triangular
number %u(u+l) = 2^2^2 — ^4 —m3. Since 8 times a
triangular number plus 1 gives a square,
2 — 8w4— 8m3+ 1 = a square = (4?i£ — yfc)2, say,
and the problem is solved.]
V. 15.
[Let
therefore 
£ = {(m3 -1) + (ns -1) + (p* - 1)} £3;
and we have to find three cubes m\ ri6, p* such that
m3 + n6 +ps — 3 = a square. 
Diophantus assumes as
the sides of the cubes (&-I-1), (2 — k), 2; this gives
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

506 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
9 k2 — 9k + 14 = a square = (3k—I)2, say; and k is found.
Retracing our steps, we find £ and therefore x, y, z.~\
V. 16. (x + y + z)3 — x = u3, (# + 2/ + j2;)3~2/ = v3,
V. 17. #— ( 
2/ 
) 
, y 
( y 
)
0 - (x + y + z)3 = vu3.
V. 18.
[Put x + y + z = ?, x = (p*-l)i«, 
y=(q2-l)£\
0 = (r2-l)^6, whence g2 = (p2-l+q2-l+r2-l)g\ 
so
that ^92 — 1 -f q2 — 1 + r2 — 1 must be made a 
fourth
power. 
Diophantus assumes p2=(m2— I)2, g2 = (m +1)2,
r2 = (m—I)2, since m4— 2m2 + m2-f-2m + m2 — 2m=m 4.]
V. 19. a? + 2/ + 0 = t2, (x + y + zf-x 
— u2,
V. 19a. x + y + z = t2, x-(x + y + zf = u2,
y — (x + y + zf = v2, z —
V. 19. b, c. x + y + z = a, (x + y + zf ± x = u2,
(x + y + zf±y 
= v2, (x + y + z)3+ z = w2.
V. 20. x + y + z = —, x-(x 
+ y + z)3 = u2,
= v2, z-(x + y + zf = w2.
[IV. 8]. x-y = 1, 
x3-y*=u2.
[V. 15].
[V. 16]. 3-(x*
[V. 17]. a3 + 2/
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INDETERMINATE ANALYSIS 
507
(ix) Indeterminate analysis of the fourth degree.
V. 29. 054 + 2/4 + z4 = u2.
['Why', says Fermat, 'did not Diophantus seek tivo
fourth powers such that their sum is a square. This
problem is, in fact, impossible, as by my method I am
able to prove with all rigour/ No doubt Diophantus
knew this truth empirically. 
Let x2 = £2, y2 = p2,
zl = q2. Therefore £4 + p* + g4 = a square = (£2 — r)2, say;
therefore £2 = (r2— p* — g4)/2r, and we have to make
this expression a square.
Diophantus puts r = p2 + 4, q2 = 4, so that the expres-
sion reduces to 8p2/(2p2 + 8) or 4j32/(p2 + 4). To make
this a square, let p2 -f 4 = (p -f I)2, say; therefore p = 1-|,
and p2 = 2J, g2 = 4, r = 6J; or (multiplying by 4)
p2 = 9, g2 = 16, r = 25, which solves the problem.]
[V. 18]. x2 + y2 + z2-3 = u\
(See above under V. 18.)
(x) Problems of constructing right-angled triangles with
sides in rational numbers and satisfying various
other conditions.
[I shall in all cases call the hypotenuse z, and the
other two sides x} y, so that the condition x2 + y2 = z2
applies in all cases, in addition to the other conditions
specified.]
[Lemma to V. 7], xy = xxyx = x2y2.
[Form a right-angled triangle from £, m, so that
z = £2 +m2, x = 2m^, 2/ = ^2 —m2; thus 0—7/ = 2m2,
and, as this must be a cube, we put m = 2; therefore
0—# = £2_ 4 | + 4 must be a cube, or £ — 2 = a cube,
say ns, and ^ = n6 -f 2.]
VI. 2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

508 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
VI. 3.
[Suppose the required triangle to be hg, pg, bg) there-
fore %pbg2 + a = a square = n2g2
9 say, and the ratio of a
to n2 — \pb must be the ratio of a square to a square.
To find n, p, b so as to satisfy this condition, form
a right-angled triangle from m, — ?
i.e. 
(m2+—5, 
2, m2 
2)'
V 
m2 
m2/
therefore ±pb = in2
 
5« 
Assume n2 = (mH 
j ;
Z1 
m2 
V 
m/
,, 
- 
2
1
7
.
^ 
4 a
2 + l . 
, / „ 
4 a
2 + l \ i
therefore n* — hvb=ka-\ 
^—, andi 4aH 
5—1 la,
A1 
m2 
\ 
m2 
//
4a2+ ~ 
g—^s has to be made a square. 
Put
or
m
4a2m2 + a (4 a2 + 1) = (2 am + &)2
; and we have a solution.
Diophantus has a = 5; leading to 100m2 + 505 = a square
= (10m+<6)2, say, which gives m *= ^- and n = *£A.
h, p, b are thus determined in such a way that
|rp6£2 + a — n2g2 gives a rational solution.]
VI. 4. %xy-a = u2.
VI. 5. a — \xy = u2.
" VI. 6. \xy + x = a.
[Assume the triangle to be hg, pg, bg, so that
ipbg2+pg 
= a, and for a rational solution of this equa-
tion we must have (ip)2 + a(%pb) a square. Diophantus
assumes p = 1, b = m, whence -|am-|-^ or 2am+l
= a square.
But, since the triangle is rational, m2 + 1 = a square.
That is, we have a double equation. 
Difference
= m2 —2am = m(m —2a). 
Put
2am-\-1 = { i ( m - m - 2 a ) } 2 = a2, and m = ( a 2 - l ) / 2 a .
The sides of the auxiliary triangle are thus determined
in such a way that the original equation in g is solved
rationally.]
^ VI. 7. \xy — x — a.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INDETERMINATE ANALYSIS 
509
VI. 8. %xy + (x + y) 
-a.
VI. 9. \xy-(x 
+ y) = a.
[With the same assumptions we have in these cases
to make {^(p + b)}2 + a(%pb) a square. 
Diophantus
assumes as before 1, m for the values of p, b, and obtains
the double equation
^ (m + l)2 + ^am = square]
m2+ 1 = square)
m2 + (2a + 2)m + 1 = square)
or 
f >
m2 + 1 = square)
solving in the usual way.]
VI. 10. \xy + x + z = a.
VI. 11. %xy -(x + z) = a.
[In these cases the auxiliary right-angled triangle has
to be found such that
iid1 + P)}2 + a(iPfy = a square.
Diophantus assumes it formed from 1, m+ 1 ; thus
±(k+p)* = J- {m2 + 2m + 2 + m2 + 2m}2 = (m2 + 2m + I)2,
and 
a{^pb) = a(m + 1) (m2-f 2m).
Therefore
m4 + (a + 4)m3 + (3a + 6)m2 + (2a + 4)ra + 1
= a square
= {l+(a + 2)m-m 2} 2, «ay;
and m is found.]
Lemma 1 to VI. 12. # = u2, x — y — v2, \xy + y — w2.
(
VI. 12. \xy + x = u2, \xy + y — v2.
VI. 13. ^ajy — a = u2, \xy—y = 'y2.
[These problems and the two following are interesting,
but their solutions run to some length; therefore only
one case can here be given. We will take VI. 12 with
its Lemma 1.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

510 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
Lemma 1. If a rational right-angled triangle be formed
from m, n, the perpendicular sides are 2mn9 m2 — ni.
We will suppose the greater of the two to be 2mn,
The first two relations are satisfied by making m = 2n.
Form, therefore, a triangle from g, 2g. The third con-
dition then gives 6 £4 + 3 g2 = a square or 6 g2 -f 3 = a
square. One solution is g = 1 (and there are an infinite
number of others to be found by means of it). If | = 1,
the triangle is formed from 1,2.
VI. 12. Suppose the triangle to be (hg, bg9pg). 
Then
(kpb)g2+Pg = *> square = (/^)2, say, and 
g=p/(k2-%pb).
This value must be such as to make (ipb)g2 + bg a square
also. By substitution of the value of g we get
so that bpk2 + \p2b{p—b) 
must be a square; or, if p}
the greater perpendicular, is made a square number,
bk2 + ±pb(p — b) has to be made a square. 
This by
Lemma 2 (see p. 467 above) can be made a square if
b + ipb(p — b) is a square. .How fo sofee these problems,
says Diophantus, is shoion in the Lemmas. 
It is not
clear how they were applied, but, in fact, his solution
is such as to make p, p — b, and b + \pb all squares,
namely b = 3, p = 4, h= 5.
Accordingly, putting for the original triangle 3£5 4£, 5£,
we have
6 £2 + 4 £ = a square)
6£2+3£ = a square) '
Assuming 6£2 + 4£ = m2£2, we have g = 4/(m2— 6), and
the second condition gives
96 
12
+
or 
12m2 + 24 = a square.
This can be solved, since m = 1 satisfies it (Lemma 2).
A solution is m2 = 25, whence g = /g.]
VI. 14. £&2f —£ = w2, -|^2/ —cc = v2.
VI. 15. %ocy + z = u2, \xy-\-x = v2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INDETERMINATE ANALYSIS 
511
[The auxiliary right-angled triangle in this case must
be such that
m2 hp — \pb. p (h —p) is a square.
If, says Diophantus (VI. 14), we form a triangle from
the numbers X19 X2 and suppose that p = 2XXX2, and if
we then divide out by {Xx — X2)2, which is equal to h -p}
we must find a square k2[ = m2/(X1~Xj)2] 
such that
k2hp — %pb . p is a square.
The problem, says Diophantus, can be solved if X19 X2
ryy) 2
are c similar plane numbers' (numbers such as ab, — ab).
This is stated without proof, but it can easily be verified
that, if k2 = X1X2, the expression is a square. Dioph.
takes 4, 1 as the numbers, so that k2 = 4. The equation
for m becomes
8 . 17m2- 4 . 15 . 8 . 9 = a square,
or 
136m2— 4320 = a square.
The solution m2 = 36 (derived from the fact that
k2 = m2/(X1-X2)2
i 
o r 4 = m 2 / 3 2 )
satisfies the condition that
m2hp — ^pb . p(h—p) is a square.]
VI. 16.
[To find a rational right-angled triangle such that the
number representing the (portion intercepted within
the triangle of the) bisector of an acute angle is rational.
Let the bisector be 5£, the segment BB of the base
so that the perpendicular is 4£.
Let 
CB=3n. 
Then AC: AB = CB : DB,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

512 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
so that AC=z4(n-i). 
Therefore (Eucl. I. 47)
so that £ = 7n2/32n = -i^n. [Dioph. has n = 1.]
- VI. 17. \xy + z = u2, x + y + z = vs.
[Let £ be the area \xy, and let z — k2 — ^ 
Since
xy = 2g, suppose a? = 2, y = £. Therefore 2 + &2 must
be a cube. 
As we have seen (p. 475), Diophantus
takes (m—I)3 for the cube and (tn+1)2 for &2, giving
m 3-3m 2 + 3rn-l=m 2 + 2m + 3) whence m = 4. There-
fore k = 5, and we assume ^#3/ = £, z = 25 — £, with
# = 2, y = £ as before. 
Then we have to make
(25-£)2 = 4 + f, and £ =
L VI. 18. -1^?/ 4-« = u3, cc + y + z = v2.
VI. 19. ±xy + x — v?, x + y + z = vz.
[Here a right-angled triangle is formed from one odd
number, say 2£ + l, according to the Pythagorean for-
mula m2+ {-|(m2— I)}2 = {^(m2+l)}2, where m is an
odd number. The sides are therefore 2£+l, 2£2 + 2£
2^2+ 2^+ !• Since the perimeter = a cube,
4£2 + 6£ + 2 = (4£ + 2)(£+l) = acube.
Or, if we divide the sides by ^+1, 4 £ + 2 has to be
made a cube.
A • 1 
2£3 + 3£2 + £ 
2£ + l
Again \xy + x = 
& 
^ 
s + - ^ - y = a square,
which reduces to 2£+ 1 = a square.
But 4£ + 2 is a cube. We therefore put 8 for the cube,
and £ = 1J.]
VI. 20.
VI. 21.
[Form a right-angled triangle from g, 1, i.e. (2^, ^2— 1,
+ 1). Then 2£2 + 21 must be a square, and £3 + 2f + ^
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INDETERMINATE ANALYSIS 
513
a cube. Put 2£2 + 2£ = m
2£2, so that £ = 2/(m 2-2),
and we have to make
O 
O 
Z 
u IIU 
,
"• / 
9 
^7\9 i 
o 
7i' ^^* / 
o 
_VQ j a cuoe.
(m 2-2) 3^ (m2-2)2 ' m 2-2 
(m2-2)3
Make 2 m a cube = nz, so that 2 m4 = m3w3, and
Q
m = i/n3; therefore £ = — 
> and £ must be made
greater than 1, in order that £2 — 1 may be positive.
Therefore 
8 < n6 < 16;
this is satisfied by n? = Zffi or TI3 = -2/, and 77L = f|.]
VI. 22.
[(1) First seek a rational right-angled triangle such
that its perimeter and its area are given numbers,
say p, m.
Let the perpendiculars be -, 2mg; therefore the hypo-
tenuse = p— ~— 2mg, and (Eucl. I. 47)
or
2p
that is, 
(^2 + 4 m) £ = 4 wip | 2 -f 2^9.
(2) In order that this may have a rational solution,
{^(/ + 4m) }2— 8^>2m must be a square,
i.e. 
4m2-6])2m + \p* = a square,
or 
m2 — f £>2m + y1^^4 = a square ]
Also, by the second condition, m + p = a square)
To solve this, we must take for p some number which
is both a square and a cube (in order that it may be
possible, by multiplying the second equation by some
square, to make the constant term equal to the constant
1523.2 
Xi 1
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

514 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
term in the first). Diophantus takes p = 64, making
the equations
m2— 6144 m + 1048576 == a square]
64 = a square)
Multiplying the second by 16384, and subtracting the two
expressions, we have as the difference m2 —22528 m.
Diophantus observes that, if we take m, m—22528 as
the factors, we obtain m = 7680, an impossible value for
the area of a right-angled triangle of perimeter p = 64.
We therefore take as factors llm, ^m— 2048, and,
equating the square of half the difference ( = §f m + 1024)
to 16384m + 1048576, we have m =
(3) Returning to the original problem, we have
substitute this value for m in
( 6 4 - 
^ -
and we obtain
= 0,
the solution of which is rational, namely £ = 4% (or Tf Q).
Diophantus naturally takes the first value, though the
second gives the same triangle.]
VI. 23. z2 = u2+ u, z2(x —
VI. 24. z = vP + u, x — v* — v, y = iv3.
[VI. 6, 7]. ftx)* + imvy = u*.
[VI. 8, 9]. {i(x + y)}2 + ±mxy = u2.
[VI. 10, 11]. {±(z + x)}2 + ±mxy = u2.
[VI. 12.] y + (x-y).±xy 
= u2, x = v\ 
(x > y)
[VI. 14, 15]. u2zx — \xy .x{z—x) = v2. (u2 < or > %xy.)
The treatise on Polygonal Numbers.
The subject of Polygonal Numbers on which Diophantus
also wrote is, as we have seen, an old one, going back to the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE TREATISE ON POLYGONAL NUMBERS 515
Pythagoreans, while Philippus of Opus and Speusippus carried
on the tradition. Hypsicles (about 170 B.C.) is twice men-
tioned by Diophantus as the author of a 'definition' of
a polygonal number which, although it does not in terms
mention any polygonal number beyond the pentagonal,
amounts to saying that the nth a-gon (1 counting as the
first) is
irc{2 + (n-l)(a-2)}.
Theon of Smyrna, Nicomachus and Iamblichus all devote
some space to polygonal numbers. Nicomachus in particular
gives various rules for transforming triangles into squares,
squares into pentagons, &c.
1. If we put two consecutive triangles together, we get a square.
In fact
2. A pentagon is obtained from a square by adding to it
a triangle the side of which is 1 less than that of the square;
similarly a hexagon from a pentagon by adding a triangle
the side of which is 1 less than that of the pentagon, and so on.
In fact
3. Nicomachus sets out the first triangles, squares, pentagons,
hexagons and heptagons in a diagram thus:
Triangles
Squares
Pentagons
Hexagons
Heptagons
1
1
1
1
1
3
4
5
6
7
6
9
12
15
18
•10
16
22
28
34
15
25
35
45
55
21
36
51
66
81
28
49
70
91
112
36
64
92
120
148
45
81
117
153
189
55,
100,
145,
190,
235,
and observes that:
Each polygon is equal to the polygon immediately above it
in the diagram plus the triangle with 1 less in its side, i. e. the
triangle in the preceding column.
L l 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

516 
DIOPHANTUS OF ALEXANDRIA
4. The vertical columns are in arithmetical progression, the
common difference being the triangle in the preceding column.
Plutarch, a contemporary of Nicomachus, mentions another
method of transforming triangles into squares. Every tri-
angular number taken eight times and then increased by 1
gives a square.
In fact, 
8.4<n,(w+l) + l = (2n+ I)2.
Only a fragment of Diophantus's treatise On Polygonal
Numbers survives. Its character is entirely different from
that of the Arithmetica. 
The method of proof is strictly
geometrical, and has the disadvantage, therefore, of being long
and involved. He begins with some preliminary propositions
of which two may be mentioned. Prop. 3 proves that, if a be
the first and I the last term in an arithmetical progression
of. n terms, and if s is the sum of the terms, 2s = n(l + a).
Prop. 4 proves that, if 1, 1+6, 1 + 26,... 1 + (n-1)6 be an
A. P., and s the sum of the terms,
The main result obtained in the fragment as we have it
is a generalization of the formula 8 . ±n(n + 1) + 1 = (2 n + I)2.
Prop. 5 proves the fact stated in Hypsicles's definition and also
(the generalization referred to) that
8P(a — 2) + (a—4)2 = a square,
where P is any polygonal number with a angles.
It is also proved that, if P be the nth. a-gonal number
(1 being the first),
8P(a-2) + (a-4) 2= {2 + (2n- 1) (a-2)}2.
Diophantus deduces rules as follows.
1. To find the number from its side.
p_ 
{
8(a-2)
2. To find the side from the number'.
a - 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE TREATISE ON POLYGONAL NUMBERS 517
The last proposition, which breaks off in the middle, is:
Given a number, to find in how many ways it can be
polygonal
The proposition begins in a way which suggests that
Diophantus first proved geometrically that, if
then 
2P = n{2+ 
(n-l)(a-2)}.
Wertheim (in his edition of Diophantus) has suggested a
restoration of the complete proof of this proposition, and
I have shown (in my edition) how the proof can be made
shorter. Wertheim adds an investigation of the main pro-
blem, but no doubt opinions will continue to differ as to
whether Diophantus actually solved it.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

