
This page intentionally left blank

An Introduction to English Sentence Structure
This outstanding resource for students offers a step-by-step, practical
introduction to English syntax and syntactic principles, as developed by
Chomsky over the past 15 years. Assuming little or no prior background
in syntax, Andrew Radford outlines the core concepts and how they can
be used to describe various aspects of English sentence structure. This is
an abridged version of Radford’s major new textbook Analysing English
Sentences (also published by Cambridge University Press), and will be
welcomed as a handy introduction to current syntactic theory.
andrew radford is Professor & Head of the Department of Language
and Linguistics at the University of Essex. His recent publications include
Minimalist Syntax: Exploring the Structure of English (Cambridge, 2004)
and English Syntax: An Introduction (Cambridge, 2004).


An Introduction to English
Sentence Structure
●
ANDREW RADFORD
University of Essex

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK
First published in print format
ISBN-13    978-0-521-51693-8
ISBN-13    978-0-521-73190-4
ISBN-13
978-0-511-50666-6
© Andrew Radford 2009
2009
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521516938
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the 
provision of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part
may take place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy 
of urls for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, 
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, 
accurate or appropriate.
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
paperback
eBook (EBL)
hardback

Contents
Preface
page viii
1
Grammar
1
1.1
Overview
1
1.2
Traditional grammar: Categories and functions
1
1.3
Universal Grammar
11
1.4
The Language Faculty
15
1.5
Principles of Universal Grammar
19
1.6
Parameters
22
1.7
Parameter-setting
26
1.8
Summary
30
1.9
Bibliographical background
32
Workbook section
33
2
Structure
39
2.1
Overview
39
2.2
Phrases
39
2.3
Clauses
44
2.4
Clauses containing complementisers
49
2.5
Testing structure
51
2.6
Structural relations and the syntax of polarity items
58
2.7
The c-command condition on binding
62
2.8
Bare phrase structure
64
2.9
Summary
66
2.10
Bibliographical background
69
Workbook section
70
3
Null constituents
81
3.1
Overview
81
3.2
Null subjects
81
3.3
Null auxiliaries
86
3.4
Null T in ﬁnite clauses
89
3.5
Null T in inﬁnitive clauses
94
3.6
Null C in ﬁnite clauses
96
3.7
Null C in inﬁnitive clauses
101
3.8
Defective clauses
105
3.9
Null determiners and quantiﬁers
108
3.10
Summary
111
v

vi
contents
3.11
Bibliographical background
113
Workbook section
114
4
Head movement
120
4.1
Overview
120
4.2
T-to-C movement
120
4.3
Movement as copying and deletion
123
4.4
V-to-T movement
128
4.5
Head movement
132
4.6
Auxiliary Raising
134
4.7
Another look at negation
137
4.8
do-support
140
4.9
Summary
144
4.10
Bibliographical background
146
Workbook section
147
5
Wh-movement
152
5.1
Overview
152
5.2
Wh-questions
152
5.3
Wh-movement as copying and deletion
155
5.4
Driving wh-movement and auxiliary inversion
161
5.5
Pied-piping of material in the domain of a wh-word
165
5.6
Pied-piping of a superordinate preposition
171
5.7
Long-distance wh-movement
174
5.8
Multiple wh-questions
182
5.9
Summary
185
5.10
Bibliographical background
188
Workbook section
189
6
A-movement
196
6.1
Overview
196
6.2
Subjects in Belfast English
196
6.3
Idioms
199
6.4
Argument structure and theta-roles
201
6.5
Unaccusative predicates
205
6.6
Passive predicates
211
6.7
Long-distance passivisation
215
6.8
Raising
219
6.9
Comparing raising and control predicates
221
6.10
Summary
227
6.11
Bibliographical background
229
Workbook section
230
7
Agreement, case and A-movement
237
7.1
Overview
237
7.2
Agreement
237
7.3
Feature Valuation
240
7.4
Uninterpretable features and Feature Deletion
242

contents
vii
7.5
Expletive it subjects
246
7.6
Expletive there subjects
251
7.7
Agreement and A-movement
258
7.8
EPP and agreement in control inﬁnitives
261
7.9
EPP and person agreement in defective clauses
262
7.10
Defective clauses with expletive subjects
267
7.11
Summary
272
7.12
Bibliographical background
274
Workbook section
275
8
Split projections
279
8.1
Overview
279
8.2
Split CP: Force, Topic and Focus projections
279
8.3
Split TP: Aspect and Mood projections
287
8.4
Split VP: Transitive ergative structures
292
8.5
Split VP: Other transitive structures
298
8.6
Split VP: Unaccusative structures
304
8.7
Split VP: Passive and raising structures
310
8.8
Summary
313
8.9
Bibliographical background
316
Workbook section
317
9
Phases
323
9.1
Overview
323
9.2
Phases
323
9.3
Intransitive and defective clauses
327
9.4
Phases and A-bar movement
330
9.5
A-bar movement in transitive clauses
334
9.6
Uninterpretable features and feature inheritance
340
9.7
Independent probes
346
9.8
Subject questions
355
9.9
More on subextraction
359
9.10
Summary
362
9.11
Bibliographical background
363
Workbook section
364
Glossary and list of abbreviations
370
References
410
Index
435

Preface
Aims
This book supercedes my English Syntax book, published in 2004. Although
there is much in common between the two books, it should be noted that this
book contains new material and new analyses (particularly in later chapters). It
has two main aims. The ﬁrst is to provide an intensive introduction to recent work
in syntactic theory (more particularly to how the syntactic component operates
within the model of grammar assumed in recent work within the framework of
Chomsky’s Minimalist Program). The second is to provide a description of a
range of phenomena in English syntax, making use of Minimalist concepts and
assumptions wherever possible.
Key features
The book is intended to be suitable both for people with only minimal grammatical
knowledge, and for those who have already done quite a bit of syntax but want to
know something (more) about Minimalism. It is not historicist or comparative in
orientation, and does not presuppose knowledge of earlier or alternative models of
grammar. It is written in an approachable style, avoiding unnecessary complexity
and unexplained jargon. Each chapter contains:
r
a core text (divided up into eight sections or so) focusing on a speciﬁc
topic
r
a summary recapitulating the main points in the chapter
r
a list of key concepts/principles introduced in the chapter
r
a bibliographical section providing extensive references to original
source material
r
a workbook section containing two different kinds of exercise
r
a set of model answers accompanying the exercises, together with
extensive helpful hints designed to eliminate common errors students
make and to help students whose native language is not English
r
an extensive glossary and integral list of abbreviations
The bibliographical background section often contains references to primary
research works which are highly technical in nature, and so it would not be
viii

preface
ix
appropriate for students to tackle them until they have read the whole book:
they are intended to provide a useful source of bibliographical information for
extended essays or research projects in particular areas, rather than being essential
back-up reading: indeed, the exercises in the book are designed in such a way that
they can be tackled on the basis of the coursebook material alone. The glossary
at the end of the book provides simple illustrations of how key technical terms
are used (both theory-speciﬁc terms like EPP and traditional terms like subject):
technical terms are written in bold print when they are mentioned for the ﬁrst
time in the main text (italics being used for highlighting particular expressions –
e.g. a key word appearing in an example sentence). The glossary also contains
an integrated list of abbreviations.
The book is intensive and progressive in nature, which means that it starts at an
elementary level but gets progressively harder as you delve further into the book.
A group of students I taught an earlier version of the book to gave the following
degree-of-difﬁculty score to each chapter on a 5-point scale ranging from 1 =
very easy to 5 = very hard: ch.1 = 1.7; ch.2 = 2.2; ch.3 = 2.7; ch.4 = 2.9;
ch.5 = 3.2; ch.6 = 3.4; ch.7 = 3.7; ch.8 = 4.2; ch.9 = 4.4.
Successive chapters become cumulatively more complex, in that each chapter
presupposes material covered in previous chapters as well as introducing new
material: hence it is helpful to go back and read material from earlier chapters
every so often. In some cases, analyses presented in earlier chapters are subse-
quently reﬁned or revised in the light of new assumptions made in later chapters.
Teaching materials
For teachers adopting the book, I have developed a series of web materials (in
the form of Powerpoint transparencies) designed to provide two hours’ worth of
teaching material for each chapter. The relevant materials present detailed step-
by-step analyses of those exercise examples which have the symbol (w) after
them in the coursebook. They can be accessed at www.cambridge.org/radford
Companion volume
This book is being produced in parallel with a longer version entitled Analysing
English Sentences: A Minimalist Approach. In this shorter version, the main text
(particularly in the later chapters) is generally about a third shorter than the main
text in the longer version (with the exception of chapters 1 and 6). This shorter
version is aimed primarily at students whose native language is not English,
and who are taking (English) syntax as a minor rather than a major course. The
two books have an essentially parallel organisation into chapters and sections
(though additional sections, technical discussion and bibliographial references
are included in the longer version), and contain much the same exercise material.

x
preface
In keeping the two books parallel in structure and organisation as far as possible,
I am mindful of the comment made in a review of two earlier books which I
produced in parallel longer and shorter versions (Radford 1997a and Radford
1997b) that some readers may wish to read the short version of a given chapter
ﬁrst, and then look at the longer version afterwards, and that this is ‘not facilitated’
if there is ‘an annoyingly large number of non-correspondences’ between the two
(Ten Hacken 2001, p. 2). Accordingly, I have tried to maximise correspondence
between the ‘long’ and ‘short’ versions of these two new books.
Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Neil Smith (of University College London) for his forebearance in
patiently wading through an earlier draft of the manuscript and pointing out some
of the imperfections in it, while managing to make his comments challenging
and good-humoured at the same time. Thanks also go to my Essex colleague Bob
Borsley for helpful comments, and to Mich`ele Vincent for preparing the index.
Dedication
This book is dedicated to my long-suffering wife Khadija (who has had to put up
with extended periods of authorial autism) and to her family, who have always
spoiled me shamefully (and done their best to indulge my every whim) whenever
we visit Morocco.

1
Grammar
●
●
1.1
Overview
In broad terms, this book is concerned with aspects of grammar. Gram-
mar is traditionally subdivided into two different but interrelated areas of study –
morphology and syntax. Morphology is the study of how words are formed out
of smaller units (called morphemes), and so addresses questions such as ‘What
are the component morphemes of a word like antidisestablishmentarianism, and
what is the nature of the morphological operations by which they are combined
together to form the overall word?’ Syntax is the study of the way in which
phrases and sentences are structured out of words, and so addresses questions
like ‘What is the structure of a sentence like What’s the president doing? and
what is the nature of the grammatical operations by which its component words
are combined together to form the overall sentence structure?’ In this chapter, we
begin (in §1.2) by taking a brief look at the approach to the study of syntax taken
in traditional grammar: this also provides an opportunity to introduce some
useful grammatical terminology. In the remainder of the chapter, we look at the
approach to syntax adopted within the theory of Universal Grammar developed
by Chomsky.
●
●
1.2
Traditional grammar: Categories and functions
Within traditional grammar, the syntax of a language is described in
terms of a taxonomy (i.e. classiﬁcatory list) of the range of different types of
syntactic structures found in the language. The central assumption underpinning
syntactic analysis in traditional grammar is that phrases and sentences are built
up of a series of constituents (i.e. syntactic units), each of which belongs to
a speciﬁc grammatical category and serves a speciﬁc grammatical function.
Given this assumption, the task of the linguist in analysing the syntactic struc-
ture of any given type of sentence is to identify each of the constituents in the
sentence, and (for each constituent) to say what category it belongs to and what
function it serves. For example, in relation to the syntax of a simple sentence
like:
(1)
Students protested
1

2
1 grammar
it would traditionally be said that the sentence consists of two constituents (the
word students and the word protested), that each of these constituents belongs
to a speciﬁc grammatical category (students being a plural noun and protested a
past tense verb) and that each serves a speciﬁc grammatical function (students
being the subject of the sentence, and protested being the predicate). The overall
sentence Students protested has the categorial status of a clause which is ﬁnite
in nature (by virtue of denoting an event taking place at a speciﬁc time), and
has the semantic function of expressing a proposition which is declarative in
force (in that it is used to make a statement rather than e.g. ask a question).
Accordingly, a traditional grammar of English would tell us that the simplest
type of ﬁnite declarative clause found in English is a sentence like (1), in which
a nominal subject is followed by a verbal predicate. Let’s brieﬂy look at some of
the terminology used here.
In traditional grammar, words are assigned to grammatical categories (called
parts of speech) on the basis of their semantic properties (i.e. meaning), mor-
phological properties (i.e. the range of different forms they have) and syn-
tactic properties (i.e. word-order properties relating to the positions they can
occupy within sentences): a set of words which belong to the same category thus
have a number of semantic, morphological and syntactic properties in common.
There are traditionally said to be two different types of word, namely content
words/contentives (= words which have substantive lexical content) on the one
hand, and function words/functors (= words which essentially serve to mark
grammatical properties) on the other. The differences between the two can be
illustrated by comparing a contentive like car with a functor like they. A noun
like car has substantive lexical content in that it denotes an object which typically
has four wheels and an engine, and it would be easy enough to draw a picture
of a typical car; by contrast, a pronoun such as they has no descriptive content
(e.g. you can’t draw a picture of they), but rather is a functor which simply marks
grammatical (more speciﬁcally, person, number and case) properties in that it is
a third person plural nominative pronoun. Because they have lexical semantic
content, content words often (though not always) have antonyms (i.e. ‘oppo-
sites’) – e.g. the adjective tall has the antonym short, the verb increase has the
antonym decrease, and the preposition inside has the antonym outside: by con-
trast, a typical function word like e.g. the pronoun me has no obvious antonym.
Corresponding to these two different types of (content and function) word are
two different kinds of grammatical category – namely lexical/substantive cat-
egories (= categories whose members are content words) on the one hand, and
functional categories (= categories whose members are function words) on the
other.
Let’s begin by looking at the main lexical/substantive categories found in
English – namely noun, verb, adjective, adverb and preposition (conventionally
abbreviated to N, V, A, ADV and P in order to save space). Nouns (= N) are
traditionally said to have the semantic property that they denote entities: so,
bottle is a noun (since it denotes a type of object used to contain liquids),

1.2 Traditional grammar: Categories and functions
3
water is a noun (since it denotes a type of liquid) and John is a noun (since
it denotes a speciﬁc person). There are a number of distinct subtypes of noun:
for example, a noun like chair is a count noun in that it can be counted (cf. one
chair, two chairs . . .), whereas a noun like furniture is a mass noun in that it
denotes an uncountable mass (hence the ungrammaticality of ∗one furniture, ∗two
furnitures – a preﬁxed star/asterisk being used to indicate that an expression is
ungrammatical). Likewise, a distinction is traditionally drawn between a common
noun like boy (which can be modiﬁed by a determiner like the – as in The boy is
lying) and a proper noun like Andrew (which cannot be used in the same way in
English, as we see from the ungrammaticality of ∗The Andrew is lying). Count
nouns generally have the morphological property that they have two different
forms: a singular form (like horse in one horse) used to denote a single entity,
and a plural form (like horses in two horses) used to denote more than one entity.
Common nouns have the syntactic property that only (an appropriate kind of)
noun can be used to end a sentence such as They have no . . . In place of the dots
here we could insert a singular count noun like car, or a plural count noun like
friends or a mass noun like money, but not other types of word (e.g. not see or
slowly or up, as these are not nouns).
A second lexical/substantive category is that of verb (= V). These are tradi-
tionally said to have the semantic property that they denote actions or events:
so, eat, sing, pull and resign are all (action-denoting) verbs. From a syntactic
point of view, verbs have the property that only an appropriate kind of verb
(in its uninﬂected inﬁnitive form) can be used to complete a sentence such as
They/It can . . . So, words like stay, leave, hide, die, starve and cry are all verbs
and hence can be used in place of the dots here (but words like apple, under,
pink and if aren’t). From a morphological point of view, regular verbs like cry
in English have the property that they have four distinct forms: e.g. alongside
the bare (i.e. uninﬂected) form cry we ﬁnd the present tense form cries, the
past tense/perfect participle/passive participle form cried and the progressive
participle form crying. (See the Glossary of terminology at the end of this book
if you are not familiar with these terms.)
A third lexical/substantive category is that of adjective (= A). These are
traditionally said to have the semantic property of denoting states or attributes
(cf. ill, happy, tired, conscientious, red, cruel, old etc.). They have the syntactic
property that they can occur after be to complete a sentence like They may be . . .
(as with They may be tired/ill/happy etc.), and the further syntactic property that
(if they denote a gradable property which can exist in varying degrees) they
can be modiﬁed by a degree word like very/rather/somewhat (cf. She is very
happy). Many (but not all) adjectives have the morphological property that they
have comparative forms ending in -er and superlative forms ending in -est (cf.
big/bigger/biggest).
A fourth lexical/substantive category is that of adverb (= ADV). These often
have the semantic property that they denote the manner in which an action is per-
formed (as with well in She sings well). Regular adverbs have the morphological

4
1 grammar
property that they are formed from adjectives by the addition of the sufﬁx -ly (so
that corresponding to the adjective sad we have the adverb sadly). A syntactic
property of adverbs is that an adverb (like e.g. badly) is the only kind of word
which could be used to end sentences such as She behaved . . ., He treats her . . .
or He worded the statement . . .
The ﬁfth and ﬁnal lexical/substantive category found in English is that of
preposition (= P). Many of these have the semantic property of marking location
(cf. in/on/off/inside/outside/under/above/below). They have the syntactic prop-
erty that a preposition (with the appropriate kind of meaning) can be modiﬁed
by right in the sense of ‘completely’, or by straight in the sense of ‘directly’ (as
with the preposition down in He fell right down the stairs and the preposition to
in He went straight to bed). Prepositions have the morphological property that
they are invariable/uninﬂected forms (e.g. the preposition off has no past tense
form ∗offed, no superlative form ∗offest and so on).
In addition to the ﬁve lexical/substantive categories identiﬁed above, English
also has a number of functional categories. One such functional category is that of
determiner (= D) – a category whose members are traditionally said to include
the deﬁnite article the and the demonstrative determiners this/that/these/those.
They are called determiners because they have the semantic property that they
determine speciﬁc semantic properties of the noun expression that they introduce,
marking it as a deﬁnite referring expression: for example, an expression like the
car in a sentence such as Shall we take the car? is a deﬁnite referring expression
in the sense that it refers to a deﬁnite (speciﬁc) car which is assumed to be familiar
to the hearer/addressee. A related class of words are those which belong to the
functional category quantiﬁer (= Q), denoting expressions of quantity, such as
some/all/no/any/each/every/most/much/many. (We shall also take the indeﬁnite
article a to be a quantiﬁer – one which quantiﬁes over a single entity.)
A further type of functional category found in English is that of pronoun
(= PRN). Pronouns are items which are said to ‘stand in place of’ (the meaning
of the preﬁx pro-) or ‘refer back to’ noun expressions. However, there are reasons
to think that there are a number of different types of pronoun found in English and
other languages. For example, in sentences such as John has a red car and Jim has
a blue one, the word one is traditionally said to be a pronoun because it has no lex-
ical semantic content of its own, but rather takes its content from its antecedent
(i.e. one refers back to the noun car and so one is interpreted as having the same
meaning as car). However, from a morphological perspective, the pronoun one
behaves like a regular count noun in that it has a plural form ending in -s (as in
I’ll take the green apples if you haven’t got any red ones). So, more accurately,
we could say that one is an N-pronoun (or pronominal noun). By contrast, in a
sentence like Many miners were rescued, but some died, the word some seems
to function as a Q-pronoun (i.e. a pronominal quantiﬁer). And in a sentence like
These apples are ripe, but those aren’t, the word those seems to be a D-pronoun
(i.e. a pronominal determiner). Indeed, some linguists have argued that so-called
personal pronouns like I/me/we/us/you/he/him/she/her/it/they/them are also

1.2 Traditional grammar: Categories and functions
5
D-pronouns: the rationale for this is that some such pronouns can be used as
determiners which modify a following noun (as in We republicans don’t trust
you democrats, where we could be argued to be a determiner modifying the
noun republicans, and you could be seen as a determiner modifying the noun
democrats). While, as noted here, pronouns can be argued to belong to a number
of distinct types of category, in order to simplify discussion I shall simply refer
to them as belonging to the category PRN throughout this book. (Because there
are a number of different types of pronoun, some linguists prefer to refer to them
by using the more general term proform.)
Another type of functional category found in English is that of auxiliary
(verb). They have the semantic property of marking grammatical properties such
as tense, aspect, voice or mood (see the Glossary of terminology at the end of the
book if you are not sure what these terms mean). Auxiliaries have the syntactic
property that (unlike lexical/main verbs) they can be inverted with their subject
in questions (so that corresponding to a statement like It is raining we have the
question Is it raining? where the auxiliary is has moved in front of the subject it
and is said to have been inverted). The items italicised in (2) below (in the use
illustrated there) are traditionally categorised as auxiliaries taking a [bracketed]
complement containing a bold-printed verb:
(2) (a)
He has/had [gone]
(b)
She is/was [staying at home]
(c)
They are/were [taken away for questioning]
(d)
He really does/did [say a lot]
(e)
You can/could [help us]
(f)
They may/might [come back]
(g)
He will/would [get upset]
(h)
I shall/should [return]
In the uses illustrated here, have/be in (2a,b) are (perfect/progressive) aspect
auxiliaries, be in (2c) is a (passive) voice auxiliary, do in (2d) is an expletive
or dummy auxiliary (i.e. one with no intrinsic lexical semantic content), and
can/could/may/might/will/would/shall/should in (2e–h) are modal auxiliaries.
What auxiliaries in sentences like those above have in common is the fact that
they inﬂect for present/past tense. Hence, in work in syntax over the past ten
years or so, they have been said to belong to the category T (= tense-marked
auxiliary).
An interesting word which has been argued to be related to tense-marking
auxiliaries in work over the past thirty years or so is the inﬁnitive particle to, in
sentences such as:
(3)
They are now expecting the president to be impeached tomorrow
In a sentence like (3), inﬁnitival to seems to have future time-reference (in that
the act of impeachment will take place at some time in the future), and this is why
we can use the word tomorrow in the to-clause. In this respect, inﬁnitival to seems

6
1 grammar
to have much the same function as the auxiliary will in They are now expecting
that the president will be impeached tomorrow, suggesting that inﬁnitival to is an
inﬁnitival tense marker, and so belongs to the same category T as present/past
tense auxiliaries such as is/was. The difference between auxiliaries and inﬁnitival
to is that most auxiliaries overtly inﬂect for present/past tense (though this is
not true of the invariable auxiliaries must and ought), whereas inﬁnitival to is
invariable in form. We can thus say that an auxiliary like will is a ﬁnite T
constituent, whereas inﬁnitival to is a nonﬁnite T.
The last type of functional category which we will look at is a kind of word
(like each of the words italicised in the examples below) which is traditionally
termed a (subordinating) conjunction:
(4) (a)
I think [that you may be right]
(b)
I doubt [if you can help me]
(c)
I’m anxious [for you to receive the best treatment possible]
Each of the bracketed clauses in (4) is a complement clause, in that it is the
complement of the word immediately preceding it (think/doubt/anxious); for this
reason, the italicised word which introduces each clause is known in work since
the 1960s as a complementiser (= C), and this is the terminology which will
be adopted throughout this book. Complementisers are functors in the sense that
they encode particular sets of grammatical properties. For example, complemen-
tisers encode (non)ﬁniteness by virtue of the fact that they are intrinsically ﬁnite
or nonﬁnite. More speciﬁcally, the complementisers that and if are inherently
ﬁnite in the sense that they can only be used to introduce a ﬁnite clause (i.e. a
clause containing a present or past tense auxiliary or verb, like the present tense
auxiliaries may and can in 4a and 4b); by contrast, for is an inherently inﬁnitival
complementiser, and so can be used to introduce a clause containing inﬁnitival
to (as in 4c). Moreover, that introduces a declarative clause (i.e. one which has
the force of a statement), if introduces an interrogative clause (i.e. one which
has the force of a question) and for introduces an irrealis clause (i.e. one relating
to a hypothetical event which hasn’t yet taken place and may or may not take
place at some stage in the future). Hence, we can say that is a ﬁnite declarative
complementiser, if is a ﬁnite interrogative complementiser and for is an inﬁnitival
irrealis complementiser.
Using the set of syntactic categories outlined above, we can employ the tra-
ditional labelled bracketing technique to categorise words (i.e. assign them to
grammatical categories) in a way which describes how they are being used in a
particular sentence. Using this technique, the words in sentence (5a) below can
be categorised as in (5b):
(5) (a)
The president is clearly feeling angry that Congress has refused to negotiate
with him
(b)
[D The] [N president] [T is] [ADV clearly] [V feeling] [A angry] [C that]
[N Congress] [T has] [V refused] [T to] [V negotiate] [P with] [PRN him]

1.2 Traditional grammar: Categories and functions
7
The labelled bracketing in (5b) tells us that the is a D/determiner, president
a N/noun, is a T/present tense auxiliary, clearly an ADV/adverb, feeling a
V/verb, angry an A/adjective, that a C/complementiser, Congress a N/noun,
has a T/present tense auxiliary, refused a V/verb, to a T/inﬁnitival tense particle,
negotiate a V/verb, with a P/preposition and him a PRN/pronoun.
The discussion of grammatical categories presented above is merely a brief
sketch: however, it sufﬁces to illustrate the point that when traditional grammar-
ians analyse the syntax of sentences, they begin by assigning each of the words
in the sentence to a grammatical category which describes how it is being used
in the sentence concerned. Grammatical differences between individual words
belonging to the same category are traditionally described in terms of sets of
grammatical features, and these features (by convention) are enclosed in square
brackets. For example, both she and us are pronouns, but they differ in that she
is a third person pronoun which is feminine in gender, singular in number
and nominative in case, whereas us is a ﬁrst person pronoun which is plural
in number and accusative in case. Accordingly, we can describe the differences
between these two pronouns by saying that the pronoun she carries the features
[third-person, singular-number, feminine-gender, nominative-case], whereas us
carries the features [ﬁrst-person, plural-number, accusative-case].
As noted at the beginning of this section, traditional grammarians are also con-
cerned to describe the grammatical functions which words and other expressions
fulﬁl within the sentences containing them. We can illustrate this point in terms
of the following set of sentences:
(6) (a)
John smokes
(b)
The president smokes
(c)
The president of Utopia smokes
(d)
The former president of the island paradise of Utopia smokes
Sentence (6a) comprises the noun John which serves the function of being the
subject of the sentence (and denotes the person performing the act of smoking),
and the verb smokes which serves the function of being the predicate of the
sentence (and describes the act being performed). In (6a), the subject is the single
noun John; but as the examples in (6b,c,d) show, the subject of a sentence can
also be an (italicised) phrase like the president, or the president of Utopia or the
former president of the island paradise of Utopia.
Now consider the following set of sentences:
(7) (a)
John smokes cigars
(b)
John smokes Cuban cigars
(c)
John smokes Cuban cigars imported from Havana
(d)
John smokes a speciﬁc brand of Cuban cigars imported by a friend of his
from Havana
Sentence (7a) comprises the subject John, the predicate smokes and the comple-
ment (or direct object) cigars. (The complement cigars describes the entity on

8
1 grammar
which the act of smoking is being performed; as this example illustrates, subjects
normally precede the verb with which they are associated in English, whereas
complements typically follow the verb.) The complement in (7a) is the single
noun cigars; but a complement can also be a phrase: in (7b), the complement of
smokes is the phrase Cuban cigars; in (7c) the complement is the phrase Cuban
cigars imported from Havana; and in (7d) the complement is the phrase a speciﬁc
brand of Cuban cigars imported by a friend of his from Havana. A verb which
has a noun or pronoun expression as its direct object complement is traditionally
said to be transitive.
From a semantic perspective, subjects and complements share in common the
fact that they generally represent entities directly involved in the particular action
or event described by the predicate: to use the relevant semantic terminology,
we can say that subjects and complements are arguments of the predicate with
which they are associated. Predicates may have one or more arguments, as we
see from sentences such as (8) below, where each of the bracketed nouns is a
different argument of the italicised predicate:
(8) (a)
[John] resigned
(b)
[John] felt [remorse]
(c)
[John] sent [Mary] [ﬂowers]
A predicate like resign in (8a) which has a single argument is said to function as
a one-place predicate (in the relevant use); one like feel in (8b) which has two
arguments is a two-place predicate; and one like send in (8c) which has three
arguments is a three-place predicate.
In addition to predicates and arguments, sentences can also contain adjuncts,
as we can illustrate in relation to (9) below:
(9) (a)
The president smokes a cigar after dinner
(b)
The president smokes a cigar in his ofﬁce
In both sentences in (9), smokes functions as a two-place predicate whose two
arguments are its subject the president and its complement a cigar. But what is
the function of the phrase after dinner which also occurs in (9a)? Since after
dinner isn’t one of the entities directly involved in the act of smoking (i.e. it
isn’t consuming or being consumed), it isn’t an argument of the predicate smoke.
On the contrary, after dinner simply serves to provide additional information
about the time when the smoking activity takes place. In much the same way, the
italicised expression in his ofﬁce in (9b) provides additional information about the
location of the smoking activity. An expression which serves to provide (optional)
additional information about the time or place (or manner, or purpose etc.) of an
activity or event is said to serve as an adjunct. So, after dinner and in his ofﬁce
in (9a,b) are both adjuncts.
So far, all the sentences we have looked at in (6–9) have been simple sentences
which contain a single clause. However, alongside these we also ﬁnd complex
sentences which contain more than one clause, like (10) below:

1.2 Traditional grammar: Categories and functions
9
(10)
Mary knows John smokes
If we take the traditional deﬁnition of a clause as a predication structure (more
precisely, a structure containing a predicate which has a subject, and which may or
may not also contain one or more complements and adjuncts), it follows that since
there are two predicates (knows and smokes) in (10), there are correspondingly
two clauses – the smokes clause on the one hand, and the knows clause on the
other. The smokes clause comprises the subject John and the predicate smokes; the
knows clause comprises the subject Mary, the predicate knows and the comple-
ment John smokes. So, the complement of knows here is itself a clause – namely
the clause John smokes. More precisely, the smokes clause is a complement
clause (because it serves as the complement of knows), while the knows clause is
the main clause (or principal clause or independent clause or root clause). The
overall sentence (10) Mary knows John smokes is a complex sentence because
it contains more than one clause. In much the same way, (11) below is also a
complex sentence:
(11)
The press clearly think the president deliberately lied to Congress
Once again, it comprises two clauses – one containing the predicate think, the
other containing the predicate lie. The main clause comprises the subject the
press, the adjunct clearly, the predicate think and the complement clause the
president deliberately lied to Congress. The complement clause in turn com-
prises the subject the president, the adjunct deliberately, the predicate lie and the
complement to Congress.
As was implicit in our earlier classiﬁcation of (1) as a ﬁnite clause, tra-
ditional grammars draw a distinction between ﬁnite and nonﬁnite clauses.
In this connection, consider the contrast between the italicised clauses
below (all of which function as the complement of an underlined adjective
or verb):
(12) (a)
She was glad that he apologised
(b)
She demanded that he apologise
(c)
I can’t imagine him apologising
(d)
It would be sensible for him to apologise
(e)
It’s important to know when to apologise
The italicised clauses in (12a,b) are ﬁnite, and it is characteristic of ﬁnite clauses
in English that they contain an (auxiliary or main) verb marked for tense/mood,
and can have a nominative pronoun like he as their subject. In (12a), the verb
apologised is ﬁnite by virtue of being inﬂected for past tense and indicative
mood, and by virtue of having a nominative subject (he); in (12b), the verb apol-
ogise is ﬁnite by virtue of being inﬂected for subjunctive mood (and perhaps
present tense, though this is far from clear), and by virtue of having a nomina-
tive subject (he). A clause containing a verb in the indicative mood denotes a
real (or realis, to use the relevant grammatical term) event or state occurring at

10
1 grammar
a speciﬁc point in time; a subjunctive clause by contrast denotes a hypotheti-
cal or unreal (= irrealis) event or state which has not yet occurred and which
may never occur. In contrast to the italicised clauses in (12a,b), the clauses ital-
icised in (12c–e) are nonﬁnite, in that they contain no verb marked for tense or
mood, and do not allow a nominative subject. For example, the verb apologis-
ing in (12c) is nonﬁnite because it is a tenseless and moodless gerund form,
and has an accusative subject him. Likewise, the verb apologise in (12d,e) is
a tenseless and moodless inﬁnitive form (as we see from the fact that it fol-
lows the inﬁnitive particle to), and has an accusative subject him in (12d), and
a ‘silent’ (implicit) subject in (12e). (Excluded from our discussion here are
gerund structures with genitive subjects like the italicised in ‘I can’t stand his
perpetual(ly) whining about syntax’, since these are more nominal than clausal in
nature.)
As the examples in (12) illustrate, whether or not a clause is ﬁnite in turn
determines the kind of subject it can have, in that ﬁnite clauses can have a nomi-
native pronoun like he as their subject, but nonﬁnite clauses cannot. Accordingly,
one way of telling whether a particular clause is ﬁnite or not is to see whether
it can have a nominative pronoun (like I/we/he/she/they) as its subject. In this
connection, consider whether the italicised clauses in the dialogues in (13a,b)
below are ﬁnite or nonﬁnite:
(13) (a)
speaker a: I know you cheat on me
speaker b: OK, I admit it. I cheat on you. But not with any of your friends
(b)
speaker a: I know you cheat on me
speaker b: Me cheat on you? No way! I never would!
The fact that the italicised clause in speaker b’s reply in (13a) has the nominative
subject I suggests that it is ﬁnite, and hence that the verb cheat (as used in
the italicised sentence in 13a) is a ﬁrst person singular present tense form. By
contrast, the fact that the italicised clause in speaker b’s reply (13b) has the
accusative subject me suggests that it is nonﬁnite, and that the verb cheat (as used
in the italicised sentence in 13b) is an inﬁnitive form (and indeed this is clear
from sentences like Me be a cheat? No way! where we ﬁnd the inﬁnitive form
be).
In addition to being ﬁnite or nonﬁnite, each clause within a sentence has a
speciﬁc force. In this connection, consider the following simple (single-clause)
sentences:
(14) (a)
He went home
(b)
Are you feeling OK?
(c)
You be quiet!
(d)
What a great idea that is!
A sentence like (14a) is traditionally said to be declarative in force, in that it is
used to make a statement. (14b) is interrogative in force in that it is used to ask
a question. (14c) is imperative in force, by virtue of being used to issue an order

1.3 Universal Grammar
11
or command. (14d) is exclamative in force, in that it is used to exclaim surprise
or delight. In complex sentences, each clause has its own force, as we can see in
relation to (15) below:
(15) (a)
He asked where she had gone
(b)
Did you know that he has retired?
(c)
Tell her what a great time we had!
In (15a), the main (asked) clause is declarative, whereas the complement (gone)
clause is interrogative; in (15b) the main (know) clause is interrogative, whereas
the complement (retired) clause is declarative; and in (15c), the main (tell) clause
is imperative, whereas the complement (had) clause is exclamative.
We can summarise this section as follows. From the perspective of tradi-
tional grammar, the syntax of a language is described in terms of a taxonomy
(i.e. a classiﬁcatory list) of the range of different phrase-, clause- and sentence-
types found in the language. So, for example, a typical traditional grammar
of (say) English will include chapters on the syntax of negatives, interroga-
tives, exclamatives, imperatives and so on. The chapter on interrogatives will
note (e.g.) that in main-clause questions in English like ‘Is he winning?’ the
present tense auxiliary is inverts with (i.e. moves in front of) the subject he,
but not in complement clause questions like the if-clause in ‘I wonder if he is
winning’, and will typically not be concerned with trying to explain why auxil-
iary inversion applies in main clauses but not complement clauses: this reﬂects
the fact that the primary goal of traditional grammar is description rather than
explanation.
●
●
1.3
Universal Grammar
In contrast to the taxonomic approach adopted in traditional grammar,
Chomsky takes a cognitive approach to the study of grammar. For Chomsky, the
goal of the linguist is to determine what it is that native speakers know about
their native language which enables them to speak and understand the language,
and how this linguistic knowledge might be represented in the mind/brain: hence,
in studying language, we are studying a speciﬁc kind of cognition (i.e. human
knowledge). In a fairly obvious sense, any native speaker of a language can
be said to know the grammar of his or her native language. For example, any
native speaker of English can tell you that the negative counterpart of I like
syntax is I don’t like syntax, and not e.g. ∗I no like syntax: in other words, native
speakers know how to combine words together to form expressions (e.g. negative
sentences) in their language. Likewise, any native speaker of English can tell
you that a sentence like She loves me more than you is ambiguous and has two
interpretations which can be paraphrased as ‘She loves me more than she loves
you’ and ‘She loves me more than you love me’: in other words, native speakers
also know how to interpret (i.e. assign meaning to) expressions in their language.

12
1 grammar
However, it is important to emphasise that this grammatical knowledge of how to
form and interpret expressions in your native language is tacit (i.e. subconscious)
rather than explicit (i.e. conscious): so, it’s no good asking a native speaker of
English a question such as ‘How do you form negative sentences in English?’
since human beings have no conscious awareness of the processes involved
in speaking and understanding their native language. To introduce a technical
term devised by Chomsky, we can say that native speakers have grammatical
competence in their native language: by this, we mean that they have tacit
knowledge of the grammar of their language – i.e. of how to form and interpret
words, phrases and sentences in the language.
In work in the 1960s, Chomsky drew a distinction between competence (the
native speaker’s tacit knowledge of his or her language) and performance (what
people actually say or understand by what someone else says on a given occa-
sion). Competence is ‘the speaker-hearer’s knowledge of his language’, while
performance is ‘the actual use of language in concrete situations’ (Chomsky
1965, p. 4). Very often, performance is an imperfect reﬂection of competence: we
all make occasional slips of the tongue, or occasionally misinterpret something
which someone else says to us. However, this doesn’t mean that we don’t know
our native language or that we don’t have competence in it. Misproductions and
misinterpretations are performance errors, attributable to a variety of perfor-
mance factors like tiredness, boredom, drunkenness, drugs, external distractions
and so forth. A grammar of a language tells you what you need to know in order
to have native-like competence in the language (i.e. to be able to speak the lan-
guage like a ﬂuent native speaker): hence, it is clear that grammar is concerned
with competence rather than performance. This is not to deny the interest of
performance as a ﬁeld of study, but merely to assert that performance is more
properly studied within the different – though related – discipline of psycholin-
guistics, which studies the psychological processes underlying speech production
and comprehension.
Thus, when we study the grammatical competence of a native speaker of a
language like English we’re studying a cognitive system internalised within the
brain/mind of native speakers of English which is the product of a ‘cognitive
organ’ which is ‘shared among human beings and in crucial respects unique to
them’ (Chomsky 2006, p. 1). In the terminology adopted by Chomsky (1986a,
pp.19–56), our ultimate goal in studying competence is to characterise the nature
of the internalised linguistic system (or I-language, as Chomsky terms it) which
makes native speakers proﬁcient in English. Such an approach has obvious impli-
cations for the descriptive linguist who is concerned to develop a grammar of a
particular language like English. According to Chomsky (1986a, p.22) a gram-
mar of a language is ‘a theory of the I-language . . . under investigation’. This
means that in devising a grammar of English, we are attempting to uncover
the internalised linguistic system (= I-language) possessed by native speakers
of English – i.e. we are attempting to characterise a mental state (a state of
competence, and thus linguistic knowledge).

1.3 Universal Grammar
13
Chomsky’s ultimate goal is to devise a theory of Universal Grammar/UG
which generalises from the grammars of particular I-languages to the grammars
of all possible natural (i.e. human) I-languages. He deﬁnes UG (1986a, p. 23)
as ‘the theory of human I-languages . . . that identiﬁes the I-languages that are
humanly accessible under normal conditions’. (The expression ‘are humanly
accessible’ means ‘can be acquired by human beings’.) In other words, UG is
a theory about the nature of possible grammars of human languages: hence,
a theory of Universal Grammar answers the question: ‘What are the deﬁning
characteristics of the grammars of human I-languages?’
There are a number of criteria of adequacy which a theory of Universal
Grammar must satisfy. One such criterion (which is implicit in the use of the
term Universal Grammar) is universality, in the sense that a theory of UG must
provide us with the tools needed to provide a descriptively adequate grammar
for any and every human I-language (i.e. a grammar which correctly describes
how to form and interpret expressions in the relevant language). After all, a
theory of UG would be of little interest if it enabled us to describe the grammar
of English and French, but not that of Swahili or Chinese.
However, since the ultimate goal of any theory is explanation, it is not enough
for a theory of Universal Grammar simply to list sets of universal properties
of natural language grammars; on the contrary, a theory of UG must seek to
explain the relevant properties. So, a key question for any adequate theory of
UG to answer is: ‘Why do grammars of human I-languages have the properties
they do?’ The requirement that a theory should explain why grammars have the
properties they do is conventionally referred to as the criterion of explanatory
adequacy.
Since the theory of Universal Grammar is concerned with characterising the
properties of natural (i.e. human) I-language grammars, an important question
which we want our theory of UG to answer is: ‘What are the deﬁning character-
istics of human I-languages which differentiate them from, for example, artiﬁcial
languages like those used in mathematics and computing (e.g. Java, Prolog, C
etc.), or from animal communication systems (e.g. the tail-wagging dance per-
formed by bees to communicate the location of a food source to other bees)?’
It therefore follows that the descriptive apparatus which our theory of Universal
Grammar allows us to make use of in devising natural language grammars must
not be so powerful that it can be used to describe not only natural languages,
but also computer languages or animal communication systems (since any such
excessively powerful theory wouldn’t be able to pinpoint the criterial properties
of natural languages which differentiate them from other types of communication
system). In other words, a third condition which we have to impose on our theory
of language is that it be maximally constrained: that is, we want our theory to pro-
vide us with technical devices which are so limited in their expressive power that
they can only be used to describe natural languages, and are not appropriate for
the description of other communication systems. A theory which is constrained
in appropriate ways should enable us to provide a principled explanation for why

14
1 grammar
certain types of syntactic structure and syntactic operation simply aren’t found in
natural languages. One way of constraining grammars is to suppose that gram-
matical operations obey certain linguistic principles, and that any operation which
violates the relevant principles leads to ungrammaticality: see the discussion in
§1.5 below for a concrete example.
A related requirement is that linguistic theory should provide grammars which
make use of the minimal theoretical apparatus required: in other words, gram-
mars should be as simple as possible. Some earlier work in syntax involved the
postulation of complex structures and principles: as a reaction to the excessive
complexity of this kind of work, Chomsky in work over the past two decades has
made the requirement to minimise the theoretical and descriptive apparatus used
to describe language the cornerstone of the Minimalist Program for Linguistic
Theory which he has been developing. He has suggested that language is a per-
fect system of optimal design in the sense that natural language grammars create
structures which are designed to interface perfectly with other components of
the mind – more speciﬁcally with speech and thought systems, so that (in the
words of Chomsky 2005b, p. 2) ‘Language is an optimal way to link sound and
meaning.’
To make this discussion rather more concrete, let’s look at the internal organi-
sation of the grammar of a language. One component of a grammar is a lexicon (=
dictionary = list of all the lexical items/words in the language and their linguistic
properties), and in forming a given sentence out of a set of words, we ﬁrst have to
take the relevant words out of the lexicon. Our chosen words are then combined
together by a series of syntactic computations in the syntax (i.e. in the syntac-
tic/computational component of the grammar), thereby forming a syntactic
structure. This syntactic structure serves as input into two other components
of the grammar. One is the semantic component which maps (i.e. ‘converts’)
the syntactic structure into a corresponding semantic representation (i.e. into a
representation of linguistic aspects of its meaning): the other is a PF component,
so called because it maps the syntactic structure into a PF representation (i.e.
a representation of its Phonetic Form, giving us a phonetic spellout for each
word, telling us how it is pronounced). The semantic representation interfaces
with systems of thought, and the PF representation with systems of speech – as
shown in diagrammatic form below:
(16)
semantic  
                      semantic               
         component           
       representation  
SYSTEMS
 Lexicon               syntactic  
Syntax
     structure             
   PF       
                           PF                
          SPEECH
component           
       representation  
SYSTEMS
THOUGHT
Chomsky (2005b, p. 3) refers to the interface with thought systems as the
‘conceptual-intentional interface (CI)’, and to the interface with speech sys-
tems as the ‘sensory-motor interface (SM)’. In terms of the model in (16), an

1.4 The Language Faculty
15
important consideration is that the (semantic and PF) representations which are
‘handed over’ to the (thought and speech) interface systems should contain only
elements which are legible by the appropriate interface system – so that the
semantic representations handed over to thought systems contain only elements
contributing to meaning, and the PF representations handed over to speech sys-
tems contain only elements which contribute to phonetic form (i.e. to determining
how the sentence is pronounced).
The neurophysiological mechanisms which underlie linguistic competence
make it possible for young children to acquire language in a remarkably short
period of time. Accordingly, a fourth condition which a linguistic theory must
meet is that of learnability: it must provide grammars which are learnable by
young children in a short period of time. The desire to maximise the learnability
of natural language grammars provides an additional argument for minimising
the theoretical apparatus used to describe languages, in the sense that the simpler
grammars are, the simpler it is for children to acquire them.
●
●
1.4
The Language Faculty
Mention of learnability leads us to consider the related goal of devel-
oping a theory of language acquisition. An acquisition theory is concerned
with the question of how children acquire grammars of their native languages.
Children generally produce their ﬁrst recognisable word (e.g. Mama or Dada)
by around the age of twelve months (with considerable variation between indi-
vidual children, however). For the next six months or so, there is little apparent
evidence of grammatical development in their speech production, although the
child’s productive vocabulary typically increases by about ﬁve words a month
until it reaches around thirty words at age eighteen months. Throughout this
single-word stage, children’s utterances comprise single words spoken in isola-
tion: e.g. a child may say Apple when reaching for an apple, or Up when wanting
to climb up onto someone’s knee. During the single-word stage, it is difﬁcult
to ﬁnd any immediately visible evidence of the acquisition of grammar, in that
children do not make productive use of inﬂections (e.g. they don’t productively
add the plural -s ending to nouns, or the past tense -d ending to verbs), and don’t
productively combine words together to form two- and three-word utterances.
(However, it should be noted that perception experiments have suggested that
infants may acquire some syntactic knowledge even before one year of age.)
At around the age of eighteen months (though with considerable variation
from one child to another), we ﬁnd the ﬁrst visible signs of the acquisition of
grammar: children start to make productive use of inﬂections (e.g. using plural
nouns like doggies alongside the singular form doggy, and inﬂected verb forms
like going/gone alongside the uninﬂected verb form go), and similarly start to
produce elementary two- and three-word utterances such as Want Teddy, Eating
cookie, Daddy gone ofﬁce etc. From this point on, there is a rapid expansion in

16
1 grammar
their grammatical development, until by the age of around thirty months they
have typically acquired a wide variety of the inﬂections and core grammatical
constructions used in English, and are able to produce adult-like sentences such
as Where’s Mummy gone? What’s Daddy doing? Can we go to the zoo, Daddy?
etc. (though occasional morphological and syntactic errors persist until the age
of four years or so – e.g. We goed there with Daddy, What we can do? etc.).
So, the central phenomenon which any theory of language acquisition must
seek to explain is this: how is it that after a long-drawn-out period of many
months in which there is no obvious sign of grammatical development, at around
the age of eighteen months there is a sudden spurt as multiword speech starts
to emerge, and a phenomenal growth in grammatical development then takes
place over the next twelve months? This uniformity and (once the spurt has
started) rapidity in the pattern of children’s linguistic development are the cen-
tral facts which a theory of language acquisition must seek to explain. But
how?
Chomsky maintains that the most plausible explanation for the uniformity and
rapidity of ﬁrst language acquisition is to posit that the course of acquisition
is determined by a biologically endowed innate Faculty of Language/FL (or
language acquisition program, to borrow a computer software metaphor) within
the brain, which provides children with a genetically transmitted algorithm (i.e.
set of procedures) for developing a grammar, on the basis of their linguistic
experience (i.e. on the basis of the speech input they receive). The way in which
Chomsky visualises the acquisition process can be represented schematically as
in (17) below (where L is the language being acquired):
(17)
xperience            →        Faculty of           →          Grammar
of L
 
         of L                              Language/FL                     
E
Children acquiring a language will observe people around them using the lan-
guage, and the set of expressions in the language which a child hears (and the
contexts in which they are used) in the course of acquiring the language constitute
the child’s linguistic experience of the language. This experience serves as input
to the child’s Faculty of Language/FL, which incorporates a set of UG principles
(i.e. principles of Universal Grammar) which enable the child to use the experi-
ence to devise a grammar of the language being acquired. Thus, the input to the
language faculty is the child’s experience, and the output of the language faculty
is a grammar of the language being acquired.
The claim that the course of language acquisition is determined by an innate
language faculty is known popularly as the innateness hypothesis. Chomsky
maintains that the ability to speak and acquire languages is unique to human
beings, and that natural languages incorporate principles which are also unique
to humans and which reﬂect the nature of the human mind:

1.4 The Language Faculty
17
Whatever evidence we do have seems to me to support the view that the
ability to acquire and use language is a species-speciﬁc human capacity,
that there are very deep and restrictive principles that determine the nature
of human language and are rooted in the speciﬁc character of the human
mind.
(Chomsky 1972, p. 102)
Moreover, he notes, language acquisition is an ability which all humans possess,
entirely independently of their general intelligence:
Even at low levels of intelligence, at pathological levels, we ﬁnd a command
of language that is totally unattainable by an ape that may, in other respects,
surpass a human imbecile in problem-solving activity and other adaptive
behaviour.
(Chomsky 1972, p. 10)
In addition, the apparent uniformity in the types of grammars developed by dif-
ferent speakers of the same language suggests that children have genetic guidance
in the task of constructing a grammar of their native language:
We know that the grammars that are in fact constructed vary only
slightly among speakers of the same language, despite wide variations
not only in intelligence but also in the conditions under which language
is acquired.
(Chomsky 1972, p. 79)
Furthermore, the rapidity of acquisition (once the grammar spurt has started) also
points to genetic guidance in grammar construction:
Otherwise it is impossible to explain how children come to construct gram-
mars . . . under the given conditions of time and access to data.
(Chomsky
1972, p. 113)
(The sequence ‘under . . . data’ means simply ‘in so short a time, and on the basis
of such limited linguistic experience’.) What makes the uniformity and rapidity of
acquisition even more remarkable is the fact that the child’s linguistic experience
is often degenerate (i.e. imperfect), since it is based on the linguistic performance
of adult speakers, and this may be a poor reﬂection of their competence:
A good deal of normal speech consists of false starts, disconnected phrases,
and other deviations from idealised competence.
(Chomsky 1972, p. 158)
If much of the speech input which children receive is ungrammatical (because
of performance errors), how is it that they can use this degenerate experience
to develop a (competence) grammar which speciﬁes how to form grammatical
sentences? Chomsky’s answer is to draw the following analogy:
Descartes asks: how is it when we see a sort of irregular ﬁgure drawn in front
of us we see it as a triangle? He observes, quite correctly, that there’s a dispar-
ity between the data presented to us and the percept that we construct. And
he argues, I think quite plausibly, that we see the ﬁgure as a triangle because
there’s something about the nature of our minds which makes the image of
a triangle easily constructible by the mind.
(Chomsky 1968, p. 687)

18
1 grammar
The obvious implication is that in much the same way as we are genetically
predisposed to analyse shapes (however irregular) as having speciﬁc geometric
properties, so too we are genetically predisposed to analyse sentences (however
ungrammatical) as having speciﬁc grammatical properties.
A further argument Chomsky uses in support of the innateness hypothesis
relates to the fact that language acquisition is an entirely subconscious and invol-
untary activity (in the sense that you can’t consciously choose whether or not to
acquire your native language – though you can choose whether or not you wish
to learn chess); it is also an activity which is largely unguided (in the sense that
parents don’t teach children to talk):
Children acquire . . . languages quite successfully even though no spe-
cial care is taken to teach them and no special attention is given to their
progress.
(Chomsky 1965, pp. 200–1)
The implication is that we don’t learn to have a native language, any more than
we learn to have arms or legs; the ability to acquire a native language is part of
our genetic endowment – just like the ability to learn to walk.
Studies of language acquisition lend empirical support to the innateness
hypothesis. Research has suggested that there is a critical period for the
acquisition of syntax, in the sense that children who learn a given language
before puberty generally achieve native competence in it, whereas those who
acquire a (ﬁrst or second) language after the age of nine or ten years rarely
manage to achieve native-like syntactic competence. A particularly poignant
example of this is a child called Genie, who was deprived of speech input
and kept locked up on her own in a room until age thirteen. When eventu-
ally taken into care and exposed to intensive language input, her vocabulary
grew enormously, but her syntax never developed. This suggests that the acqui-
sition of syntax is determined by an innate ‘language acquisition program’
which is in effect switched off (or gradually atrophies) around the onset of
puberty.
Further support for the key claim in the innateness hypothesis that the human
Language Faculty comprises a modular cognitive system autonomous of non-
linguistic cognitive systems such as vision, hearing, reasoning or memory comes
from the study of language disorders. Some disorders (such as Speciﬁc Lan-
guage Impairment) involve impairment of linguistic abilities without concomi-
tant impairment of other cognitive systems. By contrast, other types of disorder
(such as Williams Syndrome) involve impairment of cognitive abilities in the
absence of any major impairment of linguistic abilities. This double dissoci-
ation between linguistic and cognitive abilities lends additional plausibility to
the claim that linguistic competence is the product of an autonomous Language
Faculty.
Given the assumption that human beings are endowed with an innate language
faculty, the overall goal of linguistic theory is to attempt to uncover:

1.5 Principles of Universal Grammar
19
the properties that are speciﬁc to human language, that is, to the ‘faculty of
language’ FL. To borrow Jespersen’s formulation eighty years ago, the goal
is to unearth ‘the great principles underlying the grammars of all languages’
with the goal of ‘gaining a deeper insight into the innermost nature of human
language and of human thought.’ The biolinguistic perspective views FL as
an ‘organ of the body,’ one of many subcomponents of an organism that
interact in its normal life.
(Chomsky 2005b, p. 1)
However, Chomsky (2006, p. 1) notes that some properties of human language
may reﬂect ‘principles of biology more generally, and perhaps even more funda-
mental principles about the natural world’. Accordingly:
development of language in the individual must involve three factors: (1)
genetic endowment, which sets limits on the attainable languages, thereby
making language acquisition possible; (2) external data, converted to the
experience that selects one or another language within a narrow range; (3)
principles not speciﬁc to FL.
(Chomsky 2006, p. 2: FL = Faculty of
Language)
The ‘third factor principles’ referred to under (3) ‘enter into all facets of growth
and evolution’ and include ‘principles of efﬁcient computation’ (Chomsky
2006, p. 2) and – more generally – ‘properties of the human brain that deter-
mine what cognitive systems can exist, though too little is yet known about
these to draw speciﬁc conclusions about the design of FL’ (Chomsky 2006,
fn. 6)
●
●
1.5
Principles of Universal Grammar
If (as Chomsky claims) human beings are biologically endowed with
an innate language faculty, an obvious question to ask is what the nature of the
language faculty is. An important point to note in this regard is that children can
in principle acquire any natural language as their native language (e.g. Afghan
orphans brought up by English-speaking foster parents in an English-speaking
community acquire English as their ﬁrst language). It therefore follows that
the language faculty must incorporate a theory of Universal Grammar/UG
which enables the child to develop a grammar of any natural language on the
basis of suitable linguistic experience of the language (i.e. sufﬁcient speech
input). Experience of a particular language L (examples of words, phrases and
sentences in L which the child hears produced by native speakers of L in particular
contexts) serves as input to the child’s language faculty which incorporates a
theory of Universal Grammar providing the child with a procedure for developing
a grammar of L.
If the acquisition of grammatical competence is indeed controlled by a genet-
ically endowed language faculty incorporating a theory of UG, then it fol-
lows that certain aspects of child (and adult) competence are known without

20
1 grammar
experience, and hence must be part of the genetic information about language
with which we are biologically endowed at birth. Such aspects of language would
not have to be learned, precisely because they form part of the child’s genetic
inheritance. If we make the (plausible) assumption that the language faculty does
not vary signiﬁcantly from one (normal) human being to another, those aspects
of language which are innately determined will also be universal. Thus, in seek-
ing to determine the nature of the language faculty, we are in effect looking for
UG principles (i.e. principles of Universal Grammar) which determine the very
nature of language.
But how can we uncover such principles? The answer is that since the relevant
principles are posited to be universal, it follows that they will affect the application
of every relevant type of grammatical operation in every language. Thus, detailed
analysis of one grammatical construction in one language could reveal evidence
of the operation of principles of Universal Grammar. By way of illustration, let’s
look at question-formation in English. In this connection, consider the following
dialogue:
(18)
speaker a: He had said someone would do something
speaker b: He had said who would do what?
In (18), speaker b largely echoes what speaker a says, except for replacing
someone by who and something by what. For obvious reasons, the type of question
produced by speaker b in (18) is called an echo question. However, speaker b
could alternatively have replied with a non-echo question like that below:
(19)
Who had he said would do what?
If we compare the echo question He had said who would do what? in (18) with
the corresponding non-echo question Who had he said would do what? in (19),
we ﬁnd that (19) involves two movement operations which are not found in (18).
One is an auxiliary inversion operation by which the past tense auxiliary had is
moved in front of its subject he. The other is a wh-movement operation by which
the wh-word who is moved to the front of the overall sentence, and positioned
in front of had. (A wh-word is a question word like who/what/where/when etc.
beginning with wh.)
A closer look at questions like (19) provides evidence that there are UG
principles which constrain the way in which movement operations may apply.
An interesting property of the questions in (18b, 19) is that they contain two
auxiliaries (had and would) and two wh-words (who and what). Now, if we
compare (19) with the corresponding echo-question in (18), we ﬁnd that the ﬁrst
of the two auxiliaries (had) and the ﬁrst of the wh-words (who) is moved to the
front of the sentence in (19). If we try inverting the second auxiliary (would) and
fronting the second wh-word (what), we end up with ungrammatical sentences,
as we see from (20c–e) below (key items are bold-printed/italicised, and the
corresponding echo question is given in parentheses; 20a is repeated from the
echo question in 18b, and 20b from 19):

1.5 Principles of Universal Grammar
21
(20) (a)
He had said who would do what? (= echo question)
(b)
Who had he said would do what? (cf. He had said who would do what?)
(c)
∗Who would he had said do what? (cf. He had said who would do what?)
(d)
∗What had he said who would do? (cf. He had said who would do what?)
(e)
∗What would he had said who do? (cf. He had said who would do what?)
If we compare (20b) with its echo-question counterpart (20a) He had said who
would do what? we see that (20b) involves preposing the ﬁrst wh-word who and
the ﬁrst auxiliary had, and that this results in a grammatical sentence. By contrast,
(20c) involves preposing the ﬁrst wh-word who and the second auxiliary would;
(20d) involves preposing the second wh-word what and the ﬁrst auxiliary had;
and (20e) involves preposing the second wh-word what and the second auxiliary
would. The generalisation which emerges from the data in (20) is that auxiliary
inversion preposes the closest auxiliary had (i.e. the one nearest the beginning of
the sentence in (20a) above) and likewise wh-fronting preposes the closest wh-
expression who. The fact that two quite distinct movement operations (auxiliary
inversion and wh-movement) are subject to the same locality condition (which
requires preposing of the most local – i.e. closest – expression of the relevant
type) suggests that one of the principles of Universal Grammar incorporated into
the language faculty is a Locality Principle which can be outlined informally as:
(21)
Locality Principle
Grammatical operations are local
In consequence of (21), auxiliary inversion preposes the closest auxiliary, and
wh-movement preposes the closest wh-expression. It seems reasonable to sup-
pose that (21) is a principle of Universal Grammar (rather than an idiosyncratic
property of question-formation in English). In fact, the strongest possible hypoth-
esis we could put forward is that (21) holds of all grammatical operations in all
natural languages, not just of movement operations; and indeed we shall see in
later chapters that other types of grammatical operation (including agreement
and case assignment) are subject to a similar locality condition. If so, and if
we assume that abstract grammatical principles which are universal are part of
our biological endowment, then the natural conclusion to reach is that (21) is a
principle which is biologically wired into the language faculty, and which thus
forms part of our genetic make-up.
A theory of grammar which posits that grammatical operations are constrained
by innate principles of UG offers the important advantage that it minimises the
burden of grammatical learning imposed on the child (in the sense that children
do not have to learn e.g. that auxiliary inversion affects the ﬁrst auxiliary in a
sentence, or that wh-movement likewise affects the ﬁrst wh-expression). This is
an important consideration, since we saw earlier that learnability is a criterion
of adequacy for any theory of grammar – i.e. any adequate theory of grammar
must be able to explain how children come to learn the grammar of their native
language(s) in such a rapid and uniform fashion. The UG theory developed
by Chomsky provides a straightforward account of the rapidity of the child’s

22
1 grammar
grammatical development, since it posits that there is a universal set of innately
endowed grammatical principles which determine how grammatical operations
apply in natural language grammars. Since UG principles which are innately
endowed are wired into the language faculty and so do not have to be learned
by the child, this minimises the learning load placed on the child, and thereby
maximises the learnability of natural language grammars. It also (correctly)
predicts that there are certain types of error which children will not make – e.g.
producing sentences such as (20c–e).
●
●
1.6
Parameters
Thus far, we have argued that the language faculty incorporates a set
of universal principles which guide the child in acquiring a grammar. However,
it clearly cannot be the case that all aspects of the grammar of languages are uni-
versal; if this were so, all natural languages would have the same grammar and
there would be no grammatical learning involved in language acquisition (i.e.
no need for children to learn anything about the grammar of the language they
are acquiring), only lexical learning (viz. learning the lexical items/words in the
language and their idiosyncratic linguistic properties, e.g. whether a given item
has an irregular plural or past tense form). But although there are universal prin-
ciples which determine the broad outlines of the grammar of natural languages,
there also seem to be language-particular aspects of grammar which children
have to learn as part of the task of acquiring their native language. Thus, lan-
guage acquisition involves not only lexical learning but also some grammatical
learning. Let’s take a closer look at the grammatical learning involved, and what
it tells us about the language acquisition process.
Clearly, grammatical learning is not going to involve learning those aspects of
grammar which are determined by universal (hence innate) grammatical opera-
tions and principles. Rather, grammatical learning will be limited to those param-
eters (i.e. dimensions or aspects) of grammar which are subject to language-
particular variation (and hence vary from one language to another). In other
words, grammatical learning will be limited to parametrised aspects of grammar
(i.e. those aspects of grammar which are subject to parametric variation from
one language to another). The obvious way to determine just what aspects of
the grammar of their native language children have to learn is to examine the
range of parametric variation found in the grammars of different (adult) natural
languages.
We can illustrate one type of parametric variation across languages in terms of
the following contrast between the English example in (22a) below and its Italian
counterpart in (22b):
(22) (a)
Maria thinks that ∗(they) speak French
(b)
Maria pensa che parlano francese
‘Maria thinks that speak French’

1.6 Parameters
23
(The notation ∗(they) in 22a means that the sentence is ungrammatical if they is
omitted – i.e. that the sentence ∗Maria thinks that speak French is ungrammatical.)
The ﬁnite (present tense) verb speak in the English sentence (22a) requires an
overt subject like they, but its Italian counterpart parlanospeak in (22b) has no overt
subject. However, there are two pieces of evidence suggesting that the Italian verb
parlanospeak must have a ‘silent’ subject of some kind. One is semantic in nature,
in that the verb parlanospeak is understood as having a third person plural subject,
and this understood subject is translated into English as they; in more technical
terms, this amounts to saying that in the relevant use, the verb parlanospeak is
a two-place predicate which requires both a subject argument and an object
argument, and so it must have an ‘understood’ silent subject of some kind in
(22b). The second piece of evidence is grammatical in nature. Finite verbs agree
with their subjects in Italian: hence, in order to account for the fact that the verb
parlanospeak is in the third person plural form in (22b), we need to posit that it
has a third person plural subject to agree with. Since the verb parlanospeak has
no overt subject, it must have a null subject which can be thought of as a silent
or invisible counterpart of the pronoun they which appears in the corresponding
English sentence (22a). This null subject is conventionally designated as pro, so
that (22b) has the fuller structure Maria pensa che pro parlano francese ‘Maria
thinks that pro speak French,’ where pro is a null subject pronoun.
The more general conclusion to be drawn from our discussion here is that
in languages like Italian, any ﬁnite verb can have either an overt subject like
Maria or a null pro subject. But things are very different in English. Although
ﬁnite verbs can have an overt subject like Maria in English, they cannot normally
have a null pro subject – hence the ungrammaticality of ∗Maria thinks that speak
French (where the verb speak has a null subject). So, ﬁnite verbs in a language
like Italian can have either overt or null subjects, but in a language like English,
ﬁnite verbs can generally have only overt subjects, not null subjects. We can
describe the differences between the two types of language by saying that Italian
is a null-subject language, whereas English is a non-null-subject language.
More generally, there appears to be parametric variation between languages as
to whether or not they allow ﬁnite verbs to have null subjects. The relevant
parameter (termed the Null Subject Parameter) would appear to be a binary
one, with only two possible settings for any given language L, viz. L either does
or doesn’t allow any ﬁnite verb to have a null subject. There appears to be no
language which allows the subjects of some ﬁnite verbs to be null, but not others –
e.g. no language in which it is OK to say Drinks wine (meaning ‘He/she drinks
wine’) but not OK to say Eats pasta (meaning ‘He/she eats pasta’). The range
of grammatical variation found across languages appears to be strictly limited to
just two possibilities – languages either do or don’t systematically allow ﬁnite
verbs to have null subjects.
A more familiar aspect of grammar which appears to be parametrised relates
to word order, in that different types of language have different word orders
in speciﬁc types of construction. One type of word-order variation can be

24
1 grammar
illustrated in relation to the following contrast between English and Chinese
questions:
(23) (a)
What do you think he will say?
(b)
Ni
xiang
ta
hui
shuo
shenme
You think
he
will
say
what?
In simple wh-questions in English (i.e. questions containing a single word begin-
ning with wh- like what/where/when/why) the wh-expression is moved to the
beginning of the sentence, as is the case with what in (23a). By contrast, in
Chinese, the wh-word does not move to the front of the sentence, but rather
remains in situ (i.e. in the same place as would be occupied by a corresponding
non-interrogative expression), so that shenme ‘what’ is positioned after the verb
shuo ‘say’ because it is the (direct object) complement of the verb, and comple-
ments of the relevant type are normally positioned after their verbs in Chinese.
Thus, another parameter of variation between languages is the Wh-Parameter –
a parameter which determines whether wh-expressions are fronted (i.e. moved
to the front of the overall interrogative structure containing them) or not. Signif-
icantly, this parameter again appears to be one which is binary in nature, in that
it allows for only two possibilities – viz. a language either does or doesn’t allow
wh-movement (i.e. movement of wh-expressions to the front of the sentence).
Many other possibilities for wh-movement just don’t seem to occur in natural
language: for example, there is no language in which the counterpart of who
undergoes wh-fronting but not the counterpart of what (e.g. no language in which
it is OK to say Who did you see? but not What did you see?). Likewise, there
is no language in which wh-complements of some verbs can undergo fronting,
but not wh-complements of other verbs (e.g. no language in which it is OK to
say What did he drink? but not What did he eat?). It would seem that the range
of parametric variation found with respect to wh-fronting is limited to just two
possibilities: viz. a language either does or doesn’t allow wh-expressions to be
systematically fronted.
Let’s now turn to look at a rather different type of word-order variation,
concerning the relative position of heads and complements within phrases. It is
a general (indeed, universal) property of phrases that every phrase has a head word
which determines the nature of the overall phrase. For example, an expression
such as students of philosophy is a plural Noun Phrase because its head word
(i.e. the key word in the phrase whose nature determines the properties of the
overall phrase) is the plural noun students: the noun students (and not the noun
philosophy) is the head word because the phrase students of philosophy denotes
kinds of student, not kinds of philosophy. The following expression of philosophy
which combines with the head noun students to form the Noun Phrase students
of philosophy functions as the complement of the noun students. In much the
same way, an expression such as in the kitchen is a Prepositional Phrase which
comprises the head preposition in and its complement the kitchen. Likewise, an
expression such as stay with me is a Verb Phrase which comprises the head verb

1.6 Parameters
25
stay and its complement with me. And similarly, an expression such as fond of
fast food is an Adjectival Phrase formed by combining the head adjective fond
with its complement of fast food.
In English all heads (whether nouns, verbs, prepositions or adjectives etc.)
immediately precede their complements; however, there are also languages like
Korean in which all heads immediately follow their complements. In informal
terms, we can say that English is a head-ﬁrst language, whereas Korean is a
head-last language. The differences between the two languages can be illustrated
by comparing the English examples in (24) below with their Korean counterparts
in (25):
(24) (a)
Close the door
(b) desire for change
(25) (a)
Muneul dadara
(b) byunhwa-edaehan galmang
Door
close
change-for
desire
In the English Verb Phrase close the door in (24a), the head verb close immediately
precedes its complement the door; if we suppose that the door is a Determiner
Phrase, then the head of the phrase (= the determiner the) immediately precedes
its complement (= the noun door). Likewise, in the English Noun Phrase desire
for change in (24b), the head noun desire immediately precedes its complement
for change; the complement for change is in turn a Prepositional Phrase in which
the head preposition for likewise immediately precedes its complement change.
Since English consistently positions heads before complements, it is a head-ﬁrst
language. By contrast, we ﬁnd precisely the opposite ordering in Korean. In
the Verb Phrase muneul dadara (literally ‘door close’) in (25a), the head verb
dadara ‘close’ immediately follows its complement muneul ‘door’; likewise,
in the Noun Phrase byunhwa-edaehan galmang (literally ‘change-for desire’)
in (25b) the head noun galmang ‘desire’ immediately follows its complement
byunhwa-edaehan ‘change-for’; the expression byunhwa-edaehan ‘change-for’
is in turn a Prepositional Phrase whose head preposition edaehan ‘for/about’
immediately follows its complement byunhwa ‘change’ (so that edaehan might
more appropriately be called a postposition; prepositions and postpositions are
differents kinds of adposition). Since Korean consistently positions heads imme-
diately after their complements, it is a head-last language. Given that English is
head-ﬁrst and Korean head-last, it is clear that the relative positioning of heads
with respect to their complements is one word-order parameter along which lan-
guages differ; the relevant parameter is termed the Head Position Parameter.
It should be noted, however, that word-order variation in respect of the relative
positioning of heads and complements falls within narrowly circumscribed limits.
There are many logically possible types of word-order variation which just don’t
seem to occur in natural languages. For example, we might imagine that in a
given language some verbs would precede and others follow their complements,
so that (e.g.) if two new hypothetical verbs like scrunge and plurg were coined in
English, then scrunge might take a following complement, and plurg a preceding

26
1 grammar
complement. And yet, this doesn’t ever seem to happen: rather, all verbs typically
occupy the same position in a given language with respect to a given type of
complement.
What this suggests is that there are universal constraints (i.e. restrictions)
on the range of parametric variation found across languages in respect of the
relative ordering of heads and complements. It would seem that there are only
two different possibilities which the theory of Universal Grammar allows for: a
given type of structure in a given language must either be head-ﬁrst (with the
relevant heads positioned immediately before their complements), or head-last
(with the relevant heads positioned immediately after their complements). Many
other logically possible orderings of heads with respect to complements appear
not to be found in natural language grammars. The obvious question to ask is why
this should be. The answer given by the theory of parameters is that the language
faculty imposes genetic constraints on the range of parametric variation permitted
in natural language grammars. In the case of the Head Position Parameter (i.e.
the parameter which determines the relative positioning of heads with respect to
their complements), the language faculty allows only a binary set of possibilities –
namely that a given kind of structure in a given language is either consistently
head-ﬁrst or consistently head-last.
We can generalise our discussion in this section in the following terms. If
the Head Position Parameter reduces to a simple binary choice, and if the
Wh-Parameter and the Null Subject Parameter also involve binary choices, it
seems implausible that binarity could be an accidental property of these particular
parameters. Rather, it seems much more likely that it is an inherent property of
parameters that they constrain the range of structural variation between languages,
and limit it to a simple binary choice. Generalising still further, it seems possible
that all grammatical variation between languages can be characterised in terms
of a set of parameters, and that for each parameter, the language faculty speciﬁes
a binary choice of possible values for the parameter.
●
●
1.7
Parameter-setting
The theory of parameters outlined in the previous section has impor-
tant implications for a theory of language acquisition. If all grammatical variation
can be characterised in terms of a series of parameters with binary settings, it
follows that the only grammatical learning which children have to undertake in
relation to the syntactic properties of the relevant class of constructions is to
determine (on the basis of their linguistic experience) which of the two alter-
native settings for each parameter is the appropriate one for the language being
acquired. So, for example, children have to learn whether the native language
they are acquiring is a null subject language or not, whether it is a wh-movement
language or not, and whether it is a head-ﬁrst language or not . . . and so on for all
the other parameters along which languages vary. Of course, children also face

1.7 Parameter-setting
27
the formidable task of lexical learning – i.e. building up their vocabulary in the
relevant language, learning what words mean and what range of forms they have
(e.g. whether they are regular or irregular in respect of their morphology), what
kinds of structures they can be used in and so on. On this view, the acquisition
of grammar involves the twin tasks of lexical learning and structural learning
(with the latter involving parameter-setting).
This leads us to the following view of the language acquisition process. The
central task which the child faces in acquiring a language is to construct a
grammar of the language. The innate Language Faculty incorporates (i) a set of
universal grammatical principles, and (ii) a set of grammatical parameters which
impose severe constraints on the range of grammatical variation permitted in
natural languages (perhaps limiting variation to binary choices). Since universal
principles don’t have to be learned, the child’s syntactic learning task is limited to
that of parameter-setting (i.e. determining an appropriate setting for each of the
relevant grammatical parameters). For obvious reasons, the theory outlined here
(developed by Chomsky at the beginning of the 1980s) is known as Principles-
and-Parameters Theory/PPT.
The PPT model clearly has important implications for the nature of the lan-
guage acquisition process, since it vastly reduces the complexity of the acquisition
task which children face. PPT hypothesises that grammatical properties which
are universal will not have to be learned by the child, since they are wired into the
language faculty and hence part of the child’s genetic endowment: on the con-
trary, all the child has to learn are those grammatical properties which are subject
to parametric variation across languages. Moreover, the child’s learning task will
be further simpliﬁed if it turns out (as research since 1980 has suggested) that the
values which a parameter can have fall within a narrowly speciﬁed range, perhaps
characterisable in terms of a series of binary choices. This simpliﬁed parameter-
setting model of the acquisition of grammar has given rise to a metaphorical
acquisition model in which the child is visualised as having to set a series of
switches in one of two positions (up/down) – each such switch representing a
different parameter. In the case of the Head Position Parameter, we can imag-
ine that if the switch is set in the up position (for particular types of head), the
language will show head-ﬁrst word order in relevant kinds of structure, whereas
if it is set in the down position, the order will be head-last. Of course, an obvious
implication of the switch metaphor is that the switch must be set in either one
position or the other, and cannot be set in both positions. (This would preclude
e.g. the possibility of a language having both head-ﬁrst and head-last word order
in a given type of structure.)
The assumption that acquiring the grammar of a language involves the rel-
atively simple task of setting a number of grammatical parameters provides a
natural way of accounting for the fact that the acquisition of speciﬁc parameters
appears to be a remarkably rapid and error-free process in young children. For
example, young children acquiring English as their native language seem to set
the Head Position Parameter at its appropriate head-ﬁrst setting from the very

28
1 grammar
earliest multiword utterances they produce (at around eighteen months of age),
and seem to know (tacitly, not explicitly, of course) that English is a head-ﬁrst lan-
guage. Accordingly, the earliest verb phrases and Prepositional Phrases produced
by young children acquiring English consistently show verbs and prepositions
positioned before their complements, as structures such as the following indicate
(produced by a young boy called Jem/James at age twenty months; head verbs
are italicised in (26a) and head prepositions in (26b), and their complements are
in non-italic print):
(26) (a)
Touch heads. Cuddle book. Want crayons. Want malteser. Open door. Want
biscuit. Bang bottom. See cats. Sit down
(b)
On Mummy. To lady. Without shoe. With potty. In keyhole. In school. On
carpet. On box. With crayons. To mummy
The obvious conclusion to be drawn from structures like (26) is that children like
Jem consistently position heads before their complements from the very earliest
multiword utterances they produce. They do not use different orders for different
words of the same type (e.g. they don’t position the verb see after its complement
but the verb want before its complement), or for different types of words (e.g.
they don’t position verbs before and prepositions after their complements).
A natural question to ask at this point is how we can provide a principled expla-
nation for the fact that from the very onset of multiword speech we ﬁnd English
children correctly positioning heads before their complements. The Principles-
and-Parameters model enables us to provide an explanation for why children
manage to learn the relative ordering of heads and complements in such a rapid
and error-free fashion. The answer provided by the model is that learning this
aspect of word order involves the comparatively simple task of setting a binary
parameter at its appropriate value. This task will be a relatively straightforward
one if the language faculty tells the child that the only possible choice is for a
given type of structure in a given language to be uniformly head-ﬁrst or uni-
formly head-last. Given such an assumption, the child could set the parameter
correctly on the basis of minimal linguistic experience. For example, once the
child is able to analyse the structure of an adult utterance such as Help Daddy
and knows that it contains a Verb Phrase comprising the head verb help and its
complement Daddy, then (on the assumption that the language faculty speciﬁes
that all heads of a given type behave uniformly with regard to whether they are
positioned before or after their complements), the child will automatically know
that all verbs in English are canonically (i.e. normally) positioned before their
complements.
One of the questions posed by the parameter-setting model of acquisition
outlined here is just how children come to arrive at the appropriate setting
for a given parameter, and what kind(s) of evidence they make use of in set-
ting parameters. There are two types of evidence which we might expect to
be available to the language learner in principle, namely positive evidence and
negative evidence. Positive evidence comprises a set of observed expressions

1.7 Parameter-setting
29
illustrating a particular phenomenon: for example, if children’s speech input is
made up of structures in which heads precede their complements, this provides
them with positive evidence which enables them to set the Head Position Param-
eter at the head-ﬁrst setting appropriate to English. Negative evidence might be
of two kinds – direct or indirect. Direct negative evidence could come from
the correction of children’s errors by other speakers of the language. However,
(contrary to what is often imagined) correction plays a fairly insigniﬁcant role in
language acquisition, for two reasons. Firstly, correction is relatively infrequent:
adults simply don’t correct all the errors children make (if they did, children
would soon become inhibited and discouraged from speaking). Secondly, chil-
dren are notoriously unresponsive to correction, as the following dialogue (from
McNeill 1966, p. 69) illustrates:
(27)
child: Nobody don’t like me
adult: No, say: ‘Nobody likes me’
child: Nobody don’t like me
(8 repetitions of this dialogue)
adult: No, now listen carefully. Say ‘Nobody likes me’
child: Oh, nobody don’t likes me
As Hyams (1986, p. 91) notes: ‘Negative evidence in the form of parental dis-
approval or overt corrections has no discernible effect on the child’s developing
syntactic ability.’
Direct negative evidence might also take the form of self-correction by other
speakers. Such self-corrections tend to have a characteristic intonation and rhythm
of their own, and may be signalled by a variety of ﬁllers (such as those italicised
in (28) below):
(28) (a)
The picture was hanged . . . or rather hung . . . in the Tate Gallery
(b)
The picture was hanged . . . sorry hung . . . in the Tate Gallery
(c)
The picture was hanged . . . I mean hung . . . in the Tate Gallery
However, self-correction is arguably too infrequent a phenomenon to play a major
role in the acquisition process.
Rather than say that children rely on direct negative evidence, we might instead
imagine that they learn from indirect negative evidence (i.e. evidence relating to
the non-occurrence of certain types of structure). Suppose that a child’s experience
includes no examples of structures in which heads follow their complements (e.g.
no Prepositional Phrases like ∗dinner after in which the head preposition after
follows its complement dinner, and no Verb Phrases such as ∗cake eat in which
the head verb eat follows its complement cake). On the basis of such indirect
negative evidence (i.e. observing that such structures never occur in English), the
child might infer that English is not a head-last language.
Although it might seem natural to suppose that indirect negative evidence plays
some role in the acquisition process, there are potential learnability problems
posed by any such claim. After all, the fact that a given construction does not occur

30
1 grammar
in a given chunk of the child’s experience does not provide conclusive evidence
that the structure is ungrammatical, since it may well be that the non-occurrence
of the relevant structure in the relevant chunk of experience is an accidental
(rather than a systematic) gap. Thus, the child would need to process a very
large (in principle, inﬁnite) chunk of experience in order to be sure that non-
occurrence reﬂects ungrammaticality. It is implausible that young children pro-
cess massive chunks of experience in this way and search through it for negative
evidence about the non-occurrence of certain types of structure, since this would
impose an unrealistic memory load on them. In any case, given the assumption
that parameters are binary and single-valued, negative evidence becomes entirely
unnecessary: after all, once the child hears a Prepositional Phrase like with Daddy
in which the head preposition with precedes its complement Daddy, the child
will have positive evidence that English allows head-ﬁrst order in prepositional
phrases; and given the assumption that the Head Position Parameter is a binary
one and the further assumption that each parameter allows only a single setting,
then it follows (as a matter of logical necessity) that if English allows head-ﬁrst
Prepositional Phrases, it will not allow head-last Prepositional Phrases. Thus, in
order for the child to know that English doesn’t allow head-last Prepositional
Phrases, the child does not need negative evidence from the non-occurrence of
such structures, but rather can rely on positive evidence from the occurrence of the
converse order in head-ﬁrst structures (on the assumption that if a given structure
is head-ﬁrst, UG speciﬁes that it cannot be head-last). And, as we have already
noted, a minimal amount of positive evidence is required in order to identify
English as a uniformly head-ﬁrst language (i.e. a language in which all heads
precede their complements). Learnability considerations such as these have led
Chomsky (1986a, p. 55) to conclude that ‘There is good reason to believe that
children learn language from positive evidence only.’ The claim that children do
not make use of negative evidence in setting parameters is known as the No-
Negative-Evidence Hypothesis; it is a hypothesis which is widely assumed in
current acquisition research.
●
●
1.8
Summary
We began this chapter in §1.2 with a brief look at traditional grammar,
noting that this is a taxonomic (i.e. classiﬁcatory) system in which the syntax of
a given sentence is described by assigning each of the constituents in the sentence
to a grammatical category, and saying what grammatical function it has. In §1.3,
we noted that Chomsky takes a very different cognitive approach to the study
of language in which a grammar of a language is a model of the grammatical
knowledge (or competence) internalised in the mind/brain of a native speaker
(hence a model of the speaker’s I-language). We saw that Chomsky’s ultimate
goal is to develop a theory of Universal Grammar/UG which characterises the
deﬁning properties of the grammars of natural languages – a theory which is
universal, explanatory and constrained, and which provides descriptively

1.8 Summary
31
adequate grammars that are minimally complex and hence learnable. In §1.4,
we went on to look at the nature of language acquisition, and argued that the
most fundamental question for a theory of language acquisition to answer is
why it should be that after a period of a year and a half during which there is
little evidence of grammatical development visible in the child’s speech output,
most of the grammar of the language is acquired by children during the course
of the following year. We outlined the Innateness Hypothesis put forward by
Chomsky, under which the course of language acquisition is genetically prede-
termined by an innate Language Faculty. In §1.5, we noted Chomsky’s claim
that the Language Faculty incorporates a theory of Universal Grammar/UG
which embodies a set of universal grammatical principles that determine the
ways in which grammatical operations work; and we saw that the syntax of ques-
tions in English provides evidence for postulating that syntactic operations are
constrained by the following principle:
Locality Principle: Every grammatical operation is local in the sense that it
affects the closest constituent of the relevant type
In §1.6, we went on to argue that the grammars of natural languages vary along
a number of parameters. We looked at three such parameters, namely:
Wh-Parameter: Some languages (like English) require movement of an inter-
rogative wh-expression to the front of an interrogative clause, whereas others
(like Chinese) leave interrogative wh-expressions in situ
Null Subject Parameter: Some languages (like Italian) allow a null pronoun
(= pro) to be used as the subject of any ﬁnite (auxiliary or main) verb, whereas
other languages (like English) do not
Head Position Parameter: Some languages (like English) position head words
immediately before their complements, whereas others (like Korean) position
them immediately after their complements.
We hypothesised that each such parameter has a binary choice of settings. In
§1.7, we argued that the syntactic learning task which children face involves
parameter-setting – i.e. determining which of two possible settings is the appro-
priate one for each parameter in the language being acquired. We further argued
that if parameters have binary settings (e.g. so that a given kind of structure in a
given language is either head-ﬁrst or head-last), we should expect to ﬁnd evidence
that children correctly set parameters from the very onset of multiword speech:
and we presented evidence to suggest that from their very earliest multiword
utterances, children acquiring English as their mother tongue correctly set the
Head Position Parameter at the head-ﬁrst value appropriate for English. We con-
cluded that the acquisition of grammar involves the twin tasks of lexical learning
(i.e. acquiring a lexicon/vocabulary) and parameter-setting. We went on to ask
what kind of evidence children use in setting parameters, and concluded that they
use positive evidence from their experience of the occurrence of speciﬁc types
of structure (e.g. head-ﬁrst structures, or null subject structures or wh-movement
structures).

32
1 grammar
●
●
1.9
Bibliographical background
For a fuller account of the grammatical categories discussed in §1.2,
see chapter 2 of Radford (2004a) or (2004b). On the nature of determiners,
see Giusti (1997), Spinillo (2004) and Isac (2006). On different types of pro-
noun, see Cardinaletti and Starke (1999), Wiltschko (2001) and D´echaine and
Wiltschko (2002). On the claim that personal pronouns are D constituents, see
Postal (1966) and Abney (1987). On the claim that inﬁnitival to is a tense particle,
see Freidin (2004, p. 117, fn. 32). For a technical discussion of tense, see Julien
(2001) and Ishii (2006a). The term complementiser dates back to Rosenbaum
(1965, 1967) and Bresnan (1970). For more extensive discussion of the notion of
I-language introduced in §1.3, see Smith (2004). Chomsky’s Minimalist Pro-
gram is developed in Chomsky (1993, 1995, 1998, 1999, 2001, 2002, 2005a,
2005b, 2006). For discussion of Chomsky’s idea that language is a perfect sys-
tem of optimal design, see Lappin, Levine and Johnson (2000a, 2000b, 2001),
Holmberg (2000a), Piattelli-Palmarini (2000), Reuland (2000, 2001b), Roberts
(2000, 2001a), Uriagereka (2000, 2001) and Freidin and Vergnaud (2001). For
further discussion of the innateness hypothesis outlined in §1.4, see Lightfoot
(1999), Anderson and Lightfoot (2002), Antony and Hornstein (2003), Giv´on
(2002), Hauser, Chomsky and Fitch (2002) and Fitch, Hauser and Chomsky
(2005); for a more critical view, see Everett (2005, 2006) and Sampson (2005),
and for a reply to such criticism, see Chomsky’s contributions to Antony and
Hornstein (2003). For a textbook summary of perceptual evidence that very
young infants may be sensitive to syntactic structure, see Lust (2006, §9.2.1). For
evaluation of the idea that children learn languages in spite of receiving degener-
ate input, see Pullum and Scholz (2002), Thomas (2002), Sampson (2002), Fodor
and Crowther (2002), Lasnik and Uriagereka (2002), Legate and Yang (2002),
Crain and Pietroski (2002), Scholz and Pullum (2002), Lewis and Elman (2002)
and Gualmini and Crain (2005). For discussion of the critical period in language
acquisition, see Lenneberg (1967), Hurford (1991) and Smith (1998, 2004); on
Genie, see Curtiss (1977) and Rymer (1993). On evidence of a double disso-
ciation between linguistic and cognitive abilities, see Clahsen (2008). The idea
outlined in §1.5 that grammars incorporate a set of UG principles is developed
in Chomsky (1981). The Locality Principle sketched in the same section has its
historical roots in a number of related principles, including the Relativised Mini-
mality Principle of Rizzi (1990), the Shortest Move principle of Chomsky (1995)
and the Attract Closest Principle of Richards (1997). The idea that grammatical
differences between languages can be reduced to a small number of parame-
ters is developed in Chomsky (1981). A complication glossed over in the text
discussion of the Null Subject Parameter is posed by languages in which only
some ﬁnite verb forms can have null subjects: see Vainikka and Levy (1999) and
the collection of papers in Jaeggli and Saﬁr (1989) for illustration and discussion.
The discussion of the Wh-Parameter in the main text is simpliﬁed by ignoring
the complication that some languages allow more than one wh-expression to

Workbook section
33
be fronted in wh-questions (see Boˇskovi´c 2002a, Grohmann 2006 and Sur´anyi
2006), and the additional complication that wh-movement appears to be optional
in some languages, either in main clauses, or in main and complement clauses
alike (see Denham 2000, and Cheng and Rooryck 2000); on wh-in-situ struc-
tures, see Pesetsky (1987), Cheng (1997), Cole and Hermon (1998), Reinhart
(1998) and Bruening (2007). The claim made in the outline of the Head Position
Parameter that all heads of a given type occupy a uniform position with respect
to their complements is called into question by the behaviour of prepositions
in German, most of which precede their complements, but a few of which (e.g.
entlang ‘along’) follow them. Although we assumed in the text that parameters
have binary settings, it should be noted that some researchers have assumed that
parameters can have more than two alternative settings (e.g. Manzini and Wexler
1987). For discussion of a wide range of parametric variation between languages,
see Cinque and Kayne (2005). For a critique of the idea that cross-linguistic
variation is reducible to a small number of structural parameters, see Culicover
and Nowak (2003), Newmeyer (2004, 2006) and Abeill´e and Borsley (2006):
for a defence of parameters, see Roberts and Holmberg (2006). For a defence
of the claim made in §1.7 that parameters are correctly set by children at a very
early stage in their development, see Wexler (1998). The claim that no negative
evidence is used in setting parameters is made in Chomsky (1981, pp. 8–9); sup-
porting evidence can be found in McNeill (1966), Brown, Cazden and Bellugi
(1968), Brown and Hanlon (1970), Braine (1971), Bowerman (1988), Morgan
and Travis (1989) and Marcus (1993) – but for potential counterevidence, see
Lappin and Shieber (2007). On how children set parameters, see Fodor (2001)
and Fodor and Sakas (2005). For a technical account of language acquisition
within the framework used here, see Guasti (2002) and Lust (2006).
●
●
Workbook section
●
Exercise 1.1
Word-order parameters like the Head Position Parameter determine the canonical (i.e. ‘basic’,
‘normal’ or ‘underlying’) word order found in particular types of structure in a given language.
However (as we will see in subsequent chapters), languages may have a variety of movement
operations which allow particular types of expression to be fronted (i.e. preposed) and thereby be
moved out of their canonical position into some new position at the front of a particular phrase,
clause or sentence. For example, in a head-ﬁrst language like English, both main and auxiliary
verbs immediately precede their complements. Accordingly, in a sentence like John has gone
home, the verb gone immediately precedes its complement home, and the auxiliary has
immediately precedes its complement gone home. But in a question like Where has John gone?
wh-movement means that the complement where of the verb gone is moved to the front of the
overall sentence, and so the verb gone no longer immediately precedes its complement where.
Likewise, the auxiliary has undergoes auxiliary inversion (thereby moving in front of its subject

34
1 grammar
John) and consequently no longer immediately precedes its complement gone where.
Below are a number of sentences taken from various plays written by Shakespeare, representing a
variety of English sometimes referred to as Elizabethan English (because it was spoken during the
reign of Queen Elizabeth the First). Elizabethan English (like present-day English) was a
head-ﬁrst language in which heads were canonically positioned in front of their complements. In
relation to the sentences below, show how movement operations which fronted various types of
expression could mask the underlying head-ﬁrst setting of the Head Position Parameter in
Elizabethan English.
1
Seawater shalt thou drink (Prospero, The Tempest, I.ii)
2
That letter hath she delivered (Speed, Two Gentlemen of Verona, II.i)
3
Friend hast thou none (Duke, Measure for Measure, III.i)
4
True is it that we have seen better days (Duke Senior, As You Like It, II.vii) (w)
5
She may more suitors have (Tranio, The Taming of the Shrew, I.ii)
6
Run you to the citadel! (Iago, Othello, V.i)
7
Came you from the church? (Tranio, Taming of the Shrew, III.ii)
8
What think you he hath confessed? (First Lord, All’s Well That Ends Well, IV.iii) (w)
9
What will this come to? (Flavius, Timon of Athens, I.ii)
10
What visions have I seen! (Titania, Midsummer Night’s Dream, V.i)
Helpful hints
Take none in 3, more in 5 and what in 10 to be quantiﬁers with a noun as their complement (and
assume that the negative quantiﬁer is spelled out as no if immediately followed by its
complement, but as none otherwise). Note that 1–5 are declarative sentences (used to make a
statement), 6 is an imperative sentence (used to issue an order), 7–9 are interrogative sentences
(used to ask a question) and 10 is an exclamative sentence (used to exclaim amazement).
Model answer for 1
The auxiliary verb shalt ‘shall’ has the subject thou ‘yousingular’ and the complement drink
seawater.
The main verb drink has the complement seawater. If no movement operations took place in the
relevant sentence, we should expect to ﬁnd the word order Thou shalt drink seawater, with the
auxiliary shalt immediately preceding its complement drink seawater, and the verb drink
immediately preceding its complement seawater, in keeping with the assumption that Elizabethan
English has a head-ﬁrst setting for the Head Position Parameter. However, the noun seawater
undergoes a fronting/preposing operation in order to highlight it, and this means that instead of
occupying its canonical position immediately after the verb drink, it is instead moved to a new
position at the front of the overall sentence. Likewise, the auxiliary shalt undergoes a separate
(subject–auxiliary) inversion operation which means that instead of occupying its canonical
position immediately preceding its complement drink seawater, it is instead moved to a new
position immediately preceding its subject thou. The effect of these two movement operations is
shown schematically below:
underlying order:
Thou shalt drink seawater
superﬁcial order:
Seawater shalt thou drink
In the underlying order, the auxiliary shalt immediately precedes its complement drink seawater,
and the verb drink immediately precedes its complement seawater. But preposing seawater and

Workbook section
35
inverting shalt means that the verb drink no longer immediately precedes its complement
seawater, and likewise that the auxiliary shalt no longer immediately precedes its complement
drink seawater. The main theoretical point which our discussion here illustrates is that word-order
parameters determine the underlying order of constituents rather than their superﬁcial order
(which may be disrupted by movement operations). A point of incidental interest to note in relation
to sentence 1 is that inversion was not just restricted to interrogative sentences in Elizabethan
English, but could also take place in declaratives and other types of sentence. Moreover (as you
will see from other examples in this exercise), it could affect main verbs as well as auxiliary verbs.
●
Exercise 1.2
Below are examples of utterances produced by a girl called Lucy at age twenty-four months.
Comment on whether Lucy has correctly set the three parameters discussed in the text (the Head
Position Parameter, the Wh-Parameter and the Null Subject Parameter). Discuss the signiﬁcance
of the relevant examples for the parameter-setting model of acquisition.
CHILD SENTENCE
ADULT COUNTERPART
1 What doing?
‘What are you doing?’
2 Want bye-byes
‘I want to go to sleep’
3 Daddy play with me (w) ‘Daddy played with me’; this was in reply to ‘What did Daddy
do in the park yesterday?’
4 Mummy go shops
‘Mummy went to the shops’; this was in reply to ‘Where did
Mummy go?’
5 Where Daddy gone? (w) ‘Where’s Daddy gone?’
6 Gone ofﬁce
‘He’s gone to the ofﬁce’
7 Me have yoghurt?
‘Can I have a yoghurt?’
8 Daddy doing? (w)
‘What’s Daddy doing?’
9 Cry (w)
‘(I) cry’; this was in reply to ‘What do you do when Daddy gets
cross with you?’
10 I play (w)
‘I play’; this was in reply to ‘What do you do in the park?’
11 What me having?
‘What am I having?’; this followed her mother saying
‘Mummy’s having ﬁsh for dinner’
12 No me have ﬁsh
‘I’m not going to have ﬁsh’
13 Want bickies
‘She wants some biscuits’; this was her reply to ‘What does
Dolly want?’
14 What Teddy have?
‘What can Teddy have?’
15 Where going?
‘Where are you going?’
16 What Nana eating?
‘What’s Grandma eating?’
17 Dolly gone?
‘Where’s Dolly gone?’
18 Watch te’vision
‘I’m going to watch television’
19 Me have more
‘I want to have some more’
20 Open door
‘Open the door!’
Helpful hints
If Lucy has correctly set the Wh-Parameter, we should expect to ﬁnd that she systematically
preposes wh-expressions and positions them sentence-initially. If she has correctly set the Head

36
1 grammar
Position Parameter, we should expect to ﬁnd (e.g.) that she correctly positions the complement of
a verb after the verb, and the complement of a preposition after the preposition; however, where
the complement is a wh-expression, we expect to ﬁnd that the complement is moved into
sentence-initial position in order to satisfy the requirements of the Wh-Parameter (if the
Wh-Parameter in some sense overrides the Head Position Parameter). If Lucy has correctly set the
Null Subject Parameter, we should expect to ﬁnd that she does not use null subjects in ﬁnite
clauses: however, it seems clear that many of the sentences produced by two-year old English
children like Lucy do indeed have null subjects – and this led Nina Hyams in inﬂuential research
(1986, 1992) to conclude that English children go through a null subject stage in which they use
Italian-style null (pro) subjects in ﬁnite clauses. If Hyams is right, this implies that children may
sometimes start out with incorrect settings for a given parameter, and then later have to reset the
parameter – a conclusion which (if true) would provide an obvious challenge to the simple
parameter-setting model of acquisition outlined in the main text.
However, the picture relating to the use of null subjects is complicated by the fact that although
English does not have ﬁnite null subjects (i.e. the kind of null pro subject found in ﬁnite clauses
in languages like Italian), it has three other types of null subject. One is the kind of imperative
null subject found in imperatives such as Shut up! and Don’t say anything! (Imperatives are
sentences used to issue orders; they are the kind of sentences you can put please in front of – as in
Please don’t say anything!) Another is the kind of nonﬁnite null subject found in a range of
nonﬁnite clauses in English (i.e. clauses containing a verb which is not marked for tense and
agreement), including main clauses like Why worry? and complement clauses like those bracketed
in I want [to go home] and I like [playing tennis]: the kind of null subject found in nonﬁnite
clauses in English is usually designated as PRO and called ‘big PRO’ (whereas the kind of null
subject found in a ﬁnite clause in a null-subject language like Italian is designated as pro and
called ‘little pro’. The terms big and little here simply reﬂect the fact that PRO is written in ‘big’
capital letters, and pro in ‘small’ lower-case letters). A third type of null subject found in English
can be called a truncated null subject, because English has a process of truncation which allows
one or more words at the beginning of a sentence to be truncated (i.e. omitted) in certain types of
style (e.g. diary styles of written English and informal styles of spoken English). Hence in
colloquial English, a question like Are you doing anything tonight? can be reduced (by truncation)
to You doing anything tonight? and further reduced (again by truncation) to Doing anything
tonight? Truncation is also found in abbreviated written styles of English: for example, a diary
entry might read Went to a party. Had a great time. Got totally smashed (with the subject I being
truncated in each of the three sentences). An important constraint on truncation is that it can only
affect words at the beginning of a sentence, not e.g. words in the middle of a sentence: hence,
although we can truncate are and you in Are you doing anything tonight?, we can’t truncate them
in What are you doing tonight? (as we see from the ungrammaticality of ∗What doing tonight?)
since here are and you are preceded by what and hence occur in the middle of the sentence.
What all of this means is that in determining whether Lucy has mis-set the Null Subject
Parameter and has misanalysed English as a null subject language (i.e. a language which allows
the kind of ﬁnite null ‘little pro’ subjects found in Italian), you have to bear in mind the alternative
possibility that the null subjects used by Lucy may represent one or more of the three kinds of null
subject permitted in adult English (viz. imperative null subjects, truncated null subjects and
nonﬁnite null subjects).
Since truncation occurs only sentence-initially (at the beginning of a sentence), but ﬁnite null
(little pro) subjects in a genuine null subject language like Italian can occur in any subject position

Workbook section
37
in a sentence, one way of telling the difference between a ﬁnite null subject and a truncated null
subject is to see whether children omit subjects only when they are the ﬁrst word in a sentence
(which could be the result of truncation), or whether they also omit subjects in the middle of
sentences (as is the case in a genuine null-subject language like Italian). Another way of
differentiating the two is that in null subject languages like Italian with null ﬁnite pro subjects, we
ﬁnd that overt pronoun subjects are only used for emphasis, so that in an Italian sentence like L’ho
fatto io (literally ‘It have done I’) the subject pronoun io ‘I’ has a contrastive interpretation, and
the relevant sentence is paraphraseable in English as ‘I was the one who did it’ (where italics
indicate contrastive stress): by contrast, in a non-null-subject language like English, subject
pronouns are not intrinsically emphatic – e.g. he doesn’t necessarily have a contrastive
interpretation in an English diary-style sentence such as Went to see Jim. Thought he might help.
A third way of telling whether truncation is operative in Lucy’s grammar or not is to see whether
expressions other than subjects can be truncated, as can happen in adult English (e.g. What time is
it? can be reduced to Time is it? via truncation in rapid spoken English).
At ﬁrst sight, it might seem unlikely that (some of) Lucy’s null subjects could be nonﬁnite (‘big
PRO’) null subjects, since all the clauses she produces in the data given above occur in ﬁnite
contexts (i.e. in contexts where adults would use a ﬁnite clause). Note, however, that two-year-old
children typically go through a stage which Wexler (1994) calls the Optional Inﬁnitives/OI stage,
during which (in ﬁnite contexts) they sometimes produce ﬁnite clauses, and sometimes nonﬁnite
clauses (the relevant nonﬁnite clauses typically containing an inﬁnitive form like go or a participle
like going/gone). Hence, an additional possibility to bear in mind is that some of Lucy’s clauses
may be nonﬁnite and have nonﬁnite (‘big PRO’) null subjects.
In relation to the sentences in 1–20, make the following assumptions. In 1 doing is a verb which
has a null subject and the complement what. In 2 want is a verb which has a null subject and the
complement bye-byes. In 3 play is a verb which has the subject Daddy and the complement with
me (and in turn me is the complement of the preposition with). In 4 go is a verb which has the
subject Mummy and the complement shops. In 5 gone is a verb which has the subject Daddy and
the complement where. In 6 gone is a verb which has a null subject and the complement ofﬁce. In
7 have is a verb which has the subject me and the complement yoghurt. In 8 doing is a verb which
has the subject Daddy, and its complement is a null counterpart of what. In 9 cry is a verb with a
null subject. In 10, play is a verb and I is its subject. In 11, having is a verb which has the subject
me and the complement what. In 12 no is a negative particle which has the complement me have
ﬁsh (assume that no is the kind of word which doesn’t have a subject), and have is a verb which
has the subject me and the complement ﬁsh. In 13 want is a verb which has a null subject and the
complement bickies. In 14 have is a verb which has the subject Teddy and the complement what.
In 15 going is a verb which has a null subject and the complement where. In 16 eating is a verb
which has the subject Nana and the complement what. In 17 gone is a verb which has the subject
Dolly and its complement is a null counterpart of where. In 18 watch is a verb which has a null
subject and the complement te’vision. In 19 have is a verb which has the subject me and the
complement more. In 20 open is a verb whose subject is null and whose complement is door.
Model answer for 1
In What doing? the verb doing has an overt object what and a null subject of some kind. Since the
object what does not occupy the normal postverbal position associated with objects in English (cf.
the position of the object something in Do something!), what has clearly undergone
wh-movement: this suggests that Lucy has correctly set the Wh-Parameter at the ‘requires

38
1 grammar
wh-movement’ value appropriate for English. Because the object complement what has
undergone wh-movement, we cannot tell (from this sentence) whether Lucy generally positions
(unmoved) complements after their heads: in other words, this particular sentence provides us
with no evidence of whether Lucy has correctly set the Head Position Parameter or not (though
other examples in the exercise do). Much more difﬁcult to answer is the question of whether Lucy
has correctly set the Null Subject Parameter at the value appropriate to English, and hence
(tacitly) ‘knows’ that ﬁnite clauses do not allow a null ﬁnite pro subject in English. At ﬁrst sight, it
might seem as if Lucy has wrongly analysed English as a null subject language (and hence mis-set
the Null Subject Parameter), since What doing? has a null subject of some kind. But the crucial
question here is: What kind of null subject does the verb doing have? It clearly cannot be an
imperative null subject, since the sentence is interrogative in force, not imperative. Nor can it be a
truncated null subject, since truncated subjects only occur in sentence-initial position (i.e. as the
ﬁrst word in a sentence), and what is the ﬁrst word in the sentence in What doing? (since preposed
wh-words occupy sentence-initial position in questions). This leaves two other possibilities. One
is that the null subject in What doing? is the ‘little pro’ subject found in ﬁnite clauses in genuine
null subject languages like Italian: since the verb doing is nonﬁnite, this would entail positing that
the sentence What doing? contains a null counterpart of the ﬁnite auxiliary are (raising questions
about why the auxiliary is null rather than overt); this in turn would mean that Lucy has indeed
mis-set the Null Subject Parameter (raising questions about how she comes to do so, and why she
doesn’t mis-set the other two parameters we are concerned with here). However, an alternative
possibility is that the structure What doing? is a nonﬁnite clause (like adult questions such as Why
worry?) and has the kind of nonﬁnite (‘big PRO’) null subject found in nonﬁnite clauses in many
languages (English included). If so (i.e. if What doing is a nonﬁnite clause which has the structure
What PRO doing?), there would be no evidence that Lucy has mis-set the Null Subject
Parameter – i.e. no evidence that she ever produces ﬁnite clauses with a ‘little pro’ subject. This in
turn would mean that we can maintain the hypothesis put forward in the main text that children
correctly set parameters at their appropriate value from the very earliest stages of the acquisition
of syntax. The error Lucy makes in producing sentences like What doing? would be in not
knowing that main clauses generally have to be ﬁnite in English, and that main clause questions
generally have to contain a ﬁnite auxiliary.

2
Structure
●
●
2.1
Overview
In this chapter, we introduce the notion of syntactic structure, look-
ing at how words are combined together to form phrases and sentences. We shall
see that phrases and sentences are built up by a series of merger operations, each
of which combines a pair of constituents together to form a larger constituent. We
show how the resulting structure can be represented in terms of a tree diagram.
We look at some of the principles which underlie sentence formation, and we
explore ways of testing the structure of phrases and sentences.
●
●
2.2
Phrases
To put our discussion on a concrete footing, let’s consider how an
elementary two-word phrase such as the italicised response produced by speaker
b in the following mini-dialogue is formed:
(1)
speaker a: What are you trying to do?
speaker b: Help you
As speaker b’s utterance illustrates, the simplest way of forming a phrase is
by merging (a technical term meaning ‘combining’) two words together: for
example, by merging the word help with the word you in (1), we form the phrase
help you. The resulting phrase help you seems to have verb-like rather than
pronoun-like properties, as we see from the fact that it can occupy the same range
of positions as the simple verb help, and hence e.g. occur after the inﬁnitive
particle to: cf.
(2) (a)
We are trying to help
(b)
We are trying to help you
By contrast, the phrase help you cannot occupy the same kind of position as a
pronoun such as you, as we see from (3) below:
(3) (a)
You are very difﬁcult
(b)
∗Help you are very difﬁcult
39

40
2 structure
So, it seems clear that the grammatical properties of a phrase like help you are
determined by the verb help, and not by the pronoun you. Much the same can be
said about the semantic properties of the expression, since the phrase help you
describes an act of help, not a kind of person. Using the appropriate technical
terminology, we can say that the verb help is the head of the phrase help you,
and hence that help you is a Verb Phrase: and in the same way as we abbreviate
category labels like verb to V, so too we can abbreviate the category label Verb
Phrase to VP. If we use the traditional labelled bracketing technique to represent
the category of the overall verb phrase help you and of its constituent words (the
verb help and the pronoun you), we can represent the structure of the resulting
phrase as in (4) below:
(4)
[VP [V help] [PRN you]]
An alternative (equivalent) way of representing the structure of phrases like help
you is via a labelled tree diagram such as (5) below (which is a bit like a family
tree diagram – albeit for a small family):
(5)
VP
V          PRN
help
   you
What the tree diagram in (5) tells us is that the overall phrase help you is a Verb
Phrase (VP), and that its two constituents are the verb (V) help and the pronoun
(PRN) you. The verb help is the head of the overall phrase (and so is the key
word which determines the grammatical and semantic properties of the phrase
help you). Introducing another technical term at this point, we can say that, con-
versely, the VP help you is a projection of the verb help, in the sense that the verb
help is projected into a larger structure by merging it with another constituent of an
appropriate kind. In this case, the constituent which is merged with the verb help
is the pronoun you, which has the grammatical function of being the (direct
object) complement of the verb help. The head of a projection/phrase deter-
mines grammatical properties of its complement: in this instance, since help is
a transitive verb, it requires a complement with accusative case (e.g. a pro-
noun like me/us/him/them), and this requirement is satisﬁed here since you can
function as an accusative form (as you can see from the table of pronouns
listed under the entry for Case in the Glossary at the end of the book). The tree
diagram in (5) is entirely equivalent to the labelled bracketing in (4), in the sense
that the two provide us with precisely the same information about the structure of
the phrase help you. The differences between a labelled bracketing like (4) and
a tree diagram like (5) are purely notational: each category is represented by a
single labelled node in a tree diagram (i.e. by a point in the tree which carries a
category label like VP, V or PRN), but by a pair of labelled brackets in a labelled
bracketing.

2.2 Phrases
41
Since our goal in developing a theory of Universal Grammar is to uncover
general structural principles governing the formation of phrases and sentences,
let’s generalise our discussion of (5) at this point and hypothesise that all phrases
are formed in essentially the same way as the phrase in (5), namely by a binary
(i.e. pairwise) merger operation which combines two constituents together to form
a larger constituent. In the case of (5), the resulting phrase help you is formed by
merging two words. However, not all phrases contain only two words – as we see
if we look at the structure of the italicised phrase produced by speaker b in (6)
below:
(6)
speaker a: What was your intention?
speaker b: To help you
The phrase in (6b) is formed by merging the inﬁnitive particle to with the Verb
Phrase help you. What’s the head of the resulting phrase to help you? A rea-
sonable guess would be that the head is the inﬁnitival tense particle/T to, so
that the resulting expression to help you is an inﬁnitival TP (= inﬁnitival tense
projection = inﬁnitival tense phrase). This being so, we’d expect to ﬁnd that TPs
containing inﬁnitival to occur in a different range of positions from VPs/Verb
Phrases – and this is indeed the case, as we see from the contrast below:
(7) (a)
They ought to help you (= ought + TP to help you)
(b)
∗They ought help you (= ought + VP help you)
(8) (a)
They should help you (= should + VP help you)
(b)
∗They should to help you (= should + TP to help you)
If we assume that help you is a VP whereas to help you is a TP, we can account
for the contrasts in (7) and (8) by saying that ought is the kind of word which
selects (i.e. ‘takes’) an inﬁnitival TP as its complement, whereas should is the
kind of word which selects an inﬁnitival VP as its complement. Implicit in this
claim is the assumption that different words like ought and should have different
selectional properties which determine the range of complements which they
can take.
The inﬁnitive phrase to help you is formed by merging the inﬁnitive particle to
with the Verb Phrase help you. If (as we argued in the previous chapter) inﬁnitival
to is an inﬁnitival tense particle (belonging to the category T) and if to is the
head of the phrase to help you, the structure formed by merging to with the Verb
Phrase/VP help you in (5) will be the TP in (9) below:
(9)
TP
T
       VP 
to
V        PRN
help        you

42
2 structure
The head of the resulting inﬁnitival tense projection to help you is the inﬁnitive
particle to, and the Verb Phrase help you is the complement of to; conversely,
to help you is a projection of to. In keeping with our earlier observation that
‘The head of a projection/phrase determines grammatical properties of its com-
plement,’ the inﬁnitival tense particle to requires an inﬁnitival Verb Phrase as its
complement: more speciﬁcally, to requires the head V of its VP complement to
be a verb in its inﬁnitive form, so that we require the (bare/uninﬂected) inﬁnitive
form help after inﬁnitival to (and not an inﬂected form like helping/helped/helps).
Reﬁning our earlier observation somewhat, we can therefore say that ‘The head
of a projection/phrase determines grammatical properties of the head word of its
complement.’ In (9), to is the head of the TP to help you, and the complement of
to is the VP help you; the head of this VP is the V help, so that to determines the
form of the V help (requiring it to be in the inﬁnitive form help).
More generally, our discussion here suggests that we can build up phrases by a
series of binary merger operations which combine successive pairs of constituents
to form ever larger structures. For example, by merging the inﬁnitive phrase to
help you with the verb trying, we can form the even larger italicised phrase trying
to help you produced by speaker b in (10) below:
(10)
speaker a: What are you doing?
speaker b: Trying to help you
The resulting phrase trying to help you is headed by the verb trying, as we see
from the fact that it can be used after words like be, start or keep, which select a
complement headed by a verb in the -ing form (cf. They were/started/kept trying
to help you). This being so, the italicised phrase produced by speaker b in (10) is
a VP (= Verb Phrase) which has the structure (11) below:
(11)
VP
  V             
 TP 
trying
T 
VP
to
    V             PRN
  help            you   
(11) tells us (amongst other things) that the overall expression trying to help you
is a Verb Phrase/VP; its head is the verb/V trying, and the complement of trying
is the TP/inﬁnitival tense phrase to help you: conversely, the VP trying to help
you is a projection of the V trying. An interesting property of syntactic structures
which is illustrated in (11) is that of recursion – that is, the property of allowing a
given structure to contain more than one instance of a given category (in this case,
more than one Verb Phrase/VP – one VP headed by the verb help and another
VP headed by the verb trying).
Since our goal in developing a theory of Universal Grammar/UG is to attempt
to establish universal principles governing the nature of linguistic structure, an

2.2 Phrases
43
important question to ask is whether there are any general principles of constituent
structure which we can abstract from structures like (5, 9, 11). If we look closely
at the relevant structures, we can see that they obey the following two (putatively
universal) constituent structure principles:
(12)
Headedness Principle
Every nonterminal node in a syntactic structure is a projection of a head
word
(13)
Binarity Principle
Every nonterminal node in a syntactic structure is binary-branching
(A terminal node is one at the foot/bottom of a tree, whereas a nonterminal node
is one which branches down into other nodes: consequently, the V-trying, T-to,
V-help and PRN-you in (11) are terminal nodes because they do not branch down
into any other node; by contrast, the VP and TP constituents are nonterminal
because they branch down into other nodes.) For example, the structure (11)
obeys the Headedness Principle (12) in that the VP help you is headed by the V
help, the TP to help you is headed by the T to, and the VP trying to help you
is headed by the V trying. Likewise, (11) obeys the Binarity Principle (13) in
that the VP help you branches into two immediate constituents (in the sense
that it has two constituents immediately beneath it, namely the V help and the
PRN you), the TP to help you branches into two immediate constituents (the
nonﬁnite tense particle T to and the VP help you) and the VP trying to help
you likewise branches into two immediate constituents (the V trying and the
TP to help you). Our discussion thus leads us towards a principled account of
constituent structure – i.e. one based on a set of principles of Universal Grammar.
There are several reasons for trying to uncover constituent structure principles
like (12) and (13). From a learnability perspective, such principles reduce the
range of alternatives which children have to choose between when trying to
determine the structure of a given kind of expression: they therefore help us
develop a more constrained theory of syntax. Moreover, additional support for
the Binarity Principle comes from evidence that phonological structure is also
binary, in that (e.g.) a syllable like bat has a binary structure, consisting of
the onset |b| and the rhyme |at|, and the rhyme in turn has a binary structure,
consisting of the nucleus |a| and the coda |t| – vertical bars being used to enclose
sounds or sequences of sounds. Likewise, there is evidence that morphological
structure is also binary, and hence (e.g.) that the noun indecipherability is formed
by adding the preﬁx de- to the noun cipher to form the verb decipher; then adding
the sufﬁx -able to this verb to form the adjective decipherable; then adding the
preﬁx in- to this adjective to form the adjective indecipherable; and then adding
the sufﬁx -ity to the resulting adjective to form the noun indecipherability. It
would thus seem that binarity is an inherent characteristic of the phonological,
morphological and syntactic structure of natural languages: as our discussion
develops below, we shall uncover empirical evidence in support of the claim that
syntactic structure is indeed binary.

44
2 structure
●
●
2.3
Clauses
Having considered how phrases are formed, let’s now turn to look
at how clauses and sentences are formed. By way of illustration, suppose that
speaker b had used the simple (single-clause) sentence italicised in (14) below to
reply to speaker a, rather than the phrase used by speaker b in (10):
(14)
speaker a: What are you doing?
speaker b: We are trying to help you
What’s the structure of the italicised clause produced by speaker b in (14)?
In work in the 1960s, clauses were generally taken to belong to the category
S (Sentence/Clause), and the sentence produced by b in (14) would have been
taken to have a structure along the following lines:
(15)
S 
PRN
T 
VP
We      
 are
V       
TP
         trying 
T          
VP       
  to 
    V               PRN
  help              you 
However, a structure such as (15) violates the two constituent structure principles
which we posited in (12) and (13) above. More particularly, the S analysis of
clauses in (15) violates the Headedness Principle (12) in that the S We are trying
to help you is a structure which has no head of any kind. Likewise, the S analysis
in (15) also violates the Binarity Principle (13) in that the S constituent We are
trying to help you is not binary-branching but rather ternary-branching, because
it branches into three immediate constituents, namely the PRN we, the T are and
the VP trying to help you. If our theory of Universal Grammar requires every
syntactic structure to be a binary-branching projection of a head word, it is clear
that we have to reject the S analysis of clause structure in (15) as one which is
not in keeping with UG principles.
Let’s therefore explore an alternative analysis of the structure of clauses which
is consistent with the headedness and binarity requirements in (12) and (13).
More speciﬁcally, let’s make the unifying assumption that clauses are formed
by the same binary merger operation as phrases. This in turn will mean that
the italicised clause in (14b) is formed by merging the (present) tense auxiliary
are with the Verb Phrase trying to help you, and then subsequently merging
the resulting expression are trying to help you with the pronoun we. Since are
belongs to the category T of tense auxiliary, it might at ﬁrst sight seem as if
merging are with the Verb Phrase trying to help you will derive (i.e. form) the

2.3 Clauses
45
tense projection/tense phrase/TP are trying to help you. But this can’t be right,
since it would provide us with no obvious account of why speaker b’s reply in
(16) below is ungrammatical:
(16)
speaker a:
What are you doing?
speaker b: ∗Are trying to help you
If Are trying to help you is a complete TP, how come it can’t be used to answer
a’s question in (16), since we see from sentences like (6b) that TP constituents
like to help you can be used to answer questions.
An informal answer we can give is to say that the expression Are trying to help
you is somehow ‘incomplete’, and that only ‘complete’ expressions can be used to
answer questions. In what sense is Are trying to help you incomplete? The answer
is that ﬁnite (e.g. present/past tense) T constituents require a subject, and the ﬁnite
auxiliary are doesn’t have a subject in (16). More speciﬁcally, let’s assume that
when we merge a tense auxiliary (= T) with a Verb Phrase (= VP), we form
an intermediate projection which we shall here denote as T′ (pronounced ‘tee-
bar’); and that only when we merge the relevant T-bar constituent with a subject
like we do we form a maximal projection – or, more informally a ‘complete TP’.
Given these assumptions, the italicised clause in (14b) will have the structure (17)
below:
(17)
TP
PRN
T' 
 We 
T  
VP
         are
V       
TP
         trying 
T          
VP 
  to 
    V               PRN
  help              you 
What this means is that a tense auxiliary like are has two projections: a smaller
intermediate projection (T′) formed by merging are with its complement trying
to help you to form the T-bar (intermediate tense projection) are trying to help
you; and a larger maximal projection (TP) formed by merging the resulting T′
are trying to help you with its subject we to form the TP We are trying to help
you. Saying that TP is the maximal projection of are in (17) means it is the
largest constituent headed by the auxiliary are.
Why should tense auxiliaries require two different projections, one in which
they merge with a following complement to form a T-bar, and another in which the
resulting T-bar merges with a preceding subject to form a TP? The requirement for
tense auxiliaries to have two projections (as in (17) above) was taken by Chomsky
in earlier work to be a consequence of a principle of Universal Grammar known as

46
2 structure
the Extended Projection Principle (conventionally abbreviated to EPP), which
speciﬁed that a ﬁnite tense constituent T must be extended into a TP projection
containing a subject.
However, comparative evidence suggests that there are other languages in
which a tense auxiliary does not require a preceding subject of its own – as
illustrated by an Italian sentence such as:
(18)
`E stata arrestata una vecchia signora
Is been arrested an old lady
‘An old lady has been arrested’
The absence of any subject preceding the present tense auxiliary `e ‘is’ in (18)
suggests that it cannot be a principle of Universal Grammar that every tense
auxiliary in every ﬁnite clause in every language has a subject. Rather, it seems
more likely that this is a property of tense auxiliaries in particular languages
like English, but not of their counterparts in some other languages. Recall that
we noted in §1.2 that the grammatical properties of categories of word are
traditionally described in terms of sets of features, and by convention these are
enclosed in square brackets. So, for example, in order to describe the grammatical
properties of the auxiliary are (in a sentence like They are lying) as a third person
plural present progressive auxiliary, we could say that it carries the features [third-
person, plural-number, present-tense, progressive-aspect]. Using this convention,
Chomsky suggested in later work that English tense auxiliaries like are carry an
epp feature which requires them to have an extended projection into a TP
containing a subject. If all ﬁnite auxiliaries in English carry an epp feature, it
follows that any English clause structure (like that produced by speaker b in
(16) above) containing a tense auxiliary which does not have a subject will be
ungrammatical.
The EPP requirement (for a ﬁnite auxiliary in English to have a subject) would
seem to be essentially syntactic (rather than semantic) in nature, as we can see
from sentences such as (19) below:
(19) (a)
It was alleged that he lied under oath
(b)
There has been no trouble
In structures like (19), the italicised subject pronouns it/there seem to have no
semantic content (in particular, no referential properties) of their own, as we see
from the fact that neither can be questioned by the corresponding interrogative
words what?/where? (cf. the ungrammaticality of ∗What was alleged that he lied
under oath? and ∗Where has been no trouble?), and neither can receive contrastive
focus (hence it/there cannot be contrastively stressed in sentences like 19 above).
Rather, they function as expletive pronouns – i.e. pronouns with no intrinsic
meaning which are used to satisfy the syntactic requirement for a ﬁnite auxiliary
like was/has to have a subject.
It is interesting to note that theoretical considerations also favour a binary-
branching TP analysis of clause structure like (17) over a ternary-branching S

2.3 Clauses
47
analysis like (15). The essential spirit of Minimalism is to reduce the theoretical
apparatus which we use to describe syntactic structure to a minimum. Within
this spirit, it has generally been assumed that tree diagrams should only contain
information about hierarchical structure (i.e. containment/constituent structure
relations), not about linear structure (i.e. left-to-right word order), because linear
information is redundant (in the sense that it can be predicted from hierarchical
structure by simple word-order rules) if we use binary-branching trees. Suppose,
for example, that we have a word-order rule for English to the effect that ‘Any
constituent of a phrase which is directly merged with the head word of the phrase
is positioned to the right of the head, but any other constituent of the phrase is
positioned to the left of the head.’ This word-order rule will correctly predict
(inter alia) that the VP trying to help you in (17) must be positioned to the right
of the tense auxiliary/T are (because the relevant VP is directly merged with the
T-head are), and that the pronoun we must be positioned to the left of are (because
we is not merged with T-are but rather with the T-bar are trying to help you).
As you can see for yourself, it’s not clear how we can achieve the same result
(of eliminating redundant word-order information from trees) under a ternary-
branching analysis like (15), since both the pronoun we and the Verb Phrase trying
to help you are merged with T-are in (15). It should be noted in passing that an
important consequence of assuming that linear order is not a syntactic relation is
that it entails that syntactic operations cannot be sensitive to word order (e.g. we
can’t handle subject–auxiliary agreement by saying that a ﬁnite auxiliary agrees
with a preceding noun or pronoun expression): rather, all syntactic operations
must be sensitive to hierarchical rather than linear structure. On this view (and
assuming the overall structure of a grammar in diagram 16 of §1.3), word order
is a PF property (i.e. a property assigned to constituents in the PF component on
the basis of linearisation rules like that sketched informally above).
An interesting implication of the analysis of clause structure we have presented
here is that heads can have more than one kind of projection: e.g. the tense
auxiliary are in (17) above has an intermediate (T-bar) projection into are trying
to help you and a maximal (TP) projection into We are trying to help you. The same
is true of other types of head, as can be illustrated by the italicised expressions
below:
(20) (a)
American intervention in Iraq has caused considerable controversy
(b)
She arrived at the solution quite independently of me
(c)
He must go straight to bed
(d)
Nobody expected the ﬁlm to have so dramatic an ending
In (20a) the noun intervention merges with its complement in Iraq to form the
intermediate projection (N-bar) intervention in Iraq, and the resulting N-bar in
turn merges with the adjective American to form the maximal projection (NP)
American intervention in Iraq. In (20b) the adverb independently merges with its
complement of me to form the intermediate projection (ADV-bar) independently
of me, and this in turn merges with the adverb quite to form the maximal projection

48
2 structure
(ADVP) quite independently of me. In (20c) the preposition to merges with its
complement bed to form the intermediate (P-bar) projection to bed, and this
in turn merges with the adverb straight to form the maximal (PP) projection
straight to bed. In (20d), the quantiﬁer (indeﬁnite article) an merges with its
complement ending to form the intermediate (Q-bar) projection an ending which
in turn merges with the expression so dramatic to form the maximal projection
(QP) so dramatic an ending.
In clause structures like (17) above, the pronoun we which merges with the
intermediate T-bar projection are trying to help you to form the maximal TP
projection We are trying to help you has the function of being the subject of
the TP. However, the expressions which merge with the relevant intermediate
projections to form maximal projections in (20) don’t always have the function
of being subjects. If we take a fairly ﬂexible view of what a subject is, we
could perhaps say that the adjective American is the ‘subject’ of the expression
intervention in Iraq in (20a) by virtue of denoting the entity perpetrating the act
of intervention. But we certainly wouldn’t want to say that quite is the subject
of independently of me in (20b), or that straight is the subject of to bed in (20c),
or that so dramatic is the subject of an ending in (20d). Rather, the expressions
which precede the head word in the examples in (20b-d) seem to have the function
of being modiﬁers of the expression that follows them – so that quite modiﬁes
independently of me, straight modiﬁes to bed and so dramatic modiﬁes an ending
(and perhaps American modiﬁes intervention in Iraq in 20a).
What our discussion here illustrates is that it is important to draw a distinction
between the position occupied by an expression in a given structure, and its
function. In order to get a clearer view of the distinction, let’s take a closer look
at the derivation of (20c) He must go straight to bed. As we noted earlier, the
preposition to merges with its noun complement bed to form the P-bar to bed
which in turn is merged with the adverb straight to form the PP straight to bed.
The resulting PP is then merged with the verb go to form the VP go straight
to bed. This in turn is merged with the present tense auxiliary must to form the
T-bar must go straight to bed. This T-bar merges with the pronoun he to form the
TP below:
(21)
TP
PRN
T' 
He 
T  
VP
must   
  V      
          PP 
  go 
                  ADV
      P' 
straight
          P                 N
to  
bed 

2.4 Clauses containing complementisers
49
In a fairly obvious sense, the pronoun he occupies the same kind of position
within TP as the adverb straight does within PP: more speciﬁcally, he merges
with an intermediate T-bar projection to form a maximal TP projection in the
same way as straight merges with an intermediate P-bar projection to form a
maximal PP projection. Since it’s useful to have a term to designate the position
they both occupy, let’s say that they both occupy the speciﬁer position within
the expression containing them. More speciﬁcally, let’s say that he occupies the
speciﬁer position within the T-projection (conventionally abbreviated to spec-T
or spec-TP) and that straight occupies the speciﬁer position within PP (= spec-P
or spec-PP). However, although he and straight occupy the same speciﬁer posi-
tion within the expressions containing them, they have different functions: he is
the subject of the T-bar expression has gone to bed, whereas straight is a modiﬁer
of the P-bar expression to bed. In much the same way, we can say that American
occupies the speciﬁer position within the Noun Phrase American intervention in
Iraq in (20a), quite occupies the speciﬁer position within the Adverbial Phrase
quite independently of me in (20b) and so dramatic occupies the speciﬁer position
within the Quantiﬁer Phrase so dramatic an ending in (20d).
●
●
2.4
Clauses containing complementisers
A question which we have not so far asked about the structure of
clauses concerns what role is played by complementisers like that, for and if, e.g.
in speaker b’s reply in (22) below:
(22)
speaker a: What are you saying?
speaker b: That we are trying to help you
Where does the C/complementiser that ﬁt into the structure of the sentence? The
answer suggested in work in the 1970s was that a complementiser merges with
an S constituent like that in (15) above to form an S′/S-bar (pronounced ‘ess-
bar’) constituent like that shown below (simpliﬁed by not showing the internal
structure of the VP trying to help you, which is as in (11) above):
(23)
 S' 
C  
 S
that
            PRN                        T
VP
  we
        are   
trying to help you 
However, the claim that a clause introduced by a complementiser has the status of
an S-bar constituent falls foul of the Headedness Principle (12), which requires
every nonterminal node in a tree to be a projection of a head word. The principle
is violated because S-bar in (23) is analysed as a projection of the S constituent
we are trying to help you, and S is clearly not a word (but rather a string of words).

50
2 structure
An interesting way round the headedness problem is to suppose that the head of
a clausal structure introduced by a complementiser is the complementiser itself:
since this is a single word, there would then be no violation of the Headedness
Principle (12) requiring every syntactic structure to be a projection of a head
word. Let’s therefore assume that the complementiser that merges with the TP
we are trying to help you (whose structure is shown in (17) above) to form the
CP/complementiser projection/complementiser phrase in (24) below:
(24)
CP 
C   
   TP 
That
 PRN     
T' 
  we 
    T  
VP
   are
V           
TP
  trying 
  T
  VP 
 to             
V              PRN
            help             you 
(24) tells us that the complementiser that is the head of the overall clause that we
are trying to help you (and conversely, the overall clause is a projection of the
complementiser that) – and indeed this is implicit in the traditional description of
such structures as that-clauses. (24) also tells us that the complement of that is the
TP/tense phrase we are trying to help you. Clauses introduced by complementisers
have been taken to have the status of CP/complementiser phrase constituents since
the early 1980s.
An interesting aspect of the analyses in (17) and (24) above is that clauses and
sentences are analysed as headed structures – i.e. as projections of head words
(in conformity with the Headedness Principle). In other words, just as phrases
are projections of a head word (e.g. a verb phrase like help you is a projection
of the verb help), so too a sentence like We will help you is a projection of the
auxiliary will, and a complement clause like the bracketed that-clause in I can’t
promise [that we will help you] is a projection of the complementiser that. This
enables us to arrive at a unitary analysis of the structure of phrases, clauses and
sentences, in that clauses and sentences (like phrases) are projections of head
words. More generally, it leads us to the conclusion that clauses/sentences are
simply particular kinds of phrase (e.g. a that-clause is a complementiser phrase).
An assumption which is implicit in the analyses which we have presented here
is that phrases and sentences are derived (i.e. formed) in a bottom-up fashion
(i.e. they are built up from bottom to top). For example, the clause in (24) involves
the following sequence of merger operations: (i) the verb help is merged with
the pronoun you to form the VP help you; (ii) the resulting VP is merged with
the nonﬁnite T/tense particle to to form the TP to help you; (iii) this TP is in turn

2.5 Testing structure
51
merged with the verb trying to form the VP trying to help you; (iv) the resulting
VP is merged with the T/tense auxiliary are to form the T-bar are trying to help
you; (v) this T-bar is merged with its subject we to form the TP we are trying to
help you; and (vi) the resulting TP is in turn merged with the C/complementiser
that to form the CP structure (24) that we are trying to help you. By saying that
the structure (24) is derived in a bottom-up fashion, we mean that lower parts of
the structure nearer the bottom of the tree are formed before higher parts of the
structure nearer the top of the tree.
As those of you familiar with earlier work will have noticed, the kind of struc-
tures we are proposing here are very different from those assumed in traditional
grammar and in work in linguistics in the 1960s and 1970s. Earlier work implic-
itly assumed that only items belonging to substantive/lexical categories could
project into phrases, not words belonging to functional categories. More specif-
ically, earlier work assumed that there were Noun Phrases headed by nouns, Verb
Phrases headed by verbs, Adjectival Phrases headed by adjectives, Adverbial
Phrases headed by adverbs and Prepositional Phrases headed by prepositions.
However, more recent work has argued that not only content words but also func-
tion words can project into phrases, so that we have Tense Phrases headed by a
tense-marker, Complementiser Phrases headed by a complementiser, Determiner
Phrases headed by a determiner – and so on. More generally, the assumption made
in work over the last three decades is that in principle all word-level categories
can project into phrases. This means that some of the structures we make use of
here may seem (at best) rather strange to those of you with a more traditional
background, or (at worst) just plain wrong. However, the structure of a given
phrase or sentence cannot be determined on the basis of personal prejudice or
pedagogical precepts inculcated into you at secondary school, but rather has to
be determined on the basis of syntactic evidence of the kind discussed in the next
section below. I would therefore ask traditionalists to be open to new ideas and
new analyses (a prerequisite for understanding in any discipline).
●
●
2.5
Testing structure
Thus far, we have argued that phrases and sentences are built up by
merging successive pairs of constituents into larger and larger structures, and that
the resulting structure can be represented in terms of a labelled tree diagram. The
tree diagrams which we use to represent syntactic structure make speciﬁc claims
about how sentences are built up out of various different kinds of constituent (i.e.
syntactic unit): hence, trees can be said to represent the constituent structure
of sentences. But this raises the question of how we know (and how we can
test) whether the claims made about syntactic structure in tree diagrams are
true. So far, we have relied mainly on intuition in analysing the structure of
sentences – we have in effect guessed at the structure. However, it is unwise to
rely on intuition in attempting to determine the structure of a given expression in

52
2 structure
a given language. For, while experienced linguists over a period of years tend to
acquire fairly strong intuitions about structure, novices by contrast tend to have
relatively weak, uncertain and unreliable intuitions; moreover, even the intuitions
of supposed experts may ultimately turn out to be based on little more than
personal preference.
For this reason, it is more satisfactory (and more accurate) to regard constituent
structure as having the status of a theoretical construct. That is to say, it is
part of the theoretical apparatus which linguists ﬁnd they need to make use
of in order to explain certain observations about language (just as molecules,
atoms and subatomic particles are constructs which physicists ﬁnd they need
to make use of in order to explain the nature of matter in the universe). It is
no more reasonable to rely wholly on intuition to determine syntactic structure
than it would be to rely on intuition to determine molecular structure. Inevitably,
then, much of the evidence for syntactic structure is of an essentially empirical
character, based on the observed grammatical properties of particular types of
expression. The evidence typically takes the form ‘If we posit that such-and-
such an expression has such-and-such a constituent structure, we can provide a
principled account of the observed grammatical properties of the expression.’
Thus, structural representations ultimately have to be justiﬁed in empirical terms,
i.e. in terms of whether or not they provide a principled account of the grammatical
properties of phrases and sentences.
In order to make our discussion more concrete, we’ll look at how we can test
the structure of the following sentence:
(25)
The chairman has resigned from the board
Let’s suppose that (25) is derived as follows. The determiner the is merged with
the noun board to form the DP the board. This DP is merged with the preposition
from to form the PP from the board. The resulting PP is merged with the verb
resigned to form the VP resigned from the board. This VP is then merged with
the auxiliary has to form the T-bar has resigned from the board. This T-bar is
in turn merged with its subject/speciﬁer the chairman (which is a DP formed by
merging the determiner the with the noun chairman), thereby forming the TP
shown in (26) below:
(26)
TP
DP     
T' 
D     
     N
T     
VP
The               chairman                  has 
 V       
    PP 
resigned
          P  
             DP 
from 
     D                 N
    the  
board

2.5 Testing structure
53
The tree diagram in (26) is a representation of (what we take to be) the structure
of (25) The chairman has resigned from the board.
However, a tree diagram like (26) has the status of a hypothesis (i.e. untested
and unproven assumption) about the structure of the relevant sentence. How can
we test our hypothesis and determine whether (26) is or isn’t an appropriate
representation of the structure of the sentence? The answer is that there are a
number of standard heuristics (i.e. ‘tests’) which we can use to determine struc-
ture: we shall discuss just three of these here. The ﬁrst relates to the phenomenon
of co-ordination. English and other languages have a variety of co-ordinating
conjunctions like and/but/or which can be used to co-ordinate (= conjoin =
join together) expressions such as those bracketed below:
(27) (a)
[fond of cats] and [afraid of dogs]
(b)
[slowly] but [surely]
(c)
[to go] or [to stay]
In each of the expressions in (27), an italicised co-ordinating conjunction has been
used to conjoin the bracketed pairs of expressions. Clearly, any adequate grammar
of English will have to provide a principled answer to the question: ‘What kinds
of strings (i.e. sequences of words) can and cannot be co-ordinated?’
Now, it turns out that we can’t just co-ordinate any random set of strings, as we
see by comparing the grammatical reply produced by speaker b in (28) below:
(28)
speaker a: What does he do to keep ﬁt?
speaker b: Run up the hill and up the mountain
with the ungrammatical reply produced by speaker b in (29) below:
(29)
speaker a: What did he do about his bills?
speaker b: ∗Ring up the phone company and up the electricity company
Why should it be possible to co-ordinate the string up the hill with the string
up the mountain in (28), but not possible to co-ordinate the string up the phone
company with the string up the electricity company in (29)? We can provide a
principled answer to this question in terms of constituent structure: the italicised
string up the hill in (28) is a constituent of the phrase run up the hill (up the hill is
a Prepositional Phrase, in fact), and so can be co-ordinated with another similar
type of Prepositional Phrase (e.g. a PP such as up the mountain, or down the hill
or along the path etc.). Conversely, however, the string up the phone company
in (29) is not a constituent of the phrase ring up the phone company, and so
cannot be co-ordinated with another similar string like up the electricity company.
(Traditional grammarians say that up is associated with ring in expressions like
ring up someone, and that the expression ring up forms a kind of complex verb
which carries the sense of ‘telephone’.) On the basis of contrasts such as these,
we can formulate the following generalisation:
(30)
Co-ordination Condition
Only constituents of the same type can be co-ordinated

54
2 structure
A constraint (i.e. principle imposing restrictions on certain types of grammatical
operation) along the lines of (30) is assumed in much work in traditional grammar.
Having established the condition (30), we can now make use of it as a way
of testing the tree diagram in (26) above. In this connection, consider the data in
(31) below (in which the bracketed strings have been co-ordinated by and):
(31) (a)
The chairman has resigned from [the board] and [the company]
(b)
The chairman has resigned [from the board] and [from the company]
(c)
The chairman has [resigned from the board] and [gone abroad]
(d)
The chairman [has resigned from the board] and [is living in Utopia]
(e)
∗The [chairman has resigned from the board] and [company has replaced
him]
(f)
[The chairman has resigned from the board] and [the company has
replaced him]
(31a) provides us with evidence in support of the claim in (26) that the board is
a Determiner Phrase constituent, since it can be co-ordinated with another DP
like the company; similarly, (31b) provides us with evidence that from the board
is a Prepositional Phrase constituent, since it can be co-ordinated with another
PP like from the company; likewise, (31c) provides evidence that resigned from
the board is a Verb Phrase constituent, since it can be co-ordinated with another
VP like gone abroad; in much the same way, (31d) provides evidence that has
resigned from the board is a T-bar constituent, since it can be co-ordinated with
another T′ like is living in Utopia (thereby providing interesting evidence in
support of the binary-branching structure assumed in the TP analysis of clauses,
and against the ternary-branching analysis assumed in the S analysis of clauses);
and in addition, (31f) provides evidence that the chairman has resigned from
the board is a TP constituent, since it can be co-ordinated with another TP
like the company has replaced him. Conversely, however, the fact that (31e) is
ungrammatical suggests that (precisely as (26) claims) the string chairman has
resigned from the board is not a constituent, since it cannot be co-ordinated with
a parallel string like company has replaced him (and the constraint in (30) tells
us that two strings of words can only be co-ordinated if both are constituents –
and, more precisely, if both are constituents of the same type). Overall, then, the
co-ordination data in (31) provide empirical evidence in support of the analysis
in (26).
A second way of testing structure is to use a substitution test. The assumption
underlying this test is that a string of words is a constituent if it can be substituted
by a single word. In this connection, consider:
(32) (a)
The chairman has resigned from the board, and he is now living in Utopia
(b)
The press say that the chairman has resigned from the board, and so he has
(c)
%If the Managing Director says the chairman has resigned from the board,
he must have done
(d)
If the chairman has resigned from the board (which you say he has), how
come his car is still in the company car park?

2.5 Testing structure
55
(The percentage sign in front of 32c indicates that this type of structure is only
found in certain varieties of English – notably, British English.) In each of the
above sentences, the italicised string can be replaced (or referred back to) by a
particular kind of proform. (Recall that a proform is a function word that can stand
‘in place of’ some other expression.) The fact that the expression the chairman
in (32a) can be substituted by a single word (in this case, the proform/pronoun
he) provides evidence in support of the claim in (26) that the chairman is a single
constituent (a DP/determiner phrase, to be precise). Likewise, the fact that the
expression resigned from the board in (32b,c,d) can serve as the antecedent of
the proforms so/done/which provides evidence in support of the claim in (26)
that resigned from the board is a constituent (more precisely, a VP/verb phrase).
Unfortunately, since English has a very limited inventory of proforms, this test is
of limited usefulness.
A third way of testing structure is to use a preposing test. The core assump-
tion underlying this test is that only a string of words forming a constituent
can be preposed (and thereby moved to the front of the structure containing
it) in order to highlight it in some way (e.g. in order to mark it out as a topic
containing familiar/old information, or as a focused constituent containing unfa-
miliar/new information). However, there are restrictions on the kind of constituent
which can be highlighted by preposing – as can be illustrated by the following
contrast:
(33) (a)
Straight to bed he must go
(b)
∗To bed he must go straight
As we see from the structure in (21) above, both straight to bed and to bed are
constituents of sentence (20c) He must go straight to bed. So how come only the
larger of these two constituents can be preposed? The answer would appear to
be that straight to bed is a PP and hence a maximal projection, whereas to bed
(when modiﬁed by straight) is a P-bar constituent, and hence an intermediate
projection. And it would seem (from contasts like that in 33) that only a maximal
projection can undergo the relevant kind of preposing operation. This being so,
one way we can test whether a given expression is a maximal projection or not is
by seeing whether it can be preposed. In this connection, consider the following
sentence:
(34)
The press said that the chairman would resign from the board, and resigned
from the board he has
The fact that the italicised expression resigned from the board can be preposed
in (34) indicates that it must be a maximal projection: this is consistent with the
analysis in (26) which tells us that resigned from the board is a Verb Phrase which
is the maximal projection of the verb resigned.
However, an important caveat which should be noted in relation to the prepos-
ing test is that particular expressions can sometimes be difﬁcult (or even impos-
sible) to prepose even though they are maximal projections. This is because

56
2 structure
there are constraints (i.e. restrictions) on such movement operations. One such
constraint can be illustrated by the following contrast:
(35) (a)
He resolutely refused to surrender to the enemy
(b)
Surrender to the enemy, he resolutely refused to
(c)
∗To surrender to the enemy, he resolutely refused
Here, the VP/Verb Phrase surrender to the enemy can be highlighted by being pre-
posed, but the TP/inﬁnitival tense phrase to surrender to the enemy cannot – even
though it is a maximal projection (by virtue of being the largest expression headed
by inﬁnitival to). What is the nature of the restriction on preposing to+inﬁnitive
expressions illustrated by the ungrammaticality of (35c)? The answer is not clear,
but may be semantic in nature. When an expression is preposed, this is in order
to highlight its semantic content in some way (e.g. for purposes of contrast – as
in e.g. ‘Syntax, I don’t like but phonology I do’). It may be that inﬁnitival to has
no intrinsic lexical semantic content, and that this makes an inﬁnitival to-phrase
an unsuitable candidate for highlighting. If so, this suggests that when preposing
material for highlighting purposes, we should prepose as few words as possible.
This requirement would seem to be related to Grice’s (1975) ‘Be concise’ maxim
(which amounts to ‘Use as few words as possible’), and we can conﬂate the two
together in terms of the following more general condition:
(36)
Economy Condition
Syntactic structures should contain as few words as possible, and syntactic
operations should affect as few words as possible
Given that only a maximal projection can be preposed for highlighting purposes, it
follows from the Economy Condition that the following (more speciﬁc) condition
will hold on preposing:
(37)
Preposing Condition
When material is preposed in order to highlight it, what is preposed is the
smallest possible maximal projection containing the highlighted material
So, if we want to highlight the semantic content of the VP surrender to the enemy,
we prepose the VP surrender to the enemy rather than the TP to surrender to the
enemy because the VP is smaller than the TP containing it.
However, this is by no means the only constraint on preposing, as we see from
(38) below (where FBA is an abbreviation for the Federal Bureau of Assassina-
tions – a purely ﬁctitious body, of course):
(38) (a)
Nobody had expected that the FBA would assassinate the king of Ruritania
(b)
∗King of Ruritania, nobody had expected that the FBA would assassinate the
(c)
The king of Ruritania, nobody had expected that the FBA would
assassinate
(d)
∗The FBA would assassinate the king of Ruritania, nobody had expected
that (nb that = |ðət|)
(e)
That the FBA would assassinate the king of Ruritania, nobody had
expected

2.5 Testing structure
57
The ungrammaticality of (38b,d) tells us that we can’t prepose the NP King of
Ruritania or the TP the FBA would assassinate the King of Ruritania. Why should
this be? One possibility is that there is a constraint on movement operations to
the effect that a DP can be preposed but not an NP contained within a DP, and
likewise that a CP can be preposed but not a TP contained within a CP. One
implementation of this idea would be to posit a constraint like (39) below:
(39)
Functional Head Constraint/FHC
The complement of a certain type of functional head F (such as a determiner
or complementiser) cannot be moved on its own (without also moving F)
Suppose, then, that we want to highlight the NP king of Ruritania in (38a)
by preposing. (37) tells us to move the smallest possible maximal projection
containing the highlighted material, and hence we ﬁrst try to move this NP on
its own: but the Functional Head Constraint tells us that it is not possible to
prepose this NP on its own, because it is the complement of the determiner
the. We therefore prepose the next smallest maximal projection containing the
hightlighted NP king of Ruritania – namely the DP the king of Ruritania; and as
the grammaticality of (38c) shows, the resulting sentence is grammatical.
Now suppose that we want to highlight the TP the FBA would assassinate
the king of Ruritania. (37) tells us to move the smallest maximal projection
containing the highlighted material – but the FHC (39) tells us that we cannot
prepose a constituent which is the complement of a complementiser. Hence, we
prepose the next smallest maximal projection containing the TP which we want to
highlight, namely the CP that the FBA would assassinate the King of Ruritania –
as in (38e).
However, an apparent problem for the Functional Head Constraint (39) is
posed by examples like:
(40) (a)
Surrender to the enemy, I never will
(b)
Surrender to the enemy, he resolutely refused to
The preposed Verb Phrase surrender to the enemy is the complement of will in
(40a), and the complement of to in (40b). Given the analysis in §1.2, will is
a ﬁnite T/tense auxiliary and to is a nonﬁnite T/tense particle. If (as we have
assumed so far) T is a functional category, we would expect the Functional
Head Constraint (39) to block preposing of the VP surrender to the enemy
because this VP is the complement of the functional T constituent will/to. The
fact that the resulting sentences (40a,b) are grammatical might lead us to follow
Chomsky (1999) in concluding that T is a substantive category rather than a
functional category, and hence does not block preposing of its complement.
Alternatively, it may be that the constraint only applies to certain types of func-
tional category (as hinted at in 39) – e.g. D and C but not T (perhaps because
D and C are the ‘highest’ heads within nominal and clausal structures respec-
tively – and indeed in chapter 9 we shall reformulate this constraint along such
lines).

58
2 structure
It is interesting to note that alongside sentences like (40) above in which a
phrase has been highlighted by being preposed, we also ﬁnd sentences like (41)
below in which a single word has been preposed:
(41) (a)
Surrender, I never will
(b)
Surrender, he resolutely refused to
In (41) the verb surrender has been preposed on its own. At ﬁrst sight, this
might seem to contradict our earlier statement that only maximal projections
can undergo preposing. However, more careful reﬂection shows that there is no
contradiction here: after all, the maximal projection of a head H is the largest
expression headed by H; and in a sentence like I never will surrender, the largest
expression headed by the verb surrender is the verb surrender itself – hence, sur-
render in (41) is indeed a maximal projection. This provides another illustration
of a point noted earlier – namely that an individual word can itself be a maximal
projection, if it has no complement or speciﬁer of its own.
The overall conclusion to be drawn from our discussion here is that the prepos-
ing test has to be used with care. If an expression can be preposed in order to
highlight it, it is a maximal projection; if it cannot, this may either be because it
is not a maximal projection, or because (even though it is a maximal projection)
a syntactic constraint of some kind prevents it from being preposed, or because
its head word has insufﬁcient semantic content to make it a suitable candidate for
highlighting.
●
●
2.6
Structural relations and the syntax of polarity items
Throughout this chapter, we have argued that phrases and sentences
are formed by a series of binary merger operations, and that the resulting structures
can be represented in the form of tree diagrams. Because they mark the way that
words are combined together to form phrases of various types, tree diagrams
are referred to in earlier technical work as phrase-markers (abbreviated to P-
markers). They show us how a phrase or sentence is built up out of constituents
of various types: hence, a tree diagram provides a visual representation of the
constituent structure of the corresponding expression. Each node in the tree
(i.e. each point in the tree which carries a category label like N, V, A′, T′,
PP, CP etc.) represents a different constituent of the sentence; hence, there are
as many different constituents in any given phrase-marker as there are nodes
carrying category labels. As we saw earlier, nodes at the very bottom of the
tree are called terminal nodes, and other nodes are nonterminal nodes: so,
for example, all the D, N, T, V and P nodes in (26) are terminal nodes, and
all the DP, PP, VP, T′ and TP nodes are nonterminal nodes. The topmost node
in any tree structure (i.e. TP in the case of (26) above) is said to be its root.
Each terminal node in the tree carries a single lexical item (i.e. an item from the
lexicon/dictionary, like dog or go etc.): lexical items are sets of phonological,
semantic and grammatical properties/features (with category labels like N, V, T,

2.6 Structural relations and the syntax of polarity items
59
C etc. being used as shorthand abbreviations for the set of grammatical features
carried by the relevant items).
It is useful to develop some terminology to describe the syntactic relations
between constituents, since these relations turn out to be central to syntactic
description. Essentially, a P-marker is a graph comprising a set of points (=
labelled nodes), connected by branches (= solid lines) representing containment
relations (i.e. telling us which constituents contain or are contained within which
other constituents). We can illustrate what this means in terms of the following
abstract tree structure (where A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H and J are different nodes in
the tree, representing different constituents):
(42)
A
B  
      E
C            D              F                G
        H            
J
In (42), G immediately contains H and J (and conversely H and J are the two
constituents immediately contained within G, and hence are the two immediate
constituents of G): this is shown by the fact that H and J are the two nodes
immediately beneath G which are connected to G by a branch (solid line).
Likewise, E immediately contains F and G; B immediately contains C and D; and
A immediately contains B and E. We can also say that E contains F, G, H and J;
and that A contains B, C, D, E, F, G, H and J (and likewise that G contains H and
J; and B contains C and D). Using equivalent kinship terminology, we can say
that A is the mother of B and E (and conversely B and E are the two daughters
of A); B is the mother of C and D; E is the mother of F and G; and G is the mother
of H and J. Likewise, B and E are sisters (by virtue of both being daughters of
A) – as are C and D; F and G; and H and J.
A particularly important syntactic relation is c-command (a conventional
abbreviation of constituent-command), which provides us with a useful way of
determining the relative position of two different constituents within the same
tree (in particular, whether one is lower in the tree than the other or not). We can
deﬁne this relation informally as follows (where X, Y and Z are three different
nodes):
(43)
c-command
A constituent X c-commands its sister constituent Y and any constituent Z
which is contained within Y
For those of you who ﬁnd it difﬁcult to conceptualise such abstractions, a more
concrete way of visualising this is to think of a tree diagram as representing a
network of train stations, with each of the labelled nodes representing the name
of a different station in the network, and the branches representing the rail tracks
linking the stations. We can then say that one node X c-commands another node
Y if you can get from X to Y on the network by taking a northbound train, getting

60
2 structure
off at the ﬁrst station, changing trains there and then travelling one or more stops
south on a different line.
In the light of the deﬁnition of c-command given above, let’s consider which
constituents each of the nodes in (42) c-commands. A doesn’t c-command any
of the other nodes, since A has no sister. B c-commands E, F, G, H and J because
B’s sister is E, and E contains F, G, H and J. C c-commands only D, because C’s
sister is D, and D does not contain any other constituent; likewise, D c-commands
only C. E c-commands B, C and D because B is the sister of E and B contains C
and D. F c-commands G, H and J, because G is the sister of F and G contains H
and J. G c-commands only F, because G’s sister is F, and F does not contain any
other constituents. H and J likewise c-command only each other because they are
sisters which have no daughters of their own.
We canillustrate the importance of the c-commandrelationinsyntactic descrip-
tion by looking at the distribution of a class of expressions which are known as
polarity items. These are items which have an inherent ‘polarity’ in the sense that
they are restricted to occurring in certain types of sentence. In this connection,
consider the quantiﬁer any in English (and its compounds like anyone, anything,
anywhere etc.). It has two different uses. One is as a universal (or free choice)
quantiﬁer with a meaning similar to every (as in You can have any cake you
like): in this use, the initial a of any is stressed, and the relevant word is not a
polarity item. The second use of any is as a partitive (or existential) quantiﬁer:
in this use, it has a meaning similar to some and can be unstressed (with its
initial vowel reduced to schwa or even being truncated in rapid colloquial speech
styles – e.g. He wouldn’t do ’nything to help me), and in this second use it is
indeed a polarity item. As the sentences in (44) below illustrate, partitive any (and
its compounds) can occur in a clause containing a (bold-printed) interrogative
expression like how often in (44a), a negative expression like no student in (44b)
or a conditional expression like if in (44c) – but not in a positive declarative clause
like (44d):
(44) (a)
I wonder how often we ﬁnd any morality in business
(b)
No student will complain about anything
(c)
If anyone should ask for me, say I’ve gone to lunch
(d)
∗I’d like any coffee, please
Klima (1964, p. 313) conjectured that negative, interrogative and conditional
expressions share ‘a common grammatico-semantic feature to be referred to as
affective’. In his terms, expressions like how often, no student and if are all
‘affective’ constituents (by which he seems to mean that they are non-assertive –
or nonveridical, to employ the alternative term used by Giannikidou (1997, 1998,
1999)). Using Klima’s terminology, we can suppose that a polarity item such
as (partitive) any is restricted to occurring in a structure containing an affective
constituent. It turns out that numerous other expressions (italicised below) are
similarly restricted to occurring in a structure containing a (bold-printed) affective
constituent:

2.6 Structural relations and the syntax of polarity items
61
(45) (a)
I didn’t think I would ever pass the exam
(b)
∗I thought I would ever pass the exam
(46) (a)
Nobody dare contradict him
(b)
∗Everybody dare contradict him
(47) (a)
I don’t think he need apologise
(b)
∗He need apologise
Curiously, the items need and dare are polarity items when they function as
auxiliaries (and so do not take the third person singular present tense s-afﬁx, and
are not followed by inﬁnitival to), but not when they function as main verbs (e.g.
in sentences like Professor Knutter needs to see a psychiatrist).
It might at ﬁrst sight seem as if we can characterise the relevant restriction on
the use of polarity items by saying that they can only be used after (i.e. when they
follow) an affective constituent. However, any such claim is falsiﬁed by contrasts
such as the following:
(48) (a)
The fact that he has resigned won’t change anything
(b)
∗The fact that he won’t resign will change anything
In both (48a) and (48b), the polarity item anything follows a bold-printed affective
item (the negative auxiliary won’t), and yet only (48a) is grammatical. Why should
this be? The answer is that (as originally noted by Klima), polarity items like
partitive any are subject to a structural condition on their use which can be
characterised in the following terms:
(49)
Polarity Condition
A polarity item must be c-commanded by an affective (e.g. negative,
interrogative or conditional) constituent
To see how this works, consider whether the polarity item anything satisﬁes the
Polarity Condition (49) in a structure such as the following:
(50)
TP
       DP       
T
D       
     NP                  
T    
VP
The 
won’t/*will 
           N    
          CP         
     V   
   PRN
fact
 change           anything
C                    TP
that  
            PRN          
T' 
             he 
T  
   V
       hasn’t
 resigned 
' 
Consider ﬁrst of all whether the pronoun anything is c-commanded by the bold-
printed T-auxiliary will/won’t. Since the sister of [T will/won’t] is the VP change
anything, and since anything is one of the constituents of this VP, it follows that

62
2 structure
[T will/won’t] does indeed c-command [PRN anything] under the deﬁnition of c-
command given in (43) above. What this means is that using the negative auxiliary
won’t in (50) will satisfy the Polarity Condition (49), so correctly predicting that
the corresponding sentence (51) below is grammatical:
(51)
The fact that he hasn’t resigned won’t change anything
But now consider whether [PRN anything] is c-commanded by the underlined
T-auxiliary hasn’t in (50). The sister of [T hasn’t] is the V-constituent resigned,
and it is clear that anything is not a constituent of the verb resigned, and hence
that [T hasn’t] does not c-command anything in (50). The Polarity Condition
(49) therefore (correctly) predicts the ungrammaticality of a sentence such as the
following:
(52)
∗The fact that he hasn’t resigned will change anything
The overall conclusion which our discussion here leads us to is thus that restric-
tions on the use of polarity items can be given a structural characterisation in
terms of the relation c-command.
●
●
2.7
The c-command condition on binding
A second class of expressions whose distribution can be given a princi-
pled characterisation in tems of the relation c-command are so-called anaphors.
These include reﬂexives (i.e. self/selves forms like myself/yourself/themselves
etc.), and reciprocals like each other and one another. Such anaphors have
the property that they cannot be used to refer directly to an entity in the outside
world, but rather must by bound by (i.e. take their reference from) an antecedent
elsewhere in the same phrase or sentence. Where an anaphor has no (suitable)
antecedent to bind it, the resulting structure is ungrammatical – as we see from
contrasts such as that in (53) below:
(53) (a)
He must feel proud of himself
(b)
∗She must feel proud of himself
(c)
∗Himself must feel proud of you
In (53a), the third person masculine singular anaphor himself is bound by a
suitable third person masculine singular antecedent (he), with the result that (53a)
is grammatical. But in (53b), himself has no suitable antecedent (the feminine
pronoun she is not a suitable antecedent for the masculine anaphor himself), and
so is unbound (with the result that (53b) is ill-formed). In (53c), there is no
antecedent of any kind for the anaphor himself, with the result that the anaphor
is again unbound and the sentence ill-formed.
There are structural restrictions on the binding of anaphors by antecedents, as
we see from:
(54) (a)
The president may blame himself
(b)
∗Supporters of the president may blame himself

2.7 The c-command condition on binding
63
(55) (a)
They may implicate each other
(b)
∗The evidence against them may implicate each other
As a third person masculine singular anaphor, himself must be bound by a
third person masculine singular antecedent like the president; similarly, as a
plural anaphor, each other must be bound by a plural antecedent like they/them.
However, it would seem from the contrasts above that the antecedent must
occupy the right kind of position within the structure in order to bind the anaphor
or else the resulting sentence will be ungrammatical. The question of what is
the right position for the antecedent can be answered in terms of the following
structural condition:
(56)
Binding Condition
A bound constituent must be c-commanded by an appropriate antecedent
The relevant bound constituent is the reﬂexive anaphor himself in (54), and its
antecedent is the president; the bound constituent in (55) is the reciprocal anaphor
each other, and its antecedent is they/them. Sentence (54a) has the structure (57)
below:
(57)
TP
 DP             
T'
D                 N        
T           
VP
The         president           may
V      
  PRN
      blame
himself 
The reﬂexive pronoun himself can be bound by the DP the president in (57)
because the sister of the DP node is the T-bar node, and the pronoun himself is one
of the constituents of the relevant T-bar node: consequently, the DP the president
c-commands the anaphor himself and the Binding Condition (56) is satisﬁed.
We therefore correctly specify that (54a) The president may blame himself is
grammatical, with the president interpreted as the antecedent of himself.
But now consider why a structure like (58) below is ungrammatical (cf. (54b)
above):
(58)
TP
           NP   
T' 
N          
 PP                 
T          
VP
Supporters      
      may
   P                       DP      
V    
     PRN
  of   
        blame
   himself 
    D                    N  
   the             president
The answer is that the DP node containing the president doesn’t c-command the
PRN node containing himself, because the sister of the DP node is the P node
of, and himself is clearly not a constituent of the preposition of. Since there is no

64
2 structure
other appropriate antecedent for himself within the sentence (e.g. although the NP
supporters of the president c-commands himself, it is not a suitable antecedent
because it is a plural expression, and himself requires a singular antecedent), the
anaphor himself remains unbound – in violation of the Binding Condition on
anaphors. This is the reason why (54b) ∗Supporters of the president may blame
himself is ungrammatical.
Our brief discussion of polarity items and anaphors in this section and the last
underlines the importance of the relation c-command in syntax. It also provides
further evidence for positing that sentences have a hierarchical constituent struc-
ture, in that the Polarity Condition (49) and the Binding Condition (56) are both
characterised in structural terms.
●
●
2.8
Bare phrase structure
In this chapter, we have used a system of category labels based on
the bar notation which has been widely adopted since the 1970s. Within this
framework, a sentence like (the title of Gloria Gaynor’s immortal song) I will
survive has the structure shown below:
(59)
TP
PRN         
    T' 
I
T         
  V
 will       
survive
The bar notation used in (59) posits that there are three different levels of projec-
tion (i.e. types of expression): (i) heads (also called minimal projections) like
the T/tense auxiliary will; (ii) intermediate projections like the T-bar will sur-
vive; and (iii) maximal projections like the TP I will survive. However, Chomsky
(1999, p. 2) argues that a system which posits three different types of category
label for projections of a given head H (viz. H, H-bar and HP) violates a UG prin-
ciple called the Inclusiveness Condition which speciﬁes that no new information
can be introduced in the course of the syntactic computation – a principle which
Chomsky (2006, p. 4) claims to be ‘a natural principle of efﬁcient computation’.
The reason why the bar notation used in trees like (59) violates Inclusiveness
is as follows. When the word will is taken out of the lexicon, its lexical entry
speciﬁes that it has a set of properties which include the grammatical properties
represented by the category label T in (59). But the tree in (59) tells us that
when will is merged with its complement survive, the resulting string will survive
belongs to the category T-bar – in other words, it is an intermediate projec-
tion of will. Likewise, the tree in (59) also tells us that the larger string I will
survive is a TP – in other words, it is the maximal projection of will. But this
information about intermediate and maximal projections is not part of the lexical
entry for will, and hence has seemingly been added in the course of the syntactic

2.8 Bare phrase structure
65
computation. However, adding such information about projection levels violates
the Inclusiveness Condition.
One way of avoiding violation of Inclusiveness is to remove all information
about projection levels from trees, and hence replace a tree like (59) above by
one like (60) below:
(60)
T 
PRN         
    T
I
T         
  V
 will       
survive
What our revised tree (60) says is that will, will survive and I will survive are
all projections of the tense auxiliary will and hence are all tense expressions.
Information about projection levels is omitted in (60) because it is redundant,
since it is predictable from looking at the relative positions of constituents within
a given structure. Simply by looking at the positions they occupy in the tree
(60), we can tell that will is the minimal projection of will (i.e. it is the smallest
expression headed by will), that will survive is an intermediate projection of
will (by virtue of being neither the smallest nor the largest expression headed
by will) and that I will survive is the maximal projection of will (by virtue of
being the largest expression headed by will). Similarly, we can tell that the V
survive is both a minimal and a maximal projection, in that it is both the smallest
and the largest expression headed by survive: hence (e.g.) it can behave like a
maximal projection and undergo preposing (as in Survive, I will). In much the
same way, we know from looking at the structure in (60) that the pronoun I is
likewise both a minimal and a maximal projection: given their status as maximal
projections, it follows that pronouns can undergo preposing (as with the pronoun
him in Him, I would never trust). Since the information about projection levels
in the bar notation is redundant, Chomsky reasons, such information should not
be represented in the system of category labels used in tree diagrams: after all,
the goal of Minimalism is to reduce theoretical apparatus to the minimum that
is conceptually necessary.
Chomsky goes even further and argues in favour of a theory of bare (i.e.
category-free) phrase structure in which the nodes in trees do not carry category
labels. We can illustrate the kind of reasoning behind his thinking in the following
terms. In a category-based theory of syntax, the grammatical properties of a
pronoun like he are described by assigning it to the category PRN of pronoun.
But simply telling us that he belongs to the category PRN does not characterise its
other grammatical properties – e.g. the fact that it is a third person expression, it is
singular in number, masculine in gender and nominative in case. The traditional
way of describing grammatical properties like these is in terms of a set of features
like [third-person], [singular-number], [masculine-gender], [nominative-case],
with grammatical features conventionally enclosed within square brackets. But
Chomsky (1965, 1970) argued that the categorial properties of words can also be

66
2 structure
described in terms of sets of grammatical features: one such feature might indicate
that he is nominal (rather than verbal) in nature, and another might indicate that it
is a function word (rather than a content word). If all the grammatical properties
of words (including their categorial properties) can be described in terms of sets
of grammatical features, the possibility arises that category labels can be entirely
replaced by sets of features, so opening up the possibility of developing a theory
of bare phrase structure – i.e. a theory in which there are no category labels in
syntactic trees. A radical possibility along these lines would be for the structure
of I will survive to be represented in terms of an unlabelled tree diagram like
(61) below (i.e. a tree containing no category labels):
(61)
I                       will                survive
An unlabelled tree diagram like (61) tells us that the constituents of (61) are I,
will, survive, will survive and I will survive. The lexical entries for the items I,
will and survive comprise sets of features which include information about their
grammatical and selectional properties: e.g. the entry for will tells us that it is a
ﬁnite auxiliary which selects an inﬁnitival complement. The fact that will selects
an inﬁnitive complement (and that survive is an inﬁnitive form and is the sister
of will) means that survive must be the complement of will and hence that will
survive is a projection of will. Likewise, the fact that will has an epp feature
requiring it to project a subject means that the nominative pronoun I must be the
subject of will, and hence that I will survive is an extended projection of will.
As before, the relative position of the relevant constituents within the overall
structure tells us that will is a minimal projection (of itself), will survive is an
intermediate projection of will, and I will survive is the maximal projection of
will. The overall conclusion we arrive at is that the information about category
labels and projection levels in a conventional labelled tree diagram like (59) above
may well be redundant.
Given that bare phrase structure is more of a leading idea than a fully
developed theory and that it has not been widely adopted in descriptive work, we
shall continue to use traditional labelled trees and the bar notation to represent
structure, category membership and projection levels throughout the rest of this
book, because this remains the notation most widely used in contemporary work
in syntax.
●
●
2.9
Summary
In this chapter, we have looked at how words are combined together
to form phrases and sentences. In §2.2 we showed how more and more complex

2.9 Summary
67
phrases can be built up by successive binary merger operations, each of which
combines a pair of constituents to form a larger constituent. In §2.3 we argued
that clauses containing a ﬁnite tense auxiliary are formed by merging the tense
auxiliary with a verbal complement to form an intermediate T-bar projection
which is then merged with a subject to form an extended TP/tense phrase projec-
tion. On this view, a sentence like It may rain would be formed by merging the
present tense auxiliary may with the verb rain to form the T-bar constituent may
rain, and then merging the resulting T-bar with the pronoun it to derive the TP
It may rain. We also noted that the requirement for English tense auxiliaries to
have a subject can be described by saying that a T-auxiliary in English has an epp
feature requiring it to have an extended phrasal projection containing a subject.
Introducing a new term, we said that the subject occupies the speciﬁer position
within TP, and that speciﬁers are constituents which merge with an intermediate
projection to form a maximal projection. We noted that other kinds of constituent
can also have speciﬁers, so that (e.g.) straight occupies the speciﬁer position
within a Prepositional Phrase like straight to bed. In §2.4 we argued that clauses
introduced by a complementiser/C are formed by merging C with a TP comple-
ment to form a CP/complementiser phrase. In §2.5, we looked at ways of testing
constituent structure, outlining tests relating to co-ordination, substitution and
preposing. We noted that a variety of factors can sometimes prevent constituents
from being preposed in order to highlight them; for example, only maximal pro-
jections can be highlighted via preposing, and phrases headed by items with little
or no substantive lexical semantic content generally cannot be preposed: more-
over, there are also syntactic restrictions on preposing, in that the Functional
Head Constraint bars the complement of a determiner or complementiser from
being moved on its own. In §2.6, we looked at the structural relations between
constituents within tree diagrams, noting that the relation c-command plays a
central role in accounting for the syntax of polarity items. In §2.7, we went on to
show that the relation c-command is also central to any account of the binding
properties of anaphors. In §2.8 we discussed the potential redundancy in the
system of labels used to represent categories and projection levels in traditional
phrase structure trees, and noted that Chomsky has been seeking to develop a
theory of bare phrase structure in recent work.
For those of you familiar with work in traditional grammar, it will be clear
that the assumptions made about syntactic structure within the Minimalist frame-
work are somewhat different from those made in traditional grammar. Of course,
there are some similarities: within both types of framework, it is assumed that
lexical categories project into phrases, so that by combining a noun with one or
more other constituents we can form a Noun Phrase, and likewise by combin-
ing a verb/preposition/adjective/adverb with one or more other constituents we
can form a Verb Phrase/Prepositional Phrase/Adjectival Phrase/Adverbial Phrase.
But there are two major differences between the two types of framework. One
is that Minimalism (unlike traditional grammar) assumes that function words
also project into phrases (so that by combining a determiner/D with a noun

68
2 structure
expression we form a Determiner Phrase/DP, by combining a (present or past
tense) auxiliary/T with a complement and a subject we form a Tense Projec-
tion/TP, and by combining a complementiser with a TP we form a Complemen-
tiser Projection/CP). This in some cases results in an analysis which is rather
different from that found in traditional grammar, so that (for example) the nose
would be considered a Noun Phrase in traditional grammar, but is taken to be
a Determiner Phrase within the framework adopted here. A further difference
between the two frameworks is that Minimalism assumes that all syntactic struc-
ture is binary-branching, whereas traditional grammar (implicitly) does not.
Key principles/conditions introduced in this chapter include the following:
(12)
Headedness Principle
Every nonterminal constituent in a syntactic structure is a projection of a
head word
(13)
Binarity Principle
Every nonterminal constituent in a syntactic structure is binary-branching
(30)
Co-ordination Condition
Only constituents of the same type can be co-ordinated
(36)
Economy Condition
Syntactic structures should contain as few words as possible, and syntactic
operations should affect as few words as possible
(37)
Preposing Condition
When material is preposed in order to highlight it, what is preposed is the
smallest possible maximal projection containing the highlighted material
(39)
Functional Head Constraint/FHC
The complement of a certain type of functional head F (such as a determiner
or complementiser) cannot be moved on its own (without also moving F)
(49)
Polarity Condition
A polarity item must be c-commanded by an affective (e.g. negative,
interrogative or conditional) constituent
(56)
Binding Condition
A bound constituent must be c-commanded by an appropriate antecedent
An important relation introduced in the chapter is the following:
(43)
c-command
A constituent X c-commands its sister constituent Y and any constituent Z
which is contained within Y
Recall that – using a train metaphor which treats the nodes in a tree as stations on
a train network – we characterised c-command rather more informally by saying
that a node X c-commands another node Y if you can get from X to Y by taking
a northbound train, getting off at the ﬁrst station/node, changing trains there and
then travelling one or more stops/nodes south on a different line.

2.10 Bibliographical background
69
●
●
2.10
Bibliographical background
The claim made in §2.2 that syntactic structures are headed dates
back in spirit to Bloomﬁeld (1935) – but with the difference that Bloomﬁeld
assumed that some structures are headless. The idea that all syntactic structure
is binary goes back to Kayne (1984). On the claim that syllable structure and
morphological structure are binary, see Radford et al. (1999, pp. 88ff. and p. 164
respectively). The traditional S analysis of clauses outlined in §2.3 dates back
to Chomsky (1955, 1957, 1975), and the S-bar analysis to Bresnan (1970, 1972,
1979). Chomsky (1981, 1986b) argued for an alternative analysis of S constituents
as projections of a head I/INFL/Inﬂection constituent and hence as IP constituents;
when INFL was supplanted by T/tense in later work, S was reanalysed as a TP
projection. Likewise, Chomsky (1981, 1986b) and Stowell (1981) reanalysed
S-bar as CP. For a range of views on the nature of the EPP property of T, see
Chomsky (1982, 1995, 1998), Rothstein (1983), Alexiadou and Anagnostopoulou
(1998), D´eprez (2000), Grohmann, Drury and Castillo (2000), Holmberg (2000b),
Kiss (2001), Boˇskovi´c (2002b), Roberts and Roussou (2002), Rosengren (2002),
Haeberli (2003), van Craenenbroeck and den Dicken (2006) and Landau (2007).
On the claim that syntactic structure contains information about hierarchical
structure but not linear structure (i.e. word order), see Kayne (1994), Yang (1999),
Chomsky (2001) and Kural (2005). An alternative to Chomsky’s bottom-up model
of syntax is the top-down model presented in Phillips (2003): but see Chomsky
(2006, p. 4) for a suggestion that the bottom-up/top-down dichotomy may be
a false one. The claim made in §2.4 that phrases are formed by combining
heads with complements and speciﬁers dates back to the model of X-bar Syntax
developed in Jackendoff (1974, 1977a, 1977b): for a textbook introduction to
X-bar Syntax, see Radford (1981, 1988). In earlier work (e.g. Chomsky 1957,
1965) nominal expressions like the nose were taken to have the status of NP/Noun
Phrase; however, in much work since Abney (1987) they have been analysed as
having the status DP/Determiner Phrase constituents – though it should be pointed
out that the DP analysis is not without posing problems (see e.g. Pollard and Sag
1994, Sadler and Arnold 1994, van Langendonck 1994, Escribano 2004 and van
Eynde 2006). The DEGP analysis of phrases such as quite so rapid also derives
from Abney (1987). On the syntax of nominal expressions like the government
ban on imports, see Radford (1993). The Functional Head Constraint is inspired
by a similar suggestion made in Chomsky (1999). For a more detailed discussion
of the co-ordination criterion used to test structure in §2.5, see Radford (1988,
pp. 75–78). The c-command condition on polarity items discussed in §2.6 dates
back in spirit to Klima (1964): fuller discussion of the syntactic and semantic
conditions governing the distribution of polarity items can be found in Fauconnier
(1975, 1978), Ladusaw (1979), Linebarger (1987), Giannikidou (1997, 1998,
1999), Lahiri (1998), von Fintel (1999), Acquaviva (2002), Watanabe (2004),
Benmamoun (2006), Borroff (2006), Chierchia (2006) and Herdan and Sharvit

70
2 structure
(2006). The c-command condition on binding outlined in §2.7 (and the binding
principles discussed in exercise §2.2) date back to Chomsky (1980): more recent
technical accounts of binding can be found in Reuland (2001a), Reuland and
Everaert (2001), B¨uring (2005), Lasnik (2006) and Giorgi (2007). A technical
defence of the primitive nature of c-command can be found in Frank and Vijay-
Shanker (2001). The theory of Bare Phrase Structure sketched in §2.8 has its
origins in Chomsky (1995, p. 249): see Uriagereka (1998) for a textbook account.
The Inclusiveness Condition is outlined in Chomsky (1999, p. 2), and is an
outgrowth of the earlier No Tampering Condition proposed in Chomsky (2005b,
p. 5) to the effect that ‘Merge of X and Y . . . cannot break up X or Y, or add new
features to them.’ (By saying that merge cannot ‘break up’ an existing structure,
Chomsky means that merge cannot e.g. add a constituent in the middle of an
existing structure, only at its edge, so that ‘Merge is invariably “to the edge”.’)
●
●
Workbook section
●
Exercise 2.1
Discuss the derivation of the following sentences, showing how their structure is built up in a
pairwise fashion by successive binary merger operations.
1
He has become very fond of Mary
2
She must be quite pleased to see you
3
He will need to ask for help (w)
4
They are expecting to hear from you
5
You should try to talk to the president of Utopia
6
Inﬂation has undermined some parts of the economy (w)
7
He won’t admit that he was defrauding the company (w)
8
Nobody could believe that Sam was working for the government
Show how evidence from co-ordination and proforms can be used in support of your analysis. In
addition, say which constituents can (and cannot) be preposed – and why.
Helpful hints
Assume that the sentences are derived in a bottom-up fashion by ﬁrst merging the last two words
in the sentence to form a constituent, then merging the constituent thereby formed with the
third-from-last word to form an even larger constituent, then merging this even larger constituent
with the fourth-from-last word . . . and so on. (It should be noted, however, that while this simple
procedure will work for most of the sentences in the two exercises in this chapter, it requires
modiﬁcation to handle sentences with more complex speciﬁers, like sentences 10 and 12 in
exercise 2.2.) Take very and quite to be adverbs which function as the speciﬁers of the adjectival
expressions fond of Mary and pleased to see you respectively in 1 and 2. In 7, take won’t (for the
purposes of this exercise) to be a negative auxiliary occupying the head T position of TP.

Workbook section
71
Model answer for 1
Merging the preposition of with the noun Mary which serves as its complement derives the PP
(Prepositional Phrase) in (i) below:
(i)
 PP 
P             N
of 
Mary
Merging the adjective fond with the resulting PP (which is the complement of fond) forms the
intermediate adjectival projection (A-bar) fond of Mary in (ii) below:
(ii)
A'
A                    PP 
fond
P  
N 
of          Mary
Merging the A-bar in (ii) with the adverb very which serves as its speciﬁer (in that it modiﬁes fond
of Mary) forms the AP/Adjectival Phrase in (iii) below:
(iii)
    AP 
ADV
  A' 
very
          A 
    PP 
fond
               P   
        N
              of        
Mary
Merging the verb become with the AP very fond of Mary which serves as the complement of
become forms the VP/Verb Phrase in (iv) below:
(iv)
VP
V  
           AP 
become 
          ADV
  A' 
very
                  A  
 PP 
fond 
       P                 N
      of              Mary
Merging the tense auxiliary (T constituent) has with its Verb Phrase complement become very
fond of Mary forms the intermediate T-bar projection (v) below:

72
2 structure
(v)
T' 
T          
VP
has           
   V        
        AP 
          become
          ADV   
  A' 
          very
  A         
PP 
fond 
        P                    N
       of   
  Mary 
Merging the T-bar in (v) with the pronoun he which serves as its subject/speciﬁer will derive the
TP:
(vi)
TP
PRN          
T' 
He 
T  
VP
has
V  
           AP 
            become
          ADV
       A' 
very
    A           
PP 
  fond 
        P
                 N
       of
Mary
Evidence in support of the analysis in (vi) comes from co-ordination data in relation to sentences
such as:
(vii) (a)
He has become very fond [of Mary] and [of her sister]
(b)
He has become very [fond of Mary] and [proud of her achievements]
(c)
He has become [very fond of Mary] but [less fond of her sister]
(d)
He has [become very fond of Mary] and [grown used to her mother]
(e)
He [has become very fond of Mary] and [is hoping to marry her]
The fact that each of the italicised strings can be co-ordinated with another similar (bold-printed)
string is consistent with the claim made in (vi) that of Mary is a PP, fond of Mary is an A-bar, very
fond of Mary is an AP, become very fond of Mary is a VP and has become very fond of Mary is a
T-bar.
Additional evidence in support of the analysis in (vi) comes from the use of the proforms
so/which in:
(viii)(a) He is apparently very fond of Mary, though nobody expected him to become so
(b) If he has become very fond of Mary (which he has), why doesn’t he ask her out?
The fact that very fond of Mary is the antecedent of so in (viiia) is consistent with the claim made
in (vi) that very fond of Mary is an AP; likewise, the fact that become very fond of Mary is the

Workbook section
73
antecedent of which in (viiib) is consistent with the claim made in (vi) that become very fond of
Mary is a VP.
If we look at the question of which expressions in the sentence can and cannot be preposed in
order to highlight them, we ﬁnd the following picture (? indicates questionable grammaticality):
(ix) (a) Mary, he (certainly) has become very fond of
(b) ?Of Mary, he (certainly) has become very fond
(c) ∗Fond of Mary, he (certainly) has become very
(d) Very fond of Mary, he (certainly) has become
(e) Become very fond of Mary, he (certainly) has
(f) ∗Has become very fond of Mary, he (certainly)
(Adding the adverb certainly improves the acceptability of some of the relevant sentences, for
discourse reasons which need not concern us.) In (37) in the main text, we suggested that
highlighting involves preposing the smallest possible maximal projection containing the
highlighted material. Suppose that we want to highlight Mary via preposing. Since Mary is a
maximal projection in (vi) by virtue of being the largest expression headed by the word Mary,
preposing Mary in (ixa) yields a grammatical outcome, as expected. By contrast, preposing the
Prepositional Phrase of Mary yields a somewhat degraded sentence, as we see from (ixb): this
may be because if we want to highlight Mary alone, we prepose the smallest maximal projection
containing Mary, and this is clearly the N Mary not the PP of Mary. There would only be some
point in preposing of Mary if we wanted to highlight of as well as Mary; but since the preposition
of (rather like inﬁnitival to) has little or no semantic content (some linguists suggesting that it is a
genitive case particle in this kind of use and hence a functor), an of-phrase is not a good
candidate for highlighting. The string fond of Mary cannot be preposed in (ixc) because it is an
intermediate (A-bar) projection of the adjective fond, not its maximal projection (the maximal
projection of the adjective fond being the AP very fond of Mary). By contrast, the string very fond
of Mary can be preposed in (ixd) by virtue of its status as the maximal projection of fond (i.e. the
largest expression headed by fond). In (ixe) we see that become very fond of Mary can also be
preposed by virtue of being the maximal projection of the verb become – even though it is the
complement of the T constituent has; hence, either T is not a functional category (as suggested in
Chomsky 1999), or else the Functional Head Constraint applies only to some functional
categories (e.g. those like D and C which are the highest heads in nominal/clausal structures
respectively). By contrast, the string has become very fond of Mary cannot be preposed in (ixf)
because of its status as an intermediate (T-bar) projection of has – the corresponding maximal
projection of has being the TP He has become very fond of Mary.
Helpful hints for sentences 2–7
Discuss whether the analysis you propose accounts for the (un)grammaticality of the sentences
below (which represent intuitions about grammaticality in my own British English variety). To
help you, I have italicised parts of the sentences of particular interest.
Example 2
(a)
She must be quite pleased to see you and meet your mother
(b)
She must be quite pleased to see you and to meet your mother
(c)
She must be quite pleased to see you and glad that you are OK
(d)
She must be quite pleased to see you and very glad that you are OK

74
2 structure
(e)
She must be quite pleased to see you and feel relieved that you’re OK
(f)
She must be quite pleased to see you but will not admit it
(g)
She must be quite pleased to see you, even if she doesn’t seem so.
(h)
You she must be quite pleased to see (though not your sister)
(i)
?See you, she (certainly) must be quite pleased to
(j)
∗To see you, she (certainly) must be quite pleased
(k)
∗Pleased to see you, she (certainly) must be quite
(l)
Quite pleased to see you, she (certainly) must be
(m)
?Be quite pleased to see you, she (certainly) must
(n)
∗Must be quite pleased to see you, she (certainly)
Example 3
(a)
He will need to ask for help and for advice
(b)
He will need to ask for help and seek advice
(c)
He will need to ask for help and to accept it
(d)
He will need to ask for help, and expect to get it
(e)
He will need to ask for help, but can’t count on it
(f)
A lot of people think he will need to ask for help, and so he will
(g)
If he has to ask for help (as he will need to), will he get any?
(h)
Help, he will (certainly) need to ask for (though not money)
(i)
?For help he will (certainly) need to ask (though not for money)
(j)
Ask for help, he will (certainly) need to
(k)
∗To ask for help, he will (certainly) need
(l)
Need to ask for help, he (certainly) will
(m)
∗Will need to ask for help, he (certainly)
Example 4
(a)
They are expecting to hear from you and from her
(b)
They are expecting to hear from you and meet you
(c)
They are expecting to hear from you and to meet you
(d)
They are expecting to hear from you and longing to meet you
(e)
They are expecting to hear from you and are longing to meet you
(f)
They said they were expecting to hear from you, and so they are
(g)
You, they are (certainly) expecting to hear from (though not your sister)
(h)
?From you, they (certainly) are expecting to hear (though not from your sister)
(i)
Hear from you, they (certainly) are expecting to
(j)
∗To hear from you, they (certainly) are expecting
(k)
Expecting to hear from you, they (certainly) are
(l)
∗Are expecting to hear from you, they
Example 5
(a)
You should try to talk to the president of Utopia and of Ruritania
(b)
You should try to talk to the president of Utopia and head of the government
(c)
You should try to talk to the president of Utopia and the leader of the opposition
(d)
You should try to talk to the president of Utopia and to the leader of the opposition

Workbook section
75
(e)
You should try to talk to the president of Utopia and convince him
(f)
You should try to talk to the president of Utopia and to convince him
(g)
You should try to talk to the president of Utopia and contact his aides
(h)
You should try to talk to the president but may not succeed
(i)
You should try to talk to the president of Utopia and should contact his aides
(j)
He said you should try to talk to the president of Utopia, and so you should
(k)
?Utopia, you should certainly try to talk to the president of
(l)
∗Of Utopia, you should certainly try to talk to the president
(m)
∗President of Utopia, you should (certainly) try to talk to the
(n)
The president of Utopia, you should (certainly) try to talk to
(o)
?To the president of Utopia, you should (certainly) try to talk (though not to his aides)
(p)
Talk to the president of Utopia, you should (certainly) try to
(q)
∗To talk to the president of Utopia, you should certainly try
(r)
Try to talk to the president of Utopia, you (certainly) should
(s)
∗Should try to talk to the president of Utopia, you (certainly)
Example 6
(a)
Inﬂation has undermined some parts of the economy and the stockmarket
(b)
Inﬂation has undermined some parts of the economy and of the stockmarket
(c)
Inﬂation has undermined some parts of the economy and sectors of the stockmarket
(d)
Inﬂation has undermined some parts of the economy and many sectors of the stockmarket
(e)
Inﬂation has undermined some parts of the economy and jeopardised growth
(f)
Inﬂation has undermined some parts of the economy and is spiralling out of control
(g)
If inﬂation has undermined some parts of the economy (as it has), why doesn’t the
government act?
(h)
The president said that inﬂation has undermined some parts of the economy, and so it has.
(i)
∗Economy, inﬂation (certainly) has undermined some parts of the
(j)
The economy, inﬂation (certainly) has undermined some parts of
(k)
∗Of the economy, inﬂation (certainly) has undermined some parts
(l)
∗Parts of the economy, inﬂation (certainly) has undermined some
(m)
Some parts of the economy, inﬂation (certainly) has undermined
(n)
Undermined some parts of the economy, inﬂation (certainly) has
(o)
∗Has undermined some parts of the economy, inﬂation (certainly)
Example 7
(a)
He won’t admit that he was defrauding the company and the workforce
(b)
He won’t admit that he was defrauding the company and bankrupting it
(c)
He won’t admit that he was defrauding the company and had bankrupted it
(d)
He won’t admit that he was defrauding the company and it was being bankrupted
(e)
He won’t admit that he was defrauding the company or that he was bankrupting it
(f)
He won’t admit that he was defrauding the company or concede that he lied
(g)
He won’t admit that he was defrauding the company and doesn’t accept that he has
bankrupted it
(h)
If he won’t admit that he was defrauding the company (which he won’t), what can we do
about it?

76
2 structure
(i)
He won’t admit that he was defrauding the company, even though everybody knows it
(j)
∗Company, he (certainly) won’t admit that he was defrauding the
(k)
The company, he (certainly) won’t admit that he was defrauding
(l)
Defrauding the company, he (certainly) won’t admit that he was
(m)
∗Was defrauding the company, he (certainly) won’t admit that he
(n)
∗He was defrauding the company, he (certainly) won’t admit that (= |ðət|)
(o)
That he was defrauding the company, he (certainly) won’t admit
(p)
Admit that he was defrauding the company, he (certainly) won’t
(q)
∗Won’t admit that he was defrauding the company, he (certainly)
Example 8
(a)
Nobody could believe that Sam was working for the government and the opposition
(b)
Nobody could believe that Sam was working for the government and for the opposition
(c)
Nobody could believe that Sam was working for the government and siding with the
opposition
(d)
Nobody could believe that Sam was working for the government and was siding with the
opposition
(e)
Nobody could believe that Sam was working for the government and his wife was working
for the opposition
(f)
Nobody could believe that Sam was working for the government and that his wife was
working for the opposition
(g)
Nobody could believe that Sam was working for the government or imagine that his wife
was working for the opposition
(h)
Nobody could believe that Sam was working for the government or would admit that his
wife was working for the opposition
(i)
If people couldn’t believe that Sam was working for the government (which nobody could),
why didn’t they ask him whether it was true?
(j)
If nobody could believe than Sam was working for the government (as he was), why didn’t
they ask him whether it was true?
(k)
∗Government, nobody could believe that Sam was working for the
(l)
The government, nobody could believe that Sam was working for
(m)
??For the government, nobody could believe that Sam was working
(n)
Working for the government, nobody could believe that Sam (really) was
(o)
∗Was working for the government, nobody could believe that Sam
(p)
∗Sam was working for the government, nobody could believe that (= |ðət|)
(q)
That Sam was working for the government, nobody could believe
(r)
Believe that Sam was working for the government, nobody (really) could
(s)
∗Could believe that Sam was working for the government, nobody
●
Exercise 2.2
We saw in §2.7 that the relation c-command plays an important role in accounting for the syntax
of polarity expressions which are restricted to occurring in a position where they are
c-commanded by an ‘affective’ (e.g. negative, interrogative or conditional) constituent. Show how

Workbook section
77
the c-command condition on the use of polarity items accounts for the (un)grammaticality of
the following:
1
You mustn’t talk to anyone
2
Nobody need do anything
3
Who dare blame anyone?
4
She has refused to sign anything
5
She should know if anyone has made any changes
6
I don’t think that anyone dare lift a ﬁnger
7
He may have no desire to change anything (w)
8
Nobody will think that anything has changed
9
He may feel unable to do anything
10
No politician dare offend anyone (w)
11
∗Anyone isn’t helping me (w)
12
∗The fact that nothing has happened will change anything
13
John will deny that anything has happened
14
∗John has denied anything
15
John has denied any involvement
16
John has denied any involvement in any fraud
In relation to 11 (intended to be synonymous with There isn’t anyone helping me) show how the
traditional ternary-branching analysis of clauses as S constituents (whereby 11 would be analysed
as an S constituent comprising the pronoun/PRN anyone, the present tense auxiliary/T isn’t and
the Verb Phrase/VP helping me) would be unable to provide a principled account of the
ungrammaticality of 11 in terms of the c-command condition on polarity items. In relation to 13
and 14, consider why some linguists (e.g. Landau 2002) have claimed that it is not the verb deny
which is negative in 13, 14, but rather the complementiser that, and say why sentences like 15 and
16 cast doubt on this. Consider an alternative account of data like 13–16 under which we assume
that a polarity item must be asymmetrically c-commanded by an affective item, and we deﬁne
asymmetric c-command as follows:
(i)
X asymmetrically c-commands Y if X c-commands Y but Y does not c-command X
In §2.7, we also showed how the relation c-command plays an important role in accounting for
the syntax of reﬂexive and reciprocal anaphors. The same can be argued to be true of two other
types of expression, namely non-anaphoric pronominals like he/him/her/it/them etc. and
referential noun expressions like John or the president. Chomsky (1980, 1981) developed a
Theory of Binding which incorporated the three binding principles outlined in a slightly revised
form below:
(ii)
Binding Principles
Principle A:
An anaphor must be bound within its local domain
Principle B:
A (non-anaphoric) pronominal (expression) must be free within its local
domain
Principle C:
An R-expression (i.e. referring noun expression) must be free within the
overall structure containing it
Although there is controversy about how best to deﬁne the notion of local domain in relation to

78
2 structure
binding, for present purposes assume that this corresponds to the notion of TP, and that the three
binding principles in (ii) thus amount to the following:
(iii) A: An anaphor (like himself) must be bound by (i.e. must refer to) a c-commanding
constituent within the closest TP immediately containing it
B: A pronominal (like him) must not be bound by (i.e. must not refer to) any c-commanding
constituent within the closest TP immediately containing it
C: An R-expression (i.e. a referring noun expression like John/the president) must not be
coreferential to (i.e. must not refer to the same entity as) any c-commanding expression
within the overall structure containing it
In the light of the Binding Principles outlined informally in (ii), discuss the binding properties of
the expressions Fred, John, he/him and himself in sentences 17–22 below, drawing trees to
represent the structure of the sentences.
17 a
John must feel that Fred has disgraced himself (w)
b
∗John must feel that himself has disgraced Fred
18 a
John must feel that Fred has disgraced him (w)
b
John must feel that he has disgraced Fred
19 a
John may suspect that Fred has taken some pictures of him
b
John may suspect that Fred has taken some pictures of himself
20 a
The rumours about Fred have upset him
b
∗The rumours about Fred have upset himself
21 a
The rumours about him have upset Fred (w)
b
∗The rumours about himself have upset Fred
22 a
John may wonder if the rumours about Fred will affect him
b
John may wonder if the rumours about him will affect Fred
Helpful hints
Make the following assumptions about examples 1–16. When need/dare take a bare to-less
inﬁnitive complement, they are modal auxiliaries which occupy the head T position of TP and
take a VP complement, and they are polarity items in this use. Assume that no in 7 and 10 is a
quantiﬁer (= Q) which heads a quantiﬁer phrase (= QP) constituent and has a noun or Noun
Phrase as its complement: assume that when the head Q of QP is negative, the overall QP is
negative as well (because a phrase carries the same features as its head by virtue of being a
projection of the relevant head). In addition, assume that mustn’t/don’t/isn’t are (inherently
negative) T/tense auxiliaries. Finally, assume that anyone/anything/nobody/nothing are pronouns
(more speciﬁcally, they are Q-pronouns, i.e. pronominal quantiﬁers). In addition, assume that in
the examples in 1–16 above, any and its compounds are partitive in use, and hence polarity items.
In relation to examples 17–22, assume (when drawing your trees) that him and himself belong to

Workbook section
79
the category PRN/pronoun – even though they have different binding properties (himself being an
anaphoric pronoun, and him being a non-anaphoric pronoun).
Model answer for 1
Given the assumptions made in the text, 1 will have the structure (iv) below:
(iv)
TP 
PRN                 
T' 
You 
T     
VP
  mustn’t
V        
 PP 
talk
                  P           PRN
to         anyone
The T node containing the negative auxiliary mustn’t here c-commands the PRN node containing
the polarity item anyone because the sister of [T mustn’t] is [VP talk to anyone], and anyone is
contained within this VP, since the PRN node is one of the grandchildren of the VP node. If you
prefer to use the alternative train metaphor suggested in §2.7 (under which X c-commands Y if
you can get from X to Y on a train by going one stop north, then taking a southbound train on a
different line and travelling as many stops south as you choose), you can say that [T mustn’t]
c-commands [PRN anyone] because if you travel one stop north from the T station you arrive at the
T-bar station, and if you then change trains at the T-bar station you can get a southbound train on a
different line which will take you to the PRN station containing anyone (at the end of the line) via
the VP and PP stations. Since the polarity item anyone is c-commanded by the negative auxiliary
mustn’t, the c-command condition on the use of polarity items is satisﬁed, and sentence 1 is
therefore grammatical.
Model answer for 20a
Although we will not attempt to argue this here, there are good reasons for thinking that sentence
20a has the structure (v) below:
(v)
TP
 DP            
T' 
D      
     NP
T      
VP
The
          have 
 N                       PP     
V  
  PRN
rumours      
               upset               him
    P                N
 about           Fred 
Him is a pronominal (i.e. a non-anaphoric pronoun), and hence subject to Principle B of Binding
Theory. This speciﬁes that a pronominal like him cannot refer to any expression c-commanding it
within the closest TP containing it; and from this it follows that such a pronominal can (a) refer to

80
2 structure
an expression contained in a different TP within the same sentence, or (b) refer to an expression
within the same TP as long as that expression does not c-command him, or (c) refer to some entity
in the domain of discourse (e.g. some person not mentioned in the relevant sentence, but present
in the discourse context). The second of these possibilities (b) allows for him to refer to Fred in
(i), since although him and Fred are contained within the same TP, Fred does not c-command him
(the only constituent which Fred c-commands being the preposition about) so that principle B is
satisﬁed if him refers to Fred (or if indeed him refers to some other person not mentioned in the
sentence).
The noun Fred is an R-expression by virtue of being a referring noun expression, and hence
is subject to Principle C of Binding Theory. This speciﬁes that an R-expression like Fred cannot
be coreferential to any expression which c-commands it anywhere within the overall structure
containing it. However, there is no violation of Principle C in (i) if Fred and him are coreferential,
since Fred is not c-commanded by him. (The only constituent which him c-commands is the V
upset.) There is likewise no violation of Principle C if Fred refers to some person not mentioned
within the sentence. Overall, then, principles B and C allow for the twin possibilities that him can
either refer to Fred or refer to someone other than Fred who is not directly mentioned in the
sentence.

3
Null constituents
●
●
3.1
Overview
So far, our discussion of syntactic structure has tacitly assumed that
all constituents in a given structure are overt (in the sense that they have audible
phonetic features, as well as grammatical and semantic features). However, in
this chapter we argue that syntactic structures may also contain null constituents
(also known as empty categories) – i.e. constituents which have grammatical
and semantic features but lack audible phonetic features (and so are ‘silent’ or
‘inaudible’).
●
●
3.2
Null subjects
We are already familiar with one kind of null constituent from the
discussion of the Null Subject Parameter in §1.6. There, we saw that alongside
ﬁnite clauses like that produced by speaker a in the dialogue in (1) below with
an overt subject like Maria, Italian also has ﬁnite clauses like that produced by
speaker b, with a null subject pronoun conventionally designated as pro (and
referred to affectionately as ‘little pro’):
(1)
speaker a: Maria `e tornata?
Maria is returned?
‘Has Maria returned?’
speaker b: S`ı, pro `e tornata
Yes, pro is returned
‘Yes, she has returned’
One reason for positing pro in (1b) is that it captures the intuition that the sentence
has an ‘understood’ subject (as is clear from the fact that its English translation
contains the subject pronoun she). A second reason relates to the agreement
morphology carried by the auxiliary `e ‘is’ and the participle tornata ‘returned’
in (1). Just as the form of the (third person singular) auxiliary `e ‘is’ and the
(feminine singular) participle tornata is determined via agreement with the overt
(third person feminine singular) subject Maria in (1a), so too the auxiliary and
participle agree in exactly the same way with the null pro subject in (1b), which
(as used here) is third person feminine singular by virtue of referring to Maria.
81

82
3 null constituents
If the sentence in (1b) were subjectless, it is not obvious how we would account
for the relevant agreement facts. Since all ﬁnite clauses in Italian allow a null pro
subject, we can refer to pro as a ﬁnite null subject.
Although English is not an Italian-style null subject language (in the sense that
it is not a language which allows any and every kind of ﬁnite clause to have a null
pro subject), it does have three different types of null subject (brieﬂy discussed
in exercise 1.2). As the examples in (2) below illustrate, an imperative sentence
in English can have an overt subject which is either a second person expression
like you, or a third person expression like anyone:
(2) (a)
Don’t you lose your nerve!
(b)
Don’t anyone lose their nerve!
However, English also allows an imperative null subject in imperative sentences
like (3a) below, and these are intrinsically second person – as the contrast with
(3b) illustrates:
(3) (a)
Don’t lose your nerve!
(b)
∗Don’t lose their nerve!
In other words, imperative null subjects seem to be a silent counterpart of you.
One way of describing this is to say that the pronoun you can have a null spellout
(and thereby have its phonetic features not spelled out – i.e. deleted/omitted)
when it is the subject of an imperative sentence.
English also has a second kind of null subject which we will call a truncated
null subject. In informal styles of spoken English (and also in diary styles of
written English) a sentence can be truncated (i.e. shortened) by giving a subject
pronoun like I/you/he/we/they a null spellout if it is the ﬁrst word in a sentence,
and if it is weak (i.e. unstressed/non-contrastive). So, in sentences like those in
(4) below:
(4) (a)
I can’t ﬁnd my pen
(b)
I think I left it at home
(c)
Why do I always lose things?
the two italicised occurrences of the subject pronoun I can be given a null spellout
because in each case I is the ﬁrst word in the sentence, but not other occurrences
of I – as we see from (5) below:
(5) (a)
Can’t ﬁnd my pen
(b)
Think I left it at home/∗Think left it at home
(c)
∗Why do always lose things?
However, not all sentence-initial subjects can be truncated (e.g. we can’t readily
truncate He in a sentence like He is tired, giving ∗Is tired): the precise nature of
the constraints on truncation are unclear.
A third type of null subject found in English is a nonﬁnite null subject,
found in nonﬁnite clauses which don’t have an overt subject. In this connection,

3.2 Null subjects
83
compare the structure of the bracketed inﬁnitive clauses in the (a) and (b) examples
below:
(6) (a)
We would like [you to stay]
(b)
We would like [to stay]
(7) (a)
We don’t want [anyone to upset them]
(b)
We don’t want [to upset them]
Each of the bracketed inﬁnitive complement clauses in the (a) examples in (6) and
(7) contains an overt (italicised) subject. By contrast, the bracketed complement
clauses in the (b) examples appear to be subjectless. However, we shall argue
that apparently subjectless inﬁnitive clauses contain a null subject. The particular
kind of null subject found in the bracketed clauses in the (b) examples has the same
grammatical and referential properties as a pronoun, and hence appears to be a
null pronoun. In order to differentiate it from the null (‘little pro’) subject found in
ﬁnite clauses in null subject languages like Italian, it is conventionally designated
as PRO and referred to as ‘big PRO’. Given this assumption, a sentence such as
(6b) will have a parallel structure to (6a), except that the bracketed TP has an
overt pronoun you as its subject in (6a), but a null pronoun PRO as its subject in
(6b) – as shown below:
(8)
TP
PRN           
  T' 
We 
T  
VP
      would
  V      
TP
like 
  PRN              
T' 
                 you/PRO 
  T
V 
 to             stay
Using the relevant technical terminology, we can say that the null PRO sub-
ject in (8) is controlled by (i.e. refers back to) the subject we of the matrix
(= containing = next highest) clause – or, equivalently, that we is the controller
or antecedent of PRO: hence, a structure like ‘We would like PRO to stay’ has
an interpretation akin to that of ‘We would like ourselves to stay.’ Verbs (such
as like) which allow an inﬁnitive complement with a PRO subject are said to
function (in the relevant use) as control verbs; likewise, a complement clause
with a null PRO subject is known as a control clause.
An obvious question to ask at this juncture is why we should posit that appar-
ently subjectless inﬁnitive complements like those bracketed in (6b) and (7b)
above have a null PRO subject. Part of the motivation comes from the intuition
that the verb stay in (6b) above has an understood subject – and positing a PRO
subject for the stay clause captures this intuition. The null PRO subject of a

84
3 null constituents
control inﬁnitive becomes overt if the inﬁnitive clause is substituted by a ﬁnite
clause, as we see from the paraphrase for (9a) below given in (9b):
(9) (a)
Jim promised [PRO to come to my party]
(b)
Jim promised [he would come to my party]
The fact that the bracketed clause in the (b) example contains an overt (italicised)
subject makes it plausible to suppose that the bracketed clause in the synonymous
(a) example has a null PRO subject.
Further evidence in support of positing a null PRO subject in such clauses
comes from the syntax of reﬂexive anaphors (i.e. self/selves forms such as
myself/yourself/himself/themselves etc.). As examples such as the following indi-
cate, reﬂexives generally require a local antecedent (the reﬂexive being italicised
and its antecedent bold printed):
(10) (a)
They want [John to help himself]
(b)
∗They want [John to help themselves]
In the case of structures like (10), a local antecedent means ‘a clausemate
antecedent’ – i.e. an antecedent contained within the same [bracketed] clause/TP
as the reﬂexive. (10a) is grammatical because it satisﬁes this clausemate condi-
tion: the antecedent of the reﬂexive himself is the noun John, and John is contained
within the same (bracketed) help-clause as himself. By contrast, (10b) is ungram-
matical because the reﬂexive themselves does not have a clausemate antecedent
(i.e. it does not have an antecedent within the bracketed clause containing it); its
antecedent is the pronoun they, and they is contained within the want clause, not
within the [bracketed] help clause. In the light of the requirement for reﬂexives
to have a local antecedent, consider now how we account for the grammaticality
of the following kind of structure:
(11)
John wants [to prove himself]
It follows from the clausemate condition on reﬂexives that himself must have
an antecedent within the clause/TP immediately containing it. This clausemate
condition is satisﬁed if we assume that the complement clause in (11) has a PRO
subject of its own, as shown in simpliﬁed form in (12) below:
(12)
John wants [TP PRO [T to] prove himself]
We can then say that PRO serves as a clausemate antecedent for himself (i.e.
PRO is the antecedent of himself, and is immediately contained within the same
bracketed TP as himself). Since PRO in turn is controlled by John (i.e. John is
the antecedent of PRO), this means that himself is coreferential to (i.e. refers to
the same individual as) John.
However, it might be objected that we can account for sentences like (11)
without the need for positing a PRO subject for the bracketed to-clause if we
posit that a reﬂexive contained within a subjectless clause can have an antecedent
in a higher clause. We could then suppose that the bracketed TP in (11) is

3.2 Null subjects
85
subjectless, and that the antecedent of himself is the main-clause subject John.
However, the assumption that inﬁnitival TPs like that bracketed in (11) don’t have
a subject of their own but rather the main-clause subject serves as the subject
of both the main and the complement clause proves problematic in respect of
structures such as those below:
(13) (a)
It’s vital [to prepare myself properly for the exam]
(b)
It’s important [not to take oneself too seriously]
(c)
John didn’t want [to get themselves into trouble]
(d)
John proposed [to become partners]
(e)
John wanted [to work together]
If the bracketed inﬁnitive clause were subjectless in (13a,b), the reﬂexive
myself/yourself would have to refer to the main-clause subject it, so we would
wrongly predict that itself has to be used and that sentences like (13a,b) are
ungrammatical. Likewise, if the bracketed inﬁnitive clause in (13c) were subject-
less, the only possible antecedent for the reﬂexive themselves within the sentence
would be the main-clause subject John – and yet it is clear that the two don’t
match (in that he is singular and themselves plural): so once again, we would
wrongly predict that sentences like (13c) are ungrammatical. A similar mismatch
would arise if the bracketed inﬁnitive clause in (13d) were subjectless, since
there would then be a mismatch between the plural noun partners and the sin-
gular subject John with which it is associated – the same kind of mismatch that
we ﬁnd in ∗John became partners. And since the adverb together as used in
sentences like (13e) must be associated with a plural expression (cf. They/∗He
worked together), it is clear that saying that the bracketed inﬁnitive clause in
(13e) is subjectless would wrongly predict that (13e) should be ungrammatical,
because of the number mismatch between (singular) John and (plural) together.
By contrast, we can overcome these problems if we suppose that seemingly
subjectless clauses have a null subject, and that sentences like those in (13) have
the structure shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(14) (a)
It’s vital [PRO to prepare myself properly for the exam]
(b)
It’s important [PRO not to take oneself too seriously]
(c)
John didn’t want [PRO to get themselves into trouble]
(d)
John proposed [PRO to become partners]
(e)
John wanted [PRO to work together]
We could then say that PRO in (14a) refers to the speaker who uttered the
sentence, so that PRO is a ﬁrst person singular subject (like I), and hence can
serve as the antecedent of myself: when PRO refers to some entity within the
domain of discourse but not directly mentioned in the sentence, we can say that
PRO has a discourse controller. In (14b), PRO has arbitrary reference, and
so denotes ‘any arbitrary person you care to mention’ and hence has essentially
the same interpretation as arbitrary one in sentences like ‘One can’t be too
careful these days’: consequently, PRO can serve as the antecedent of oneself.

86
3 null constituents
In (14c–e), PRO is a third person plural subject (like they), and it is partially
controlled by the main clause subject John (in the sense that the antecedent of
PRO is a plural expression which denotes a set of individuals including John –
i.e. referring to John and one or more other people): since PRO is a plural
subject, it is compatible in number with expressions like themselves/partners/
together.
A different kind of argument in support of positing that control clauses have a
silent PRO subject can be formulated in theoretical terms. In the previous chapter,
we noted that T-auxiliaries like will have an epp feature which requires them to
project a subject on the edge of TP. However, since we argued in chapter 1 that
inﬁnitival to also belongs to the category T (by virtue of its status as an inﬁnitival
tense particle), we can suggest the broader generalisation that all T constituents
have an epp feature requiring them to project a subject on the edge of TP – not
only T-auxiliaries like will but also the inﬁnitival T constituent to. The analysis in
(8) above is consistent with this generalisation, since it posits that the stay clause
either has an overt you subject or a null PRO subject, with either type of subject
satisfying the epp feature of to. This leads us to the more general conclusion that
just as inﬁnitive complements like you to stay in (6a) have an overt subject (you),
so too seemingly subjectless inﬁnitive complements like to stay in (6b) have a
null PRO subject – as shown in (8) above.
●
●
3.3
Null auxiliaries
So far, all the clauses we have looked at in this chapter and the last
have contained a TP projection headed by a ﬁnite auxiliary or inﬁnitival to.
The obvious generalisation suggested by this is that all clauses contain TP. An
important question begged by this assumption, however, is how we are to analyse
ﬁnite clauses which contain no overt auxiliary. In this connection, consider the
structure below:
(15)
He could have helped her, or [she have helped him]
Both clauses here (viz. the he clause and the bracketed she clause) appear to be
ﬁnite, since both have nominative subjects (he/she). If all ﬁnite clauses contain
a TP projection headed by a ﬁnite T constituent, it follows that both clauses in
(15) must be TPs containing a ﬁnite T. This is clearly true of the he clause, since
this contains the ﬁnite modal auxiliary could; however, the she clause doesn’t
seem to contain any ﬁnite auxiliary constituent, since have is an inﬁnitive form in
(15) (the corresponding ﬁnite form which would be required with a third person
subject like she being has). How can we analyse ﬁnite clauses as projections of
a ﬁnite T constituent when clauses like that bracketed in (15) contain no ﬁnite
auxiliary?
A plausible answer is to suppose that the string she have helped him in (15) is
an elliptical (i.e. abbreviated) variant of she could have helped him, and that the

3.3 Null auxiliaries
87
T constituent could in the second clause undergoes a particular form of ellipsis
called gapping. (Gapping is a grammatical operation which allows the head
of a phrase to be given a null spellout – and so be ‘silent’ – when the same
item occurs elsewhere within the sentence, and is so called because it leaves an
apparent ‘gap’ in the phrase where the head would otherwise have been.) If so, the
second clause will have the structure shown below (where could marks an ellipsed
counterpart of could, and we assume that a nonﬁnite auxiliary like have occupies
the head AUX/Auxiliary position of an AUXP/Auxiliary Phrase: see §4.6 on
AUXP):
(16)
TP
PRN            
  T' 
she
T  
            AUXP 
       could
AUX
VP
have
  V               PRN
helped           him
The head T position of TP in a structure like (16) is ﬁlled by the ellipsed aux-
iliary could. Although an ellipsed item loses its phonetic features, it retains its
grammatical and semantic features, so that could in (16) is a silent counterpart
of could. The null T analysis in (16) provides a principled account of three
observations. Firstly, the bracketed clause in (15) is interpreted as an elliptical
form of she could have helped him: this can be straightforwardly accounted for
under the analysis in (16) since T contains a null counterpart of could. Secondly,
the subject is in the nominative case form she: this can be attributed to the fact
that the T position in (16) is ﬁlled by a ‘silent’ counterpart of the ﬁnite aux-
iliary could, which (like other ﬁnite auxiliaries) requires a nominative subject.
Thirdly, the perfect auxiliary have is in the inﬁnitive form: this is because could
(being a null copy of could) has the same selectional properties as could, and so
(like could) selects a complement headed by an item (like have) in the inﬁnitive
form.
A further argument in support of the null T analysis in (16) comes from facts
relating to cliticisation (a process by which one word attaches itself in a leech-
like fashion to another). The perfect auxiliary have has a range of variant forms in
the spoken language. When unstressed, it can lose its initial /h/ segment and have
its vowel reduced to schwa /ə/, and so be pronounced as /əv/ e.g. in sentences
such as You should have been there. (Because of is also pronounced /əv/ when
unstressed, some people mistakenly write this as You should of been there – not
you, of course!) However, when have is used with a pronominal subject ending
in a vowel or diphthong (e.g. a pronoun like I/we/you/they), it can lose its vowel
entirely and be contracted down to /v/; in this weak form, it is phonetically too

88
3 null constituents
insubstantial to survive as an independent word and encliticises onto (i.e. attaches
to the end of) its subject, resulting in structures such as:
(17) (a)
You’ve done your duty
(b)
They’ve retired General Gaga
(c)
I’ve forgotten to lock the door
(d)
We’ve saved you a place
However, note that have cannot cliticise onto she in (18) below:
(18)
∗He could have helped her or she’ve helped him
so that she’ve is not homophonous with the word sheave. Why should cliticisation
of have onto she be blocked here? Let’s suppose that have-cliticisation is subject
to the following structural conditions:
(19)
Have-cliticisation
Have can encliticise onto a word W ending in a vowel or diphthong
provided that
(i)
W c-commands have and
(ii)
W is immediately adjacent to have
(W is immediately adjacent to have if there is no constituent between the two –
i.e. no constituent which c-commands have and which in turn is c-commanded
by W. A descriptive detail which we set aside here is that (19) applies speciﬁcally
to encliticisation of have: encliticisation of the ’s variant of has and of other
contracted auxiliary forms is subject to far less restrictive conditions on its use –
but this will not be pursued here.)
To see how (19) works, consider the structure below:
(20)
TP
PRN              
 T' 
They
  T
V 
have         
left
Here, the pronoun they ends in a diphthong and so is the kind of pronoun that have
can cliticise onto. The c-command condition (19i) is met in that they c-commands
have, and the adjacency condition (19ii) is also met in that there is no constituent
intervening between they and have. Since both its structural conditions are met,
(19) correctly predicts that have can encliticise onto they, so deriving They’ve
left. The kind of cliticisation involved here is essentially phonological (rather than
syntactic), so that they and have remain separate words in the syntax, but are fused
together in the PF component (i.e. the component responsible for determining
Phonetic Form) once the structure generated (i.e. formed) by the syntax has been
handed over to the PF component for morphological and phonological processing.
In the light of our discussion of have-cliticisation, now consider why clitici-
sation of have onto she is not possible in (18) ∗He could have helped her or

3.4 Null T in ﬁnite clauses
89
she’ve helped him. Under the null T analysis suggested above, the second clause
in (18) contains a null variant of could and has the structure shown in (16) above.
Although the c-command condition (19i) is met in (16) in that she c-commands
have, the adjacency condition (19ii) is not met in that she is not immediately
adjacent to have because the null auxiliary could intervenes between the two (in
that could c-commands have, and could is in turn c-commanded by she). Thus,
the presence of the intervening null auxiliary could blocks cliticisation of have
onto she in (16), thereby accounting for the ungrammaticality of (18) ∗He could
have helped her or she’ve helped him. Turning this conclusion on its head, we
can say that the ungrammaticality of (18) provides us with empirical evidence
that the bracketed clause in (15) contains a null counterpart of could intervening
between she and have – as claimed in the analysis in (16) above.
●
●
3.4
Null T in ﬁnite clauses
Our analysis of the kind of auxiliariless clauses discussed in §3.3 as
TPs headed by a T which has a null phonetic spellout suggests the more general
hypothesis that:
(21)
All ﬁnite clauses are TPs headed by an (overt or null) T constituent
Such a hypothesis has interesting implications for ﬁnite clauses such as the
following which contain a ﬁnite verb, but no auxiliary:
(22) (a)
He enjoys syntax
(b)
He enjoyed syntax
It implies that we should analyse auxiliariless indicative clauses like those in
(22a,b) above as TP constituents which have the respective structures shown in
(23a,b) below:
(23)
(a) 
TP
(b)
TP
PRN         
  T' 
             PRN         
T' 
He   
              He 
T            
VP          
T 
    VP 
  V                  N   
  V                  N
enjoys
syntax
enjoyed
syntax
Structures like those in (23) would differ from null-auxiliary structures like (15)
He could have helped her or she could have helped him in that they don’t contain
a silent counterpart of a speciﬁc auxiliary like could or is, but rather simply don’t
contain any auxiliary at all.
However, there’s clearly something very odd about a null T analysis like (23)
if we say that the relevant clauses are TPs which are headed by a T constituent
which contains absolutely nothing. For one thing, a category label like T is an

90
3 null constituents
abbreviation for a set of features (i.e. grammatical properties) carried by a lexical
item – hence, if we posit that structures like (23) are TPs, the head T position of TP
has to be occupied by some kind of lexical item. Moreover, the structures which
are generated by the syntactic component of the grammar are eventually handed
over to the semantic component to be assigned a semantic interpretation, and it
seems reasonable to follow Chomsky (1995) in requiring all heads in a syntactic
structure to play a role in determining the meaning of the overall structure. If
so, it clearly has to be the case that the head T of TP contains some item which
contributes in some way to the semantic interpretation of the sentence. But what
kind of item could T contain?
In order to try and answer this question, it’s instructive to contrast auxiliariless
structures like those in (23) above with auxiliary-containing structures like those
in (24) below:
(24)
(a)           TP
(b)    
TP
PRN         
  T' 
             PRN         
T' 
He   
              He 
T            
VP          
T 
    VP 
         does    
          did    
  V                  N   
  V                  N
  enjoy
syntax       
  enjoy
syntax
The head T position in TP is occupied by the present tense auxiliary does in
(24a), and by the past tense auxiliary did in (24b). If we examine the internal
morphological structure of these two words, we see that does contains the present
tense afﬁx -s, and that did contains the past tense afﬁx -d (each of these afﬁxes
being attached to an irregular stem form of the auxiliary do). In schematic terms,
then, we can say that the head T constituent of TP in structures like (24) is of the
form auxiliary stem+tense afﬁx.
If we now look back at the auxiliariless structures in (23), we see that the head
V position of VP in these structures is occupied by the verbs enjoys and enjoyed,
and that these have a parallel morphological structure, in that they are of the form
verb stem+tense afﬁx. So, what ﬁnite clauses like (23) and (24) share in common
is that in both cases they contain an (auxiliary or main) verb carrying a tense
afﬁx. In structures like (24) which contain an auxiliary like do, the tense afﬁx is
attached to the auxiliary; in structures like (23) which contain no auxiliary, the
tense afﬁx attaches instead to the main verb enjoy. If we make the reasonable
assumption that (as its label suggests) T is the locus of the tense properties of a
ﬁnite clause (in the sense that T is the constituent which carries its tense features),
an interesting possibility to consider is that the relevant tense afﬁx (in both types
of clause structure) originates in the head T position of TP. Since tensed verbs
agree with their subjects in person and number, let us suppose that the tense
afﬁx (below abbreviated to Af) also carries person and number features. On this
view, sentences like He does enjoy syntax and He enjoys syntax would have the

3.4 Null T in ﬁnite clauses
91
respective syntactic structures indicated in (25a,b) below, where [3SgPr] is an
abbreviation for the features [third-person, singular-number, present-tense]:
(25)
(a)           TP
(b)    
TP
PRN         
  T' 
             PRN         
T' 
 He   
              He 
T            
VP          
T 
    VP 
DO+Af3SgPr
      Af3SgPr 
  V                  N   
  V                  N
  enjoy
syntax       
  enjoy
syntax
The two structures share in common the fact that they both contain a tense afﬁx
(Af) in T; they differ in that the tense afﬁx is attached to the auxiliary do in (25a),
but is unattached in (25b) because there is no auxiliary in T for the afﬁx to attach
to. (An interesting implication of the analysis in (25b) is that it requires us to
make a minor revision to the assumption we made in the previous chapter that all
nonterminal nodes in a tree are projections of a head word, since a tense afﬁx is
clearly not a word.)
Under the analysis in (25), it is clear that T in auxiliariless clauses like (25b)
would not be empty, but rather would contain a tense/agreement afﬁx whose
semantic contribution to the meaning of the overall sentence is that it marks
tense. But what about the phonetic spellout of the tense afﬁx? In a structure
like (25a), it is easy to see why the (third person singular present) tense afﬁx is
ultimately spelled out as an s-inﬂection on the end of the auxiliary does, because
the afﬁx is directly attached to the auxiliary do in T. But how come the afﬁx
ends up spelled out as an s-inﬂection on the main verb enjoys in a structure like
(25b)? We can answer this question in the following terms. Once the syntax has
formed a clause structure like (25), the relevant syntactic structure is then sent to
the semantic component to be assigned a semantic interpretation, and to the PF
component to be assigned a phonetic form. In the PF component, a number of
morphological and phonological operations apply. One of these morphological
operations is traditionally referred to as Afﬁx Hopping, and can be characterised
informally as follows:
(26)
Afﬁx Hopping
When some constituent C contains an unattached afﬁx Af, in the PF
component Af is lowered onto the head H of the complement of C (provided
H is an appropriate host for the afﬁx to attach to)
Since the Afﬁx is in T in (25b), and since the complement of T is the VP enjoy
syntax, (26) means that the afﬁx in T will be lowered onto the head V enjoy of
the relevant VP – provided that V is an appropriate kind of host for the afﬁx. But
since the afﬁx in T is a tense afﬁx which needs to attach to a verbal host, it is clear
that the verb enjoy is indeed an appropriate host for the tense afﬁx. Accordingly,
in the PF component the unattached afﬁx in T in (25b) will be lowered onto the

92
3 null constituents
verb enjoy via the morphological operation of Afﬁx Hopping (26), in the manner
shown by the arrow in (27) below:
(27)
TP
PRN         
T' 
He
  T
VP      
Af3SgPr
    V    
 N    
 enjoy
syntax 
Since inﬂections in English are sufﬁxes, we can assume that the tense afﬁx will
be lowered onto the end of the verb enjoy, to derive the structure [enjoy+Af3SgPr].
Given that enjoy is a regular verb, the resulting structure will ultimately be spelled
out in the phonology as the form enjoys.
What we have done so far in this section is sketch out an analysis of auxiliariless
ﬁnite clauses as TPs headed by a T constituent containing an abstract tense afﬁx
which is subsequently lowered onto the verb by an Afﬁx Hopping operation in
the PF component (so resulting in a clause structure which looks as if it contains
no T constituent). However, an important question to ask at this juncture is why
we should claim that auxiliariless clauses contain an abstract T constituent. From
a theoretical point of view, one advantage of the abstract T analysis is that it
provides a unitary characterisation of the syntax of clauses, since it allows us to
say that all clauses contain a TP projection, that the subject of a clause is always
in spec-T (i.e. always serves as the speciﬁer of T), that a ﬁnite clause always
contains an (auxiliary or main) verb carrying a tense afﬁx, and so on. Lending
further weight to theory-internal considerations such as these is a substantial body
of empirical evidence, as we shall see.
One argument in support of the tense afﬁx analysis comes from co-ordination
facts in relation to sentences such as:
(28) (a)
He enjoys syntax, and has learned a lot
(b)
He enjoyed syntax, and is taking a follow-up course
In both sentences, the italicised string enjoys syntax/enjoyed syntax has been
co-ordinated with a bold-printed constituent which is clearly a T-bar in that
it comprises a present tense auxiliary (has/is) with a Verb Phrase complement
(learned a lot/taking a follow-up course). On the assumption that only the same
kinds of constituent can be conjoined by and, it follows that the italicised (seem-
ingly T-less) strings enjoys syntax/enjoyed syntax must also be T-bar constituents;
and since they contain no overt auxiliary, this means they must contain an abstract
T constituent of some kind – precisely as the tense afﬁx analysis in (27) claims.
A direct consequence of the tense afﬁx analysis (27) of auxiliariless ﬁnite
clauses is that ﬁnite auxiliaries and ﬁnite main verbs occupy different positions

3.4 Null T in ﬁnite clauses
93
within the clause: ﬁnite auxiliaries occupy the head T position of TP, whereas
ﬁnite main verbs occupy the head V position of VP. An interesting way of testing
this hypothesis is in relation to the behaviour of items which have the status of
auxiliaries in some uses, but of verbs in others. One such word is have. In the
kind of uses illustrated in (29) below, have is a perfect auxiliary (and so requires
the main verb to be in the perfect participle form seen/been):
(29) (a)
They have seen the ghost
(b)
They had been warned about the ghost
However, in the uses illustrated in (30) below, have is causative or experiential in
sense, and so has much the same meaning as cause in (30a,b) and as experience
in (30c,d):
(30) (a)
The doctor had an eye-specialist examine the patient
(b)
The doctor had the patient examined by an eye-specialist
(c)
The teacher had three students walk out on her
(d)
I’ve never had anyone send me ﬂowers
By traditional tests of auxiliarihood, perfect have is an auxiliary, and
causative/experiential have is a main verb: e.g. perfect have can undergo inver-
sion (Has she gone to Paris?) whereas causative/experiential have cannot (∗Had
the doctor an eye specialist examine the patient?). In terms of the assumptions
we are making here, this means that ﬁnite forms of have are positioned in the
head T position of TP in their perfect use, but in the head V position of VP in
their causative or experiential use.
Evidence in support of this claim comes from cliticisation. We noted earlier
in (19) above that the form have can cliticise onto an immediately adjacent
pronoun ending in a vowel/diphthong which c-commands have. In the light of
this, consider contrasts such as the following:
(31) (a)
They’ve seen a ghost (= perfect have)
(b)
∗They’ve their car serviced regularly (= causative have)
(c)
∗They’ve students walk out on them sometimes (= experiential have)
How can we account for this contrast? If we assume that perfect have in (31a) is a
ﬁnite (present tense) auxiliary which occupies the head T position of TP, but that
causative have in (31b) and experiential have in (31c) are main verbs occupying
the head V position of a VP complement of a null T, then prior to cliticisation
the three clauses will have the respective simpliﬁed structures indicated by the
partial labeled bracketings in (32a–c) below (where Af is an abstract tense afﬁx):
(32) (a)
[TP They [T have+Af] [VP [V seen] a ghost]]
(b)
[TP They [T Af] [VP [V have] their car serviced regularly]]
(c)
[TP They [T Af] [VP [V have] students walk out on them sometimes]]
(Here and throughout the rest of the book, partial labelled bracketings are used
to show those parts of the structure most relevant to the discussion at hand,

94
3 null constituents
omitting other parts. In such cases, we generally show relevant heads and their
maximal projections but omit intermediate projections, as in (32) above where
we show e.g. T and TP but not T-bar.) Since we claimed in (19) above that
cliticisation of have onto a pronoun is blocked by the presence of an intervening
constituent, it should be obvious why have can cliticise onto they in (32a) but not
in (32b,c): after all, there is no intervening constituent separating the pronoun
they from have in (32a), but they is separated from the verb have in (32b,c) by an
intervening T constituent containing a tense afﬁx (Af), so blocking contraction.
It goes without saying that a crucial premise of this account is the assumption
that have is positioned in the head T position of TP in its use as a ﬁnite perfect
auxiliary, but in the head V position of VP in its use as a causative or experiential
verb. In other words, have-cliticisation data suggest that ﬁnite clauses which lack
a ﬁnite auxiliary are TPs headed by an abstract T constituent containing a tense
afﬁx.
In this section, we have argued that T in a ﬁnite clause always contains a tense
afﬁx. In clauses containing an auxiliary, the auxiliary is directly merged with the
tense afﬁx to form an auxiliary+afﬁx structure; in auxiliariless clauses, the tense
afﬁx is lowered onto the main verb by an Afﬁx Hopping operation in the PF
component, so forming a verb+afﬁx structure. When an afﬁx is stranded with no
verbal stem to attach to, it is spelled out as an inﬂected form of do (as we shall
see in more detail later).
●
●
3.5
Null T in inﬁnitive clauses
In the previous section, we argued that auxiliariless ﬁnite clauses are
TP constituents headed by an abstract T containing a tense afﬁx. Given that
clauses containing a ﬁnite auxiliary are also TPs, a plausible conclusion to draw
is that all ﬁnite clauses are TPs. Since clauses containing inﬁnitival to are also
TPs (with to serving as a nonﬁnite tense particle) we can generalise still further
and say that all ﬁnite and inﬁnitival clauses are TPs. This in turn has implications
for how we analyse bare (i.e. to-less) inﬁnitive complement clauses such as those
bracketed below (where the italicised verb is inﬁnitival in form):
(33) (a)
I have never known [Tom criticise anyone]
(b)
A reporter saw [Senator Sleaze leave Benny’s Bunny Bar]
(c)
You mustn’t let [the pressure get to you]
If (as we are suggesting) all ﬁnite and inﬁnitival clauses are indeed TPs, bare
inﬁnitive clauses like those bracketed in (33) will be TPs headed by a null
T constituent. Since the relevant null T constituent resembles inﬁnitival to in
requiring the (italicised) verb in the bracketed complement clause to be in the
inﬁnitive form, we can take it to be a null counterpart of inﬁnitival to (below
symbolised as to). This in turn will mean that the bracketed inﬁnitive clause in
(33a) has the structure (34) below:

3.5 Null T in inﬁnitive clauses
95
(34)
TP
N      
T' 
Tom 
T          
VP         
  to
  V                PRN
criticise         anyone     
We could then say that verbs like know, see and let (as used in (33) above) take
an inﬁnitival TP complement headed by an inﬁnitive particle with a null spellout,
whereas verbs like expect, judge, report, believe etc. take a TP complement
headed by an inﬁnitive particle which is overtly spelled out as to in structures
like those below:
(35) (a)
I expect [him to win]
(b)
I judged [him to be lying]
(c)
They reported [him to be missing]
(d)
I believe [him to be innocent]
This means that all inﬁnitive clauses are TPs headed by an inﬁnitival T which
is overtly spelled out as to in inﬁnitive clauses like those bracketed in (35), but
which has a null spellout in inﬁnitive clauses like those bracketed in (33).
From a historical perspective, the null inﬁnitive particle analysis is far from
implausible since bare inﬁnitive clauses in present-day English had to inﬁni-
tive counterparts in earlier varieties of English – as illustrated by the following
Shakespearean examples:
(36)(a)
I saw [her coral lips to move] (Lucentio, Taming of the Shrew, I.i)
(b)
My lord your son made [me to think of this] (Helena, All’s Well That Ends
Well, I.iii)
(c)
What would you have [me to do]? (Lafeu, All’s Well That Ends Well, V.ii)
(d)
I had rather hear [you to solicit that] (Olivia, All’s Well That Ends Well, III.i)
Moreover, some bare inﬁnitive clauses have to-inﬁnitive counterparts in present-
day English: cf.
(37) (a)
I’ve never known [Tom (to) criticise anyone]
(b)
Tom has never been known [to criticise anyone]
(38) (a)
A reporter saw [Senator Sleaze leave Benny’s Bunny Bar]
(b)
Senator Sleaze was seen [to leave Benny’s Bunny Bar]
The inﬁnitive particle which heads the bracketed inﬁnitival TP in sentences like
(37, 38) must be overtly spelled out as to when the relevant TP is used as the
complement of a passive participle like known in (37b) or seen in (38b), but
can have a null spellout when the relevant TP is the complement of an active
transitive verb like the perfect participle known in (37a) or the past tense form
saw in (38a) – a key difference (in my British variety of English) being that a null

96
3 null constituents
spellout for the inﬁnitive particle is optional in structures like (37a) but obligatory
in structures like (37b). However, occasional ‘slips of the tongue’ can result in
the inﬁnitive particle sometimes being overt even in active structures like (38a) –
as we see from the following sentences recorded from TV programmes:
(39) (a)
The Mayor of New Orleans would like to see parts of the city which were
devastated in the hurricane to get back to normal (BBC TV newsreader)
(b)
Arsenal’s back ﬁve are making Essien and Frank Lampard to work very
hard across the pitch (Sky TV sports commentator)
Although data like (36–39) are suggestive rather than conclusive, they make it
plausible to suppose that bare inﬁnitive clauses are TPs headed by a null variant
of inﬁnitival to.
Additional support for the null inﬁnitive particle analysis of bare inﬁnitive
clauses comes from cliticisation facts in relation to sentences such as the follow-
ing:
(40) (a)
I can’t let [you have my password]
(b)
∗I can’t let [you’ve my password]
If we suppose that the bracketed inﬁnitive complement in (40b) is a TP headed
by a null variant of inﬁnitival to as in:
(41)
I can’t let [TP you [T to] have my password]
we can account for the fact that have cannot cliticise onto you by positing that
the presence of the null inﬁnitive particle to intervening between you and have
blocks cliticisation of have onto you.
Our discussion here leads us to the wider conclusion that both to-inﬁnitive
clauses and bare (to-less) inﬁnitive clauses are TP constituents headed by an
inﬁnitive particle which has the overt spellout to in most types of inﬁnitive clause,
but has a null spellout in bare inﬁnitive clauses. Given that we earlier argued that
all ﬁnite clauses contain a TP projection (headed by a T which contains a tense
afﬁx, and may or may not also contain an auxiliary), the overall conclusion which
we reach is that all ﬁnite and inﬁnitival clauses contain a TP, and that T is overt in
clauses containing a ﬁnite auxiliary or inﬁnitival to, but is null elsewhere (because
to in bare inﬁnitive clauses has a null spellout, and the tense afﬁx in auxiliariless
ﬁnite clauses is lowered onto the main verb in the PF component). One advantage
of this analysis is that it enables us to attain a uniform characterisation of the
syntax of (ﬁnite and inﬁnitival) clauses as TP structures headed by a T with a V
or VP complement.
●
●
3.6
Null C in ﬁnite clauses
The overall conclusion to be drawn from our discussion in §§3.3–
3.5 is that all ﬁnite and inﬁnitive clauses contain an overt or null T constituent

3.6 Null C in ﬁnite clauses
97
which projects into TP (with the subject of the clause occupying the speciﬁer
position within TP). However, given that clauses can be introduced by com-
plementisers such as if/that/for, a natural question to ask is whether apparently
complementiserless clauses can likewise be argued to be CPs headed by a null
complementiser. In this connection, consider the following:
(42) (a)
We didn’t know [if he had resigned]
(b)
We didn’t know [that he had resigned]
(c)
We didn’t know [he had resigned]
The bracketed complement clause is interpreted as interrogative in force in (42a)
and declarative in force in (42b), and it is plausible to suppose that the force of the
clause is determined by a force feature carried by the italicised complementiser
introducing the clause: in other words, the bracketed clause is interrogative in
force in (42a) because it is introduced by the interrogative complementiser if,
and is declarative in force in (42b) because it is introduced by the declarative
complementiser that.
But now consider the bare (i.e. seemingly complementiserless) clause in (42c):
this can only be interpreted as declarative in force (not as interrogative), so that
(42c) is synonymous with (42b) and not with (42a). Why should this be? One
answer is to suppose that the bracketed bare clause in (42c) is a CP headed by a
null variant of the declarative complementiser that (below symbolised as that),
and that the bracketed complement clauses in (42a,b,c) have the structure (43)
below:
(43)
      CP 
     C         
TP
if/that/that
            PRN                        T' 
he
T            
V 
had     
resigned         
Given the analysis in (43), we could then say that the force of each of the bracketed
complement clauses in (42) is determined by the force feature carried by the head
C of the overall CP; in (42a) the clause is a CP headed by the interrogative
complementiser if and so is interrogative in force; in (42b) it is a CP headed by
the declarative complementiser that and so is declarative in force; and in (42c) it
is a CP headed by a null variant of the declarative complementiser that and so is
likewise declarative in force. More generally, the null complementiser analysis
would enable us to arrive at a uniform characterisation of all ﬁnite clauses as CPs
in which the force of a clause is indicated by the force feature carried by an (overt
or null) complementiser introducing the clause.

98
3 null constituents
Empirical evidence in support of the null complementiser analysis of bare
complement clauses like that bracketed in (42c) comes from co-ordination data
in relation to sentences such as:
(44)
We didn’t know [he had resigned] or [that he had been accused of
corruption]
In (44), the italicised bare clause has been co-ordinated with a bold-printed clause
which is clearly a CP since it is introduced by the overt complementiser that. If
we make the traditional assumption that only constituents of the same type can
be co-ordinated, it follows that the italicised clause he had resigned in (44) must
be a CP headed by a null counterpart of that because it has been co-ordinated
with a bold-printed clause headed by the overt complementiser that – as shown
in simpliﬁed form in (45) below:
(45)
We didn’t know [that he had resigned] or [that he had been accused of
corruption]
What such an analysis implies is that the complementiser that can optionally be
given a null phonetic spellout by having its phonetic features deleted in the PF
component under certain circumstances.
So far in this section, we have argued that seemingly complementiserless ﬁnite
declarative complement clauses are introduced by a null C constituent (here
analysed as a null counterpart of the complementiser that). However, the null
C analysis can be extended from ﬁnite embedded clauses to main (= root =
principal = independent) clauses like those produced by speakers a and b in
(46) below:
(46)
speaker a:
I am feeling thirsty
speaker b:
Do you feel like a Coke?
The sentence produced by speaker a is declarative in force (by virtue of being
a statement). If force is marked by a force feature carried by the head C of
CP, this suggests that such declarative main clauses are CPs headed by a null
complementiser carrying a declarative force feature. And indeed, theoretical
considerations require us to assume this, if we suppose that the set of UG
principles wired into the Language Faculty include a Categorial Uniformity
Principle to the effect that all expressions of the same type belong to the same
category (and, more speciﬁcally, all clauses with the same force belong to the
same category): since declarative that-clauses are clearly CPs, it follows from
the Categorial Uniformity Principle that all other declarative clauses (includ-
ing declarative main clauses) must be CPs. This leads to the conclusion that a
declarative main clause like that produced by speaker a in (46) is a CP headed
by a null declarative complementiser. But what is the nature of the relevant null
complementiser?
It seems unlikely that the null complementiser introducing declarative main
clauses is a null counterpart of that, since that in English is only used to introduce

3.6 Null C in ﬁnite clauses
99
embedded clauses, not main clauses. Let’s therefore suppose that declarative main
clauses in English are introduced by an inherently null complementiser (below
symbolised as ø), and hence that the sentence produced by speaker a in (46) has
the structure shown in (47) below:
(47)
       CP 
 C  
TP
   PRN   
T' 
      I
T     
     VP 
            am 
V     
     A
  feeling
 thirsty
ø
Under the CP analysis of main clauses in (47), the declarative force of the overall
sentence is attributed to the sentence being a CP headed by a null complementiser
ø carrying a declarative force feature which we can represent as [Dec-Force]. (The
purists among you may object that it’s not appropriate to call a null declarative
particle introducing a main clause a complementiser when it doesn’t introduce a
complement clause: however, in keeping with work over the past four decades,
we’ll use the term complementiser/C in a more general sense here, to designate
a category of word which can introduce both complement clauses and other
clauses, and which serves to mark properties such as force and ﬁniteness.)
From a cross-linguistic perspective, an analysis such as (47) which posits that
main clauses are CPs headed by a force-marking complementiser is by no means
implausible in that we ﬁnd languages like Arabic in which both declarative and
interrogative main clauses can be introduced by an overt complementiser, as the
examples below illustrate:
(48) (a)
?inna l-walada taraka l-bayta (adapted from Ross 1970, p. 245)
That the-boy left the-house
‘The boy left the house’ (declarative)
(b)
Hal taraka l-waladu l-bayta?
If left the-boy the-house
‘Did the boy leave the house?’ (interrogative)
Moreover (as we will see in more detail in §4.2), there is some evidence
from sentences like (49) below that inverted auxiliaries in main-clause yes-no
questions occupy the head C position of CP in English:
(49)
speaker a: What were you going to ask me?
speaker b: (a)
If you feel like a Coke
(b)
Do you feel like a Coke?
(c) ∗If do you feel like a Coke?

100
3 null constituents
The fact that the inverted auxiliary do in (49b) occupies the same pre-subject
position (in front of the bold-printed subject you) as the complementiser if in
(49a), and the fact that if and do are mutually exclusive (as we see from the fact
that structures like (49c) are ungrammatical) suggests that inverted auxiliaries
(like complementisers) occupy the head C position of CP. This in turn means that
main-clause questions are CPs headed by a C which is interrogative in force by
virtue of containing an interrogative force feature which can be represented as
[Int-Force].
Interestingly, an interrogative main clause can be co-ordinated with a declara-
tive main clause, as we see from sentences like (50) below:
(50)
[I am feeling thirsty], but [should I save my last Coke till later]?
In (50) we have two (bracketed) main clauses joined together by the co-ordinating
conjunction but. The second (italicised) conjunct should I save my last Coke till
later? is an interrogative CP containing an inverted auxiliary in the head C position
of CP. Given the traditional assumption that only constituents which belong to
the same category can be co-ordinated, it follows that the ﬁrst conjunct I am
feeling thirsty must also be a CP; and since it contains no overt complementiser,
it must be headed by a null complementiser – precisely as assumed in (47)
above.
The assumption that all complete clauses contain an (overt or null) complemen-
tiser has important implications for the analysis of the case-marking of subjects –
as we can illustrate in relation to the case-marking of the italicised pronouns in a
sentence like (51a) below, with the structure in (51b):
(51) (a)
They may feel that/that She can’t help him
(b)
 CP 
C       
 TP 
         PRN       
T' 
they
T          
VP
may 
V  
      CP 
feel
    C       
TP
that/that
       PRN               
T' 
she
T         
VP
      can’t
V               PRN
 help         
him
ø
We’ve already seen that the relation c-command plays a central role in the syntax
of a wide range of phenomena, including the binding of anaphors, morphological

3.7 Null C in inﬁnitive clauses
101
operations like Afﬁx Hopping, phonological operations like have-cliticisation,
and so on. It therefore seems plausible to hypothesise that c-command is also
central to case assignment. Reasoning along these lines, let’s suppose that case
assignment is subject to the following condition:
(52)
Case Condition
A pronoun or noun expression is assigned case by the closest
case-assigning head which c-commands it
The requirement that a (pro)noun expression be assigned case by the closest case
assigner c-commanding it is arguably a consequence of the Locality Principle
which we posited in §1.5. Let’s look at what (52) implies for the case-marking
of the italicised pronouns in (51b).
Given the traditional assumption that transitive verbs like help are accusative
case assigners, it follows that the closest case assigner c-commanding the pronoun
him will be the transitive verb help, and that this will assign accusative case to him
in accordance with (52). If we suppose that ﬁnite complementisers are nominative
case assigners in English, we can also account for why she and they are assigned
nominative case in (51b). The closest case assigner c-commanding she in (51b)
is the ﬁnite complementiser that/that, and this therefore assigns nominative case
to the pronoun she in conformity with (52). Similarly, the closest case assigner
c-commanding the pronoun they in (51b) is the null complementiser introducing
the main clause, and this assigns nominative case to they in accordance with (52).
Note that a consequence of the c-command analysis of case-marking outlined in
(52) is that we need to assume that seemingly complementiserless ﬁnite clauses
contain a null complementiser in order to account for how the subjects of such
clauses come to be assigned nominative case.
The conclusion that our discussion in this section leads us to is that all ﬁnite
clauses have the status of CPs introduced by a complementiser. Finite complement
clauses are CPs headed either by an overt complementiser like that or if or by
a null complementiser (e.g. a null variant of that in the case of declarative
complement clauses). Finite main clauses are likewise CPs headed by a C which
contains an inverted auxiliary if the clause is interrogative, and an inherently null
complementiser otherwise. A ﬁnite C constituent (whether overt or null) assigns
nominative case to the subject of its clause under c-command.
●
●
3.7
Null C in inﬁnitive clauses
The overall conclusion to be drawn from our discussion in §3.6 is that
all ﬁnite clauses (whether main clauses or complement clauses) are CPs headed
by an (overt or null) complementiser which marks the force of the clause and
case-marks its subject. But what about nonﬁnite clauses? It seems clear that a
for-to inﬁnitive clause such as that bracketed in (53a) below is a CP with the

102
3 null constituents
structure shown in (53b) since it is introduced by the inﬁnitival complementiser
for:
(53) (a)
I will arrange [for him to see a specialist]
(b)
       CP 
 C             
    TP 
for 
    PRN  
T' 
him 
T          
 VP 
        to 
V            
QP
  see
Q    
 N
        a              specialist 
If we assume that the complementiser for (like the preposition for) is an accusative
case assigner, it will then follow that the inﬁnitive subject him will be assigned
accusative case by the complementiser for, since for is the closest case assigner
c-commanding him.
But what is the status of the type of (bracketed) inﬁnitive complement clause
found after verbs like want in sentences such as (54) below?
(54)
She wanted [him to apologise]
At ﬁrst sight, it might seem as if the bracketed complement clause in a sentence
like (54) can’t be a CP, since it isn’t introduced by the inﬁnitival complementiser
for. However, the type of inﬁnitive complement bracketed in (54) can be co-
ordinated with a CP introduced by for in sentences such as the following – as
noted by Sawada (1995, p. 406, fn. 5) and Nomura (2006, p. 78):
(55)
I want [Mary to come to Japan] and [for her to see my parents]
This suggests that the inﬁnitive complement of want is always a CP, and that the
head C of the relevant CP sometimes has an overt spellout as for and sometimes
has a null spellout. This in turn would mean that the complement of want in
structures like (54) is a CP headed by a variant of for which ultimately receives
a null spellout in the PF component (below symbolised as for), so that (54) has
the skeletal structure (56) below (simpliﬁed by showing only those parts of the
structure directly relevant to the discussion at hand):
(56)
She wanted [CP [C for] [TP him [T to] apologise]]
We can then say that the inﬁnitive subject him is assigned accusative case by
the complementiser for in structures like (56) in exactly the same way as the
accusative subject him is assigned accusative case by the complementiser for in the
complement clause in (53). One way of accounting for why the complementiser
isn’t overtly spelled out as for in structures like (56) is to suppose that it is given

3.7 Null C in inﬁnitive clauses
103
a null spellout (and thereby has its phonetic features deleted) when introducing
the complement of a verb like want: we can accordingly refer to verbs like want
as for-deletion verbs.
For speakers of varieties of English like my own (British) variety, for-deletion
with verbs like want is obligatory when the for-clause immediately follows a verb
like want, but cannot apply when the for-clause is separated from want in some
way – e.g. when the two are separated by an intervening adverbial expression
such as more than anything, as the examples below illustrate:
(57) (a)
∗More than anything, she wanted for him to apologise
(b)
More than anything, she wanted him to apologise
(c)
She wanted more than anything for him to apologise
(d)
∗She wanted more than anything him to apologise
Likewise, when the complement of want is in focus position in a pseudo-cleft
sentence as in (58) below, it is obligatory for the complementiser to have an overt
spellout as for (because it does not immediately follow the verb want, but rather
follows the copula was):
(58) (a)
What she wanted was for him to apologise
(b)
∗What she wanted was him to apologise
(Pseudo-cleft structures are sentences such as ‘What John bought was a car’,
where the italicised expression is said to be focused and to occupy focus position
within the sentence.)
Interestingly, not all for-deletion verbs behave exactly like want: for example,
in my own (British) variety of English the verb prefer optionally (rather than
obligatorily) allows deletion of for when it immediately follows prefer – cf.:
(59) (a)
We would very much prefer for you to be there
(b)
We would very much prefer you to be there
The precise set of verbs which optionally allow (or obligatorily require) deletion
of for when it immediately follows the verb seems to vary from one variety to
another, and even from one speaker to another.
Having looked at for-deletion verbs which select an inﬁnitival complement
with an accusative subject, we now turn to look at control inﬁnitive clauses with
a null PRO subject like that bracketed in (60) below:
(60)
I will arrange [PRO to see a specialist]
What we shall argue here is that control clauses which have a null PRO subject
are introduced by a null inﬁnitival complementiser. However, the null comple-
mentiser introducing control clauses differs from the null complementiser found
in structures like want/prefer someone to do something in that it never surfaces
as an overt form like for, and hence is inherently null. There is, however, paral-
lelism between the structure of a for-inﬁnitive clause like that bracketed in (53a)
above, and that of a control inﬁnitive clause like that bracketed in (60), in that

104
3 null constituents
they are both CPs and they have a parallel internal structure, as shown in (61a,b)
below (simpliﬁed by not showing the internal structure of the Verb Phrase see a
specialist):
(61)
(a)
CP 
(b) 
CP
C 
TP 
C 
TP
for
ø
PRN
T' 
PRN
T' 
him
PRO
T
VP
T
VP
to
see a specialist
to
see a specialist
The two types of clause thus have essentially the same CP+TP+VP structure, and
differ only in that a for-inﬁnitive clause like (61a) has an overt for complementiser
and an overt accusative subject like him, whereas a control inﬁnitive clause like
(61b) has a null ø complementiser and a null PRO subject.
Some evidence in support of claiming that a control clause with a null PRO
subject is introduced by a null complementiser comes from co-ordination data in
relation to sentences such as the following:
(62)
I will arrange [to see a specialist] and [for my wife to see one at the same
time]
The fact that the italicised control inﬁnitive can be conjoined with the bold-printed
CP headed by for suggests that control inﬁnitives must be CPs (if only the same
types of constituent can be conjoined).
Further evidence in support of the CP status of control inﬁnitives comes from
the fact that they can be focused in pseudo-cleft sentences. In this connection,
consider the contrast below:
(63) (a)
What I’ll try and arrange is [for you to see a specialist]
(b)
∗What I’ll try and arrange for is [you to see a specialist]
(c)
What I’ll try and arrange is [PRO to see a specialist]
The grammaticality of (63a) suggests that a CP like for you to see a specialist
can occupy focus position in a pseudo-cleft sentence, whereas conversely the
ungrammaticality of (63b) suggests that a TP like you to see a specialist cannot.
If CP can be focused in pseudo-clefts but TP cannot, then the fact that a control
inﬁnitive like PRO to see a specialist can be focused in a pseudo-cleft like (63c)
suggests that it must have the same CP status as (63a) – precisely as the analysis
in (61b) above claims.
An interesting issue which arises in relation to control inﬁnitives concerns the
morphological properties of the null PRO subject which they contain. It is clear
from a structure like:
(64)
Mary promised [CP [C ø] [TP PRO [T to] take care of herself]]

3.8 Defective clauses
105
that PRO must carry the same person, number and gender properties as other
pronouns (in that PRO must be third person feminine singular in order to be able
to serve as the antecedent of herself). It is therefore plausible to suppose that PRO
carries the same morphological properties as overt personal pronouns like she.
But if this is so, then PRO must also carry case of some kind. But what case? The
morphological effect of case is to determine how a noun or pronoun expression is
spelled out (e.g. as he, him or his). Since PRO has a null spellout, we can therefore
suppose that PRO carries null case. The effect of null case is to ensure that a
pronoun is unpronounced – just as the morphological effect of nominative case
is to ensure that (e.g.) a third person masculine singular pronoun is pronounced
as he. Given the assumption we have made in this section and the last that the
subject of a CP clause is case-marked by the head C of CP, it follows that PRO
must be assigned null case by the inherently null complementiser introducing
a control clause. This means that an (overt or null) ﬁnite complementiser in
English is a nominative case assigner, that the inﬁnitival complementiser for (and
its null counterpart for) is an accusative case assigner, and that the inherently
null inﬁnitival complementiser ø introducing a control clause is a null case
assigner.
Overall, the conclusion which our analysis in this section leads us to is that
inﬁnitive complements containing the complementiser for (or its null counterpart
for) are CPs, and so are control inﬁnitives (which contain a null complementiser
ø as well as a null PRO subject). In each case, the subject of the inﬁnitive is
case-marked by the head C of CP, with for/for assigning accusative case to the
subject, and the null complementiser ø in control clauses assigning null case to
its PRO subject.
●
●
3.8
Defective clauses
In §3.6, we argued that all ﬁnite clauses are CPs, and in §3.7 we went
on to argue that for-inﬁnitives with accusative subjects and control inﬁnitives
with null PRO subjects are likewise CPs. These two assumptions lead us to the
more general conclusion that:
(65)
All complete clauses are CPs
And indeed this is an assumption widely held in recent work. However, there
is one particular type of clause which is exceptional (and incomplete) in that it
lacks the CP layer found in complete clauses – namely inﬁnitival complement
clauses like those bracketed in (66) below which have (italicised) accusative
subjects:
(66) (a)
They believe [him to be innocent]
(b)
We didn’t intend [you to hurt anyone]

106
3 null constituents
Complement clauses like those bracketed in (66) are exceptional in that their sub-
jects are assigned accusative case by the transitive verb (believe/intend) immedi-
ately preceding them: what’s exceptional about this is that the verb is in a different
clause from the subject which it assigns accusative case to. For this reason, such
clauses are known as exceptional case-marking clauses (or ECM clauses); and
verbs (like believe) when used with an ECM clause as their complement are
known as ECM verbs.
ECM complement clauses seem to be TPs which lack the CP layer found in
complete clauses, and for this reason they can be considered defective clauses.
One reason for thinking that the bracketed ECM clauses in sentences like (66) are
not complete CPs is that they cannot readily be co-ordinated with for-inﬁnitives,
as we see from the ungrammaticality of (67) below:
(67)
∗We didn’t intend [you to hurt him] or [for him to hurt you]
Although (for speakers like me) the verb intend can take either a bare ECM
inﬁnitive complement or a for-inﬁnitive complement, the fact that the two cannot
be conjoined suggests that the bare ECM inﬁnitive clauses have the status of TPs
while for-to inﬁnitive clauses have the status of CPs. (Speakers who, unlike me,
accept sentences like (67), seem to have the additional possibility of using intend
as a verb taking an inﬁnitival CP complement headed by the null complementiser
for.) By contrast, co-ordination is indeed possible in sentences like:
(68)
We didn’t intend [you to hurt him] or [him to hurt you]
and this is because both bracketed clauses in (68) are inﬁnitival TPs.
Further evidence that ECM inﬁnitive clauses like those bracketed in (66) are
TPs rather than CPs comes from the fact that they cannot occur in focus position
in pseudo-clefts, as we see from the ungrammaticality of the sentences below:
(69) (a)
∗What they believe is [him to be innocent]
(b)
∗What we hadn’t intended was [you to hurt anyone]
If ECM clauses are TPs, this follows from the restriction noted in (63) that only a
CP (not a TP) can occur in focus position in a pseudo-cleft sentence. Moreover, a
further property of sentences like (66), which would be difﬁcult to account for if
the bracketed complement clause were a CP, is the fact that its (italicised) subject
can be passivised and thereby made into the subject of the main clause, as in (70)
below:
(70) (a)
He is believed to be innocent
(b)
You weren’t intended to hurt anyone
This is because it is a property of the subject of an inﬁnitival CP complement
clause like that bracketed in (71a) below that its subject cannot be passivised –
as we see from the ungrammaticality of (71b):
(71) (a)
We didn’t intend [for you to hurt anyone]
(b)
∗You weren’t intended [for to hurt anyone]

3.8 Defective clauses
107
Why should the subject of a CP be unable to passivise? The answer lies in a
constraint which we will return to look at in greater detail in chapter 9 (where we
will see that it subsumes the Functional Head Constraint discussed in §2.5), but
which we can formulate for the time being as follows:
(72)
Impenetrability Condition
A constituent in the domain of (i.e. c-commanded by) a complementiser is
impenetrable to (and so cannot be attracted by) a higher head
c-commanding the complementiser
Anticipating the analysis of passivisation to be presented in chapter 6, let’s
suppose that what happens in a passive structure like (71b) is that the main-
clause T constituent weren’t attracts the pronoun you to move out of its original
position (as the subject of the inﬁnitival T constituent to) into a new position
where it becomes the subject of weren’t – as shown by the arrow below:
(73)
    [CP [C ø] [TP You [T weren’t] intended [CP [C for] [TP you [T to] hurt anyone]]]] 
Because the pronoun you originates within the domain of the complementiser for
(i.e. in a position where it is c-commanded by for), and the T-auxiliary weren’t c-
commands the complementiser for, it follows from the Impenetrability Condition
(72) that you is impenetrable to the T-auxiliary weren’t and so you cannot become
the subject of weren’t via passivisation. For analogous reasons, the subject of the
inﬁnitival CP complement of a for-deletion verb like want cannot be passivised
either: cf.
(74) (a)
She wanted [for John to apologise]
(b)
∗John was wanted [for to apologise]
and indeed this is precisely what we expect if the Impenetrability Condition
prevents the subjects of CPs from passivising, and if the bracketed complement
clauses in (74) are CPs headed by a null counterpart of for, as claimed in §3.7.
However, the fact that the passive sentences in (70) are grammatical suggests
that the bracketed complement clauses in (66) are TPs rather than CPs (since the
Impenetrability Condition allows the subject of an inﬁnitival TP to be passivised,
but not the subject of an inﬁnitival CP). Hence, complement clauses like those
bracketed in (66) above are defective clauses which have no CP layer, and (66a)
They believe him to be innocent accordingly has the structure (75) below (with
Af representing a present tense afﬁx):

108
3 null constituents
(75)
          CP 
C                                   TP 
ø
   PRN                                 T' 
  
   they 
                           T                                VP 
                          Af 
                                               V                              TP 
                                          believe 
                     PRN                        T' 
  
                         him 
                            T                         VP 
                            to 
                                              V                   A 
                                                be             innocent
The particular aspect of the analysis in (75) most relevant to our discussion in
this section is the claim that the complement clause him to be innocent is an
inﬁnitival TP headed by to, and its subject him is assigned accusative case by
the closest case assigner c-commanding it (namely the transitive verb believe), in
accordance with the Case Condition (52) above.
●
●
3.9
Null determiners and quantiﬁers
Thus far, we have argued that empty categories play an important
role in the syntax of clauses in that clauses may contain a null subject, a null T
constituent and a null C constituent. We now turn to argue that the same is true
of the syntax of nominals (i.e. noun expressions), and that bare nominals (i.e.
noun expressions which contain no overt determiner or quantiﬁer) are generally
headed by a null determiner or null quantiﬁer.
In this connection, consider the syntax of the italicised bare nominals in (76)
below:
(76)
John admires Mary
As we see from (77a) below, the Greek counterparts of the bare nouns in (76) are
DPs headed by a deﬁnite determiner:
(77)
O Gianis thavmazi tin Maria
The John admires the Mary
‘John admires Mary’
This raises the possibility that bare nouns like those italicised in (76) above are
DPs headed by a null deﬁnite determiner, so that the overall sentence in (76) has
the structure (78) below:

3.9 Null determiners and quantiﬁers
109
(78)
      CP 
C                                             TP 
             DP                                                 T' 
  
 D                       N                     T                               VP 
  
             John         
                                                                       V                            DP 
                                                                   admires 
                                                                                            D                     N 
                                                                                        
  
           Mary
The assumption that all deﬁnite noun expressions are DPs (including those not
containing an overt determiner) is known as the DP hypothesis. A DP analysis
of bare deﬁnite noun expressions is plausible from a semantic perspective in
that a name like John is a referring expression which denotes a speciﬁc/deﬁnite
individual in precisely the same way as a DP such as this/that/the boy does.
One piece of empirical evidence in support of analysing bare nouns as DPs
comes from sentences like:
(79)
John and [the chairman] are attending a meeting
The fact that a bare noun like John can be co-ordinated with a determiner
phrase/DP like the chairman provides us with empirical evidence that bare nouns
must be DPs, given the assumption that expressions can only be co-ordinated if
they belong to the same category.
If (as we are suggesting here) English has a null D constituent, we should
expect this not only to have identiﬁable semantic properties (viz. in marking
deﬁniteness/speciﬁcity) but also to have identiﬁable grammatical properties. And
indeed there is evidence that (like deﬁnite determiners such as this/these) the null
D constituent carries person properties. In this respect, consider sentences such
as:
(80) (a)
We linguists take ourselves/∗yourselves/∗themselves too seriously, don’t
we/∗you/∗they?
(b)
You linguists take yourselves/∗ourselves/∗themselves too seriously, don’t
you/∗we/∗they?
(c)
John takes himself/∗ourselves/∗yourselves too seriously, doesn’t he/∗don’t
we/∗don’t you?
(80a) shows that a ﬁrst person expression such as we linguists can only bind
(i.e. serve as the antecedent of) a ﬁrst person reﬂexive like ourselves, and can
only be tagged by a ﬁrst person pronoun like we. (80b) shows that a second
person expression like you linguists can only bind a second person reﬂexive like
yourselves, and can only be tagged by a second person pronoun like you. (80c)
shows that a bare noun like John can only bind a third person reﬂexive like himself
and can only be tagged by a third person pronoun like he. One way to account for

110
3 null constituents
the relevant facts is to suppose that the nominals we linguists/you linguists/John
in (80a,b,c) are DPs with the respective structures shown in (81a,b,c) below:
(81)
(a)           DP                           (b)            DP       
 (c)        
DP
D               N  
      D         
N                            D       
N 
we         linguists
    you         linguists       
ø
  John 
and that the person properties of a DP are determined by the person features
carried by its head determiner. If we is a ﬁrst person determiner, you is a second
person determiner and ø is a third person determiner, the grammaticality judg-
ments in (80a,b,c) above are precisely as the analysis in (81a,b,c) would lead us
to expect. More generally, we can conclude that all deﬁnite referring expressions
are D-expressions: thus, an expression such as the chairman is a DP headed by
the overt determiner the; a name/proper noun such as John is a DP headed by a
null determiner; and a deﬁnite pronoun such as he is a pronominal D constituent
(or a D-pronoun).
In addition to having a null deﬁnite determiner, English can also be argued
to have a null (indeﬁnite) quantiﬁer. In this connection, consider the following
sentences:
(82) (a)
Eggs and many dairy products cause cholesterol
(b)
I’d like toast and some coffee please
The fact that the bare plural noun eggs is co-ordinated with the QP/quantiﬁer
phrase many dairy products in (82a) suggests that eggs is a QP headed by a null
quantiﬁer. Likewise, the fact that the bare singular noun toast is co-ordinated
with the QP some coffee in (82b) suggests that toast is also a QP headed by a null
quantiﬁer, so that the italicised nouns in (82) have the structure shown below:
(83)
QP
Q     
N 
ø
    eggs/toast
The null quantiﬁer has the semantic property of being generic or partitive in
interpretation: thus, eggs in (82a) has a generic interpretation which can be
paraphrased as ‘eggs in general’, while toast in (82b) has a partitive interpretation
paraphraseable as ‘some toast’.
In addition to having its own semantic properties, the null quantiﬁer found in
‘bare’ indeﬁnite noun expressions in English has its own selectional properties –
as illustrated by the following examples:
(84) (a)
I wrote poems
(b)
I wrote poetry
(c)
∗I wrote poem

3.10 Summary
111
If each of the italicised bare nouns in (84) is the complement of a null quantiﬁer
ø, the relevant examples show that ø can select as its complement an expression
headed by a plural count noun like poems, or by a singular mass noun like poetry –
but not by a singular count noun like poem. The complement-selection properties
of the null quantiﬁer ø mirror those of the overt quantiﬁer enough: cf.
(85) (a)
I’ve read enough poetry
(b)
I’ve read enough poems
(c)
∗I’ve read enough poem
The fact that ø has the same selectional properties as a typical overt quantiﬁer
such as enough strengthens the case for positing the existence of a null quantiﬁer
ø, and for analysing bare indeﬁnite noun expressions as QPs headed by a null
quantiﬁer.
We have argued that bare deﬁnite noun expressions (like John) are DPs headed
by a null determiner which is deﬁnite in interpretation, and that bare indeﬁnite
noun expressions (like toast or eggs) are QPs headed by a null quantiﬁer which
is generic or partitive in interpretation. The claim that null determiners and
quantiﬁers have speciﬁc semantic properties is an important one from a theoretical
perspective in the light of the principle suggested in Chomsky (1995) that all heads
must be interpretable at the semantics interface (i.e. must be able to be assigned
a semantic interpretation by the semantic component of the grammar, and hence
must contribute something to the meaning of the sentence containing them). This
principle holds of null constituents as well as overt constituents, so that e.g. a null
T constituent contains an abstract afﬁx carrying an interpretable tense feature,
and a null C constituent contains an abstract morpheme carrying an interpretable
force feature. If the null D constituent found in a structure like (81c) is deﬁnite in
interpretation and the null Q found in a structure like (83) is generic or partitive in
interpretation, the requirement for heads to have identiﬁable semantic properties
will be met.
The overall conclusion to be drawn from this section is that deﬁnite expressions
(like the president and John) are DPs headed by an overt or null determiner,
whereas indeﬁnite expressions (like an apple or cheese) are QPs headed by an
overt or null quantiﬁer.
●
●
3.10
Summary
In this chapter, we have seen that null constituents (i.e. constituents
which have no overt phonetic form but have speciﬁc grammatical and semantic
properties) play a central role in syntax. We began by looking at null (ﬁnite,
imperative, truncated and nonﬁnite) subjects in §3.2, arguing in particular that
control inﬁnitive clauses have a null PRO subject which can refer to some expres-
sion within a higher clause, or refer to some entity in the domain of discourse,

112
3 null constituents
or have arbitrary reference. In §3.3 we showed that elliptical clauses like that
bracketed in He could have helped her or [she have helped him] are TPs headed
by a null (ellipsed) tense auxiliary. In §3.4 we extended this null T analysis to
auxiliariless ﬁnite clauses like He enjoys syntax, arguing that they contain a TP
headed by an abstract tense afﬁx which is lowered onto the main verb by the mor-
phological operation of Afﬁx Hopping in the PF component. In §3.5 we argued
that bare (to-less) inﬁnitive clauses like that bracketed in I can’t let [you have my
password] are TPs headed by a null variant of inﬁnitival to. We concluded that
all ﬁnite and inﬁnitive clauses contain a TP headed by an overt or null T con-
stituent carrying ﬁnite or nonﬁnite tense. In §3.6, we argued that all ﬁnite clauses
are CPs, and that those which are not introduced by an overt complementiser are
CPs headed by a null complementiser which encodes the force of the clause and
assigns nominative case to its subject (so that a sentence like He enjoys syntax is
declarative in force by virtue of being a CP headed by a null declarative C which
is ﬁnite and so assigns nominative case to the subject he). In §3.7 we saw that for-
inﬁnitives are also CPs, and that the subject of the inﬁnitive is assigned accusative
case by the complementiser for. We went on to argue that the complement of
want-class verbs in structures like We want him to stay is a CP headed by a null
counterpart of for which assigns accusative case to the subject. We also argued
that the inﬁnitive complement of a control verb like promise in He promised to
stay is a CP headed by an inherently null complementiser which assigns null case
to the PRO subject of the inﬁnitive. In §3.9 we argued that ECM (Exceptional
Case Marking) clauses with accusative subjects like that bracketed in I believe
[him to be innocent] are defective clauses which have the status of TPs rather
than CPs, and that the subject of the inﬁnitive clause is assigned accusative case
by the verb in the matrix/containing clause (believe in this case). In §3.9, we
looked brieﬂy at the syntax of nominals (i.e. noun expressions), maintaining that
bare deﬁnite nominals are DPs headed by a null determiner, and bare indeﬁnite
nominals are QPs headed by a null quantiﬁer; consequently, in a sentence such
as John wanted eggs for breakfast, the bare noun John is a DP headed by a null
deﬁnite determiner, whereas the bare noun eggs is a QP headed by a null indeﬁnite
quantiﬁer.
Key assumptions made in this chapter are recapitulated below:
(19)
Have-cliticisation
Have can encliticise onto a W ending in a vowel or diphthong provided
that
(i)
W c-commands have and
(ii)
W immediately adjacent to have
(26)
Afﬁx Hopping
When some constituent C contains an unattached afﬁx Af, in the PF
component Af is lowered onto the head H of the complement of C (provided
H is an appropriate host for the afﬁx to attach to)

3.11 Bibliographical background
113
(52)
Case Condition
A pronoun or noun expression is assigned case by the closest
case-assigning head which c-commands it
(Recall in relation to 52 that we argued that a ﬁnite complementiser in English
assigns nominative case, the inﬁnitival complementisers for/for assign accusative
case and the inherently null complementiser ø introducing a control clause assigns
null case)
(72)
Impenetrability Condition
A constituent in the domain of (i.e. c-commanded by) a complementiser is
impenetrable to (and so cannot be attracted by) a higher head
c-commanding the complementiser
●
●
3.11
Bibliographical background
For a range of accounts of the null pro subjects discussed in §3.2,
see Chomsky (1981), Rizzi (1982, 1986, 1997), Jaeggli (1982, 1984), Huang
(1984), Montalbetti (1984), Saﬁr (1984), Su˜ner (1984), Hyams (1986), Jaeggli
and Saﬁr (1989), Roberts (1993), Barbosa (1995, 2000, 2007), Barbosa, Duarte
and Kato (2005), Kato (1999, 2000), Alexiadou and Anagnostopoulou (1998),
Holmberg (2005), Neeleman and Szendr˝oi (2005) and Tamburelli (2006, 2007).
On truncated null subjects in English, see Haegeman (1990) and Rizzi (2000). On
imperatives in English, see Potsdam (1998) and Rupp (2003). The idea that control
inﬁnitives have a null PRO subject dates back to Chomsky (1977): for more recent
discussion of control inﬁnitives, see Landau (1999, 2001, 2003, 2004, 2006a).
Although the discussion in §3.2 focuses on null subjects, it should be noted that
many languages (though not English) productively allow null objects (see Rizzi
1986; Raposo 1986; Authier 1989; Farrell 1990; Huang 1991; Groefsema 1995;
Cummins and Roberge 2004, 2005). The idea in §3.3 that null constituents can
arise via gapping and other forms of ellipsis has a long history, dating back to
Hankamer (1971), Hankamer and Sag (1976), Sag (1980), Kuno (1981), Pesetsky
(1982), Hardt (1993), McCawley (1993), Lobeck (1995), Schwarz (1999, 2000),
Johnson (2000), Merchant (2001, 2005), Coppock (2002), Kennedy (2002, 2003),
Carlson, Dickey and Kennedy (2005) and Frazier and Clifton (2005). The Afﬁx
Hopping account of verb morphology outlined in §3.4 dates back in spirit to
Chomsky (1955, 1957). For alternative analyses of the type of inﬁnitive clause
structures discussed in §3.5, see Felser (1999a,b) and Basilico (2003). On the
historical development of to-inﬁnitives, see Los (2005). The claim in §3.6 that
apparently complementiserless clauses contain a null complementiser dates back
in spirit more than four decades (see e.g. Stockwell, Schachter and Partee 1973,
p. 599): for evidence of null complementisers in Japanese, see Kishimoto (2006).
For discussion of factors governing the null spellout of that, see Ormazabal
(1995), Hawkins (2001), Boˇskovi´c and Lasnik (2003), Epstein, Pires and Seely
(2005) and Nomura (2006). The Categorial Uniformity Principle was devised by

114
3 null constituents
Rizzi (2000, p. 288). The idea in §3.7 that (non-defective) inﬁnitive clauses are
introduced by an (overt or null) complementiser dates back to Bresnan (1970).
The idea in §3.8 that ECM clauses are defective in respect of lacking the CP
layer found in full clauses is defended in Chomsky (1999). The Impenetrability
Condition has its origins in the Phase Impenetrability Condition of Chomsky
(1998) – but since the notion phase is not introduced until chapter 9, for the
time being we refer to it simply as the Impenetrability Condition: it attempts
to capture the intuition that syntactic operations are clause-bound, and so apply
one clause at a time; its historical antecedents lie in the Subjacency Condition
of Chomsky (1973) (amended by Rizzi 1982) and the Barrierhood Condition of
Chomsky (1986b). On ﬁnite complementisers being nominative case assigners,
see Chomsky (1999, p. 35, fn. 17). The idea that PRO subjects in English carry
null case derives from work by Chomsky and Lasnik (1993), Chomsky (1995)
and Martin (1996, 2001). On the claim that null case is assigned to a PRO subject
by C, see Rizzi (1997, p. 304) and Collins (2005a, p. 104). For an alternative
proposal that PRO carries ‘real’ (e.g. nominative, accusative or dative) case, see
Cecchetto and Oniga (2004) and Landau (2004, 2006a). The assumption in §3.9
that bare nominals contain a null determiner/quantiﬁer has a long history, dating
back to a suggestion made by Chomsky (1965, p.108) which was taken up and
extended in later work by Abney (1987), Bernstein (1993, 2001) and Longobardi
(1994, 1996, 2001). On the nature of quantiﬁed expressions, see L¨obel (1989),
Giusti (1991) and Shlonsky (1991). On determiners and Determiner Phrases, see
Abney (1987), Bernstein (1993), Giusti (1997), Alexiadou and Wilder (1998),
Zamparelli (2000), Grohmann and Haegeman (2002) and Ticio (2003, 2005).
●
●
Workbook section
●
Exercise 3.1
Draw tree diagrams to represent the structure of the following sentences, presenting arguments in
support of your analysis and commenting on any null constituents they contain and the reasons for
positing them. In addition, say how each of the noun or pronoun expressions in each of the
sentences is case-marked.
1
Students enjoy the classes
2
We have fun (w)
3
Voters know politicians lie
4
John promised to behave himself (w)
5
She sees no need for anyone to apologise
6
They would prefer students to do exams
7
Economists expect salaries to rise (w)
8
He might like you to stay (w)
9
%I have known you have a tantrum
10
John wanted to help him

Workbook section
115
In addition, say why have-cliticisation is or is not permitted in 11b, 12b, 13b and 14b below:
11 a
They have suffered hardship
b
They’ve suffered hardship (w)
12 a
The Sioux have suffered hardship
b
∗The Sioux’ve suffered hardship
13 a
Sioux have suffered hardship
b
∗Sioux’ve suffered hardship (w)
14
speaker a: How are students coping with your Fantasy Syntax course?
speaker b: ∗Two’ve given up
Helpful hints
Assume that all clauses other than nonﬁnite clauses used as the complement of an ECM verb are
CPs, and that bare deﬁnite nominal arguments are DPs headed by a null deﬁnite D, and bare
indeﬁnite nominal arguments are QP constituents headed by a null indeﬁnite Q. Assume the
conditions on have-cliticisation given in (19) in the main text/summary. In relation to 3, consider
what case politicians has, and how you can use this to determine whether the complement of know
is a TP or a CP. In 4, use Binding Principle A from exercise 2.2 to help you account for why
himself is coreferential to John. In 5, assume that no is a negative quantiﬁer which has a Noun
Phrase complement. Take 9 (which is found only in some varieties of English, including my own
British one) to be a variant of I have known you to have a tantrum. In 10, use Binding Principle B
from exercise 2.2 to help you account for why him cannot be coreferential to John. In relation to
the (b, b) examples in 11–14, draw trees to represent the structure of the sentences immediately
prior to cliticisation, and then show whether or not the analysis of have-cliticisation given here
predicts that cliticisation is possible; note that the noun Sioux is pronounced |su:|. Show how the
ungrammaticality of 13b can be used to evaluate the hypothesis that a bare noun like Sioux in 13 is
a QP headed by a null qualiﬁer. In addition, say how sentences like 11b can be used to evaluate
the plausibility of analyses (such as that proposed by Freidin and Vergnaud 2001) which take
pronouns like they to be determiners which have a nominal complement whose phonetic features
are given a null spellout in the PF component, so that e.g. if they refers to Sioux, the pronoun they
would be a DP with the structure shown below:
(i)
 DP 
D     
N 
they           Sioux
Would it be any more or less plausible to suppose that the (numeral) quantiﬁer two in sentences
like that produced by speaker b in 14 has a null N complement (interpreted as referring to the
noun students)?
Model answer for 1
Given the arguments in the main text that all ﬁnite clauses contain a TP headed by a T constituent
containing an Afﬁx which encodes Tense and (Person and Number) agreement features, the
sentence Students enjoy the classes will contain a TP headed by a tense afﬁx which carries the
features [third-person, plural-number, present-tense], which we can abbreviate to Af3PlPr.

116
3 null constituents
Likewise, given the arguments in the main text that all ﬁnite clauses are CPs headed by an (overt
or null) complementiser which marks the force of the clause, the overall sentence will be a CP
headed by a null ﬁnite declarative complementiser [C ø]. In addition, the indeﬁnite bare noun
students will be a QP headed by a null quantiﬁer which is generic in interpretation (and so is
paraphraseable as ‘students in general’). Given these assumptions, sentence 1 will have the
structure shown below:
(ii)
            CP 
C  
TP
ø
  QP
T' 
 Q                      N        
  T
VP
ø
       students     
Af3PLPR
V       
DP
          enjoy
   D                  N
  the
         classes
Because there is no auxiliary in T for it to attach to, the tense afﬁx in T is lowered onto the verb
enjoy by the morphological operation of Afﬁx Hopping in the PF component, forming
enjoy+Af3PlPr (which is ultimately spelled out as the third person plural present tense form enjoy).
Evidence that the overall clause Students enjoy the classes is a CP headed by a null
complementiser comes from co-ordination facts in relation to sentences such as:
(iii)
[Students enjoy the classes] but [do they like the lectures]?
In (iii) the declarative clause Students enjoy the classes has been co-ordinated with the
interrogative clause do they like the lectures? which contains the inverted auxiliary do. If (as
claimed in the main text) inverted auxiliaries occupy the head C position of CP, it follows that the
second of the two co-ordinate clauses in (iii) must be a CP; and if only constituents of the same
type can be co-ordinated, it follows that the ﬁrst clause must also be a CP – as in (ii) above.
Evidence in support of positing a null present tense T constituent in (ii) comes from the fact that
the T-bar Af3PlPr enjoy the classes can be co-ordinated with another T-bar like don’t like the
lectures, as we see from (iv) below:
(iv)
Students enjoy the classes, but don’t like the lectures
Evidence that the bare nominal students is a QP headed by a null quantiﬁer comes from the fact
that it can be co-ordinated with a QP such as many teachers, as in:
(v)
Students and many teachers enjoy the classes
The DP the classes in (i) is assigned accusative case by virtue of being c-commanded by the
transitive verb enjoy. Accordingly, the DP the classes can be substituted by an accusative
pronoun, as in:
(vi)
Students enjoy them

Workbook section
117
By contrast, the QP ø students is assigned nominative case by virtue of being c-commanded by the
ﬁnite complementiser ø. We therefore correctly predict that this QP can be substituted by a
nominative pronoun, as in:
(vii)
They enjoy the classes
Additional helpful hints for sentences 2–10
Discuss whether/how your analysis can account for the (un)grammaticality of the sentences below
(the relevant grammaticality judgments holding for my own variety of British English).
2a
We have fun and some pain
2b
∗We’ve fun
2c
We have fun and are enjoying syntax
2d
We have fun but will it last?
3a
Voters and most journalists know politicians lie
3b
Voters know politicians and many celebrities lie
3c
Voters know politicians lie and can’t be trusted
3d
Voters know politicians lie and don’t trust them
3e
Voters know politicians lie and that they do so knowingly
3f
Voters know politicians lie, but do they care?
4a
John promised to behave himself, but will he do so?
4b
John and the vicar promised to behave themselves
4c
John promised to behave himself and has done so
4d
What John promised was to behave himself
4e
John promised to behave himself (How come himself refers to John?)
5a
She sees no need for him to apologise, but does she think he will?
5b
She sees no need for him to apologise, and would not want him to
6a
They would prefer very much for students to do exams
6b
They would prefer students to do exams and for their papers to remain conﬁdential
6c
What they would very much prefer is for students to do exams
6d
∗Students would be preferred to do exams
7a
Salaries are expected to rise
7b
∗They expect salaries to rise and for inﬂation to fall
7c
They expect salaries to rise and inﬂation to fall
7d
∗They expect fully for salaries to rise (cf. They fully expect salaries to rise)
8a
He might like more than anything for you to stay
8b
He might like you to stay and for things to be settled between you
8c
What he might like is for you to stay
8d
∗You might be liked to stay
9a
I have known you to have a tantrum (on occasions)
9b
∗I’ve known you’ve a tantrum (on occasions)
9c
I’ve never know you have a tantrum or your brother to have one either
9d
You have been known to have a tantrum (cf. ∗You have been known have a tantrum)
9e
∗I’ve known you have a tantrum and for other people to get upset about it
9f
∗I’ve known occasionally for you to have a tantrum (OK = I’ve occasionally known you
have a tantrum)
10a
What John wanted was to help him

118
3 null constituents
10b
John wanted to help him (Why can’t him refer to John?)
10c
John wanted very much to help him
●
Exercise 3.2
Account for the (un)grammaticality of the bracketed inﬁnitive complement clause structures in the
following sentences in standard varieties of English:
1 a
They were planning [to escape]
b
∗They were planning [him to escape]
2 a
We consider [him to be unsuitable]
b
∗It is considered [him to be unsuitable]
3 a
He would like [me to leave]
b
He would like [to leave]
4 a
She seems keen [for them to participate]
b
∗She seems keen [for to participate]
5 a
I received a request [to resign]
b
∗I received a request [him to resign]
6 a
It was agreed [to review the policy]
b
∗It was agreed [us to review the policy]
7 a
Congress decided [to ratify the treaty]
b
∗Congress decided [for him to ratify the treaty]
8 a
She expected [to win the nomination]
b
She expected [him/∗he to win the nomination]
9 a
He should let [you have a break]
b
∗He should let [have a break]
10 a
∗He said [her to like oysters]
b
∗He said [to like oysters]
In addition, say how you would analyse structures like 4b in varieties of English (like Belfast
English) in which they are grammatical and have a meaning roughly paraphraseable as ‘She
seems keen for herself to participate.’ What if for-to can serve as a compound T constituent in
such sentences in the relevant varieties (and likewise in sentences such as I wanted Jimmy for to
come with me; from Henry 1995, p. 85)?
Helpful hints
Note that 1b is intended to have an interpretation paraphraseable as ‘They were planning for him
to escape,’ 9b to have an interpretation paraphraseable as ‘He should let himself have a break,’
10a to have an interpretation paraphraseable as ‘He said she liked oysters,’ and 10b to have an
interpretation paraphrasable as ‘He said he liked oysters’ (where the two occurrences of he refer
to the same individual). Assume that each of the italicised words in the above examples has its
own idiosyncratic selectional properties, and that the selectional properties of any word W are
described by saying: ‘W selects as its complement an expression headed by . . .’ (where in place

Workbook section
119
of the dots you insert the features characterising the relevant head). So, you might say e.g. that a
verb like arrange can select a complement headed by an inﬁnitival complementiser (either the
transitive inﬁnitival complementiser for or the null intransitive inﬁnitival complementiser ø),
whereas an ECM verb like believe selects a complement headed by the inﬁnitival T to. By
contrast, other verbs (it might turn out) don’t select a particular kind of inﬁnitive complement – or
indeed any kind of inﬁnitive complement. Assume that the seemingly subjectless clauses in 1–10
(whether grammatical or not) have a null PRO subject. Pay attention (i) to the selectional
properties of the italicised words and (ii) to the case properties of the subjects of the bracketed
complement clauses. In the case of the ungrammatical examples, consider whether the
ungrammaticality is attributable to a selectional error (in that the italicised word is used with a
kind of complement which it does not select/allow) or a case error (in that the subject of the
bracketed complement clause has a case which it cannot be assigned in accordance with the
assumptions about case-marking made in the main text) – or both.
Model answer for (1)
Given the CP analysis of ﬁnite clauses and control clauses in the text, 1a will have the structure (i)
below:
(i)
         CP 
C         
TP
ø  
ø  
   PRN             
T' 
   they 
T 
 VP 
        were 
V  
      CP 
             planning 
        C   
  TP 
       PRN               
T' 
PRO
T    
  V
to        
escape 
The inherently null complementiser introducing the inﬁnitival control clause assigns null case to
the PRO subject which it c-commands. Support for the CP analysis of the bracketed complement
clause to escape in 1a comes from the fact that (like other CPs, but unlike TPs) it can serve as the
focused constituent in pseudo-cleft sentences like:
(ii)
What they were planning was to escape
The fact that it is also possible to say:
(iii)
They were planning for him to escape
suggests that plan can also select a complement headed by the transitive inﬁnitival
complementiser for. This leads to the greater generalisation that plan can select a CP complement
headed by an inﬁnitival complementiser (either the accusative-case-assigning complementiser for
or the null-case-assigning complementiser ø). The ungrammaticality of 1b ∗They were planning
him to escape could be attributable to a spellout error (if the complementiser heading the
complement clause is the kind of for complementiser which can never be given a null spellout –
unlike the for introducing an inﬁnitival complement of a verb like want).

4
Head movement
●
●
4.1
Overview
So far, we have examined a range of syntactic structures which are
derived by a series of merger operations. We now go on to look at struc-
tures whose derivation involves not only merger but also a speciﬁc type of
movement operation called head movement. In this chapter, we focus on two
speciﬁc types of head movement operation, one which affects auxiliaries in
present-day English, and another which affected main verbs in earlier stages of
English.
●
●
4.2
T-to-C movement
In chapters 2 and 3, we saw that complementisers are positioned in
front of subjects in the clauses they introduce. More speciﬁcally, we suggested
that complementisers head a separate projection in clauses which we termed a
complementiser phrase/CP, with the head C position of CP being ﬁlled by
a complementiser like that/for/if. However, complementisers are not the only
kinds of word which can precede subjects in clauses. As we saw in our brief
discussion of questions in §3.6, auxiliaries can also precede subjects in yes-no
questions such as Do you feel like a Coke? In this respect, inverted auxiliaries seem
to resemble complementisers – as the following (love-struck, soap-operesque)
dialogue illustrates:
(1)
speaker a: Honey-buns, there’s something I wanted to ask you
speaker b: What, sweetie-pie?
speaker a: If you will marry me
speaker b: (pretending not to hear): What d’you say, darlin’?
speaker a: Will you marry me?
What’s the structure of the two bold(-printed) proposals which speaker a
makes in (1)? The answer is straightforward enough in the case of If you
will marry me: it’s a clause introduced by the interrogative complementiser/C
if, and so is a complementiser phrase/CP constituent with the structure (2)
below:
120

4.2 T-to-C movement
121
(2)
     CP 
C         
TP
if 
        PRN        
T' 
you 
   T   
VP
 will 
V                 PRN  
marry
me
But now consider the structure of the second proposal Will you marry me?
What position is occupied by the inverted auxiliary will? Since will appears to
occupy the same pre-subject position that the complementiser if occupies in (2),
a plausible suggestion to make is that the inverted auxiliary actually occupies the
head C position of CP. If this is so, we’d expect will and if to be mutually exclusive
(on the assumption that we can only insert one word in a given head position
like C, not two words): in other words, if both complementisers and inverted
auxiliaries occupy the head C position of CP, we’d expect to ﬁnd that a question
can be introduced either by a complementiser or by a preposed auxiliary – but not
by the two together. This is indeed the case, as we see from the ungrammaticality
of speaker b’s reply in (3) below:
(3)
speaker a: What d’you want to ask me?
speaker b: ∗If will you marry me
The fact that questions can’t contain both a complementiser and an inverted
auxiliary provides us with empirical evidence that inverted auxiliaries occupy the
same structural position as complementisers – i.e. that both occupy the head C
position of CP.
But how can a ﬁnite auxiliary (which normally occupies the head T position of
TP) come to be positioned in the head C position of CP? The conventional answer
is that auxiliaries in questions move out of their normal post-subject position into
pre-subject position by a movement operation which in chapter 1 we referred to
as auxiliary inversion. Given our assumption that an inverted auxiliary occupies
the head C position of CP, this means that the auxiliary moves from the head T
position in TP into the head C position in CP, as shown by the arrow in (4) below:
(4)
CP
C
TP
PRN
T' 
you           
T      
VP  
will
V  
   PRN
               marry
 me 
Hence, auxiliary inversion in questions involves T-to-C movement.

122
4 head movement
An important question which is begged by the T-to-C movement analysis in
(4) is why auxiliaries should move from T to C in main-clause questions. Using
a traditional metaphor, let us say that C is a strong head in interrogative main
clauses in English and that a strong C position has to be ﬁlled by an overt word of
some kind – either a complementiser directly merged in C, or an auxiliary which
moves from T to C. In a complement-clause yes-no question like that bracketed
in:
(5)
I wanted to ask [if you will marry me]
C is ﬁlled by the complementiser if – and indeed speaker a’s ﬁrst proposal in (1)
might be regarded as an elliptical form of (5) I wanted to ask you [if you will marry
me], with if introducing the bracketed complement clause, and constituents other
than those of the bracketed clause undergoing ellipsis. However, complementisers
like if can’t be used to introduce main clauses in English, so the strong head C
position is instead ﬁlled by moving an auxiliary from T to C (i.e. via auxiliary
inversion).
In order to understand the mechanics of auxiliary inversion, let’s look in rather
more detail at the derivation of (1) Will you marry me? The verb marry merges
with the pronoun me to form the VP marry me. This VP is then merged with the
T-auxiliary will to form the T-bar will marry me, and this T-bar is in turn merged
with the pronoun you to form the TP you will marry me. The resulting TP is
then merged with a strong null interrogative complementiser ø to form the CP ø
you will marry me. Being strong, the null complementiser attracts the auxiliary
will to move from T to C to attach to the null complementiser, so ﬁlling the C
position.
But what property makes the null complementiser strong enough to attract
the auxiliary will to move from T to C? One possibility is that the null com-
plementiser in an interrogative main clause is afﬁxal in nature, and so must
be attached to an overt host of an appropriate kind. Since afﬁxes generally
only attach to a particular kind of host (e.g. the past tense -d afﬁx attaches to
verbs but not to nouns, prepositions or adjectives), and since only tensed (i.e.
present or past tense) auxiliaries move to C, one implementation of this idea
is to suppose that the afﬁx carries a tense feature – below denoted as [tns] –
which requires it to attach to a tensed host (i.e. to a present or past tense T
constituent). If we suppose that the afﬁx in C in main-clause questions is strong,
and that a strong afﬁx can attract a subordinate head to adjoin to it (but can-
not itself lower onto a subordinate head), it follows that the only way for a
null strong afﬁx in C to ﬁnd a host is by attracting an auxiliary in T to adjoin
to the afﬁx in C, thereby satisfying the requirement for the afﬁx in C to be
attached to a tensed host. Thus, at the stage where the null interrogative com-
plementiser is merged with its TP complement, we have the structure (6) below
(where ø is a strong afﬁx with a tns feature requiring it to attach to a tensed
host):

4.3 Movement as copying and deletion
123
(6)
CP
C          
TP
[TNS] 
ø            PRN         
T' 
you           
T      
VP  
will 
V  
   PRN
               marry
 me 
The [tns] feature on the strong null afﬁx in C attracts the auxiliary will to move
from T to C (in the manner shown by the arrow below), and the [tns] feature on
C is thereby deleted (this being marked by strikethrough) and therafter becomes
inactive, so resulting in the following structure:
(7)
CP
C     
TP
 T         
C               PRN                      T' 
Will         [TNS]            you  
ø
T  
VP
will
    marry me 
The auxiliary will moves from T to C in order to satisfy the requirement of the
[tns] feature on the afﬁx for the afﬁxal null interrogative complementiser to have
a present or past tense T constituent afﬁxed to it. This results in the formation
of a complex C constituent containing the original null complementiser with
the preposed T-auxiliary attached to it. The null complementiser thus behaves
like an afﬁxal question particle. Such an interrogative afﬁx analysis is far from
implausible from a cross-linguistic point of view, in that (e.g.) yes-no questions
in Latin could be formed using the overt question sufﬁx -ne, and this could attract
a ﬁnite verb to attach to it. If we adopt the question-afﬁx analysis, we can say
that it is the strong afﬁxal character of an interrogative C (viz. the fact that C in
main-clause questions contains a strong null afﬁxal complementiser with a tense
feature requiring it to have a T host) which triggers T-to-C movement. Given
that English is a largely sufﬁxal language (in that it mainly utilises derivational
and inﬂectional sufﬁxes), we can take the null complementiser to be sufﬁxal in
nature, so that the attracted auxiliary will end up positioned to the left of it.
●
●
4.3
Movement as copying and deletion
An interesting question which arises from the T-to-C movement
analysis is what it means for the auxiliary to move out of T. If movement of

124
4 head movement
an auxiliary from T to C were to result in the head T position of TP vanishing
completely, a sentence such as Will you marry me? would have the structure
shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(8)
     CP 
C         
 TP 
Will+ø
           PRN     
T' 
            you      
VP
V   
     PRN
         marry
      me 
But a structure such as (7) is problematic in that it violates two constituent
structure principles which we posited in §2.2, namely:
(9)
Headedness Principle
Every nonterminal node in a syntactic structure is a projection of a head
(10)
Binarity Principle
Every nonterminal node in a syntactic structure is binary-branching
(Note that the Headedness Principle has been slightly revised from its original
formulation to remove reference to head word, in recognition of the point made in
§3.4 that not all heads are words.) A tree such as (8) would violate the headedness
requirement (9) in that TP and T-bar are nonterminal nodes and yet neither has
a head T constituent; (8) would also violate the binarity requirement (10) in that
T-bar is a nonterminal node and yet is not binary-branching (since T-bar does
not have two daughters) but rather unary-branching (since T-bar has only one
daughter).
It seems clear, then, that movement of an auxiliary from T to C cannot result in
the loss of the original T constituent which heads TP: so, T must remain in place
in the form of a null constituent of some kind. But what kind of item could the
relevant null T constituent contain? Our discussion of gapping (i.e. head ellipsis)
in the previous chapter suggests a possible answer. In §3.4 we suggested that
ellipsis of the second (italicised) occurrence of could in a sentence such as (11a)
below results in a structure such as (11b) containing a null occurrence of could
(designated as could):
(11) (a)
He could have helped her, or she could have helped him
(b)
He could have helped her, or she could have helped him
This raises the possibility that T-to-C movement is a composite operation by
which a copy of an auxiliary in T is ﬁrst moved into C, and then the original
occurrence of the auxiliary in T is deleted (by which we mean that its pho-
netic features are given a null spellout and so are unpronounced), leaving a null

4.3 Movement as copying and deletion
125
copy of the auxiliary in T. The assumption that movement is a composite oper-
ation involving two suboperations of copying and deletion is the cornerstone of
Chomsky’s copy theory of movement.
To see how the copy theory works, let’s look rather more closely at the deriva-
tion of Will you marry me? Let’s suppose that a series of merger operations have
applied to derive the structure shown below:
(12)
   CP 
C         
TP
ø 
        PRN        
T' 
you 
  T    
VP  
will                 marry me 
A copy of the T constituent will is then adjoined (i.e. attached) to the afﬁxal null
interrogative complementiser C ø, so forming a complex C constituent which
comprises both the original C constituent containing a null complementiser and
the T constituent containing will. Subsequent deletion of the phonetic features of
the original occurrence of will in T derives the structure (13) below:
(13)
            CP 
C     
TP
 T         
C               PRN                      T' 
Will           ø         
you  
T   
VP
will
   marry me 
On this view, the T-auxiliary will is initially merged with its VP complement
marry me, forming the T-bar will marry me. The resulting T-bar is merged with
the pronoun you to form the TP you will marry me. This TP is then merged with
a null interrogative complementiser, forming the CP ø you will marry me. The
null complementiser (being a strong afﬁx which needs an auxiliary host) attracts
a copy of the T-auxiliary will to adjoin to it, forming the CP Will+ø you will
marry me. Subsequent deletion of the phonetic features of the original occur-
rence of will in turn derives Will+ø you will marry me. The resulting structure
(13) satisﬁes both the Headedness Principle (9) and the Binarity Principle (10).
Considerations of computational efﬁciency determine that only one copy of a
moved constituent is overtly spelled out (since this minimises the amount of
material to be pronounced); and considerations of optimal design dictate that the
highest copy is the one which is overtly spelled out, since otherwise movement
would be undetectable.
An interesting source of evidence in support of the copy theory of movement
comes from the study of language acquisition. Young children sometimes produce

126
4 head movement
auxiliary copying structures like the following (produced by a boy called Sam
at age two years and nine months: thanks to Ian Crookston for the data):
(14) (a)
Can its wheels can spin?
(b)
Did the kitchen light did ﬂash?
(c)
Is the steam is hot?
(d)
Was that was Anna?
What is Sam doing here? The answer seems to be that he has mastered the
copying component of auxiliary inversion and so is able to adjoin a copy of will
to the null C constituent: but he has not yet mastered the deletion component
of auxiliary inversion and so fails to delete the phonetic features of the original
occurrence of the auxiliary in T. Accordingly, (14a) above has the simpliﬁed
structure (15) below for Sam (in which the structure of the DP its wheels is not
shown because it is irrelevant to the point at hand):
(15)
CP
C  
TP
Can+ø
 DP                   
  T' 
its wheels 
T     
V 
can
       spin 
The fact that Sam has adjoined a copy of the T-auxiliary can to the null comple-
mentiser at the beginning of the overall sentence structure but fails to delete the
original occurrence of the auxiliary in T suggests that it is plausible to analyse a
movement operation like auxiliary inversion as a composite operation involving
two separate operations of copying and deletion.
In addition to evidence from child grammars we also have evidence from adult
grammars in support of the claim that a moved auxiliary leaves behind a null copy
of itself. Part of this evidence comes from the phenomenon of have-cliticisation
which we touched on in §3.3. In this connection, note that have cannot cliticise
onto the pronoun I/we/you/they in inversion structures such as:
(16) (a)
Should they have/∗they’ve called the police?
(b)
Will we have/∗we’ve ﬁnished the rehearsal by 9pm?
(c)
Would you have/∗you’ve come with me?
(d)
Could I have/∗I’ve done something to help?
(’ve represents the vowel-less clitic form /v/ here.) The sequence they’ve in (16a)
does not rhyme with grave in careful speech styles, since it is pronounced /ðeiəv/
not /ðeiv/. Likewise, the sequence we’ve in (16b) is not homophonous with weave
in careful speech styles, since we have in (16a) can be reduced to /wiəv/ but not
/wi:v/. Similarly, you’ve doesn’t rhyme with groove in (16c), nor I’ve with hive in
(16d). Why should cliticisation of have onto the pronoun be blocked here? We can
give a straightforward answer to this question if we posit that when an inverted

4.3 Movement as copying and deletion
127
auxiliary moves from T to C, it leaves behind a null copy of itself in the T position
out of which it moves. Given this assumption, a sentence such as (16a) will have
the simpliﬁed structure shown below (if we assume that nonﬁnite auxiliaries
occupy the head AUX/Auxiliary position of an AUXP/Auxiliary Phrase: see §4.6
for discussion of AUXP):
(17)
CP 
C  
      TP 
Should+ø        
     PRN 
T' 
they
T        
       AUXP          
should
AUX
VP
       have                  called the police
In the previous chapter, we characterised have-cliticisation along the following
lines:
(18)
Have can encliticise onto a word W ending in a vowel or diphthong
provided that W c-commands have and W is immediately adjacent to
have
Although in (17) the pronoun they ends in a diphthong and c-commands have,
the two are not immediately adjacent because the null auxiliary should which
occupies the head T position of TP intervenes between them and hence blocks
have-cliticisation thereby accounting for the ungrammaticality of (16a) ∗Should
they’ve called the police? Note that a crucial plank in the argumentation here is
the assumption that T-to-C movement leaves behind a null copy of the moved
auxiliary in the head T position of TP, and this null auxiliary serves to block
cliticisation of have onto a c-commanding pronoun.
Our discussion of auxiliary inversion here has interesting implications for the
derivation of sentences. In this connection, consider how we derive a sentence
such as:
(19)
Can you swim?
The ﬁrst stage is to go to the lexicon (= dictionary) and choose a lexical array
(i.e. a selection of lexical items out of which the sentence is going to be built).
In the case of (19), the lexical array will consist of the verb swim, the pronoun
you, the auxiliary can and a null afﬁxal interrogative complementiser ø. The next
stage is for the auxiliary can and the verb swim to be taken out of the lexical
array and merged, so deriving the T-bar can swim. The pronoun you is then taken
from the lexical array, and merged with the T-bar can swim to form the TP you

128
4 head movement
can swim. The null afﬁxal interrogative complementiser ø is then taken from the
lexical array and merged with the TP you can swim to form the CP ø you can
swim. Since the null interrogative C is afﬁxal and has a tense feature attracting a
tensed head, it triggers movement of a copy of the present tense auxiliary can to
adjoin to the null afﬁx ø, forming Can+ø you can swim. Subsequent deletion of
the original occurrence of can in T derives Can+ø you can swim.
●
●
4.4
V-to-T movement
Having looked at T-to-C movement in English, we now turn to look
at a rather different kind of movement operation, which involves V-to-T move-
ment – more speciﬁcally, movement of a ﬁnite main verb from the head V position
of VP into the head T position of TP. We shall see that this kind of verb movement
operation was productive in Elizabethan English (i.e. the English used during
the reign of Queen Elizabeth I, when Shakespeare was writing around 400 years
ago), but is no longer productive in present-day English. Since part of the evi-
dence for V-to-T movement involves negative sentences, we begin by looking at
the syntax of negation.
In Elizabethan English, clauses containing a ﬁnite auxiliary are typically
negated by positioning not between the (italicised) auxiliary and the (bold-
printed) verb: cf.
(20)(a)
She shall not see me (Falstaff, Merry Wives of Windsor, III.iii)
(b)
I will not think it (Don Pedro, Much Ado About Nothing, III.ii)
(c)
Thou hast not left the value of a cord (Gratiano, Merchant of Venice, IV.i)
Let’s suppose (for the time being, pending a reanalysis of negation in §4.7) that
not in Elizabethan English is an adverb which functions as the speciﬁer of the
verbal expression following it (e.g. not is the speciﬁer of see me in (20a) above,
and hence modiﬁes see me). If so, (20a) will have a structure along the lines of
(21) below (where ø is a null complementiser marking the declarative force of
the sentence, and assigning nominative case to the subject she):
(21)
 CP 
 C             
TP
ø 
      PRN
T' 
she 
T   
  VP 
            shall
     ADV                  
V' 
       not 
V       
    PRN
            see       
me
An analysis such as (21) accounts for the position which not occupies in front of
the verb see.

4.4 V-to-T movement
129
In negative questions, the auxiliary moves from T to C (as in present-day
English), leaving not in front of the verb: cf.
(22) (a)
Have I not heard the sea rage like an angry boar? (Petruchio, Taming of the
Shrew, I.ii)
(b)
Didst thou not hear somebody? (Borachio, Much Ado About Nothing, III.iii)
(c)
Will you not dance? (King, Love’s Labour’s Lost, V.ii)
If questions involve movement of a ﬁnite auxiliary from T to C, then a sentence
such as (22a) will involve the T-to-C movement operation shown in (23) below
(where we take the string the sea rage like an angry boar to be a TP headed by a
null counterpart of the inﬁnitival T-constituent to, symbolised as to):
(23)
     CP 
C
TP
Have+ø
       PRN    
T' 
    I
T        
VP
have
         ADV
V' 
          not  
  V      
TP
  heard
 the sea to rage like
an angry boar
The auxiliary have originates in T and then moves to C (i.e. a copy of the auxiliary
is adjoined to the strong afﬁxal complementiser in C), leaving behind a copy of
have in T which is ultimately deleted. The assumption that not is a VP-speciﬁer
provides a straightforward account of the fact that not remains positioned in front
of the verb heard after have moves to C.
However, an interesting aspect of negative sentences in Shakespearean English
is that in auxiliariless ﬁnite clauses like those in (24) below, the (bold-printed)
main verb is positioned in front of not: cf.
(24) (a)
I care not for her (Thurio, Two Gentlemen of Verona, V.iv)
(b)
He heard not that (Julia, Two Gentlemen of Verona, IV.ii)
(c)
My master seeks not me (Speed, Two Gentlemen of Verona, I.i)
(d)
I know not where to hide my head (Trinculo, The Tempest, II.ii)
If not in Elizabethan English is a VP-speciﬁer which is positioned at the leftmost
edge of the Verb Phrase, how can we account for the fact that the verb (which
would otherwise be expected to follow the negative particle not) ends up posi-
tioned in front of not in sentences like (24)? The answer is that when a ﬁnite T
in Elizabethan English contains no auxiliary, the verb moves out of the head V
position of VP into the head T position of TP in order to ﬁll T. Accordingly, a
sentence like (24a) I care not for her will involve the V-to-T movement operation
represented by the dotted arrow in (25) below:

130
4 head movement
(25)
 CP 
C   
TP
ø  
      PRN
T' 
I 
T            
VP
 care
ADV
V' 
not
  V             
 PP 
care
       P
PRN 
      for            her
Thus, the verb care is ﬁrst merged in the head V position within VP, and then
moves into the head T position in TP, thereby ending up positioned in front of
not (with the original occurrence of care in V being given a null spellout).
An important theoretical question to ask at this juncture is why the verb care
should move from V to T. Using Chomsky’s strength metaphor, we can suppose
that a ﬁnite T is strong in Elizabethan English and so must be ﬁlled: this means
that in a sentence in which the T position is not ﬁlled by an auxiliary, the verb
moves from V to T in order to ﬁll the strong T position. One way of characterising
what it means for T to be strong is to suppose that T contains a strong tense afﬁx
with a V-feature which requires it to have an (auxiliary or nonauxiliary) verb
attached to it as its host. Let’s suppose that a strong afﬁx is one which can ﬁnd a
host either by merger, or by attracting some item below it to adjoin to the afﬁx. So,
in a structure like (21), the strong (third person singular present) tense afﬁx in T
is provided with a host by directly merging the auxiliary shall with the tense afﬁx
in T, forming shall+Af (although the tense afﬁx is not shown in the simpliﬁed
structure in 21 above); but in a structure like (25), the strong tense afﬁx in T
attracts the closest verb which it c-commands (namely the verb care) to move to
T and attach to the tense afﬁx, so that the afﬁx is provided with a verbal host via
movement – as shown in (26) below (where the notation Af1SgPr indicates that
the afﬁx has features marking it as ﬁrst person singular present tense):
(26)
 CP 
C   
TP
ø
      PRN
T' 
I 
T            
VP
care+Af1SgPr 
ADV
V' 
not
  V             
 PP 
care
       P
PRN 
      for            her

4.4 V-to-T movement
131
By contrast, T in present-day English contains a weak tense afﬁx, and a weak
tense afﬁx cannot attract a verb to move from V to T, but rather can only be
attached to a verbal host either by merger of an auxiliary like shall directly with
the null tense afﬁx in T, or by lowering of the tense afﬁx onto the main verb, e.g.
in auxiliariless ﬁnite clauses such as He enjoys the classes. In such auxiliariless
clauses, the weak tense afﬁx in T undergoes the morphological operation of Afﬁx
Hopping in the PF component, lowering the afﬁx onto the main verb in the
manner shown by the arrow in (27) below:
(27)
     CP 
C        
TP
ø
        PRN        
T' 
He 
 T     
VP       
Af3SgPr
V   
     DP
              enjoy
the classes 
On this view, both strong and weak tense afﬁxes can be directly merged with an
auxiliary in T; the two differ in how the afﬁx comes to be attached to a main verb;
a strong tense afﬁx (like that found in Elizabethan English) triggers movement
of the verb from V to T in structures like (26) above; a weak tense afﬁx (like that
found in present-day English) is lowered onto the main verb in the PF component
by Afﬁx Hopping in structures like (27) above.
A potential methodological objection which might be made to our use of
Shakespearean English data in this section to illustrate V-to-T movement is to
question whether it is legitimate to use historical evidence from a ‘dead’ language
variety to illustrate a particular type of syntactic operation permitted by UG. There
are three types of response which can be given to this type of objection. One is that
if UG involves a set principles innately programmed into the human Language
Faculty, it is highly improbable that this genetic endowment will have changed
over a mere 400-year time span. Secondly, we have plenty of evidence from
(e.g. negative and interrogative sentences in) Shakespeare’s plays that main verbs
could raise from V to T, and although this evidence comes from written texts (and
may represent a more conservative variety than the spoken language at the time),
this is equally true of many descriptive grammars of present-day English. And
thirdly, there are plenty of present-day languages which show V-to-T movement
(e.g. French, Italian, Spanish, German etc.), so it is clear that the phenomenon
in question is far from ‘dead’: we have chosen to illustrate it using data from
Elizabethan English rather than (e.g.) French because the central descriptive focus
of this book is on English, which means that particular phenomena are illustrated
using data from some variety of English wherever possible.

132
4 head movement
●
●
4.5
Head movement
There seem to be signiﬁcant parallels between the kind of movement
operation involved in T-to-C movement in (23) on the one hand, and V-to-T
movement in (25) on the other. Both operations involve movement of a word
from the head position in one phrase into the head position in a higher phrase.
Accordingly, in (23) the auxiliary have moves from the head T position of TP
into the head C position of CP; and in (25) the verb care moves from the head
V position of VP into the head T position of TP. This suggests that T-to-C
movement and V-to-T movement are two different instances of a more general
head movement operation by which an item occupying the head position in a
lower phrase is moved into the head position in a higher phrase.
As we see from (23) above, questions in Elizabethan English involved the
same inversion operation as in present-day English. Given our assumption that
inversion involves movement from T to C, an obvious prediction made by the
assumption that verbs move from V to T in Elizabethan English is that they can
subsequently move from T to C in interrogatives – and this is indeed the case, as
we see from the fact that the (italicised) moved verb ends up positioned in front
of its (bold-printed) subject in questions like:
(28) (a)
Saw you my master? (Speed, Two Gentlemen of Verona, I.i)
(b)
Speakest thou in sober meanings? (Orlando, As you Like It, V.ii)
(c)
Know you not the cause? (Tranio, Taming of the Shrew, IV.ii)
On the account given here, the derivation of a negative question such as (28c)
Know you not the cause? will involve the two head movement operations shown
in simpliﬁed form in (29) below:
(29)
CP 
  C            
TP
Know
       PRN
T' 
you 
T   
 VP 
(2)
know
    ADV 
V' 
     not 
V        
   DP
(1)
know
the cause
(The structure in (29) is simpliﬁed for expository purposes by not showing the
verb know attaching to a strong tense afﬁx in T, and by not showing movement of
the resulting know+Af structure to attach to a strong null interrogative afﬁx ø in C,
forming the structure know+Af+ø.) The verb know moves from V to T because
a ﬁnite T is strong in Elizabethan English, by virtue of containing a strong null
tense afﬁx with a V-feature (requiring the afﬁx to attach to a verbal host); and

4.5 Head movement
133
know subsequently moves from T to C because an interrogative C is likewise
strong by virtue of containing a strong null afﬁx ø with a T-feature (requiring the
afﬁx to attach to a T-auxiliary). Consequently, know moves through T into C by
two successive applications of head movement (numbered 1 and 2 above): know
is ﬁrst merged in V, then moved to T, and from there moved to C. In structures
like (29), head movement is said to apply in a successive-cyclic fashion, moving
the verb know (in successive cycles or steps) ﬁrst from V to T, and then from T to
C. Each time the verb moves, it leaves behind a copy of itself which is eventually
deleted.
A key assumption made in (29) is that the verb know moves to C via the
intermediate step of moving to T. This raises the question of why know can’t
move directly from V to C in the manner shown in simpliﬁed form in (30) below:
(30)
[CP [C Know] [TP you [T ø] [VP not [V know] the cause]]]
One reason why the kind of long-distance head-movement operation illustrated
in (30) is ruled out is because it violates the following Locality Principle:
(31)
Head Movement Constraint/HMC
Head Movement is only possible between a given head and the head of its
complement
If we look at the two movement operations in (29), we see that both obey HMC:
operation (1) involves local movement of the verb know into T from the head V
position of a VP which is the complement of T; and operation (2) involves local
movement of know into a C position from the head T position of a TP which is
the complement of C. Since both head-movement operations are strictly local,
there is no violation of HMC. By contrast, direct movement of know from V to
C in (30) is non-local and violates HMC in that the verb know moves from the
head V position of VP directly into the head C position of CP, in spite of the
fact that VP is not the complement of C. HMC therefore provides a principled
account of why (28c) Know you not the cause? is ungrammatical in present-day
English: the verb know cannot move directly to C (because this would violate the
HMC requirement for movement to be local), and cannot move through T into
C, because verbs can no longer move from V to T in present-day English.
However, such an analysis raises the question of why ﬁnite verbs should be
able to move from V to T in Elizabethan English, but not in present-day English.
Using our earlier strength metaphor, we can say that the tense afﬁx carried by a
ﬁnite T was strong in Elizabethan English, but is weak in present-day English.
Because the afﬁx was strong in ﬁnite clauses in Elizabethan English, it could
attract a verb to move from V to T; but because the afﬁx is weak in present-day
English, T can only be ﬁlled by an auxiliary which is directly merged in T, not by a
verb moving from V to T. More generally, we can suppose that there is parametric
variation with respect to the relative strength of a given type of head, so that (e.g.)
a ﬁnite T was strong in Elizabethan English but is weak in present-day English.

134
4 head movement
We can refer to the relevant parameter as the Head Strength Parameter. Note
that the parameter may have different settings for different types of head in a
given language: e.g. a ﬁnite T is weak in present-day English, but a ﬁnite C is
strong in interrogative main clauses.
An interesting possibility raised by our assumption that T was strong in Eliz-
abethan English but is weak in present-day English is that historical change can
be characterised in terms of parameter resetting – i.e. in terms of the settings
of individual parameters changing over time (e.g. a T which was strong at some
point in time being reanalysed as weak at a later point in time). One way this can
come about is by children analysing the speech input they receive and arriving at a
different setting for a given parameter from that adopted by their parents. Another
is by transfer of parameter-settings between one language and another brought
about by conquests or colonisation. However, since this book is not concerned
with historical change, we shall have no more to say about it here.
●
●
4.6
Auxiliary Raising
Although we assumed in the previous section that no verbs in present-
day English can move from V to T, the picture is complicated by the behaviour
of be in examples like (32) below:
(32) (a)
She may not be suitable
(b)
She is not suitable
In (32a) the copular verb be seems to occupy the head V position in VP, and
so follows not: but in (32b) is precedes not and so seems to occupy the head T
position of TP. This suggests that the copula be originates as a main verb (in the
head V position of VP) and remains in situ when nonﬁnite as shown in simpliﬁed
form in (33a) below, but moves into the head T position of TP when ﬁnite as
shown in (33b):
(33) (a)
(b)
[CP [C ø] [TP she [T may] [VP not [V be] suitable]]] 
 [CP [C ø] [TP she [T is] [VP not [V is] suitable]]] 
A similar conclusion is suggested by examples such as the following:
(34) (a)
She may not be enjoying syntax
(b)
She is not enjoying syntax
In (34a), the head T position of TP is occupied by the modal auxiliary may,
and the head V position of VP is occupied by the verb enjoying: the word be
therefore seems to occupy some intermediate position between the two. Since be
(in this use) is an aspectual auxiliary (marking progressive aspect), let’s suppose
that be in (34a) occupies the head AUX/Auxiliary position of an AUXP (i.e.
Auxiliary Phrase). However, in (34b) progressive is occupies the head T position

4.6 Auxiliary Raising
135
of TP and hence precedes not. One analysis of the relevant data is to suppose
that aspectual be originates as the head AUX constituent of AUXP and remains
in situ when nonﬁnite as shown in (35a) below, but moves from AUX to T when
ﬁnite – as shown in (35b) (where not is taken to occupy a position to the left of
AUXP):
(35) (a)
(b)
[CP [C ø] [TP she [T may] not [AUXP [AUX be] [VP [V enjoying] syntax]]]] 
[CP [C ø] [TP she [T is] not [AUXP [AUX is] [VP [V enjoying] syntax]]]] 
On this view, present-day English would have a be-raising operation moving
ﬁnite forms of be from the head V position in VP (or the head AUX position in
AUXP) into the head T position in TP. This would mean that present-day English
retains a last vestige of raising-to-T.
The different positions occupied by ﬁnite and nonﬁnite forms of be are mirrored
by the perfect auxiliary have – as the examples below illustrate:
(36) (a)
He may not have done it
(b)
He has not done it
The head T position of TP in (36a) is occupied by may and the head V position of
VP by done; hence the inﬁnitive form have must occupy some position interme-
diate between the two, e.g. the head AUX position of an AUXP/Auxiliary Phrase,
as in (37a) below. However, the fact that the ﬁnite form has in (36b) is positioned
in front of not suggests that ﬁnite forms of the perfect auxiliary have raise from
AUX to T in the manner shown informally in (37b) below:
(37) (a)
(b)
[CP [C ø] [TP He [T may] not [AUXP [AUX have] [VP [V done] it]]]]
[CP [C ø] [TP He [T has] not [AUXP [AUX has] [VP [V done] it]]]] 
The conclusion which our discussion of (32–37) leads us to is that have (in its
use as a perfect auxiliary) and be (in its use as a progressive auxiliary or copular
verb) may originate in a position below not and subsequently raise into the head
T position of TP.
There is evidence that certain modal auxiliaries also originate in a position
below T and subsequently raise into T. In this connection, consider the interpre-
tation of the following negative sentences:
(38) (a)
You must not do that (= ‘It is necessary for you not to do that’)
(b)
You need not do that (= ‘It is not necessary for you to do that’)
In (38a) the modal must has wide scope with respect to negation (i.e. must has
semantic scope over not) whereas in (38b) the modal need has narrow scope with
respect to negation (i.e. need falls within the semantic scope of not). Although
wide-scope modals like must are directly generated in T (as in (39a) below), there
is evidence to suggest that narrow-scope modals like need are initially generated

136
4 head movement
in some position below T (e.g. the head AUX position of AUXP), and from there
move to T (as in (39b) below):
(39) (a)
(b)
[CP [C ø] [TP you [T must] not [VP [V do] that]]]
[CP [C ø] [TP you [T need] not [AUXP [AUX need] [VP [V do] that]]]]
The analysis in (39b) implies that present-day English has an operation by which
narrow-scope auxiliaries raise from AUX to T. There are two factors which lend
empirical support to the Auxiliary Raising analysis in (39b). Firstly, it enables
us to provide a principled account of the relevant scope relations in terms of
the relation c-command: since must c-commands not in (39a), must has scope
over not; but since not c-commands the lower copy of need in (39b), not can
have scope over need. The second factor which lends support to the Auxiliary
Raising analysis is that it allows us to account for how the polarity item need
can occur in a structure like (39b), when we saw in §2.6 that a polarity item
must be c-commanded by an affective (e.g. negative) constituent, and not in
(39b) does not c-command need in the superﬁcial syntactic structure. We can
solve this seeming puzzle if we suppose that at least one copy of a polarity item
must be c-commanded by an affective constituent (the lower copy of need being
c-commanded by not in 39b). It may be that the two different (T and AUX)
positions for auxiliaries can be occupied by different modals in Scots English
structures such as:
(40)
He must no can do it (Brown 1991, p. 98)
‘It must be the case that he does not have the capability of doing it’
In (40), must is located in T and has scope over not, whereas can is located in
AUX and falls within the scope of not.
If ﬁnite forms of be (in all uses), have (in its use as a perfect auxiliary) and
narrow-scope modals like need all raise to T, it is clear that the suggestion made
in the previous section that T in present-day English is a weak head which does not
trigger any form of V-raising is untenable. Rather, the appropriate generalisation
would appear to be that in present-day English, only a highly restricted set
of verbs (like have, be and need) can raise to T. What do such verbs have
in common which differentiates them from other verbs? An answer given by
many traditional grammars is that they serve to mark grammatical properties like
aspect and modality, and have little or no inherent lexical content (and for this
reason they are sometimes called light verbs), so in this respect they resemble
auxiliaries. Adopting this intuition, we can say that the afﬁx in a ﬁnite T in
present-day English is only strong enough to trigger movement of an auxiliary
like have/be/need to T, not movement of a lexical verb to T. This means that if
the head immediately beneath T is an auxiliary (as in (33b, 35b, 37b and 39b)
above), the afﬁx attracts it; but if the head beneath T is a main verb (as in (27)

4.7 Another look at negation
137
above), the afﬁx is instead lowered onto the main verb in the PF component by
Afﬁx Hopping.
●
●
4.7
Another look at negation
In §4.4 and §4.5 we assumed that the negative particle not is a VP-
speciﬁer which occupies initial position within VP. However, this assumption is
problematic in a number of respects. For example, in a sentence such as (35a)
She may not be enjoying syntax, it is clear that not does not occupy a VP-initial
position immediately in front of the verb enjoying: on the contrary, not appears
to occupy some position between the modal auxiliary may and the aspectual
auxiliary be. Moreover, we shall argue in chapter 6 that only an argument of
a verb can occupy the speciﬁer position within VP – and not in a negative
sentence like She may not sell it is not an argument of the verb sell (because not
isn’t one of the participants in the act of selling). It is clear, therefore, that we
need to rethink our earlier analysis of negation. An alternative analysis which
we shall outline in this section (and which has been widely adopted in work
since the end of the 1980s) posits that not is contained within a separate NEGP
(= Negation Phrase) projection. The speciﬁc implementation of this analysis
which we will assume here is one which takes the negative particle not to be the
speciﬁer of NEGP (though it should be pointed out that some linguists adopt an
alternative analysis under which not is taken to be the head NEG constituent of
NEGP).
The NEGP analysis is far from implausible from a historical perspective: in
earlier varieties of English, sentences containing not also contained the negative
particle ne (with ne arguably serving as the head NEG constituent of NEGP
and not as its speciﬁer). This can be illustrated by the following Middle English
example taken from Chaucer’s Wife of Bath’s Tale:
(41)
A lord in his houshold ne hath nat every vessel al of gold (lines 99–100)
‘A lord in his household does not have all his vessels made entirely of gold’
A plausible analysis of a sentence like (41) is to suppose that ne originates as the
head NEG constituent of NEGP, with nat (= ‘not’) as its speciﬁer: the verb hath
originates in the head V position of VP and from there moves to the head NEG
position of NEGP, attaching to the negative preﬁx ne to form the complex head
ne+hath as shown in simpliﬁed form in (42) below:
(42)
[NEGP nat [NEG ne+hath] [VP [V hath] every vessel al of gold]]
The resulting complex head ne+hath then attaches to a present tense afﬁx (Af) in
T, as shown in simpliﬁed (and abbreviated) form in (43) below:
(43)
[TP A lord . . . [T ne+hath+Af] [NEGP nat [NEG ne+hath] [VP [V hath] every
vessel al of gold]]]

138
4 head movement
Merger of the TP in (43) with a null declarative complementiser will derive the
CP structure associated with (41) A lord in his houshold ne hath nat every vessel
al of gold.
By Shakespeare’s time, ne had dropped out of use, leaving the head NEG
position of NEGP null (just as in ne . . . pas ‘not . . . . at.all’ negatives in present-
day French, ne has dropped out of use in colloquial styles). Positing that not in
Elizabethan English is the speciﬁer of a NEGP headed by a null NEG constituent
opens up the possibility that V moves through NEG into T, so that (24a) I care
not for her has the derivation shown (in simpliﬁed form) in (44) below:
(44)
 CP 
C    
TP
ø
    PRN  
T' 
      I
T   
          NEGP 
 care
           ADV
    NEG' 
not 
                  NEG     
        VP 
care
 V               PP   
care
  for her 
This would mean that head movement applies in a successive-cyclic (two-step)
fashion. Each of the two head movement operations in (44) – viz. movement of
care from V to NEG, and then from NEG to T – is local in the sense that it
satisﬁes the Head Movement Constraint (31), since in each case movement is
from one head position into the next highest head position in the structure. If head
movement is driven by afﬁxal properties of heads, and if both T and NEG contain
a strong afﬁx with a V-feature which can trigger movement of a main verb, the
verb care will ﬁrst move from V to NEG in order to attach to a null negative afﬁx
(in much the same way as the verb hath in (42) moves from V to Neg to attach to
the overt negative afﬁx ne), and the resulting complex NEG head (comprising a
null negative afﬁx with a verb attached to it) in turn will move from NEG to T in
order to attach to a strong tense afﬁx in T.
An important question posed by the analysis in (44) is why sentences like
(24a) I care not for her are ungrammatical in present-day English. The answer
is that neither T nor NEG contains a strong afﬁx with a V-feature in present-day
English, and so they are unable to attract a main verb like care to move through
NEG into T. Still, this assumption in turn raises the question of why we can’t
simply leave the present tense verb care in situ (in the head V position of VP) in
present-day English – as in (45) below:
(45)
[CP [C ø] [TP I [T Af] [NEGP not [NEG ø] [VP [V care] for her]]]]

4.7 Another look at negation
139
One answer is the following. Let’s suppose that (just like syntactic operations),
morphological and phonological operations in the PF component apply in a
bottom-up fashion, and process structures in a cyclic fashion (i.e. in a step-
wise fashion, one projection at a time). What this means is that when the syn-
tax hands over the structure in (45) to the PF component, the lowest maximal
projection in the structure (the VP care for her) will be processed ﬁrst, then
the next lowest maximal projection (the NEGP not ø care for her), then the
next lowest maximal projection (the TP I Af not ø care for her) and ﬁnally
the overall CP (ø I Af not ø care for her). Let’s also posit that all opera-
tions (whether syntactic, morphological or phonological) obey the following UG
principle:
(46)
Earliness Principle
Operations must apply as early as possible in a derivation
All of this means that Afﬁx Hopping will apply to the tense afﬁx in (45) on the
TP cycle – i.e. at the point where we have already processed VP and NEGP, and
are now beginning to process TP. The structure which the PF component can
‘see’ on the TP cycle is (47) below:
(47)
[TP I [T Af] [NEGP not [NEG ø] [VP [V care] for her]]]
At this point, we might expect Afﬁx Hopping to apply to lower the tense afﬁx
in T onto the verb care. There are two possible ways in which we could seek
to achieve this. One is by lowering the afﬁx directly from T onto V as in (48a)
below, and the other is to lower the afﬁx ﬁrst onto null NEG head and then onto
V in the manner shown in (48b):
(48) (a)
(b)
[TP I [T Af ] [NEGP not [NEG ø] [VP [V care] for her]]] 
[TP I [TAf ] [NEGP not [NEG ø] [VP [V care] for her]]] 
However, a movement operation like (48a) which lowers the afﬁx directly from
T onto V would violate the Head Movement Constraint (31), since it involves
lowering the head T of TP onto the head V of VP; and yet V is not the next lowest
head in the structure (rather, NEG is), and HMC only allows a head to be lowered
onto the head immediately beneath it in the structure. Accordingly, we might
suppose that Afﬁx Hopping applies in a successive-cyclic fashion, lowering the
afﬁx ﬁrst from T onto NEG, and then from NEG onto V – as in (48b). However,
there are two problems posed by any such successive-cyclic lowering operation.
The ﬁrst is that NEG doesn’t seem to be the kind of head which is an appropriate
host for a tense afﬁx (at least, if we assume that a tense afﬁx attaches to an overt
verb, since NEG is neither overt nor a verb): hence, the ﬁrst step of the two-step
movement arrowed in (48b) – namely lowering the afﬁx onto NEG – may be
ruled out for this reason. To make matters worse, the second step of lowering the

140
4 head movement
tense afﬁx from NEG onto V in (48b) is also ruled out, because it violates the
following UG principle:
(49)
Strict Cyclicity Principle/SCP
At a stage of derivation where a given projection HP is being
cycled/processed, only operations involving the head H of HP and
some other constituent c-commanded by H can apply
Lowering the tense afﬁx from T onto NEG in (48b) does not violate SCP, since
T-to-NEG lowering clearly involves T (by moving the tense afﬁx in T) and also
involves a NEG constituent which is c-commanded by T (since this ends up
having a tense afﬁx attached to it). But the subsequent operation of lowering the
afﬁx from NEG onto V is anticyclic, since NEG-to-V lowering does not involve T
(in violation of SCP), but rather involves only NEG and V. We therefore correctly
predict that sentences like ∗I not care for her are ungrammatical in present-day
English.
A ﬁnal point to be made here is that we have excluded from our discussion
negative interrogatives like Shouldn’t you be at work? In such sentences the
negative particle n’t has scope over the modal (so that the sentence has a meaning
paraphraseable as ‘Is it not the case that you should be at work?’) and hence
originates in a position above TP. One proposal along these lines would be to
suppose that NEGP in such sentences is positioned between CP and TP, and that
the auxiliary should raises from T through NEG into C, with n’t cliticising onto the
auxiliary. This would allow for the possibility of two types of negation occurring
in a sentence such as Mightn’t he not have seen her? where not originates within
a NEGP immediately above VP, and n’t within a NEGP immediately above TP.
●
●
4.8
do-support
In present-day English, the negative counterpart of a sentence like I
care for her requires do-support, as we see from (50) below:
(50)
I do not care for her
But how does do come to appear in such sentences – and why? In order to answer
this question, let’s look rather more closely at the derivation of sentence (50).
Suppose that (as before) the syntactic component of our grammar generates the
structure (45) above, repeated as (51) below:
(51)
[CP [C ø] [TP I [T Af] [NEGP not [NEG ø] [VP [V care] for her]]]]
Since T contains an unattached weak tense afﬁx with a V-feature requiring it to
attach to a verbal host, we would expect the afﬁx to be lowered onto an overt
verbal stem by Afﬁx Hopping. But if Afﬁx Hopping is a purely local operation
which lowers an unattached weak tense afﬁx onto the closest head c-commanded
by T (hence onto the head word of the expression which is the complement

4.8 do-support
141
of T), then it follows that all Afﬁx Hopping can do is lower the afﬁx onto the
head NEG constituent of NEGP. But, as we have already seen, NEG is not an
appropriate host for the afﬁx, since it is neither overt nor verbal. The result is
that the afﬁx in T remains stranded (i.e. left without a verbal host to attach to).
Let us suppose that when an afﬁx is attached to an (auxiliary or main) verb host,
the resulting verb+afﬁx substructure is spelled out as an appropriately inﬂected
form of the relevant verb (e.g. wait+af3.SG.PRES is spelled out as the regular form
waits, whereas be+af3.SG.PRES is spelled out as the irregular form is). However,
let us further suppose that when a tense afﬁx is stranded (i.e. unable to ﬁnd a
verbal host to attach to), it is spelled out as an appropriately inﬂected form of the
dummy/expletive auxiliary do. This being so, the ﬁrst person singular present
tense afﬁx stranded in C in (51) will be spelled out as the ﬁrst person singular
present tense form of do (namely do) – as in (52) below:
(52)
[CP [C ø] [TP I [T do] [NEGP not [NEG ø] [VP [V care] for her]]]]
On this view, there is no do-insertion operation in the syntax or morphology
(somehow inserting the stem do into a structure which previously did not contain
it); rather, a form like do in a structure like (52) is simply the spellout of a stranded
afﬁx. In other words, a third person singular present tense afﬁx is spelled out as
the contracted (afﬁxal) form -s in sentences like (53a) below, but as the full form
does in sentences like (53b) and (53c):
(53) (a)
He likes pasta
(b)
Does he like pasta?
(c)
He doesn’t like pasta
In much the same way, the third person singular present tense form of the auxilary
have/be is sometimes spelled out as the full form has/is, and sometimes as the
contracted form ’s.
What is implicitly being assumed here is that Afﬁx Hopping and do-support
are complementary PF operations which provide two different ways of spelling
out an afﬁx. We can therefore see them as two facets of an Afﬁx Attachment
operation, as in (54) below:
(54)
Afﬁx Attachment
When the PF component processes a structure whose head H contains an
(undeleted) weak afﬁx which needs a verbal host and which is not already
attached to an (auxiliary or main) verb
(i)
if H has a complement headed by an overt verb, the afﬁx is
lowered onto the relevant verb [= Afﬁx Hopping]
(ii)
if not (i.e. if H does not have a complement headed by an overt
verb and the afﬁx is stranded), the afﬁx is spelled out as an
appropriately inﬂected form of do [= do-support]
We can illustrate how (54) works in terms of the italicised structures below:
(55) (a)
He won the race
(b)
He said he would win the race, and he did

142
4 head movement
(c)
He said he would win the race, and win the race, he did
(d)
Did he win the race?
(e)
Didn’t he win the race?
(f)
Some people don’t believe he won the race, but he did win it
Consider ﬁrst (55a), which is derived as follows. The determiner the merges with
the noun race to form the DP the race; the verb win merges with this DP to
form the VP win the race. This VP is merged with a T constituent containing a
(past tense) afﬁx Af to form the T-bar Af win the race. This T-bar merges with
the pronoun he to form the TP he Af win the race; and the resulting TP in turn
is merged with a null declarative complementiser ø to form the CP shown in
skeletal form in (56) below:
(56)
[CP [C ø] [TP He [T Af] [VP [V win] the race]]]
The syntactic structure (56) is then sent to the PF component (and the semantic
component) to be processed. PF operations apply in a bottom-up, cyclic fashion.
On the TP cycle in the PF component, the tense afﬁx in T is lowered onto the
verb win in accordance with (54i), so that the verb has the form win+Af: since
the lexical entry for the irregular verb win speciﬁes that it is spelled out as won
when it has a past tense afﬁx attached to it, the overall structure is eventually
spelled out as (55a) He won the race.
Now consider why do is used in the elliptical clause he did in (55b). This has the
syntactic structure shown in (57) below, with the italicised material undergoing
ellipsis:
(57)
[CP [C ø] [TP he [T Af] [VP [V win] the race]]]
The tense afﬁx in T cannot subsequently be lowered onto the verb win in the PF
component via the Afﬁx Hopping operation (54i) because an afﬁx can only attach
to an overt verb, and the verb win in (57) is not overt (by virtue of having under-
gone ellipsis); hence the do-support operation in (54ii) has to apply, spelling
out the unattached afﬁx as an appropriately inﬂected form of do – namely did.
Now consider the clause Win the race, he did in (55c). Let’s suppose that (in
the syntax) the VP win the race undergoes preposing in order to highlight it, and
is thereby moved to the front of the overall clause (to become the speciﬁer of the
null complementiser), and that the phonetic features of the original occurrence of
the VP win the race are given a null spellout, as shown informally in (58) below:
(58)
[CP [VP win the race] [C ø] [TP he [T Af] [VP win the race]]]
Once again, in the PF component the weak tense afﬁx in T cannot be lowered
onto the verb win because the complement of T is a VP which contains a null
copy of the verb win (the overall VP having moved to the front of the sentence,
leaving a null copy behind). Accordingly, do-support (54ii) applies once again,
and the afﬁx in T is spelled out as did.
Let’s turn now to look at the derivation of the yes-no question (55d) Did he
win the race? Suppose that a series of syntactic merger operations have applied
to generate the structure (59) below:

4.8 do-support
143
(59)
[CP [C ø] [TP he [T Af] [VP [V win] the race]]]
Suppose also that the interrogative C contains a strong null afﬁx ø with a tense
feature (requiring it to attach to a T constituent) and hence attracts whatever is
contained within T to adjoin to it. Since T in (59) contains only a tense afﬁx, this
afﬁx will adjoin to the null afﬁxal complementiser (and the original occurrence
of the afﬁx in T will be deleted), so deriving the structure (60) below:
(60)
[CP [C Af+ø] [TP he [T Af] [VP [V win] the race]]]
The resulting syntactic structure is then sent to the PF component to undergo mor-
phological and phonological processing. Since the tense afﬁx in T gets deleted,
it does not undergo Afﬁx Hopping. By contrast, the tense afﬁx (Af) in C is not
deleted and is unhosted (in the sense that it is not attached to the kind of verbal
host that it requires), and hence must undergo Afﬁx Attachment (54). However,
since the complement of the C constituent which contains the tense afﬁx is not
headed by an overt verb (but rather is a TP headed by a null T), Afﬁx Hop-
ping (54i) cannot apply; consequently, do-support (54ii) applies instead, with the
result that the afﬁx is spelled out as the appropriate inﬂected form of do, namely
did.
Now, consider the negative question (55e) Didn’t he win the race? In keeping
with the NEGP analysis of negation outlined in the previous section, let’s suppose
that after the VP win the race has been formed, it is merged with a null NEG head
ø to form a NEG-bar constituent, and that this in turn is merged with a negative
clitic n’t which serves as its speciﬁer, forming the NEGP n’t ø win the race. This
NEGP is then merged with a T containing an abstract tense afﬁx, forming the
T-bar Af n’t ø win the race. Suppose that the clitic negative n’t then attaches to the
end of the tense afﬁx, with the original occurrence of n’t in spec-NEGP ultimately
being deleted, so forming the string Af+n’t n’t ø win the race. The resulting T-bar
is in turn merged with the subject he, forming the TP He Af+n’t n’t ø win the
race. This is then merged with an interrogative C constituent containing a null
afﬁx ø, forming the CP (61) below:
(61)
[CP [C ø] [TP he [T Af+n’t] [NEGP n’t [NEG ø] [VP [V win] the race]]]]
Since the null afﬁx in C is strong and has a tense feature, it attracts all the material
contained in T to adjoin to it, so deriving:
(62)
[CP [C Af+n’t+ø] [TP he [T Af+n’t] [NEGP n’t [NEG ø] [VP [V win] the race]]]]
The resulting syntactic structure is then handed over to the PF component. On
the CP cycle in the PF component, the tense afﬁx in C will be subject to Afﬁx
Attachment (54). However, since the complement of C is not a VP headed by
an overt verb, Afﬁx Hopping (54i) cannot apply, and do-support (54ii) applies
instead (with the afﬁx being spelled out as an appropriate form of do), creating
the complex head do+n’t+ø, which is ultimately spelled out as didn’t.
An interesting descriptive implication of the analysis presented in (62) is that
it is in principle possible that the interrogative form of some auxiliaries may have

144
4 head movement
a different spellout from their non-interrogative counterparts. This is because in
their interrogative form they attach to a null afﬁxal interrogative complementiser
ø, whereas in their non-interrogative form they do not. A case in point is be. When
used with a ﬁrst person singular subject (= I), this has the negative interrogative
form aren’t – a form which is not found with an I subject (in varieties of English
like mine) in non-interrogative uses: cf.
(63) (a)
Aren’t I entitled to claim Social Security beneﬁts?
(b)
*I aren’t entitled to claim Social Security beneﬁts (= I’m not . . .)
This can be accounted for by positing that the string be+Af1SgPr+n’t+ø found in
(63a) can be spelled out as aren’t – but not the string be+Af1SgPr+n’t in (63b)
because this is not interrogative (by virtue of having no null interrogative afﬁx
attached to it).
Finally, let’s turn to consider the clause He did win it in (55f), where capitals
mark contrastive stress (and the utterance is used to deny any suggestion that he
didn’t win the race). One way of handling the relevant phenomenon is to sup-
pose that such sentences contain an invisible positive counterpart of the NEGP
constituent which appears in negative sentences. Since positive and negative are
two different polarities, we can conﬂate the two types of (positive and negative)
projection into a POLP (Polarity Phrase) projection. This is not quite as implau-
sible as it may seem, since some American varieties of English (though not my
own British one) allow so to be used to mark positive polarity in a sentence such
as He did so win it (meaning ‘He really did win it’). We could then say that an
emphatic sentence such as He did (so) win it has the structure shown below:
(64)
[CP [C ø] [TP he [T Af] [PolP (so) [Pol ø] [VP [V win] it]]]]
The afﬁx in T in (64) will have no verbal host immediately beneath it to attach
to, because the head immediately beneath T is Pol, and Pol does not contain an
overt verbal stem (but rather is a null, non-verbal head). Because the afﬁx in (64)
is stranded without a verbal host, it is spelled out as an appropriate form of do –
here, did.
●
●
4.9
Summary
In this chapter, we have been concerned with the syntax of head
movement. We began by looking at auxiliary inversion in questions in English
in §4.2, arguing that this involves a T-to-C movement operation whereby an
auxiliary moves from the head T position of TP into the head C position of CP. We
suggested that auxiliaries move to C in main-clause questions because C in such
structures is strong (perhaps by virtue of containing a strong afﬁx with a tense
feature requiring a T constituent to attach to it) and so attracts an auxiliary in T to
move to C. In §4.3 we argued that movement operations like auxiliary inversion
involve two separate copying and deletion operations: a copy of the auxiliary in

4.9 Summary
145
T is adjoined to a null interrogative afﬁx in C, and then the original occurrence of
the auxiliary in T is deleted. In §4.4 we saw that ﬁnite main verbs in Elizabethan
English could move from V to T by an operation of V-to-T movement (as is shown
by word order in negative sentences like I care not for her), but that this kind
of movement is no longer possible in present-day English. We suggested that a
null ﬁnite T was strong in Elizabethan English (perhaps containing a strong tense
afﬁx with a V-feature triggering the raising of verbs to T) but that its counterpart
in present-day English is weak (so that a tense afﬁx in T is lowered onto the
main verb by the morphological operation of Afﬁx Hopping). In §4.5 we argued
that T-to-C movement and V-to-T movement are two different reﬂexes of a more
general head movement operation, and that head movement is subject to a strict
locality condition (imposed by the Head Movement Constraint) which requires
it to apply in a successive-cyclic (stepwise) fashion, so that head movement is
only possible between a given head and the next highest head within the structure
containing it. In §4.6 we argued that present-day English has a last vestige of
V-to-T raising in ﬁnite clauses whereby be and have and narrow-scope modals
like need raise from a lower AUX position into the head T position of TP. We
suggested that a ﬁnite T in present-day English contains a tense afﬁx which is
only strong enough to attract an auxiliary-like light verb to move to T, not a lexical
verb. In §4.7, we took another look at negation. Revising our earlier analysis of
not as a VP-speciﬁer, we outlined an alternative analysis under which not is the
speciﬁer of a NEGP constituent which was headed by ne in Chaucerian English,
but which is null in present-day English. On this view, Shakespearean negatives
like He heard not that involve movement of the verb from V through NEG into T.
Because NEG and T don’t contain a strong enough afﬁx in present-day English,
they can no longer trigger movement of a lexical verb. In §4.8 we outlined a
morphological account of Afﬁx Hopping and do-support. We suggested that
once the syntactic component of the grammar has generated a given syntactic
structure (e.g. a complete CP), the relevant structure is then sent to the PF
component for morphological and phonological processing. If a structure being
processed by the PF component contains an unattached weak tense afﬁx, this is
lowered onto the head immediately below by Afﬁx Hopping if this is an overt
verb; if not, the afﬁx is spelled out as an appropriately inﬂected form of do.
Key principles and operations which ﬁgured in our discussion in this chapter
include the following:
(31)
Head Movement Constraint/HMC
Head Movement is only possible between a given head and the head of its
complement
(46)
Earliness Principle
Operations must apply as early as possible in a derivation
(49)
Strict Cyclicity Principle/SCP
At a stage of derivation where a given projection HP is being
cycled/processed, only operations affecting the head H of HP and some
other constituent c-commanded by H can apply

146
4 head movement
(54)
Afﬁx Attachment
When the PF component processes a structure whose head H contains an
(undeleted) weak afﬁx which needs a verbal host and which is not already
attached to an (auxiliary or main) verb
(i)
if H has a complement headed by an overt verb, the afﬁx is lowered onto the
relevant verb [= Afﬁx Hopping]
(ii)
if not (i.e. if H does not have a complement headed by an overt verb and the
afﬁx is stranded), the afﬁx is spelled out as an appropriately inﬂected form
of do [= do-support]
●
●
4.10
Bibliographical background
The analysis of auxiliary inversion in §4.2 as involving a strong,
afﬁxal C constituent attracting a subordinate T-auxiliary is adapted from
Chomsky (1993, 1995). On inversion in so-sentences like John can speak French
and so can Mary, see Toda (2007). The idea in §4.3 that movement involves
copying derives from Chomsky (1995, §3.5); the discussion of which copy of
a moved constituent is overtly spelled out is adapted from Chomsky (2006,
p. 9). Children’s auxiliary copying structures are discussed in Hiramatsu (2003).
The Head Movement Constraint/HMC outlined in §4.5 has its origins in Travis
(1984); a complication which arises with it is that some languages have a
form of long-distance head movement operation which allows a verb to be
moved out of one clause to the front of another in order to highlight the
verb in some way, and which appears not to obey HMC: for relevant discus-
sion, see Koopman (1984), van Riemsdijk (1989), Lema and Rivero (1990),
Larson and Lefebvre (1991), Manzini (1994), Roberts (1994), Carnie (1995),
Borsley, Rivero and Stephens (1996), Hoge (1998), Holmberg (1999), Toyoshima
(2000), Fanselow (2002) and Landau (2006b). The analysis of have/be raising
in §4.6 dates back in spirit to Klima (1964); see Nomura (2006, pp. 303–314)
for discussion of have/be-raising in subjunctive clauses. The analysis of narrow-
scope modal auxiliaries as originating in a lower position and subsequently
raising to T is adapted from Roberts (1998) and Nomura (2006). On the deﬁn-
ing characteristics of auxiliaries, see Pollock (1989) and Poletto and Beninc`a
(2004). On the nature of historical change in syntax, see Kroch (2001). The
NEGP analysis of negative clauses in §4.7 has its roots in earlier work by Pol-
lock (1989), Laka (1990), Rizzi (1990), Ouhalla (1990), Iatridou (1990), Belletti
(1990), Zanuttini (1991), Roberts (1993), Haegeman (1995), Chomsky (1995)
and Potsdam (1997, 1998); on negation in earlier varieties of English, see Ing-
ham (2000, 2002, 2007). On sentences like Shouldn’t you be at work?, see
Cormack and Smith (2000a). The Earliness Principle is taken from Pesetsky
(1995). A range of alternative accounts of the do-support phenomenon discussed
in §4.8 can be found in Halle and Marantz (1993), Lasnik (1995a, 2000, 2003,
2006), Ochi (1999), Embick and Noyer (2001), Bobaljik (2002) and Freidin
(2004).

Workbook section
147
Although we have taken head movement to be a syntactic operation here (fol-
lowing Baltin 2002, Roberts 2001b, Donati 2006, Matushansky 2006 and Nomura
2006), it should be noted that Chomsky (1999) takes it to be a morphological
operation applying in the PF component, essentially designed to enable afﬁxes
to attach to appropriate heads: see Boeckx and Stjepanovi´c (2001), Flagg (2002)
and Sauerland and Elbourne (2002) for discussion of this idea. If head movement
were indeed a PF operation, we could conﬂate it with the Afﬁx Attachment oper-
ation in (54), by supposing that a tense afﬁx triggers raising of an appropriate
host if it is strong enough to do so, but otherwise is lowered onto the relevant
host wherever possible, or is spelled out as an appropriate form of do if stranded.
However, the picture is complicated by evidence from Zwart (2001) that head
movement has some properties typical of syntactic operations, and others typical
of PF operations.
●
●
Workbook section
●
Exercise 4.1
Discuss the derivation of each of the following (declarative or interrogative) sentences, drawing a
tree diagram to represent the structure of each sentence and saying why the relevant structure is
(or is not) grammatical (in the case of 4, saying why it is ungrammatical as a main clause):
1
He helps her
2
*He d’s help her
3
*Helps he her?
4
*If he helps her?
5
Does he help her? (w)
6
I wonder if he helps her
7
*I wonder if does he help her
8
*I wonder if helps he her
9
*He helps not her
10
*He not helps her
11
He does not help her (w)
12
He doesn’t help her
13
Doesn’t he help her?
14
He might not help her (w)
15
He dare not help her (w)
(Note that d’s in 2 represents unstressed does/dəz/.) Say what is unusual about the syntax of
sentences like 16 below (the second line of the nursery rhyme Baa Baa Black Sheep) – and why
such structures appear to be problematic for the assumptions made in §4.6 in the main text:
16
Have you any wool?
Can we overcome the relevant problems if we follow Freidin (2004, p. 115) in supposing that
have in sentences like 16 is an auxiliary generated in T, and the head V of VP contains a null

148
4 head movement
variant of the verb got? (Take any wool to be a QP headed by the quantiﬁer any.) In addition, say
why you think negative imperatives like 17 below (which were grammatical in Elizabethan
English) are ungrammatical in present-day English, and why we ﬁnd 18 instead:
17
∗Be not afraid!
18
Don’t be afraid!
Next, comment on the syntax of the following negative sentence produced by a boy called Abe at
age 2;5.26 (two years, ﬁve months, twenty-six days):
19
I not can ﬁnd it (w)
and compare 19 with the corresponding adult structure I cannot ﬁnd it. Then discuss the derivation
of each of the following questions produced by a number of different children aged two to four
years, and identify the nature of the child’s error in each case, comparing the child’s structure with
its adult counterpart:
20
Is the clock is working?
21
Does it opens?
22
Don’t you don’t want one?
23
Does it doesn’t move? (w)
Consider, also, the derivation of the following questions reported (by Akmajian and Heny 1975,
p. 17) to have been produced by an unnamed three-year-old girl:
24
Is I can do that?
25
Is you should eat the apple?
26
Is the apple juice won’t spill?
Helpful hints
In 13, account for the fact that the sentence is ambiguous between one interpretation
paraphraseable as ‘Is it the case that he doesn’t help her’ and another paraphraseable as ‘Isn’t it
the case that he helps her?’ In relation to 14, 15 and 19, consider the scope relations between the
auxiliary and not, and bear in mind the suggestion made in the main text that ﬁnite auxiliaries
originate in an AUX position below NEG if they fall within the scope of not. In relation to 17 and
18, consider the possibility that although a T in ﬁnite declarative and interrogative clauses in
present-day English is strong enough to attract an auxiliary (but not a lexical verb), T in
imperatives is too weak to attract either an auxiliary or a main verb. In 20–23, consider the
possibility that children sometimes fail to delete the original occurrence of a moved T constituent.
In 22 and 23, consider the possibility that attachment of the clitic n’t to a tense afﬁx in T may
either be treated by the child as a syntactic operation, or as a phonological operation in the PF
component which applies after the relevant syntactic structure has been formed.

Workbook section
149
Model answer for 1
Given the assumptions made in the text, 1 will have the simpliﬁed syntactic structure (i) below:
(i)
CP
C
TP
ø
       PRN         
T' 
        He 
  T    
VP
 Af3SgPr 
  V                  PRN
help          
her 
The overall clause is a CP headed by a null declarative complementiser ø which has a TP
complement headed by a T constituent which carries a present tense afﬁx which is third person
singular by agreement with the subject he, and which needs an overt verb stem to attach to. Since
tense afﬁxes are not strong enough to trigger raising of main verbs in present-day English, the
verb help cannot be raised to provide a host for the afﬁx in T. After the syntactic structure in (i)
has been formed, it is handed over to the PF component, where it is processed in a bottom-up,
cyclic fashion. On the TP-cycle, the tense afﬁx in T is lowered onto the end of the verb help by
Afﬁx Hopping, which speciﬁes that a weak afﬁx in T is lowered onto the head V of a VP
complement of T. Afﬁx Hopping results in the form [help+Af3SgPr], which is ultimately spelled
out as helps. The complement pronoun her is assigned accusative case in the syntax by the
c-commanding transitive verb help, and the subject pronoun he is assigned nominative case by the
c-commanding ﬁnite complementiser ø.
●
Exercise 4.2
Discuss the derivation of the following Shakespearean sentences:
1
Thou marvell’st at my words (Macbeth, Macbeth, III.ii)
2
Macbeth doth come (Third Witch, Macbeth, I.iii)
3
He loves not you (Lysander, Midsummer Night’s Dream, III.ii) (w)
4
You do not look on me (Jessica, Merchant of Venice, II.vi)
5
Wilt thou use thy wit? (Claudio, Much Ado About Nothing, V.i)
6
Wrong I mine enemies? (Brutus, Julius Caesar, IV.ii)
7
Knows he not thy voice? (First Lord, All’s Well That Ends Well, IV.i) (w)
8
Didst thou not say he comes? (Baptista, Taming of the Shrew, III.ii)
9
Canst not rule her? (Leontes, Winter’s Tale, II.iii)
10
Hath not a Jew eyes? (Shylock, Merchant of Venice, III.i)
11
Do not you love me? (Benedick, Much Ado About Nothing, V.iv)
12
Buy thou a rope! (Antipholus, Comedy of Errors, IV.i)
13
Fear you not him! (Tranio, Taming of the Shrew, Iv.iv)
14
Speak not you to him! (Escalus, Measure for Measure, V.i)
15
Do not you meddle! (Antonio, Much Ado About Nothing, V.i)
16
She not denies it (Leonato, Much Ado About Nothing, IV.i) (w)

150
4 head movement
Helpful hints
Assume that 9 has a null ﬁnite pro subject. Assume also that the sentences in 12–15 are
imperative in force, and consider the possibility that V raises to C in imperatives in Elizabethan
English (see Han 2001), perhaps attaching to a strong imperative afﬁx Imp. Consider also the
possibility that not had a dual status and could either function as an independent word (like
present-day English not) or could serve as an enclitic particle (like present-day English n’t) which
attached to the end of an immediately adjacent ﬁnite T constituent. Finally, say in what way(s)
sentence 16 proves problematic in respect of the assumptions made in the main text (and in the
model answer below), and see if you can think of possible solutions (e.g. what if the verb raised as
far as NEG but not as far as T?). Assume that genitive nominals like my words, mine enemies, thy
wit, and thy voice are DPs, but do not concern yourself with their internal structure. (We will
brieﬂy look at the structure of genitive nominals in the next chapter.)
Model answer for 1 and 2
Relevant aspects of the derivation of 1 (here presented in simpliﬁed form) are as follows. The verb
marvel merges with its PP complement at my words to form the VP marvel at my words. This in
turn is merged with a T constituent containing a strong present tense afﬁx (= Af) to form the T-bar
Af marvel at my words, which is in turn merged with its subject thou to form a TP. The tense afﬁx
agrees with thou and thus carries the features [second-person, singular-number, present-tense],
below abbreviated to 2SgPr. Being strong, the tense afﬁx triggers raising of the verb marvel to
adjoin to the afﬁx in T. The resulting TP is merged with a null intransitive ﬁnite C which marks
the declarative force of the sentence and which assigns nominative case to thou. 1 thus has the
syntactic structure shown in simpliﬁed form in (i) below, with the dotted arrow indicating
movement of the verb marvel from V to T:
(i)
 CP 
C        
      TP 
ø  
        PRN        
T' 
thou 
T          
VP
          marvel+Af2SgPr
V 
      PP 
marvel
  at my words
The string marvel+Af2SgPr is ultimately spelled out as marvell’st in the PF component.
Sentence 2 is derived as follows. The verb come merges with a tense afﬁx in T, forming
the T-bar Af come. This will in turn be merged with its subject Macbeth, which is a DP headed
by a null determiner, in accordance with the DP hypothesis. Merging the resulting DP with
a null declarative complementiser will derive the syntactic structure shown in (ii)
below:

Workbook section
151
(ii)
            CP 
C
TP
ø
ø
     DP    
T' 
        D       
 N                   
T       
        V
Macbeth
Af                 come   
It would seem that the tense afﬁx in T is ultimately spelled out as doth (which is a dialectal variant
of does). What is surprising about this is that the dummy auxiliary do (in present-day English, at
least) is used only to spell out a tense afﬁx which is unable to ﬁnd a host by any other means.
Since ﬁnite verbs can raise from V to T in Elizabethan English, what we’d expect to happen in (ii)
is for the verb come to raise to adjoin to the tense afﬁx in T, so forming the substructure come+Af,
which would ultimately be spelled out as cometh (a dialectal variant of comes). However,
although this is indeed one possible outcome, this is clearly not what happens in the case of 2
Macbeth doth come. Why not?
Let us suppose that the tense afﬁx in a ﬁnite T in a structure like (ii) in Elizabethan English
could be either strong or weak, and that Elizabethan English (perhaps because it had V-to-T
raising) did not have any T-to-V lowering operation like the Afﬁx Lowering operation found in
present-day English. Where T is strong, the tense afﬁx will trigger raising of the main verb from V
to T; where it is weak, the verb will remain in situ, and the tense afﬁx will remain unattached, and
so will ultimately be spelled out as an appropriately inﬂected form of do (here, doth). Such an
analysis implies that there was considerably more morphosyntactic variation in Shakespearean
English than we ﬁnd in present-day varieties of Standard English – e.g. in respect of a ﬁnite tense
afﬁx being either strong or weak. Given that Shakespeare’s writing contains a mixture of different
dialect forms (as we see from the alternation between dialectal variants like comes/cometh and
does/doth), this may not be implausible. However, as noted by Tieken-Boon van Ostade (1988),
the origin of do is ‘one of the great riddles of English linguistic history’.

5
Wh-movement
●
●
5.1
Overview
In the previous chapter, we looked at the head movement operation
by which a head can move into the next highest head position within the structure
containing it. In this chapter, we look at a very different kind of movement
operation traditionally termed wh-movement, by which a wh-expression like
who or what languages moves into the speciﬁer position within CP. In this
chapter, we focus on the syntax of wh-questions, though exercise 5.2 at the end
of the chapter invites you to think about the syntax of another type of wh-clause,
namely relative clauses.
●
●
5.2
Wh-questions
So far, we have implicitly assumed that CP comprises a head C
constituent (which can be ﬁlled by a complementiser or a preposed auxiliary)
and a TP complement. However, one question which such an analysis begs is
what position is occupied by the bold-printed constituent which precedes the
italicised auxiliary in root interrogatives (i.e. main-clause questions) such as (1)
below:
(1) (a)
What languages can you speak?
(b)
Which one would you like?
(c)
Who was she dating?
(d)
Where are you going?
Each of the sentences in (1) contains an italicised inverted auxiliary occupy-
ing the head C position of CP, preceded by a bold-printed interrogative wh-
expression – i.e. an expression containing an interrogative word beginning with
wh- like what/which/who/where/when/why. (Note that how in questions like How
are you? How well did he behave? etc. is also treated as a wh-word because it
exhibits the same syntactic behaviour as other interrogative words beginning with
wh-.) Each of the wh-expressions in (1) functions as the complement of the verb
at the end of the sentence – as we see from the fact that each of the examples in
(1) has a paraphrase like that in (2) below in which the wh-expression occupies
complement position after the italicised verb:
152

5.2 Wh-questions
153
(2) (a)
You can speak what languages?
(b)
You would like which one?
(c)
She was dating who?
(d)
You are going where?
Structures like (2) are termed wh-in-situ questions, because the bold-printed wh-
expression does not get preposed, but rather remains in situ (i.e. ‘in place’) in the
canonical position associated with its grammatical function (e.g. what languages
in (2a) is the direct object complement of speak, and complements are normally
positioned after their verbs, so what languages is positioned after the verb speak).
In English, wh-in-situ questions are used primarily as echo questions, to echo
and question something previously said by someone else (e.g. a sentence like
(2c) might be used as an incredulous response to someone who says She was
dating Lord Lancelot Humpalotte). Echo questions like those in (2) suggest that
the wh-expressions in (1) originate as complements of the relevant verbs, and
subsequently get moved to the front of the overall clause. But what position do
they get moved into, in non-echoic questions like (1)?
The answer is obviously that they are moved into some position preceding the
inverted auxiliary. Since inverted auxiliaries occupy the head C position of CP,
let’s suppose that preposed wh-expressions are moved into a position preceding
the head C of CP. Given that speciﬁers are positioned before heads, a plausible
suggestion to make is that preposed wh-expressions move to become the speciﬁer
of C (i.e. move into spec-C). If so, a sentence like (2c) Who was she dating? will
involve the arrowed movement operations shown in (3) below (where who has
been assigned to the category PRN – though it should be noted that interrogative
pronouns like who are pronominal quantiﬁers and hence Q-pronouns, and so who
could alternatively be assigned to the category Q):
(3)
     CP 
PRN                  
C' 
Who
            C  
TP
was+ø
    PRN                  
  T' 
     she
T            
VP
       (1)
was
       V 
        PRN
dating
who
(2)  
Two different kinds of movement operation (indicated by the numbered arrows)
are involved in (3): the movement arrowed in (1) involves the familiar operation
of head movement by which the bold-printed auxiliary was moves from the head
T position of TP to the head C position of CP (adjoining to a null afﬁxal inter-
rogative complementiser ø); by contrast (2) involves movement of an italicised

154
5 wh-movement
wh-expression from a position below C (here, from the complement position
within VP) into the speciﬁer position in CP, and this very different kind of move-
ment operation is known as wh-movement. Note that unlike head movement
(which, as its name suggests, moves only heads), wh-movement moves maximal
projections; for instance, in (1a) What languages can you speak? wh-movement
moves the quantiﬁer phrase what languages which is the maximal projection
of the interrogative quantiﬁer what? by virtue of being the largest expression
headed by the word what; and in (1c) Who was she dating? it moves the inter-
rogative Q-pronoun who (which is a maximal projection by virtue of being the
largest expression headed by the word who). Let us suppose that every clause/CP
must be typed (i.e. identiﬁed as declarative or interrogative, or exclamative etc.
in type) in the syntax, and that a clause is typed as interrogative if it contains
an interrogative head or speciﬁer: on this view, movement of the interrogative
pronoun who to spec-C serves to type the CP in (3) as interrogative.
Evidence in support of the assumption that preposed wh-expressions move
into spec-C comes from varieties of English in which a preposed wh-expression
can precede a complementiser like that. This is true, for example, of interrogative
complement clauses in Belfast English like those bracketed below (from Henry
1995, p. 107):
(4) (a)
I wonder [which dish that they picked]
(b)
They didn’t know [which model that we had discussed]
Since the complementiser that occupies the head C position in the bracketed
CP, it seems reasonable to suppose that the wh-expressions which dish/which
model in front of that occupy the speciﬁer position within CP, and this is what
Alison Henry argues (these wh-expressions having the status of quantiﬁer phrases
headed by the wh-quantiﬁer which). In standard varieties of English, sentences
like (4) are ungrammatical because they violate the following condition:
(5)
Complementiser Condition
An overt complementiser (like that/for/if) cannot have an overt speciﬁer in
the superﬁcial structure of a sentence
However, it should be noted that even speakers of Standard English varieties
occasionally produce wh+that structures in spontaneous speech. However, such
structures typically involve a wh-phrase rather than a wh-word preceding that –
as illustrated by the contrast below:
(6) (a)
%I wonder [what kind of party that they have in mind]
(b)
∗I wonder [what that they have in mind]
The italicised expression preceding that is a quantiﬁer phrase in (6a), but a
pronominal quantiﬁer in (6b).
Although our discussion in this chapter will focus on wh-movement in inter-
rogative clauses, it should be pointed out that there is a wide range of other
constructions which have been claimed to involve movement of a (visible or

5.3 Wh-movement as copying and deletion
155
invisible) wh-constituent (albeit without auxilary inversion), including exclama-
tive clauses like that italicised in (7a) below, relative clauses like that italicised
in (7b), comparative clauses like that italicised in (7c) below, as-clauses like that
italicised in (7d) and so-called tough-clauses like that italicised in (7e):
(7) (a)
He hadn’t realised what a fool he was making of himself
(b)
She is someone who you can trust
(c)
It is bigger than I expected it to be
(d)
Ames was a spy, as the FBI eventually discovered
(e)
Syntax is tough to understand
It is interesting to note that (7c) has a variant form containing the overt wh-word
what in some (non-standard) varieties of English, where we ﬁnd It is bigger than
what I expected it to be. We will not attempt to fathom the syntax of constructions
like those in (7) here, however – although exercise 5.2 asks you to think about
the syntax of relative clauses.
A theoretical point to note in passing is that although the above discussion
implicitly assumed that movement and merger are two entirely distinct types
of operation, Chomsky (2001) maintains that movement is simply a particular
type of merger operation. He refers to merger operations which involve taking
an item out of the lexical array and merging it with some other constituent as
external merge, and to movement operations by which an item contained within
an existing structure is moved to a new position within the same structure as
internal merge. Accordingly, wh-movement in (3) can be seen as involving an
internal merger operation. (By contrast, head movement involves a different type
of adjunction operation by which one head is adjoined to another – as we saw in
the previous chapter.)
●
●
5.3
Wh-movement as copying and deletion
A tacit assumption made in our analysis of wh-movement in (3) is
that just as a moved head (e.g. an inverted auxiliary) leaves behind a null copy
of itself in the position out of which it moves, so too a moved wh-expression
leaves behind a copy at its extraction site (i.e. in the position out of which it is
extracted/moved). In earlier work in the 1970s and 1980s, moved constituents
were said to leave behind a trace in the positions out of which they move
(informally denoted as t), and traces were treated as being like pronouns in
certain respects. A moved constituent and its trace(s) were together said to form
a (movement) chain, with the highest member of the chain (i.e. the moved
constituent) being the head of the movement chain, and the lowest member
being the foot of the chain. Within the framework of Chomsky’s more recent copy
theory of movement, a trace is taken to be a full copy (rather than a pronominal
copy) of a moved constituent. Informally, however, we shall sometimes refer to

156
5 wh-movement
the null copies left behind by movement as traces or trace copies in later sections
and chapters.
The assumption that moved wh-expressions leave a copy behind can be
defended not only on theoretical grounds (in terms of our desire to develop a
uniﬁed theory of movement in which both minimal and maximal projections
leave behind copies when they move), but also on empirical grounds. One such
empirical argument comes from the familiar phenomenon of have-cliticisation in
sentences like:
(8)
I have/I’ve been to Rome more often than I have/∗I’ve to Paris
Although have can cliticise onto I in the string I’ve been to Rome in (8), clitici-
sation is not possible in the string I’ve to Paris. Why should this be? Let us make
the reasonable assumption that I’ve to Paris in (8) is an elliptical variant of I’ve
been to Paris, so that (8) has the fuller structure shown informally in (9) below,
with strikethrough indicating that the ellipsed V receives a null spellout in the PF
component:
(9)
I have been to Rome more often than I have been to Paris
The relevant type of cliticisation operation is subject to a constraint which can be
characterised informally in the following terms:
(10)
Cliticisation is barred when a clitic is followed by a null constituent
(where ‘is followed by’ can be given an order-free formulation in terms of the
relation c-command, in ways that I leave the technophiles among you to fathom
for yourselves). This accounts for the ungrammaticality of the string I’ve to Paris
in (8), since have is immediately followed by a null copy of the verb been and so
the constraint (10) blocks have from cliticising onto I.
In the light of the constraint in (10), consider why cliticisation is permitted (in
my own British English variety) in (11) below:
(11) (a)
They have very little money in their bank account
(b)
They’ve very little money in their bank account
but not in (12):
(12) (a)
I wonder [how much money they have in their bank account]
(b)
∗I wonder [how much money they’ve in their bank account]
The bracketed clauses in (12) are interrogative complement clauses which show
wh-movement of an interrogative expression to the front of the clause (the moved
wh-expression being how much money, comprising a quantiﬁer much with the
complement money and the speciﬁer how). If (as we claim here) wh-movement
involves a copying operation, (12b) will have the fuller structure shown in (13)
below:
(13)
I wonder [how much money they have how much money in their bank
account]

5.3 Wh-movement as copying and deletion
157
That is, the wh-QP how much money will originate as the complement of the
verb have, and a copy of this constituent will then be placed at the front of the
bracketed interrogative complement clause, with the original occurrence of the
QP receiving a null spellout (marked by strikethrough). But the null QP following
the clitic have will then block have from contracting onto they in accordance with
the cliticisation constraint in (10). Thus, the ungrammaticality of sentences like
(12b) is consistent with the claim that wh-movement involves copying.
A different kind of evidence in support of the claim that preposed wh-
expressions leave behind a null copy when they move comes from a phenomenon
which we can call preposition copying. In this connection, consider the following
Shakespearean wh-structures:
(14) (a)
In what enormity is Marcius poor in? (Menenius, Coriolanus, II.i)
(b)
To what form but that he is should wit larded with malice and malice forced
with wit turn him to? (Thersites, Troilus and Cressida, V.i)
(c)
. . . that fair [for which love groan’d for] (Prologue to Act II, Romeo and
Juliet)
(14a, b) are interrogative clauses, and the bracketed structure in (14c) is a relative
clause – so called because it contains a relative wh-pronoun which relating
(more speciﬁcally, referring back) to the preceding noun expression that fair. In
these examples, an italicised prepositional wh-phrase (i.e. a Prepositional Phrase
containing a wh-word like what/which) has been moved to the front of the relevant
clause by wh-movement. But a (bold-printed) copy of the preposition also appears
at the end of the clause. In case you think that this is a Shakespearean quirk (or –
Heaven forbid – a slip of the quill on the part of Will), the examples in (15)
below show much the same thing happening in (bracketed) relative clauses in
present-day English:
(15) (a)
But if this ever-changing world [in which we live in] makes you give in and
cry, say ‘Live and Let Die’ (Sir Paul McCartney, theme song from the
James Bond movie Live and Let Die)
(b)
IKEA only actually has ten stores [from which to sell from] (Economics
reporter, BBC Radio 5)
(c)
Israeli soldiers ﬁred an anti-tank missile and hit a police post [in which the
Palestinian policeman who was killed had been in] (News reporter, BBC
Radio 5)
(d)
Tiger Woods (about whom this Masters seems to be all about) is due to tee
off shortly (Sports reporter, BBC Radio 5)
(e)
The hearing mechanism is a peripheral, passive system over which we have
no control over (undergraduate exam paper)
How can we account for preposition copying in structures like (14) and (15)?
The copy theory of movement enables us to provide a principled answer to
this question. Let’s suppose that wh-movement is a composite operation involving
two suboperations of copying and deletion: the ﬁrst stage is for a copy of the
moved wh-expression to be moved into spec-C; the second stage is for the

158
5 wh-movement
original occurrence of the wh-expression to be deleted. From this perspective,
preposition copying arises when the preposition at the original extraction site
undergoes copying but not deletion. To see what this means in more concrete
terms, consider the syntax of (14a) In what enormity is Marcius poor in? This
is derived as follows. The wh-quantiﬁer what merges with the noun enormity to
derive the quantiﬁer phrase/QP what enormity. This in turn is merged with the
preposition in to form the Prepositional Phrase/PP in what enormity. This PP
is then merged with the adjective poor to form the Adjectival Phrase/AP poor
in what enormity. This AP is merged with the copular verb is to form the Verb
Phrase/VP is poor in what enormity. This VP is merged with a ﬁnite T constituent
which triggers raising of the verb is from V to T; the resulting T-bar constituent
is merged with its subject Marcius (which is a DP headed by a null determiner)
to form the tense phrase/TP ø Marcius is is poor in what enormity. Merging this
with a strong C into which is moves forms the C-bar Is ø Marcius is is poor
in what enormity? Moving a copy of the PP in what enormity into spec-C in
turn derives the structure shown in simpliﬁed form in (16) below (with copies of
moved constituents shown in italics):
(16)
CP
PP 
              C' 
In what enormity
C                    
TP
is
     DP         
T' 
ø Marcius
     T 
VP      
is
V  
AP
is
   A                PP 
 poor    in what enormity
The two italicised copies of the moved copular verb is are deleted by operation
of copy deletion. But consider how copy deletion affects the copy left behind
by movement of the PP in what enormity to spec-C. If we suppose that copy
deletion in (14a) deletes the smallest phrase containing the wh-word what, it
will delete the quantiﬁer phrase what enormity rather than the Prepositional
Phrase in what enormity, so deriving (14a) In what enormity is Marcius poor
in? Thus, preposition copying structures like (14) and (15) provide evidence that
wh-movement is a composite operation involving wh-copying and wh-deletion.
A related piece of evidence that wh-movement leaves behind a copy comes
from speech errors involving wh-copying, e.g. in relative clauses such as that
bracketed below:
(17)
It’s a world record [which many of us thought which wasn’t on the books at
all] (Athletics commentator, BBC2 TV)

5.3 Wh-movement as copying and deletion
159
What’s the nature of the speech error made by the tongue-tied (or brain-drained)
BBC reporter in (17)? The answer is that when moving the relative pronoun
which from its initial italicised position to its subsequent bold-printed position,
our intrepid reporter successfully merges a copy of which in the bold-printed
position, but fails to delete the original occurrence of which in the italicised
position. Such speech errors provide us with further evidence that wh-movement
is a composite operation involving both copying and deletion.
An additional piece of evidence in support of wh-movement involving a copy-
ing operation comes from sentences such as those below:
(18) (a)
What hope of ﬁnding any survivors could there be?
(b)
What hope could there be of ﬁnding any survivors?
(19) (a)
What proof that he was implicated have you found?
(b)
What proof have you found that he was implicated?
In order to try and understand what’s going on here, let’s take a closer look
at the derivation of (18). The expression what hope of ﬁnding any survivors in
(18a) is a QP comprising the quantiﬁer what and an NP complement which in
turn comprises the noun hope and its PP complement of ﬁnding any survivors
(with the polarity item any being able to occur because it is c-commanded by
the interrogative quantiﬁer what: see §2.6). The overall QP what hope of ﬁnding
any survivors is initially merged as the complement of the verb be, but ultimately
moves to the front of the overall sentence in (18a): this is unproblematic, since it
involves wh-movement of the whole QP. But in (18b), it would seem as if only part
of this QP (= the string what hope) undergoes wh-movement, leaving behind the
remnant PP of ﬁnding any survivors. The problem with this is that the string what
hope is not a constituent, only a subpart of the overall QP what hope of ﬁnding
any survivors. Given the standard assumption that only complete constituents
can undergo movement, we clearly cannot maintain that the nonconstituent string
what hope gets moved on its own. So how can we account for sentences like (18b)?
Copy theory provides us with an answer, if we suppose that wh-movement places
a copy of the complete QP what hope of ﬁnding survivors at the front of the
overall sentence, so deriving the structure shown in skeletal form in (20) below:
(20)
What hope of ﬁnding any survivors could there be what hope of ﬁnding
any survivors
If we further suppose that the PP of ﬁnding any survivors is spelled out in its
original position (i.e. in the italicised position it occupied before wh-movement
applied) but the remaining constituents of the QP (the quantiﬁer what and the
noun hope) are spelled out in the superﬁcial (bold-printed) position in which
they end up after wh-movement, (18b) will be spelled out in the manner shown
in simpliﬁed form below after copy-deletion has applied (with strikethrough
indicating constituents which receive a null spellout):

160
5 wh-movement
(21)
What hope of ﬁnding any survivors could there be what hope of ﬁnding
any survivors
As should be obvious, such an analysis relies crucially on the assumption that
moved constituents leave behind full copies of themselves. It also assumes the
possibility of split spellout or discontinuous spellout, in the sense that (in
sentences like (18) and (19) above) a PP or CP which is the complement of a
particular type of moved constituent can be spelled out in one position (in the
position where it originated), and the remainder of the constituent spelled out in
another (in the position where it ends up). More generally, it suggests that (in
certain structures) there is a choice regarding which part of a movement chain
gets deleted. A further possibility which this opens up is that wh-in-situ structures
in languages like Chinese may involve wh-movement, but with the moved wh-
expression being spelled out in its initial position (at the foot of the movement
chain) rather than in its ﬁnal position (at the head of the movement chain).
A different type of argument in support of the copy theory of movement can
be formulated in connection with the interpretation of reﬂexive anaphors like
himself in sentences such as:
(22)
Joe wonders which picture of himself Jim bought
In (22), the reﬂexive anaphor himself can refer either to Joe or to Jim. An
obvious problem posed by the latter interpretation is that a reﬂexive has to be
c-commanded by a local antecedent (one contained within the same TP, as we saw
in §2.7), and yet Jim does not c-command himself in (22). How can we account
for the dual interpretation of himself? The copy theory of movement provides a
principled answer to this question. The QP which picture of himself is initially
merged as the complement of the verb bought but is subsequently moved to front
of the bought clause, leaving behind a copy in its original position, so deriving
the structure shown in skeletal form in (23) below:
(23)
[CP [TP Joe wonders [CP which picture of himself [TP Jim bought
which picture of himself ]]]]
Given the two-copy structure in (23), the possibility of himself referring to Jim
can be attributed to the fact that the italicised copy of himself is c-commanded by
(and contained within the same TP as) Jim. On the other hand, the possibility of
himself referring to Joe can be attributed to the fact that the bold-printed copy of
himself is c-commanded by (and occurs within the same TP as) Joe.
In this section, we have seen that there is a range of empirical evidence
which supports the claim that a constituent which undergoes wh-movement leaves
behind a copy at its extraction site. This copy is normally given a null spellout in
the PF component, though we have seen that copies may sometimes have an overt
spellout, or indeed part of a moved phrase may be spelled out in one position,
and part in another. We have also seen that copies of moved wh-constituents are
visible in the semantic component, and play an important role in relation to the
interpretation of anaphors.

5.4 Driving wh-movement and auxiliary inversion
161
●
●
5.4
Driving wh-movement and auxiliary inversion
An important question raised by the analysis outlined above is what
triggers wh-movement. In recent work, Chomsky has suggested that an edge
feature is the mechanism which drives movement of wh-expressions to spec-C.
More speciﬁcally, he maintains that just as T in ﬁnite clauses carries an epp
feature requiring it to be extended into a TP projection containing a speciﬁer
on the edge of TP, so too C in questions carries an edge feature [ef] requiring
it to be extended into a CP projection containing a speciﬁer on the edge of CP.
These two types of feature differ in that the epp feature on T works in conjunction
with agreement (so that T requires as its subject a constituent which it agrees
with in person/number), whereas the edge feature on C operates independently
of agreement, allowing C (in principle) to attract any type of constituent to move
to the speciﬁer position within CP. However, questions in languages like English
are subject to the following condition:
(24)
Interrogative Condition
A clause is interpreted as a non-echoic question if (and only if) it is a CP
with an interrogative speciﬁer (i.e. a speciﬁer containing an interrogative
word)
If wh-words like who/what/where etc. originate within TP, it follows that the edge
feature on an interrogative C will need to attract an interrogative expression to
move to spec-C in order for the relevant clause to be interpreted as interrogative
in accordance with (24).
We can illustrate how the edge feature analysis of wh-movement works by
looking at the derivation of the bracketed interrogative complement clause below:
(25)
He wants to know [where you are going]
The bracketed wh-question clause in (25) is derived as follows. The verb going
is merged with its complement where to form the VP going where. The present
tense T-auxiliary are is then merged with the resulting VP to form the T-bar are
going where. The pronoun you is in turn merged with this T-bar to form the TP
you are going where. A null interrogative complementiser [C ø] is subsequently
merged with the resulting TP. Since English (unlike Chinese) is the kind of
language which requires wh-movement in non-echoic wh-questions, C also has
an edge feature [ef] requiring it to have a speciﬁer (with the speciﬁer having to
be interrogative in order for the resulting structure to be interpreted as a question
in accordance with 24). Thus, merging C with its TP complement will form the
C-bar in (26) below (with the edge feature on C being bracketed, following the
convention that features are enclosed in square brackets):

162
5 wh-movement
(26)
 C' 
C   
TP
[EF] 
ø
PRN                            T' 
you                 
T      
VP
are 
  V 
          PRN
           going
where 
(The locative adverbial pronoun where is categorised here as a PRN/pronoun,
though – like other adverbial wh-pronouns such as how and when – it could
equally be categorised as an ADV/adverb.) The edge feature on C enables it
to attract the wh-pronoun where to move from its VP-complement position
in (26) to CP-speciﬁer position. If ‘ef is always deleted when satisﬁed’ in
English (Chomsky 2006, p. 8), the edge feature carried by C will be deleted
(and thereby inactivated) once its requirements are satisﬁed (deletion being indi-
cated by strikethrough), so that (arrowed) wh-movement derives the structure
(27) below:
(27)
          CP 
PRN           
       C' 
where
   C        
TP
 [EF] 
     PRN                 
T' 
      you 
T  
VP
are
 V                   PRN
            going               where
ø
There is no auxiliary inversion (hence no movement of the auxiliary are from T
to C) because (27) is a complement clause, and an interrogative C does not carry
a tense feature triggering auxiliary inversion in complement clauses.
By contrast, main-clause wh-questions involve auxiliary inversion as well as
wh-movement, as we see from sentences like (28) below:
(28)
Who were you phoning?
The derivation of (28) proceeds as follows. The wh-pronoun who merges with
the verb phoning to form the VP phoning who. The resulting VP is subsequently
merged with the past tense auxiliary were to form the T-bar were phoning who,
which is itself merged with the pronoun you to form the TP you were phoning
who. This TP is then merged with a null interrogative C which carries an edge
feature. Since (28) is also a main-clause question, C will additionally carry a
tense feature [tns]. Given these assumptions, merging C with the TP you were
phoning who will derive the following structure:

5.4 Driving wh-movement and auxiliary inversion
163
(29)
C' 
C        
     TP 
[TNS, EF] 
ø                    PRN  
T' 
            you 
T          
VP
      were 
V       
           PRN
   phoning
           who 
The tense feature on C attracts the past tense auxiliary were to move to C
(attaching to a null afﬁxal interrogative complementiser). The edge feature on the
interrogative C triggers movement of the interrogative pronoun who to spec-C,
so deriving the structure shown below (with the tense and edge features on C
being deleted once their requirements are met, and arrows indicating movements
which take place in the course of the derivation):
(30)
      CP 
PRN      
     C' 
Who 
       C             
 TP 
 [TNS, EF] 
were+ø              PRN                           T' 
you 
   T   
   VP 
were
V          
       PRN
phoning
      who
And (30) is the superﬁcial syntactic structure of (28) Who were you phoning?
A key assumption embodied in the analysis presented here is that questions
in English obey the Interrogative Condition (24) above, which speciﬁes that ‘A
clause is interpreted as a non-echoic question if (and only if) it is a CP with an
interrogative speciﬁer (i.e. a speciﬁer containing an interrogative word).’ This
assumption has interesting implications for the syntax of yes-no questions such
as:
(31)
Is it raining?
It implies that not only (non-echoic) wh-questions but also (non-echoic) yes-no
questions are CPs with an interrogative speciﬁer. This in turn suggests that yes-no
questions contain a null yes-no question particle which is directly generated in
spec-C (i.e. which is positioned in spec-C by simple merger rather than move-
ment). From a historical perspective, such an analysis is by no means implausible,

164
5 wh-movement
since Elizabethan English had main-clause yes-no questions introduced by the
overt question word whether, as illustrated below:
(32) (a)
Whether had you rather lead mine eyes or eye your master’s heels?
(Mrs Page, Merry Wives of Windsor, III.ii)
(b)
Whether dost thou profess thyself a knave or a fool? (Lafeu, All’s Well That
Ends Well, IV.v)
This raises the possibility that yes-no questions have essentially the same syntax
in present-day English as in Elizabethan English, save that they could be intro-
duced by the overt interrogative adverb whether in Elizabethan English, but are
introduced by a null counterpart of whether (which we can denote as whether) in
present-day English.
A second piece of evidence in support of the null yes-no question particle
analysis comes from the fact that yes-no questions can be introduced by whether
when they are transposed into reported speech (and so occur in a complement
clause), as we see from the examples below:
(33) (a)
‘Are you feeling better?,’ he asked
(b)
He asked whether I was feeling better
A third piece of evidence is that yes-no questions with auxiliary inversion resem-
ble whether questions in that in both cases yes/no are appropriate answers: cf.
(34) (a)
When he asked ‘Did you vote for Larry Loudmouth?,’ I said ‘Yes’ and you
said ‘No’
(b)
When he asked whether we voted for Larry Loudmouth, I said ‘Yes’ and
you said ‘No’
A fourth argument is that main-clause yes-no questions can be tagged by or not
in precisely the same way as complement-clause whether questions: cf.
(35) (a)
Has he ﬁnished or not?
(b)
I can’t say whether he has ﬁnished or not
If yes-no questions are CPs containing a null counterpart of whether in spec-C,
we can arrive at a unitary characterisation of (non-echoic) questions as CPs with
an interrogative speciﬁer.
What all of this means is that (31) Is it raining? will be derived as follows.
The present tense auxiliary is merges with the verb raining to form the T-bar
is raining. The resulting T-bar merges with the subject it to form the TP it is
raining. This TP in turn merges with a null C which has a tense feature and an
edge feature. The tense feature of C attracts (a copy of ) the T constituent is to
merge with C; the requirement imposed by the edge feature of the interrogative C
for CP to have an interrogative speciﬁer is met by merging a null yes-no question
particle in spec-C (which, for concreteness, we will take to be a null counterpart
of the adverb whether, below symbolised as whether), ultimately deriving the
structure shown below (after deletion of the features of C and of the original
occurrence of is):

5.5 Pied-piping of material in the domain of a wh-word
165
(36)
CP
ADV
  C' 
 whether
C                    
TP
[TNS, EF] 
is+ø                     PRN        
T' 
it  
T      
V 
is
       raining
If the yes-no question particle is a null counterpart of whether, the lexical entry
for whether will need to specify that it receives a null spellout in main clauses
but is spelled out as |weðə(r)| elsewhere.
●
●
5.5
Pied-piping of material in the domain of a wh-word
The wh-questions we have analysed so far have all involved movement
of a wh-word to spec-C. However, sometimes it’s more than just a wh-word which
gets preposed under wh-movement. For example, if we look at the wh-movement
counterpart of a wh-in-situ question like (37a) below, we ﬁnd that when the wh-
quantiﬁer which is moved to the front of the sentence, the noun assignment has
to be moved together with it:
(37) (a)
You have done which assignment?
(b)
∗Which have you done assignment?
(c)
Which assignment have you done?
To use the relevant technical term, when a wh-quantiﬁer is moved to spec-C,
subordinate material in its c-command domain (i.e. material c-commanded by
the wh-quantiﬁer) has to be pied-piped (i.e. dragged) along with it: consequently,
when the wh-quantiﬁer which moves in (37), it pied-pipes the noun assignment
with it, so that the whole quantiﬁer phrase which assignment moves to spec-C – as
in (37c). (The colourful pied-piping metaphor was coined by Ross 1967, based
on a traditional fairy story in which the pied-piper in the village of Hamelin
enticed a group of children to follow him out of a rat-infested village by playing
his pipe.) Why should this be? In order to try and answer this question, let’s
consider how (37c) is derived.
The quantiﬁer which merges with the noun assignment to form the QP which
assignment. This in turn is merged with the verb done to form the VP done which
assignment. The resulting VP is subsequently merged with the present tense
auxiliary have to form the T-bar have done which assignment, which is itself
merged with the pronoun you to form the TP you have done which assignment.
TP is then merged with a null interrogative C. Since (37c) is a main-clause

166
5 wh-movement
question, C will carry tense and edge features. Consequently, merging C with the
TP you have done which assignment will derive the following structure:
(38)
C' 
C
     TP 
     [TNS, EF] 
ø
        PRN  
T' 
            you 
T          
 VP 
      have
V       
            QP 
     done 
Q                        N
          which    
assignment
The tense feature of C attracts the present tense auxiliary have to move to C,
attaching to a null afﬁx in C. The edge feature of C attracts an interrogative
expression to move to the speciﬁer position on the edge of CP.
However, a question which arises at this point is why C can’t simply attract
the wh-word which on its own to move to spec-C, so deriving the structure (39)
below (with arrows marking wh-movement and auxiliary inversion):
(39)
          CP 
Q    
C' 
Which
     C      
TP
[TNS, EF] 
have+ø             PRN          
T' 
            you 
T  
VP
        have
   V     
         QP 
 done
 Q              
  N
               which
assignment
The resulting derivation crashes, as we see from the ungrammaticality of (37b)
∗Which have you done assignment? Why should this be?
The answer is that movement of which on its own violates the following UG
condition on movement chains:
(40)
Chain Uniformity Condition
‘A chain is uniform with regard to phrase structure status’ (Chomsky 1995,
p. 253)

5.5 Pied-piping of material in the domain of a wh-word
167
(40) requires every copy in a movement chain to be uniform. This condition rules
out the possibility of which moving on its own in (39) for the following reason. In
(39), the moved wh-word which in spec-C has the status of a maximal projection
by virtue of being the largest expression headed by the word which; by contrast,
the null copy which left behind by wh-movement has the status of a minimal
projection by virtue of being the head Q constituent of the QP which assignment.
The resulting wh-chain thus violates the Chain Uniformity Condition (40) by
having a maximal projection at its head and a minimal projection at its foot.
In simpler terms, the Chain Uniformity Condition means that since the original
occurrence of the quantiﬁer which heads a QP, all other copies of which in the
movement chain must also head a QP – and this will only be the case if QP rather
than Q moves. (As should be apparent, the Chain Uniformity Condition will also
bar movement of an intermediate projection to spec-C.)
However, while we have now accounted for why the quantiﬁer which cannot
move on its own in (37b), we have not accounted for how the whole quantiﬁer
phrase which assignment comes to move in (37c) Which assignment have you
done? Why should this be? The answer lies in a further condition which can be
formulated as follows:
(41)
Attract Smallest Condition/ASC
A head which attracts a particular type of item attracts the smallest
constituent containing such an item which will not lead to violation of any
UG principle
What this implies in relation to a movement operation like wh-movement is that
we move the wh-word on its own wherever possible, but that if movement of
the wh-word on its own is prevented by some UG principle, we then move the
next smallest possible constituent containing the wh-word (as long as this doesn’t
involve violation of any UG principle): because the Chain Uniformity Condition
prevents intermediate projections from undergoing movement, this means that
(if a wh-word cannot move on its own) we move the smallest possible maximal
projection containing the wh-word . . . and so on. Let’s see how this works for a
structure such as (38).
The edge feature on the interrogative C in (38) means that the interrogative
C attracts an interrogative constituent. The Attract Smallest Condition/ASC (41)
means that C attracts the smallest possible interrogative constituent to move to
spec-C. The smallest syntactic constituent is a head, so ASC tells us that what we
should do ﬁrst is try and move the head interrogative Q which of the QP which
assignment to spec-C. However (as we have just seen), movement of the wh-word
which on its own is blocked by the Chain Uniformity Condition (40). Hence, in
conformity with ASC, we try moving the next smallest constituent containing
the interrogative word which, and this is the QP which assignment. Moving QP
to spec-C derives the structure shown below:

168
5 wh-movement
(42)
      CP 
QP   
     C' 
Which assignment 
       C             
 TP 
 [TNS, EF] 
have+ø               PRN        
  T' 
you 
   T   
   VP 
have
V          
        QP 
  done           which assignment
The resulting structure is convergent/well-formed (as we see from the gram-
maticality of (37c) Which assignment have you done?) and is interpreted as a
non-echoic question (in accordance with (24) above) by virtue of being a CP with
an interrogative speciﬁer.
Our discussion here shows that when movement of a wh-word on its own is
not possible, a maximal projection containing the wh-word is moved instead.
Note, however, that we can’t just move any maximal projection containing a
wh-word. For example, although the Verb Phrase done which assignment in (38)
is a maximal projection (more speciﬁcally, the maximal projection of the verb
done) and contains the wh-word which, it cannot undergo wh-movement – as we
see from the ungrammaticality of
(43)
∗Done which assignment have you?
Why should this be? The answer is that in consequence of the Attract Smallest
Condition (41), C can only attract the smallest maximal projection which doesn’t
violate any UG principle: since the smaller maximal projection which assignment
can move on its own without violating any constraint, there is no reason whatever
to move the larger maximal projection done which assignment.
Although we have attributed the requirement for moving the smallest possible
constituent to the Attract Smallest Condition/ASC (41), it should be noted that
ASC can arguably be subsumed under a more general condition which Chomsky
sketches in the following terms:
(44)
Economy Condition
‘Derivations and representations . . . are required to be minimal, with no
superﬂuous steps in derivations and no superﬂuous symbols in
representations’ (Chomsky 1989, p. 69)
(44) amounts to requiring that structures (i.e. ‘representations’) be as simple (i.e.
‘minimal’) as possible, and that the syntactic operations involved in derivations
should likewise be as simple as possible.
The conclusion which emerges from our discussion in this section is the
following. An interrogative C carries an edge feature enabling C to attract an

5.5 Pied-piping of material in the domain of a wh-word
169
interrogative word. Where the relevant wh-word is the head of a larger phrase, the
Chain Uniformity Condition will prevent movement of the wh-word on its own,
and the Economy Condition/Attract Smallest Condition will require movement
of the smallest constituent containing the wh-word. If we further suppose that (in
consequence of the Chain Uniformity Condition) only a maximal projection can
move to spec-C, this condition (taken together with the Interrogative Condition
(24)) leads to the generalisation that an interrogative C with an edge feature
attracts the smallest possible maximal projection containing an interrogative wh-
word to become its speciﬁer.
A further type of sentence in which material in the (c-command) domain of
a wh-word is pied-piped along with a preposed wh-word is found in possessive
structures such as the following:
(45) (a)
You have borrowed whose car?
(b)
∗Whose have you borrowed car?
(c)
Whose car have you borrowed?
In the echo-question (45a), the interrogative phrase whose car remains in situ
in complement position within the Verb Phrase. In the corresponding non-echo
questions in (45b,c) the genitive pronoun whose undergoes wh-movement on its
own in (45b) but leads to an ungrammatical outcome, whereas the larger expres-
sion whose car undergoes wh-movement in (45c) and results in a grammatical
sentence. So, it would seem that movement of whose to the front of the overall
sentence requires the noun car to be pied-piped along with whose. Why should
this be?
In order to answer this question, we need to understand the structure of the
wh-expression whose car. At ﬁrst sight, it might seem as if whose is the head
of the phrase whose car. However, closer reﬂection suggests that this cannot
be so because whose carries genitive case and yet whose car is the comple-
ment of the transitive verb borrow in (45) and so must be accusative. Moreover,
whose in (45) can be substituted by a phrasal genitive (as in ‘Which of the men’s
car did you borrow?’); and since phrases can occupy the speciﬁer (but not the
head) position within a projection, it seems more likely that genitives are the
speciﬁers of the expressions containing them. Furthermore, whose car is deﬁ-
nite in interpretation (in the sense that it has a meaning paraphraseable as ‘the
car belonging to who?’), suggesting that it must be a DP headed by a deﬁnite
determiner (and indeed there are a number of languages which have a type of pos-
sessive structure paraphraseable in English as whose the car – e.g. Hungarian).
Since there is no overt determiner in a structure like whose car, it is plausible
to suppose that its head must be a null counterpart of the deﬁnite D constituent
the.
Given these assumptions, (45c) Whose car have you borrowed? will be derived
as follows. The noun car is merged with a null deﬁnite determiner marking
possession, and this forms the D-bar ø car. This D-bar is in turn merged with

170
5 wh-movement
its pronoun speciﬁer whose forming the DP whose ø car. The resulting DP
is merged with the verb borrowed, forming the VP borrowed whose ø car.
The relevant VP is merged with the present tense T-auxiliary have, forming
the T-bar have borrowed whose ø car, which in turn is merged with its subject
you forming the TP you have borrowed whose ø car. This TP is then merged
with an interrogative C carrying tense and edge features, so forming the C-bar
below:
(46)
 C'
C     
TP
[TNS, EF] 
ø 
         PRN
T' 
you
T    
       VP 
           have
   V        
          DP 
         borrowed
             PRN         
 D' 
            whose 
     D              N
ø
          car
The tense feature of C triggers movement of the present tense auxiliary have
from T to C, and the edge feature of C attracts the smallest possible maxi-
mal projection containing an interrogative word to move to spec-C. Now, the
smallest maximal projection containing an interrogative word in (46) is the gen-
itive pronoun whose itself, which is a maximal projection by virtue of being
the largest expression headed by whose. Hence, we might expect whose to
move to spec-C on its own, so deriving the structure associated with (45b)
∗Whose have you borrowed car? But the resulting sentence is ungrammatical.
Why?
The answer lies in a constraint identiﬁed by Ross (1967) which we can para-
phrase as follows:
(47)
Left Branch Condition/LBC
In languages like English, the leftmost constituent of a nominal expression
cannot be extracted out of the expression containing it
(Nominal expressions can be taken to include DP and QP. In an order-free model
of syntax like that assumed in Minimalism, where syntactic structures are not
linearly ordered, and word order is added by linearisation conditions in the
PF component, the LBC will have to be formulated in structural terms, e.g.
as barring extraction of any constituent from the edge of the relevant kinds

5.6 Pied-piping of a superordinate preposition
171
of expression.) If we look at (46), we see that the genitive pronoun whose is
the leftmost constituent of the DP whose ø car. Consequently, the Left Branch
Condition (47) prevents whose from being extracted out of the DP containing
it, so accounting for the ungrammaticality of (45b) ∗Whose have you borrowed
car? In accordance with the Economy Condition (44), we therefore try preposing
the next smallest maximal projection containing whose, namely the DP whose
ø car. Moving this DP to spec-C has the effect of pied-piping the noun car
along with the interrogative word whose, and derives the structure shown in (48)
below (simpliﬁed by showing only overt constituents and not showing the internal
structure of TP or DP):
(48)
       CP 
DP  
  C' 
whose car 
C                    
TP
[TNS, EF] 
       you borrowed
 have
This leads to convergence, as we see from the grammaticality of (45c) Whose car
have you borrowed?
●
●
5.6
Pied-piping of a superordinate preposition
An interesting question raised by the economy analysis sketched
above is how we account for what happens in clauses like those bracketed in
(49) below:
(49)
They asked [to whom he was referring]
In formal styles of English, the superordinate preposition to is pied-piped
along with the interrogative pronoun whom, so that the whole PP to whom
moves to spec-C position within the bracketed clause. Why should a superor-
dinate preposition be pied-piped along with the subordinate wh-pronoun in such
cases? In order to try and answer this question, let’s look at the derivation of
(49).
Given the assumptions made here, the bracketed interrogative complement
clause in (49) will be derived as follows. The preposition to merges with the
pronoun whom to form the PP to whom. This PP in turn is merged with the verb
referring to form the VP referring to whom. This VP is then merged with the past
tense auxiliary was, forming the T-bar was referring to whom, and this in turn is
merged with the subject pronoun he to form the TP he was referring to whom.

172
5 wh-movement
Merging the resulting TP with a null interrogative complementiser carrying an
edge feature [ef] will derive the structure below:
(50)
           C' 
C       
TP
[EF] 
ø
PRN                               T' 
        he 
T      
        VP 
          was
V     
PP 
 referring 
                 P 
PRN 
to                    whom
We’d then expect the edge feature of C to trigger movement of the smallest max-
imal projection containing an interrogative word to the speciﬁer position within
CP. Since the pronoun whom is a maximal projection containing an interroga-
tive word (by virtue of being the largest expression headed by the interrogative
word whom), economy considerations would lead us to expect that whom will be
moved on its own. And yet, this is not the case: instead, the whole PP to whom
undergoes movement to the spec-C at the front of the embedded clause. Why
should this be?
The answer suggested by Chomsky (1995, p. 264) is that extracting whom
out of the Prepositional Phrase containing it violates a constraint which ‘bars
preposition stranding’. Although Chomsky does not elaborate on the nature of
the relevant constraint, for concreteness let us suppose that it can be subsumed
under the Impenetrability Condition which we outlined in §3.8, as will be the
case if we revise the latter by the addition of the material italicised below:
(51)
Impenetrability Condition
A constituent in the domain of a complementiser or preposition is
impenetrable to (and so cannot be attracted by) a higher head
c-commanding the relevant complementiser/preposition
(Recall that domain means ‘c-command domain’, so that a constituent is within
the domain of a preposition if it is c-commanded by the preposition – i.e. if it is
the complement of the preposition, or is contained within the complement of the
preposition.) If the head C of CP in (50) attracts the wh-pronoun whom to move
directly to spec-C, the Impenetrability Condition (51) will be violated, because
whom is c-commanded by the preposition to and is attracted by a C constituent
which c-commands the preposition to. Because the Impenetrability Condition
bars C from attracting whom on its own, C instead attracts the next smallest
maximal projection containing whom – namely the PP to whom.
However, while the analysis presented above accounts for why prepositions
are pied-piped along with their complements in formal styles of English (and

5.6 Pied-piping of a superordinate preposition
173
indeed in many other languages – e.g. French, Italian, Spanish, Greek, Japanese
and so forth), what it fails to account for is why prepositions can be stranded (i.e.
left behind) under wh-movement in informal styles of English, e.g. in sentences
such as:
(52)
They asked [who he was referring to]
After all, under the account offered above, a sentence like (52) ought to violate
the Impenetrability Condition (51), and hence would be expected to be ungram-
matical. It would therefore seem that colloquial English manages to bypass the
Impenetrability Condition somehow. But how?
In this connection, consider the following examples:
(53) (a)
They went how far inside the tunnel? (echo question)
(b)
How far did they go inside the tunnel? (non-echoic question)
If we suppose that the tunnel is the complement of the preposition inside and
how far is its speciﬁer, the wh-PP how far inside the tunnel in (53a) will have the
structure shown in simpliﬁed form in (54) below:
(54)
[PP how far [P′ [P inside] the tunnel]]
That is to say, the preposition inside merges with its complement the tunnel to
form the P-bar inside the tunnel, and this P-bar is in turn merged with the wh-
speciﬁer how far to form the PP how far inside the tunnel. As the grammaticality
of (53b) shows, the speciﬁer how far can be extracted out of the PP containing it
without violating the Impenetrability Condition (51). This is because the Impen-
etrability Condition only bars extraction of a constituent in the domain of (i.e.
c-commanded by) the preposition, and the speciﬁer how far is not c-commanded
by the preposition inside. More generally, the Impenetrability Condition allows
material to be extracted from the edge of a Prepositional Phrase, but not from its
(c-command) domain.
Assuming that movement is permitted from the edge of a Prepositional Phrase,
let’s now consider how who comes to be moved out of its containing preposition
phrase in colloquial English sentences like (52) They asked who he was referring
to. Let us suppose that it is a property of prepositions in colloquial English that
they can have an edge feature which allows a wh-expression in the domain of
the preposition to move to the edge of PP. This will allow who to move from
complement to speciﬁer position within the PP (thereby deleting the edge feature
on P) in a structure such as (55) below:

174
5 wh-movement
(55)
           C' 
C       
TP
[EF] 
ø   
PRN                               T' 
        he 
T      
        VP 
          was
V     
PP 
 referring 
               PRN       
  P' 
who
   P     
      PRN
 [EF]     
who
to
Once who has moved to the edge of PP, it no longer falls within the (c-command)
domain of the preposition, and so can freely be attracted by the edge feature on the
complementiser to move into the spec-C position at the front of the interrogative
clause (so deriving the structure associated with who he was referring to). On
this view, the key difference between preposition pied-piping and preposition
stranding lies in whether or not P has an edge feature which can trigger wh-
movement to the edge of PP. In informal (but not formal) styles of English, P can
have an an edge feature which allows a wh-expression within its domain to move
to the edge of PP, and thereafter be extracted from its containing PP.
Added plausibility is given to the edge feature analysis by the fact that in
informal (but not formal) styles of English, we ﬁnd wh+preposition sentence
fragments such as that produced by speaker b below:
(56)
speaker a: He has been talking to someone
speaker b: Who to?/∗Whom to?
It would seem that in sentence fragments like those italicised in (56), it is possible
for the wh-word to move in front of the preposition in informal (but not formal)
styles of English. Since whom is used in formal (but not informal) styles of
English, it follows that only who and not whom can occur in the kind of informal
structure found in (56b). Such structures are consistent with the suggestion made
here that a preposition can have an edge feature attracting a wh-expression to
become its speciﬁer in informal (but not formal) styles of English.
●
●
5.7
Long-distance wh-movement
The account of (non-echoic) wh-questions which we have presented
so far amounts to claiming that the smallest possible maximal projection contain-
ing an interrogative word moves to the speciﬁer position in the CP containing it.
But this assumption raises interesting questions about what happens in questions

5.7 Long-distance wh-movement
175
like (57) below where an interrogative word originates in a lower clause (as the
complement of the verb hiding) and moves to the spec-C position in a higher
clause:
(57)
What might he think that she is hiding what?
Such structures (in which a wh-expression originating in a lower clause moves
to spec-C in a higher clause) are said to involve long-distance wh-movement
(and hence are referred to as long-distance questions). In this section, we look
at how long-distance wh-movement works.
At ﬁrst sight, the answer might seem to be obvious. Thus, we might imagine that
wh-movement in a sentence like (57) has the effect of moving the interrogative
pronoun what directly from the position in which it originates (as the object of
the verb hiding) into the position where it ends up (as the speciﬁer of the inverted
auxiliary might), in the manner shown by the arrow below;
(58)
[CP What [C might] he think [CP [C that] she is hiding what]]
However, any such direct movement of what into the main-clause spec-C position
would violate the Impenetrability Condition, presented in its original form in (59)
below:
(59)
Impenetrability Condition
A constituent in the domain of (i.e. c-commanded by) a complementiser is
impenetrable to (and so cannot be attracted by) a higher head
c-commanding the complementiser
The problem posed by one-step wh-movement in (58) is that it violates the
Impenetrability Condition (59). This is because what originates within the domain
of the embedded clause complementiser that (i.e. it originates in a position where
it is c-commanded by that) and is subsequently attracted by the main-clause
complementiser to move to the spec-C position in the main clause: since the
main-clause complementiser c-commands the embedded-clause complementiser
that, this leads to violation of the constraint (59). Thus, an analysis such as (58)
would wrongly predict that sentences like (57) are ungrammatical.
However, we can avoid violation of the Impenetrability Condition if we sup-
pose that wh-movement in sentences like (57) applies in two separate steps,
moving the wh-pronoun what ﬁrst to the spec-C position in the complement
clause (in front of the complementiser that), and then into the spec-C position at
the front of the main clause – as shown by the two arrows below;
(60)
[CP What [C might] he think [CP what [C that] she is hiding what]]
Once what has moved to become the speciﬁer of the complementiser that, it is
no longer in the domain of that and hence is free to be attracted by the main-
clause complementiser to move into spec-C in the main clause. On this view,

176
5 wh-movement
wh-movement is a local (clause-bound) operation which applies in a successive-
cyclic fashion, moving a wh-expression ﬁrst to the front of the clause in which
it originates, then to the front of the next highest clause . . . and so on until the
wh-expression reaches its ultimate landing site at the front of the interrogative
clause. (Note that movement of what to become the speciﬁer of that in (60)
does not violate the Complementiser Condition (5), as long as what subsequently
moves elsewhere.)
The implication of the discussion above is that a UG principle (= the Impen-
etrability Condition) requires wh-movement to be a local operation moving wh-
expressions one clause at a time. However, there is also a second UG principle
(devised by Rizzi 1990, p. 7) which similarly requires long-distance movement
to take place one clause at a time. Adapting this constraint from the earlier frame-
work used by Luigi Rizzi to that utilised here, we can formulate it as follows:
(61)
Relativised Minimality Condition/RMC
A constituent X can only be affected by (e.g. agree with or be attracted by)
the minimal (i.e. closest) constituent of the relevant type above it (i.e.
c-commanding X)
It follows from (61) that a constituent undergoing wh-movement can only be
attracted to become the speciﬁer of the minimal/closest C constituent above
it. It also follows that a constituent undergoing head movement can only be
attracted to adjoin to the minimal/closest head above it (so that the Relativised
Minimality Condition can be said to subsume – and thereby obviate the need
for – the Head Movement Constraint outlined in §4.5). As should be clear, long-
distance (single-step) wh-movement in the manner of (58) above would violate
RMC because what moves directly to become the speciﬁer of the main clause
C constituent containing might, and yet this is not the closest C constituent above
the original copy of what. Since the closest C constituent above the position
in which what originates is the embedded clause complementiser that, RMC
requires what to become the speciﬁer of the embedded C constituent containing
that before subsequently becoming the speciﬁer of the next highest C constituent
in the structure, namely the main clause C containing might: consequently, RMC
requires wh-movement to apply one clause at a time, as in (60) above.
If (as assumed here) wh-movement is driven by an edge feature on C, and
if wh-movement applies in a successive-cyclic (one-clause-at-a-time) fashion, it
follows that the head C in each of the clauses through which a wh-expression
moves must have an edge feature of its own, enabling it to attract a wh-expression
to move to its speciﬁer position. Given this assumption, (57) will be derived as
follows. The verb hiding merges with the interrogative pronoun what to form the
VP hiding what. This VP is merged with the T-auxiliary is to form the T-bar is
hiding what, which is then merged with the pronoun she to form the TP she is
hiding what. The resulting TP is merged with the complementiser that to form the
C-bar that she is hiding what. The complementiser that has an edge feature which
attracts what to move to its speciﬁer position, thereby deriving the following

5.7 Long-distance wh-movement
177
structure (with the edge feature on C being deleted once its requirements have
been satisﬁed, and the original copy of what also being deleted):
(62)
          CP 
PRN          
     C' 
what   
   C        
TP
 [EF] 
 that            PRN               
T' 
        she
T     
     VP 
is
V               PRN
       hiding            what
(Note that a structure like (62) does not violate the Complementiser Condition
(5) which bars an overt complementiser from having an overt speciﬁer, since (62)
is an intermediate stage of derivation, and the Complementiser Condition holds
only of ﬁnal/superﬁcial syntactic structures.) The CP in (62) is then merged as
the complement of the verb think, forming the VP think what that she is hiding
what. The resulting VP is merged as the complement of the past tense modal
T-auxiliary might, forming the T-bar might think what that she is hiding what.
This T-bar is itself merged with the subject pronoun he, forming the TP he might
think what that she is hiding what. The TP thereby formed is merged with a null
C constituent ø which (in main-clause questions) carries both a tense feature and
an edge feature, so forming the C-bar ø he might think what that she is hiding
what. The tense feature of the null afﬁxal complementiser attracts the T-auxiliary
might to move from T to adjoin to C, and the edge feature of the complementiser
attracts a copy of the interrogative pronoun what to move to become the speciﬁer
of C, so deriving the structure shown in simpliﬁed form in (63) below (with
arrows indicating movements which take place in the course of the derivation):
(63)
       CP 
PRN           
  C' 
What
          C    
TP
might+ø 
 PRN                     
T' 
   he
T        
VP
might
V 
           CP 
think
              PRN        
  C' 
what
   C     
TP
  that       she is hiding what

178
5 wh-movement
On this view, long-distance wh-movement proceeds in a successive-cyclic fashion
(i.e. in a succession of short steps, one clause at a time), with each individual step
involving a local operation in which a wh-expression is attracted to become the
speciﬁer of the closest C constituent above it (thereby satisfying the Relativised
Minimality Condition (61)).
The key assumption being made here is that UG principles such as Chomsky’s
Impenetrability Condition and Rizzi’s Relativised Minimality Condition require
long-distance wh-movement to take place in a series of short-distance steps.
There is a considerable amount of empirical evidence (both from English and
from other languages) that wh-movement is indeed a local operation which moves
a wh-expression one clause at a time. Since our concern here is with English, in
the remainder of this section, we examine evidence from a number of varieties
of English.
An interesting piece of evidence that wh-expressions move one clause at a time
is offered by McCloskey (2000, 2002), based on observations about quantiﬁer
stranding/ﬂoating in West Ulster English. In this variety, a wh-word can be
modiﬁed by the universal quantiﬁer all, giving rise to questions such as:
(64)
What all did you get for Christmas?
=‘What are all the things which you got for Christmas?’
McCloskey argues that in such sentences, the quantiﬁer and the wh-word originate
as a single constituent. He further maintains that under wh-movement, the wh-
word what can either pied-pipe the quantiﬁer all along with it as in (64) above,
or can move on its own leaving the quantiﬁer all stranded. In this connection,
consider the sentences below:
(65) (a)
What all do you think that he’ll say that we should buy?
(b)
What do you think all that he’ll say that we should buy?
(c)
What do you think that he’ll say all that we should buy?
(d)
What do you think that he’ll say that we should buy all?
McCloskey claims (2000, p. 63) that ‘All in wh-quantiﬁer ﬂoat constructions
appears in positions for which there is considerable independent evidence that
they are either positions in which wh-movement originates or positions through
which wh-movement passes. We have in these observations a new kind of argu-
ment for the successive-cyclic character of long wh-movement.’
McCloskey argues that the derivation of (65a–d) proceeds along the follow-
ing lines (simpliﬁed in a number of ways). The quantiﬁer all merges with its
complement what to form the structure [all what]. The wh-word what then raises
to become the speciﬁer of all, forming the overt QP [what all]. (To simplify
exposition, we only show the overt constituents of QP here, hence not the null
copy of what following all.) The resulting QP [what all] is merged as the object
of buy, forming [buy what all]. If what undergoes wh-movement on its own in
subsequent stages of derivation, we derive (65d) ‘What do you think that he’ll say
that we should buy all?’ But suppose that the quantiﬁer all is pied-piped along

5.7 Long-distance wh-movement
179
with what under wh-movement until we reach the stage shown in skeletal form
below:
(66)
[CP what all [C that] we should buy]
If wh-movement then extracts what on its own, the quantiﬁer all will be stranded
in the most deeply embedded spec-C position, so deriving (65c) ‘What do you
think that he’ll say all that we should buy?’ By contrast, if all is pied-piped along
with what until the end of the intermediate C-cycle, we derive:
(67)
[CP what all [C that] he’ll say that we should buy]
If wh-movement then extracts what on its own, the quantiﬁer all will be stranded
in the intermediate spec-C position and we will ultimately derive (65b) ‘What
do you think all that he’ll say that we should buy?’ But if all continues to be
pied-piped along with what throughout the remaining stages of derivation, we
ultimately derive (65a) ‘What all do you think that he’ll say that we should buy?’
A further piece of evidence that wh-expressions move one clause at a time
comes from auxiliary inversion in Belfast English. In her (1995) book Belfast
English, Alison Henry notes that in long-distance wh-questions in Belfast English,
not only the main clause C but also intermediate C constituents show T-to-C
movement (i.e. auxiliary inversion), as illustrated below:
(68)
What did Mary claim [did they steal]? (Henry 1995, p. 108)
We can account for auxiliary inversion in structures like (68) in a straightforward
fashion if we suppose that (in this kind of variety) the head C of any clause which
has an interrogative speciﬁer can trigger auxiliary inversion. If so, the fact that the
complement clause shows auxiliary inversion provides evidence that the preposed
wh-word what moves through the spec-C position in the bracketed complement
clause in (68) before subsequently moving into the main-clause spec-C position.
A further piece of evidence leading to the same conclusion comes from the
interpretation of reﬂexive anaphors like himself in standard varieties of English.
As we saw in exercise 2.2, these are subject to Principle A of Binding Theory
which requires an anaphor to be locally bound and hence to have an antecedent
within the TP most immediately containing it. This requirement can be illustrated
by the contrast below:
(69) (a)
∗Jim was surprised that [TP Peter wasn’t sure [CP that [TP Mary liked
this picture of himself best]]]
(b)
Jim was surprised that [TP Peter wasn’t sure [CP which picture of himself
[TP Mary liked best]]]
In (69a), the TP most immediately containing the reﬂexive anaphor himself is
the bold-printed TP whose subject is Mary, and since there is no suitable (third
person masculine singular) antecedent for himself within this TP, the resulting
sentence violates Binding Principle A and so is ill-formed. However, in (69b)
the wh-phrase which picture of himself has been moved to the speciﬁer position

180
5 wh-movement
within the bracketed CP, and the TP most immediately containing the reﬂexive
anaphor is the italicised TP whose subject is Peter. Since this italicised TP does
indeed contain a c-commanding antecedent for himself (namely its subject Peter),
there is no violation of Principle A if himself is construed as bound by Peter –
though Principle A prevents Jim from being the antecedent of himself.
In the light of this restriction, consider the following sentence:
(70)
Which picture of himself wasn’t he sure that Mary liked best?
In (70), the antecedent of himself is he – and yet himself is clearly not
c-commanded by he, as we see from (71) below (simpliﬁed in numerous ways,
including by showing only overt constituents):
(71)
             CP 
      QP        
     C' 
Q        
 NP  
   C        
TP
which         
            wasn’t 
          N     
      PP            
      PRN                
   T' 
     picture                                                              he                 sure that Mary liked best
            P             PRN
of           himself  
In fact, the only elements c-commanded by the pronoun he in (71) are T-bar and
its constituents. But if he does not c-command himself in (71), how come he is
interpreted as the antecedent of himself when we would have expected such a
structure to violate Principle A of Binding Theory and hence to be ill-formed?
We can provide a principled answer to this question if we suppose that wh-
movement operates in a successive-cyclic fashion, and involves an intermediate
stage of derivation represented in (72) below (simpliﬁed by showing overt con-
stituents only):
(72)
[TP He wasn’t sure [CP which picture of himself that [TP Mary liked best]]]
In (72), the anaphor himself has a c-commanding antecedent within the italicised
TP most immediately containing it – namely the pronoun he. If the requirements
of Principle A can be satisﬁed at any stage of derivation, it follows that the
assumption that a sentence like (70) involves an intermediate stage of derivation
like (72) enables us to account for why himself is construed as bound by he.
More generally, sentences like (72) provide us with evidence that long-distance
wh-movement involves successive-cyclic movement through intermediate spec-C
positions – and hence that wh-movement is an inherently local operation. At a
subsequent stage of derivation, the wh-QP which picture of himself moves into
spec-C in the main clause, so deriving the structure (71) associated with (70)
Which picture of himself wasn’t he sure that Mary liked best?

5.7 Long-distance wh-movement
181
A ﬁnal piece of evidence that wh-expressions move one clause at a time
comes from the phenomenon of wh-copying in Child English. Ros Thornton
(1995) reports children producing long-distance wh-copy questions such as the
following (p. 147):
(73)(a)
What do you think [what Cookie Monster eats]?
(b)
How do you think [how Superman ﬁxed the car]?
In such cases, it would appear that the wh-word moves to the italicised spec-C
position within the bracketed complement clause before moving into its ﬁnal
landing-site in the bold-printed spec-C position in the main clause. While the
children concerned ‘know’ that the original occurrence of the wh-word receives
a null spellout, they wrongly assume that any wh-copy in any spec-C position can
be overtly spelled out (whereas only the highest such copy is overtly spelled out
in adult English). Children’s wh-copying structures thus provide evidence that
wh-expressions move one clause at a time.
Overall, then, we see that there is a considerable body of empirical evi-
dence which supports the hypothesis that (in consequence of UG principles
like the Impenetrability Condition and the Relativised Minimality Condition)
long-distance wh-movement is successive-cyclic in nature and involves wh-
expressions moving one clause at a time through intermediate spec-C positions
(attracted by an edge feature on each of the relevant C constituents).
A ﬁnal question to be answered in relation to our discussion of long-distance
wh-movement in this section is why long-distance wh-movement is not possible
in structures such as (74b) below:
(74)(a)
[CP [C ø] she might ask [CP where [C øInt] he has been where]]
(b)
∗[CP Where [C might] she ask [CP where [C øInt] he has been where]]
The wh-adverb where originates as the complement of been in (74) and in the (a)
example is attracted by an edge feature on the null interrogative complementiser
introducing the embedded clause to become its speciﬁer, so deriving She might
ask where he has been. However, given our assumption that any C constituent can
carry an edge feature, the obvious question which arises at this juncture is what
prevents the head C constituent of the main clause CP from carrying an edge
feature which attracts where to move further to the front of the overall sentence
in the (b) example. A plausible answer is that further movement is prevented by
the following constraint:
(75)
Freezing Constraint
An element moved to a position dedicated to some scope-discourse
interpretive property . . . is frozen in place (Rizzi and Shlonsky 2005, p. 1)
If we assume that the speciﬁer position of an interrogative C is the scope position
for a moved interrogative expression (marking the fact that it has scope over

182
5 wh-movement
all the constituents that it c-commands, hence over all the other constituents
of the clause), then (in the case of interrogatives) (75) amounts to claiming
that once an interrogative wh-expression moves into the speciﬁer position of
an interrogative complementiser, it immediately becomes frozen in place and
is unable to move further. Part of the reason for this may be that a verb like
ask requires an interrogative complement, and we saw that the Interrogative
Condition outlined in (24) above means that a clause is only interpreted as
interrogative if it is a CP with an interrogative speciﬁer. An alternative way of
thinking about the same problem is to suppose that an interrogative wh-expression
which falls within the scope of (i.e. originates in a position c-commanded by) an
interrogative complementiser cannot move out of the CP headed by the relevant
complementiser. Either assumption will prevent where from moving out of the
embedded CP in (74).
●
●
5.8
Multiple wh-questions
So far, all the questions which we have looked at have contained
only a single interrogative wh-expression. However, alongside such questions,
we also ﬁnd multiple wh-questions – i.e. questions containing more than one
interrogative wh-expression. A salient syntactic property of such questions in
English is that only one of the wh-expressions can be preposed – as we can
illustrate in relation to the following set of examples:
(76) (a)
He might think who has done what?
(b)
Who might he think has done what?
(c)
∗What might he think who has done?
(d)
∗Who what might he think has done?
(e)
∗What who might he think has done?
(76a) is an echo question in which the highlighted wh-words who and what
remain in situ; (76b–e) are non-echoic questions in which either or both of the
two wh-words are preposed. If we try and prepose the highlighted wh-words in
(76), we ﬁnd that only one of the two can be preposed (not both of them), and
moreover the preposed item has to be who and not what. Why should this be? In
order to get a clearer idea of what’s going on here, let’s take a closer look at the
derivation of (76a). The verb done merges with the interrogative pronoun what to
form the VP done what. The present tense T-auxiliary has merges with this VP
to form the T-bar has done what, and this in turn merges with the interrogative
pronoun who to form the TP who has done what. The resulting TP is merged with
a null declarative complementiser (a null counterpart of that, below shown as ø)
with an edge feature, to form the C-bar shown below:

5.8 Multiple wh-questions
183
(77)
           C' 
C       
TP
[EF] 
ø   
PRN                               T' 
      who
T      
        VP 
          has 
V     
PRN 
   done   
          what 
The edge feature on C enables it to attract a wh-expression which it c-commands
to move to become the speciﬁer of C. But an obvious problem which arises in
the case of a structure like (77) is that there are two different wh-expressions
c-commanded by the null complementiser, namely who and what. Since C can
only attract a single wh-expression to move to spec-C, it is clear that only one of
the two wh-words can move to spec-C – but which? Since we know from (76) that
it is who rather than what which must be preposed in (77) and since who is higher
up in the structure than what, such sentences provide evidence for the existence
of a superiority effect – i.e. a requirement for C to attract the highest wh-word in
the structure. Why should this be? A plausible suggestion to make is that this is
because C has to attract the closest interrogative word which it c-commands. This
requirement is a consequence of a principle of Universal Grammar (proposed by
Richards 1997) which we can outline informally as follows:
(78)
Attract Closest Condition
A head which attracts a given kind of constituent attracts the closest
constituent of the relevant kind
The Attract Closest Condition is related to the Locality Principle which we
posited in §1.5, and can be seen as the obverse of the Relativised Minimality
Condition – and indeed all three conditions can arguably be subsumed within
the Economy Condition (44), given that economy considerations require us to
move the smallest constituent possible the shortest distance possible. And since
the Chain Uniformity Condition tells us that only a maximal projection can be
attracted to move into a speciﬁer position, the various conditions which UG
imposes on movement mean that wh-movement will in effect be subject to the
condition in (79) below:
(79)
Wh-Attraction Condition
The edge feature on C attracts the smallest possible maximal projection
containing the closest wh-word to move to spec-C
What this means is that we ﬁrst identify the closest wh-word to C, and then move
the smallest possible maximal projection containing it to spec-C; if that’s barred
for some reason, we move the next smallest maximal projection containing the
wh-word . . . and so on.

184
5 wh-movement
After this brief excursus, let’s now return to the derivation of (76b) Who might
he think has done what? Suppose that we have reached the stage of derivation
in (77) above. In accordance with the Attract Closest Condition (78), C identi-
ﬁes who as the closest wh-word, and in compliance with the Chain Uniformity
Condition (40) and the Economy Condition (44) attracts the smallest possible
maximal projection containing who to move to spec-C. However, since who is
itself a maximal projection (by virtue of being the largest expression headed
by the word who), this means that who is attracted to move to spec-C, thereby
deriving the structure shown below:
(80)
          CP 
PRN          
     C' 
who   
   C        
TP
 [EF] 
   ø             PRN                
T' 
       who
T     
     VP 
      has 
V               PRN
done            what 
As shown in (80), wh-movement leads to deletion of the edge feature on C, and
to the original occurrence of who ultimately being given a null spellout.
The derivation continues by merging the CP in (80) as the complement of the
verb think, forming the VP think who ø who has done what. This VP is then
merged with the T-auxiliary might to form the T-bar might think who ø who
has done what, and this in turn merges with the pronoun he to form the TP he
might think who ø who has done what. The resulting TP is then merged with a C
constituent which (as in all main-clause questions) carries a tense feature and an
edge feature, so forming the following structure:
(81)
C' 
C         
    TP 
[TNS, EF] 
ø                 PRN    
T' 
  he
    T  
   VP 
 might
V          
         CP 
  think
        PRN
    C' 
        who               has done what 
In accordance with the Attract Closest Condition (78), the tense feature on C in
(81) attracts the closest T-auxiliary (= might) to move to C. In conformity with

5.9 Summary
185
the same principle, the edge feature on C attracts the closest interrogative word
(= who) to move to become the speciﬁer of C, so deriving the structure shown
below (simpliﬁed in the same ways as for 81):
(82)
          CP 
PRN 
       C' 
who 
   C        
TP
[TNS, EF] 
         might+ø        PRN                
T' 
          he
T    
VP
    might
  V      
  CP 
think
     PRN                   C' 
     who
      has done what
In short, the assumption that movement operations like wh-movement are subject
to the Attract Closest Condition (78) provides a principled account of why it is
who rather than what which undergoes wh-movement in (76). Moreover, given the
assumption that (in a language like English) the edge feature on C is immediately
deleted (and thereby inactivated) once C has attracted the closest wh-expression,
it follows that no more than one wh-expression can be moved to the front of any
given clause.
●
●
5.9
Summary
We began this chapter in §5.2 by arguing that main-clause wh-
questions are CPs headed by a C constituent which attracts a tensed auxiliary
to move to C via head movement, and a wh-expression to move into spec-C
via wh-movement. In §5.3 we argued that wh-movement involves a copying
operation whereby a moved wh-expression leaves behind a null copy of itself at
its extraction site (i.e. in the position out of which it is extracted/moved); and we
noted that in earlier work, copies were analysed as traces. In §5.4 we outlined an
analysis of wh-questions under which an interrogative C carries an edge feature
which attracts an interrogative wh-word to move to spec-C, and also (in main-
clause questions) a tense feature which attracts a tensed auxiliary to adjoin to C
and so triggers auxiliary inversion. We saw that wh-movement provides a way of
satisfying the Interrogative Condition which speciﬁes that a CP is only interpreted
as a non-echoic question if it has an interrogative speciﬁer. We saw that the same
condition also requires us to assume that yes-no questions are CPs containing
a null yes-no question particle (which can be thought of as a null counterpart
of whether). In §5.5 we noted that an interrogative word like which heading a
larger phrase like which assignment cannot be preposed on its own (since this

186
5 wh-movement
would violate the Chain Uniformity Condition), but rather has to pied-pipe the
noun assignment along with it (e.g. in a sentence like Which assignment have you
done?). We saw that pied-piping of the noun assignment along with the wh-word
which is the consequence of an Attract Smallest Condition which requires C to
attract the smallest possible constituent containing the wh-word (and we noted
that this condition can be subsumed under a more general Economy Condition).
We also noted that (since the Chain Uniformity Condition requires the speciﬁer
position within CP to be ﬁlled by a maximal projection), C attracts the smallest
possible maximal projection containing an interrogative word to move to spec-
C. We saw how Ross’s Left Branch Condition prevents genitive possessors
like whose from being extracted out of the DP containing them, with the result
that the whole DP containing whose has to be preposed in sentences such as
Whose car have you borrowed? In §5.6, we observed that in formal styles of
English, a wh-expression which is the complement of a preposition pied-pipes
the preposition along with it when it undergoes wh-movement, so that the whole
Prepositional Phrase moves to spec-C in sentences like To whom was he refer-
ring? We argued that this is a consequence of the Impenetrability Condition
which prevents a constituent in the domain of a preposition (or complementiser)
from being attracted by a higher head, so forcing the preposition to be pied-piped
along with the wh-expression under wh-movement. We went on to suggest that in
informal styles of English, prepositions can carry an edge feature which enables
a wh-expression in the domain of the preposition to move to the edge of PP and
thereafter to be extracted out of PP, so leaving the preposition stranded. In §5.7,
we presented evidence that wh-movement in long-distance questions like What
might he think that she is hiding? applies in a successive-cyclic fashion (one
clause at a time), with what ﬁrst moving into the spec-C position at the front of
the that-clause before subsequently going on to move into the spec-C position
in the main clause. We noted that successive-cyclic application of wh-movement
is forced by locality principles such as Chomsky’s Impenetrability Condition
(which bars a constituent within the domain of C from being attracted by a
higher head), and Rizzi’s Relativised Minimality Condition (which requires
a wh-expression to be attracted by the closest C constituent above it). In §5.8,
we looked at the syntax of multiple wh-questions, noting that in consequence of
the Attract Closest Condition, C in multiple wh-questions attracts the closest
wh-word which it c-commands. We noted that this condition (in conjunction with
the Chain Uniformity and Economy conditions) means that the edge feature on C
attracts the smallest possible maximal projection containing the closest wh-word
to move to spec-C.
Overall, the main goal of this chapter has been to look at the syntax of preposed
interrogative wh-expressions. Preposed wh-expressions end up (via movement)
in an A-bar position – i.e. a speciﬁer position which can be occupied by either an
argument or an adjunct. Because it moves wh-expressions into spec-C and spec-C
is an A-bar position, wh-movement can be regarded as a particular instance of a
more general A-bar movement operation.

5.9 Summary
187
Key conditions on movement operations (or on the structures they produce)
introduced in this chapter include the following:
(5)
Complementiser Condition
An overt complementiser (like that/for/if) cannot have an overt speciﬁer in
the superﬁcial structure of a sentence
(24)
Interrogative Condition
A clause is interpreted as a non-echoic question if (and only if) it is a CP
with an interrogative speciﬁer (i.e. a speciﬁer containing an interrogative
word)
(40)
Chain Uniformity Condition
‘A chain is uniform with regard to phrase structure status’ (Chomsky 1995,
p. 253)
(41)
Attract Smallest Condition/ASC
A head which attracts a particular type of item attracts the smallest
constituent containing such an item which will not lead to violation of any
UG principle
(44)
Economy Condition
‘Derivations and representations . . . are required to be minimal, with no
superﬂuous steps in derivations and no superﬂuous symbols in
representations’ (Chomsky 1989, p. 69)
(47)
Left Branch Condition/LBC
In languages like English, the leftmost constituent of a nominal expression
cannot be extracted out of the expression containing it
(51)
Impenetrability Condition
A constituent in the domain of a complementiser or preposition is
impenetrable to (and so cannot be attracted by) a higher head
c-commanding the relevant complementiser/preposition (Recall that a
constituent is in the domain of a head H if it is c-commanded by H.)
(61)
Relativised Minimality Condition/RMC
A constituent X can only be affected by (e.g. agree with or be attracted by)
the minimal (i.e. closest) constituent of the relevant type above it (i.e.
c-commanding X)
(75)
Freezing Constraint
An element moved to a position dedicated to some scope-discourse
interpretive property . . . is frozen in place (Rizzi and Shlonsky 2005, p. 1)
(78)
Attract Closest Condition
A head which attracts a given kind of constituent attracts the closest
constituent of the relevant kind
(79)
Wh-Attraction Condition
The edge feature on C attracts the smallest possible maximal projection
containing the closest wh-word to move to spec-C

188
5 wh-movement
●
●
5.10
Bibliographical background
On the idea of clause-typing in §5.2, see Cheng (1997). The Comple-
mentiser Condition outlined in §5.2 derives from the Multiply Filled COMP Filter
of Chomsky and Lasnik (1977): for further discussion, see Sepp¨anen and Trotta
(2000) and Zwicky (2002). See Kennedy and Merchant (2000), Lechner (2001),
Kennedy (2002), Bhatt and Pancheva (2004) and Grosu and Horvath (2006) for
discussion of comparative structures like (7c) in the main text, Potts (2002) for
discussion of as-structures like (7d), and Chomsky (1977) for discussion of tough
structures like (7e). Chomsky’s claim that there are two types of Merger opera-
tion (internal and external) is extended in Citko (2005), who argues for a third
type of Merger operation which she calls Parallel Merge, and claims that this
is found in co-ordinate structures like I wonder what Gretel recommended and
Hansel read. On wh-movement in rhetorical questions, see Sprouse (2007). The
idea in §5.3 that there is parametric variation with respect to which copies in a
movement chain are overtly spelled out and which are deleted is developed in
Bobaljik (1995), Brody (1995), Groat and O’Neil (1996), Pesetsky (1997, 1998),
Richards (1997), Roberts (1997), Franks (1999), Runner (1998), Cormack and
Smith (1999), Nunes (1999, 2001, 2004), Boˇskovi´c (2001), Fanselow and ´Cavar
(2002), Bobaljik (2002), Landau (2006b) and Polinsky and Potsdam (2006). The
idea that wh-in-situ structures may involve a form of wh-movement in which the
initial copy at the foot of the movement chain is overtly spelled out is devel-
oped in Pesetsky (2000) and Reintges, LeSourd and Chung (2002): see Watanabe
(2001) for a more general discussion of wh-in-situ structures. The idea in §5.4
that wh-movement is driven by an edge feature derives from Chomsky (2005b).
The claim that a clause is interpreted as interrogative if it has an interrogative
speciﬁer is taken from Radford et al. (1999). The idea that yes-no questions con-
tain an abstract yes-no question particle derives from earlier work by Katz and
Postal (1964), Grimshaw (1993) and Roberts (1993); the idea that this particle
is a null counterpart of whether is suggested by Bresnan (1970). In relation to
the claim in §5.5 that structures like ∗Which/Whose was he driving car? involve
violation of a Chain Uniformity or Left Branch condition, it should be noted
that numerous languages permit either or both such structures: for discussion,
see Uriagereka (1988), Borsley and Jaworska (1998), Corver (1990), Franks and
Progovac (1994), Zlati´c (1997), Merchant (2001), Fanselow and ´Cavar (2002),
Davies and Dubinsky (2004) and Boˇskovi´c (2004, 2005). On the Attract Smallest
Condition, see Akiyama (2004). The analysis of possessive structures presented
in the text is loosely based on Abney (1987): see Chomsky (1995, p. 263) for
a variant of this. For alternative accounts of the preposition pied-piping phe-
nomenon discussed in §5.6, see Abels (2003), Heck (2004), Radford (2004a,
pp. 211–15), Watanabe (2006) and Boeckx (2007). On the Relativised Minimal-
ity Condition, see Rizzi (1990, 2001a); on preposition stranding, see Abels (2003)
and Almeida and Yoshida (2007). For more detailed discussion of sentences like

Workbook section
189
Which picture of himself wasn’t he sure that Mary liked best? see Belletti and
Rizzi (1988), Uriagereka (1988), Lebeaux (1991), Fox (2000) and Barss (2001).
Additional evidence that wh-movement applies in a local (one-clause-at-a-time)
fashion comes from a variety of other phenomena, including spellout of multiple
copies of a moved wh-expression in Frisian (Hiemstra 1986), Romani (McDaniel
1989), German (Felser 2004), Afrikaans (Hong 2005) and Punjabi (Yang 2006);
stranding of material on the edge of intermediate CPs, including prepositions
in Afrikaans (du Plessis 1977) and else in Child English sentences like What
do you want else to eat? (Boecks 2007); partial wh-movement in German and
a variety of languages (see e.g. Cole 1982, McDaniel 1986, Saddy 1991, Cole
and Hermon 2000 and Bruening 2006); postverbal subjects in French (Kayne
and Pollock 1978), Spanish (Torrego 1984) and Basque (Ortiz de Urbina 1989);
wh-marking of complementisers in Irish (McCloskey 2001, 2002) and of subject
pronouns in Ewe (Collins 1993); and exceptional accusative case-marking by
a higher transitive verb of the wh-subject of a lower ﬁnite clause (reported for
English by Kayne (1984, p. 5) and for Hungarian by Bejar and Massam (1999, p.
66)). On the Freezing Constraint, see Rizzi and Shlonsky (2005) and Rizzi (2006).
On the semantic properties of multiple wh-questions like those discussed in §5.8,
see Dayal (2002). The Attract Closest Condition has its historical antecedents in
the Superiority Condition of Chomsky (1973) and the Minimal Link Condition
of Chomsky (1995) and is related to the Defective Intervention Constraint of
Chomsky (1998): for an alternative account of superiority effects, see Hornstein
(1995); for an experimental study of superiority effects, see Clifton, Fanselow
and Frazier (2006). Although in languages like English only one wh-expression
can be fronted in a wh-question, it should be pointed out that there are languages
like Bulgarian which allow multiple wh-fronting question structures which can
be paraphrased in English as ‘Who what to whom said?’: see Rudin (1988) and
Boˇskovi´c (2002a). Although we do not discuss other types of wh-construction
(e.g. relative clauses) in the text, for alternative accounts of their syntax see Fabb
(1990), Borsley (1992, 1997), Sag (1997), Wiltschko (1998), del Gobbo (2003),
Authier and Reed (2005), Adger and Ramchand (2005) and de Vries (2002,
2006), as well as the collection of papers in Alexiadou, Law, Meinunger and
Wilder (2000).
●
●
Workbook section
●
Exercise 5.1
Discuss the derivation of the wh-clauses below, drawing tree diagrams to show their superﬁcial
structure and saying why they are grammatical or ungrammatical in standard varieties of English.
1 a
Which ﬁlm have you seen?
b
∗Which have you seen ﬁlm?

190
5 wh-movement
2 a
Dare anyone say anything? (w)
b
Do you speak French?
3 a
To whom/?To who have they spoken? (w)
b
∗To who’ve they spoken? (w)
c
Who have they spoken to? (w)
d
Who’ve they spoken to? (w)
4 a
Which picture of who have you chosen? (w)
b
∗Which picture of who’ve you chosen? (w)
c
∗Who’ve you chosen which picture of?
d
Which picture have you chosen of who?
5 a
What excuse has he given?
b
∗What has he given excuse?
c
∗What excuse he has given?
d
∗What he has given excuse?
6 a
In how many places has he hidden?
b
How many places has he hidden in?
c
∗In how many has he hidden places?
d
∗How has he hidden in many places?
7 a
To whom/?To who do you think that they were talking?
b
Who/?Whom do you think that they were talking to?
8 a
Whose car will he think has crashed into what?
b
∗What will he think whose car has crashed into?
9 a
He is wondering who has done what (w)
b
∗He is wondering what who has done (w)
c
∗Who is he wondering has done what? (w)
d
∗What is he wondering who has done? (w)
10 a
Which of the two dresses do you think (that) she will prefer?
b
Which do you think of the two dresses (%that) she will prefer?
In addition, discuss the syntax of child wh-questions like that in (11) below:
11
Who will he think who the cat was chasing? (= ‘Who will he think the cat was
chasing?’) (w)
And comment on relevant aspects of the syntax of the which/how clauses in (12) below:
12 a
To which of these groups do you consider that you belong to?
b
May we ask you to indicate which of these ethnic groups that you belong to?
c
It’s difﬁcult to see how that we can keep these players
(12a and 12b are from an ofﬁcial form issued by the Tax Ofﬁce in the town I live in, and 12c was
produced by an England soccer star on TV.) Say what is interesting about the which/how clauses
in (12), what their counterparts would be in ‘standard’ varieties of English, and how the two
varieties differ.
Finally, comment on relevant aspects of the syntax of the Shakespearean questions in (13)
below, the African American English questions in (14) (from Green 1998, pp. 98–99) and the
bracketed interrogative complement clauses in Belfast English (adapted from Henry 1995) in
(15–16):

Workbook section
191
13 a
What sayst thou? (Olivia, Twelfth Night, III.iv)
b
What dost thou say? (Othello, Othello, III.iii)
c
What didst not like? (Othello, Othello, III.iii)
14 a
What I’m gon’ do? (= ‘What am I going to do?’)
b
How she’s doing? (= ‘How is she doing?’)
15 a
They wondered [which one that he chose]
b
They wondered [which one did he choose]
c
∗They wondered [which one that did he choose]
16 a
They wondered [if/whether (∗that) we had gone]
b
∗They wondered [if/whether had we gone]
c
They wondered [had we gone]
Helpful hints
In 2a, assume that dare, anyone and anything are polarity items (see §2.6), and so must be
c-commanded by an interrogative constituent; assume also that dare originates in T. In 3 and 7, a
preﬁxed question mark ? indicates that the use of who(m) in the relevant sentence (for speakers
like me) leads to stylistic incongruity (in that the accusative form whom and preposition
pied-piping occur in more formal styles, and the accusative form who and preposition stranding in
less formal styles). In 3 and 4, assume (for the purposes of this exercise) that have can cliticise
onto a preceding word W if W ends in a vowel or diphthong, if W c-commands have and if there
is no (overt or null) constituent intervening between W and have. In 4, take which picture of who
to be a QP formed by merging the quantiﬁer which with the NP picture of who; in relation to 4d,
bear in mind the discussion of split spellout in §5.3. In 6, take how many places to be a QP formed
by merging the Q many with the N places to form the Q-bar many places and assume that this
Q-bar is then merged with the wh-adverb how to form the QP how many places (so that the degree
adverb how is the speciﬁer of this QP): note that, irrelevantly, 6c is grammatical on a different
interpretation on which how is a manner adverb with a meaning paraphraseable as ‘In what way?’
In 10, assume that which of the two dresses is a QP which has the internal constituent structure
[QP [Q which] [PP [P of] [DP [D the] [NumP [Num two] [N dresses]]]]], in which two is a numeral
quantiﬁer (= Num), and of is a preposition which (in this type of use) is sometimes said to have
the function of marking genitive case; in relation to 10b, note that the percentage sign in front of
that means that this type of structure is only acceptable in some varieties of English if that is
omitted, and bear in mind the discussion of split spellout in the main text. In 11, bear in mind that
the same child also produced How much do you think how much the bad guy stole? In 12b and
12c, concern yourself only with the structure of the which/how-clauses, not with the structure of
the main clause; and take these ethnic groups to be a DP but don’t concern yourself with its
structure. In 16, consider the possibility that both if and whether are complementisers in Belfast
English (though only if is a complementiser in Standard English).
Model answer for 1
(1a) is derived as follows. The interrogative quantiﬁer which is merged with the noun ﬁlm to form
the QP which ﬁlm. This is merged with the (perfect participle) verb seen to form the VP seen
which ﬁlm. This VP is in turn merged with the (present) tense auxiliary have to form the T-bar
have seen which ﬁlm. The resulting T-bar is merged with the pronoun you to form the TP you have
seen which ﬁlm. This TP is merged with a null C constituent carrying a tense feature and an edge
feature, so forming the C-bar in (i) below:

192
5 wh-movement
(i)
  C' 
C         
      TP 
[TNS, EF]   
ø     
 PRN     
T' 
 you       
T         
VP
       have
V     
             QP 
        seen
  Q                    N
which               film
The tense feature of C attracts the present tense auxiliary have to move from T to C. In
consequence of the Wh-Attraction Condition, the edge feature of C attracts the smallest possible
maximal projection containing the closest interrogative word to move to spec-C. Since the closest
interrogative word to C (and indeed the only interrogative word in the structure) is which, and the
smallest maximal projection containing which is the QP which ﬁlm, and since preposing this QP on
its own does not violate any syntactic constraints, the QP which ﬁlm moves to spec-C. Assuming
that the features of C are deleted once their requirements are satisﬁed, the structure which results
after head-movement and wh-movement have applied is that shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(ii)
           CP 
QP           
                 C' 
which  film 
          C 
  TP 
    [TNS, EF] 
     have+ø        
       PRN          
  T' 
you 
     T 
VP
  have            seen which film
●
Exercise 5.2
The discussion in the main text was mainly limited to wh-movement interrogative clauses.
However, wh-movement can also be argued to take place in relative clauses like those bracketed
below:
(i) (a) It’s hard to ﬁnd someone [who you can relate to]
(b) Can you think of things [which she might need]?
The bracketed structures are termed relative clauses because they contain a (bold-printed)
relative pronoun (who/whose/which) that ‘relates to’ (i.e. refers back to) an italicised antecedent
in a higher clause (generally one which immediately precedes the bold-printed relative
wh-expression). Make the following set of assumptions about the syntax of relative clauses:
I
Relative clauses are CPs headed by a complementiser like that/for/ø which has an edge
feature triggering movement of a relative pronoun (like who/which/where/when/why)
to spec-C

Workbook section
193
II
A relative pronoun occupying spec-C position in a relative clause is given a null spellout
in the PF component – optionally in a ﬁnite clause, obligatorily in an inﬁnitive clause
(= Relative Pronoun Spellout Condition)
III
An overt complementiser (like that/for/if) cannot have an overt speciﬁer in the superﬁcial
structure of a sentence (Complementiser Condition)
(Recall that in the main text, we noted that in some varieties, the Complementiser Condition only
holds where spec-C is occupied by a pronoun rather than by a noun expression. Note that the term
overt speciﬁer is intended to denote a constituent in spec-C which contains one or more overt
items.)
In the light of the assumptions made in I–III above, discuss the derivation of the bracketed
relative clauses in the sentences below, drawing tree diagrams to show their superﬁcial structure
and saying why they are grammatical or ungrammatical in standard varieties of English:
1 a
There is no-one else [who you can blame]
b
There is no-one else [you can blame]
c
∗There is no-one else [who that you can blame]
d
There is no-one else [that you can blame]
2 a
There is no-one else [for you to blame] (w)
b
There is no-one else [to blame] (w)
c
∗There is no-one else [who for you to blame] (w)
d
∗There is no-one else [who to blame] (w)
3 a
∗There is no-one [who that you can talk to]
b
There is no-one [that you can talk to]
c
There is no-one [who you can talk to]
d
There is no-one [to whom you can talk] (w)
e
∗There is no-one [to whom that you can talk]
f
∗There is no-one [to you can talk] (w)
4 a
∗This is the way [how he behaved]
b
This is the way [he behaved]
c
∗This is the way [how that he behaved]
d
This is the way [that he behaved]
5 a
∗I need someone [who to love me]
b
I need someone [to love me]
c
∗I need someone [who to love]
d
I need someone [to love]
6 a
I need a place [in which to stay]
b
∗I need a place [in to stay]
c
∗I need a place [which to stay in]
d
I need a place [to stay in]
e
∗I need a place [where to stay]
f
I need a place [to stay]
7 a
∗I need a place [in which for her to stay]
b
∗I need a place [in for her to stay]
c
∗I need a place [which for her to stay in]
d
I need a place [for her to stay in]
e
∗I need a place [where for her to stay]
f
I need a place [for her to stay]

194
5 wh-movement
8 a
∗This is no way [how to behave]
b
This is no way [to behave]
c
∗This is no way [how for you to behave]
d
This is no way [for you to behave]
In addition, comment on the syntax of the bracketed relative clause in the sentence in (9) below
(produced by a sports commentator on Sky TV):
9
As Liverpool chase the game, there may be more room [in which for Manchester United
to manoeuvre]
and say what its ‘Standard English’ counterpart would be and why. Finally, consider the following:
10 a
The world [in which we are living] is changing
b
The world [which we are living in] is changing
c
%The world [in which we are living in] is changing
Contrary to what is said in the main text, assume that preposition pied-piping is obligatory in
English (and universally), but that languages (and language varieties) may differ with regard to
which link/s of the wh-chain the preposition is spelled out on.
Helpful hints
In relation to 4 and 8, assume that how is a pronominal manner adverb (which you can categorise
as ADV) which originates as the complement of the verb behave: try and identify the way in
which how differs from other relative pronouns like who/which/where/why.
Model answer for 1a,b
The bracketed relative clause in 1a is derived as follows. The verb blame is merged with the
relative pronoun who to form the VP blame who. The resulting VP is merged with the present
tense auxiliary can to form the T-bar can blame who, and this is then merged with the subject you
to form the TP you can blame who. This TP is subsequently merged with a null complementiser
(perhaps a null counterpart of that) which carries an edge feature, so deriving the structure shown
in (ii) below:
(ii)
C' 
C    
TP
[EF] 
ø
      PRN
T' 
       you 
T    
VP
            can
V   
        PRN
     blame   b
      who     
In accordance with the Wh-Attraction Condition, the edge feature on the relative clause C
constituent attracts the smallest possible maximal projection containing a relative pronoun to
move to spec-C. The smallest such maximal projection is the pronoun who, which is a maximal
projection containing a relative pronoun by virtue of being the largest expression headed by the
relative pronoun who. Hence, who moves to spec-C, and thereby erases the edge feature of C, so

Workbook section
195
deriving the structure shown in simpliﬁed form below, which is the superﬁcial structure of the
bracketed relative clause in 1a:
(iii)
 CP 
PRN                 
C' 
who 
       C       
  TP 
     [EF]  
       you can blame who
 ø  
Given that a relative pronoun occupying the speciﬁer position in a relative clause can be given a
null spellout in the PF component, an alternative possibility is for the relative pronoun who in
spec-C to be given a null spellout at PF, so deriving (iv) below, which is the superﬁcial structure
associated with the bracketed relative clause in 1b:
(iv)
       CP 
PRN                 
C' 
who
       C       
  TP 
     [EF]  
      you can blame who
ø  

6
A-movement
●
●
6.1
Overview
In this chapter, we look at the syntax of subjects. So far, we have
assumed that subjects originate in the speciﬁer position within TP and remain
there (unless the subject is a wh-expression which undergoes wh-movement and
moves to spec-C, e.g. in sentences like Who did he say was coming?). However,
in this chapter we shall argue that subjects originate internally within the Verb
Phrase as arguments of verbs, and are subsequently raised into the speciﬁer
position within TP, with the relevant movement operation being triggered by an
epp feature carried by T. Since spec-T is an A-position (i.e. a position which can
generally only be occupied by argument expressions), the operation by which
subjects move into spec-T is traditionally known as A-movement.
●
●
6.2
Subjects in Belfast English
Let’s begin our discussion of the syntax of subjects by looking at
some interesting data from Belfast English (kindly supplied to me by Alison
Henry). Alongside Standard English constructions like (1a,b) below:
(1) (a)
Some students should get distinctions
(b)
Lots of students have missed the classes
Belfast English also has structures like (2a,b):
(2)(a)
There should some students get distinctions
(b)
There have lots of students missed the classes
Sentences like (2a,b) are called expletive structures because they contain the
expletive pronoun there. (The fact that there is not a locative pronoun in this
kind of use is shown by the impossibility of replacing it by locative here or
questioning it by the interrogative locative where? or focusing it by assigning it
contrastive stress.) For the time being, we concentrate on the derivation of Belfast
English sentences like (2a,b) before turning to consider the derivation of Standard
English sentences like (1a,b).
One question to ask about the sentences in (2a,b) is where the exple-
tive pronoun there is positioned. Since there immediately precedes the tensed
196

6.2 Subjects in Belfast English
197
auxiliary should/have, a reasonable conjecture is that there is the subject/speciﬁer
of should/have and hence occupies the spec-T position. If this is so, we’d expect
to ﬁnd that the auxiliary can move in front of the expletive subject (via T-to-C
movement) in questions – and this is indeed the case in Belfast English, as the
sentences in (3) below illustrate:
(3) (a)
Should there some students get distinctions?
(b)
Have there lots of students missed the classes?
But what position is occupied by the underlined quantiﬁed expressions some stu-
dents/lots of students in (3)? Since they immediately precede the verbs get/missed
and since subjects precede verbs, it seems reasonable to conclude that the expres-
sions some students/lots of students function as the subjects of the verbs get/missed
and (since subjects are typically speciﬁers) occupy spec-V (i.e. speciﬁer posi-
tion within VP). If these assumptions are correct, (2a) will have the structure
(4) below (simpliﬁed by not showing the internal structure of the expressions
some students/distinctions: we can take both of these to be QP/Quantiﬁer Phrase
expressions, headed by the overt quantiﬁer some in one case and by a null quan-
tiﬁer [Q ø] in the other):
(4)
CP
C          
TP
ø  
          PRN      
T' 
there 
T           
VP
   should
  QP       
V' 
      some students 
V   
 QP 
                get  
ø distinctions
The analysis in (4) claims that the sentence contains two subjects/speciﬁers: there
is the speciﬁer (and subject) of should, and some students is the speciﬁer (and
subject) of get. The two subjects serve two different functions: the expression
some students has the semantic function of denoting the recipients of the dis-
tinctions, and so could be said to be the semantic subject of the sentence; by
contrast, the pronoun there satisﬁes the syntactic requirement of the epp feature
on T (requiring T to have a speciﬁer which is a noun or pronoun expression), and
so could be said to be the syntactic subject of the sentence.
Given the assumptions in (4), sentence (2a) will be derived as follows. The
noun distinctions merges with a null quantiﬁer [Q ø] to form the QP ø distinctions.
By virtue of being the complement of the verb get, this QP is merged with the
V get to form the V-bar (incomplete verb expression) get ø distinctions. The
resulting V-bar is then merged with the subject of get, namely the QP some
students (itself formed by merging the quantiﬁer some with the noun students),

198
6 a-movement
so deriving the VP some students get ø distinctions. This VP is in turn merged
with the past tense T-auxiliary should, forming the T-bar should some students get
ø distinctions. Let’s suppose that every T constituent has an epp feature requiring
it to have a noun or pronoun expression as its speciﬁer. In sentences like (2a,b) in
Belfast English, the requirement for T to have such a speciﬁer can be satisﬁed by
merging expletive there with the T-bar should some students get ø distinctions, so
forming the TP There should some students get ø distinctions. The resulting TP
is then merged with a null declarative complementiser, forming the CP shown in
(4) above.
But what about the derivation of the corresponding Standard English sentence
(1a) Some students should get distinctions? Let’s suppose that the derivation of
(1a) runs parallel to the derivation of (2a) until the point where the auxiliary
should merges with the VP some students get ø distinctions to form the T-bar
should some students get ø distinctions. As before, let’s assume that [T should]
has an epp feature requiring it to project a structural subject/speciﬁer. But let’s
also suppose that the requirement for [T should] to have a speciﬁer of its own
cannot be satisﬁed by merging expletive there in spec-T because in standard
varieties of English there can generally only occur in structures containing an
intransitive verb like be, become, exist, occur, arise, remain etc. Instead, the epp
requirement for T to have a subject with person/number properties is satisﬁed by
moving the subject some students from its original position in spec-V into a new
position in spec-T, in the manner shown by the arrow below:
(5)
CP
C          
TP
ø  
ø  
            QP  
T' 
Some students
T            
VP
              should 
  QP
V' 
some students
V     
         QP 
         get   
  distinctions
Since spec-T is an A-position which can only be occupied by an argument
expression (i.e. an expression which originates as the subject or complement of a
verb or other predicate), the kind of movement operation illustrated by the dotted
arrow in (5) is called A-movement.
Given the arguments presented in chapters 4 and 5 that Head Movement and
Wh-Movement are composite operations involving copying and deletion, we
would expect the same to be true of A-movement. One piece of evidence in
support of a copying analysis of A-movement comes from scope properties in
relation to sentences such as (6a) below, which will have the syntactic structure
shown in simpliﬁed form in (6b) if everyone originates as the subject of the verb

6.3 Idioms
199
ﬁnished and is then raised up (by A-movement) to become the subject of the
present tense auxiliary have:
(6) (a)
Everyone hasn’t ﬁnished the assignment yet
(b)
[CP [C ø] [TP Everyone [T has] [negP not [Neg ø] [VP everyone [V ﬁnished]
the assignment yet]]]]
For many speakers, sentences like (6a) are ambiguous between (i) a reading on
which the quantiﬁer expression everyone has scope over not so that the sentence
means much the same as ‘Everyone is in the position of not having ﬁnished
the assignment yet,’ and (ii) another reading on which everyone falls within the
scope of not (so that the sentence means much the same as ‘Not everyone is
yet in the position of having ﬁnished the assignment’). We can account for this
scope ambiguity in a principled fashion if we suppose that A-movement involves
copying, that scope is deﬁned in terms of c-command (so that a scope-bearing
constituent has scope over constituents which it c-commands), and that the scope
of a universally quantiﬁed expression like everyone in negative structures like
(6b) can be determined either in relation to the initial position of everyone or
in relation to its ﬁnal position. In (6b) everyone is initially merged in a position
(marked by strikethrough) in which it is c-commanded by (and so falls within
the scope of) not; but via A-movement it ends up in an (italicised) position in
which it c-commands (and so has scope over) not. The scope ambiguity in (6a)
therefore reﬂects the two different positions occupied by everyone in the course
of the derivation.
The claim that (non-expletive) subjects like some students/lots of students in
sentences like (1) originate internally within the VP containing the relevant verb
(and from there move into spec-T in sentences like (1) above) is known in the
relevant literature as the VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis (= VPISH), and this
has been almost universally adopted in research since the mid 1980s. Below, we
look at some of the evidence in support of VPISH.
●
●
6.3
Idioms
An interesting piece of evidence in support of the VP-Internal Subject
Hypothesis comes from the syntax of idioms. We can deﬁne idioms as expressions
(like those italicised below) which have an idiosyncratic meaning which is not a
purely compositional function of the meaning of their individual parts:
(7) (a)
Let’s have a couple of drinks to break the ice
(b)
Be careful not to upset the applecart
(c)
The president must bite the bullet
There seems to be a constraint that only a string of words which forms a unitary
constituent can be an idiom. So, while we ﬁnd idioms like those in (7) which are
of the form verb+complement (but where the subject isn’t part of the idiom), we

200
6 a-movement
don’t ﬁnd idioms of the form subject+verb where the verb has a complement
which isn’t part of the idiom: this is because in subject+verb+complement struc-
tures, the verb and its complement form a unitary constituent (a V-bar), whereas
the subject and the verb do not – and only unitary constituents can be idioms.
In the light of the constraint that an idiom is a unitary constituent with an
idiosyncratic interpretation, consider idioms such as the following:
(8) (a)
All hell broke loose
(b)
The shit hit the fan
(c)
The cat got his tongue
In (8), not only is the choice of verb and complement ﬁxed, but so too is the choice
of subject. In such idioms, we can’t replace the subject, verb or complement by
near synonyms – as we see from the fact that sentences like (9) below are
ungrammatical (on the intended idiomatic interpretation):
(9) (a)
∗The whole inferno escaped
(b)
∗Camel dung was sucked into the air conditioning
(c)
∗A furry feline bit his lingual articulator
However, what is puzzling about idioms like (8) is that one or more auxiliaries
can freely be positioned between the subject and verb: cf.
(10) (a)
All hell will break loose
(b)
All hell has broken loose
(c)
All hell could have broken loose
(11) (a)
The shit might hit the fan
(b)
The shit has hit the fan
(c)
The shit must have hit the fan
How can we reconcile our earlier claim that only a string of words which form
a unitary constituent can constitute an idiom with the fact that all hell . . . break
loose is a discontinuous string in (10), since the subject all hell and the predicate
break loose are separated by the intervening auxiliaries will/has/could have? To
put the question another way: how can we account for the fact that although the
choice of subject, verb and complement is ﬁxed, the choice of auxiliary is not?
The VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis provides a straightforward answer, if we
suppose that subjects originate internally within VP, and that clausal idioms like
those in (8) are VP idioms which require a ﬁxed choice of head, complement
and speciﬁer in the VP containing them. For instance, in the case of (8a), the
relevant VP idiom requires the speciﬁc word break as its head verb, the speciﬁc
adjective loose as its complement and the speciﬁc quantiﬁer phrase all hell as
its subject/speciﬁer. We can then account for the fact that all hell surfaces in
front of the auxiliary will in (8a) by positing that the QP all hell originates in
spec-V as the subject of break loose, and is then raised (via A-movement) into
spec-T to become the subject of will break loose. Given these assumptions, (8a)
will be derived as follows. The verb break merges with the adjective loose to

6.4 Argument structure and theta-roles
201
form the idiomatic V-bar break loose. This is then merged with its QP subject all
hell to form the idiomatic VP all hell break loose. The resulting VP is merged
with the tense auxiliary will to form the T-bar will all hell break loose. Since
ﬁnite auxiliaries carry an epp feature requiring them to have a subject speciﬁer
with person/number features, the subject all hell moves from being the subject
of break to becoming the subject of will – as shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(12)
TP
  QP            
T' 
all hell 
T 
VP
         will 
                QP    
    V' 
all hell
V 
                 A
   break
loose 
We can then say that (in the relevant idiom) all hell must be the sister of break
loose, and that this condition will be met only if all hell originates in spec-V
as the subject (and sister) of the V-bar break loose. We can account for how the
subject all hell comes to be separated from its predicate break loose by positing
that subjects originate internally within VP and from there raise to spec-T (via
A-movement) across an intervening T constituent like will, so that the subject and
predicate thereby come to be separated from each other – movement of the subject
to spec-T being driven by an epp feature carried by [T will] requiring will to have
a subject with person/number features. Subsequently, the TP in (12) is merged
with a null declarative complementiser, so deriving the structure associated with
(10a) All hell will break loose.
●
●
6.4
Argument structure and theta-roles
The assumption that subjects originate internally within VP ties up
in interesting ways with a traditional idea from predicate logic maintaining that
propositions (which can be thought of as representing the substantive semantic
content of clauses) comprise a predicate and a set of arguments. Simplifying
somewhat, we can say that a predicate is an expression denoting an activity or
event, and an argument is an expression denoting a participant in the relevant
activity or event. For example, in sentences such as those below, the italicised
verbs are predicates and the bracketed expressions represent their arguments:
(13) (a)
[The guests] have arrived
(b)
[The police] have arrested [the suspect]
In other words, the arguments of a verb are typically its subject and comple-
ment(s). A verb like arrive, when used with a single [bracketed] argument in a

202
6 a-movement
structure like (13a), is said to be a one-place predicate; and a verb like arrest
when used with two [bracketed] arguments in a structure like (13b) is said to be
a two-place predicate.
However, there is an important sense in which it is not enough simply to say that
in a sentence such as (13b) The police have arrested the suspect the verb arrest is
a predicate which has two arguments – the internal argument the suspect and the
external argument the police. After all, such a description fails to account for the
fact that these two arguments play very different semantic roles in relation to the
act of arrest – i.e. it fails to account for the fact that the police are the individuals
who perform the act (and hence get to verbally and physically abuse the suspect),
and that the suspect is the person who suffers the consequences of the act (e.g.
being manhandled, handcuffed, thrown into the back of a windowless vehicle and
beaten up). Hence, any adequate account of argument structure should provide a
description of the semantic role which each argument plays.
In research spanning more than half a century, linguists have attempted to
devise a universal typology of the semantic roles played by arguments in relation
to their predicates. In the table in (14) below are listed a number of terms used to
describe some of these roles (the convention being that terms denoting semantic
roles are capitalised), and for each role an informal gloss is given, together with
an illustrative example (in which the italicised expression has the semantic role
speciﬁed):
(14)
List of roles played by arguments with respect to predicates
Role
Gloss
Example
theme
Entity undergoing the effect of some action
Mary fell over
agent
Entity instigating some action
Debbie killed Harry
experiencer Entity experiencing some psychological state
I like syntax
locative
Place in which something is situated or takes
place
He hid it under the bed
goal
Entity representing the destination of some
other entity
John went home
source
Entity from which something moves
He returned from Paris
instrument
Means used to perform some action
He hit it with a hammer
We can illustrate how the terminology in (14) can be used to describe the semantic
roles played by arguments in terms of the following examples:
(15) (a)
[The FBI] arrested
[Larry Luckless]
[agent]
[theme]
(b)
[The suspect] received
[a caution]
[goal]
[theme]
(c)
[The audience] enjoyed
[the play]
[experiencer]
[theme]
(d)
[The president] went
[to Boston]
[theme]
[goal]

6.4 Argument structure and theta-roles
203
(e)
[They] stayed
[in a hotel]
[theme]
[locative]
(f)
[The noise] came
[from the house]
[theme]
[source]
Given that – as we see from these examples – the theme role is a central one, it
has become customary over the past two decades to refer to the relevant semantic
roles as thematic roles; and since the Greek letter θ (= theta) corresponds to th in
English and the word thematic begins with th, it has become standard practice to
also use the synonymous expression theta-role or θ-role (pronounced theeta-role
by some and thayta-role by others). Using this terminology, we can say (e.g.)
that in (15a) the FBI is the agent argument of the predicate arrested, and that
Larry Luckless is the theme argument of arrested.
Thematic relations (like agent and theme) have been argued to play a central
role in the description of a range of linguistic phenomena. For example, it has
been claimed that the distribution of certain types of adverb is thematically
determined. Thus, Gruber (1976) maintains that adverbs like deliberately can
only be associated with agent arguments: cf.
(16) (a)
John (= agent) deliberately rolled the ball down the hill
(b)
∗The ball (= theme) deliberately rolled down the hill
Likewise, Fillmore (1972, p. 10) argues that the adverb personally can only be
associated with experiencer arguments: cf.
(17) (a)
Personally, your proposal doesn’t interest me (= experiencer)
(b)
∗Personally, you hit me (= theme)
And indeed thematic structure has been argued to play an important role in a
wide range of other phenomena (e.g. the syntax of passives and reﬂexives) – but
space limitations prevent us from reviewing the relevant evidence here.
If we look closely at the examples in (15), we see a fairly obvious pattern
emerging. Each of the bracketed argument expressions in (15) carries one and
only one θ-role, and no two arguments of any predicate carry the same θ-role.
Chomsky (1981) suggested that these thematic properties of arguments are the
consequence of a principle of Universal Grammar traditionally referred to as the
θ-criterion, and outlined in (18) below:
(18)
Theta-criterion/θ-criterion
Each argument bears one and only one θ-role, and each θ-role is assigned to
one and only one argument (Chomsky 1981, p. 36)
A principle along the lines of (18) has been assumed (in some form or other) in
much subsequent work.
However, an important question raised by (18) is precisely how arguments
come to be assigned theta-roles. To put this question in a more concrete form,
consider how the object the suspect comes to be assigned its theta-role of theme
complement of the predicate arrested in (13b) The police have arrested the

204
6 a-movement
suspect. Since the suspect is the complement of the verb arrested and since verbs
merge with their complements, a principled answer would be to suppose that
theta-roles are assigned to arguments in accordance with the hypothesis (19)
below:
(19)
Predicate-Internal Theta-Marking Hypothesis
An argument is theta-marked (i.e. assigned a theta-role) via merger with a
predicate
The hypothesis in (19) will also account for the theta-marking of subjects, if we
assume that subjects originate as arguments of verbs. To see how, let’s look at the
derivation of (13b) The police have arrested the suspect.
The verb arrested merges with its direct object complement the suspect (a DP
formed by merging the determiner the with the noun suspect). In accordance with
the Predicate-Internal Theta-Marking Hypothesis (19), the object the suspect will
be theta-marked via merger with the verbal predicate arrested. If the lexical entry
for the verb arrest speciﬁes that its complement plays the thematic role of theme
argument of arrest, merging the verb arrested with its complement the suspect
will result in the suspect being assigned the theta-role of theme argument of
arrested. The V-bar thereby formed is then merged with the subject DP the police
(itself formed by merging the determiner the with the noun police) to form the
VP shown in (20) below (simpliﬁed by not showing the internal structure of the
two DPs):
(20)
VP
DP  
V' 
the police
V                           DP 
      arrested      
the suspect  
If the lexical entry for the verb arrest speciﬁes that its subject has the thematic
role of agent argument of arrest, merging the police with the V-bar arrested
the suspect will result in the police being assigned the theta-role of agent
argument of the predicate arrested. Introducing some new terminology at this
point, we can say that in a structure such as (20), the complement the suspect is
the internal argument of the verb arrested (in the sense that it is the argument
contained within the immediate V-bar projection of the verb, and hence is a
sister of the verb), whereas the subject the police is the external argument of
the verb arrested (in that it occupies a position external to the V-bar constituent
which is the immediate projection of the verb arrested). We can equivalently
say that the verb arrested is ﬁrst-merged with its complement the suspect and
second-merged with its subject the police.
The VP in (20) is then merged with the present tense auxiliary [T have],
forming the T-bar have the police arrested the suspect. Since a ﬁnite T has an
[epp] feature requiring it to have a subject of its own, the DP the police moves
from being the subject of arrested to becoming the subject of [T have], forming

6.5 Unaccusative predicates
205
The police have the police arrested the suspect. Merging the resulting TP with a
null complementiser marking the declarative force of the sentence in turn derives
the (simpliﬁed) structure in (21) below:
(21)
CP
C    
TP
ø
       DP  
T' 
 the police 
  T
VP
have
DP                                 V' 
the police
V        
         DP 
  arrested           the suspect 
The analysis in (21) is consistent with the θ-criterion (18) in that each argu-
ment is assigned a single theta-role which is different from that assigned to any
other argument of the same predicate (the suspect being the theme argument of
arrested and the police being its agent argument). (21) is also consistent with
the Predicate-Internal Theta-Marking Hypothesis (19), since the suspect is
assigned the thematic role of theme argument of arrested by being ﬁrst-merged
with arrested, and the police is assigned the thematic role of agent argument
of arrested by being second-merged with arrested. Since only predicative heads
can assign theta-roles, and since neither T nor C is a predicative head, neither T
nor C assigns any theta-role to any constituent in (21).
Our discussion here suggests that thematic considerations lend further support
to the VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis. By positing that all arguments of a verb
(including its subject) originate internally within VP, we can arrive at a unitary
and principled account of θ-marking in terms of the Predicate-Internal Theta-
Marking Hypothesis (19), since we can say that a verb only theta-marks an
argument with which it is merged (via a ﬁrst- or second-merge operation).
●
●
6.5
Unaccusative predicates
The overall conclusion to be drawn from our discussion so far is that
subjects originate internally within VP, as theta-marked arguments of the verb.
In all the structures we have looked at until now, the Verb Phrase has contained
both a complement and a speciﬁer (the speciﬁer being the subject of the verb).
However, in this and subsequent sections we look at VPs which contain a verb
and a complement but no speciﬁer, and where it is the complement of the verb
which subsequently moves to spec-T.

206
6 a-movement
One such type of VP are those headed by a special subclass of intransitive
verbs which have the property that they can be used both in expletive structures
such as (22a–24a) below, and in non-expletive structures like those in (22b–24b):
(22) (a)
There have arisen several complications
(b)
Several complications have arisen
(23) (a)
There could have occurred a diplomatic incident
(b)
A diplomatic incident could have occurred
(24) (a)
There does still remain some hope of ﬁnding survivors
(b)
Some hope of ﬁnding survivors does still remain
We shall argue here that the italicised arguments originate as the complements
of the bold-printed verbs in both types of structure: they remain in situ as the
complement of the verb in the expletive (a) structures, but raise to become the
subject of the underlined T-auxiliary have/could/does in the non-expletive (b)
structures. However, the bold-printed verbs in (22–24) differ from transitive
verbs taking a noun expression as their complement in that they don’t assign
accusative case to their complement, but rather nominative case. Although the
nominative–accusative case contrast is invisible in noun expressions in English, it
is visible in languages like Icelandic with a richer case system. And in Icelandic,
the (italicised) complement of an unaccusative verb receives nominative (= nom)
case even in expletive structures where it remains in situ and follows the verb –
as the following example (which Matthew Whelpton kindly persuaded Johannes
Gisli J´onsson to provide for me) illustrates:
(25)
Þad hafa komið nokkrirNOM gestirNOM
There have come some guests
Because they don’t assign accusative case to their complements, verbs like those
bold-printed in (22–24) are known as unaccusative predicates.
Given that the complements of unaccusative predicates are not assigned
accusative case, it would be only natural to question whether they actually are
complements (rather than e.g. subjects which end up positioned after the unac-
cusative verb rather than in front of it). In fact, there is strong syntactic evidence
in support of analysing them as complements. Part of the evidence comes from
their behaviour in relation to a constraint on movement operations discovered by
Huang (1982), which can be characterised in the following terms:
(26)
Constraint on Extraction Domains/CED
Only complements allow material to be extracted out of them, not speciﬁers
or adjuncts
We can illustrate Huang’s CED constraint in terms of the following contrasts:
(27) (a)
He was taking [pictures of who]?
(b)
Who was he taking [pictures of who]?

6.5 Unaccusative predicates
207
(28) (a)
[Part of what] has broken?
(b)
∗What has [part of what] broken?
(29) (a)
He was angry [when she broke what]?
(b)
∗What was he angry [when she broke what]?
(27a, 28a, 29a) are echo questions in which the wh-pronoun who/what remains
in situ, while (27b, 28b, 29b) are their wh-movement counterparts. In (27b), who
is extracted out of a bracketed nominal expression which is the complement of
the verb taking, and yields a grammatical outcome because there is no violation
of CED (extraction out of complement expressions being permitted by CED).
By contrast, in (28b) what is extracted out of a bracketed expression which is
the subject (and hence speciﬁer) of the auxiliary has, and since CED blocks
extraction out of speciﬁers, the resulting sentence is ungrammatical. Likewise in
(29b) what is extracted out of a bracketed adjunct clause, and since CED blocks
extraction out of adjuncts, the sentence is ungrammatical.
In the light of Huang’s CED constraint, consider a sentence such as:
(30)
How many survivors does there remain [some hope of ﬁnding
how many survivors]
Here, the wh-phrase how many survivors has been extracted (via wh-movement)
out of the bracketed expression some hope of ﬁnding how many survivors. Given
that the Condition on Extraction Domains tells us that only complements allow
material to be extracted out of them, it follows that the bracketed expression in
(30) must be the complement of the verb remain. By extension, we can assume
that the italicised expressions in (22–24) are likewise the complements of the
bold-printed verbs.
Not all intransitive verbs allow their arguments to be positioned after them,
however – as we see from the ungrammaticality of sentences such as (31) below:
(31) (a)
∗When the Snail Rail train arrived ﬁve hours late, there complained many
passengers
(b)
∗In the dentist’s surgery, there groaned a toothless patient
(c)
∗Every time General Wynott Nukem goes past, there salutes a guard at the
gate
Intransitive verbs like complain/groan/salute are known as unergative verbs:
they differ from unaccusatives in that the subject of an unergative verb has the
thematic role of an agent argument, whereas the subject of an unaccusative verb
has the thematic property of being a theme argument.
In addition to those already noted, there are a number of other impor-
tant syntactic differences between unaccusative verbs and other types of verb
(e.g. unergative verbs or transitive verbs). For example, Alison Henry (1995)
observes that in one dialect of Belfast English (which she calls dialect A) unac-
cusative verbs can have (italicised) postverbal subjects in imperative structures
like:

208
6 a-movement
(32) (a)
Leave you now!
(b)
Arrive you before 6 o’clock!
(c)
Be going you out of the door when he arrives!
By contrast, other (e.g. unergative or transitive) verbs don’t allow postverbal
imperative subjects, so that imperatives such as (33) below are ungrammatical in
the relevant dialect:
(33) (a)
∗Read you that book!
(b)
∗Eat you up!
(c)
∗Always laugh you at his jokes!
Additional evidence for positing that unaccusative verbs are syntactically distinct
from other verbs comes from auxiliary selection facts in relation to earlier
stages of English when there were two perfect aspect auxiliaries (have and be),
each taking a complement headed by a speciﬁc kind of verb. Unaccusative verbs
differed from transitive or unergative verbs in being used with the perfect auxiliary
be, as the sentences in (34) below (taken from various plays by Shakespeare)
illustrate:
(34) (a)
Mistress Page is come with me (Mrs Ford, Merry Wives of Windsor, V.v)
(b)
Is the duke gone? Then is your cause gone too (Duke, Measure for
Measure, V.i)
(c)
How chance thou art returned so soon? (Antipholus, Comedy of Errors,
I.ii)
(d)
She is fallen into a pit of ink (Leonato, Much Ado About Nothing, IV.i)
A last vestige of structures like (34) survives in present-day English sentences
such as All hope of ﬁnding survivors is now gone.
Verbs which (when used intransitively) are unaccusative predicates include
motion predicates such as arrive/come/fall/go/leave/return/rise etc. and
existential predicates (i.e. verbs indicating the existence or coming into
being of a state of affairs, or a change of state, or the cessation of a state) like
appear/arise/be/become/begin/change/die/exist/happen/occur/remain/start/stay/
stop/turn. An unaccusative verb like fall typically allows inanimate as well
as animate subjects (cf. My wife fell off a stool/The temperature fell sharply),
whereas an unergative predicate like complain typically allows only an animate
subject (cf. My wife complained/!The temperature complained).
As we have seen, there is a considerable body of empirical evidence that
unaccusative subjects behave differently from subjects of other (e.g. unergative
or transitive) verbs. Why should this be? The answer given by the VP-Internal
Subject Hypothesis is that the subjects of unaccusative verbs do not originate
as the subjects of their associated verbs at all, but rather as their complements,
and that unaccusative structures with postverbal arguments involve leaving the
relevant argument in situ in VP-complement position – e.g. in unaccusative
expletive structures such as (22–24) above, and in Belfast English unaccusative
imperatives such as (32). This being so, a sentence such as (22a) There have

6.5 Unaccusative predicates
209
arisen several complications will be derived as follows. The quantiﬁer several
merges with the noun complications to form the QP several complications. This
is merged as the complement of the unaccusative verb arisen, forming the VP
arisen several complications. The resulting VP is merged with the auxiliary have
to form the T-bar shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(35)
  T' 
T            
VP
have 
V   
          QP 
     arisen           several complications
The epp feature carried by the ﬁnite T constituent have requires it to have a nomi-
nal (i.e. noun or pronoun) expression as its speciﬁer. This requirement is satisﬁed
by merging expletive there in spec-T. The resulting TP there have arisen several
complications is then merged with a null declarative-force complementiser to
form the CP (36) below:
(36)
     CP 
C           
TP      
ø
       PRN         
T' 
there 
 T     
 VP 
  have                
V           
     QP 
 arisen       several complications
And (36) is the structure of (22a) There have arisen several complications.
However, an alternative way for the T constituent in (35) to satisfy the epp
requirement to have a nominal speciﬁer is for T to attract a nominal to move
to spec-T. In accordance with the Attract Closest Condition, T will attract the
closest nominal within the structure containing it. Since the only nominal in (35)
is the QP several complications, T therefore attracts this QP to move to spec-T
in the manner shown in simpliﬁed form in (37) below:
(37)
      TP 
        QP      
T' 
several complications
T 
       VP 
              have                 
V     
          QP 
  arisen               several complications

210
6 a-movement
The type of movement involved is the familiar A-movement operation which
moves an argument from a position lower down in a sentence to become the
structural subject (and speciﬁer) of TP. The resulting TP in (37) is subsequently
merged with a null complementiser marking the declarative force of the sentence,
so generating the structure associated with Several complications have arisen.
The A-movement analysis of unaccusative subjects in (37) above allows us to
provide an interesting account of sentences pairs like that in (38) below:
(38) (a)
All hope of ﬁnding survivors has gone
(b)
All hope has gone of ﬁnding survivors
Since go is an unaccusative verb, the QP all hope of ﬁnding survivors will
originate as the complement of gone. Merging gone with this QP will derive the
VP gone all hope of ﬁnding survivors. The resulting VP is merged with the T
constituent has to form the T-bar has gone all hope of ﬁnding survivors. Since T
has an epp feature requiring it to project a speciﬁer, the QP all hope of ﬁnding
survivors is raised to spec-T, leaving an italicised copy behind in the position in
which it originated. Merging the resulting TP with a null complementiser marking
the declarative force of the sentence derives the structure shown in simpliﬁed form
in (39) below:
(39)
[CP [C ø] [TP [QP All hope of ﬁnding survivors] [T has] [VP [V gone]
[QP all hope of ﬁnding survivors]]]]
In the case of (38a), the whole of the QP all hope of ﬁnding survivors is spelled
out in the bold-printed spec-T position which it moves to, and the italicised copy
of the moved QP in VP-complement position is deleted in its entirety – as shown
in simpliﬁed form in (40) below:
(40)
[CP [C ø] [TP [QP All hope of ﬁnding survivors] [T has] [VP [V gone]
[QP all hope of ﬁnding survivors]]]]
In the case of (38b), the quantiﬁer all and the noun hope are spelled out in the
bold-printed position they move to in (39), and the PP of ﬁnding survivors is
spelled out in the VP-complement position in which it originates – as shown in
(41) below:
(41)
[CP [C ø] [TP [QP All hope of ﬁnding survivors] [T has] [VP [V gone]
[QP all hope of ﬁnding survivors]]]]
(41) thus presents us with another example of the discontinuous/split spellout
phenomenon highlighted in §5.3. It also provides evidence in support of tak-
ing A-movement (like other movement operations) to be a composite operation
involving copying and deletion.

6.6 Passive predicates
211
●
●
6.6
Passive predicates
A class of predicates which are similar in some respects to unac-
cusative predicates are passive predicates. Traditional grammarians maintain
that the bold-printed verbs in sentences such as the (a) examples in (42–44)
below are in the active voice, whereas the italicised verbs in the corresponding
(b) sentences are in the passive voice (and have the status of passive participles):
(42) (a)
Hundreds of passers-by saw the attack
(b)
The attack was seen by hundreds of passers-by
(43) (a)
Lex Luthor stole the kryptonite
(b)
The kryptonite was stolen by Lex Luthor
(44)(a)
They took everything
(b)
Everything was taken
There are four main properties which differentiate passive sentences from their
active counterparts. One is that passive (though not active) sentences generally
require the auxiliary be. Another is that the main verb in passive sentences is in the
passive participle form (cf. seen/stolen/taken), which is generally homophonous
with the perfect participle form. A third is that passive sentences may (though
need not) contain a by-phrase in which the complement of by plays the same
thematic role as the subject in the corresponding active sentence: for example,
hundreds of passers-by in the active structure (42a) serves as the subject of saw
the attack, whereas in the passive structure (42b) it serves as the complement of
the preposition by (though in both cases it has the thematic role of experiencer
argument of see). The fourth difference is that the expression which serves as
the complement of an active verb surfaces as the subject in the corresponding
passive construction: for example, the attack is the complement of saw in the
active structure (42a), but is the subject of was in the passive structure (42b).
Since this chapter is concerned with A-movement (and hence the syntax of
subjects), we focus on the syntax of the superﬁcial subjects of passive sentences,
setting aside the derivation of by-phrases.
Passive predicates resemble unaccusatives in that alongside structures like
those in (45a–47a) below containing preverbal subjects they also allow expletive
structures like (45b–47b) in which the italicised argument can be postverbal
(providing it is an indeﬁnite expression):
(45) (a)
No evidence of any corruption was found
(b)
There was found no evidence of any corruption
(46) (a)
Several cases of syntactophobia have been reported
(b)
There have been reported several cases of syntactophobia

212
6 a-movement
(47) (a)
A signiﬁcant change of policy has been announced
(b)
There has been announced a signiﬁcant change of policy
How can we account for the dual position of the italicised expressions in such
structures?
The answer given within the framework outlined here is that a passive subject
is initially merged as the thematic complement of the main verb (i.e. it originates
as the complement of the main verb as in (45b–47b) and so receives the θ-role
which the relevant verb assigns to its complement), and subsequently moves
from V-complement position into T-speciﬁer position in passive sentences such
as (45a–47a).
On this view, the derivation of sentences like (45) will proceed as follows. The
noun corruption merges with the quantiﬁer any to form the QP any corruption.
The resulting QP then merges with the preposition of to form the PP of any
corruption. This PP in turn merges with the noun evidence to form the NP evidence
of any corruption. The resulting NP is merged with the negative quantiﬁer no to
form the QP no evidence of any corruption. This QP is merged as the complement
of the passive verb found (and thereby assigned the thematic role of theme
argument of found) to form the VP found no evidence of any corruption. The VP
thus formed is merged with the auxiliary was forming the T-bar was found no
evidence of any corruption. The auxiliary [T was] carries an epp feature requiring
it to have a speciﬁer. This requirement can be satisﬁed by merging the expletive
pronoun there in spec-T, deriving the TP There was found no evidence of any
corruption. Merging this TP with a null complementiser marking the declarative
force of the sentence will derive the structure shown in simpliﬁed form in (48)
below:
(48)
        CP 
C
    TP 
ø
           PRN     
T' 
there 
      T            
VP
    was
V         
                  QP 
   found            no evidence of any corruption 
However, an alternative way of satisfying the epp feature of T is not to merge
there in spec-T, but rather to passivise the QP no evidence of any corruption –
i.e. to move it from being the thematic object of found to becoming the structural
subject of was. Merging the resulting TP with a null complementiser which marks
the sentence as declarative in force derives the CP shown in simpliﬁed form in
(49) below (with the arrow showing the movement which took place on the
T-cycle):

6.6 Passive predicates
213
(49)
CP                          
C     
TP
ø
   QP                 
T' 
no evidence of any corruption
T                  
     VP 
          was
 V 
             QP 
found
no evidence of
any corruption
The arrowed movement operation (traditionally called passivisation) by which
QP moves from thematic complement position into structural subject position
turns out to be a particular instance of the more general A-movement operation
which serves to create structural subjects (i.e. to move arguments into spec-T
in order to satisfy the epp feature of T). Note that an assumption implicit in
the analyses in (48) and (49) is that verb phrases headed by intransitive passive
participles remain subjectless throughout the derivation, because the T constituent
was is the head which requires a structural subject by virtue of its epp feature, not
the verb found (suggesting that it is functional heads like T and C which trigger
movement, not lexical heads like V).
In the case of (45a) No evidence of any corruption was found, the whole of the
QP no evidence of any corruption is spelled out in the bold-printed spec-T position
in (49) at the head of the movement chain, and all the material in the italicised
V-complement position at the foot of the movement chain is deleted. However,
in §5.3 we saw that some structures in which a moved noun has a prepositional
complement may allow discontinuous spellout, with the noun and any preceding
expressions modifying it being spelled out at the head (i.e. on the highest link) of
the movement chain, and its prepositional or clausal complement being spelled
out at the foot (i.e. on the lowest link) of the movement chain. Discontinuous
spellout is also permitted in (49), allowing for the possibility of the quantiﬁer
no and the noun evidence being spelled out in the bold-printed position at the
head (i.e. top) of the movement chain, and the PP of any corruption being spelled
out in the italicised VP-complement position at the foot (i.e. bottom) of the
movement chain, so deriving the structure associated with the sentence in (50)
below:
(50)
No evidence was found of any corruption
Sentences such as (50) thus provide evidence that passive subjects originate as
complements, if of any corruption is a remnant of the preposed complement no
evidence of any corruption.

214
6 a-movement
Further evidence that passive subjects originate as complements comes from
the distribution of idiomatic nominals like those italicised below:
(51) (a)
They paid little heed to what he said
(b)
Little heed was paid to what he said
(52) (a)
They paid due homage to General Ghouly
(b)
Due homage was paid to General Ghouly
(53) (a)
The FBI kept close tabs on the CIA
(b)
Close tabs were kept on the CIA by the FBI
In expressions such as pay heed/homage to and keep tabs on, the verb pay/keep
and the noun expression containing heed/tabs/homage together form an idiom.
Given the arguments in §6.3 that idioms are unitary constituents, it is apparent
that the bold-printed verb and the italicised noun expression must form a unitary
constituent when they are ﬁrst introduced into the derivation. This will clearly
be the case if we suppose that the noun expression originates as the complement
of the associated verb (as in 51a–53a), and becomes the subject of the passive
auxiliary was/were in (51b–53b) via passivisation/A-movement.
A claim which is implicit in the hypothesis that passive subjects originate
as thematic objects is that the subjects of active verbs and the complements of
passive verbs have the same thematic function. Evidence that this is indeed the
case comes from the traditional observation that the two are subject to the same
pragmatic restrictions on the choice of expression which can occupy the relevant
position, as we see from sentences such as the following (where ?, ?! and ! mark
increasing degrees of anomaly):
(54) (a)
The students/?The camels/?!The ﬂowers/!The ideas were arrested
(b)
They arrested the students/?the camels/?!the ﬂowers/!the ideas
We can account for this if we suppose that pragmatic restrictions on the choice
of admissible arguments for a given predicate depend jointly on the semantic
properties of the predicate and the thematic role of the argument: it will then follow
that two expressions which fulﬁl the same thematic role in respect of a given
predicate will be subject to the same pragmatic restrictions on argument choice.
Since passive subjects like those italicised in (54a) originate as complements, they
will have the same θ-role (and so be subject to the same pragmatic restrictions
on argument choice) as active complements like those italicised in (54b).
We can arrive at the same conclusion (that passive subjects originate as the-
matic complements) on theoretical grounds. It seems reasonable to suppose that
thematic structure is mapped into syntactic structure in a uniform fashion, and
that this is regulated by a UG principle such as the following:
(55)
Uniform Theta Assignment Hypothesis/UTAH
Constituents which fulﬁl the same thematic role with respect to a given
predicate occupy the same initial position in the syntax

6.7 Long-distance passivisation
215
It follows from UTAH that if passive subjects have the same theta-role as active
objects, it is plausible to suppose that passive subjects originate in the same
V-complement position as active objects.
●
●
6.7
Long-distance passivisation
Thus far, the instances of passivization which we have looked at
have been clause-internal in the sense that they have involved movement from
complement to subject position within the same clause. However, passivisation is
also able to apply across certain types of clause boundary – as can be illustrated
in relation to structures such as (56) and (57) below:
(56) (a)
There are alleged to have been stolen a number of portraits of the queen
(b)
A number of portraits of the queen are alleged to have been stolen
(57) (a)
There are believed to have occurred several riots
(b)
Several riots are believed to have occurred
It seems clear that the italicised expression in each case is the thematic comple-
ment of the bold-printed verb in the inﬁnitive clause, so that a number of portraits
of the queen is the thematic complement of the passive verb stolen in (56), and
several riots is the thematic complement of the unaccusative verb occurred in
(57). In (56a, 57a) the italicised argument remains in situ as the complement of
the bold-printed verb; but in (56b, 57b) the italicised argument moves to become
the structural subject of the auxiliary are. Let’s look rather more closely at the
derivation of sentences like (57a) and (57b).
(57a) is derived as follows. The quantiﬁer several merges with the noun riots
to form the QP several riots. This QP merges with (and is assigned the θ-role
of theme argument of) the unaccusative verb occurred to form the VP occurred
several riots. The resulting VP merges with the perfect auxiliary have to form the
AUXP have occurred several riots. This in turn merges with the inﬁnitival tense
particle to, so forming the T-bar to have occurred several riots. As we saw in §3.2,
inﬁnitival to (like all T-constituents) has an epp feature which requires it to have
a noun or pronoun expression as its subject/speciﬁer. One way of satisfying this
requirement is for expletive there to be merged in spec-T, forming the TP there
to have occurred several riots. The resulting TP merges with the passive verb
believed to form the VP believed there to have occurred several riots. This VP
then merges with the present tense T-auxiliary are to form the T-bar are believed
there to have occurred several riots. A T-constituent like are has an epp feature
requiring it to have a suitable subject of its own, and one way of satisfying this
requirement is for T to attract a (pro)noun expression which it c-commands to
become its subject. Given the Attract Closest Condition (recapituated below from
§5.8):

216
6 a-movement
(58)
Attract Closest Condition/ACC
A head which attracts a given kind of constituent attracts the closest
constituent of the relevant kind
it follows that T will attract the closest noun or pronoun expression within its
(c-command) domain. Accordingly, the T-auxiliary are attracts the expletive
pronoun there to become its subject (via passivisation), so forming the TP there
are believed there to have occurred several riots. This TP is then merged with
a null C marking the sentence as declarative in force, so deriving the following
structure:
(59)
          CP 
C     
    TP 
ø  
           PRN     
T' 
There
    T  
VP
   are
V            
TP
                believed 
            PRN                        T' 
there
T  
 AUXP 
to
            AUX
VP
have
      V  
  QP 
 occurred    several riots
And (59) is the structure of (57a) There are believed to have occurred several
riots.
Now consider the derivation of (57b) Several riots are believed to have
occurred. Assume that the derivation proceeds as for (57a) until we reach the
stage where we have formed the T-bar to have occurred several riots. But this
time, suppose that the epp requirement that the inﬁnitival T-constituent to should
have a subject of its own is satisﬁed by moving the QP several riots to spec-T
to become the subject of to, so forming the TP several riots to have occurred
several riots. The resulting TP merges with the passive verb believed to form
the VP believed several riots to have occurred several riots. This then merges
with the present tense T-auxiliary are to form the T-bar are believed several riots
to have occurred several riots. Since the T-constituent are has an epp feature, it
will attract the closest noun or pronoun expression (= the QP several riots) to
become its subject/speciﬁer, so forming the TP several riots are believed several
riots to have occurred several riots. The resulting TP is then merged with a null
C constituent marking the sentence as declarative in force, so forming the CP
shown below:

6.7 Long-distance passivisation
217
(60)
          CP 
C
    TP 
 QP        
T' 
Several
riots
    T  
VP
   are
V            
TP
                believed 
  QP
T' 
several
riots
T            
AUXP 
to
            AUX
VP
have
      V  
  QP 
 occurred
several riots
ø  
Our discussion illustrates that (in consequence of the epp feature on T) long-
distance passivisation takes place in a series of short steps (i.e. in a successive-
cyclic fashion), moving the relevant expression one TP at a time. Since oper-
ations which move a noun or pronoun expression into spec-T are instances of
A-movement, long-distance passivisation involves a series of applications of the
familiar A-movement operation: thus, each of the two arrowed movements in
(60) is a particular instance of A-movement.
In the previous chapter, we noted that movement operations obey the Rela-
tivised Minimality Condition (61) below:
(61)
Relativised Minimality Condition/RMC
A constituent X can only be affected by (e.g. agree with or be attracted by)
the minimal (i.e. closest) constituent of the relevant type above it (i.e.
c-commanding X)
As we saw in §5.6, this means that a constituent undergoing wh-movement
is attracted by the closest C constituent above it. However, it also means
that a constituent undergoing A-movement is likewise attracted by the closest
T constituent above it. As should be clear, A-movement in (60) conforms to
RMC, in that the QP several riots is ﬁrst attracted to become the speciﬁer of
the closest T constituent above it (= the embedded clause T constituent contain-
ing inﬁnitival to), and then attracted to become the speciﬁer of the next closest
T constituent above it (= the main-clause T constituent containing are). As
should be apparent, there is considerable overlap between the Attract Closest
Condition/ACC in (58) and the Relativised Minimality Condition/RMC (61) –
one is in effect the converse of the other. Thus, ACC says that a head H can
only attract the closest expression X of the relevant type which it c-commands,
whereas RMC says that an expression X can only be attracted by the closest
head H of the relevant type which c-commands it. Accordingly, ACP and RMC

218
6 a-movement
represent two different approaches to capturing the locality property of syntactic
operations.
A key assumption made in (59) and (60) is that the to-inﬁnitive complement
of the verb believed is a TP and not a CP. This is in line with our assumption in
§3.8 that believe is an ECM verb when used with an inﬁnitival complement (i.e.
an Exceptional Case-Marking verb able to assign accusative case to the subject
of its complement), and that its complement is a defective clause (lacking the CP
layer found in complete clauses) and hence a TP. Recall that we have independent
evidence from contrasts such as:
(62) (a)
Nobody intended [you to get hurt]
(b)
You weren’t intended [to get hurt]
(63) (a)
Nobody intended [for you to get hurt]
(b)
∗You weren’t intended [for to get hurt]
that an italicised expression contained within a TP complement like that bracketed
in (62) can passivise, but not one contained within a CP complement like that
bracketed in (63).
It is traditionally said that passivisation is an operation by which the comple-
ment of a VP becomes the subject/speciﬁer of a higher TP. However, while this
is true of the kind of passive structures which we have looked at so far, it is not
true of those like (64) below:
(64) (a)
All hell was said to have broken loose
(b)
The shit is expected to hit the fan
In (64a,b) the italicised passivised nominal is an idiomatic expression which
originates as the subject of the bold-printed expression – demonstrating that
passivisation can target subjects as well as complements. The derivation of (64b)
proceeds as follows. The verb hit merges with the DP the fan to form the V-bar hit
the fan. This V-bar in turn merges with the DP the shit to form the (idiomatic) VP
the shit hit the fan. This VP is merged with the inﬁnitival T-constituent to, forming
the T-bar to the shit hit the fan. In conformity with the Attract Closest Condition
(58), the epp feature on [T to] enables it to attract the closest noun expression
(= the shit) to become its subject, so forming the TP the shit to the shit hit the
fan. The resulting TP is merged as the complement of the passive verb expected,
forming the VP expected the shit to the shit hit the fan. This VP is then merged as
the complement of the present tense T-auxiliary is, forming the T-bar is expected
the shit to the shit hit the fan. In conformity with the Attract Closest Condition
(58), the epp feature on the T-auxiliary is enables it to attract the closest nominal
(= the shit) to become its subject, so forming the TP The shit is expected the shit
to the shit hit the fan. Merging this TP with a null complementiser marking the
sentence as declarative in force derives the structure below:

6.8 Raising
219
(65)
          CP 
C     
    TP 
ø
            DP  
T' 
The shit
     T 
VP
     is 
V            
TP
expected 
  DP
T' 
the shit
T  
VP
to
  DP     
V' 
the shit
      V  
  DP 
     hit             the fan
Although structures like (65) are traditionally said to involve long-distance pas-
sivisation, in actual fact they involve two separate local A-movement operations
by which the idiomatic nominal the shit moves ﬁrst to become the speciﬁer of
the lower TP (thereby becoming the subject of inﬁnitival to) and then to become
the speciﬁer of the higher TP (thereby becoming the subject of is). In each case
(in conformity with the Attract Closest Condition) T attracts the closest nominal
expression which it c-commands to move to spec-T, and the relevant movement
operation also satisﬁes the Relativised Minimality Condition (61), which requires
a constituent undergoing A-movement to become the speciﬁer of the closest T
constituent above it.
●
●
6.8
Raising
A further type of structure which involves movement of an argument
expression out of one clause to become the subject of another clause is illustrated
by the (b) examples in (66–69) below:
(66) (a)
There does seem [to remain some hope of peace]
(b)
Some hope of peace does seem [to remain]
(67) (a)
There does appear [to have been made remarkably little progress on
disarmament]
(b)
Remarkably little progress on disarmament does appear [to have
been made]
(68) (a)
It would seem [that Senator Slyme has been lying to Congress]
(b)
Senator Slyme would seem [to have been lying to Congress]
(69) (a)
It would appear [that they have underestimated her]
(b)
They would appear [to have underestimated her]

220
6 a-movement
In (66), the italicised expression some hope of peace is the thematic complement
of the unaccusative predicate remain; it remains in situ in the expletive structure
(66a), but raises to become the subject of the seem-clause in (66b). In (67), the
italicised expression remarkably little progress on disarmament is the thematic
complement of the passive verb made; it remains in situ in the expletive structure
(67a) but raises to become the subject of the appear-clause in (67b). In (68), the
italicised expression Senator Slyme is the thematic subject of the verb lying: if
the complement clause is a ﬁnite clause as in (68a), it surfaces as the subject of
the complement clause; but if the complement clause is inﬁnitival as in (68b), it
surfaces as the subject of the seem-clause. Likewise, in (69) the italicised pronoun
they is the thematic subject of the verb underestimate: if the complement clause
is ﬁnite as in (69a), it surfaces as the subject of the complement clause; if the
complement clause is inﬁnitival as in (69b), it surfaces as the subject of the appear
clause.
Examples like (66–69) suggest that verbs like seem and appear resemble
passive verbs in that they allow an expression which is a theta-marked argument
of a predicate in a lower clause to raise to become the subject of the seem/appear-
clause. Given this assumption, a sentence such as (66b) will have the following
simpliﬁed derivation. At the point where the QP some hope of ø peace has been
formed (the noun peace having been merged with a null quantiﬁer), it will be
merged with (and θ-marked by) the verb remain to form the VP remain some hope
of ø peace. This VP is then merged with the inﬁnitival tense particle to, forming
the T-bar to remain some hope of ø peace. Inﬁnitival to (like all T constituents)
has an epp feature requiring it to have a noun or pronoun expression as its subject.
One way of satisfying this requirement is by merging the expletive pronoun there
in spec-T, so deriving the TP there to remain some hope of ø peace. The resulting
inﬁnitival TP is subsequently merged with the verb seem to form the VP seem
there to remain some hope of ø peace. This in turn is merged with the present
tense auxiliary does to form the T-bar does seem there to remain some hope of
ø peace. Like all T constituents, [T does] has an epp feature which enables it to
attract the closest noun or pronoun expression (= the expletive pronoun there)
to become its subject, so forming the TP There does seem there to remain some
hope of ø peace. This TP is then merged with a null complementiser marking
the sentence as declarative in force, so forming the structure shown in simpliﬁed
form below (with movement indicated by an arrow):
(70)
[CP [C ø] [TP there [T does] [VP [V seem] [TP there [T to] [VP [V remain] some hope of ø peace]]]]] 
And (70) is the structure of (66a) There does seem to remain some hope of peace.
Now consider the derivation of (66b) Some hope of peace does seem to remain.
Assume that this proceeds as for (66a) until we have formed the T-bar to remain
some hope of ø peace. Since inﬁnitival to (like all T constituents in English) has an
epp feature, it can (in conformity with the Attract Closest Condition (58)) attract

6.9 Comparing raising and control predicates
221
the closest nominal (= some hope of ø peace) to become its subject, so forming
the TP some hope of ø peace to remain some hope of ø peace. The resulting TP
is then merged with the verb seem to form the VP seem some hope of ø peace to
remain some hope of ø peace. This VP is in turn merged with the present tense
T constituent does to form the T-bar does seem some hope of ø peace to remain
some hope of ø peace. Like all T constituents, the T-auxiliary does has an epp
feature which allows it to attract the closest nominal (= some hope of ø peace)
to become its subject, so forming the TP some hope of ø peace does seem some
hope of ø peace to remain some hope of ø peace. Merging this TP with a null
declarative complementiser forms the following structure (with arrows indicating
A-movement operations which take place in the course of the derivation):
(71)
[CP [C ø] [TP some hope of ø peace [T does] [VP [V seem] [TP some hope of  ø peace [T to]
 [VP [V remain] some hope of  ø peace]]]]]
The movement operation by which the noun or pronoun expression moves from
being the speciﬁer of a lower TP to becoming the speciﬁer of a higher TP in (70)
and (71) is traditionally known as (subject) raising (because it raises a noun or
pronoun expression from being the subject of a lower clause to becoming the
subject of a higher clause) but in reality it turns out to be yet another instance of
the more general A-movement operation by which T attracts the closest nominal
which it c-commands to become its speciﬁer (and thereby move to spec-T). Words
like seem/appear (when used with an inﬁnitival complement) have the property
that the subject of the seem/appear-clause is created by being raised out of a
complement clause, and so (for this reason) are known as raising predicates. The
parallels between raising in structures like (71) and long-distance passivisation
in structures like (60) should be obvious.
Note in addition that the assumption that the nominal some hope of peace
moves from its underlying position as the complement of the verb remain into its
superﬁcial position as the subject of does in two successive steps (moving one
TP at a time) means that A-movement in (71) obeys the Relativised Minimality
Condition (which requires a constituent undergoing A-movement to become the
speciﬁer of the closest T constituent above it, each time it moves).
●
●
6.9
Comparing raising and control predicates
It might at ﬁrst sight seem tempting to conclude from our discussion
of long-distance passivisation structures like (65) and raising structures like (71)
that all clauses containing a structure of the form verb+to+inﬁnitive have a
derivation in which some expression is raised out of the inﬁnitive complement to
become the subject of the main clause. However, any such conclusion would be

222
6 a-movement
undermined by our claim in §3.2 and §3.7 that some verbs which take to+inﬁnitive
complements are control predicates (i.e. predicates which can take an inﬁnitive
complement with a PRO subject which is controlled by/refers book to the subject
of the main clause). In this connection, consider the difference between the two
types of inﬁnitive structure illustrated below:
(72) (a)
He does seem [to scare them]
(b)
He does want [to scare them]
As used in (72), the verb seem is a raising predicate, but the verb want is a
control predicate. We will see that this reﬂects the fact that the verbs seem
and want differ in respect of their argument structure. We can illustrate this by
sketching the derivation of the two sentences.
In the raising structure (72a), the verb scare merges with (and assigns the
experiencer θ-role to) its internal argument/thematic complement them. The
resulting V-bar scare them then merges with (and assigns the agent θ-role to)
its external argument/thematic subject he. The resulting VP he scare them is
subsequently merged with the inﬁnitival tense particle to, so forming the T-bar to
he scare them. Like all T constituents, to has an epp feature which enables it to
attract the closest noun or pronoun expression to become its subject, so forming
the TP he to he scare them. This in turn merges with the raising verb seem to
form the VP seem he to he scare them. The resulting VP is then merged with
the (emphatic) T-auxiliary does. The epp feature carried by [T does] enables it to
attract he to become its subject, so forming the TP he does seem he to he scare
them. This TP is merged with a null C which marks the clause as declarative in
force, so forming the structure shown in simpliﬁed form below (with each of the
arrows marking a separate application of A-movement):
(73)
[CP [C ø] [TP he [T does] [VP [V seem] [TP he [T to] [VP he [V scare] them]]]] ] 
The successive-cyclic (one-TP-at-a-time) application of A-movement in (73)
satisﬁes the Relativised Minimality Condition (61), which requires an A-moved
constituent to become the speciﬁer of the closest T constituent above it: accord-
ingly, he becomes the speciﬁer of the embedded clause T constituent to before
moving on to become the speciﬁer of the main clause T constituent containing
does.
A key assumption made in the raising analysis in (73) is that the verb seem
(as used there) is a one-place predicate whose only argument is its inﬁnitival TP
complement, to which it assigns an appropriate θ-role – that of theme argument
of seem. This means that the VP headed by seem has no thematic subject: note,
in particular, that the verb seem does not θ-mark the pronoun he, since he is
θ-marked by scare, and the θ-criterion (18) rules out the possibility of any argu-
ment being θ-marked by more than one predicate. Nor does the VP headed by

6.9 Comparing raising and control predicates
223
seem have a structural subject at any stage of derivation, since he raises to become
ﬁrst the subject of the lower TP headed by inﬁnitival to, and then to become the
subject of the higher TP headed by the present tense T-auxiliary does. This
underlines the point that syntactic movement operations typically move a con-
stituent to the edge (i.e. head or speciﬁer position) of a functional projection like
TP or CP.
The property of having a theme complement but no thematic subject means
that raising predicates like seem have essentially the same thematic properties
as unaccusative verbs like come discussed in §6.5. Not surprisingly, therefore,
many intransitive verbs like those below allow a dual use as (i) an unaccusative
verb with an italicised nominal complement as in the relevant (a) example below,
and (ii) a raising verb with an underlined inﬁnitival TP complement as in the
corresponding (b) example:
(74) (a)
There appeared a grotesque face at the window
(b)
His attitude appears to have changed
(75) (a)
There has never before happened anything quite so momentous
(b)
It happened to be raining at the time
(76) (a)
There remain doubts about his competence
(b)
That remains to be seen
(77) (a)
There began a long period of negotiation
(b)
The situation began to get worse
In such sentences, a raising verb is a one-place predicate with a TP as its com-
plement, whereas an unaccusative verb is a one-place predicate with a noun or
pronoun expression as its complement.
Having looked at the raising inﬁnitive structure (72a), let’s now turn to consider
the derivation of the control inﬁnitive structure (72b) He does want to scare them.
As before, the verb scare merges with (and assigns the experiencer θ-role to)
its internal argument (i.e. thematic complement) them. The resulting V-bar scare
them then merges with (and assigns the agent θ-role to) its external argument.
Given the assumption we made in §3.2 that control inﬁnitives have a particular
kind of null pronominal subject known as ‘big PRO’, the thematic subject of scare
them will be PRO, and this will be merged in spec-V (in accordance with the
VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis), and thereby be assigned the θ-role of agent
argument of scare. The resulting VP PRO scare them then merges with inﬁnitival
to, forming the T-bar to PRO scare them. The epp feature of inﬁnitival to enables
it to attract PRO to become its subject, so forming the TP PRO to PRO scare them.
Given the conclusion we drew in §3.7 that control inﬁnitives are CPs, this TP will
in turn merge with a null inﬁnitival complementiser to form the CP ø PRO to PRO
scare them. The CP thereby formed serves as the internal argument (and thematic
complement) of the verb want, so is merged with want and thereby assigned
the θ-role of theme argument of want. The resulting V-bar want ø PRO to PRO
scare them then merges with its external argument (and thematic subject) he,

224
6 a-movement
assigning he the thematic role of experiencer argument of want. The resulting
VP he want ø PRO to PRO scare them is then merged with the T-auxiliary does,
forming the T-bar does he want ø PRO to PRO scare them. The epp feature carried
by [T does] enables it to attract the closest noun or pronoun expression which it
c-commands (= he) to become its subject, so forming the TP he does he want ø
PRO to PRO scare them. Merging the resulting TP with a null declarative comple-
mentiser forms the structure shown in simpliﬁed form below (with arrows indi-
cating the two different A-movement operations taking place in the course of the
derivation):
(78)
[ CP [C ø] [TP He [T does] [VP he [V want] [CP [C ø] [TP PRO [T to] [VP PRO [V scare] them]]]]]] 
The resulting structure satisﬁes the θ-criterion (18) (which requires each argu-
ment to be assigned a single θ-role, and each θ-role to be assigned to a single
argument), in that he is the experiencer argument of want, the bracketed CP is
the theme complement of want, PRO is the agent argument of scare, and them
is the experiencer argument of scare.
The analysis of control predicates presented here differs from that presented
in chapter 3 in that it assumes that the PRO subject of a control inﬁnitive like
that bracketed in (72b) He does want to scare them is merged in spec-V, and not
(as assumed in chapter 3) in spec-T. The requirement for pro to be generated in
spec-V follows from the VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis and the Predicate-
Internal Theta-Marking Hypothesis, which posit that arguments are generated
and theta-marked internally to a projection of their predicate, so that pro (by
virtue of being the agent argument of scare) is generated as the speciﬁer of
the VP headed by scare. However, given that all T constituents in English have
an epp feature, the epp feature on inﬁnitival to will attract pro to move out of
the VP in which it originates into the speciﬁer position within the TP headed by
inﬁnitival to. Since movement of an empty category like pro out of the VP into
spec-T is by nature invisible, an obvious question which arises is whether there
is any empirical evidence that pro moves to spec-T rather than remaining in situ
within VP. The answer, as we shall see, is ‘Yes’.
One piece of evidence suggesting that pro does indeed move to spec-T in
control inﬁnitives comes from the syntax of constituents like those italicised
in (79) below which have the property that they are construed as modifying a
bold-printed antecedent which is not immediately adjacent to them:
(79) (a)
They were both priding themselves on their achievements
(b)
I don’t myself think that Capuccino was the best choice for manager of the
England team
(c)
He was personally held responsible
Both in (79a) is a ﬂoating quantiﬁer (and each/all can be used in a similar
fashion); myself in (79b) is a ﬂoating emphatic reﬂexive; and personally in
(79c) is an argument-oriented adverb (construed as modifying an argument, in

6.9 Comparing raising and control predicates
225
this case he). In each sentence in (79), the italicised expression is construed as
modifying the bold-printed subject of the clause. Contrasts such as those in (80)
and (81) below:
(80) (a)
Two republican senators were themselves thought to have been
implicated
(b)
∗There were themselves thought to have been implicated two republican
senators
(81) (a)
Two republican senators are both thought to have been implicated
(b)
∗There are both thought to have been implicated two republican senators
suggest that a ﬂoating modiﬁer must be c-commanded by its bold-printed
antecedent.
In the light of the requirement for a ﬂoating modiﬁer to be c-commanded
by its antecedent, consider the syntax of the bracketed clauses in the following
sentences:
(82) (a)
[To both be betrayed by their friends] would be disastrous for Romeo and
Juliet
(b)
[To themselves be indicted] would be unfair on the company directors
(c)
It was upsetting [to personally have been accused of corruption]
In each of these examples, the bracketed clause is a control clause containing a
pro argument. In each case, pro is the thematic complement of a passive participle
(viz. betrayed/indicted/accused). Hence, if control to had no epp feature and pro
remained in situ, the TP in the bracketed inﬁnitive complement in (82b) would
have the skeletal structure (83a) below, but if (as suggested here) control to has
an epp feature, this will trigger movement of pro to become the structural subject
of to – as in (83b):
(83) (a)
[CP [C ø] [TP [T to] [AUXP themselves [AUX be] [VP [V indicted] pro]]]]
(b)
[CP [C ø] [TP pro [T to] [AUXP themselves [AUX be] [VP [V indicted] pro]]]]
Given the requirement for a ﬂoating emphatic reﬂexive to be c-commanded by
its antecedent, and given that pro is the intended antecedent of themselves in
(83), it is clear that (83a) cannot be the right structure, since pro does not c-
command themselves in (83a). By contrast, movement of pro to spec-T in (83b)
means that pro will indeed c-command themselves, so correctly predicting that
(82b) is grammatical. Thus, sentences such as (82) provide us with empirical
evidence that pro moves to spec-T in control clauses, and thereby becomes the
subject of inﬁnitival to. This in turn is consistent with our more general claim
that all T constituents in English have an epp feature requiring them to have a
subject.
Having compared the syntax of control predicates with that of raising pred-
icates, we end this chapter by looking brieﬂy at the question of how we can
determine whether a given predicate which selects an inﬁnitival to complement
is a control predicate or a raising predicate. In this connection, it should be noted

226
6 a-movement
that there are a number of syntactic differences between raising and control predi-
cates which are a direct reﬂection of the different thematic properties of these two
types of predicate. For example, raising predicates like seem can have expletive
it/there subjects, whereas control predicates like want cannot: cf.
(84) (a)
It seems/∗wants to be assumed that he lied to Congress
(b)
There seem/∗want to remain several unsolved mysteries
(The expletive nature of it in (84a) is shown by the fact that it cannot be substituted
by a referential pronoun like this/that, or questioned by what? Likewise, the
expletive nature of there in (84b) is shown by the fact that it cannot be substituted
by a referential locative pronoun like here, or questioned by where?) This is
because control predicates like want are two-place predicates which project a
thematic subject (an experiencer in the case of want, so that the subject of
want must be an expression denoting a sentient entity capable of experiencing
desires), and non-referential expressions like expletive it/there clearly do not
denote sentient entities and so cannot serve as the thematic subject of a verb
like want. By contrast, raising predicates like seem have no thematic subject, and
hence impose no restrictions on the choice of structural subject in their clause,
so allowing a (non-thematic) expletive subject.
Similarly, raising predicates like seem (but not control predicates like want)
allow idiomatic subjects such as those italicised below:
(85)
Whenever they meet . . .
(a)
all hell seems/∗wants to break loose
(b)
the fur seems/∗wants to ﬂy
(c)
the cat seems/∗wants to get his tongue
The ungrammaticality of sentences like ∗All hell wants to break loose can be
attributed to the fact that want is a control predicate, and hence (in order to derive
such a structure) it would be necessary to assume that all hell originates as the
subject of want, and that break loose has a separate pro subject of its own: but
this would violate the requirement that (in its idiomatic use) all hell can only
occur as the subject of break loose, and conversely break loose (in its idiomatic
use) only allows all hell as its subject. By contrast, All hell seems to break loose
is grammatical because seem is a raising predicate, and so all hell can originate
as the subject of break loose and then be raised up to become the subject of the
tense afﬁx in T in the seem clause.
A further property which differentiates the two types of predicate is that raising
predicates like seem preserve synonymy under long-distance passivisation, so that
(86a) below is synonymous with (86b):
(86) (a)
John seems to have helped Mary
(b)
=Mary seems to have been helped by John

6.10 Summary
227
By contrast, control predicates like want do not preserve synonymy in long-
distance passives, as we see from the fact that (87a) below is not synonymous
with (87b):
(87)(a)
John wants to help Mary
(b)
̸=Mary wants to be helped by John
Moreover, there are pragmatic restrictions on the choice of subject which control
predicates like want allow (in that the subject generally has to be a rational
animate being, not an inanimate entity) – as we see from (88) below (where !
marks pragmatic anomaly):
(88)
My cat/!My gesture wants to be appreciated
By contrast, raising predicates freely allow animate or inanimate subjects: cf.
(89)
My cat/My gesture seems to have been appreciated
The different properties of the two types of predicate stem from the fact that
control predicates like want θ-mark their subjects, whereas raising predicates
like seem do not: so, since want selects an experiencer subject as its external
argument (and prototypical experiencers are animate beings), want allows an
animate subject like my cat, but not an inanimate subject like my gesture. By
contrast, since raising predicates like seem do not θ-mark their subjects, they
allow a free choice of subject.
An important point to note is that although our discussion of raising and control
predicates has revolved around verbs, a parallel distinction is found in adjectives.
For example, in sentences such as:
(90) (a)
John is likely to win the race
(b)
John is keen to win the race
the adjective likely is a raising predicate and keen a control predicate. We can
see this from the fact that likely allows expletive and idiomatic subjects, but keen
does not: cf.
(91) (a)
There is likely/∗keen to be a strike
(b)
All hell is likely/∗keen to break loose
This is one reason why throughout this chapter we have talked about differ-
ent types of predicate (e.g. drawing a distinction between raising and control
predicates) rather than different types of verb.
●
●
6.10
Summary
This chapter has primarily been concerned with the syntax of
subjects. In §6.2 we argued that Belfast English structures such as There should

228
6 a-movement
some students get distinctions provide us with evidence that subjects originate
internally within VP, and we noted that this claim is known as the VP-Internal
Subject Hypothesis/VPISH. We also maintained that sentences such as Some
students should get distinctions involve movement of some students from the
speciﬁer position within VP to the speciﬁer position within TP, and we saw that
the relevant movement operation is known as A-movement. In §6.3 we suggested
that idiomatic structures like All hell will break loose provide empirical support
for the VPISH. In §6.4 we argued that the VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis allows
us to posit a uniform mapping (i.e. relationship) between thematic argument
structure and (initial) syntactic structure, if we suppose that all arguments of a
predicate originate (and are theta-marked) internally within a projection of the
predicate. In §6.5, we looked at the syntax of unaccusative predicates like
arise/remain/occur etc. and hypothesised that the argument of an unaccusative
verb originates as its complement but differs from the complement of a transitive
verb in that it receives nominative rather than accusative case. We highlighted a
number of further differences between unaccusative predicates and other types of
predicate (e.g. in relation to the position of subjects in Belfast English imperatives,
and auxiliary selection in earlier varieties of English). In §6.6, we looked at the
structure of simple passive clauses, arguing that a passive subject originates as the
thematic complement of a subjectless passive participle, and is raised into spec-T
(via A-movement) in order to satisfy the epp feature of T. In §6.7 we saw that pas-
sivisation can be a long-distance operation involving movement of an argument
contained within an inﬁnitival TP which is the complement of a passive participle.
We saw that (in consequence of every T carrying an epp feature requiring it to
have a subject) the passivised nominal moves in a successive-cyclic fashion, ﬁrst
into the closest spec-T position above it, then into the next closest one (and so
on) – in conformity with the Relativised Minimality Condition. In §6.8 we argued
that predicates like seem/appear function as raising predicates in the sense that
their subjects originate internally within their inﬁnitive complement, and from
there are raised to the spec-T position within the seem/appear-clause: hence,
in a sentence such as All hell would appear to have broken loose, the idiomatic
expression all hell originates as the subject of broken loose and from there is
raised up (one TP at a time) ﬁrst to become the speciﬁer of the lower TP headed by
inﬁnitival to, and then to become the speciﬁer of the higher TP headed by would.
In §6.9, we contrasted raising predicates with control predicates, noting that they
differ in that control predicates theta-mark their subjects (and hence generally
require an animate subject) and have a CP complement, whereas raising predi-
cates do not theta-mark their subjects (and hence freely allow inanimate, expletive
and idiomatic subjects) and have a TP complement. We also noted that (unlike
control predicates), raising predicates preserve synonymy under long-distance
passivisation.
Key constructs which our discussion in this chapter made use of include the
following:

6.11 Bibliographical background
229
(18)
Theta Criterion/θ-criterion
Each argument bears one and only one θ-role, and each θ-role is assigned to
one and only one argument
(19)
Predicate-Internal Theta-Marking Hypothesis
An argument is theta-marked (i.e. assigned a theta-role) via merger with a
predicate
(26)
Constraint on Extraction Domains/CED
Only complements allow material to be extracted out of them, not speciﬁers
or adjuncts
(55)
Uniform Theta Assignment Hypothesis/UTAH
Constituents which fulﬁl the same thematic role with respect to a given
predicate occupy the same initial position in the syntax
(58)
Attract Closest Condition/ACC
A head which attracts a given kind of constituent attracts the closest
constituent of the relevant kind
(61)
Relativised Minimality Condition/RMC
A constituent X can only be affected by (e.g. agree with or be attracted by)
the minimal (i.e. closest) constituent of the relevant type above it (i.e.
c-commanding X)
●
●
6.11
Bibliographical background
Evidence adduced in support of the VP-internal Subject Hypoth-
esis outlined in §6.2 can be found in a variety of works dating back to the
mid 1980s, including Kitagawa (1986), Speas (1986), Contreras (1987), Zagona
(1987), Kuroda (1988), Sportiche (1988), Rosen (1990), Ernst (1991), Koopman
and Sportiche (1991), Woolford (1991), Burton and Grimshaw (1992), McNally
(1992), Guilfoyle, Hung and Travis (1992), Huang (1993) and McCloskey (1997).
For further discussion of quantiﬁer scope in A-movement structures, see Lebeaux
(1995), Hornstein (1995), Romero (1997), Sauerland (1998), Lasnik (1998,
1999), Fox (2000), Boeckx (2000, 2001) and Fox and Nissenbaum (2004). It
should be noted that some linguists have attempted to eliminate epp as a factor in
driving movement of a subject out of VP into spec-T (e.g. Epstein, Pires and Seely
2005). The ideas on theta-roles discussed in §6.4 date back to pioneering work by
Gruber (1965), Fillmore (1968, 1972) and Jackendoff (1972): the Theta Criterion
is taken from Chomsky (1981). The idea in §6.5 that subjects of unaccusative
verbs originate as their complements dates back to work by Burzio (1986) on
Italian and Contreras (1986) on Spanish. For attempts to develop a Minimalist
counterpart of the Constraint on Extraction Domains, see Nunes and Uriagereka

230
6 a-movement
(2000), Sabel (2002), Rackowski and Richards (2005) and Chomsky (2005b).
The use of (the counterpart of) be rather than have as a perfect auxiliary with
unaccusative verbs is found in a number of languages – e.g. Italian and French
(cf. Burzio 1986), Sardinian (cf. Jones 1994), German and Dutch (cf. Haegeman
1994) and Danish (cf. Spencer 1991): see Sorace (2000) for further discussion
of auxilary selection. On unaccusative structures like The stockmarket dropped
250 points today, see Nakajima (2006). On the syntax of by-phrases in passive
structures like those discussed in §6.6, see Jaeggli (1986), Roberts (1987), Baker,
Johnson and Roberts (1989), Afarli (1989), Mahajan (1994), Goodall (1997)
and Collins (2005a). The Uniform Theta Assignment Hypothesis was devised
by Baker (1988, p. 46, 1997, p. 74): it is rejected (inter alia) by proponents of
the Movement Theory of Control (see below). For evidence that long-distance A-
movement applies in a successive-cyclic fashion, see Boˇskovi´c (2002b), Lasnik
(2006) and Boeckx (2007). For more detail on the properties of raising predicates
discussed in §6.8 and on the differences between control and raising predicates
discussed in §6.9, see Davies and Dubinsky (2004). Note that some verbs (e.g.
begin, continue, fail and start) are ambiguous between being raising or con-
trol verbs (in the sense that they can be used as either): see Perlmutter (1970)
and (on the learnability problem which this poses for children) Becker (2006).
Finally, it should be noted that this chapter presents the classical theory of control
assumed by Chomsky in his own work. An alternative Movement Theory of Con-
trol/MTC has been developed by Bowers (1973), O’Neil (1995), Hornstein (1999,
2001, 2003), Boeckx (2000, 2007), Manzini and Roussou (2000), Boeckx and
Hornstein (2003, 2004, 2006a,b) and Grohmann (2003): the key assumption of
the movement analysis is that in a sentence such as Jim will try to open it, the
nominal Jim originates as the subject of the embedded clause verb open and then
raises up to become the subject of (and acquire an additional theta-role from)
the main clause verb try. For a critique of the movement analysis, see Landau
(2006a). For a very different account of control which posits that PRO does not
exist and that control clauses are subjectless, see Jackendoff and Culicover (2003)
and Culicover and Jackendoff (2001, 2005, 2006).
●
●
Workbook section
●
Exercise 6.1
Say whether the italicized verbs as used in the type of construction illustrated in the examples
below function as raising or control predicates, and what evidence there is to support your
analysis. Provide a detailed outline of the derivation of any one of the control sentences and any
one of the raising sentences, giving arguments in support of your answer.
1
Employers tend to exploit employees
2
He has decided to admit it (w)
3
We came to appreciate the classes

Workbook section
231
4
You have to help me
5
They failed to hit the target
6
He tried to rectify the situation
7
He refused to sign the petition
8
He’s beginning to irritate me
9
They attempted to pervert the course of justice
10
I happened to be passing your house
11
He is going to help me (w)
12
He is bound to win
13
John looks to be a good student
14
He needs to have a shave
15
They managed to open the door
16
We intend to close the store
17
The weather is threatening to ruin the weekend
18
We are hoping to get a visa
19
She has chosen to ignore him
20
They are planning to visit London
In addition, comment on what is interesting about the following sentence (produced by a former
captain of the England soccer team in a TV interview):
21
Racism has been trying to be cut out of the game for a number of years now
Helpful hints
You might like to consider how sentences such as the following can help you determine whether a
particular predicate is a raising or control predicate. The (a) sentence in each case shows whether
the verb concerned allows an inanimate subject, the (b) sentence whether it allows an expletive
subject, the (c) sentence whether it allows an idiomatic subject, and the (d) sentence whether it
allows long-distance passivisation with preservation of synonymy.
1a
Syntax tends to bafﬂe people
1b
There tends to be a lot of confusion about syntax
1c
All hell tends to break loose
1d
Employees tend to be exploited by employers
2a
∗Your attitude has decided to upset him
2b
∗There has decided to be a strike
2c
∗The cat has decided to be out of the bag
2d
∗Syntax has decided to be abandoned by John
3a
Her behaviour came to annoy him
3b
There came to be an understanding between them
3c
The shit eventually came to hit the fan
3d
The classes came to be appreciated by the students
4a
The situation has to improve
4b
There has to be some form of compromise
4c
The chickens have to come home to roost before long
4d
The matter has to be settled
5a
My car failed to start
5b
There failed to be any improvement in the situation

232
6 a-movement
5c
The shit won’t fail to hit the fan
5d
Their disagreements failed to be resolved amicably
6a
∗The game tried to end in a draw
6b
∗There tried to be renewed efforts to achieve peace
6c
∗The shit tried to hit the fan
6d
∗The conﬂict tried to be resolved peacefully
7a
∗The situation has refused to improve
7b
∗There refused to be any form of compromise
7c
∗The cat refused to get his tongue
7d
∗The offer refused to be accepted
8a
The situation is beginning to deteriorate
8b
It’s beginning to snow
8c
The fur is beginning to ﬂy
8d
Taxes are beginning to be lowered
9a
∗The decision attempted to upset her
9b
∗There attempted to be a compromise
9c
∗The cat attempted to be out of the bag
9d
∗The decision attempted to be rescinded
10a
An ambulance happened to be passing
10b
It happened to have been raining at the time
10c
All hell suddenly happened to break loose
10d
The incident happens to have been caught on camera
11a
The situation is going to get worse
11b
There is going to be a storm later
11c
The chickens are going to come home to roost
11d
Taxes are going to be cut
12a
The car is bound to break down
12b
There is bound to be an inquest
12c
The shit is bound to hit the fan
12d
Election promises are bound to be broken
13a
The situation looks to have improved
13b
There looks to be no chance of getting a ticket
13c
The cat looks to have got his tongue
13d
All the tickets look to have been sold
14a
The quality of teaching needs to improve
14b
There needs to be goodwill on all sides
14c
All hell needs to break loose
14d
The government needs to be overthrown
15a
∗The situation managed to upset her
15b
∗There managed to be a compromise
15c
∗All hell managed to break loose
15d
∗Taxes managed to be cut
16a
∗Your arguments intended to convince me
16b
∗There had intended to be a meeting in the morning
16c
∗The shit intended to hit the fan
16d
∗Taxes intended to be lowered

Workbook section
233
17a
The strike is threatening to undermine proﬁtability
17b
There is threatening to be a hostile takeover
17c
All hell is threatening to break loose
17d
Punitive measures are threatening to be taken
18a
∗Your attitude is hoping to exacerbate the situation
18b
∗There is hoping to be an increase in proﬁts
18c
∗The cat is hoping to get his tongue
18d
∗Taxes are hoping to be reduced
19a
∗The situation has chosen to upset her
19b
∗It has chosen to rain
19c
∗All hell has chosen to break loose
19d
∗The decision has chosen to be revoked
20a
∗The decision planned to upset her
20b
∗There hadn’t planned to be a strike
20c
∗The cat had planned to get his tongue
20d
∗London plans to be visited next week
Non-native speakers of English might ﬁnd it useful to note the meaning of the following idioms:
All hell broke loose = ‘A chaotic situation arose’
The cat is out of the bag = ‘The secret has been discovered’
The cat has got his tongue = ‘He is speechless’
The shit hit the fan = ‘The relevant action had dire consequences’
The chickens came home to roost = ‘The consequences of the action in question became apparent’
Model answer for 1
There are a number of reasons for suggesting that tend functions as a raising predicate when it
takes an inﬁnitive complement. For one thing (as we would expect if tend is a one-place raising
predicate which does not theta-mark its subject), tend imposes no restrictions on its choice of
subject, and so freely allows either an expression like Professor Brainstorm (denoting an animate
being) or an expression like Syntax (denoting an inanimate entity) as the subject of its containing
clause – as illustrated in (i) below:
(i)
Professor Brainstorm/Syntax tends to bafﬂe people
Moreover, tend allows a non-thematic subject like expletive there/it – as in the examples below:
(ii)
There tends to be a lot of confusion about syntax
(iii)
It tends to be assumed that syntax is hard
(We can tell that there is an expletive pronoun in (ii) from the fact that it cannot be substituted by
here or questioned by where? Likewise, it must be expletive in (iii) because it cannot be
substituted by this/that or questioned by what?) Moreover, tend can have an idiomatic subject, as
in (iv) below:
(iv)
All hell tends to break loose
Given that all hell can serve only as the subject of break loose in the relevant idiom in (iv), it is
clear that we could not analyse tend as a control predicate in (iv) and claim that all hell originates

234
6 a-movement
as the subject of tend and PRO as the subject of break loose, since this would violate the
requirement that all hell can occur only as the subject of break loose and conversely that break
loose can only have the subject all hell (in the relevant idiom). By contrast, if tend is a raising
predicate, we can claim that all hell originates as the subject of break loose and then raises up to
become the subject of the (null T constituent in the) tend clause. Furthermore, tend preserves
synonymy under long-distance passivisation, as we can see from the fact that (v) and (vi) are
synonymous:
(v)
Employers tend to exploit employees
(vi)
=Employees tend to be exploited by employers
If (as argued here) tend is a raising predicate, sentence 1 will be derived as follows. The noun
employees merges with a null quantiﬁer (which has a generic interpretation paraphraseable as
‘employees in general’) to form the QP ø employees. The resulting QP merges with (and is
assigned the θ-role of theme argument of) the verb exploit to form the V-bar exploit ø employees.
The QP ø employers (itself formed by merging a null generic quantiﬁer with the noun employers)
is then merged with (and assigned the θ-role of agent argument of) this V-bar, forming the VP ø
employers exploit ø employees. This VP is merged as the complement of the inﬁnitival tense
particle to, forming the T-bar to ø employers exploit ø employees. Inﬁnitival to (like all T
constituents) has an epp feature which enables it to attract the closest nominal (= the QP ø
employers) to become its subject, so forming the TP ø employers to ø employers exploit ø
employees. The relevant TP is in turn merged with the verb tend, forming the VP tend ø employers
to ø employers exploit ø employees (with the TP complement of tend having the semantic function
of being a theme argument of tend). The resulting VP is merged with a T-constituent containing a
present tense afﬁx (= Af) forming the T-bar Af tend ø employers to ø employers exploit ø
employees. The epp feature on T enables it to attract the closest nominal which it c-commands (=
the QP ø employers) to become its subject, so forming the TP ø employers Af tend ø employers to
ø employers exploit ø employees. The resulting TP is merged with a null declarative C to form the
CP shown in simpliﬁed form below (with arrows showing the two A-movement operations which
take place in the course of the derivation):
(vii)
The derivation satisﬁes the θ-criterion by virtue of the fact that each argument carries one and only
one θ-role: i.e. ø employees is the theme argument of exploit, ø employers is the agent argument
of exploit and the TP complement of tend is its theme argument. It also satisﬁes the Relativised
Minimality Condition (which requires a constituent undergoing A-movement to become the
speciﬁer of the closest T constituent above it) in that the QP ø employers moves into the spec-T
position in the complement clause before moving into the spec-T position in the main clause.
●
Exercise 6.2
Discuss the derivation of the following sentences:
1 a
There are certain to remain some problems
b
There were reported to remain some problems (w)
c
There were thought likely to remain some problems

Workbook section
235
2 a
A change of policy was envisaged (w)
b
A change is thought to be envisaged (w)
c
A change seems likely to be envisaged
3 a
Differences of opinion are emerging (w)
b
Differences of opinion are starting to emerge (w)
c
Differences of opinion appear to be starting to emerge
4 a
He is leaving the country
b
He is planning to leave the country (w)
c
He is thought to be planning to leave the country
5 a
No details are going to be revealed
b
No details of any threats are expected to emerge (w)
c
No details are expected to emerge of any threats (w)
6 a
Nothing has happened
b
Nothing is expected to happen (w)
c
Nothing is thought likely to happen
Helpful hints
Assume that the inﬁnitive form be is an auxiliary occupying the head AUX position of AUXP in
2b, 2c, 3c, 4c and 5a. Assume that T always has an epp feature, whether ﬁnite or inﬁnitival. In
addition, assume that the verbs leave/plan in 4 have an agent external argument, but that all other
arguments in 1–6 are theme internal arguments of their associated predicates. In relation to 5b
and 5c assume that any is a partitive quantiﬁer which has the property of being a polarity item and
so must be c-commanded by a negative or interrogative constituent; in relation to 5c, bear in mind
the discussion of discontinuous spellout in the text.
Model answer for 1a
The quantiﬁer some merges with the noun problems to form the QP some problems. This QP is
merged with (and assigned the θ-role of theme complement of) the unaccusative predicate
remain to form the VP remain some problems. This in turn is merged with the inﬁnitival tense
particle to, forming the TP to remain some problems. Like all T constituents, inﬁnitival to has an
epp feature requiring it to have a noun or pronoun expression as its subject, and this requirement
can be met by merging the expletive pronoun there with the T-bar already formed, so generating
the TP there to remain some problems. This TP is then merged with the raising adjective certain to
form the AP certain there to remain some problems. The resulting TP in turn is merged with the
copular verb are to form the VP are certain there to remain some problems. This VP is
subsequently merged with a null ﬁnite T which attracts the copula are to move from V to T in the
manner showed by the dotted arrow in (i), so forming the following structure (simpliﬁed by not
showing the internal structure of the QP some problems):

236
6 a-movement
(i)
T' 
T        
VP
are
V         
              AP 
are
  A
TP
         certain
               PRN       
  T' 
there   
T          
VP
  to  
    V    
       QP 
remain         some problems 
Like all T constituents, the T-auxiliary are has an epp feature (not shown above) which allows it to
attract the closest noun or pronoun expression (= there) to move to spec-T to become its subject
in the manner shown in simpliﬁed form in (ii) below:
(ii)
TP
 PRN            
T' 
there
T  
VP
are 
  V
    AP 
are
  certain there to remain some problems 
The TP in (ii) is subsequently merged with a null complementiser which serves to mark the
sentence as declarative in force. The arrowed A-movement operation satisﬁes the Relativised
Minimality Condition (which requires a constituent undergoing A-movement to become the
speciﬁer of the closest T constituent above it), since the arrowed movement operation in (ii)
moves there from being the speciﬁer of the T constituent in the embedded clause to becoming the
speciﬁer of the T constituent in the main clause – as shown in simpliﬁed schematic form below:
(iii)
[CP [C ø] [TP there [T are] are certain [TP there [T to] remain some problems]]]
The analysis presented here assumes that certain is a raising adjective. Evidence that this is so
comes from the fact that clauses containing certain allow expletive and idiomatic subjects, as in:
(iv)(a) It is certain to be raining in Manchester
(b) The fur is certain to ﬂy
The expletive nature of it in (iva) is shown by the fact that it cannot be substituted by referential
pronouns like this/that or questioned by what?

7
Agreement, case and A-movement
●
●
7.1
Overview
In this chapter, we take a look at the syntax of agreement. We begin
by outlining the claim made by Chomsky in recent work that agreement involves
a relation between a probe and a goal (though it should be noted that the term
goal in this chapter is used in an entirely different way from the term goal –
written in capital letters – which was used to denote the thematic role played
by a particular kind of argument in relation to its predicate in §6.4). We look
at the nature of agreement (exploring its relation with case-marking on the one
hand, and with movement on the other) and examine the consequences of this for
control inﬁnitives on the one hand and raising inﬁnitives on the other.
●
●
7.2
Agreement
In traditional grammars, ﬁnite auxiliaries are said to agree with their
subjects. Since (within the framework used here) ﬁnite auxiliaries occupy the
head T position of TP and their subjects are in spec-T, in earlier work agreement
was said to involve a speciﬁer–head relationship (between T and its speciﬁer).
However, there are both theoretical and empirical reasons for doubting that agree-
ment involves a spec–head relation. From a theoretical perspective, Minimalist
considerations lead us to the conclusion that we should restrict the range of syn-
tactic relations used in linguistic description, perhaps limiting them to the relation
c-command. From a descriptive perspective, a spec–head account of agreement
is problematic in that it fails to account for agreement between the auxiliary were
and the nominal several prizes in passive structures such as:
(1)
There were awarded several prizes
Since the auxiliary were occupies the head T position of TP in (1) and the expletive
pronoun there is in spec-T, a spec–head account of agreement would lead us to
expect that were should agree with there. But instead, were agrees with the in situ
complement several prizes of the passive participle awarded. What is going on
here? In order to try and understand this, let’s take a closer look at the derivation
of (1).
237

238
7 agreement, case and a-movement
The quantiﬁer several merges with the noun prizes to form the QP several
prizes. This QP is merged with the passive verb awarded to form the VP awarded
several prizes. The resulting VP is in turn merged with the passive auxiliary be,
forming the T-bar shown in simpliﬁed form in (2) below (where the notation
be indicates that the morphological form of the relevant item hasn’t yet been
determined):
(2)
T' 
 
T                                VP 
BE 
 V                                 QP 
awarded     
several prizes
The tense auxiliary [T be] needs to agree with an appropriate nominal within
the structure containing it. Let us suppose that the ‘timing’ of operations such
as agreement, case-marking and movement is determined by the following
principle:
(3)
Earliness Principle
Operations must apply as early as possible in a derivation
Given (3), T-agreement must apply as early as possible in the derivation, and
hence will apply as soon as be is introduced into the structure. On the assumption
that c-command is central to syntactic operations, T will agree with a nominal
(i.e. a noun or pronoun expression) which it c-commands. Accordingly, as soon as
the structure in (2) is formed, [T be] searches for a nominal which it c-commands
to agree with.
To use the relevant technical terminology, by virtue of being the highest head
in the overall structure at this point in the derivation, be serves as a probe which
searches for a c-commanded nominal goal to agree with. The only nominal goal
c-commanded by [T be] within the structure in (2) is the QP several prizes:
[T be] therefore agrees in person and number with several prizes, and so is
ultimately spelled out as the third person plural form were in the PF component.
Chomsky refers to person and number features together as ϕ-features (where ϕ
is the Greek letter phi, pronounced in the same way as ﬁe in English): using this
terminology, we can say that the probe [T be] agrees in ϕ-features with the goal
several prizes. Let us suppose that expletive there is directly merged in spec-T in
order to satisfy the epp requirement for T to project a nominal speciﬁer, and that
the resulting TP is in turn merged with a null declarative complementiser to form
the CP shown in simpliﬁed form below:

7.2 Agreement
239
(4)
    CP 
C                              TP 
          PRN                               T' 
 
there 
       T                              VP 
     were 
       V                              QP 
  awarded                several prizes
ø  
(4) is then the structure of (1) There were awarded several prizes.
However, there are a number of details which we have omitted in (4); one
relates to the case assigned to the complement (several prizes) of the passive
participle awarded. Although case is not overtly marked on the relevant noun
expressions in English, evidence from languages like Icelandic with a richer case
system suggests that the complement of a passive participle in ﬁnite expletive
clauses is assigned nominative case via agreement with T – as the following
contrast (from Sigurðsson 1996, p. 12) illustrates:
(5) (a)
Þad voru
lesnar fj´orar
bækur
There were read fourNOM.PL booksNOM.PL
(b)
Þad var
skilað fj´orum b´okum
There was returned fourDAT.PL booksDAT.PL
In (5a), the auxiliary voru is a third person plural form which agrees with the
nom.pl/nominative plural complement fj´orar bækur ‘four books’. In (5b), the
auxiliary is in the agreementless form var ‘was’, and the complement of the
passive participle is dat.pl/dative plural. (Var is a third person singular form, but
can be treated as an agreementless form if we characterise agreement by saying
that ‘An auxiliary is ﬁrst/second person if it agrees with a ﬁrst/second person
subject, but third person otherwise; it is plural if it agrees with a plural subject,
but singular otherwise.’ This means that a third person singular auxiliary can arise
either by agreement with a third person singular expression or – as here – can be a
default form used as a fall-back when the auxiliary doesn’t agree with anything.)
Sigurðsson argues that it is an inherent lexical property of the participle skilað
‘returned’ that (like around a quarter of transitive verbs in Icelandic) it assigns
so-called inherent dative case to its complement (inherent case being assigned
by a verb to one of its arguments which has a speciﬁc thematic role, and hence
being thematically based). Consequently, (because it can’t agree with a non-
nominative complement) the auxiliary surfaces in the agreementless form var in
(5b); by contrast, the participle lesnar ‘read’ in (5a) does not assign inherent case
to its complement, and instead the complement is assigned (so-called) structural
nominative case via agreement with the past tense auxiliary voru ‘were’.
Icelandic data like (5) suggest that there is a systematic relationship between
nominative case assignment and T-agreement: they are two different reﬂexes
of an agreement relationship between a ﬁnite T probe and a nominal goal. In

240
7 agreement, case and a-movement
consequence of the agreement relationship between the two, the T probe agrees
with a nominal goal which it c-commands, and the nominal goal is assigned
nominative case. Accordingly, several prizes in (4) receives nominative case via
agreement with [T are].
The approach to case assignment outlined here (in which subjects are assigned
nominative case via agreement with a ﬁnite T) might at ﬁrst sight seem to be
competely at odds with our earlier claim in §3.6 and §3.7 that subjects are
case-marked by a c-commanding C constituent. But in one sense, our revised
hypothesis that ﬁnite subjects are case-marked by T is a natural reﬁnement of
our earlier analysis. In chapter 3, we argued that a noun or pronoun expression
is case-marked by the closest case assigner which c-commands it: since we also
assumed in chapter 3 that subjects originate in spec-T, it was natural to assume that
they are case-marked by the closest functional head above them, namely C. But
once we move to an analysis like that in chapter 6, in which subjects originate
internally within VP, our assumption that they are case-marked by the closest
functional head above them leads to the conclusion that nominative subjects are
case-marked by T rather than by C (because T is the closest functional head above
a VP-internal subject). The apparent discrepancy between these two approaches
can be resolved if (as suggested in recent work) agreement features originate
on C but are ‘handed over’ to T in the course of the derivation (for theoretical
reasons which we look at in chapter 9).
●
●
7.3
Feature Valuation
Let’s think through rather more carefully what it means to say that
case is systematically related to agreement, and what the mechanism is by which
case and agreement operate. To illustrate our discussion, consider the derivation
of a simple passive such as that produced by speaker b below:
(6)
speaker a: What happened to the protestors?
speaker b: They were arrested
Here, discourse factors determine that a third person plural pronoun is required in
order to refer back to the third person plural expression the protestors, and that a
past tense auxiliary is required because the event described took place in the past.
So (as it were) the person/number features of they and the past tense feature of
were are determined in advance, before the items enter the derivation. By contrast
the case feature assigned to they and the person/number features assigned to were
are determined via an agreement operation in the course of the derivation: e.g. if
the subject had been the third person singular pronoun one, the auxiliary would
have been third person singular via agreement with one (as in One was arrested);
and if they had been used as the object of a transitive verb (as in The police
arrested them), it would have surfaced in the accusative form them rather than
the nominative form they.

7.3 Feature Valuation
241
Generalising at this point, let’s suppose that noun and pronoun expressions like
they enter the syntax with their (person and number) ϕ-features already valued,
but their case feature as yet unvalued. (The notation they is used here to provide
a case-independent characterisation of the word which is variously spelled out
as they/them/their depending on the case assigned to it in the syntax.) Using a
transparent feature notation, let’s say that they enters the derivation carrying
the features [3-Pers, Pl-Num, u-Case], where Pers = person, Pl = plural, Num
= number and u = unvalued. Similarly, let’s suppose that ﬁnite T constituents
(like the tense auxiliary be) enter the derivation with their tense feature already
valued, but their person and number ϕ-features as yet unvalued (because they
will be valued via agreement with an appropriate goal). This means be enters
the derivation with the features [Past-Tns, u-Pers, u-Num]. In the light of these
assumptions, let’s see how the derivation of (6b) proceeds.
The pronoun they is the thematic complement of the passive verb arrested
and so merges with it to form the VP arrested they. This is in turn merged with
the tense auxiliary be, forming the structure (7) below (where already valued
features are shown in bold, and unvalued features in italics):
(7)
T' 
  
T                                    VP 
BE 
[Past-Tns]                V                        PRN
[u-Pers]              arrested                   THEY 
[u-Num]     
  [3-Pers]
 [Pl-Num]
   [u-Case]
The T-auxiliary be will probe at this point and search for a suitable goal, locating
they as the only potential goal in its c-command domain. The unvalued ϕ-
features on the probe are then valued by the goal, and (conversely) the unvalued
case feature on the goal is valued by the probe. (In Chomsky’s use of these terms,
it is the unvalued person/number features which serve as probes rather than the
item be itself, but this is a distinction which we shall overlook throughout, in
order to simplify exposition.) For concreteness, let us suppose that agreement can
be characterised as involving the two Feature Valuation suboperations sketched
below:
(8)
Agreement
When a probe (like T) agrees with a goal in its local domain
(i)
the unvalued (person/number) ϕ-features on the probe will be valued (i.e.
assigned a value which is a copy of that on the goal)
(ii)
the unvalued case feature on the goal will be valued (i.e. assigned a value
dependent on the nature of the probe – e.g. nominative if the probe is a
ﬁnite T)

242
7 agreement, case and a-movement
In the light of our characterisation of agreement in (8), let’s return to consider
what happens when we reach the stage of derivation in (7) above where agreement
applies. In consequence of ϕ-feature-valuation suboperation in (8i), the values
of the person/number features of they are copied onto be, so that the unvalued
person and number features [u-Pers, u-Num] on be in (7) are assigned the values
[3-Pers, Pl-Num] carried by they. At the same time, via the case valuation
suboperation (8ii), the unvalued case feature [u-Case] carried by the goal they
is valued as nominative by the ﬁnite T-probe be. Thus, application of Agreement
to the structure in (7) results in the structure shown in (9) below (where the
underlined features are the ones which have been valued via Agreement):
(9)
T' 
  
T                                    VP 
BE 
[Past-Tns]                V                        PRN 
[3-Pers]              arrested                   THEY 
[Pl-Num]    
                          [3-Pers] 
    [Pl-Num] 
    [Nom-Case] 
Since all the features carried by be are now valued, be can ultimately be spelled out
in the phonology as the third person plural past tense form were. Likewise, since
all the features carried by they are also valued at this point, they can ultimately
be spelled out as the third person plural nominative form they. However, the
derivation in (9) is not yet terminated: the epp feature of T (not shown above)
will subsequently trigger A-movement of they to become the structural subject of
were, and the resulting TP they were arrested they will then be merged with a null
declarative complementiser to form the structure shown in skeletal form below:
(10)
[CP [C ø] [TP They [T were] [VP [V arrested] they]]]
But since our immediate concern is with case and agreement, we skip over these
details here.
●
●
7.4
Uninterpretable features and Feature Deletion
Our discussion of how case and agreement work in a sentence such
as (6b) has wider implications. One of these is that items may enter the deriva-
tion with some of their features already valued and others as yet unvalued:
e.g. be enters the derivation in (7) with its tense feature valued, but its (person
and number) ϕ-features unvalued; and they enters with its ϕ-features valued
but its case feature unvalued. This raises the question of which features are
initially valued when they ﬁrst enter the derivation, which are initially unval-
ued – and why. Chomsky (1998) argues that the difference between valued and
unvalued grammatical features correlates with a related distinction between those

7.4 Uninterpretable features and Feature Deletion
243
grammatical features which are interpretable (in the sense that they play a role in
semantic interpretation) and those which are uninterpretable (and hence play no
role in semantic interpretation). For example, it seems clear that the case feature
of a pronoun like they is uninterpretable, since a subject pronoun surfaces as
nominative, accusative or genitive depending on the type of [bracketed] clause it
is in, without any effect on meaning – as the examples in (11) below illustrate:
(11)(a)
It seems [they were arrested]
(b)
He expected [them to be arrested]
(c)
He was shocked at [their being arrested]
By
contrast,
the
(person/number/gender)
ϕ-features
of
pronouns
are
interpretable, since e.g. a ﬁrst person singular pronoun like I clearly differs in
meaning from a third person plural pronoun like they, and a masculine pronoun
like he differs in meaning from a feminine pronoun like she. We can illustrate
the interpretable and uninterpretable features carried by auxiliaries (or, more
abstractly, ﬁnite T constituents) in terms of the sentences below:
(12)(a)
She is working/She was working
(b)
He is writing the assignment/He has written the assignment
(c)
He insists that she is respected/He insists that she be respected
(d)
They are working/∗They am working
The choice of tense feature on the auxiliary is/was determines whether the sen-
tence is interpreted as describing a present or past state of affairs, and so tense
is clearly an interpretable feature. Likewise, the choice between the progressive
auxiliary is and the perfect auxiliary has in (12b) determines whether the sen-
tence is interpreted as describing an action which is in progress or one which
is completed, and so aspect is also an interpretable feature of the auxiliary. In
much the same way, the choice between the indicative auxiliary is and its sub-
junctive counterpart be in (12c) determines whether the sentence is interpreted as
describing a realis (i.e. existing) state of affairs or an irrealis one (i.e. one which
does not exist at present but which may exist in the future), and so mood must
also be an interpretable feature of auxiliaries. By contrast, the (person/number)
ϕ-features of auxiliaries are uninterpretable, in that they serve purely to mark
agreement with a particular nominal: consequently, if we replace the third person
plural T-auxiliary are by the ﬁrst person singular form am in a sentence like (12d)
with a third person plural subject, we do not change the meaning of the sentence
but rather simply make it ungrammatical. We can summarise the picture which
we get from sentences like (11) and (12) above in terms of the table in (13) below:
(13)
Table of interpretable and uninterpretable features
Type of constituent
interpretable features
include
uninterpretable
features include
T-constituent
tense, aspect and mood
person and number
noun expression
or pronoun
person, number and
gender
case

244
7 agreement, case and a-movement
However, there are a number of potential complications which cloud the picture
painted in (13). For example, the person and number (and gender, if such they
have) features on expletive pronouns appear to be uninterpretable, as do the
gender features on nouns in languages with arbitrary grammatical gender (such
as the feminine gender of the French noun table ‘table’). Similarly, where tense
is determined by sequence of tense requirements, it may be an uninterpretable
feature. However, we set aside such complications here.
As we saw in the simpliﬁed model of grammar which we presented in §1.3, each
structure generated by the syntactic component of the grammar is subsequently
sent to the PF component of the grammar to be spelled out (i.e. assigned a PF
representation which provides a representation of its Phonetic Form). If we
assume that unvalued features are illegible to (and hence cannot be processed by)
the PF component, it follows that every unvalued feature in a derivation must be
valued in the course of the derivation, or else the derivation will crash (i.e. fail)
because the PF component is unable to spell out unvalued features: in the words
of Chomsky (2006, p. 13) ‘If transferred to the interface unvalued, uninterpretable
features will cause the derivation to crash.’ In more concrete terms, this amounts
to saying that unless the syntax speciﬁes whether we require e.g. a ﬁrst person
singular or third person plural present tense form of be, the derivation will crash
because the PF component cannot determine whether to spell out be as am or are.
In addition to being sent to the PF component, each structure generated by
the syntactic component of the grammar is simultaneously sent to the semantic
component, where it is converted into an appropriate semantic representa-
tion. Clearly, interpretable features play an important role in computing semantic
representations. Equally clearly, however, uninterpretable features play no role
whatever in this process: indeed, since they are illegible to the semantic compo-
nent, we need to devise some way of ensuring that uninterpretable features do
not input into the semantic component. How can we do this?
The answer suggested in work by Chomsky over the past decade is that uninter-
pretable features are deleted in the course of the derivation, and thereby become
invisible to the syntactic and semantic components (while remaining visible to
the PF component). But how? As a ﬁrst approximation (to be slightly revised in
terms of the Completeness Condition below), let us suppose that Feature Deletion
works along the lines sketched informally below:
(14)
Feature Deletion
An uninterpretable feature is deleted immediately any operation it is
involved in applies, and is thereafter invisible in the syntactic and semantic
components (but visible in the PF component)
By saying that a feature becomes invisible in the syntax once it is deleted, we
mean that it becomes inactive: for example, an epp feature can no longer trigger
movement once deleted, and a pronoun which has been assigned case cannot sub-
sequently be assigned another case. Chomsky supposes that a constituent is only
active for an operation like agreement, case-marking or movement if it carries an

7.4 Uninterpretable features and Feature Deletion
245
undeleted uninterpretable feature of some kind, and that once the relevant unin-
terpretable feature has been deleted, the constituent carrying it becomes inactive
for further operations of the relevant kind.
To illustrate how this works, consider the case-marking of the italicised subject
of the bracketed complement clause in the sentences below:
(15)(a)
They believe [John to be lying]
(b)
They believe [John is lying]
In (15a), the complement-clause subject John is not assigned case by any con-
stituent internally within its own bracketed clause, and so can receive exceptional
accusative case from the transitive verb believe in the higher clause – as we see
from They believe him to be lying. But in (15b), John is assigned nominative case
by the ﬁnite T constituent is within its own clause, and consequently (given (14)
above) is inactivated for further case/agreement operations at that point, and so
cannot subsequently be assigned accusative case by the verb believe – as we see
from the ungrammaticality of ∗They believe him is lying.
In the light of our characterisation of Feature Deletion in (14) above, let’s
reconsider how agreement applies in a structure like (7) above, repeated as (16)
below (though with the addition of the uninterpretable epp feature on T):
(16)
T' 
T                                    VP 
BE 
[Past-Tns]                V                        PRN
[u-Pers]              arrested                   THEY 
[u-Num]     
  [3-Pers]
[EPP]  
  [Pl-Num]
   [u-Case]
The agreement features of the probe be are valued as third person plural via the
ϕ-feature-valuation suboperation (8i); the case feature of the goal they is valued
as nominative via the case valuation suboperation (8ii); and the epp feature on
T triggers movement of the goal they to spec-T. But at the same time as these
operations apply, the Feature Deletion operation in (14) also applies, concomi-
tantly deleting the uninterpretable (italicised) person, number and epp features on
the probe, and the uninterpretable (italicised) case feature on the goal. The result
of all these various operations applying is to derive the structure in (17) below:
(17)
TP
PRN                                         T  
they  
[3-Pers]                    T                                    VP
[Pl-Num]                were 
[Nom Case]          [Past-Tns]               V                         they
        [3 Pers]            arrested                    
       [Pl Num]        
          [EPP]        

246
7 agreement, case and a-movement
(Items are shown in their spellout forms, and the structure is simpliﬁed by show-
ing the original occurrence of they as they.) In accordance with (14), the deleted
uninterpretable features will be invisible in the semantic and syntactic compo-
nents – hence they and were will be inactive for further operations which involve
case or agreement features (e.g. agreement, case assignment and A-movement).
However, the deleted features will remain visible in the PF component: accord-
ingly, the PF component can ‘see’ the deleted [nominative-case] feature on the
pronoun they and so spells out the pronoun in the nominative form they; likewise,
the PF component can ‘see’ the deleted [third-person, plural-number] features on
the T-constituent be, and so spells it out as the third person plural form were.
An interesting complication which arises from our assumption in (14) that
uninterpretable features are deleted once they have ‘done their work’ is the
following. If case-marking were to apply before agreement or movement in (16)
above, the uninterpretable case feature on the pronoun they would be inactivated,
and the pronoun would then no longer be active for agreement or movement. One
way of getting round this problem is to suppose that agreement, case-marking,
A-movement and Feature Deletion all apply simultaneously on the T-cycle in
(16), and to assume that this is the consequence of a more general condition such
as (18) below:
(18)
Simultaneity Condition
All syntactic operations involving a given probe P apply simultaneously
And indeed we shall assume (18) for the time being (though we will revisit this
issue in chapter 9). In a fairly obvious sense, (18) follows from the Earliness
Principle (3), in the sense that e.g. if all (case and agreement) Feature Valuation,
Feature Deletion and agreement operations which apply on the T-cycle apply as
early as possible, they will apply simultaneously.
●
●
7.5
Expletive it subjects
So far, all the constructions we have looked at have involved a ﬁnite
T agreeing with a noun or pronoun expression which carries interpretable per-
son/number ϕ-features. However, English has two expletive pronouns which
(by virtue of being non-referential) carry no interpretable ϕ-features. One of
these is expletive it in sentences such as:
(19)(a)
It is said that he has taken bribes
(b)
It can be difﬁcult to cope with long-term illness
(c)
It’s a pity that she can’t come
The pronoun it in sentences like these appears to be an expletive, since it cannot
be replaced by a referential pronoun like this or that, and cannot be questioned
by what. Let’s examine the syntax of expletive it by looking at the derivation of
a sentence like (19a).

7.5 Expletive it subjects
247
If (as we did in our earlier discussion of (4) above) we assume that expletive
pronouns are directly merged in spec-T, the main clause in sentence (19a) will
be derived as follows. The (passive participle) verb said is merged with its CP
complement that he has taken bribes to form the VP said that he has taken
bribes. Merging this VP with the tense auxiliary be forms the structure shown in
simpliﬁed form below:
(20)
T' 
 
T                                        VP 
BE 
[Pres-Tns]               V                                   CP
[u-Pers]                 said                 that he has taken bribes
[u-Num] 
In accordance with the Earliness Principle (3), we might expect T-agreement to
apply at this point.
Accordingly, the probe be (which is active by virtue of its uninterpretable
person/number ϕ-features) searches for an active goal to value its unvalued ϕ-
features. It might at ﬁrst sight seem as if the CP headed by that is an appropriate
goal, and is a third person singular expression which can value the person/number
features of be. However, it seems unlikely that such clauses have person/number
features. One reason for thinking this is that even if the that-clause in (20) is
co-ordinated with another that-clause as in (21) below, the verb be remains in the
singular form is:
(21)
It is said [that he has taken bribes and that he has embezzled company
funds]
If each of the italicised clauses in (21) were singular in number, we would expect
the bracketed co-ordinate clause to be plural (in the same way as the co-ordinate
structure John and Mary is a plural expression in a sentence like John and Mary
are very happy together): but the fact that the passive auxiliary is remains singular
in (21) suggests that the CP has no number properties of its own. Nor indeed does
the that-clause in (21) have an unvalued case feature which could make it into an
active goal, since a that-clause cannot be used in a position like that italicised in
(22) below where it would be assigned accusative case by a transitive preposition
such as of, suggesting that that-clauses are caseless:
(22)
There have been reports of bribery/∗of that he has taken bribes
If the CP in (20) has no uninterpretable case feature, it is inactive and so cannot
value the ϕ-features of be.
However, a question we might ask about (20) is whether be could instead
agree with the subject of the that-clause, namely he: after all, he enters the
derivation with an uninterpretable case feature (making it active), and is a third
person singular expression and so could seemingly value the unvalued person
and number features of be. Yet it is clear that be does not in fact agree with he,

248
7 agreement, case and a-movement
since if we replace he by the ﬁrst person plural subject we, be still surfaces in the
third person singular form is – as in (23) below:
(23)
It is said [CP that [TP we have taken bribes]]
Something, then, must prevent be from agreeing with we in (23) – but what? The
answer is that by the time we have reached the stage of derivation in (23), the
case feature on we has already been valued as nominative and deleted, and so
is invisible to other probes (and hence inactive) at this point – see (14) above.
Consequently, be cannot agree with we in (23) – and by the same token, be cannot
agree with he in (20). (For reasons which I leave you to work out for yourself, the
Impenetrability Condition outlined in §3.8 would also prevent is from agreeing
with we in (23), because the T constituent is c-commands the complementiser
that which in turn c-commands the pronoun we.)
So far, what we have established in relation to the structure in (20) is that
be cannot agree with the CP headed by the complementiser that because that is
inactive and has no ϕ-features or case feature; nor can be agree with he, because
the case feature on he has been valued and deleted and so is inactive at this
point (and in any case, the Impenetrability Condition would prevent this). It is
precisely because be cannot agree with CP or with any of its constituents that
expletive it has to be used, in order to value the ϕ-features of T and to satisfy
the epp feature on T requiring it to have a subject of its own. In keeping with
the Minimalist spirit of positing only the minimal apparatus which is concep-
tually necessary, let’s further suppose that expletive it has ‘a full complement
of ϕ-features’ (Chomsky 1998, p. 44) but that (as Martin Atkinson suggested
in conversation) these are the only features it carries. Now, while it clearly car-
ries an interpretable (neuter/inanimate) gender feature when used as a referential
pronoun (e.g. in a sentence like This book has lots of exercises in it, where it
refers back to this book), it has no semantic interpretation in its use as an exple-
tive pronoun, and so can be assumed to carry no interpretable gender feature in
such a use. The reason for positing that expletive it is a caseless pronoun is that
it is already active by virtue of its uninterpretable ϕ-features, and hence does
not ‘need’ a case feature to make it active for agreement (unlike subjects with
interpretable ϕ-features). Some suggestive evidence that expletive it may be a
caseless pronoun comes from the fact that it has no genitive form its – at least
for speakers like me who don’t say ∗He was annoyed at its being claimed that he
lied.
If the reasoning in the previous paragraph is along the right lines, expletive
it enters the derivation carrying the features [third-person, singular-number].
Since expletive it is a ‘meaningless’ expletive pronoun, these features will be
uninterpretable. Given this assumption, merging it as the speciﬁer of the T-bar in
(20) above will derive the structure (24) below (with interpretable features shown
in bold, and uninterpretable features in italics):

7.5 Expletive it subjects
249
(24)
  TP 
PRN                                           T' 
 
it 
[3-Pers]                     T                                          VP         
[Sg-Num]                   BE 
    [Pres-Tns]                   V                                 CP 
      [u-Pers]                    said               that he has taken bribes
      [u-Num] 
Chomsky (1999) suggests that expletive it can serve as a probe (active by virtue of
its uninterpretable person/number features) which locates the T-auxiliary be as a
suitable goal (active by virtue of its uninterpretable and unvalued person/number
features). If this is so, agreement between the two will lead to valuation of
the unvalued person/number features on be, and deletion of the uninterpretable
person/number features on both be and it.
However, such an account of expletive structures is problematic from a the-
oretical perspective. For one thing, a probe is typically the head of a phrase
(and hence a minimal projection), whereas it in (24) is a speciﬁer (and hence a
maximal projection). Moreover, agreement (e.g. in a structure like (16) above)
typically involves a goal valuing unvalued person/number features on a probe,
whereas under the account offered above, agreement in (24) involves the converse
situation of a probe valuing person/number features on a goal. The conclusion
we reach is thus that an expletive ‘can’t be a probe’ (Noam Chomsky, p.c., 5
June 2005) and that having an expletive as a probe is ‘an option barred under
narrower . . . conceptions of the role of the probe in controlling operations’
(Chomsky 2006, p. 6). Consequently, be must be the probe in (24) and expletive
it the goal. However, given the assumption that a probe can only agree with a
goal which it c-commands, it follows that the expletive goal it cannot be directly
merged in spec-T, because if so it would not be c-commanded by the probe be,
and agreement would not be able to apply – with the result that the derivation
would crash (because unvalued features would not be valued, and uninterpretable
features would not be deleted), and sentence (23) would wrongly be predicted to
be ungrammatical. Since a goal must occupy a lower position than its probe, the
conclusion we reach is thus that expletive it must originate in a position below
the T-auxiliary be. But where?
Bearing in mind that the core assumption of the VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis
outlined in §6.2 is that subjects originate within VP and subsequently raise from
their original position within VP into the speciﬁer position within TP, a plausible
suggestion is that expletive pronouns likewise originate internally within VP, and
subsequently raise to the subject/speciﬁer position within TP. In this connection,
compare the following pair of sentences:
(25)(a)
They had said that he has taken bribes
(b)
I won’t have it said that he has taken bribes

250
7 agreement, case and a-movement
In (25a), said is an active perfect participle, and the speciﬁer position within the
VP headed by said is occupied by the external argument of the verb said (namely
its subject they). However, said in (25b) is a passive participle form of the verb,
and it is a property of passive verbs that they project no external argument, with
the result that the speciﬁer position is free to be occupied by an expletive. In
(25b), expletive it appears immediately in front of (and hence can plausibly be
taken to originate as the speciﬁer of) the passive participle said.
Let us therefore suppose that in sentence (19a) It is said that he has taken
bribes, the expletive pronoun it originates in spec-V. This means that the main
clause in (19a) will be derived as follows. The passive participle said merges with
its CP complement that he has taken bribes to form the V-bar said that he has
taken bribes. This V-bar is then merged with the expletive pronoun it, deriving
the VP it said that he has taken bribes. The resulting VP merges with a present
tense T constituent containing the passive auxiliary be, so deriving the structure
shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(26)
  T'  
  T                                                 VP 
 BE  
[Pres-Tns]                 PRN                                        V' 
[u-Pers]                      it 
[u-Num]                 [3-Pers]                 V                                    CP 
[EPP]                   [Sg-Num]              said                  that he has taken bribes 
At this point, be can serve as an active probe which locates the c-commanded
expletive pronoun it as an active goal (both be and it being active by virtue of their
uninterpretable person/number features). Via agreement (8), the goal it values the
unvalued person/number features on the probe be. At the same time as agreement
applies, the epp feature on the T-auxiliary be attracts the goal it to move to spec-
T. Feature Deletion (14) results in deletion of the uninterpretable person/number
features on both probe and goal, and of the epp feature on the probe. Simultaneous
application of agreement, case-marking, movement and deletion thus derives the
structure in (27) below (where outline font marks a copy which receives a null
spellout in the PF component):
(27)
     TP 
PRN                                                 T'  
it 
[3 Pres]                      T                                              VP 
[Sg Num]                                   BE                                
[Pres-Tns]                                                        V' 
[3 Pers]                                           
[Sg Num]                                       V                                        CP 
 [EPP]                                         said                
that he has 
taken bribes 

7.6 Expletive there subjects
251
The resulting structure (27) is subsequently merged with a null C constituent
carrying an interpretable declarative-force feature. Since the initially unvalued
person/number features on be have been valued, and all uninterpretable features
on both be and it have been deleted, the relevant derivation converges. Given that
deleted features remain visible in the PF component, the T-auxiliary be will be
spelled out as the third person singular present tense form is.
●
●
7.6
Expletive there subjects
Having looked at the syntax of expletive it in the previous section, we
now turn to look at expletive there. As a starting point for our discussion, we’ll go
back to the very ﬁrst sentence we looked at in this chapter, namely (1) There were
awarded several prizes. However, given the conclusion we reached in the previous
section that expletives originate internally within VP, our earlier analysis in (4)
above (which assumed that expletive there originates in spec-T) will now have
to be revised along the following lines. The (passive participle) verb awarded
merges with the QP complement several prizes to form the V-bar awarded several
prizes. This V-bar is then merged with the expletive pronoun there to form the
VP there awarded several prizes. Let’s assume that (like expletive it) expletive
there carries no case feature (and hence has no genitive form, as we see from the
ungrammaticality of ∗She was upset by there’s being nobody to help her). Let’s
also suppose that the only feature carried by expletive there is an uninterpretable
person feature, and let’s further suppose that there is intrinsically third person
(consistent with the fact that a number of other words beginning with th- are
third person – e.g. this, that, these, those and the). Given these (and earlier)
assumptions, the VP headed by the passive participle awarded will have the
following structure:
(28)
     VP 
PRN    
                              
V' 
there 
[3-Pers] 
             
V                    
          QP 
        awarded                
several prizes
[3-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
A question which arises at this juncture is whether the uninterpretable person
feature on there can be deleted via agreement with the QP several prizes. The
answer is ‘No’, because there is no probe–goal agreement relation between there
and several prizes. There are two reasons why there cannot agree with several
prizes. For one thing, there is not the head of a phrase (and so is not a minimal
projection), and hence cannot serve as a probe: rather, there is a speciﬁer (and
maximal projection) and hence can only serve as a goal, not as a probe. Secondly,
agreement typically involves a relation between a valued feature on one member

252
7 agreement, case and a-movement
of a probe–goal pair and a matching unvalued feature on the other (with the
unvalued feature being valued via agreement); but since there and several prizes
both enter the derivation valued as [third-person], there cannot in principle be
any agreement relation between them. Consequently, agreement cannot apply at
the stage of derivation in (28).
The derivation therefore continues by merging the VP already formed in (28)
with a past tense T constituent containing the passive auxiliary be, so deriving
the structure shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(29)
T'  
T              
 VP 
BE  
[Past-Tns]  
 PRN
V'
 
[u-Pers]
there 
[u-Num]  
[3-Pers] 
   V                              QP 
[EPP]
  awarded                several prizes
         [3-Pers]
        [Pl-Num]
         [u-Case]
Given the Earliness Principle (3), agreement and case assignment will apply
at this point in the derivation. Because be is the head of the overall structure
(and is active by virtue of its uninterpretable person and number features) it
serves as a probe which searches for goals which can value its unvalued features.
Let us further suppose that a probe ﬁrst locates the closest appropriate goal,
and then (if that is unable to value and delete all its features) locates the next
closest goal . . . and so on, until the point where all features of the probe have
been valued and deleted (at which point the probe stops searching for further
goals). Accordingly, when T-be probes, it locates there as the closest possible
goal. However, since there (being numberless) cannot value its unvalued number
feature, T-be continues to probe and locates the QP several prizes as a second
goal. Thus, T-be locates two suitable goals: one is there (which is active by virtue
of its uninterpretable person feature); the other is the QP several prizes (which
is active by virtue of its uninterpretable case feature). Let’s suppose that when
a probe locates more than one active goal, it undergoes simultaneous multiple
agreement with all active goals accessible to it. Accordingly, via the ϕ-feature-
valuation suboperation (8i), the T-probe be agrees in person with both goals
(the third person expressions there and several prizes) and the unvalued person
feature on be is thereby valued as third person. However, be also agrees in number
with the plural expression several prizes, and so the unvalued number feature on
be is valued as plural. At the same time, the unvalued case feature on the goal
several prizes is valued as nominative by the ﬁnite T-probe, in accordance with
the case valuation suboperation (8ii) above. The epp feature on T attracts the
closest goal, and so triggers movement of there to spec-T. In accordance with
Feature Deletion (14), the uninterpretable person and number features on be,
the uninterpretable case feature on several prizes and the uninterpretable epp

7.6 Expletive there subjects
253
feature on be are deleted. Simultaneous application of agreement, case-marking,
movement and deletion thus derives the structure shown below (where outline
font marks a copy which receives a null spellout in the PF component):
(30)
TP 
PRN                                           T' 
there 
there 
[3 Pers]                  T                                          VP 
          were 
     [Past-Tns]                
                            V' 
        [3 Pers]                                   
       [Pl Num]                                         V                           QP 
          [EPP]                                       awarded              several prizes
  [3-Pers]  
 [Pl-Num]
[Nom Case]
The resulting TP is then merged with a null C carrying an interpretable declarative
force feature. Since all features are valued, the derivation converges at the PF
interface; since all uninterpretable features have been deleted, it also converges
at the semantics interface.
Our assumption that T in (29) undergoes multiple agreement with both the
expletive goal there and the non-expletive goal several prizes and that there
is intrinsically third person carries with it the tacit implication that the non-
expletive goal must likewise be a third person expression, if we make the plausible
assumption that a probe cannot agree in person with multiple goals which have
different person properties (because this will lead to a feature mismatch). Such
an assumption accounts for contrasts like:
(31)(a)
Only I am going to the party
(b)
∗There am/is only I going to the party
In (31a), the only goal for the T-probe be is the ﬁrst person singular expression
only I, and consequently be can agree with this (single) goal and thereby be
marked as ﬁrst person singular. But in (31b), be has two goals which it must
agree with – namely the ﬁrst person singular expression only I and the third
person expletive there. If be agrees in person and number with only I, it will
be marked as ﬁrst person singular and ultimately be spelled out as am: but this
will mean that am does not agree in person with there. On the other hand, if
be agrees in person with there and in number with only I, it will be marked
as third person singular and ultimately be spelled out as is: but this will mean
that is does not agree in person with only I. Because of the resulting feature
mismatch, (31b) is ungrammatical. An interesting way of obviating this mismatch
is found in colloquial structures like There’s only me going to the party, where
the pronoun me has accusative case (perhaps assigned by be in the same way as
in structures like It’s me): if only a nominative expression can be the goal for
T-agreement, we can account for the absence of agreement between is and me in

254
7 agreement, case and a-movement
such structures, and for why the verb is gets spelled out in the default third person
singular form.
An important question to ask in the context of our discussion of expletive it in
the previous section and expletive there in this section is what conditions govern
the use of expletives. What I shall suggest here is that the relevant conditions can
be characterised as follows:
(32)
Expletive Conditions
(i)
External Argument Condition:
An expletive can only be merged as the highest argument of a verb with no
external argument
(ii)
Indeﬁniteness Condition:
Expletive there can only be merged with a verb which has an indeﬁnite
nominal or pronominal internal argument
(iii)
Inactivity Condition:
Expletive it can only be merged with a constituent which does not contain a
nominal or pronominal expression with active case- or ϕ-features
The conditions in (32) provide us with a basis to account for contrasts such as
the following, where the bold-printed pronouns are expletives:
(33)(a)
There was awarded only one prize
(b)
∗It was awarded only one prize
(34)(a)
It is said that he has taken bribes
(b)
∗There is said that he has taken bribes
(35)(a)
∗There was impeached the president
(b)
∗It was impeached the president
Sentences (33a) and (33b) both satisfy the External Argument Condition (32i)
because the verb arrested is a passive participle with no external argument: (32a)
also satisﬁes the Indeﬁniteness Condition (32ii) because the italicised associate
of there is an indeﬁnite expression; by contrast, (33b) violates the Inactivity Con-
dition (32iii) because the italicised associate of it is the QP only one prize and
this is active by virtue of its uninterpretable case feature. Sentences (34a) and
(34b) both satisfy the External Argument Condition (32i) because the verb said is
a passive participle with no external argument: (34a) also satisﬁes the Inactivity
Condition (32iii) because the italicised associate of it is a clause whose head C
that carries no active person/number/case feature (nor are any of the constituents
of the that-clause active, their uninterpretable features having been valued and
deleted at an earlier stage of derivation); but (34b) violates the Indeﬁniteness
Condition (32ii) because the italicised associate of there is not an indeﬁnite noun
or pronoun expression. Sentences (35a) and (35b) both satisfy the External Argu-
ment Condition (32i) because the verb impeached is a passive participle with
no external argument: (35a) violates the Indeﬁniteness Condition because the
italicised associate of there is not an indeﬁnite expression but rather the deﬁnite

7.6 Expletive there subjects
255
DP the president; and (35b) violates the Inactivity Condition because the ital-
icised associate of it is the DP the president and this is active by virtue of its
uninterpretable case feature. The only grammatical outcome for a structure in
which a passive participle has a deﬁnite DP complement in English is not to use
an expletive but rather to passivise the complement – as in The president was
impeached. So, we see that the conditions in (32) provide a descriptively adequate
account of the syntax of expletives. Incidentally, note that an interesting conse-
quence of the Inactivity Condition (32iii) is that a weather verb like rain which
has no thematic argument will require use of expletive it: and given the highest
argument condition in (32i), it will originate as the highest (and only) argument
of the verb rain, in the same VP-complement position as an unaccusative subject
(with it subsequently raising to spec-T and yielding a structure like It is raining
it, with strikethrough marking the initial position of it).
However, the conditions in (32) are essentially descriptive stipulations which
lack explanatory force. The question we need to ask therefore is why such condi-
tions should obtain. Consider ﬁrst the External Argument Condition (32i). If we
suppose that a Verb Phrase can only have a single speciﬁer and that the italicised
external argument of the verb in a transitive structure like (36a) below originates
as the speciﬁer for the verb, then it follows that the verb cannot also have an
expletive speciﬁer like that bold-printed as in (36b):
(36)(a)
A spokeman for the president has denied allegations of impropriety
(b)
∗There has a spokesman for the president denied allegations of impropriety
An alternative possibility is to follow Felser and Rupp (2001, p. 312) in analysing
an expletive as ‘a thematic or quasi-thematic subject’, so that ‘the expletive is
characterised as an argument expression’. More speciﬁcally, they maintain that
expletive there ‘is thematic without referring to an actual participant or event
depicted – rather, in the spirit of Kratzer (1995), we may take it to be associated
with an abstract location’ (p. 312). If an expletive is ‘the last argument to be
added’ in a derivation (p. 314), it follows that (in a sentence like There occurred
several unfortunate incidents), the expletive will be merged in spec-V: thus, the
QP several unfortunate incidents will be the ﬁrst argument to be merged with
the verb occur (as its complement), and the expletive there the second argument
(as the speciﬁer of occur). We should also note in passing that expletive it (in
some uses, at least) has argument-like properties, e.g. in being able to serve as
the antecedent of PRO in sentences like It can be difﬁcult to achieve one’s goals
without PRO being impossible.
The question of why the Inactivity Condition in (32iii) should hold also seems
to have a relatively straightforward answer: given that VP is merged as the
complement of T, and a ﬁnite T carries agreement features which require it to
agree with an active constituent within VP, we can see the function of using
expletive it in a structure which would otherwise lack a goal active for agreement
as being to provide an active goal which can value unvalued person/number
features on a T-probe – as was implicit in our earlier discussion of sentences like

256
7 agreement, case and a-movement
(19a) It is said that he has taken bribes. Moreover, given the assumption that (in
consequence of the Economy Condition) an active head probes only as far as it
needs to in order to satisfy its requirements, we can see why expletive it cannot
be used in a structure like (33b) ∗It was awarded only one prize: this is because
if it is merged as the speciﬁer of the verb awarded, the T constituent be will
agree in person and number with the closest ϕ-complete goal it, so leaving the
case feature on only one prize unvalued and undeleted, and thereby causing the
derivation to crash.
What remains to be accounted for is the Indeﬁniteness Condition (31ii). This
condition raises two questions: ﬁrstly, why an expletive should be used at all,
and secondly, why (if one is used) it has to be there and not it. Let’s look
at each of these questions in turn. Use of an expletive in association with an
indeﬁnite internal argument may well be motivated by semantic considerations.
Thus, indeﬁnites which move to spec-T are ambiguous between a speciﬁc and a
non-speciﬁc reading, whereas indeﬁnites which remain in situ within VP in exple-
tive structures allow only a non-speciﬁc reading – as illustrated by the contrast
below:
(37)(a)
A man is in the room
(b)
There is a man in the room
So, while a man in (37a) can have either a speciﬁc or a non-speciﬁc inter-
pretation, in (37b) it can only have a non-speciﬁc interpretation. This suggests
that the use of an expletive pronoun in sentences like (37b) is a device for
ensuring that the associated indeﬁnite expression does not receive a speciﬁc
interpretation.
However, this still leaves us with the question of why there rather than it
should be the expletive pronoun used in conjunction with an indeﬁnite internal
argument. The answer we shall suggest here is that the choice of pronoun in an
expletive structure is determined by the Economy Condition, in the sense that
economy considerations dictate that (in expletive structures) we use an expletive
carrying as few uninterpretable features as possible. Since there carries only one
uninterpretable feature (its third person feature) and it carries two (its third person
and singular number features), what this means in practical terms is that there
will be used wherever possible, with it only being used when use of there results
in ungrammaticality.
We can illustrate how the economy account works by considering why there is
used rather than it in sentences with an indeﬁnite associate like (33a) There was
awarded only one prize. Given the assumptions made here, (33a) will be derived
as follows. The passive verb awarded merges with its indeﬁnite complement only
one prize to form the V-bar awarded only one prize. This is then merged with
expletive there to form the VP there awarded only one prize. The resulting VP is
then merged with a past tense T constituent containing the passive auxiliary be,
so deriving the structure shown below:

7.6 Expletive there subjects
257
(38)
     T'  
T                                             VP 
BE  
[Past-Tns]               PRN                                   V' 
[u-Pers]                 there 
[u-Num]              [3-Pers]                V                              QP 
[EPP]                                          awarded               only one prize
           [3-Pers] 
          [Sg-Num]
           [u-Case]
The active T-probe be locates two active goals within its search space – namely
the expletive pronoun there (active by virtue of its uninterpretable person feature)
and the QP only one prize (active by virtue of its uninterpretable case feature).
Four things then happen at the same time: (i) be agrees in person with there, and
in person and number with only one prize; (ii) the unvalued case feature on only
one prize is valued as nominative; (iii) the epp feature on T triggers movement of
the closest goal (= expletive there) to spec-T; and (iv) all uninterpretable features
on the probe and goals are deleted. The result of these four operations is to derive
the structure in (39) below:
(39)
TP 
PRN                                           T' 
there 
[3 Pers]                  T                                          VP 
          was 
    [Past-Tns]                 
                               V' 
       [3 Pers]                                   
      [Sg Num]                                          V                           QP
[EPP]                                        awarded              only one prize 
  [3-Pers]  
 [Sg-Num]
[Nom Case]
The resulting TP is subsequently merged with a null C containing an inter-
pretable declarative force feature. The resulting derivation converges both at the
PF interface (because all features have been valued) and at the semantics interface
(because all uninterpretable features have been deleted). Since use of expletive
there in (39) leads to convergence, economy considerations rule out the use of
expletive it in structures with an indeﬁnite associate (because it is more ‘costly’
to use by virtue of having two uninterpretable features which need to be deleted).
But now consider why expletive it (but not expletive there) is used in a sentence
like (19a) above, repeated as (40a) below:
(40)(a)
It is said that he has taken bribes
(b)
∗There is said that he has taken bribes

258
7 agreement, case and a-movement
The main clause in each of the sentences in (40) will be derived by merging the
verb said with its that-clause complement to form the V-bar said that he has
taken bribes, and then merging this V-bar with the expletive pronoun it or there.
The resulting VP is then merged with a present tense T constituent containing
the progressive auxiliary be, so forming the T-bar in (41) below:
(41)
  T' 
  
T                                                           VP 
BE  
[Pres-Tns]                          PRN                                            V' 
 
[u-Pers]                it [3-Pers, Sg-Num]  
[u-Num]                      there [3-Pers]                V                                      CP 
[EPP]                                                             said                    that he has taken bribes
If the expletive used is there, the unvalued and uninterpretable person feature
on be can be valued via agreement with there, but not the unvalued and unin-
terpretable number feature on be. The result is that the derivation crashes, and
the corresponding sentence (40b) is ungrammatical. Because use of the more
economical expletive there would cause the derivation to crash, expletive it is
used instead: agreement between the probe be and the expletive goal it in (41)
will both value and delete the unvalued person/number features on be, and delete
the uninterpretable person/number features on it. The resulting sentence (40a) is
therefore correctly predicted to be grammatical.
●
●
7.7
Agreement and A-movement
So far, we have seen that agreement plays an important role not only
in valuing the ϕ-features of T but also in valuing the case features of nominals.
However, as we will see in this section, there is also evidence that agreement
also plays an important role in A-movement. To see why, let’s return to consider
the derivation of our earlier sentence (6b) They were arrested. Assume that the
derivation proceeds as sketched earlier until we reach the stage of derivation in
(16) above, repeated as (42) below:
(42)
T' 
  
T                                    VP 
BE 
[Past-Tns]                V                        PRN
[u-Pers]              arrested                   THEY
[u-Num]                                           [3-Pers]
[EPP]                                             [Pl-Num]
   [u-Case]
In (42), [T be] is an active probe (by virtue of its uninterpretable person and
number features) and has an uninterpretable epp feature. It therefore searches for

7.7 Agreement and A-movement
259
an active goal which can value and delete its person/number features, locating
the pronoun they (which is active by virtue of its uninterpretable case feature
and which has person and number features that can match those of be). Since
the matching goal they is a deﬁnite pronoun, the epp feature of [T be] cannot
be deleted by merging an expletive in spec-T, but rather can only be deleted
by movement of the goal to spec-T: accordingly, they moves to become the
speciﬁer of be. Assuming that agreement, case marking and Feature Deletion
work as before, the structure which is formed at the end of the T-cycle will be
that shown below:
(43)
TP 
PRN                                             T' 
  
they  
[3-Pers]                         T                                    VP 
[Pl-Num]                    were 
[Nom Case]              [Past-Tns]                 V        
   [3 Pers]              arrested   
  [Pl Num] 
  [EPP] 
(To avoid excessive visual clutter, the trace copy of they left behind in VP-
complement position is shown here simply as they , but is in fact an iden-
tical copy of they, containing the same features as they. The same typo-
graphical convention will be used throughout the rest of this chapter.) The
TP in (43) is subsequently merged with a null declarative-force C, so ter-
minating the syntactic derivation. Since all uninterpretable features have
been deleted, the derivation converges – i.e. results in a syntactic structure
which can subsequently be mapped into well-formed phonetic and semantic
representations.
A key assumption underlying the analysis sketched here is that T triggers
movement of a goal with which it agrees in person/number. In a passive sentence
like (5b) They were arrested, the goal which agrees with T and which moves to
spec-T is the thematic complement of the verb arrested. But in an active sentence
like:
(44)
He has arrested them
it is the subject he which agrees with T and moves to spec-T, and not the
complement them. Why should this be? In order to answer this question, let’s
look at how (44) is derived.
The verb arrested merges with its theme complement them to form the V-bar
arrested them. This V-bar is in turn merged with its agent argument he to form
the VP he arrested them. The resulting VP is then merged with a present tense T
constituent to form the T-bar shown in simpliﬁed form below:

260
7 agreement, case and a-movement
(45)
    T' 
 
T                                           VP 
HAVE  
                  PRN                                           V' 
 
       he 
    V                                       PRN
arrested                                  them
T serves as a probe at this point and looks for a goal to value (and delete) its
unvalued person/number features. However, if (as we assumed in our discussion
of the passive structure in (43) above) T can agree with the complement of a verb,
an important question to ask is why T can’t agree with the complement them in
an active structure like (45), and why in fact have must agree with the subject
he and hence is ultimately spelled out as the third person singular present tense
form has.
One reason is that (by the time we reach the stage of derivation in (45) above)
the pronoun them will already have had its case feature valued (as accusative)
and deleted, and so will no longer be active for case/agreement operations. If all
structural case assignment involves agreement (as tacitly assumed in (8) above),
it follows that accusative case assignment will involve the kind of operation
outlined informally below:
(46)
Accusative Case Assignment
An unvalued case feature on a goal is valued as accusative via agreement
with a transitive probe
Agreement between a transitive verb and its object is invisible in English (in the
sense that it has no overt phonetic manifestation), but is visible in languages like
Swahili with overt object-agreement morphology. Given the Earliness Principle
(3), the pronoun them in (45) will have had its case feature valued as accusative
(and deleted) via agreement with the transitive verb arrested on the V-cycle, and
so be inactive for subsequent case/agreement operations by the time we reach the
T-cycle in (45) above. Consequently, when the T-probe have searches for a goal
in (45), the only active goal (with an unvalued case feature) which it locates is
the pronoun he. Accordingly, have agrees with, assigns nominative case to, and
attracts he to move to spec-T, so forming a TP whose overt constituents are He has
arrested them. Merging the resulting TP with a null declarative complementiser
derives the structure associated with (44) He has arrested them.
A second reason why the T-probe have can’t agree with the object them in (45)
is the following. We suggested earlier that a head probes only as far as it needs to
in order to ensure that all its unvalued features are valued. When T-have probes
in (45), the closest goal which it locates is the subject he. Since he can value all
the unvalued (person/number) agreement features on T, there is no need for T to
probe any further and therefore (in consequence of the Economy Condition) no
possibility of T probing further and agreeing with the object them.

7.8 EPP and agreement in control inﬁnitives
261
●
●
7.8
EPP and agreement in control inﬁnitives
The analysis presented in the previous section assumes that a ﬁnite T
carries an epp feature which (in conjunction with agreement) drives A-movement.
But what about the kind of inﬁnitival [T to] constituent found in control clauses?
In the previous chapter, we argued that inﬁnitival to in a control clause like that
bracketed in (47a) below has an epp feature which attracts pro to move out of the
VP in which it originates into spec-T in the manner indicated by the arrow in (47b):
(47)
(a)      They don’t want [to see you] 
(b)      They don’t want [CP [C ] [TP PRO [T to] [VP PRO [V see] you]]]
ø  
Let’s likewise suppose that pro is assigned null case by agreement with a c-
commanding T with null (non-ﬁnite) tense in much the same way as subjects in
tensed clauses are assigned nominative case by agreement with a c-commanding
T which has ﬁnite (present or past) tense. More speciﬁcally, let’s assume that to
in control inﬁnitives contains not only an abstract non-ﬁnite tense feature, but
also abstract ϕ-features; and let’s further suppose that null case assignment can
be characterised informally as follows:
(48)
Null Case Assignment
An unvalued case feature on a pronoun goal is valued as null via agreement
with a T-probe carrying null (non-ﬁnite) tense
In the light of these assumptions, consider the derivation of the bracketed control
clause in:
(49)
They have decided [PRO to help you]
Decide is a control predicate (as we see from the fact that (49) is paraphraseable
as They have decided that they will help you, and from the fact that decide
does not allow an expletive subject in a sentence like ∗There has decided to be
an enquiry). Given the VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis, the pro subject of the
bracketed inﬁnitive clause will originate in spec-V, as the speciﬁer of help you.
More speciﬁcally, the derivation proceeds as follows. The verb help merges with
its complement you, and the resulting V-bar help you in turn merges with its pro
subject to form the VP pro help you. Merging control to with this VP forms the
T-bar to pro help you. Let’s suppose that since pro refers back to they in (49),
pro (as used here) carries the interpretable features [3-Pers, Pl-Num]; let’s also
suppose that pro enters the derivation with an unvalued case feature [u-Case].
In addition, let’s assume that control to carries an interpretable nonﬁnite tense
feature [Nf-Tns] (denoting an irrealis event which has not yet happened but may
happen in the future), and also has uninterpretable (and unvalued) person/number
features. Finally (for the reasons given in §6.9), let’s assume that to carries an
epp feature in control clauses. Given all these assumptions, merging to with

262
7 agreement, case and a-movement
[VP pro help you] will form the T-bar (50) below (simpliﬁed by showing only
features on constituents of immediate concern to us):
(50)
T' 
T     
        VP 
to
[Nf-Tns]                PRN
V' 
[u-Pers]    
PRO
[u-Num]      
[3-Pers]    
V               PRN
[EPP]              [Pl-Num]          help     
you
    [u-Case] 
Since to is the highest head in the structure and is active (by virtue of its unin-
terpretable ϕ-features), it serves as a probe which searches for a goal to value
and delete its ϕ-features. Since to c-commands pro and pro is active by virtue
of its uninterpretable case feature, pro can serve as a goal for the probe to. The
unvalued ϕ-features on the probe are assigned the same third person plural values
as those on the goal by agreement (8) and are deleted by Feature Deletion (14).
The unvalued case feature on pro is assigned the value [Null-Case] by Null Case
Assignment (48) and deleted by Feature Deletion (14). The epp feature of to
is deleted by movement of pro to spec-T. The result of applying these various
operations is to derive the TP shown in simpliﬁed form in (51) below:
(51)
TP
PRN       
T' 
PRO
[3-Pers]             
 T     
VP
[Pl-Num]   
  to       
 help you
[Null-Case]              [Nf-Tns] 
[3 Pers] 
[Pl Num] 
 [EPP] 
The resulting TP is subsequently merged with the null nonﬁnite complementiser
which introduces control clauses. As required, the structure which will serve
as input to the semantic component contains only (bold-printed) interpretable
features – all uninterpretable features having been deleted.
●
●
7.9
EPP and person agreement in defective clauses
In §7.7 we suggested that a ﬁnite T has an epp feature which triggers
movement of the closest active matching goal to spec-T, in conformity with the
Attract Closest Condition. In §7.8, we suggested that control to likewise carries an
epp feature triggering movement of the closest active goal to spec-T. If (as we did
in the previous chapter) we make the unitary assumption that all T constituents
in English have an epp feature, it follows that raising to will likewise carry an
epp feature. A piece of empirical evidence which lends support to this claim

7.9 EPP and person agreement in defective clauses
263
comes from the syntax of the italicised ﬂoating quantiﬁers in sentences such
as the following (a ﬂoating quantiﬁer being one separated from its antecedent,
underlined below):
(52)
The boys would seem to me both/all to have been treated fairly
One way of accounting for such structures is to suppose that the QP both/all
the boys originates as the complement of the passive participle treated, and then
moves to become the speciﬁer of inﬁnitival to. Subsequently, the DP the boys
moves on its own to become the speciﬁer of the T-auxiliary would, leaving
the quantiﬁer all/both ‘ﬂoating’ or ‘stranded’ as the speciﬁer of inﬁnitival to.
From this perspective, the ﬂoating/stranded quantiﬁer provides evidence of A-
movement through the speciﬁer of a defective inﬁnitival clause.
A further piece of evidence leading to the same conclusion is offered by
Chomsky (2001, fn. 56) on the basis of (somewhat contrived) sentences like (53)
below:
(53)
John seems to Fred [to appear to himself [to like Mary]]
Here, himself refers to John, not to Fred. This is puzzling if we assume that the
antecedent of a reﬂexive must be an argument locally c-commanding the reﬂexive
(and hence contained within the same TP as the reﬂexive), since if raising to has
no epp feature and John moves directly from being the subject of the like-clause
to becoming the subject of the seem-clause, the lefthand bracketed TP containing
the reﬂexive will contain no antecedent for himself, and hence we will wrongly
predict that structures like (53) are ill-formed. By contrast, argues Chomsky, if we
posit that raising to does indeed have an epp feature, John will move from being
subject of like Mary to becoming subject of to like Mary, then later becoming
subject of to appear to himself to like Mary, before ﬁnally moving to become the
subject of the null T constituent in the seem-clause. This will mean that a null
copy of John is left behind as the subject of each of the two inﬁnitive clauses, as
shown in skeletal form in (54) below:
(54)
John seems to Fred [John to appear to himself [John to like Mary]]
Since the reﬂexive himself is locally c-commanded by the bold-printed copy John
in (54) within the lefthand bracketed TP containing the reﬂexive, (54) correctly
predicts that himself will be interpreted as referring to John. (Recall that lower
copies of moved constituents are deleted in the phonological component but
remain visible in the syntactic and semantic components.)
Structures like (53) suggest that raising to must have an epp feature triggering
movement of an argument to spec-T. But it’s important to bear in mind that the epp
feature on T works in conjunction with the person/number ϕ-features of T: more
speciﬁcally, the epp feature on T triggers movement to spec-T of an active goal
which T agrees with in respect of one or more ϕ-features (i.e. in person or number
or both). It therefore follows that T in raising clauses must carry one or more ϕ-
features if it is to trigger movement of a goal carrying ϕ-features of its own. Now

264
7 agreement, case and a-movement
it clearly cannot be the case that raising to carries both person and number, since
if it did we would wrongly predict that raising clauses require a null pro subject,
given that inﬁnitival to assigns null case to its subject by (48) when carrying both
person and number. The conclusion we reach, therefore, is that raising to must
carry only one ϕ-feature. But which ϕ-feature – person or number?
The answer is provided by raising sentences such as the following:
(55)
There do seem to remain several problems
On the assumption that raising to carries an epp feature requiring it to attract a
subject, the expletive pronoun there will raise (in successive-cyclic fashion) from
its original position as the speciﬁer of the unaccusative verb remain to become the
speciﬁer of inﬁnitival to, and thereafter raise still further to become the speciﬁer
of the present tense T-auxiliary do, in the manner shown by the arrows in the
skeletal structure in (56) below:
(56)
[CP [C
] [TP There [T do] [VP [V seem] [TP there  [T to]  [VP there [V remain] several problems]]]]]
ø  
If the epp feature on a T-constituent attracts a goal which the probe agrees with
in respect of one or more ϕ-features, movement of there to become the speciﬁer
of raising to on the subordinate clause T-cycle means that the ϕ-feature carried
by to in (56) must match that carried by expletive there. Since we argued in §7.6
that expletive there carries person (but not number), it follows that to in (56) must
carry a person feature. This being so, the epp feature of raising to will require it to
project a speciﬁer carrying a person feature, and expletive there clearly satisﬁes
this requirement.
Our conclusion can be generalised from raising sentences like (55) to long-
distance expletive passives like (57a) below, involving the movement operation
arrowed in (57b):
(57)
(a)     
There are thought to remain several problems  
(b)
    [CP [C
] [TP There  [T are]  [VP  [V thought]  [TP there  [T to]   [VP  there [V remain] several problems]]]]]
ø  
Passive to (i.e. the kind of to found in long-distance passives) cannot carry both
person and number features, since otherwise it would wrongly be predicted to
require a subject with null case. Since there is attracted to become the speciﬁer
of to in (57b) and there has a person feature, it seems reasonable to conclude that
passive to (like raising to) carries person but not number.
We can generalise our ﬁnding still further to inﬁnitival TPs like those bracketed
below:
(58)(a)
They were expecting [TP the visitors to be met at the airport]
(b)
They were expecting [TP there to be someone to meet the visitors at the airport]

7.9 EPP and person agreement in defective clauses
265
(59)(a)
I will arrange [CP for [TP the visitors to be met at the airport]]
(b)
I will arrange [CP for [TP there to be someone to meet the visitors at the airport]]
The bracketed TPs in (58) are ECM clauses (with the properties noted in §3.9).
Since the visitors originates as the thematic complement of the passive verb met
in (58a) but ends up as the subject of [T to], it is clear that the head T of the
bracketed complement-clause TP must contain an epp feature and at least one
ϕ-feature. Since the inﬁnitive subject can be expletive there in (58b), and since
there carries only person, it follows that the head T of an ECM clause must carry
a person feature as well as an epp feature. But if we suppose that a nonﬁnite
T which carries a full set of person and number features (like the head T of a
control clause) assigns null case to its subject, then it is apparent from the fact
that the subject of an ECM clause is an overt constituent and hence does not have
null case that the head T of an ECM clause must also be defective, and so carry
an epp feature and a person feature, but no number feature. Our conclusion can
be generalised in a straightforward fashion to for-inﬁnitive structures like those
bracketed in (59): if we deﬁne ECM structures as structures in which a constituent
within TP is assigned case by an external head lying outside the relevant TP, it
follows that for-inﬁnitives are also ECM structures.
Our argumentation here leads us to the following more general conclusions
about the feature composition of T in English:
(60)
Feature Composition of T in English
(i)
T always carries an epp feature and a person feature in all types of (ﬁnite
and nonﬁnite, main and complement) clauses
(ii)
T also carries a number feature in complete clauses which are CPs (i.e. in
ﬁnite clauses and control clauses), though not in defective clauses which are
only TPs (hence not in raising clauses, or long-distance passives or ECM
clauses)
In the light of these assumptions, consider the derivation of the following sen-
tence:
(61)
Several prizes are thought likely [to be awarded]
Since the bracketed inﬁnitive complement in (61) is the TP complement of the
raising adjective likely, it is a defective clause and so [T to] will carry uninter-
pretable epp and person features (but no number feature) in accordance with
(60i, ii). This means that at the point where to is merged with its complement we
have the structure shown in skeletal form below:
(62)
[T to] be awarded [several prizes]
[u-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[EPP]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]

266
7 agreement, case and a-movement
Since [T to] is the highest head in the structure at this point and is active by virtue
of its uninterpretable person feature, [T to] serves as a probe which searches for
an active goal and locates several prizes, which is active by virtue of its unvalued
case feature. The unvalued person feature on the probe to is valued as third person
(and deleted) via agreement in person with the goal several prizes. But what of
the unvalued case feature on the goal several prizes? This cannot be valued by
inﬁnitival to in (62) because to is not a case assigner (and, more generally, it
would seem that only non-defective probes can be structural case assigners);
consequently, the case feature of several prizes cannot be deleted either, on the
assumption that an unvalued feature can only be deleted as part of an operation
which values it. The epp feature of to is deleted by movement of several prizes
to spec-T, thereby deriving the structure (63) below (simpliﬁed in various ways,
including by showing the deleted copy of several prizes without its features):
(63)
[several prizes]
[T to]
be awarded sev eral prizes
[3-Pers]
[3 Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[EPP]
[u-Case]
Note that several prizes remains active at this point, because its uninterpretable
case feature has not yet been valued or deleted. Merging the structure (63) with the
raising adjective likely, merging the resulting AP with the passive verb thought
and then merging the resulting VP with a ﬁnite present tense T constituent
containing be will derive:
(64)
[T be]
thought likely [several prizes] [T to]
be awarded several prizes
[Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[u-Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[EPP]
[u-Num]
[u-Case]
[EPP]
Because it is the head of the overall TP structure and is active by virtue of its unin-
terpretable ϕ-features, be serves as a probe which searches for an active goal and
locates several prizes (which is active by virtue of the fact that its uninterpretable
case feature has not been valued or deleted at this point); consequently, the goal
several prizes values and deletes the uninterpretable person/number features of
the probe be. By virtue of being ﬁnite and non-defective, be values the unvalued
case feature of the agreeing nominal several prizes as nominative, and deletes it.
The epp feature of be is deleted by moving several prizes to spec-T, so deriving:
(65)
[several prizes]
[T be]
thought likely t
[T to]
be awarded t
[3-Pers]
[Pres-Tns]
[3 Pers]
[Pl-Num]
[3 Pers]
[EPP]
[Nom Case]
[Pl Num]
[EPP]
(t denoting a null trace copy of several prizes)

7.10 Defective clauses with expletive subjects
267
The resulting TP is subsequently merged with a null declarative complementiser,
and be is ultimately spelled out as are. Since all unvalued features have been val-
ued and all uninterpretable features have been deleted, the derivation converges
(i.e. results in a well-formed structure which can be assigned an appropriate
phonetic representation and an appropriate semantic representation).
●
●
7.10
Defective clauses with expletive subjects
In the previous section, we looked at the syntax of defective clauses
which have thematic subjects; in this section, we turn to look at defective clauses
with expletive subjects. Let’s begin by comparing the derivation of (61) above
with the derivation of the corresponding expletive sentence:
(66)
There are thought likely to be awarded several prizes
The derivation of (66) proceeds as follows. The passive verb awarded merges
with its complement several prizes to form the V-bar awarded several prizes.
Since the internal argument several prizes is indeﬁnite, the resulting V-bar can be
merged with the expletive pronoun there (in accordance with the Indeﬁniteness
Condition (32ii) above) to form the VP there awarded several prizes. This VP is
then merged with the passive auxiliary be to form the AUXP be there awarded
several prizes. The resulting AUXP is subsequently merged with inﬁnitival to
(which – by virtue of heading the complement of the raising adjective likely –
is a defective T constituent carrying person and epp features only) to form the
structure shown in skeletal form below:
(67)
[T to]
be
there
awarded
[several prizes]
[u-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[EPP]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
Given what we have said so far, we might suppose that what happens at this point
is the following. Inﬁnitival to (by virtue of being the head of the overall structure
and being active) serves as a probe and identiﬁes there as the closest active goal
which can value its unvalued person feature. Agreement in person between to and
the third person expletive pronoun there results in the unvalued person feature on
to being valued as third person via (8), and in the uninterpretable person features
on both to and there being deleted. The epp feature on to attracts there to become
the subject/speciﬁer of to.
However, closer reﬂection suggests that there is something wrong with the
story told in the previous paragraph. The problem is that if the person feature
on there is deleted via agreement with inﬁnitival to, there will be inactivated at
the end of the T-cycle, once it has moved to become the speciﬁer of inﬁnitival
to, and this will wrongly predict that sentences such as the following should be
grammatical:

268
7 agreement, case and a-movement
(68)
∗It is thought likely there to be awarded several prizes
However, the fact that this sentence is ungrammatical (while that in (66) above
is grammatical) suggests that there does not have its person feature deleted or
inactivated at this point. Why should this be? The answer lies in a condition on
deletion of case/agreement features which we can outline in the following terms
(where α is a probe and β a goal, or conversely β is a probe and α a goal):
(69)
Completeness Condition
An uninterpretable case/agreement feature on a constituent α is deleted
when α agrees (in respect of one or more ϕ-features) with a ϕ-complete
constituent β (i.e. with a non-defective β which carries a complete set of
ϕ-features – both person and number)
In consequence of the Completeness Condition (69), the uninterpretable person
feature on the expletive goal there cannot be deleted by the T-probe to in (67)
because to is a defective probe (by virtue of carrying person but not number), and
only agreement with a ϕ-complete probe (i.e. one with both person and number)
can delete case/agreement features on a goal. The epp feature on to triggers
movement of the closest active goal (= there) to spec-T and (if movement of any
goal – whether ϕ-complete or not – to spec-T deletes the epp feature on T) is
thereby deleted, deriving:
(70)
there
[T to]
be there awarded
[several prizes]
[3-Pers]
[3 Pers]
[3-Pers]
[EPP]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
Merging the TP in (70) with the raising adjective likely, merging the resulting AP
with the passive verb thought and merging the resulting VP with a present tense
T containing be will derive:
(71)
[T be]
thought likely [there]
[T to]
be there awarded [several prizes]
[Pres-Tns]
[3-Pers] [3 Pers]
[3-Pers]
[u-Pers]
[EPP]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Num]
[u-Case]
[EPP]
At this point, [T be] is the highest head in the overall structure and so serves as a
probe. Its uninterpretable person and number features make it active, and mean
that [T be] looks for one or more active goals which can value its person/number
features. When T-be probes, the closest active goal which it locates is the expletive
pronoun there (active by virtue of its undeleted uninterpretable third person
feature). However, because expletive there is a defective pronoun carrying only
person (and not number), there can value (but cannot delete) only the person
feature on T-be, and (lacking number) there can neither value nor delete the

7.10 Defective clauses with expletive subjects
269
number feature on T-be. Let us suppose that economy requirements impose the
following condition on probes, as indeed we tacitly assumed earlier:
(72)
Probe Condition
A head probes only as far as is needed in order to ﬁnd a goal which can
value any unvalued features on the probe, and delete any uninterpretable
features on the probe
This will mean that T-be in (71) must probe beyond there in order to ﬁnd a goal
which can both value and delete all its features. T-be therefore probes further,
and locates the next closest active goal, which is the quantiﬁer phrase several
prizes (active by virtue of its undeleted uninterpretable case feature, and carrying
both person and number features). Accordingly, the probe be simultaneously
agrees with both there and several prizes. The unvalued person feature of be
will be valued as third person via agreement with the third person goals there
and several prizes, and the unvalued number feature of be will be valued as
plural via agreement with the plural goal several prizes. The uninterpretable
person/number features on the probe be are deleted in accordance with the
Completeness Condition (69) because be agrees with the ϕ-complete goal several
prizes. The unvalued case feature on the goal several prizes will be valued as
nominative via (8ii) and deleted via agreement with the ϕ-complete probe be in
conformity with the Completeness Condition (69). The epp feature of be attracts
the closest active goal (namely there) to move to become the speciﬁer of be
(movement resulting in deletion of the EPP feature on be), so deriving:
(73)
there
[T be]
thought likely t
[T to]
be t
[several prizes]
awarded
[3 Pers]
[Pres-Tns]
[3 Pers]
[3-Pers]
[3 Pers]
[EPP]
[Pl-Num]
[Pl-Num]
[Nom-Case]
[EPP]
(t denoting a null trace copy of there)
The resulting structure will then be merged with a null declarative complemen-
tiser, and be will ultimately be spelled out as the third person plural present tense
form are. As required, all uninterpretable features have been deleted from (73),
so only the bold interpretable features are seen by the semantic component.
Note that an important assumption which is incorporated into the analysis
presented here is that all the agreement, case assignment, movement and deletion
operations which apply on the T-cycle apply simultaneously, in conformity with
the Simultaneity Condition (18). A further key assumption we have made is that
T can agree with multiple goals, so that (e.g.) [T be] agrees with both there and
several prizes in (71). At ﬁrst sight, it might seem that allowing a probe to agree
with multiple goals creates unwelcome asymmetries between movement and
agreement. This is because (in consequence of the Attract Closest Condition) the
epp feature of T only triggers movement of a single goal (viz. the closest one) to

270
7 agreement, case and a-movement
spec-T, whereas agreement can target more than one goal. However, this potential
difference between movement and agreement can be reconciled if we suppose
that an agreeing head probes only as far as the closest (ϕ-complete) goal which
can value and delete all its agreement features – so allowing be to probe as far
as several prizes in (71). It would then follow that agreement and EPP features
alike can only probe as far as the closest constituent which will satisfy all their
requirements – and this condition in turn is arguably reducible to the Economy
Condition of Chomsky (1989, p. 69) requiring that there should be ‘no superﬂuous
steps in derivations’ (so that once a probe has satisﬁed its requirements, it ceases
to probe any further). Since the epp feature on be in (71) searches for a goal
with person, it ceases to probe once it locates the closest person-speciﬁed goal,
namely there. But since the agreement features on be require a ϕ-complete goal
with both person and number, they probe as far as the QP several prizes.
Finally, let’s turn to consider the derivation of an ECM structure such as:
(74)
John is expecting there to be several problems
This is derived as follows. The verb be merges with its QP complement several
problems to form the V-bar be several problems. This V-bar is then merged
with the expletive pronoun there to form the VP there be several problems. The
resulting VP is in turn merged with inﬁnitival to (which, being defective in ECM
clauses, carries only epp and person features), so forming the structure shown in
simpliﬁed form below:
(75)
[T to]
there
be
[several problems]
[u-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[EPP]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
The unvalued, uninterpretable person feature on the probe to is valued as third
person via multiple agreement with the two third person goals there and several
problems; it is also deleted via person agreement with the ϕ-complete goal several
problems. The unvalued, uninterpretable case feature on the goal several problems
cannot be valued or deleted by the probe to (and likewise, the uninterpretable
third person feature on the expletive goal there cannot be deleted by the probe to),
because to is a defective probe which does not have a complete set of ϕ-features
(in that to has person but not number). The epp feature on to triggers raising of
the closest person-speciﬁed goal (= there) to spec-T and is thereafter deleted, so
deriving the structure shown below:
(76)
there
[T to]
there be
[several problems]
[3-Pers]
[3 Pers]
[3-Pers]
[EPP]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
The ECM verb expecting then merges with the TP in (76) (and with its subject
John) to form the VP shown in (77) below:

7.10 Defective clauses with expletive subjects
271
(77)
John
expecting
there
[T to]
there be
[several problems]
[u-Pers]
[3-Pers]
[3 Pers]
[3-Pers]
[u-Num]
[EPP]
[Pl-Num]
[u-Case]
If (as we have assumed), structural case-marking involves agreement between
probe and goal, it follows that the transitive verb expecting in (77) will enter
the derivation with unvalued, uninterpretable person and number features which
make it an active probe. The verb expecting thus probes until all its agreement
features have been valued. It locates expletive there as a goal (active by virtue of
its uninterpretable person feature), but since there can only value the person (and
not the number) feature on the verb expecting, it continues to probe until it locates
a goal like the QP several problems which is active (by virtue of its unvalued and
uninterpretable case feature) and which carries both person and number features.
Accordingly, the (abstract) person and number features on the verb expecting are
valued as third person via agreement with both there and several problems, and as
plural via agreement with several problems: the person and number features on the
probe expecting are also deleted via agreement with the ϕ-complete goal several
problems. The case feature on the goal several problems is valued as accusative in
accordance with (46) above (and concomitantly deleted) via agreement with the
ϕ-complete probe expecting (the transitivity of the verb expecting being reﬂected
in the fact that it has an external argument – namely John). The uninterpretable
third person feature on the expletive goal there is deleted via person agreement
with the ϕ-complete probe expecting. After all these various operations have
taken place simultaneously, we derive the structure in (78) below at the end of
the V-cycle:
(78)
John
expecting
there
[T to]
there be
[several problems]
[3 Pers]
[3 Pers]
[3 Pers]
[3-Pers]
[Pl Num]
[EPP]
[Pl-Num]
[Acc Case]
Merging the resulting VP with a T constituent containing the progressive auxiliary
be, and then merging the resulting TP with a null declarative complementiser
ultimately derives the structure associated with (74) John is expecting there to be
several problems.
An interesting descriptive observation which we note in passing is that the verb
be seems to function as an unaccusative predicate (like remain) in structures such
as (79) below:
(79)
There has remained/been some dissatisfaction
However, be differs from other unaccusative predicates in seemingly requiring
the use of expletive there with an indeﬁnite associate – as we see from (80) below:
(80)
Some dissatisfaction has remained/∗been

272
7 agreement, case and a-movement
This might perhaps suggest that (when used as an existential predicate – i.e. a
predicate describing the existence of some entity) be is listed in the lexicon as
obligatorily requiring expletive there as its speciﬁer (with there perhaps serving
as a locative argument).
●
●
7.11
Summary
In this chapter, we have taken a look at Chomsky’s recent work on
case, agreement and movement. In §7.2, we saw that agreement plays an integral
role in case assignment, in that nominative case is assigned to a nominal (i.e.
noun or pronoun expression) which agrees in person and number with a ﬁnite T.
In §7.3, we argued that some features enter the derivation already valued (e.g. the
tense feature of T and the person/number ϕ-features of non-expletive nominals),
whereas others (e.g. the ϕ-features of T and the case feature of nominals) are
initially unvalued and are assigned values in the course of the derivation via a
case/agreement Feature-Valuation operation. In §7.4, we argued that agreement
and case-marking involve a relation between an active probe and an active goal,
and that probe and goal are only active if they carry one or more uninterpretable
features (e.g. uninterpretable ϕ-features or case features). We also saw that
uninterpretable features have to be deleted in the course of the derivation by
a Feature Deletion operation, in order to ensure that they do not feed into the
semantic component and thereby cause the derivation to crash (because they
are illegible in the semantic component), and we posited that a feature becomes
inactive in the syntax and invisible to the semantic component once deleted (while
remaining visible to the PF component). In §7.5, we suggested that expletive
it enters the derivation with uninterpretable third person and singular number
features, and that these value, delete and in turn are deleted by those of the
auxiliary is in sentences such as It is said that he has taken bribes; we argued that
an expletive originates within an intransitive VP which has no external argument.
In §7.6, we argued that expletive there carries only an uninterpretable third person
feature. We looked at the distribution of expletive pronouns and concluded that
expletive there is used in structures where a verb has an indeﬁnite (pro)nominal
internal argument, and expletive it in structures where there is no other active
agreeing (pro)nominal goal. In §7.7, we outlined Chomsky’s agreement-based
account of A-movement under which A-movement involves an agreement relation
between an active probe with an epp feature and an active goal, and we noted
that the epp feature of T is satisﬁed (and deleted) by movement of the closest
active goal to spec-T. In §7.8, we looked at the syntax of inﬁnitive clauses. We
saw that the pro subject of a control inﬁnitive originates within VP and that it
is attracted to move to spec-T by an inﬁnitival to which carries nonﬁnite tense
and an epp feature, and which agrees in person and number with and assigns
null case to pro. In §7.9, we went on to argue that T in other types of inﬁnitive
clause (e.g. the inﬁnitival complements of raising, passive and ECM predicates)

7.11 Summary
273
is defective in that although it carries uninterpretable epp and person features
(the latter serving to make T active), it lacks the number feature carried by T
in ﬁnite/control clauses. And in §7.10, we extended this analysis to defective
clauses with expletive subjects.
Key assumptions which we have made in this chapter are summarised below
(in some cases, slightly revised in terms of assumptions made later in the text):
(81)
Earliness Principle (= 3)
Operations apply as early as possible in a derivation
(82)
Feature Composition of T in English (= 60)
(i)
T always carries an epp feature and a person feature in all types of (ﬁnite
and nonﬁnite, main and complement) clauses
(ii)
T also carries a number feature in complete clauses which are CPs (i.e. in
ﬁnite clauses and control clauses), though not in defective clauses which are
only TPs (hence not in raising clauses, or long-distance passives or ECM
clauses)
(83)
Feature Valuation: Agreement and Case Assignment (= 8)
When an active probe (like T) agrees with one or more active goals in its
local domain
(i)
the unvalued (person/number) ϕ-features on the probe will be valued (i.e.
assigned a value which is a copy of that on the goal/s)
(ii)
the unvalued case feature/s on the goal/s will be valued (i.e. assigned a
value dependent on the nature of the probe – e.g. nominative if the probe is
a ﬁnite T, null case if the probe is a null T with nonﬁnite tense, accusative if
the probe is transitive)
(84)
Feature Deletion (= 14)
(i)
An uninterpretable case/agreement feature on a constituent α is deleted
when α agrees (in respect of one or more ϕ-features) with a ϕ-complete
constituent β which carries a complete set of person and number ϕ-features
(= Completeness Condition)
(ii)
An uninterpretable epp feature on a probe is deleted by movement of the
closest active goal of the relevant type to become the speciﬁer of the probe
(= epp Condition)
(iii)
Once deleted, a feature becomes invisible in the syntactic and semantic
components (and hence inactive in the syntax) while remaining visible in
the PF component (Invisibility Condition)
(85)
Simultaneity Condition (= 18)
All syntactic operations which involve a given probe apply simultaneously
(86)
Expletive Conditions (= 32)
(i)
External Argument Condition:
An expletive can only be merged as the highest argument of a verb with no
external argument
(ii)
Indeﬁniteness Condition:
Expletive there can only be merged with a verb which has an indeﬁnite
nominal or pronominal internal argument

274
7 agreement, case and a-movement
(iii)
Inactivity Condition:
Expletive it can only be merged with a constituent which does not contain a
nominal or pronominal expression with active case- or ϕ-features
(87)
Probe Condition (= 72)
A head probes only as far as is needed in order to ﬁnd a goal which can
value any unvalued features on the probe, and delete any uninterpretable
features on the probe
●
●
7.12
Bibliographical background
The probe–goal account of agreement and case assignment sketched
in §7.2 is based on Chomsky (1998, 1999, 2001). See Sigurðsson (2006) for
an alternative account of case assignment. The Earliness Principle derives from
work by Pesetsky (1995) and Rezac (2003). The spec-T account of expletives
derives from Chomsky (1999). On dative complements in Icelandic, see Sveno-
nius (2002a, b). On so-called ‘semantic agreement’ in British English structures
like The government are ruining the country, see den Dikken (2001) and Sauer-
land and Elbourne (2002). On the idea that agreement features originate on C
and are ‘handed down’ to T, see Chomsky (2005b, 2006) and Miyagawa (2005,
2006); we will return to this in chapter 9. For an alternative view of agreement
as involving feature sharing, see Pesetsky and Torrego (2007). On the claim
made in §7.6 that CPs headed by the complementiser that are caseless, see
Saﬁr (1986). The claim made in §7.7 that the only feature carried by expletive
there is an uninterpretable person feature derives from Chomsky (1998, 1999,
2001): for alternative analyses of expletive there structures, see Jenkins (1975),
Lasnik (1992, 1995b), Groat (1995), Moro (1997), Sobin (1997), Sch¨utze (1999),
Felser and Rupp (2001), Bowers (2002), Lasnik (2003), Han (2004), Hazout
(2004a,b), Sobin (2004), Williams (2006) and Hornstein (2007). On structures
such as There were three ﬁsh caught in the lake, see Chomsky (1999), Bow-
ers (2002), Caponigro and Sch¨utze (2003) and Rezac (2006). On agreement in
structures like There’s lots of people in the room, see Sobin (1997), Sch¨utze
(1999) and den Dikken (2001). On multiple agreement, see Chomsky (2001,
2005b), Hiraira (2001, 2005) and Henderson (2006). On the semantic properties
of indeﬁnites, see Milsark (1974, 1977), Jenkins (1975), Diesing (1992), Groat
(1995) and Felser and Rupp (2001). The claim in §7.8 that A-movement involves
agreement is made in Chomsky (1998, 1999, 2001). In relation to control clauses
discussed in §7.9, see Stowell (1982) and Martin (2001) on the tense properties
of control to, and Martin (2001) on the agreement properties of control to; see
Bowers (2002) and Landau (2006a) for alternative analyses of the case-marking
of PRO subjects. The claim that inﬁnitival to in defective clauses carries epp and
person features follows Chomsky (1999); the Completeness Condition is derived
from the same source. The analysis of ﬂoating quantiﬁers presented in the text
is adapted from Sportiche (1988). A potential problem for the claim in §7.10

Workbook section
275
that defective clauses carry an incomplete set of agreement features is posed by
languages which use subjunctive clauses in contexts where English uses inﬁni-
tives (e.g. in seem-type raising structures): in such clauses, T carries a complete
set of agreement features, but is defective in respect of its tense properties (in
being untensed, and hence showing no tense contrasts): see Uchibori (2000),
Landau (2006a) and Polinsky and Potsdam (2006). This suggests that a broader
cross-linguistic characterisation of the notion of defective clause is required.
●
●
Workbook section
●
Exercise 7.1
Discuss the derivation of the following sentences, paying particular attention to the syntax of case,
agreement and epp features:
1
Many miners may die
2
Many miners are thought to have died (w)
3
No prize was awarded
4
No prize is likely to be awarded
5
They are hoping to be promoted (w)
6
They appear to be hoping to be promoted
7
She is expecting him to be promoted
8
She seems to be expecting him to be promoted
9
He is believed to want to be promoted
10
He appears to be believed to want to be promoted
Helpful hints
When have or be occurs immediately after inﬁnitival to, take it to be the head AUX constituent of an
AUXP projection; and in 4, assume that is functions as a copula and raises from V to T in the manner
described in §4.6. Bear in mind the key assumptions summarised in (81–87) in the main text.
Model answer for 1
The verb die is an unaccusative predicate – as we see from the postverbal position of the italicised
subject in a (somewhat contrived) expletive sentence like
(i)
Never before had there died so many miners in a single accident
and from the fact its Italian counterpart morire is used in conjunction with the perfect auxiliary
essere ‘be’, as we see in:
(ii)
Sono morti parecchi minatori
Are
died several
miners
‘Several miners have died’
Accordingly, sentence 1 is derived as follows. The unaccusative verb die is merged with the QP
many miners to form the VP die many miners. This is then merged with a present tense T
constituent containing the modal auxiliary may to form the structure shown below:

276
7 agreement, case and a-movement
(iii)
T' 
  
T                                        VP 
may 
[Pres-Tns]                V                            QP 
[u-Pers]                  die                    many miners
[u-Num]                                              [3-Pers]
[EPP]                                                [Pl-Num]
      [u-Case]
The T-auxiliary may is a probe by virtue of being the head of the overall structure and carries
(abstract) uninterpretable person and number features in accordance with (82), and these make it
active. It searches for an active goal and locates the QP several miners (which is active by virtue
of its uninterpretable case feature). Via agreement with the ϕ-complete goal several miners, the
ϕ-features on the probe may are valued as third person plural in accordance with (83i), and
deleted in accordance with (84i). Via agreement with the ﬁnite ϕ-complete probe may, the case
feature on the goal several miners is valued as nominative in accordance with (83ii), and deleted
in accordance with (84i). The epp feature on T is deleted by movement of the closest goal several
miners to spec-T, in conformity with (84ii). These various (agreement, case-marking, movement
and deletion) operations apply simultaneously on the T-cycle in accordance with (85), so deriving
the TP shown in (iv) below:
(iv)
TP 
QP                                          T' 
  
many miners  
[3-Pers]                    T                                     VP 
[Pl-Num]                 may 
[Nom Case]          [Pres-Tns]               V                         QP 
        [3 Pers]                die                 
       [Pl Num]              
The resulting TP is then merged with a null complementiser containing an interpretable
declarative force feature. In accordance with (84iii), deleted features are invisible in the semantic
component, but visible in the PF component (though there is no overt spellout of the abstract
person/number agreement features on the modal auxiliary may). Since all unvalued features have
been valued (and all uninterpretable features deleted), the derivation converges both at the
interface with the PF component and at the interface with the semantic component.
●
Exercise 7.2
Discuss the syntax of the following expletive sentences, paying particular attention to
case-marking and agreement, and to the choice of expletive pronoun:
1
There remains every hope of ﬁnding survivors
2
There does appear to remain some discontent
3
∗There does appear some discontent to remain
4
It is said that there have been some demonstrations (w)
5
∗It is said there to have been some demonstrations
6
There are said to have been some demonstrations

Workbook section
277
7
It is thought to be recognised that there do appear to remain problems
8
I believe it to be essential for there to be some safeguards
9
It would seem that it is snowing
10
The jury found there to be no evidence of corruption
In addition, say what problems seem to be posed for the analysis of expletives given in the main
text by sentences such as 11:
11
It’s a pity that expletives cause problems
Helpful hints
Take a nonﬁnite form of be/have to be an AUX (heading an AUXP) in to have . . . in 5 and 6 and
in to be . . . in 7. Take any nonﬁnite form of be to be a copular V heading a VP when followed by
a QP (like some demonstrations in 4, 5 and 6, some safeguards in 8 or no evidence of corruption
in 10. In 9, assume that snow is an unaccusative verb, and that its subject originates in the same
position as other unacusative subjects. Bear in mind the key assumptions summarised in (81–87)
in the main text. Assume that the complementiser for in example 8 has the same case/agreement
properties as a transitive ECM verb. Consider the effect of taking a pity to be a predicate rather
than an argument in 11.
Model answer for 1
Given the assumptions made in the text, sentence 1 will be derived as follows. The noun hope is
merged with its PP complement of ﬁnding survivors (whose structure need not concern us here) to
form the NP hope of ﬁnding survivors. This NP is merged with the quantiﬁer every to form the QP
every hope of ﬁnding survivors. The resulting QP is merged as the complement of the
unaccusative verb remain to form the V-bar remain every hope of ﬁnding survivors. This V-bar is
then merged with expletive there to form the VP there remain every hope of ﬁnding survivors,
with there being merged as the highest argument of a verb (remain) which has an indeﬁnite
internal argument every hope of ﬁnding survivors but no external argument, so that Expletive
Conditions (86i, ii) are satisﬁed. The resulting VP in turn is merged with an afﬁxal ﬁnite T
constituent (denoted as Af ) to form the structure shown in simpliﬁed form in (i) below:
(i)
T' 
 
T                                              VP 
 Af 
[Pres-Tns]               PRN                                        V' 
[u-Pers]                  there         
[u-Num]               [3-Pers]                 V                                       QP 
[EPP]                                           remain              every hope of finding survivors
    [3-Pers, Sg-Num, u-Case]
(Note that expletive it could not be used in place of there here, because the Inactivity Condition
would prevent it from being merged with a V-bar like that in (i) which contains a constituent with
an active case feature, such as the QP every hope of ﬁnding survivors.) The afﬁxal T constituent
serves as a probe because it is the highest head in the structure, and because its uninterpretable
person/number features make it active. Consequently, T searches for active goals, locating the
expletive pronoun there, which is active by virtue of its uninterpretable person feature. However,
since there carries no number feature and so cannot value the number feature on T, the T head
probes further until it locates the (person-and-number-speciﬁed) QP every hope of ﬁnding

278
7 agreement, case and a-movement
survivors (active by virtue of having an uninterpretable case feature). The person/number features
on T are valued as third person singular (in accordance with (83i)) via multiple agreement with
there and every hope of ﬁnding survivors, and deleted (in accordance with (84i)) via agreement
with the ϕ-complete goal every hope of ﬁnding survivors. The uninterpretable person feature on
expletive there is deleted via agreement with the ϕ-complete (afﬁxal) T-probe, in accordance with
(84i). Via agreement with the ϕ-complete afﬁx in T, the unvalued case feature on every hope of
ﬁnding survivors is valued as nominative in conformity with (83ii) and deleted in accordance with
(84i). The uninterpretable epp feature on the T-probe (which requires T to have a speciﬁer with
person) is deleted by movement of the closest person-speciﬁed goal (= there) to spec-T, in
conformity with (84ii). These various agreement, case assignment, movement and deletion
operations take place simultaneously on the T-cycle, in conformity with (85), so deriving the TP
shown below:
(ii)
TP 
PRN                                         T' 
there 
[3-Pers]                  T                                      VP 
   Af 
[Pres-Tns]            
                                  V ' 
[3 Pers] 
[Sg-Num]                                   V                                     QP 
 [EPP]                                   remain            every hope of finding survivors
                          [3-Pers, Sg-Num, Nom Case]
The resulting TP is then merged with a null complementiser containing an interpretable
declarative force feature. The entire structure in (ii) (including both interpretable and
uninterpretable features) is then handed over to the PF component, where the afﬁx in T is lowered
onto the verb remain, which is consequently spelled out as the third person singular present tense
form remains. The structure in (ii) is simultaneously handed over to the semantic component,
where only undeleted features (i.e. the bold-printed interpretable features) are visible in
accordance with (84iii). Since all unvalued features have been valued (and all uninterpretable
features deleted), the derivation converges both at the interface with the PF component and at the
interface with the semantic component.

8
Split projections
●
●
8.1
Overview
Hitherto, we have assumed a simple model of clause structure in
which complete clauses are CP+TP+VP structures. However, in this chapter,
we review work suggesting that CP, TP and VP should be split into more than
one type of projection – hence the title of this chapter. We begin by looking at
arguments that the CP layer of clause structure should be split into a number of
separate (Force Phrase, Topic Phrase and Focus Phrase) projections. We then
go on to explore the possibility of splitting TP into separate Tense Phrase, Aspect
Phrase and Mood Phrase projections. In the remainder of the chapter, we look
at evidence that verb phrases should be split into two separate projections – one
headed by a lexical verb and the other by an abstract light verb.
●
●
8.2
Split CP: Force, Topic and Focus projections
Our discussion of wh-movement in chapter 5 was concerned with
movement of wh-expressions to the periphery of clauses (i.e. to a position
above TP). However, as examples like (1) below illustrate, it is not simply wh-
constituents which undergo movement to the clause periphery:
(1)
No other colleague would he turn to
In (1), no other colleague (which is the complement of the preposition to) has
been focused/focalised – i.e. moved to the front of the sentence in order to focus
it (and thereby give it special emphasis). At ﬁrst sight, it would appear that the
focused negative expression moves into spec-C and that the pre-subject auxiliary
would moves from T to C in the manner shown in (2) below (simpliﬁed inter alia
by not showing he originating in spec-V):
(2)
[CP No other colleague [C would] [TP he [T would] [VP [V turn] [PP [P to] no other colleague]]]]
279

280
8 split projections
However, one problem posed by the CP analysis of focusing/focalisation sketched
in (2) is that a structure containing a preposed focused constituent can occur after
a complementiser like that, as in (3) below:
(3)
I am absolutely convinced [that no other colleague would he turn to]
This suggests that there must be more than one type of CP projection ‘above’
TP in clauses: more speciﬁcally, there must be one type of projection which
hosts preposed focused constituents, and another type of projection which hosts
complementisers. Reasoning along these lines, Luigi Rizzi (1997, 2001b, 2004)
suggests that CP should be split into a number of different projections – an
analysis widely referred to as the split CP hypothesis. More speciﬁcally, he sug-
gests that complementisers (by virtue of their role in specifying whether a given
clause is declarative, interrogative, imperative or exclamative in force) should
be analysed as Force markers heading a ForceP (= Force Phrase) projection,
and that focused constituents should be analysed as contained within a separate
FocP (= Focus Phrase) headed by a Foc constituent (= Focus marker). If we
suppose that the preposed negative expression italicised in (3) is focused and that
the complementiser that serves to mark the complement clause as declarative in
force, the bracketed complement clause in (3) will have the structure shown in
simpliﬁed form below:
(4)
   ForceP
Force      
       FocP
that 
  QP
           Foc'
no other colleague
   Foc   
TP
 would          he would turn to no other colleague
The focused QP/quantiﬁer phrase no other colleague originates as the comple-
ment of the preposition to and (by virtue of being focused) moves from comple-
ment position within PP into speciﬁer position within FocP. The auxiliary would
originates in T and from there moves into the head Foc position of FocP. One
way of describing the relevant data is to suppose that the head Foc constituent of
FocP carries an edge feature [ef] which allows it to attract a negative expression
to move into spec-FocP (in which position the preposed negative expression is
interpreted as being focused), and that Foc is a strong (afﬁxal) head carrying a
tense feature which attracts the auxiliary would to move from T into Foc.
From a discourse perspective, a focused constituent typically represents new
information (i.e. information not previously mentioned in the discourse and unfa-
miliar to the hearer). In this connection, consider the following dialogue:
(5)
speaker a: Would you ever cheat in really tough exams?
speaker b: Under no circumstances would I cheat in exams

8.2 Split CP: Force, Topic and Focus projections
281
Here, the new information given by speaker B is that there are no circumstances
under which he would cheat in exams: accordingly, the italicised preposed nega-
tive phrase is said to be focused in 5b.
In respect of their information content, focused constituents differ from another
class of preposed expressions which serve as the topic of the clause immediately
containing them. Topics typically represent old information (i.e. information
which has already been mentioned in the discourse and hence is known to
the hearer). In this connection, consider the sentence produced by speaker b
below:
(6)
speaker a: The demonstrators have been looting shops and setting ﬁre to
cars
speaker b: That kind of behaviour, we cannot tolerate in a civilised society
Here, the italicised phrase that kind of behaviour refers back to the activity of
looting shops and setting ﬁre to cars mentioned earlier by speaker a, and so is the
topic of the discourse. Since the topic that kind of behaviour is the complement of
the verb tolerate it would be expected to occupy the canonical complement posi-
tion following tolerate. Instead, it ends up at the front of the overall sentence, and
so would seem to have undergone a movement operation of some kind. Since the
relevant movement operation serves to mark the preposed constituent as the topic
of the sentence, it is widely known as topicalisation. However, since it moves a
maximal projection to a speciﬁer position on the periphery of the clause, topical-
isation can (like focusing and wh-movement) be regarded as a particular instance
of the more general A-bar movement operation we looked at in chapter 5,
whereby a moved constituent is attracted into an A-bar speciﬁer position (i.e.
the kind of speciﬁer position which can be occupied by arguments and adjuncts
alike).
Rizzi argues that just as focused constituents occupy the speciﬁer position
within a Focus Phrase, so too topicalised constituents occupy the speciﬁer position
within a Topic Phrase. This in turn raises the question of where Topic Phrases
are positioned relative to other constituents within the clause. In this connection,
consider the italicised clause in (7) below:
(7)
He had seen something truly evil – prisoners being ritually raped, tortured
and mutilated. He prayed that atrocities like those, never again would he
witness
In the italicised clause in (7), that marks the declarative force of the clause; atroc-
ities like those is the object of the verb witness and has been preposed in order
to mark it as the topic of the sentence (since it refers back to the acts of rape,
torture and mutilation mentioned in the previous sentence); the preposed negative
adverbial phrase never again is a focused constituent, and hence requires auxil-
iary inversion. Thus, the italicised that-clause in (7) has the simpliﬁed structure

282
8 split projections
shown below:
(8)
     ForceP 
Force       
    TopP 
that
  DP       
Top'
       ø atrocities
like those   
Top      
      FocP      
           ø     
            AdvP     
   Foc'
       never again
             Foc
TP
           would              he would never again
 witness atrocities like those 
ø  
We can assume that the head Top constituent of the Topic Phrase carries an
edge feature which allows it to attract a maximal projection to move into the
speciﬁer position within the Topic Phrase – in which position the preposed
maximal projection is interpreted as the topic of the relevant sentence. If we
further assume that Top is a weak head (and so does not carry a tense feature
attracting a tensed auxiliary), we can account for the fact that the auxiliary would
remains in the strong Foc position and does not raise to the weak Top position.
Rizzi’s split CP analysis raises interesting questions about the syntax of the
kind of wh-movement operation which we ﬁnd (inter alia) in interrogatives,
relatives and exclamatives. Within the unitary (unsplit) CP analysis outlined in
chapter 5, it was clear that wh-phrases moved into spec-C; but if CP can be
split into a number of distinct projections (including a Force Phrase, a Topic
Phrase and a Focus Phrase), the question arises as to which of these projections
serves as the landing-site for wh-movement. Rizzi (1997, p. 289) suggests that
‘relative operators occupy the highest speciﬁer position, the spec of Force’. In
this connection, consider the syntax of the bracketed relative clauses in (9) below:
(9) (a)
A university is the kind of place [in which, that kind of behaviour,
we cannot tolerate]
(b)
Syntax is the kind of subject [which only very rarely will students enjoy]
In (9a), the preposed wh-expression in which precedes the preposed topic that
kind of behaviour; in (9b) the preposed relative pronoun which precedes the
preposed focused expression only very rarely. If Rizzi is right in suggesting that
preposed relative operator expressions occupy speciﬁer position within the Force
Phrase, the bracketed relative clauses in (9a,b) above will have the simpliﬁed
structures shown below:
(10)(a)
[ForceP in which [Force ø] [TopP that kind of behaviour
[Top ø] [TP we cannot tolerate t t]]]
(b)
[ForceP which [Force ø] [FocP only very rarely [Foc will]
[TP students t enjoy t t]]]

8.2 Split CP: Force, Topic and Focus projections
283
(To save space, trace copies of moved constituents are shown as t and printed in
the same typeface as their antecedent.)
In much the same way, Rizzi argues that an interrogative wh-expression occu-
pies spec-Force in complement-clause questions. Evidence in support of this
claim comes from sentences such as the following (from Culicover 1991):
(11)(a)
Lee wonders [whether under no circumstances at all would Robin volunteer]
(b)
Lee wonders [why under no circumstances at all would Robin volunteer]
Here, the wh-expressions whether/why occur to the left of the focused nega-
tive phrase under no circumstances, suggesting that whether/why do not occupy
speciﬁer position within FocP but rather some higher position – and since For-
ceP is the highest projection within the clause, it is plausible to suppose that
whether/why occupy the speciﬁer position within ForceP in structures like (11).
Further evidence in support of the same conclusion comes from contrasts such
as the following:
(12)(a)
I cannot see [how, this kind of behaviour, we can tolerate
in a civilised society]
(b)
∗I cannot see [this kind of behaviour, how we can tolerate
in a civilised society]
The observation that an (italicised) interrogative wh-expression can be followed –
but not preceded – by a (bold-printed) topic in complement-clause questions
like those bracketed in (12) is consistent with the view that a preposed wh-
expression in a complement-clause question occupies spec-ForceP, and hence is
positioned above a topic phrase. Further evidence in support of this conclusion
comes from the fact that in colloquial English we often ﬁnd structures like those
below (from Radford (1988, p. 500), recorded from radio and TV broadcasts), in
which an (italicised) preposed interrogative expression precedes the (underlined)
complementiser introducing a [bracketed] embedded clause:
(13)(a)
I’m not sure [what kind of ban that FIFA has in mind]
(b)
We’ll see [what sort of pace that Daley Thompson’s running at]
(c)
It’ll probably be evident from the ﬁeld [which of the players that are feeling
the heat most]
If the (underlined) complementiser is a Force head, it is plausible to supposed
that the (italicised) interrogative expression preceding it occupies the speciﬁer
position within ForceP.
A question raised by Rizzi’s analysis of relative and interrogative wh-clauses is
where preposed wh-expressions move in exclamative clauses. In this connection,
consider (14) below:
(14)(a)
How many of their policies only rarely do politicians get around to
implementing!
(b)
In how many countries, that kind of behaviour, autocratic leaders would
simply not tolerate!

284
8 split projections
(c)
In how many countries of the world, such behaviour, under no
circumstances would autocratic leaders tolerate!
In (14a), the italicised exclamative wh-expression how many of their policies
precedes the bold-printed focused constituent only rarely. In (14b) the excla-
mative wh-phrase in how many countries precedes the underlined topic that
kind of behaviour. And in (14c), an italicised exclamative expression precedes
both an underlined topicalised expression and a bold-printed focused expression.
Although the resulting sentences are clearly somewhat contrived, they suggest
that exclamative wh-expressions (like wh-pronouns in relative clauses and inter-
rogative wh-expressions in complement-clause questions) move into the speciﬁer
position within ForceP.
From what we have said so far, it might seem plausible to conclude that rela-
tive, interrogative and exclamative wh-expressions always move to the speciﬁer
position within ForceP. However, Rizzi (1997, p. 299) maintains that a preposed
interrogative wh-expression ‘ends up in Spec of Foc in main questions’. Further-
more, he maintains (p. 295) that ‘There can be . . . only one structural Focus
position per clause.’ The twin assumptions that interrogative wh-expressions in
main-clause questions move to the speciﬁer position in a Focus Phrase and that
no clause may contain more than one Focus Phrase projection together provide a
straightforward account of the ungrammaticality of main clause questions such
as (15) below:
(15)(a)
∗What never again will you do?
(b)
∗What will never again you do?
If both what and never again (when preposed) move into the speciﬁer position
within FocP, if Foc allows only one focused constituent as its speciﬁer, and if no
clause may contain more than one FocP constituent, it follows that (15a) will be
ruled out by virtue of Foc having two speciﬁers (what and never again) and that
(15b) will be ruled out by virtue of requiring two Focus Phrase constituents (one
hosting what and another hosting never again). Likewise, multiple wh-movement
questions (i.e. questions in which more than one wh-expression is preposed) such
as (16) below will be ruled out in a similar fashion:
(16)(a)
∗Who where did he send?
(b)
∗Who did where he send?
Thus, the conclusion which Rizzi’s observation leads us to is that wh-expressions
move to the edge of a Focus Phrase projection in main-clause wh-questions, but
move to spec-ForceP in other types of clause.
Further evidence in support of the claim that interrogative wh-expressions
move to spec-FocP (and not to spec-ForceP) in main-clause questions comes
from contrasts such as:
(17)(a)
That kind of behaviour, how can we tolerate in a civilised society?
(b)
∗How can that kind of behaviour we tolerate in a civilised society?

8.2 Split CP: Force, Topic and Focus projections
285
If how were in spec-ForceP, we would be unable to account for the observation
that it follows the bold-printed topic phrase in (17a), given Rizzi’s assumption
that ForceP is always the highest projection in a split CP. By contrast, if how is in
spec-FocP, the order of projections in (17a) is precisely as in (8), with FocP being
positioned under TopP, and TopP being positioned under a ForceP projection with
a null head.
What remains to be accounted for is why the italicised focused wh-word
cannot precede the bold-printed topic in (17b). The answer relates to the syntax
of the auxiliary can which occupies the head Foc position of FocP in (17b). Can
originates in the head T position of TP and in order to get into Foc must either
move directly from T to Foc, or move (in successive-cyclic fashion) through Top
into Foc – these two possibilities being shown by the arrowed movements in the
(abbreviated) structure below:
(18)
[ForceP [Force ø] [FocP how [Foc can] [TopP that kind of behaviour [Top ø ] [TP we [T can] tolerate… ]]]]
However, direct movement from T to Foc (represented by the dotted arrow) is
ruled out because it would violate the Head Movement Constraint (which allows
a head to move only into the next highest head position in the structure containing
it); and successive-cyclic movement from V through Top into Foc (represented
by the two solid arrows) is ruled out because Top is a weak head, and so cannot
attract T to move to Top. Consequently, the topic must be positioned above the
focused wh-expression in main-clause questions like (17) in English.
A further question raised by Rizzi’s analysis is why interrogative wh-
expressions should occupy two different types of position, moving to spec-FocP
in a main-clause question structure like (19a) below, but to spec-ForceP in a
complement-clause question structure like that bracketed in (19b):
(19)(a)
[ForceP [Force ø] [FocP what dress [Foc were] [TP you [T were] wearing]]]?
(b)
He asked [ForceP what dress [Force ø] [TP you [T were] wearing]]
Part of the answer may lie in the semantic properties of interrogative wh-words,
which not only make them suitable candidates for focusing (because a focused
expression carries new information, and interrogative wh-words ask for new
information), but also mark interrogative force. By virtue of having properties
making them suitable to be focused, they can occupy the speciﬁer position in a
Focus Phrase as in (19a); but by virtue of being interrogative in force, they can
alternatively occupy speciﬁer position within a Force Phrase as in (19b). More
generally, it would appear that constituents which are able to move to the speciﬁer
position in FocP share in common the semantic property that they are operator
expressions (i.e. expressions containing an operator). Negative and interrogative
expressions contain an operator which licenses (i.e. allows the occurrence of) a

286
8 split projections
subordinate polarity item such as partitive any, whereas exclamative and relative
wh-expressions do not – as we see from the contrast below:
(20)(a)
What sympathy did any of the protestors get?
(b)
Not a grain of sympathy did any of the protestors get
(c)
∗What a lot of sympathy any of the protestors got!
(d)
∗He was surprised at the sympathy which any of the protestors got
Consequently, operator expressions like the underlined interrogative expression
in (20a) and the underlined negative expression in (20b) can move to spec-FocP,
but not non-operator expressions like the underlined exclamative expression in
(20c) or the underlined relative pronoun in (20d). Instead, exclamative and relative
wh-expressions move to the speciﬁer position within a Force Phrase (which might
more appropriately be called a Type Phrase, given that a relative pronoun marks
a clause as relative in type rather than in force).
However, all of this still leaves the question of why interrogative expressions
move to spec-ForceP (and not to spec-FocP) in embedded questions like (19b). It
may well be that the answer lies in selection. In the use illustrated in (19b), the verb
ask selects an interrogative complement. If we suppose that a question-asking
predicate like ask requires a complement with an interrogative edge (i.e. with an
interrogative expression on the edge of the relevant projection which serves to
mark the relevant clause as interrogative in type), then it follows that movement of
an interrogative wh-expression in an interrogative complement clause must be to
the speciﬁer position of the highest head in the selected structure – hence to spec-
ForceP. By contrast, a main clause is unselected, and so a focused interrogative
wh-expression moves only as far as spec-FocP (perhaps for economy reasons,
there being no necessity for further movement to spec-ForceP in a main clause:
however, we shall offer an alternative answer at the end of §9.4). If Foc is a strong
head and Force a weak head, we can account for why auxiliary inversion occurs
in main-clause questions like (19a), but not in complement-clause questions like
(19b).
On the other hand, because preposed negative expressions are operator expres-
sions but do not mark force (as we see from the fact that there are no predicates
which select a negative complement), they move to spec-FocP in both main and
complement clauses alike. And because Foc is always a strong head, we can
account for why we ﬁnd auxiliary inversion in complement clauses like that
bracketed in (3) above I am absolutely convinced [that no other colleague would
he turn to]. The bracketed complement clause in (3) would have the structure
shown in simpliﬁed form in (21) below:
(21)
[ForceP [Force that] [FocP no other colleague [Foc would] [TP he [T would] turn
to no other colleague]]]
Its main-clause counterpart No other colleague would he turn to would have an
analogous structure, save for the head Force constituent of ForceP being null.

8.3 Split TP: Aspect and Mood projections
287
A ﬁnal descriptive detail which needs to be added relates to the spellout of the
Force head in structures such as the following:
(22)(a)
He admitted [ForceP [Force that/ø] [TP he [T is] really enjoying syntax]]
(b)
He admitted [ForceP [Force that/∗ø] [TopP syntax [Top ø] [TP he [T is] really
enjoying syntax]]]
(c)
He admitted [ForceP [Force that/∗ø] [FocP nothing else [Foc would]
[TP he [T would] rather do nothing else]]]
As these examples illustrate, the Force head in a ﬁnite declarative clause can be
spelled out as that irrespective of whether its complement is a TP as in (22a), or a
TopP as in (22b), or a FocP as in (22c). By contrast, a declarative Force head can
only have a null spellout in structures like (22a) where it has a TP complement.
One way of handling the relevant contast is in terms of selection if we suppose
that a null declarative complementiser can only select a TP complement, whereas
the overt complementiser that can select a much wider range of complements
(e.g. TP or TopP, or FocP) – a solution which obviously presupposes that we treat
that and ø as distinct complementisers.
Although in this section we have outlined Rizzi’s split CP analysis of the left
periphery of clauses, it should be noted that (because we have little further to say
about topicalisation and focalisation), we shall for the most part revert to using
the traditional unsplit CP analysis of the clause periphery in the rest of the book,
and thus follow Chomsky (2005b, p. 9) in adopting the convention that ‘C is
shorthand for the region that Rizzi (1997) calls the left periphery.’
●
●
8.3
Split TP: Aspect and Mood projections
Parallel to Rizzi’s pioneering work on splitting the peripheral C head
into a number of separate types of head (such as Force, Topic and Finiteness),
there have been attempts over the past two decades to split the inﬂectional head
termed INFL in Chomsky (1981) into separate inﬂectional heads including not
only Tense, but also Aspect, Mood and Agreement. However, Chomsky (1995)
argued against the postulation of Agr[eement] heads on the twin grounds that
(i) agreement is a relation rather than a category, and (ii) agreement features are
uninterpretable, and hence a head which carried only agreement features could
not be assigned any interpretation at the semantics interface, and would cause the
derivation to crash: accordingly, Chomsky (1995, p. 355) proposed ‘eliminating
Agr [heads] from UG entirely’ on conceptual grounds. However, Tense, Aspect
and Mood are interpretable features, and so there are no such conceptual objec-
tions to positing that these are each realised on different functional heads. Since
we have argued throughout our book that all clauses contain a T constituent car-
rying an interpretable tense feature, in this section we concentrate on the question
of whether there is evidence for positing the existence of Aspect and Mood heads
in English.

288
8 split projections
Felser (1999a) argues that in verb–particle structures such as take the rubbish
out, the verb take originates immediately adjacent to the particle out (as in take out
the rubbish), but subsequently moves into the head Aspect position of an Aspect
Phrase projection which is positioned above VP but below TP, so becoming
separated from the particle, and resulting in structures such as:
(23)(a)
[CP [C ø] [TP he [T was] [AspP [Asp taking] [VP the rubbish [V taking] out]]]]
(b)
[CP [C ø] [TP he [T had] [AspP [Asp taken] [VP the rubbish [V taken] out]]]]
(c)
[CP [C ø] [TP he [T ø] [AspP [Asp took] [VP the rubbish [V took] out]]]]
The assumption that the verb take moves into a position above the V position
in which it originates accounts for how the verb take comes to be separated
from the particle out, while the assumption that movement is to a head below T
accounts for why the verb cannot subsequently undergo T-to-C movement, e.g.
in sentences such as:
(24)
∗Took he out the rubbish?
Felser argues that perception verb complements such as that bracketed in (25a)
below have the status of Aspect Phrases, so that the bracketed complement clause
in (25a) has the structure shown in highly simpliﬁed form in (25b):
(25)(a)
We saw [him taking the rubbish out]
(b)
We saw [AsP him [Asp taking] the rubbish out]
She argues that the verb take raises from the head V position of VP into the head
Asp position of AspP, while its subject him raises to the speciﬁer position within
AspP and is assigned exceptional accusative case by the transitive verb saw.
However, while evidence of the kind outlined above in support of positing
an independent Aspect head in English is suggestive, it should be pointed out
that it is far from conclusive. For example (as we will see in §8.5), it turns out
that a split projection analysis of Verb Phrases can handle the syntax of the kind
of verb–particle structures discussed by Felser, without the need for positing an
independent Aspect head. The analyses we present throughout the rest of this
book, therefore, will ignore the possibility that English may have an Aspect head
(except in structures like She may (not) be telling the truth/She may (not) have
told the truth/She may (not) have been telling the truth, which contain one or more
overt aspectual auxiliaries be/have positioned below the T-auxiliary may and – in
negative clauses – below the negative particle not: in such cases, each occurrence
of the aspectual auxiliary could be argued to head a separate AspP projection –
though we will continue to label such projections AUXP, as in earlier chapters).
Having very brieﬂy surveyed evidence for positing an Aspect head, we now
turn to look at evidence put forward by Sch¨utze (2004) that English ﬁnite clauses
contain a further kind of inﬂectional head which marks the property of (indica-
tive, subjunctive or imperative) Mood (abbreviated to M). Sch¨utze claims that
there is empirical evidence in support of positing a Mood Phrase/MP projec-
tion between TP and CP, so that canonical negative clauses are of the form
CP+MP+TP+NEGP+VP. (A complication which we will overlook here is

8.3 Split TP: Aspect and Mood projections
289
Sch¨utze’s assumption that non-negative clauses contain a positive counterpart
of NEGP: see the discussion of POLP in §4.8.) He maintains that M is the locus
of modals and mood morphemes: more speciﬁcally, he posits that M can con-
tain either a modal auxiliary stem (e.g. can/will/must), or an abstract (indicative
or subjunctive) mood morpheme, below denoted as øIND and øSUB respectively.
Sch¨utze further assumes that an indicative mood morpheme is spelled out as an
inﬂected form of do when not attached to any other verbal stem (so that do-
support is found in indicative but not subjunctive clauses). By contrast, T is the
locus of tense afﬁxes, in the sense that ‘The only elements generated under T are
tense afﬁxes’ (Sch¨utze 2004, p. 507). T can contain either a strong afﬁx which
acquires a host by triggering movement of a lexical verb from V to T, or a weak
afﬁx which acquires a host by raising to attach to an auxiliary in M. Neg is the
locus of the negative particles not/n’t, and Sch¨utze posits that these are generated
in the head Neg position of of NEGP (and not in the speciﬁer position of NEGP
as we assumed in §4.7): he also assumes that Neg is not a strong head and so
blocks a lexical verb raising from V to T (because direct movement of the verb
from V to T is barred by the Head Movement Constraint, and successive-cyclic
movement of the verb from V through Neg into T is barred by virtue of Neg
not being strong and so being unable to attract V to move to Neg); however, a
clitic negative like n’t can itself cliticise to an M head above it. Subject–auxiliary
inversion is treated as M-to-C movement, so only a constituent in M (not one in
T) can undergo inversion and raise to C: subjects are also assumed to raise to
spec-M rather than to spec-T. Sch¨utze argues that his account obviates the need
for positing the traditional Afﬁx Lowering operation (by which an afﬁx in T is
lowered onto a verb in V), and that Head Movement is driven by the requirement
for an afﬁx to be attached to an appropriate kind of head (a strong afﬁx remaining
in situ and triggering raising of a head below it, and a weak afﬁx raising to attach
to a head above it).
How Sch¨utze’s system works can be illustrated (in a simpliﬁed fashion) as
follows. Consider ﬁrst a simple indicative clause structure like (26) below con-
taining a modal such as will and a present tense afﬁx AfPRES (with the subject he
originating as the speciﬁer of the verb help and raising to become the speciﬁer of
the modal will – as shown by the arrow):
(26)
          CP 
C     
      MP 
ø 
           PRN     
     M'
 he
     M       
TP
    will 
T     
VP
   AfPRES
PRN                    V'
he
 V 
  PRN
help               you

290
8 split projections
If the afﬁx in T is weak (and so ﬁnds a host by attaching to the head immediately
above it), it will raise to attach to the modal stem will in M, so forming:
(27)
[CP [C ø] [MP he [M will+AfPRES] [TP [T AfPRES] [VP he [V help] you]]]]
The modal is spelled out as will if (as here) the afﬁx is present tense, and as
would if it is past tense. The M constituent containing will+afﬁx can then undergo
subsequent movement to adjoin to a null interrogative C in a main-clause question
structure such as:
(28)
[CP whether [C will+AfPRES+ø] [MP he [M will+AfPRES]
[TP [T AfPRES] [VP he [V help] you]]]]
so ultimately deriving Will he help you? By contrast, if the T-afﬁx in (26) were
strong, it would attract the verb help to adjoin to it, so leaving the modal will
without a tense afﬁx (and thereby causing the derivation to crash, because the PF
component has no spellout for a tenseless form of a modal like will).
Now consider what happens in an auxiliariless indicative clause structure such
as the following:
(29)
[CP [C ø] [MP they [M øIND] [TP [T AfPRES] [VP they [V like] you]]]]
If the afﬁx in T is strong in (29), it will trigger movement of the verb like from V
to T, so forming the structure:
(30)
[CP [C ø] [MP they [M øIND] [TP [T like+AfPRES] [VP they [V like] you]]]]
Since the requirement for like to have a tense afﬁx and for the tense afﬁx to be
attached to an overt verb stem is satisﬁed by raising the verb from V to T, no
further movement is possible in this kind of structure (the null indicative mood
morpheme in M not being a strong afﬁx), and the sentence will be spelled out as
They like you. By contrast, if the T-afﬁx is weak in (30), it will raise to attach to
the null mood morpheme in M, so forming the structure:
(31)
[CP [C ø] [MP they [M øIND+AfPRES] [TP [T AfPRES] [VP they [V like] you]]]]
Since the resulting indicative M constituent contains no verbal stem, it is spelled
out as an appropriately inﬂected form of supportive do, so deriving They do like
you. In order to account for the fact that sentences like They do like you are
ungrammatical in standard varieties of English unless do is emphatic, Sch¨utze
invokes an economy condition which amounts to ‘Use as few words as possible’ –
a principle which is claimed to rule out They do like you on the grounds that it
has the more economical counterpart They like you.
Now consider a negative indicative clause such as that below:
(32)
[CP [C ø] [MP he [M øIND] [TP [T AfPRES] [negp [Neg not]
[VP he [V appreciate] you]]]]]
If the afﬁx in T is strong here, the verb appreciate cannot raise from V to attach
to the afﬁx in T because single-step movement is blocked by the Head Movement

8.3 Split TP: Aspect and Mood projections
291
Constraint, and multiple-step movement is blocked by the fact that Neg is not a
strong head and so cannot attract a lexical verb to attach to it: in either eventuality,
the derivation will crash. But if the afﬁx in T is weak, it will raise to attach to the
indicative mood head, so forming the structure:
(33)
[CP [C ø] [MP he [M øIND+AfPRES] [TP [T AfPRES] [negp [Neg not]
[VP he [V appreciate] you]]]]]
If (as here) M contains no verbal stem, the indicative mood+present tense
morphemes in M will be spelled out as an appropriately inﬂected form of do, so
deriving He does not appreciate you.
Sch¨utze claims that a signiﬁcant advantage of his split TP analysis is that it
dispenses with the need for positing the traditional Afﬁx Lowering operation by
which an afﬁx in T is lowered onto a verb in V. However, it is not clear that
Sch¨utze entirely succeeds in attaining this goal. In this connection, consider a
structure like that below in which T contains a strong afﬁx which triggers raising
of the verb from V to T:
(34)
[CP [C ø] [MP he [M øIND] [TP [T like+AfPRES] [VP he [V likePRES] you]]]]
An apparent problem which arises here is that in order to determine whether to
spell out the verb as likes or like, the PF component needs to ‘know’ whether
the verb is indicative, subjunctive or imperative in mood, since -s is an indicative
mood inﬂection. However, the mood feature is marked on M rather than on T.
Consequently, some way needs to be found of marking the verb in T for mood.
We clearly cannot raise the verb from T to M, since this would wrongly predict
that the verb would be eligible to undergo M-to-C movement in interrogatives
(i.e. auxiliary inversion). The only possibility would seem to be to lower the null
indicative mood morpheme from M onto C via Afﬁx Lowering, so deriving the
structure (35) below:
(35)
[CP [C ø] [MP he [M øIND] [TP [T like+Af+øIND] [VP he [V like] you]]]]
The verb could then be spelled out as the third person singular present indicative
form likes. However, such an analysis would undermine Sch¨utze’s argument that
his analysis dispenses with the need for Afﬁx Lowering. Moreover, the problem
is compounded if M is the locus of the (third person singular) agreement features
in the clause, as will be the case if movement of the subject out of VP into
spec-MP is contingent on agreement between M and the subject: then not only
mood features but also agreement features will have to be lowered from M onto
the verb in T by Afﬁx Lowering.
Overall, Sch¨utze’s postulation of an M head independent of T faces two main
problems. One is that derivations will crash if the ‘wrong’ choice of items is
made. For example, as noted earlier, a structure like (26) will crash if T contains
a strong (rather than a weak) afﬁx, because modal will is left without a tense afﬁx
to attach to it, and the PF component has no spellout for tenseless modals. This
poses a problem if we follow Chomsky (2006, p. 2) in positing that grammars

292
8 split projections
should meet a condition of ‘efﬁcient computation’. Moreover, Sch¨utze’s analysis
would seem to still require the Afﬁx Lowering operation which it was designed to
dispense with. Thus, while the idea that Mood should head a separate projection
from Tense is far from implausible, the particular implementation of this idea in
Sch¨utze’s analysis of English seems problematic, and hence we will not pursue
this possibility any further in the remainder of the book. Instead, in the rest of
this chapter we will look at work which has become widely accepted arguing that
Verb Phrases should be split into at least two distinct projections.
●
●
8.4
Split VP: Transitive ergative structures
Having looked at evidence that CP and TP can be split into a number
of different projections, we now turn to look at evidence arguing that VPs should
be split into two distinct projections – an outer shell and an inner core. This has
become known as the VP-shell (or split VP) analysis.
The sentences which we have analysed so far have generally contained sim-
ple Verb Phrases headed by a verb with a single complement. Such single-
complement structures can easily be accommodated within the binary-branching
framework adopted here, since all we need say is that a verb merges with its
complement to form a (binary-branching) V-bar constituent, and that the result-
ing V-bar merges with its subject to form a binary-branching VP constituent.
However, a particular problem for the binary-branching framework is posed by
three-place predicates like those italicised in (36) below which have a (bold-
printed) subject and two (bracketed) complements:
(36)(a)
He rolled [the ball] [down the hill]
(b)
He ﬁlled [the bath] [with water]
(c)
He broke [the vase] [into pieces]
(d)
They withdrew [the troops] [from Ruritania]
If we assume that complements are sisters to heads, it might seem as if the V-bar
constituent headed by rolled in (36a) has the structure (37) below:
(37)
V'
V                DP                 PP       
rolled         the ball     down the hill
However, a structure such as (37) is problematic within the framework adopted
here. After all, it is a ternary-branching structure (V-bar branches into the three
separate constituents, namely the V rolled, the DP the ball and the PP down
the hill), and this poses an obvious problem within a framework which assumes
that the merger operation which forms phrases is an inherently binary operation
which can only combine constituents in a pairwise fashion. Moreover, a ternary-
branching structure such as (37) would wrongly predict that the string the ball

8.4 Split VP: Transitive ergative structures
293
down the hill does not form a constituent, and so cannot be coordinated with
another similar string (given the traditional assumption that only identical con-
stituents can be conjoined) – yet this prediction is falsiﬁed by sentences such as:
(38)
He rolled the ball down the hill and the acorn up the mountain
How can we overcome these problems?
One answer is to suppose that transitive structures like He rolled the ball down
the hill have a complex internal structure which is parallel in some respects to
causative structures like He made the ball roll down the hill (where make has
roughly the same meaning as cause). On this view the ball roll down the hill
would serve as a VP complement of a null causative verb (which can be thought
of as an invisible counterpart of make). We can further suppose that the null
causative verb is afﬁxal in nature, and so triggers raising of the verb roll to
adjoin to the causative verb, deriving a structure loosely paraphraseable as He
made+roll [the ball roll down the hill], where roll is a null copy of the moved
verb roll. We could then say that the string the ball down the hill in (38) is a
VP remnant headed by a null copy of the moved verb roll. Since this string is a
VP constituent, we correctly predict that it can be co-ordinated with another VP
remnant like the acorn up the mountain – as is indeed the case in (38).
Analysing structures like roll the ball down the hill as transitive counterparts
of intransitive structures is by no means implausible, since many three-place
transitive predicates like roll can also be used as two-place intransitive predicates
in which the (italicised) DP which immediately follows the (bold-printed) verb
in the three-place structure functions as the subject in the two-place structure –
as we see from sentence pairs such as the following:
(39)(a)
They will roll the ball down the hill
(b)
The ball will roll down the hill
(40)(a)
He ﬁlled the bath with water
(b)
The bath ﬁlled with water
(41)(a)
He broke the vase into pieces
(b)
The vase broke into pieces
(42)(a)
They withdrew the troops from Ruritania
(b)
The troops withdrew from Ruritania
(43)(a)
They closed the store down
(b)
The store closed down
(44)(a)
They moved the headquarters to Brooklyn
(b)
The headquarters moved to Brooklyn
(Verbs which allow this dual use as either three-place transitive predicates or two-
place intransitive predicates are sometimes referred to as ergative predicates.)
Moreover, the italicised DP seems to play the same thematic role with respect
to the bold-printed verb in each pair of examples: for example, the ball is the

294
8 split projections
theme argument of roll (i.e. the entity which undergoes a rolling motion) both
in (39a) They will roll the ball down the hill and in (39b) The ball will roll down
the hill. Evidence that the ball plays the same semantic role in both sentences
comes from the fact that the italicised argument is subject to the same pragmatic
restrictions on the choice of expression which can fulﬁl the relevant argument
function in each type of sentence: cf.
(45)(a)
The ball/The rock/!The theory/!Sincerity will roll gently down the hill
(b)
They will roll the ball/the rock/!the theory/!sincerity gently down the hill
If principles of UG correlate thematic structure with syntactic structure in a
uniform fashion (in accordance with the Uniform Theta Assignment Hypothe-
sis/UTAH discussed in §6.6), then it follows that two arguments which fulﬁl the
same thematic function with respect to a given predicate must be merged in the
same position in the syntax.
An analysis within the spirit of UTAH would be to assume that both a transitive
structure like (39a) They will roll the ball down the hill and its intransitive
counterpart (39b) The ball will roll down the hill contain the same ‘core’ VP
structure [VP the ball [V roll] down the hill]. However, the question which then
arises is how the verb roll comes to precede the DP the ball in the transitive
Verb Phrase roll the ball down the hill. A plausible answer to this question is to
suppose that the verb roll moves from its initial position below the ball into a
higher verb position above the ball. Such an analysis requires us to split transitive
Verb Phrases into two separate projections, and to analyse them as comprising
an outer shell and an inner core.
More concretely, let’s make the following assumptions about how the transitive
structure (39a) is derived. The lexical verb (= V) roll is merged with its PP
complement down the hill to form the V-bar roll down the hill, and this is then
merged with the DP the ball to form the VP structure (46) below:
(46)
VP
DP      
V'
the ball
  V 
           PP 
 roll   
  down the hill 
The VP in (46) is then merged as the complement of an abstract causative light
verb (v) – i.e. a null verb with much the same causative interpretation as the verb
make (so that They will roll the ball down the hill has a similar interpretation to
They will make the ball roll down the hill). Let’s also suppose that this causative
light verb is a strong afﬁx, and attracts the verb roll to adjoin to it, forming a
structure which can be paraphrased literally as ‘make+roll the ball down the
hill’ – a structure which has an overt counterpart in French structures like faire
rouler la balle en bas de la colline, literally ‘make roll the ball into bottom of the
hill’). The resulting v-bar structure is then merged with the subject they (which is

8.4 Split VP: Transitive ergative structures
295
assigned the θ-role of agent argument of the causative light verb), to form the
complex vP (47) below (lower-case letters being used to denote the light verb,
and the dotted arrow showing movement of the verb roll to adjoin to the null light
verb ø):
(47)
        vP 
PRN         
     v'
they
   v
VP   
roll+ø
         DP           
 V'
     the ball   
V    
       PP 
roll
down the hill
(The afﬁxal light verb is treated as a sufﬁx here, since English is a language which
largely uses derivational sufﬁxes, e.g. adding the sufﬁx -en to an adjective like
sharp to form the verb sharpen ‘make sharp’.)
Subsequently, the vP in (47) merges with the T constituent will, the subject we
raises into spec-T and the resulting TP is merged with a null declarative comple-
mentiser, forming the structure (48) below (where the arrows show movements
which have taken place in the course of the derivation):
(48)
CP 
C           
TP
ø  
    PRN            
T'
They
T 
         vP 
         will           
            PRN          
    v'
they
   v
VP   
roll+ø 
           DP         
   V'
       the ball 
  V 
          PP 
roll
  down the hill
The analysis in (48) correctly speciﬁes the word order in (39a) They will roll the
ball down the hill.
The VP-shell/split VP analysis in (48) provides an interesting account of an
otherwise puzzling aspect of the syntax of sentences like (39a) – namely the fact
that adverbs like gently can be positioned either before roll or after the ball, as
we see from:
(49)(a)
They will gently roll the ball down the hill
(b)
They will roll the ball gently down the hill

296
8 split projections
Let’s suppose that adverbs like gently are adjuncts, and that adjunction is
a different kind of operation from merger. Merger extends a constituent into a
larger type of projection, so that (e.g.) merging T with an appropriate complement
extends T into T-bar, and merging T-bar with an appropriate speciﬁer extends T-
bar into TP. By contrast, adjunction extends a constituent into a larger projection
of the same type (e.g. adjoining a moved V to a T head forms a larger T head, and
adjoining an adverb to an intermediate projection like T-bar extends T-bar into
another T-bar constituent). Let’s further suppose that gently is the kind of adverb
which can adjoin to an intermediate verbal projection. Given this assumption and
the light-verb analysis in (48), we can then propose the following derivations for
(49a–b).
In (49a), the verb roll merges with the PP down the hill to form the V-bar
roll down the hill, and this V-bar in turn merges with the DP the ball to form
the VP the ball roll down the hill, with the structure shown in (46) above. This
VP then merges with a null causative light-verb ø to which the verb roll adjoins,
forming the v-bar roll+ø the ball roll down the hill. The adverb gently adjoins to
the resulting v-bar to form the larger v-bar gently roll+ø the ball roll down the
hill; and this larger v-bar in turn merges with the subject they to form the vP they
gently roll+ø the ball roll down the hill. The vP thereby formed merges with the
T constituent will, forming the T-bar will they gently roll+ø the ball roll down
the hill. The subject they raises to spec-T forming the TP they will they gently
roll+ø the ball roll down the hill. This TP is then merged with a null declarative
complementiser to derive the structure shown in simpliﬁed form in (50) below
(with arrows showing movements which have taken place):
(50)
  CP 
C          
TP
ø  
     PRN           
T'
They
T  
         vP       
        will 
           PRN           
    v'
they
  ADV   
   v'
 gently
      v
VP
roll+ø 
     DP         
V'
  the ball 
V                  PP 
roll     down the hill
The structure (50) correctly speciﬁes the word order in (49a) They will gently roll
the ball down the hill.
Now consider how (49b) They will roll the ball gently down the hill is derived.
As before, the verb roll merges with the PP down the hill, forming the V-bar roll

8.4 Split VP: Transitive ergative structures
297
down the hill. The adverb gently is then adjoined to this V-bar to form the larger
V-bar gently roll down the hill. This V-bar in turn merges with the DP the ball
to form the VP the ball gently roll down the hill. The resulting VP is merged
with a causative light verb [v ø] to which the verb roll adjoins, so forming the
v-bar roll+ø the ball gently roll down the hill. This v-bar is then merged with
the subject we to form the vP they roll+ø the ball gently roll down the hill. The
vP thereby formed merges with [T will], forming the T-bar will they roll+ø the
ball gently roll down the hill. The subject they raises to spec-T, and TP is merged
with a null declarative C to form the CP (51) below:
(51)
  CP 
C          
TP
ø  
     PRN           
T'
They
T  
         vP       
        will 
           PRN           
    v'
they
    v
 VP 
roll+ø  
       DP             
V'
   the ball 
       ADV          
V'
      gently 
  V
            PP 
roll       down the hill
The different positions occupied by the adverb gently in (50) and (51) reﬂect a
subtle meaning difference between (49a) and (49b): (49a) means that the action
which initiated the rolling motion was gentle, whereas (49b) means that the
rolling motion itself was gentle. If we assume that adjuncts can be spelled out
either to the left or to the right of the constituent they adjoin to, we can account
for sentences such as (52) below in which the adverb appears at the end of the
sentence:
(52)
They will roll the ball down the hill gently
In such a sentence, the adverb gently could be adjoined to (and spelled out to the
right of) either V-bar or v-bar, so correctly predicting that the sentence is subtly
ambiguous.
A light-verb analysis also offers us an interesting account of adverb position
in sentences like:
(53)(a)
He had deliberately rolled the ball gently down the hill
(b)
∗He had gently rolled the ball deliberately down the hill
Let’s suppose that deliberately (by virtue of its meaning) can only be an adjunct to
a projection of an agentive verb (i.e. a verb whose subject has the thematic role of
agent). Given our earlier assumption that the light-verb [v ø] is a causative verb

298
8 split projections
with an agent subject, the contrast in (53) can be accounted for straightforwardly:
in (53a) deliberately is contained within a vP headed by a null agentive causative
light verb; but in (53b) it is contained with a VP headed by the nonagentive verb
roll. (The verb roll is a nonagentive predicate because its subject has the θ-role
theme, not agent.) We can then say that adverbs like deliberately can adjoin to
a v-bar headed by an agentive light verb, but not to V-bar.
This in turn might lead us to expect to ﬁnd a corresponding class of adverbs
which can adjoin to V-bar but not v-bar. In this connection, consider the following
contrast (adapted from Bowers 1993, p. 609):
(54)(a)
Mary jumped the horse perfectly over the last fence
(b)
∗Mary perfectly jumped the horse over the last fence
Given the assumptions made here, the derivation of (54a) would be parallel to
that of (51) in relevant respects, while the derivation of (54b) would be parallel
to that of (50). If we assume that the adverb perfectly (in the relevant use) can
function only as an adjunct to a V-projection, the contrast between (54a) and
(54b) can be accounted for straightforwardly: in (54a), perfectly is adjoined to
V-bar, whereas in (54b) it is adjoined to v-bar – in violation of the requirement
that it can only adjoin to a V-projection.
An interesting question raised by the VP-shell/split VP analysis of transitive
structures outlined in this section is how the DP the ball in a structure like (51)
comes to be assigned accusative case (as we see from the fact that it can be
substituted by an accusative pronoun like them in a sentence such as They will
roll them gently down the hill). In §7.7, we suggested that a transitive probe
assigns accusative case to a goal with an unvalued case feature which it c-
commands and agrees with in person and number. This raises the question of
what is the transitive probe in (51) which assigns accusative case to the DP the
ball. It cannot be the head V of VP, since this does not c-command the DP the
ball at any stage of derivation. Instead, it must be the light verb, because this
does indeed c-command the DP the ball on the edge of VP. If structural case
assignment involves agreement, it follows that (in the relevant kind of structures)
a transitive light verb (i.e. one with a thematic external argument) carries a set
of (invisible) person and number agreement features and assigns accusative case
to a c-commanded (pro)nominal goal with an unvalued case feature. What this
means in more concrete terms is that the light verb in (51) agrees (invisibly) with
and assigns (invisible) accusative case to DP the ball (accusative case only being
directly visible in pronouns like me/us/him/them).
●
●
8.5
Split VP: Other transitive structures
As we saw in the previous section, the VP-shell analysis provides
an interesting solution to the problems posed by ergative verbs when they are
used as transitive verbs with two complements. (In their intransitive use, they

8.5 Split VP: Other transitive structures
299
have the same syntax as the unaccusative structures to be discussed in §8.7.)
However, the problems posed by transitive verbs which take two complements
arise not only with transitive ergative structures (like those in (39–44) above)
which have intransitive counterparts, but also with two-complement transitive
verbs like those bold-printed below (their complements being bracketed):
(55)(a)
They will load [the truck] [with hay]
(b)
He gave [no explanation] [to his friends]
(c)
They took [everything] [from her]
(d)
Nobody can blame [you] [for the accident]
Verbs like those in (55) cannot be used intransitively, as we see from the ungram-
maticality of:
(56)(a)
∗The truck will load with hay
(b)
∗No explanation gave to his friends
(c)
∗Everything took from her
(d)
∗You can blame for the accident
However, it is interesting to note that in structures like (55) too we ﬁnd that
adverbs belonging to the same class as gently can be positioned either before the
verb or between its two complements: cf.
(57)(a)
They will carefully load the truck with hay
(b)
They will load the truck carefully with hay
This suggests that (in spite of the fact that the relevant verbs have no intransitive
counterpart) a split projection analysis is appropriate for structures like (55) also.
If so, a sentence such as (55a) will have the structure shown in simpliﬁed form
in (58) below (with arrows showing movements which take place):
(58)
  CP 
C          
TP
ø
     PRN           
T'
They
T  
         vP       
        will 
           PRN           
     v'
they
   v
VP
load+ø
           DP         
V'
      the truck
  V 
          PP 
load
      with hay 
We can then say that the adverb carefully adjoins to v-bar in (57a), and to V-bar
in (57b). If we suppose that verbs like load are essentially afﬁxal in nature (in the
sense that they must adjoin to a null causative light verb with an agent external

300
8 split projections
argument), we can account for the ungrammaticality of intransitive structures such
as (56a) ∗The truck will load with hay. In (58), the light verb agrees (invisibly)
with and assigns (invisible) accusative case to the DP the truck.
The split vP analysis can be extended to deal with verb+particle struc-
tures like He was taking the rubbish out which involve a VP containing both a
(pro)nominal direct object complement and a prepositional particle without the
need for positing an Aspect Phrase projection. More concretely, structures like
those in (23) above can be replaced by a split vP analysis along the lines shown
below:
(59)(a)
[CP [C ø] [TP he [T was] [vP [v taking] [VP the rubbish [V taking] out]]]]
(b)
[CP [C ø] [TP he [T had] [vP [v taken] [VP the rubbish [V taken] out]]]]
(c)
[CP [C ø] [TP he [T ø] [vP [v took] [VP the rubbish [V took] out]]]]
On this view, the verb take originates in the head V position of VP and subse-
quently raises into the head v position of vP – not into the head Asp position of
AspP, as claimed in Felser (1999a). The light verb heading vP agrees (invisibly)
with and assigns (invisible) accusative case to the DP the rubbish.
The VP-shell analysis outlined above can also be extended to so-called resul-
tative predicates which have both nominal and adjectival complements – i.e. to
structures such as those below:
(60)(a)
The acid will turn the litmus-paper red
(b)
They may paint the house pink
In (60a), the verb turn originates in the head V position of VP, with the DP the
litmus-paper as its subject and the adjective red as its complement (precisely
as in The litmus-paper will turn red): turn then raises to adjoin to a causative
light-verb ø heading vP; the subject of this light verb (the DP the acid) in turn
raises from spec-v to spec-T, and the resulting TP merges with a null declarative
complementiser – as shown informally in (61) below:
(61)
[CP [C ø][TP the acid [T will] [vP the acid [v turn+ø] [VP the litmus-paper [V turn] red]]]] 
The light verb heading vP agrees (invisibly) with and assigns (invisible)
accusative case to the DP the litmus-paper.
A further set of structures which are amenable to a split vP analysis are
sentences such as the following:
(62)(a)
Duncan must persuade Dougal that he should be less frugal
(b)
Duncan must persuade Dougal to be less frugal
In these examples, the bold-printed verb persuade has two complements – an
underlined direct object DP complement (Dougal) and an italicised CP comple-
ment. The CP complement is a ﬁnite clause headed by that in the ﬁrst example,
and an inﬁnitival clause with a null complementiser and a null PRO subject in
the second. (Because the PRO subject in sentences like (62b) is controlled by

8.5 Split VP: Other transitive structures
301
the matrix direct object Dougal, the relevant type of sentence is called an Object
Control structure.) Under a traditional unsplit VP analysis, we would have to say
that the Verb Phrases in the embedded clauses in sentences like those in (62a,b)
have the respective initial structures shown in skeletal form in (63a,b) below (if
we suppose that Duncan and Dougal are both DPs headed by a null deﬁnite
determiner):
(63)
VP
V'
      DP       
(a)
(b)
    V    
   DP                          CP 
ø Duncan        persuade        ø Dougal       that he should be less frugal 
ø Duncan        persuade        ø Dougal     
 ø PRO to be less frugal   
However, structures such as these would be incompatible with the Binarity Prin-
ciple which we posited in §2.2 because they contain a ternary-branching V-bar
constituent. By contrast, we can develop a binary-branching split vP analysis
of this type of Verb Phrase in the following terms. In (62a), the verb persuade
merges with its CP complement to form the V-bar persuade that he should be
less frugal, and the resulting V-bar is then merged with the DP ø Dougal to form
the VP ø Dougal persuade that he should be less frugal (with a meaning loosely
paraphraseable as ‘Dougal realise that he should be less frugal’). This VP is then
merged with a null causative light verb to form the v-bar [v ø] ø Dougal persuade
that he should be less frugal, and the v-bar thereby formed is in turn merged
with its external argument ø Duncan to form the vP ø Duncan [v ø] ø Dougal
persuade that he should be less frugal. The lexical verb persuade adjoins to the
light verb (as shown by the arrow below), so forming the following structure
(with a meaning roughly parapraseable as ‘Duncan make Dougal realise that he
should be less frugal’):
(64)
vP 
DP       
             v
ø Duncan
       v
VP
persuade+ø
                  DP  
V'
ø Dougal      
V        
        CP 
      persuade
    that he should be less frugal 
Subsequently, the vP in (64) is merged with the T-auxiliary must, the DP ø Duncan
raises up to become the subject of must, and the resulting TP is merged with a
null declarative complementiser, so forming the structure associated with (62a).
(62b) has an essentially parallel derivation, except that the CP complement of
persuade is headed by a null complementiser and has a null PRO subject. From

302
8 split projections
a theoretical perspective, the crucial point to note is that the split vP analysis
enables us to maintain that sentences like those in (62) have a binary-branching
structure.
If we look back at structures like (64), (61), (59), (58) (51), (50) and (48), an
interesting generalisation which emerges about internal arguments is that when
a transitive V has both a (pro)nominal (e.g. QP, DP or PRN) complement and
another kind of complement (whether prepositional, adjectival or clausal), the
(pro)nominal complement is merged in a higher position than (and so precedes)
the other complement. Conversely, when a verb has both a clausal complement
and another kind of complement, the clausal complement is merged in a lower
position than (and so follows) the other complement. This suggests the following
condition on the relative order in which different types of internal argument are
merged:
(65)
Merger Condition
Where V has a clausal internal argument and some other type/s of internal
argument, the clausal argument is the ﬁrst to be merged with V; where V
has a (pro)nominal internal argument and some other type/s of internal
argument, the (pro)nominal argument is the last one merged with V
We can illustrate how (65) works in terms of the following sentence:
(66)
She bet several dollars with him that she would beat him
In (66), the ﬁrst internal argument to be merged with the verb bet is its CP
complement that she would beat him, forming the intermediate V-projection bet
that she would beat him; the second internal argument to be merged with the verb
bet is the PP with him, forming the even larger intermediate V-projection with
him bet that she would beat him; the third and last internal argument to be merged
with the verb bet is the QP several dollars, forming the complete VP projection
several dollars with him bet that she would beat him. Subsequently merging this
VP with a light verb which triggers raising of the verb bet from V to v will
generate the surface order bet several dollars with him that she would beat him.
The important point to note here is that (in conformity with the Merger Condition
(65)), the ﬁrst argument to be merged with the verb bet is its CP complement,
and the last is the nominal (QP) complement several dollars.
An important question to ask is why internal arguments should be merged in
the order speciﬁed in the Merger Condition (65). The reason why a (pro)nominal
argument is merged higher within VP than any other arguments may be that (in
order to be assigned case) it must be merged as close to its case assigner as
possible – and indeed a light verb cannot assign accusative case to a nominal if
there is an overt constituent intervening between the two (so that an intervening
adverbial adjunct blocks accusative case marking, e.g. in structures such as ∗He
closed immediately the door). The reason why clausal arguments are merged
lower than other arguments may be to avoid the parsing problems which Chomsky
(1965) claims are posed by centre-embedded clauses (i.e. by structures like ‘John

8.5 Split VP: Other transitive structures
303
admitted that he had been arrested for shoplifting to her’ in which the italicised
that-clause is embedded in a position between the bold-printed verb and its
underlined Prepositional Phrase complement).
So far, our discussion has largely been concerned with how to deal with tran-
sitive structures containing a three-place predicate with two internal arguments.
This raises the question of how to deal with the complements of simple (two-
place) transitive predicates (which have subject and object arguments) like read
in (67) below:
(67)
He will read the book
Chomsky (1995) proposes a light-verb analysis of two-place transitive predicates
under which (67) would (at the end of the vP cycle) have a structure along the
lines of (68) below (with the arrow showing movement of the verb read from V
to adjoin to a null light verb in v):
(68)
        vP 
PRN        
  v'
he
  v
VP
read+ø
       V 
      DP 
read
the book
That is, read would originate as the head V of VP, and would then be raised to
adjoin to a null agentive light-verb ø (and the structure in (68) can be paraphrased
as ‘He performed the action of reading the book’).
If all agentive Verb Phrases have a split vP structure containing both a light verb
and a lexical verb, this has important implications for the syntax of unergative
Verb Phrases (i.e. Verb Phrases with an agent subject but no direct object) such
as those italicised below:
(69)(a)
He might resign from the club
(b)
He might protest
If an agent argument is merged as the speciﬁer of a light verb which has a
complement headed by a lexical verb, the italicised Verb Phrases in (69a,b) will
have the respective derivations shown in (70a,b) below:
(70)
(a)           
vP
(b)
vP
PRN        
  v'
                 PRN     
     v'
he        
  he
  v
VP    
      v
  V
resign+ø  
protest+ø                 protest
       V 
      PP 
resign
   from the club 

304
8 split projections
The v-bar constituents in (70a,b) would have an interpretation loosely para-
phraseable as ‘perform the action of resigning from the club/protesting’. An
analysis such as (70a) would account for the possibility of positioning an adverb
like discreetly either immediately before the PP from the club (as in resign dis-
creetly from the club) or immediately before the verb resign (as in discreetly
resign from the club), depending on whether the adverb is adjoined to a projec-
tion of the lexical verb or to a projection of the light verb. The assumption that
both transitive and ergative Verb Phrases have a split projection structure would
take us one step nearer to the position of being able to maintain that all verb
phrases have a split vP structure. However, this raises the question of whether
a split vP analysis position can be defended for other types of verb phrase – a
question which we explore in the next two sections.
●
●
8.6
Split VP: Unaccusative structures
Thus far, we have argued that clauses with agent or experiencer
subjects have a shell structure comprising an inner VP headed by a lexical verb
and an outer vP headed by a light verb. However, we will now go on to present
evidence that a split projection analysis is also appropriate for intransitive clauses.
In this section, we look at clauses containing an unaccusative verb.
In §6.5, we suggested that the arguments of unaccusative predicates like
come/go originate as their complements. However, there are reasons for thinking
that the syntax of unaccusative Verb Phrases is rather more complex than we
suggested there. In this connection, consider unaccusative imperative structures
such as the following in (dialect A of) Belfast English (See Henry 1995: note that
youse is the plural form of you – corresponding to American English y’all):
(71)(a)
Go you to school!
(b)
Run youse to the telephone!
(c)
Walk you into the garden!
If postverbal arguments of unaccusative predicates are in situ complements, this
means that each of the verbs in (71) must have two complements. If we make the
traditional assumption that complements are sisters of a head, this means that if
both you and to school are complements of the verb go in (71a), they must be
sisters of go, and hence the VP headed by go must have the (simpliﬁed) structure
(72) below:
(72)
VP
V             PRN               PP 
go             you          to school 

8.6 Split VP: Unaccusative structures
305
However, a ternary-branching structure such as (72) is incompatible with a frame-
work such as that used here which assumes that the merger operation by which
phrases are formed is inherently binary.
Since analysing unaccusative subjects in such structures as underlying comple-
ments proves problematic, let’s consider whether they might instead be analysed
as speciﬁers. On this view, we can suppose that the inner VP core of a Belfast
English unaccusative imperative structure such as (71a) Go you to school! is not
(72) above, but rather (73) below:
(73)
VP
PRN
V'
you 
V    
       PP 
go
  to school 
Thus, in conformity with the Merger Condition (65), the verb go ﬁrst merges with
its PP complement to school to form the V-bar go to school and then merges with
the pronoun you to form the VP you go to school. Assuming such an analysis,
we can say that it is a property of unaccusative predicates that all their arguments
originate within VP. But the problem posed by a structure like (73) is that it
provides us with no way of accounting for the fact that unaccusative subjects like
you in (71a) Go you to school! surface postverbally. How can we overcome this
problem? One answer is the following. Let us suppose that VPs like (73) which
are headed by an unaccusative verb are embedded as the complement of a null
light verb, and that the unaccusative verb raises to adjoin to the light verb in the
manner indicated by the arrow in (74) below:
(74)
        vP 
v
   VP 
go+ø
  PRN    
 V'
   you 
V                  PP 
go
to school
If (as Alison Henry argues) subjects remain in situ in imperatives in dialect A
of Belfast English, the postverbal position of unaccusative subjects in sentences
such as (71) can be accounted for straightforwardly. And the split VP analysis in
(74) is consistent with the assumption that the merger operation by which phrases
are formed is intrinsically binary.
Moreover, the split VP analysis enables us to provide an interesting account
of the position of adverbs like quickly in unaccusative imperatives (in dialect A
of Belfast English) such as:
(75)
Go you quickly to school!

306
8 split projections
If we suppose that adverbs like quickly are adjuncts which can merge with an
intermediate verbal projection (e.g. a single-bar projection comprising a verb and
its complement), we can say that quickly in (75) is adjoined to the V-bar go to
school in (74). What remains to be accounted for (in relation to the syntax of
imperative subjects in dialect A of Belfast English) is the fact that subjects of
transitive and unergative verbs occur in preverbal (not postverbal) position: cf.
(76)(a)
You read that book!
(b)
∗Read you that book!
(77)(a)
Youse tell the truth!
(b)
∗Tell youse the truth
(78)(a)
You protest!
(b)
∗Protest you!
Why should this be? If we assume (as in our discussion of (68) above) that
transitive verbs originate as the head V of a VP complement of a null agentive
light verb, an imperative such as (76a) will contain a vP with the simpliﬁed
structure shown in (79) below (where the dotted arrow indicates movement of
the verb read to adjoin to the null light verb heading vP):
(79)
vP
PRN
  v'
you
            v
VP
read+ø
       V 
       DP
read
that  book
The agent subject you will originate in spec-v, as the subject of the agentive
light-verb ø. Even after the verb read adjoins to the null light verb, the subject
you will still be positioned in front of the resulting verbal complex read+ø. As
should be obvious, we can extend the light-verb analysis from transitive verbs
like read to unergative verbs like protest if we assume (as in (70) above) that
unergative subjects (like transitive subjects) originate as speciﬁers of an agentive
light verb.
Given these assumptions, we could then say that the difference between unac-
cusative subjects and transitive/unergative subjects is that unaccusative sub-
jects originate within VP (as the argument of a lexical verb), whereas transi-
tive/unergative subjects originate in spec-v (as the external argument of a light
verb). If we hypothesise that Verb Phrases always contain an outer vP shell
headed by a strong (afﬁxal) light verb and an inner VP core headed by a lexical
verb, and that lexical verbs always raise from V to v, the postverbal position of
unaccusative subjects can be accounted for by positing that the subject remains
in situ in such structures. Such a hypothesis can be extended to account for the

8.6 Split VP: Unaccusative structures
307
intransitive use of ergative predicates in sentences like (39b–44b) above, so that
intransitive ergatives can be analysed in a parallel fashion to unaccusatives.
The light-verb analysis of unaccusatives sketched here also offers us a way of
accounting for the observation that in Early Modern English, the perfect auxiliary
used with unaccusative verbs was be (as we saw in §6.5), whereas that used with
transitive and unergative verbs was have. We can account for this by positing that
the perfect auxiliary have selected a vP complement with an external argument,
whereas the perfect auxiliary be selected a complement headed by an intransitive
light verb with no external argument. The distinction has been lost in present-day
English, with perfect have being used with both types of vP structure.
Further evidence in support of the claim that unaccusative clauses have a split
VP structure comes from the fact that it enables us to account for the observation
that unaccusative verbs can occur in the three types of structure illustrated below:
(80)(a)
A loud scream came from inside the house
(b)
From inside the house came a loud scream
(c)
There came a loud scream from inside the house
If unaccusative clauses have a split VP structure, we can account for this as
follows. In (80a), the unaccusative verb come is ﬁrst-merged with its PP argument
(forming the V-bar come from inside the house), and second-merged with its
indeﬁnite QP argument (forming the VP a loud scream come from inside the
house) – the order of merger of the two arguments being in conformity with the
Merger Condition (65). The resulting VP is then merged with a null light-verb ø,
forming the vP ø a loud scream come from inside the house. The strong/afﬁxal
light verb triggers raising of the verb come from V to v – in the manner shown
by the arrow below:
(81)
     vP
v
  VP
come+ø  
 QP                   
 V'
      a loud scream
V     
                PP
        come           from inside the house 
The vP in (81) is then merged with a ﬁnite T constituent containing an abstract
afﬁx carrying an interpretable past tense feature, together with uninterpretable
(unvalued) person and number features, and an uninterpretable epp feature. The
T-afﬁx agrees in person and number with, assigns nominative case to and triggers
movement to spec-T of the QP a loud scream, so forming a TP which is merged
with a null declarative complementiser to form the structure shown in simpliﬁed
form below:
(82)
[CP [C ø] [TP a loud scream [T Af]
[vP [v come+ø] [VP a loud scream [V come] from inside the house]]]]

308
8 split projections
The past tense afﬁx in T lowers onto the head v of vP in the PF component, with
the result that the verb come is spelled out as the past tense form came in (80a)
A loud scream came from inside the house.
The type of structure found in (80b) From inside the house came a loud
scream is traditionally said to involve locative inversion, in the sense that the
locative PP complement from inside the house ends up positioned in front of
the verb came. One way of handling such a structure is to suppose that the epp
feature on T can be satisﬁed by raising the locative PP from inside the house
(rather than the QP a loud scream) to spec-T, so generating the structure in (83)
below:
(83)
[CP [C ø] [TP from inside the house [T Af] [vP [v come+ø]
[VP a loud scream [V come] from inside the house]]]]
Evidence in support of the analysis in (83) comes from sentences such as:
(84)
He trembled when he heard that from inside the house had come a loud
scream
The fact that the italicised locative PP follows the bold-printed complemen-
tiser in (84) suggests that the inverted locative PP is in spec-T rather than
spec-C.
Now consider the derivation of the unaccusative expletive sentence (80c) There
came a loud scream from inside the house. In §7.6, we proposed a number
of conditions on the syntax of expletive pronouns in English, including the
following:
(85)
External Argument Condition
An expletive can only be merged as the highest argument of a verb which
has no external argument
We rationalised (85) by supposing that expletives occupy the same structural
position as external arguments, with the result that the two are mutually exclu-
sive. Given the claim made in this chapter that external arguments occupy
spec-v, a plausible extension of the same reasoning would be to suppose that
expletives likewise originate in spec-v. This being so, (80c) will be derived as
follows.
The verb come is ﬁrst-merged with its PP argument (forming the V-bar come
from inside the house), and second-merged with its indeﬁnite QP argument (form-
ing the VP a loud scream come from inside the house). The resulting VP is then
merged with a null light-verb ø, forming the v-bar ø a loud scream come from
inside the house, and the resulting v-bar is in turn merged with expletive there to
form the vP there ø a loud scream come from inside the house. The strong/afﬁxal

8.6 Split VP: Unaccusative structures
309
light verb triggers raising of the verb come from V to v – in the manner shown
by the arrow in (86) below:
(86)
vP 
PRN        
                  v'
there 
         v
  VP 
come+ø
     QP         
V'
              a loud scream 
      V  
PP 
   come           from inside the house 
The vP in (86) is then merged with a ﬁnite T constituent containing an abstract
afﬁx (Af) carrying an interpretable past tense feature, together with uninterpretable
(unvalued) person and number features, and an uninterpretable epp feature. The
T-afﬁx agrees in person with (and triggers movement to spec-T of) expletive
there, and agrees in person and number with (and assigns nominative case to)
the QP a loud scream, so forming a TP which is merged with a null declarative
complementiser to form the structure shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(87)
[CP [C ø] [TP there [T Af] [vP there [v come+ø] [VP a loud scream
[V come] from inside the house]]]]
The past tense afﬁx in T lowers onto the head v of vP in the PF component,
with the result that the verb come is spelled out as the past tense form came in
(80c) There came a loud scream from inside the house. The overall conclusion
which our discussion in this section leads us to is thus that the split VP analysis
allows us to provide a principled account of (inverted and uninverted, expletive
and unexpletive) unaccusative structures.
A minor descriptive detail to note, however, is that the assumption that exple-
tives originate within vP requires us to modify the conditions on the use of
expletives which we posited in the previous chapter along the following lines:
(88)
Expletive Conditions (revised)
(i)
External Argument Condition:
An expletive can only be merged as the last/highest argument of a light verb
with no external argument (i.e. in spec-v)
(ii)
Indeﬁniteness Condition:
Expletive there can only be merged as the speciﬁer of a light verb whose VP
complement has an indeﬁnite nominal or pronominal internal argument
(iii)
Inactivity Condition:
Expletive it can only be merged as the speciﬁer of a light verb which does
not c-command any accessible nominal or pronominal expression with
some active case- or ϕ-feature(s)

310
8 split projections
●
●
8.7
Split VP: Passive and raising structures
A further class of intransitive clauses that can be argued to contain a
split vP are passives like:
(89)
The horse was jumped perfectly over the fence
The passive subject the horse originates as an internal argument of the verb
jumped here. Since passive verb forms are intransitive, the passive participle
jumped cannot assign accusative case to the DP the horse here; rather, the DP
the horse is assigned nominative case by the T-auxiliary was. Accordingly, the
derivation of (89) proceeds as follows.
The verb jump ﬁrst merges with its PP argument over the fence to form the
intermediate V-projection jump over the fence. The adverb perfectly adjoins to
this structure, forming the even larger V-projection perfectly jump over the fence.
The resulting structure is then merged with the DP argument the horse, to form
the VP the horse perfectly jump over the fence (the order of merger of the PP
and DP internal arguments being in conformity with the Merger Condition (65)).
The VP thereby formed is then merged with an intransitive light verb (with no
external argument), and this attracts the verb jump to attach to it, so forming the
vP in (90) below (with an arrow showing movement of the verb jump from V to
v):
(90)
        vP 
  v
  VP 
jump+ø
DP                                          V' 
the horse
       ADV          
V' 
     perfectly
V                      PP 
jump         over the fence 
Since the vP in (90) is a passive structure, the light verb is spelled out as the
passive participle sufﬁx -ed, with the result that the verb jump is ultimately
spelled out in the PF component as the passive participle form jumped. (Indeed,
Chomsky 1999 labels the light verb found in passive structures as PRT.)
The vP in (90) is subsequently merged with a past tense T constituent con-
taining the passive auxiliary be. This serves as a probe and locates the DP the
horse as a goal which is active by virtue of its unvalued case feature. T agrees
with, assigns nominative case to and attracts the DP the horse to move to spec-T.
The resulting TP is merged with a null declarative complementiser, deriving the
CP shown in simpliﬁed form below (with only overt constituents of vP being
shown):
(91)
[CP [C ø] [TP the horse [T was] [vP [v jumped] perfectly over the fence]]]

8.7 Split VP: Passive and raising structures
311
Thus, the assumption that passive Verb Phrases have a split VP structure accounts
for how the passive verb jumped comes to be positioned in front of the adverb
perfectly even though the adverb perfectly modiﬁes the expression jump over the
fence.
Yet another class of intransitive predicates for which a split VP analysis can
be argued to be appropriate are raising predicates like seem. In this connection,
consider the syntax of a raising sentence such as:
(92)
The president does seem to me to have upset several people
Given the assumptions made in this chapter, (92) will be derived as follows. The
verb upset merges with its QP complement several people to form the VP upset
several people. This in turn merges with a null causative light verb, which (by
virtue of being afﬁxal in nature) triggers raising of the verb upset to adjoin to the
light verb (as shown by the dotted arrow below); the resulting v-bar merges with
its external agent argument the president to form the vP in (93) below (para-
phraseable informally as ‘The president caused-to-get-upset several people’):
(93)
      vP 
 DP             
       v'
the president
         v
 VP 
upset+ø
  V 
               QP 
upset
      several people 
This vP in is then merged with the aspectual auxiliary have to form an AUXP
(which could equally be termed an AspP), and this AUXP is in turn merged with
[T to]. If (as we argued in §7.9) T in raising inﬁnitives has an epp feature and
an unvalued person feature, the subject the president will be attracted to move to
spec-T, so deriving the structure shown in simpliﬁed form in (94) below (with
the arrow marking A-movement):
(94)
TP
      DP        
T'
the president 
    T  
      AUXP 
    to  
Asp                                     vP 
    have
the president upset several people 
The TP in (94) is then merged as the complement of seem, forming the V-bar
seem the president to have upset several people (omitting trace copies and other
empty categories, to make exposition less abstract). Let’s suppose that to me is
the experiencer argument of seem and is merged as the speciﬁer of the resulting

312
8 split projections
V-bar, forming the VP shown in (95) below (simpliﬁed by not showing null copies
of moved constituents and other empty categories):
(95)
VP
PP 
V'
to me 
V   
TP
     seem
the president to have upset several people 
On the assumption that all Verb Phrases contain an outer vP shell, the VP in (95)
will then merge with a null (afﬁxal) light verb, triggering raising of the verb seem
to adjoin to the light verb. Merging the resulting vP with a ﬁnite T constituent
containing (emphatic) do will derive the structure shown in simpliﬁed form below
(with the arrow showing the verb movement that took place on the vP cycle):
(96)
T'
T   
           vP 
DO
      v
VP
 seem+ø
                 PP 
V'
to me 
V   
TP
the president to
have upset several
seem
[T do] serves as a probe looking for an active nominal goal. If a (non-expletive)
nominal can only be an active goal if it has an unvalued case feature, then neither
the pronoun me (assigned accusative case by the transitive preposition to) nor
the QP several people (assigned accusative case by the transitive verb upset) will
be accessible goals. Consequently, the DP the president (which is active by virtue
of having an unvalued case feature) is the only nominal which can serve as the
goal of [T do] in (96). Accordingly, do assigns nominative case to the president
(and conversely agrees with the president, with do ultimately being spelled out
at PF as does), and the epp and uninterpretable person/number features of do
ensure that the president moves into spec-T, so deriving the structure shown in
simpliﬁed form below:
(97)
TP
DP       
T'
the president 
T     
        vP 
    does 
         v
VP
seem+ø
        PP    
 V'
      to me       
V        
TP
seem
the president to have
upset a lot of people

8.8 Summary
313
The resulting TP will then be merged with a null declarative complementiser,
forming the CP structure associated with (92) The president does seem to me
to have upset several people. We can assume that the related sentence (98)
below:
(98)
The president does seem to have upset several people
has an essentially parallel derivation, except that the verb seem in (98) projects
no experiencer argument, so that the structure formed when seem is merged
with its TP complement will not be (95) above, but rather [VP [V seem] [TP the
president [T to] have upset several people]].
An interesting corollary of the light-verb analysis of raising verbs like seem is
that the Italian counterpart of seem is used with the perfect auxiliary essere ‘be’
rather than avere ‘have’ – as we can illustrate in relation to:
(99)
Maria mi `e sempre sembrata essere simpatica
Maria me is always seemed be nice
‘Maria has always seemed to me to be nice’
(The position of the experiencer argument mi ‘to me’ in (99) is accounted for
by the fact that it is a clitic pronoun, and clitics attach to the left of a ﬁnite
auxiliary or nonauxiliary verb in Italian – in this case attaching to the left of `e
‘is’.) Earlier, we suggested that in languages with the have/be contrast, have
typically selects a vP complement with a thematic external argument, whereas
be selects a vP complement with no thematic external argument. In this context,
it is interesting to note (e.g. in relation to structures like (96) above) that the light
verb found in clauses containing a raising predicate like seem projects no external
argument, and hence would be expected to occur with (the relevant counterpart
of) the perfect auxiliary be in a language with the have/be contrast. Data such
as (99) are thus consistent with the light-verb analysis of raising predicates like
seem outlined here.
●
●
8.8
Summary
We began this chapter in §8.2 by outlining the claim made by Rizzi
that in clauses which contain preposed focus/topic expressions, CP splits into a
number of separate projections, viz. a Force Phrase/ForceP, a Topic Phrase/TopP
and a Focus Phrase/FocP (with the Focus head being strong and so triggering
movement of an auxiliary from T to Foc, but the Topic and Force heads being
weak). We posited that preposed topics move to the speciﬁer position in TopP,
preposed negative expressions move to the speciﬁer position in the Focus Phrase
(as do preposed wh-expressions in main-clause questions) and wh-expressions
in other types of structure move to the speciﬁer of the Force Phrase. In §8.3, we
looked at suggestions for splitting TP into distinct Tense, Aspect and Mood pro-
jections. We began by looking at claims by Felser that in verb–particle structures
such as He took the rubbish out the verb took raises to an Aspect position above

314
8 split projections
V but below T, but concluded that the case for positing an Aspect head in such
structures was not entirely convincing. We also looked at proposals in Sch¨utze
(2004) in support of positing a separate M/Mood head, with M being the locus of
modals and mood morphemes, and T being the locus of tense afﬁxes: we noted
(but questioned) Sch¨utze’s argument that this would eliminate Afﬁx Lowering.
In §8.4, we presented a number of arguments suggesting that VPs should be split
into two distinct projections – an inner VP core headed by a lexical verb and an
outer vP shell headed by an afﬁxal light verb. In particular, we looked at the
syntax of ergative verbs like roll which are used both intransitively in structures
like The ball rolled down the hill and transitively in structures like They rolled the
ball down the hill. We argued that the Verb Phrase in transitive ergative structures
comprises an inner VP core headed by a lexical verb/V contained within an outer
vP shell headed by a causative light verb/v with an agent subject, and that the
afﬁxal light verb attracts the verb roll to raise from V to v. We also showed
how the shell analysis can help us account for the distribution of adverbs in
such structures. We argued that the direct object (the ball) is assigned accusative
case under c-command via agreement with the light verb. In §8.5, we extended
the shell analysis to a variety of other double-complement transitive structures
including prepositional structures such as load the cart with hay, resultatives like
turn the litmus-paper red, verb–particle structures like take the rubbish out and
Object Control structures like persuade Dougal to be less frugal. We also showed
how the vP shell analysis could be extended to simple transitive structures like
John read the book, and to unergative structures like He may resign (from the
job). In §8.6, we argued in favour of a shell analysis for intransitive clauses con-
taining an unaccusative verb. We began by showing how a split VP analysis of
unaccusative clauses would account for the word order found in Belfast English
imperatives such as Go you to school! and went on to show how it would handle
standard English unaccusative structures such as A loud scream came from inside
the house, locative inversion structures like From inside the house came a loud
scream and expletive structures such as There came a loud scream from inside
the house. In §8.7, we then went on to extend the shell analysis to passives like
The horse was jumped perfectly over the fence, and to raising structures such as
They seem to me to be ﬁne. We concluded that all transitive and intransitive Verb
Phrases alike have a shell structure in which the verb raises from V to v, with
agent and experiencer external arguments (and expletive subjects) originating
in spec-v, and all other arguments originating within VP.
Key assumptions made in this chapter include the following:
(100)
Under the version of the split CP analysis outlined in this chapter:
(i)
A preposed wh-expression moves to spec-FocP in a main clause
wh-question, but to spec-ForceP in other types of wh-clause
(ii)
A preposed negative expression moves to spec-FocP
(iii)
A preposed topic moves to spec-TopP
(iv)
Foc is a strong head attracting an auxiliary in T to move to Foc, but Top and
Force are weak heads

8.8 Summary
315
(v)
A null declarative complementiser (viz. the null counterpart of that) can
only have a TP complement
(101)
Under Sch¨utze’s version of the split TP analysis outlined in this chapter:
(i)
Clauses are of the form CP+MP+TP(+NEGP)+VP
(ii)
M contains either a modal stem or an abstract (indicative/subjunctive) mood
morpheme
(iii)
An indicative mood morpheme is spelled out as a do-form when not
attached to a verbal stem
(iv)
T contains either a strong afﬁx which triggers raising of V to T, or a weak
afﬁx which raises to M
(v)
Neg is non-afﬁxal and cannot attract V to raise to Neg; however, clitic n’t
raises to attach to M
(vi)
Auxiliary inversion is movement from M to C
(102)
Under the version of the split VP analysis outlined in this chapter:
(i)
All Verb Phrases contain a light verb projection (vP) and a subordinate
lexical verb projection (VP), with the lexical verb originating in V and
adjoining to a null afﬁxal light verb in v.
(ii)
The speciﬁer position within vP can be ﬁlled by an agent or experiencer
external argument or a non-thematic expletive, but otherwise is empty;
other arguments are internal arguments and are merged with V.
(iii)
In transitive clauses, v agrees with and assigns accusative case to a
(pro)nominal goal with an unvalued case feature which is c-commanded
by v.
Two key sets of conditions which we posited earlier in our discussion of split
VPs in the chapter are the following:
(65)
Merger Condition
Where V has a clausal internal argument and some other type/s of internal
argument, the clausal argument is the ﬁrst to be merged with V; where V
has a (pro)nominal internal argument and some other type/s of internal
argument, the (pro)nominal argument is the last one merged with V
(88)
Expletive Conditions (revised)
(i)
External Argument Condition:
An expletive can only be merged as the last/highest argument of a light verb
with no external argument (i.e. in spec-v)
(ii)
Indeﬁniteness Condition:
Expletive there can only be merged as the speciﬁer of a light verb whose VP
complement has an indeﬁnite nominal or pronominal internal argument
(iii)
Inactivity Condition:
Expletive it can only be merged as the speciﬁer of a light verb which does
not c-command any accessible nominal or pronominal expression with
some active case- or ϕ-feature(s)

316
8 split projections
●
●
8.9
Bibliographical background
The split CP analysis of the clause periphery in §8.2 derives from
work by Rizzi (1997, 2001b, 2004) and Haegeman (2000): for a critique, see
Newmeyer (2005). On differences between focusing and topicalisation, see Rizzi
(1997), Cormack and Smith (2000b), Smith and Cormack (2002), Alexopoulou
and Kolliakou (2002), Drubig (2003) and Green (2007). For evidence that what
appear to be clausal subjects like the clause underlined in That the defendant
is guilty has been proved beyond all reasonable doubt are actually topics, see
Emonds (1976), Koster (1978), Williams (1980), Stowell (1981), Saﬁr (1986),
Bresnan (1994), Postal (1998) and Alrenga (2005). On the difference between
clause type and force, see Huddleston (1994). For alternative analyses of neg-
ative preposing, see Sobin (2003), Branigan (2005) and Maekawa (2007). For
arguments against a feature-based account of focus, see Neeleman and Szendr˝oi
(2004). In relationtothe claim in §8.3 that TP can be split into anumber ofseparate
projections including an Aspect Phrase/AspP projection, it should be noted that a
number of studies have postulated the existence of an Aspect head (independent
of Tense) in a wide range of languages, including Russian (Tenny 1987), Greek
(Alexiadou 1997), Spanish and Basque (Laka 1990), Breton and Welsh (Hendrick
1991), Scots Gaelic (Ramchand 1996), Irish (Guilfoyle 1994), Chinese (Borer
1993), Nweh (Nkemnji 1995), Egyptian Arabic (Diesing and Jelinek 1995),
English (Felser 1999a, Adger 2003, van Gelderen 2004 and Thompson 2006)
and Lithuanian (Franks and Lavine 2006). On the possibility that small clauses
like that bracketed in I consider [Mary (as) unsuitable for the post] may contain
an Aspect Projection, see Jim´enez (2000a,b). For further discussion of the syntax
and semantics of Aspect, see the collection of papers in Verkuyl, de Swart and van
Hout (2005). On the idea that resultative participles (like opened in the carefully
opened package) incorporate an Aspect head, see Embick (2004). On the claim
that clauses may contain a Mood Projection/MP, see Cinque (1999, 2002, 2004),
Sch¨utze (2004) and Haegeman (2006): in relation to Sch¨utze’s claim that positing
a Mood Phrase projection eliminates the need for lowering operations like Afﬁx
Lowering, see the defence of lowering operations in Richards (2004). The claim
that structures like ∗She’s like you (where ’s is a contracted form of does) are ruled
out by an Economy Condition derives from Emonds (1994, p. 168) and Freidin
(2004, p. 119). Note that we have only discussed some of the wide range of split TP
analyses proposed in the relevant research literature – excluding, for example, the
claim made by Pollock (1989) and Belletti (1990) that clauses contain a Subject
Agreement projection (AgrSP), or the related claim by Rizzi and Shlonsky (2005)
that they contain a Subject Projection (SubjP): for evidence against an AgrSP
projection, see Iatridou (1990) and Chomsky (1995). The split vP analysis out-
lined in §§8.4–8.7 dates back in spirit to work by Larson (1988, 1990), Hale
and Keyser (1991, 1993a, 1994), Chomsky (1995) and Kratzer (1993, 1996).
On the idea that causative verbs like Italian fare ‘make’ may be the spellout of

Workbook section
317
a causative light verb, see Folli and Harley (2007). For technical accounts of
differences between Adjunction and Merger, see Stepanov (2001) and Chom-
sky (2001). For arguments that do is a light verb in elliptical structures such as
John will roll a ball down the hill and Paul will do so as well, see See Stroik
(2001) and Haddican (2007). For alternative analyses of resultative structures,
see Keyser and Roeper (1992), Carrier and Randall (1992) and Oya (2002).
For an analysis of unergative verbs involving object incorporation, see Baker
(1988) and Hale and Keyser (1993a). For further discussion of Object Control
structures, see Bowers (1993); for an analysis of the control verb promise, see
Larson (1991). On the use of the perfect auxiliary be in unaccusative structures,
see Sorace (2000). For a range of alternative accounts of locative inversion, see
Bresnan (1994), Levin and Rappaport Hovav (1995), Collins (1997), Culicover
and Levine (2001), Nakajima (2001), Bowers (2002) and Hornstein (2007). In
relation to the disussion of raising in §8.7, see Collins (2005b) for a split pro-
jection analysis of structures like John seems to Mary to be nice. The discussion
of passives in §8.8 excludes expletive passives such as There were several prizes
awarded: see Chomsky (1999) and Bowers (2002) for two different analyses of
this type of structure. Although we have assumed only two ‘layers’ of struc-
ture within the Verb Phrase here, it should be noted that a number of linguists
have proposed additional ‘layers’ of structure within the Verb Phrase, such as an
Object (Agreement) Phrase (Koizumi 1993, 1995; Radford 1997a, §§10.4–10.6),
an Acc(usative) Phrase (Beck and Johnson 2004), a Transitivity Phrase (Bowers
2002), a Voice Phrase (Collins 1997, 2005a), a Participial Phrase (Collins 2005a)
and an Applicative Phrase (McGinnis 2004). Space limitations mean that we
have excluded from discussion here the possibility that Noun Phrases may have
a split projection structure parallel to that found in Verb Phrases, on which see
Carstens (2000, 2001), Adger (2003) and Radford (2004a, §9.9). Likewise, it has
been proposed that Prepositional Phrases (in languages which allow preposition
stranding) may have a split projection structure: see Boeckx (2007).
●
●
Workbook section
●
Exercise 8.1
Discuss how the structure of the bracketed clauses in the sentences below would be analysed
within
the framework of the split CP analysis outlined in §8.2 of the main text.
1
He admitted [that they will only rarely enjoy this course]
2
∗He admitted [only rarely will they enjoy this course]
3
∗He admitted [that only rarely they will enjoy this course]
4
∗He admitted [this course, they will only rarely enjoy]
5
∗He admitted [that this course will they only rarely enjoy]
6
He admitted [that this course, only rarely will they enjoy] (w)

318
8 split projections
7
∗He admitted [that this course will only rarely they enjoy] (w)
8
∗He admitted [that only rarely will this course, they enjoy] (w)
9
∗He admitted [only rarely, this course, they will enjoy] (w)
10
This is a course [which only rarely will they enjoy] (w)
Then comment on how the wh-clauses in the following sentences might be analysed within the
split CP framework (14 and 15 being from the Leonard corpus on the childes
database, MacWhinney 1995):
11
What a mine of useless information that I am! (Irish TV celebrity, BBC1 TV) (w)
12
I wonder which dress that they picked (Belfast English, from Henry 1995, p. 107)
13
He protested that how could he have known she would be killed? (= semi-indirect speech)
14
What Kent’s gonna play with? (produced by a child with Speciﬁc Language Impairment)
(w)
15
What’s he gon(na) kill? (produced by the same child as 14) (w)
In addition, say whether contrasts such as those below can be handled within the framework of
assumptions presented in the main text, and if not try and develop an alternative analysis.
16
What under no circumstances would John do for Mary? (Maekawa 2007, p. 158)
17
∗Under no circumstances what would John do for Mary? (Maekawa 2007, p. 159)
18
Not long after the robbery, the police arrested a suspect
19
∗Not long after the robbery did the police arrest a suspect
20
None of the girls would John admit that he had lied to
21
∗None of the girls would John admit that had he lied to
Finally, say how you think the following sentences could be derived under the split TP analysis
outlined in §8.3 of the main text, highlighting any problems which arise.
22
He should receive a pardon
23
Should he not receive a pardon? (w)
24
Did he receive a pardon? (w)
25
Didn’t she demand that he receive a pardon?
26
She demanded that he not receive a pardon
Helpful hints
To simplify your discussion of sentences 1–10, concern yourself only with the structure of the left
periphery of the bracketed clauses in these examples (i.e. the Force/Topic/Focus Phrase
projections above the TP layer). Assume that the TP has the skeletal structure [TP they [T will] only
rarely enjoy this course] but don’t concern yourself with its precise internal structure. Assume that
the complementiser that occupies the head Force position of a ForceP projection (marking the
relevant clause as declarative in force); that only rarely is an ADVP constituent (whose internal
structure need not concern you) which moves to the edge of a FocP projection when preposed;
and that the DP this course moves to the edge of a TopP projection when preposed. Assume that a
clause only contains a FocP projection if it contains a focused constituent preceding the subject,
and only contains a TopP constituent if it contains a topic constituent preceding the subject.
In sentences 11–15, likewise concern yourself only with the structure of the left periphery of
the wh-clauses. Bear in mind the claim made in the main text that focused wh-interrogative
expressions can either move to become the speciﬁer of a strong Focus head (in main-clause
questions) or of a weak Force head (in embedded questions), but that exclamative wh-expressions

Workbook section
319
move to the speciﬁer position within the Force Phrase in main-clause questions and embedded
questions alike. In 14–15, bear in mind the possibility that some language learners may initially
assume that an interrogative wh-word can have more than one landing-site (in virtue of being
focused on the one hand, and interrogative in force on the other). In relation to 16–17, consider
whether preposed negative and interrogative expressions might have different landing-sites (e.g. in
the speciﬁer of a Negative Phrase/NEGP or Interrogative Phrase/IntP respectively). In 18–19,
consider whether some preposed negative expressions may be topicalised rather than focused;
take not long after the robbery to be a prepositional phrase/PP, but do not concern yourself with its
internal structure. In 20–21, consider the possibility that preposed negative expressions can move
to spec-ForceP in an embedded clause out of which they are extracted. In relation to sentences
22–26, make the set of assumptions summarised in (101) above; you can simplify your discussion
of 22–26 by not assuming the split VP analysis of Verb Phrases, if you wish.
Model answer for 1
Rizzi posits that CP splits into multiple projections in clauses which contain a preposed topic or
focus constituent. However, neither the main admitted clause nor the complement enjoy clause
contains a preposed topic or focus constituent in 1; hence, neither contains a FocP or TopP
projection. Accordingly, both clauses in 1 will be simple ForceP projections whose head serves to
mark declarative force, the main clause headed by a null Force head, and the complement clause
headed by that. However, since our concern here is with the structure of the bracketed that-clause
which serves as the complement of the verb admitted, we concentrate on how this is derived.
Assume (as in the helpful hints) that we have reached a stage of derivation where we have
formed the TP they will only rarely enjoy this course. This is merged with a Force head containing
the complementiser that, so forming the structure shown in highly simpliﬁed form in (i) below:
(i)
[ForceP [Force that] [TP they [T will] only rarely enjoy this course]]
Given the assumption made in the main text that English allows a declarative Force head to have a
null spellout when it has a TP complement, we correctly predict that alongside sentence 1 we can
also have a sentence like (ii) below, in which the bracketed complement clause contains a null
complementiser:
(ii)
He admitted [they will only rarely enjoy syntax]
Model answer for 22
Given the assumptions made in the helpful hints (adapted from Sch¨utze 2004), sentence 22 will
have the structure shown below (simpliﬁed inter alia by not showing the subject he originating
within VP, and by not splitting VP into two separate vP/VP projections):
(i)
[CP [C ø] [MP he [M shall] [TP [T AfPAST] [VP [V receive] [a pardon]]]]
By hypothesis, the past tense afﬁx in T can be either weak or strong. If it is weak, it will raise to
attach to the modal stem shall in M, so deriving the structure:
(ii)
[CP [C ø] [MP he [M shall+AfPAST] [TP [T AfPAST] [VP [V receive] a pardon]]]]
The PF component will then spell out the string shall+AfPAST as the past tense form should.
However, if (as Sch¨utze assumes) T can also contain a strong afﬁx, the strong afﬁx in T will
trigger raising of the verb receive from V to T, so deriving:
(iii)
[CP [C ø] [MP he [M shall] [TP [T receive+AfPAST] [VP [V receive] a pardon]]]]

320
8 split projections
However, this will leave the modal stem shall in M without a tense afﬁx, and since the PF
component has no means of spelling out untensed modals, the resulting derivation will crash.
What this illustrates is that the split TP analysis developed by Sch¨utze over generates in certain
respects, and hence could be argued not to meet Chomsky’s (2006, p. 2) criterion of ‘efﬁcient
computation’. In this instance, one way of circumventing the over generation problem would be to
suppose that it is a lexical property of modals that they select a TP complement headed by a weak
T constituent (though we can’t use the mechanism of selection to resolve all the over generation
problems posed by Sch¨utze’s analysis).
●
Exercise 8.2
Discuss how the syntax of sentences 1–16 below could be analysed within the split VP framework,
giving arguments in support of your analysis. Comment in particular on the syntax of the italicised
constituents, saying what position each one occupies, what case (if any) it receives and how.
1
They will increase the price gradually to 90 dollars
2
He will explain the procedures (w)
3
He should apologise profusely to her (w)
4
This could make him angry
5
Tourists may smuggle drugs illegally into the country
6
He should ask her conﬁdentially if she is taking drugs
7
They will tell you politely to leave (w)
8
There may suddenly appear a ghost at the window
9
From inside the mineshaft emerged the miners
10
It was put hastily in the bag (w)
11
You are expected to go immediately to the police (w)
12
The police were reported by the press to have arrested a suspect (w)
13
It must be proved to the jury beyond all doubt that the defendant is guilty
14
Several politicians are widely thought to be suspected of corruption
15
There does seem to me to remain some unrest in Utopia (w)
16
Some evidence would certainly appear to have emerged recently of corruption
In addition, comment on the syntax of the following sentences reported by Bowerman (1982) to
have been produced by young children (their names and ages in years; months being indicated in
parentheses):
17
I disappeared (i.e. ‘hid’) a bear in the back of the car (Scott 5;0)
18
She came (i.e. ‘brought’) it over here (Christy 3;4)
19
Somebody fell (i.e. ‘knocked’) it off (Eva 3;8)
20
I’m staying (i.e. ‘keeping’) it in the water (Eva 3;2)
Helpful hints
Treat the if-clause in 6, the to-clause in 7 and the that-clause in 13 as CPs, and the to-clauses in
11, 12, 14, 15 and 16 as TPs, but do not concern yourself with their internal structure. Treat the
by-phrase in the passive sentence in 12 as an internal argument of the verb reported. Take the PP
beyond all doubt in 13 to be an adjunct. In relation to 16, bear in mind the treatment of
discontinuous constituents in earlier chapters. More generally, assume that (in these sentences) an
(adverbial or prepositional) adjunct which follows a verb adjoins to a projection of V, whereas an

Workbook section
321
adjunct which precedes a verb adjoins to a projection of v (the relevant projection to which the
adverb adjoins in each case being one containing V/v and its complement).
Model answer for 1
The verb increase can be used not only as an transitive verb in sentences such as 1 above, but also
as an intransitive verb in sentences such as:
(i)
The price will increase gradually to 90 dollars
Accordingly, we can take increase to be an ergative predicate which (in intransitive uses) has the
same syntax as an unaccusative verb. This means that 1 is derived as follows. The verb increase
merges with its goal PP argument to 90 dollars to form the V-bar increase to 90 dollars. The
adverb gradually is then adjoined to this V-bar to form the even larger V-bar gradually increase to
90 dollars. The theme DP argument the price is then merged with the resulting V-bar to form the
VP shown below:
(ii)
VP
DP     
V'
the price
ADV
 V'
  gradually 
V  
PP 
increase          to 90 dollars
The order in which the internal arguments are merged with the verb increase in (ii) is in
accordance with the Merger Condition (65), in that the DP argument the price is the last internal
argument to be merged with the verb (and is thus the highest internal argument in the structure).
The VP in (ii) then merges with a causative light-verb ø to generate a v-bar which in turn merges
with its external agent argument (= they), so forming the structure (iii) below:
(iii)
         vP 
 PRN                                 v'
 they 
          v
VP
ø
                 DP   
V'
the price 
ADV
V'
           gradually 
V   
         PP 
increase
 to 90 dollars
The transitive light-verb [v ø] agrees (invisibly) with and assigns (invisible) accusative case to the
DP the price. Being a strong, afﬁxal head, the light verb also attracts the verb increase to move

322
8 split projections
from V to adjoin to v, as shown by the arrow below:
(iv)
           vP 
PRN                                 v'
 they 
          v
VP
increase+ø  
                 DP   
V'
the price 
ADV
V'
           gradually 
V   
         PP 
increase       to 90 dollars
The vP in (iv) is subsequently merged with a T constituent containing will, and T-will agrees
(invisibly) with and assigns nominative case to the subject they. T also has an epp feature which
triggers raising of the subject they to spec-T. Merging TP with a null declarative C forms the CP
shown in simpliﬁed form below (with the constituents marked by strikethrough being given a null
spellout in the PF component):
(v)
[CP [C ø] [TP they [T will] [vP they [v increase+ø] [VP the price gradually [V increase]
to 90 dollars]]]]
If the adverb gradually had been adjoined to v-bar rather than to V-bar, the resulting structure
would instead have been:
(vi)
[CP [C ø] [TP they [T will] [vP they gradually [v increase+ø] [VP the price [V increase]
to 90 dollars]]]]
and (vi) would be spelled out as the sentence They will gradually increase the price to 90 dollars.

9
Phases
●
●
9.1
Overview
In this chapter, we look at recent work by Chomsky suggesting that
syntactic structure is built up in phases (with phases including CP and transitive
vP). At the end of each phase, part of the syntactic structure already formed
undergoes transfer to the phonological and semantic components, with the result
that the relevant part of the structure is inaccessible to further syntactic operations
from that point on. (An incidental point of detail to note is that we shall simplify
exposition – and follow Chomsky – by adopting a split projection analysis of
Verb Phrases, but not of TP or CP constituents.)
●
●
9.2
Phases
In chapter 7, we noted Chomsky’s claim that syntactic operations
involve a relation between a probe P and a local goal G which is sufﬁciently
‘close’ to the probe (or, in the case of multiple agreement, a relation between a
probe and more than one local goal). However, an important question to ask is
why probe–goal relations must be local. In this connection, Chomsky (2001,
p. 13) remarks that ‘the P, G relation must be local’ in order ‘to minimise
search’ (i.e. in order to ensure that a minimal amount of searching will enable
a probe to ﬁnd an appropriate goal). His claim that locality is forced by the
need ‘to minimise search’ suggests a processing explanation (albeit Chomsky
has always maintained that the overall goal of linguisic theory is to develop a
theory of competence rather than of performance). The implication is that the
Language Faculty can only process limited amounts of structure at one time,
and can only hold a limited amount of structure in its ‘active memory’ (Chom-
sky 1999, p. 9). In order to ensure a ‘reduction of computational burden’ (1999,
p. 9) Chomsky proposes that ‘the derivation of EXP[ressions] proceeds by phase’
(p. 9), so that syntactic structures are built up one phase at a time. He maintains
(2001, p. 14) that ‘phases should be as small as possible, to minimise memory’,
suggesting (1999, p. 9) that they are ‘propositional’ in nature, and include CP
and transitive vP (i.e. a vP with an agent or experiencer external argument,
which he denotes as v∗P). His rationale for taking CP and v∗P as phases is that
323

324
9 phases
CP represents a complete clausal complex (including a speciﬁcation of force),
and v∗P represents a complete thematic (argument structure) complex (including
an external argument).
Once all the operations which apply within a given phase have been com-
pleted, the domain of the phase (i.e. the complement of its head) becomes
impenetrable to further syntactic operations. Chomsky refers to this condition
as the Phase Impenetrability Condition/PIC – and we can formulate it as
follows:
(1)
Phase Impenetrability Condition/PIC
The c-command domain of a phase head is impenetrable to an external
probe (i.e. a goal which is c-commanded by the head of a phase is
impenetrable to any probe c-commanding the phase)
(As should be self-evident, this condition is a modiﬁcation of the Impenetrabil-
ity Condition that we posited in earlier chapters.) The reason why the domain
of the phase head is impenetrable to an external probe (according to Chomsky
2001, p. 5) is that once a complete phase has been formed, the domain of the
phase undergoes a transfer operation by which the relevant (domain) structure is
simultaneously sent to the phonological component to be assigned an appropriate
phonetic representation, and to the semantic component to be assigned an appro-
priate semantic representation – and from that point on, the relevant domain is no
longer accessible to the syntax. So, for example, once a complete CP phase has
been formed, the TP which is the domain (i.e. complement) of the phase head
C will be sent to the phonological and semantic components for processing. As
a result, TP is no longer visible in the syntax, and hence neither TP itself nor
any constituent of TP can subsequently serve as a goal for a higher probe of any
kind: i.e. no probe c-commanding CP can enter into a relation with TP or any
constituent of TP.
In order to make our discussion more concrete, consider the derivation of the
following sentence:
(2)
Will Ruritania withdraw troops from Utopia?
Given the split projection (vP+VP) analysis of Verb Phrases outlined in the
previous chapter, (2) will be derived as follows. The V withdraw ﬁrst merges with
the PP from ø Utopia (with Utopia being a DP headed by a null determiner, given
the DP hypothesis) to form the V-bar withdraw from Utopia, and then merges
with the QP troops (comprising a null partitive quantiﬁer ø and the noun troops)
to form the VP withdraw ø troops from Utopia. The resulting VP is merged with
a causative light verb whose external agent argument is ø Ruritania (another
deﬁnite DP headed by a null determiner). The light verb agrees (invisibly) with
and assigns (invisible) accusative case to the QP ø troops; moreover, being afﬁxal
in nature, the light verb triggers movement of the verb withdraw from its original
(italicised) position in V to v, so resulting in the structure shown below (with the

9.2 Phases
325
arrow marking movement):
(3)
vP 
DP
  v'
ø Ruritania
 v
 VP 
withdraw+ø   
          QP    
V'
ø troops
V
  PP 
withdraw
from ø Utopia 
Since a transitive vP (i.e. a vP with a thematic external argument) is a phase,
and since the vP in (3) is transitive and has the external argument ø Rurita-
nia, the VP constituent (by virtue of being the domain/complement of the light
verb which is the head of the phase) will undergo transfer to the phonological
and semantic components at this point, and thereafter cease to be accessible to
further syntactic operations. Let’s suppose that transfer results in lower copies
of moved constituents receiving a null spellout in the PF component, and that
uninterpretable features which have been deleted are removed from the structure
handed over to the semantic component, but not from the structure handed over
to the phonological component. Consequently, the phonological component will
not spell out the original (italicised) copy of the verb withdraw in (3), and only
the items troops and from Utopia will be given an overt phonetic spellout.
The syntactic computation then proceeds once more, with [T will] being
merged with the vP in (3) to form the T-bar shown below (simpliﬁed by showing
only those items within VP which received an overt spellout in the PF component
after the VP underwent transfer at the end of the vP phase, and using outline
font to indicate that the items in question have already undergone transfer):
(4)
T'
T       
            vP 
will 
DP
         v'
ø Ruritania 
  v
VP
             withdraw+ø  
Since [T will] has uninterpretable (and unvalued) person/number features, it is
an active probe which searches for a local goal to value and delete its unvalued
features. Neither the QP ø troops nor the DP ø Utopia are accessible to the probe
will (since both are contained within a VP which has already been transferred
to the phonological and semantic components); however, the DP ø Ruritania is
accessible to will and is syntactically active by virtue of its uninterpretable case

326
9 phases
feature. Hence, will agrees (invisibly) with and assigns (invisible) nominative case
to the DP ø Ruritania. The auxiliary [T will] also has an epp feature requiring
movement of the closest goal which it agrees with to spec-T; accordingly, the DP
ø Ruritania is moved from its original (italicised) position in spec-v to become
the speciﬁer of will, as shown by the arrow below:
(5)
TP
DP
T'
ø Ruritania
T         
     vP 
 will 
               DP     
                  v'
ø Ruritania 
  v
 VP 
withdraw+ø   
The resulting TP is merged with a null interrogative C. Let’s suppose that (as
suggested in §5.4) yes-no questions contain a null yes-no question particle merged
in spec-C (perhaps a null counterpart of the adverb whether), and that C has a
tense feature which attracts will to move from its original (italicised) position in
T to adjoin to the null C heading CP in the manner shown by the arrow below:
(6)
            CP 
ADV
       C'
whether
   C           
TP
will+ø
          DP                  
T'
   ø Ruritania
T 
             vP 
will
     DP    
        v'
ø Ruritania
               v
VP
      withdraw+ø         
Since CP is a phase and the domain of the head of a phase is spelled out at
the end of a phase, TP undergoes transfer to the phonological and semantic
components at this point. The transfer operation results in the italicised copies
of the auxiliary will and the DP ø Ruritania receiving a null spellout in the
phonological component.
However, we are now left with something of a problem. We have come to
the end of the derivation, but so far neither C nor the null yes-no question
particle which serves as its speciﬁer have been ‘handed over’ to the phonological
and semantic components for further processing. One way of ensuring that this

9.3 Intransitive and defective clauses
327
happens is to make the additional assumption in (7ii) below about transfer:
(7)
Transfer
(i)
At the end of each phase, the domain (i.e. complement of the phase head)
undergoes transfer
(ii)
At the end of the overall derivation, all remaining constituents undergo
transfer
In the case of (6), the two remaining constituents which have not yet undergone
transfer are the C constituent containing will and the null yes-no question oper-
ator in spec-C. Accordingly, these undergo transfer to the phonological/semantic
components at the end of the overall derivation.
●
●
9.3
Intransitive and defective clauses
Our illustrative account of phases in the previous section involved a
structure containing a transitive vP phase and a CP phase. However, since neither
intransitive clauses (i.e. those containing a vP with no external argument) nor
defective clauses (i.e. clauses which are TPs lacking a CP projection) are phases,
things work differently in such structures – as we can illustrate in relation to the
derivation of:
(8)
There are thought by many to remain some problems in Utopia
The unaccusative verb remain merges with its locative complement in ø Utopia
(Utopia being a DP headed by a null determiner) to form the V-bar remain in ø
Utopia, and this V-bar is in turn merged with its theme argument (the quantiﬁer
phrase some problems) to form the VP some problems remain in ø Utopia. This
VP in turn is merged with a null light verb which, being afﬁxal, triggers movement
of the verb remain from its italicised position in V to adjoin to the light verb. If
(as argued in the previous chapter) expletives originate in spec-v, at the end of
the v-cycle we will have the following structure:
(9)
        vP
PRN
       v'
there 
  v
       VP
remain+ø
         QP     
V'
some problems 
V    
 PP
remain           in ø Utopia
Although a transitive vP is a phase (and so requires its domain to be spelled out
at the end of the v-cycle), the vP in (9) is not a phase because it is intransitive by

328
9 phases
virtue of having no thematic external argument (i.e. no agent or experiencer
subject) – as can be seen from the fact that the spec-v position in (9) is occupied
by the non-thematic expletive pronoun there. Accordingly, the VP complement
does not undergo transfer at this point, and the syntactic derivation proceeds by
merging the resulting vP with inﬁnitival to. If (as argued in §7.9) inﬁnitival to has
an epp feature and a person feature in defective clauses, to will attract expletive
there (which is a third person pronoun) to move to spec-T, so deriving:
(10)
TP
PRN          
T'
there 
T       
            vP
  to 
        PRN              
             v'
there
     v
VP
remain+ø
 QP             
V'
some problems
  V      
     PP
remain
     in ø Utopia
The (passive participle) verb thought is then introduced into the derivation, and
merges with the TP in (10) to form a V-bar which in turn merges with the PP by
many to form the VP shown below (though an incidental detail to note in passing
is that some linguists take passive by-phrases to be adjuncts):
(11)
VP
PP    
V'
 by many
  V 
TP
thought
   PRN
T'
   there
T         
      vP 
   to 
   PRN   
         v'
there
          v
VP 
    remain+ø  
          QP    
V'
        some 
     problems           V   
     PP 
remain
in ø Utopia
The resulting VP is then merged as the complement of a light verb which (being
afﬁxal) attracts the verb think to adjoin to it. If we suppose that the light verb is
participial in nature (which is why Chomsky (1999) uses the label prt to denote
it), we can account for why the verb think is ultimately spelled out as the passive

9.3 Intransitive and defective clauses
329
participle thought. Merging the resulting vP with the passive auxiliary be will
derive the following T-bar constituent (where the verb think is shown in its
passive participle spellout form thought):
(12)
T'
T     
          vP 
BE
               v
   VP 
        thought+ø  
  PP        
 V'
         by many
       V 
TP
thought
   PRN                 T'
   there
T                      vP 
     to 
 PRN                     v'
there
                 v
 VP 
           remain+ø  
  QP     
V'
some
         problems        V  
     PP 
  remain
in ø Utopia
At this point, be is an active probe by virtue of its uninterpretable (and unvalued)
ϕ-features, and so it searches for an active local goal to value its person/number
features. In chapter 7, we suggested that a head carrying unvalued person and
number features keeps on probing until it locates the closest active ϕ-complete
goal which can value (and delete) its person and number features. Accordingly,
be will not stop probing when it locates the expletive pronoun there (active by
virtue of its uninterpretable person feature, but ϕ-incomplete by virtue of lacking
number) and will continue to probe deeper into the structure until it locates
the ϕ-complete third person plural goal some problems (active by virtue of its
uninterpretable and unvalued case feature and ϕ-complete by virtue of carrying
both person and number). Both there and some problems are accessible goals for
be since neither is contained within a structure which has undergone transfer. (We
can assume that the pronoun many is not active at this point, because it falls within
the domain of a closer probe by which will already have valued its case feature
as accusative and deleted it.) Accordingly, be simultaneously agrees in person
with there and some problems, and in number with some problems, so that be is
assigned the feature values [third-person, plural-number]. Since some problems
is ϕ-complete, it can delete the uninterpretable person and number features of be.
Conversely, be (by virtue of being ﬁnite) can value the unvalued case feature of
some problems as nominative, and (because be is also ϕ-complete) can delete the
relevant case feature (and also the person feature of there). The epp feature of T is
deleted by moving the closest active goal (i.e. there) from its original position as
the speciﬁer of to into its derived position as the speciﬁer of be (movement being

330
9 phases
indicated by an arrow below). Merging the resulting TP with a null declarative
complementiser derives the CP structure shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(13)
  CP 
 C                 TP
 ø  
        PRN              
T'
       there
T         
   vP 
BE
  v
VP
thought+ø  
    PP              
V'
  by many
  V             
TP
thought
            PRN    
T'
there
T                   vP 
to
     PRN                       v'
there
  v
       VP 
remain+ø  
       QP
V'
     some
  problems         V                PP 
 remain   in ø Utopia
Since CP is a phase, the TP headed by [T be] which constitutes its domain will
undergo transfer at this point, in accordance with (7i). The italicised copies of
moved constituents will be given a null spellout, and the auxiliary be in T will
be spelled out as are in the phonological component (since it has been valued
as third person plural in the course of the derivation). The null C heading CP
subsequently undergoes transfer by (7ii), and is assigned a null spellout in the
phonological component, and interpreted in the semantic component as marking
the relevant sentence as declarative in force.
In the context of our discussion of phases here, the key point which emerges
is that neither an intransitive vP nor a defective TP clause constitutes a phase –
e.g. in the case of (13), not the intransitive vP containing remain, nor the vP
containing the passive participle thought, nor the defective TP complement of
thought. In consequence, the relevant vP and TP constituents are still accessible
in the syntax when be is introduced into the derivation, so allowing be to agree
with some problems.
●
●
9.4
Phases and A-bar movement
The phase-based theory of syntax outlined in the previous section has
far-reaching consequences for the operation of A-bar movement operations like

9.4 Phases and A-bar movement
331
wh-movement – as we can illustrate in relation to the following sentence:
(14)
Where is it thought that he will go?
The derivation of (15) proceeds as follows. The unaccusative verb go is merged
with its goal argument (the locative adverbial pronoun where) to form the V-bar
go where, which in turn is merged with its theme argument he to form the VP
he go where. This VP is then merged with a null afﬁxal light verb which triggers
raising of the verb go to v from its original position in V, as shown by the arrow
below:
(15)
            vP 
v
      VP  
go+ø
     PRN 
V'
       he
V                    PRN
go
  where
Since vP is intransitive (by virtue of the fact that the light verb has no external
argument), vP is not a phase, and transfer cannot apply at this point. The syntactic
computation therefore continues, with [T will] merging with the vP in (15). Will
agrees with (and assigns nominative case to) he, and the epp feature of will
triggers raising of he from its original position in spec-V to spec-T (as shown by
the arrow below). Merging the complementiser that with the resulting TP forms
the CP shown in (16) below:
(16)
  CP 
C
TP
that 
    PRN            
T'
      he
T 
  vP 
         will 
v
    VP    
go+ø  
    PRN  
V'
he
        V                    PRN
go
where
Since CP is a phase, its domain (i.e. its TP complement) will undergo transfer
at this point. This means that neither TP nor any of the constituents of TP will
subsequently be accessible to further syntactic operations – i.e. in effect, TP and
its constituents of TP are frozen in place once TP undergoes transfer.

332
9 phases
However, this causes an obvious problem, since if all constituents of TP are
frozen in place at this point, the wh-word where will be unable to move from
the (sentence-ﬁnal) V-complement position it occupies in (16) to the (sentence-
initial) main clause C-speciﬁer position which it occupies in (14) Where is it
thought that he will go? As we saw in §5.6, we can overcome this problem if
we posit that wh-movement applies in a successive-cyclic fashion (one clause
at a time), and that the complementiser that in structures like (16) has an edge
feature which triggers movement of the closest wh-expression (= where) to
become the speciﬁer of the complement-clause CP headed by that before where
subsequently moves on to become the speciﬁer of the main clause C constituent
containing the inverted auxiliary is. Assuming this to be so, where will move from
the clause-ﬁnal position which it occupies in (16) above as the complement of go
into the clause-initial position which it occupies in (17) below as the speciﬁer of
that (movement being indicated by an arrow):
(17)
     CP 
PRN
  C'
where
          C    
TP
that
            PRN                           T'
he
T
        vP 
               will 
       v
VP        
    go+ø 
         PRN             
V'
he
V     
         PRN
go
where
At this point (once all the operations which apply on the C-cycle have applied)
the domain of C (i.e. its TP complement) will undergo transfer in accordance
with (7i), because CP is a phase: one consequence of this is that the italicised
lower copies of moved constituents will be marked as receiving a null spellout in
the phonological component.
After transfer of TP is completed, the syntactic computation continues. The
CP in (17) is merged as the complement of the verb think, and the resulting
VP is in turn merged as the complement of a participial light verb (ensuring that
think is eventually spelled out as the passive participle thought), with the verb
think (below shown as thought) raising to adjoin to the light verb. The expletive

9.4 Phases and A-bar movement
333
pronoun it is merged as the speciﬁer of the vP. A present tense T constituent
containing the passive auxiliary be is then merged with the vP already formed,
and [T be] agrees with the third person singular expletive pronoun it (so that
be is eventually spelled out as is), and the epp feature on [T be] attracts it
to raise to spec-T. Merging the resulting TP with a null afﬁxal interrogative
C will trigger raising of be from its original (italicised) position in T to C;
since the interrogative C also has an edge feature, it will attract interrogative
where to move from the italicised spec-C position in the complement clause
into spec-C position in the main clause, so deriving the CP shown in simpliﬁed
form below (with movements triggered by the main-clause C constituent being
arrowed):
(18)
CP
PRN
     C'
where
    C          
    TP 
  is+ø  
    PRN  
  T'
      it 
     T 
  vP 
is
                  PRN    
         v'
   it        
         v
VP
   thought+ø
V      
CP
thought
          PRN                  C'
where
C                     TP   
 that      
Since CP is a phase, its domain (= the main clause TP) will undergo transfer
by (7i) at this point, so that the italicised copies of is, thought and where will
receive a null spellout in the phonological component. If we assume an additional
transfer condition (7ii) to the effect that ‘at the end of the overall derivation, all
remaining constituents undergo transfer’, the remaining constituents where and
is + ø on the edge of the root CP undergo transfer by (7ii).
What our overall discussion in this section tells us is that just as A-movement
applies in a successive-cyclic fashion (so that each time a new T constituent is
introduced into the derivation, it can attract the closest nominal goal to become
its speciﬁer), so too (within a phase-based theory of syntax) A-bar movement
operations like wh-movement must apply in a successive-cyclic fashion (one
phase at a time): this means that each time a new phase head like C is introduced
into a wh-structure, it will serve as a probe which attracts the closest wh-goal to
move into its speciﬁer position.

334
9 phases
●
●
9.5
A-bar movement in transitive clauses
In the previous section, we looked at how wh-movement applies in
intransitive clauses within Chomsky’s phase-based theory of syntax. However,
the picture is more complicated in the case of A-bar movement out of a transitive
vP. Since transitive vPs are phases, it follows that in structures containing one or
more transitive vPs, wh-movement will have to pass through intermediate spec-v
positions as well. We can illustrate how this works by looking at the derivation
of the transitive sentence
(19)
What have they done?
This will be derived as follows. The verb do (shown below in its spellout form
done) merges with its thematic complement what to form the VP done what, and
the resulting VP is merged with a transitive light verb whose external argument
is they. The light verb agrees with and assigns accusative case to what, and (by
virtue of being afﬁxal) triggers raising of done from V to v. Let’s suppose that
just as C can have an edge feature attracting movement of a wh-expression, so
too a transitive light verb (by virtue of being a phase head, like C) can have a
wh-attracting edge feature. This being so, what will be moved to become a second
(outer) speciﬁer for vP, forming the structure below:
(20)
            vP 
PRN       
       v'
what 
  PRN    
      v'
  they 
          v
VP
     done+ø          
V       
      PRN
done
what
An assumption implicit in this analysis is that a head can have multiple spec-
iﬁers – in the case of (20), an inner speciﬁer they representing the external
argument of the light verb, and an outer speciﬁer what which is attracted by the
edge feature of the light verb. Since a transitive vP is a phase, the VP domain
done what in (20) will undergo transfer at the end of the vP phase in accordance
with (7:), and the two italicised copies of moved constituents will thereby be
given a null spellout.

9.5 A-bar movement in transitive clauses
335
The derivation then proceeds by merging [T have] with the vP in (20), forming
the T-bar below:
(21)
 T'
T   
      vP 
have
 PRN     
v'
 what 
     PRN                           v'
     they 
         v
VP
done+ø
The T-probe have is active by virtue of its unvalued uninterpretable person/
number agreement features, and searches for a nominal goal to value and delete
its agreement features and become its subject. Since the closest nominal goal
c-commanded by T-have is the pronoun what, let’s ask why have can’t agree with
and attract what to become its subject. One way of ruling out the possibility of
T agreeing with and attracting what would be in terms of a condition such as the
following:
(22)
Inactivation Condition
A goal with a case feature becomes inactive for agreement with (or
attraction by) an A-head like T once its case feature has been valued and
deleted
(An A-head is a probe like T or transitive v which enters the derivation carrying
one or more unvalued agreement features, and which acts as a case assigner if
it has a complete set of agreement features.) Another condition which would
prevent what from moving to spec-T in (20) is a constraint proposed in Chomsky
(2005b) which we can characterise as follows:
(23)
Mixed Chains Constraint
Movement cannot give rise to a mixed chain containing one copy of a
constituent which has moved to the edge of a phase, and another which has
moved to the edge of a non-phasal projection
Since what has moved to the edge of the vP phase in (21), the Mixed Chains
Constraint (23) bars movement of what to the edge of TP, because this would
result in a chain in which what moves to the edge of a phasal projection (= vP),
and then from there moves to the edge of a non-phasal projection (= TP).
To summarise: the Inactivation Condition (22) means what is inactive and so
cannot agree with have, and the Mixed Chains Constraint (23) further prevents
what from moving to spec-T. By contrast, the pronoun they is active at this point
because its case feature has not yet been valued. If we follow Boeckx (2007,
p. 83) in supposing that a pronoun like what with an already valued case feature

336
9 phases
is ‘transparent’ for T, then T can see ‘through’ what and locate the pronoun they
as the closest active goal. Accordingly, have agrees with, assigns nominative case
to and attracts the pronoun they to move to spec-T, so deriving:
(24)
TP
PRN
 T'
they
  T
    vP 
have
    PRN                            v'
    what 
  PRN              
    v'
they
  v
VP
done+ø
This TP is then merged with a null complementiser with a tense feature which
triggers movement of have from T to C, and an edge feature which triggers
movement of what to spec-C, so deriving:
(25)
CP
PRN           
       C'
What 
   C        
TP
          have+ø  
    PRN                  
 T'
    they 
T       
              vP 
have
          PRN                            v'
what
             PRN         
    v'
they
     v
VP
done+ø  
At the end of the CP phase, TP undergoes transfer in accordance with (7i) and the
italicised copies of moved constituents receive a null spellout in the phonological
component. Subsequently, the constituents at the edge of CP (i.e. its speciﬁer
what and its head have + ø) undergo transfer in accordance with (7ii).
Our discussion of the derivation of (20) What have they done? shows us that
A-bar movement in transitive clauses will involve movement through spec-v into

9.5 A-bar movement in transitive clauses
337
spec-C. An obvious implication of this is that wh-questions like (26a) below
which contain two transitive clauses will correspondingly involve successive-
cyclic wh-movement through two spec-v positions (and likewise through two
spec-C positions) – as shown in skeletal form in (26b):
(26)(a)
What might she think that they will do?
[CP What [C might] she [vP what think [CP what [C that] they will [vP what do what]]]]
(b)
More generally, a sentence containing n transitive verbs and m CPs inter-
vening between the original position of a wh-expression and its ultimate
landing-site will involve movement through n spec-v positions and m spec-C
positions.
As our discussion in this section illustrates, theoretical considerations lead
us to conclude that, if CPs and transitive vPs are phases, wh-movement must
involve movement through intermediate spec-C positions, and also through inter-
mediate spec-v positions in transitive clauses. In §5.7, we presented empirical
evidence that long-distance wh-movement involves movement through interme-
diate spec-C positions. An obvious question to ask at this juncture, therefore, is
what empirical evidence there is that a wh-expression extracted out of a transitive
vP ﬁrst moves to the edge of vP before subsequently moving to the edge of CP.
Since (as we see in the case of A-movement) a probe which attracts a goal to
become its speciﬁer may agree with the attracted goal in respect of one or more
features, what we might expect to ﬁnd is that a transitive v agrees (in respect
of one or more features) with a goal which it attracts to become its speciﬁer.
However, since English has impoverished agreement morphology, we will have
to look at other languages for evidence of such agreement.
In this connection, it is interesting to note that there is evidence that wh-
movement out of a transitive Verb Phrase triggers agreement marking on the
verb in some languages. We can illustrate this phenomenon in terms of the
following Chamorro example (adapted from Reintges, LeSourd and Chung 2006,
p. 169):
(27)
Hafa sinanganen˜na si Joaquin nu hagu bininden˜na
What told the Joaquin to you sold
‘What did Joaquin tell you that he sold?’
The crucial aspect of the example in (27) is that the direct object hafa ‘what’
has been moved out of its original position as the object of the embedded clause
to the front of the main clause, and that this movement triggers agreement on
both the verb in the embedded clause and the verb in the main clause, each of
which therefore end up carrying the italicised (object-agreement) inﬁx in. This
suggests that a transitive light verb carrying an edge feature attracts a wh-marked
goal and undergoes overtly marked agreement with the goal.

338
9 phases
A different pattern of agreement (in respect of number–gender concord fea-
tures) between a transitive light verb and an attracted wh-expression is illustrated
by participle agreement in French in clauses such as (28b) below:
(28)(a)
Il a commis quelle bˆetise?
He has committed what blunder
‘What blunder did he make?’
(b)
Quelle bˆetise il a commise?
What blunder he has committed
‘What blunder did he make?’
The participle commis ‘committed’ is in the default (masculine singular) form in
(28a), and does not agree with the feminine singular in situ wh-object quelle bˆetise
‘what blunder’ (the ﬁnal -e in these words can be taken to be an orthographic
marker of a feminine singular form). However, the participle commise in (28b)
contains the feminine singular marker -e and agrees with its preposed feminine
singular object quelle bˆetise ‘what blunder’ and consequently rhymes with bˆetise.
What’s going on here?
Let’s look ﬁrst at the derivation of (28a). The QP quelle bˆetise ‘what blunder’
in (28a) is merged as the complement of the verb commis ‘committed’ forming
the VP commis quelle bˆetise ‘committed what blunder’. The resulting VP is
then merged with a null transitive light verb, and the resulting v-bar is in turn
merged with its external agent argument il ‘he’. Since the light verb has an
external argument, it assigns accusative case to the QP object quelle bˆetise ‘what
blunder’. Being afﬁxal, the light verb attracts the verb commis ‘committed’ to
adjoin to it, in the manner shown by the arrow below:
(29)
         vP 
PRN
v'
il 
  v
VP
       commis+ø   
V          
QP
commis
    quelle bêtise
By hypothesis, the light verb has no edge feature in wh-in-situ questions, so
there is no movement of the wh-phrase quelle bˆetise ‘what blunder’ to spec-
v. Subsequently the vP (29) is merged as the complement of the auxiliary a
‘has’ which agrees in person/number ϕ-features with (and triggers movement
to spec-T of) the subject il ‘he’. Merging the resulting TP with a null com-
plementiser which likewise has no edge feature derives the structure associ-
ated with (28a) Il a commis quelle bˆetise? (literally ‘He has committed what
blunder?’).
Now consider the derivation of (28b). This is similar to that of (28a), until
we reach the stage of derivation shown in (29) above. However, in a non-echoic

9.5 A-bar movement in transitive clauses
339
question, the light verb will have an edge feature which attracts the wh-marked
object quelle bˆetise ‘what blunder’ to move to become an additional (outer)
speciﬁer for the vP, in the manner shown by the arrow below:
(30)
       vP 
 QP             
  v'
quelle bêtise
 PRN                               v'
  il 
      v
VP
commis+ø  
  V      
commis
       QP
quelle bêtise 
The resulting vP (30) is then merged as the complement of the auxiliary a ‘has’
which agrees in ϕ-features with (and triggers movement to spec-T of) the subject
il ‘he’. Merging the resulting TP with a null interrogative complementiser which
has a wh-attracting edge feature triggers movement of the wh-phrase to spec-
C, so deriving the structure associated with (28b) Quelle bˆetise il a commise?
(literally ‘What blunder he has committed?’).
In the light of the assumptions made above, consider why the participle sur-
faces in the agreeing (feminine singular) form commise ‘committed’ in the wh-
movement structure (28b), but not in the non-agreeing (default) form commis in
the wh-in-situ structure (28a). In this connection, it is interesting to note that in
Irish, a complementiser only overtly agrees with a wh-expression which it attracts
to move to spec-C (not with an in situ wh-expression). What this suggests is that
French participles only overtly inﬂect for number/gender agreement with their
object if they have an edge feature which forces movement of a nominal through
spec-v. However, any such assumption requires us to suppose that wh-movement
proceeds through spec-v in transitive clauses, and hence lends further support to
Chomsky’s claim that transitive vPs are phases.
Further evidence in support of successive-cyclic wh-movement through spec-v
in transitive clauses comes from observations about mutation in Welsh made in
Tallerman (1993). Tallerman claims that wh-traces trigger so-called soft muta-
tion of the initial consonant of a following word. In this connection, con-
sider the sentence in (31) below (where prog denotes a progressive aspect
marker):
(31)
Beth wyt ti ‘n feddwl oedd gin I?
What are you prog think was with me
‘What do you think I had?’
What is particularly interesting here is that the italicised verb has undergone soft
mutation, so that in place of the radical form meddwl ‘think’, we ﬁnd the mutated

340
9 phases
form feddwl. Given independent evidence that Tallerman produces in support
of claiming that wh-traces induce mutation, an obvious way of accounting for
the use of the mutated verb form feddwl ‘think’ in (31) is to suppose that the
wh-pronoun beth ‘what’ moves through spec-v on its way to the front of the
overall sentence. We can then suppose that a wh-copy on the edge of vP triggers
soft mutation on the lexical verb adjoined to the light-verb heading the vP.
●
●
9.6
Uninterpretable features and feature inheritance
Throughout the book so far, we have assumed that a non-phasal head
like T (in ﬁnite clauses) enters the derivation carrying not only an interpretable
tense feature, but also uninterpretable agreement features which are valued via
agreement with (and work in conjunction with EPP to trigger movement of)
an active noun or pronoun expression which is assigned nominative case via
agreement with T. However, in recent work, Chomsky (2005b, 2006) has argued
that non-phasal heads enter the derivation carrying only interpretable features, and
that they inherit their uninterpretable features from the phase head immediately
above them. This means (for example) that the phase head C is not only the
locus (i.e. source) of certain interpretable features (e.g. C marks declarative,
interrogative or imperative force) but is also the locus of the uninterpretable
agreement features carried by T. Indeed, this idea had already been anticipated
in earlier work: cf. Chomsky’s suggestion (1999, p. 35, fn. 17) that ‘The locus of
nominative case and subject–verb agreement is C, not T.’ Chomsky’s reasoning
is along the following lines. T only carries a complete set of (person and number)
agreement features in a clause where T is selected by C, not in a defective (CP-
less) clause. In this connection, consider the contrast between the two complement
clauses bracketed below:
(32)(a)
It would seem [CP [C that] [TP he [T has] left]]
(b)
He would seem [TP [T to] have left]
Given the assumptions we made in chapter 7, the bracketed TP in (32a) is selected
by the C constituent that, and the head T of TP is the auxiliary has which carries
a complete set of person/number agreement features. By contrast, the TP in the
raising structure in (32b) is not selected by C, and its head T constituent to is
defective in that it does not carry a complete set of agreement features. Reasoning
thus, Chomsky concludes that the person/number agreement features of T must
originate on C, and subsequently ‘be inherited by’ or ‘be handed over to’ or
‘percolate down onto’ (three different metaphors expressing the same idea) the
T constituent immediately beneath C.
An interesting piece of evidence in support of the claim that C is the locus
of agreement features comes from the phenomenon of complementiser–subject
agreement found in a number of languages. For example, Haegeman (1992,
p. 47) notes that in West Flemish ‘the complementiser of the ﬁnite clause agrees

9.6 Uninterpretable features and feature inheritance
341
in person and number with the grammatical subject of the sentence it intro-
duces’, and provides a list of illustrative examples (p. 49) which include the
following:
(33)(a)
Kpeinzen dank ik morgen goan
I.think that1.Sg I tomorrow go
‘I think that I’ll go tomorrow’
(b)
Kpeinzen daj gie morgen goat
I.think that2.Sg (you) tomorrow go
‘I think that you will go tomorrow’
(c)
Kpeinzen dan Val`ere en Pol morgen goan
I.think that3.Pl Val`ere and Pol tomorrow go
‘I think that Valere and Paul will go tomorrow’
In these examples, the (italicised) complementiser overtly inﬂects for agreement
in person and number with the (bold-printed) subject of its clause. However, since
the ﬁnite verb in the clause also inﬂects for agreement with the subject, it would
seem that agreement features are copied from C onto T (so that both C and T end
up bearing a copy of the relevant agreement features).
A parallel phenomenon of complementiser agreement is found in a non-
standard variety of English spoken by people who come from the Boston area
of Massachusetts, in which C agrees with a preposed (italicised) wh-expression
that it attracts to move to spec-C, e.g. in stuctures such as the following (from
Kimball and Aissen 1971, p. 246):
(34)
Where are the boys [who Tom think [Dick believe
[Harry expect to be late]]]
Here, the head C constituent of each of the bracketed CPs attracts the italicised
relative pronoun who (which is plural by virtue of having the plural noun boys
as its antecedent) to move to spec-C. C ultimately ‘hands over’ these agreement
features to the bold-printed verbs in the head v position of vP (perhaps via a
downward feature-percolation operation in the PF component, of which Afﬁx
Lowering may be a particular instance). Note that sentences such as (34) also
provide independent evidence for successive-cyclic wh-movement through inter-
mediate spec-C positions, since each of the bold-printed verbs in each of the
three bracketed CPs is a plural form agreeing with the plural wh-pronoun who.
Interestingly, Radford (1992, p. 55) reports that two-year-old children sometimes
produce parallel structures such as those below (the names of the children pro-
ducing each utterance being shown in parentheses, together with their ages in
years; months):
(35)(a)
What’s the wheels doing? (Holly 2;0)
(b)
What’s those? (Alistair 2;6)
(c)
What’s you doing? (Ellen 2;9)
(d)
What’s they called now? (James 2;10)

342
9 phases
So, for example, the child producing (35a) allows the auxiliary (i)s occupying
the head C position of CP to agree with the wh-pronoun what which it attracts to
move to spec-C. In structures such as (34–35), it would appear that C retains its
agreement features, rather than handing them over to T.
Further evidence for agreement originating on C comes from inﬁnitival CPs
such as those bracketed below:
(36)(a)
I would like very much [CP [C for] [TP him [T to] win the race]]
(b)
I would like very much [CP [C ø] [TP PRO [T to] win the race]]
The locus of case assignment in (36) seems to be the complementiser introducing
the clause, in that the prepositional complementiser for requires the him subject
of its TP complement to be assigned accusative case, whereas the null comple-
mentiser ø requires the PRO subject of its TP complement to be assigned null
case. If structural case assignment works hand in hand with agreement (as we saw
in the previous chapter), this means that the complementisers must also carry a
complete set of (person and number) agreement features. However, if the case and
agreement features were to remain on the complementiser, we would expect the
complementiser to agree with and case-mark the inﬁnitive subject, and attract it
to raise to the edge of CP. However, this would wrongly predict that for-inﬁnitive
structures like that in (37) below should be grammatical:
(37)
∗I would like very much [CP him [C for] [TP [T to] win the race]]
Instead, it is the inﬁnitival T constituent to which attracts the complement clause
subject to raise from its initial position as speciﬁer of the vP win the race to
become the speciﬁer of inﬁnitival to. How can this be?
An answer consistent with Chomsky’s inheritance analysis is the following.
Let us suppose that a series of merger operations on the complement clause CP
phase in (36a) give rise to the structure shown in simpliﬁed form below (with the
material in outline font having already undergone transfer):
(38)
[CP [C for] [TP [T to] [vP him [v win] the race]]]
Let us further suppose that the complementiser is the initial locus of subject
case assignment and subject agreement properties within the clause, but that the
complementiser ‘hands over’ its uninterpretable case and agreement features to
the head T constituent of its TP complement. In consequence, the inﬁnitival T
probe to agrees with and assigns accusative case to the subject him of the vP him
win the race, and attracts it to raise to spec-T, as shown by the arrow below:
(39)
[CP [C for] [TP him [T to] [vP him [v win]
]]]   
Likewise, in a control inﬁnitive clause such as that bracketed in (36b) above,
inﬁnitival to inherits the uninterpretable case assignment and agreement features
of the null complementiser introducing the clause, and so agrees with and assigns
null case to the inﬁnitive subject, and attracts it to raise to spec-T. (An implicit

9.6 Uninterpretable features and feature inheritance
343
assumption in our discussion here is that complementisers – and other case
assigners – carry an uninterpretable case-assignment feature which determines
the value which they assign to an unvalued case feature on an accessible goal.)
Chomsky argues that in the same way as a C phase head ‘hands over’ its
subject case assignment and subject agreement feature to the head immediately
beneath it (i.e. to T), so too a transitive light verb which serves as a phase head
‘hands over’ its object case assignment and object agreement features to the head
immediately beneath it (i.e. to V). One type of structure in which this happens
are ECM structures such as the following:
(40)(a)
The DA will prove the witness conclusively to have lied (adapted from
Bowers 1993, p. 632)
(b)
I suspect him strongly to be a liar (Authier 1991, p. 729)
(c)
I’ve believed Gary for a long time now to be a fool (Kayne 1984, p. 114)
(d)
I have found Bob recently to be morose (Postal 1974, p. 146)
If (as we have assumed hitherto) the (italicised) inﬁnitive subject were superﬁ-
cially positioned in the speciﬁer position of an inﬁnitival TP complement clause,
and if accusative case in transitive Verb Phrases is assigned by a superordinate
light verb, the light verb in the main clause would agree with and assign accusative
case to the inﬁnitive subject. However, the problem is that this doesn’t account
for why – in sentences like (40) above – the (italicised) subject of the ECM clause
is followed by an (underlined) adverbial or prepositional expression which mod-
iﬁes the (bold-printed) main-clause verb. If the italicised adverbial/prepositional
expression is contained within the main-clause VP (by virtue of modifying a
projection of the main-clause verb), it follows that the bold-printed accusative
subject of the inﬁnitive complement must also be inside the main clause VP.
How can this be? The answer is that the subject of the ECM clause raises up to
become the object of the main-clause verb by an operation traditionally termed
(subject-to-) object-raising. To illustrate how this analysis works, let’s take a
closer look at the derivation of (40a).
Let’s suppose we have reached a stage of derivation at which we have formed
the inﬁnitival TP the witness to have lied. This TP is merged with the verb prove
to form the V-projection prove the witness to have lied. The adverb conclusively
is then adjoined to this V-projection to form the even larger V-projection con-
clusively prove the witness to have lied (which we will label as VP because it
is the largest structure headed by the V prove). The resulting structure is in turn
merged with a null light verb, forming the v-projection ø conclusively prove the
witness to have lied, and this in turn is merged with the DP the DA to form a
vP. Let us suppose that a transitive light verb can carry a set of agreement and
(accusative) case-assignment features, and that it hands these over to the head
immediately beneath it (i.e. to the head V of VP). Let us further suppose that V
(like T) can carry an epp feature when it inherits agreement features from the
phase head above it. Given these assumptions, the lexical V prove will (invisibly)
agree with and assign (invisible) accusative case to the DP the witness, and (by

344
9 phases
virtue of its epp feature) will also attract it to move to spec-V. The verb prove
is in turn attracted by the afﬁxal light verb to move from V to v, so deriving the
structure shown below (with arrows indicating movement):
(41)
 vP 
DP     
               v'
the DA 
      v
VP
prove+ø  
                 DP   
  V'
the witness 
ADV
 V'
      conclusively
V       
TP
prove
the witness
to
 lied
have
Given that the (italicised) moved DP thereby becomes the object of the verb
prove, it is clear that the relevant movement operation is another instance of
A-movement. The vP in (41) is subsequently merged with the T-auxiliary will,
which attracts the DP the DA to move to spec-T, so forming a TP which is merged
with a null declarative complementiser to form the CP shown in skeletal form
below (in which only overt constituents of vP are shown):
(42)
[CP [C ø] [TP the DA [T will]
[vP [v prove] the witness conclusively to have lied]]]
The analysis in (42) accounts for how the accusative subject of the inﬁnitive
complement clause comes to be positioned in front of an adverb modifying a
projection of the verb in the main clause, and how the accusative DP the witness
comes to be adjacent to the transitive verb prove.
Now consider the corresponding ECM expletive structure in (43) below, where
the subject of the ECM clause is expletive there:
(43)
The DA will prove there conclusively to have been a conspiracy
Given that we analysed expletive there in §7.6 as carrying only a third person
feature, the V prove will inherit case assignment and agreement features from v,
and will agree in person with there and in person and number with a conspiracy,
and will assign accusative case to the indeﬁnite nominal a conspiracy. (It will
not assign case to expletive there, because this is a caseless pronoun.) It will also
attract the closest (pro)nominal expression it agrees with (namely expletive there)
to move to the outer edge of VP. Consequently, expletive there will end up in a
position above (and hence be spelled out to the left of) the adverb conclusively.
A key assumption made in the preceding paragraph is that V inherits its
agreement features and its ability to assign accusative case from the light verb
which heads the vP phase. One reason for thinking that the relevant case and

9.6 Uninterpretable features and feature inheritance
345
agreement features originate on the light verb can be illustrated in relation to the
following contrast:
(44)(a)
The DA has proved the defendant conclusively to have committed the
murder
(b)
The defendant has been proved conclusively to have committed the murder
The matrix vPs in these two sentences have the respective structures shown below,
prior to agreement, case-marking and movement of the (italicised) inﬁnitive
subject the defendant:
(45)(a)
[vP the DA [v ø] [VP conclusively [V prove] [TP the defendant [T to] have
committed the murder]]]
(b)
[vP [v ø] [VP conclusively [V prove] [TP the defendant [T to] have
committed the murder]]]
Why should it be that the V prove subsequently agrees with, case-marks and
attracts the italicised inﬁnitive subject in the active structure (45a), but not in
the passive structure (45b) (where the matrix T constituent – not shown in 45b
above – agrees with, assigns nominative case to and attracts the inﬁnitive subject)?
Whether or not V agrees with, case-marks and attracts the italicised inﬁnitive
subject cannot be determined by the internal structure of VP, since this contains
the same two constituents in the two sentences (namely the verb prove and
the TP complement the defendant to have committed the murder). Rather, what
determines that accusative case is assigned to the inﬁnitive subject in the transitive
sentence (45a) but not in the intransitive passive sentence (45b) is the fact that
the vP has a thematic external argument (namely the DA, which occupies the
speciﬁer position within vP) in the transitive structure (45a), but has no external
argument (and hence no speciﬁer) in the intransitive structure (45b). A plausible
way of accounting for this is to suppose that a light verb only carries agreement
features (and only has the ability to assign accusative case) if it has a thematic
external argument. However, since it is V rather than v which agrees with, assigns
accusative case to and attracts the inﬁnitive subject in ECM structures, it is clear
that v must ‘hand over’ its agreement features to V once the vP phase is formed.
However, while v hands over its case and agreement features to V in ECM
structures like (46a) below, it seems clear that this does not happen in structures
like (46b):
(46)(a)
[vP the DA [v ø] [VP [V prove] [TP the witness to have lied]]]
(b)
[vP they [v ø] [VP the ball [V roll] down the hill]]
The reason is that while V-prove c-commands (and so can agree with and assign
accusative case to) the DP the witness in (46a), V-roll does not c-command (and
so cannot agree with and case-mark) the DP the ball in (46b). On the contrary,
only v (and not V) c-commands the ball in (46b), so it seems clear that the light
verb must retain its case/agreement features in such structures, and not hand them
over to V. This raises the question of why a transitive light verb should hand over

346
9 phases
its case/agreement features to V in ECM structures like (46a), but not in simple
transitive structures like (46b). One possible answer could be that UG prevents
a light verb v from case-marking any constituent in the c-command domain of
a lexical verb V (perhaps because V is itself a potential case assigner, and one
case assigner cannot case-mark a constituent within the domain of another case
assigner): this would mean that v can only case-mark a goal within its own
immediate domain (i.e. a goal which is c-commanded by v but not by V). If
so, then v will be able to directly case-mark the DP the ball in (46b) because
this DP is within the domain of (and so follows) the light verb, but is not within
the domain of (and so does not follow) V; but by contrast, v will not be able to
case-mark the DP the witness in (46a) because this DP falls within the domain
of (and so follows) the V prove. We could then suppose that v only hands over
its case and agreement features to V when v ﬁnds no accessible goal to case
mark within its own immediate domain: this would mean that v must hand its
case/agreement features over to V in ECM structures like (46a), but not in simple
transitives like (46b). (An alternative solution which might be envisaged is that
v always hands over its case/agreement properties to V, and that V-roll can only
case-mark the DP the ball in a structure like 46b after it has raised to adjoin to v:
this kind of solution poses other problems, and so will not be pursued here.)
To summarise our discussion in this section: in recent work, Chomsky argues
that phase heads enter the derivation carrying both interpretable and uninter-
pretable features, but that other heads enter the derivation carrying only inter-
pretable features. After a series of Merger operations have applied to build up
a particular phase structure (and before case/agreement/movement operations
apply), the phase head can ‘hand over’ its uninterpretable features to the head
beneath it, so that e.g. T can inherit agreement features from C in a ﬁnite clause,
and V can inherit agreement features from v in a transitive clause. This means
that in a ﬁnite ECM structure like (44a) The DA has proved the defendant conclu-
sively to have committed the murder, T will agree with, assign nominative case
to and attract the DP the DA to move to spec-T, while V will agree with, assign
accusative case to and attract the DP the defendant to move to spec-V.
●
●
9.7
Independent probes
Hitherto, we have adopted the classic bottom-up cyclic account of
derivations under which e.g. (within a given clause) T-operations (i.e. movement
and agreement operations involving a T-probe and one or more goals) apply before
C-operations (i.e. operations involving a C-probe and one or more goals): and
indeed, this sequential ordering of operations was assumed to be a consequence of
the Earliness Principle, in that T is introduced into the derivation before C, so T-
operations apply immediately T is introduced into the derivation, and hence before
C-operations. However, the revised conception of derivations outlined in the
previous section means that this view is no longer tenable. After all, if T inherits its

9.7 Independent probes
347
uninterpretable agreement features from C (as Chomsky claims), then it follows
that the percolation operation by which uninterpretable features percolate down
from C to T must take place before T can serve as a probe for agreement, case-
marking and movement, since it is only once T has acquired uninterpretable
agreement features from C that it can become an active probe for agreement, case
and movement operations. Consequently, in recent work, Chomsky maintains that
it is only after Merger operations have built up a complete phase structure that
movement and agreement operations can apply. Furthermore, he also posits that
each separate head within a phase can probe independently of any other probe
within the same phase, in a random fashion (with some possibilities yielding
a convergent outcome, and others causing a crash). In this section, we look at
evidence that different heads within a phase can probe independently and in
any order (e.g. C can probe before T, or T can probe before C, or C and T can
probe simultaneously). However, before doing this (and by way of background
information), let’s ﬁrst examine two constraints on movement which will play an
important part in our subsequent exposition.
In this connection, consider the following contrast:
(47)(a)
They believe [John to be innocent]
(b)
John is believed [to be innocent]
(c)
They believe [John is innocent]
(d)
∗John is believed [is innocent]
As we see from (47a,b), the subject of a defective TP (e.g. an inﬁnitive clause
which is the complement of a ECM predicate like believe) can passivise, but not
the subject of a non-defective (e.g. ﬁnite) TP. This suggests that the speciﬁer of
a non-defective TP is barred from undergoing further A-movement operations.
However, contrasts such as that below:
(48)(a)
Of which party do you believe [the leader to have committed suicide]?
(b)
∗Of which party do you believe [the leader has committed suicide]?
suggest that A-bar movement is likewise possible out of the subject of a defective
TP as in (48a), but not out of the subject of a complete (non-defective) TP as in
(48b). The observation that both A-movement and A-bar movement are barred
out of the subject/speciﬁer of a complete TP leads Chomsky (2005b) to suggest
that the subject/speciﬁer of a complete TP is invisible to further operations (and
hence to higher probes). We can characterise this constraint as follows:
(49)
Invisibility Condition
The speciﬁer of a complete (non-defective) TP is invisible to any higher
probe
The constraint in (49) provides a straightforward account of why the subject of
the bracketed complete TP cannot be passivised in (47d), and why the PP of
which party cannot be extracted out of the DP the leader of which party, which
is the subject of the bracketed complete TP in (48b).

348
9 phases
A second constraint which will also play a part in our discussion below can be
illustrated in terms of the ungrammaticality of:
(50)
∗Of which car is it unclear which driver they arrested?
On the main-clause CP phase, wh-movement will involve the movement operation
indicated by the arrow in the structure shown below (simpliﬁed in numerous ways,
including by showing only CPs, and only wh-copies on the edge of CP):
(51)
[CP Of which car is it un clear [CP which driver of which car they arrested]]
What prevents the PP of which car from being extracted out of the DP which
driver of which car? Chomsky (2005b) suggests the following constraint:
(52)
Speciﬁer Condition
No subextraction is possible out of a constituent which is a speciﬁer of a
phase head
Since the DP which driver of which car occupies spec-C in (51) and hence is
the speciﬁer of the phase head C, the Speciﬁer Condition (52) prevents the PP of
which car from being subextracted out of it.
Having outlined two background assumptions about conditions on movement,
let’s now turn to the main point of our discussion in this section – namely to
argue that different heads (like C and T) probe independently of each other
on a given phase. Chomsky (2005b) observes that traditional bottom-up cyclic
accounts of syntax fail to account for contrasts such as the following (the relevant
grammaticality judgments being Chomsky’s, and being somewhat less sharp for
some other speakers):
(53)(a)
∗Of which car has the driver caused a scandal?
(b)
Of which car was the driver arrested?
More speciﬁcally, he maintains that the existing bottom-up account would
wrongly predict that (53b) is ungrammatical. To see why both sentences would
be predicted to be ungrammatical under a bottom-up account, let’s take a look at
the derivation of each of the two sentences in (53), beginning with (53a). This is
derived as follows.
The verb cause merges with the QP a scandal to form the VP cause a scandal.
This VP in turn merges with a transitive light verb to form a v-bar which in turn
merges with the DP the driver of which car to form the vP shown in simpliﬁed
form below (with the verb cause raising to attach to the light verb, and the QP
a scandal being assigned accusative case by V, which inherits case/agreement
features from v):

9.7 Independent probes
349
(54)
        vP 
   DP           
   v'
the driver  
of which car
     v
 VP 
cause+ø       
V     
         QP 
cause
    a scandal 
The vP in (54) is then merged with the past tense T-auxiliary have, which agrees
with, case-marks, and triggers movement of the DP the driver of which car to
spec-T (as well as determining that the verb cause is spelled out in the perfect
participle form caused). Merging the resulting TP with a null interrogative C
forms the structure shown below (simpliﬁed in a number of ways, including by
only showing overt constituents of vP):
(55)
  C'
C    
TP
ø
        DP 
T'
  the driver  
of which car   
T 
   vP 
 has 
caused a scandal     
The interrogative C carries a tense feature triggering movement of has from T to
C, and an edge feature triggering movement of a maximal projection containing a
wh-word to spec-C. We might therefore expect C to be able to trigger movement
of the wh-PP of which car to spec-C, as in (56) below:
(56)
        CP 
     PP       
 C'
Of which car 
    C                
TP
  has
     DP         
T'
the driver          
of which car
   T   
         vP 
has
caused a scandal
However, the resulting sentence (53a) ∗Of which car has the driver caused a
scandal? is ungrammatical. The reason is that the arrowed movement in (56)
violates the Invisibility Condition (49) which renders the speciﬁer of a non-
defective TP invisible to a higher probe: since the DP the driver of which car in
(55) is the speciﬁer of a ﬁnite (non-defective) TP headed by the ﬁnite T-auxiliary
has, the whole DP is invisible to the higher probe C, and hence C cannot attract
the PP of which car to move to spec-C, with the result that the movement arrowed
in (56) is barred.

350
9 phases
Now consider how we would derive (53b) Of which car was the driver
arrested? In terms of our existing assumptions, this would be derived as fol-
lows. The verb arrest merges with its complement the driver of which car to
form the VP arrest the driver of which car. This VP is in turn merged with an
intransitive light verb (with no external argument) which triggers raising of the
verb arrest from V to v, forming the vP shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(57)
vP
v
VP
arrest+ø
V
DP
arrest
the driver of which car
The participial nature of the light verb means that the verb arrest is ultimately
spelled out in the passive participle form arrested. The vP in (57) is then merged
with the past tense T-auxiliary be, which agrees with, case-marks and triggers
movement of the DP the driver of which car to spec-T. Merging the resulting
TP with a null interrogative C forms the structure shown in skeletal form below
(simpliﬁed in a number of ways, including by not showing null constituents of
vP):
(58)
  C'
 
 C                                       TP 
 ø  
                       DP                                   T'  
                 the driver  
              of which car                T                        vP 
                                                was                  arrested 
As in all ﬁnite main-clause non-echoic questions, C carries a tense feature trig-
gering movement of was from T to C, and an edge feature triggering movement
of a wh-expression (more precisely, a maximal projection containing a wh-word)
to spec-C. We might therefore expect C to be able to attract the PP of which car
to move to spec-C in the manner shown by the arrow below:
(59)
CP
PP
C'
Of which car 
C
TP
was
DP
T'
the driver 
of which car
T
vP
was
arrested

9.7 Independent probes
351
However, subextraction of the PP of which car out of the DP the driver of which
car is blocked by the Invisibility Condition (49), which renders the speciﬁer of a
non-defective TP invisible to any higher probe. Accordingly, the C-probe in (58)
cannot ‘see’ the PP of which car, because this PP is part of a larger DP the driver
of which car, which is itself invisible to a higher probe like C. Consequently, on
our existing assumptions, sentence (53b) Of which car was the driver arrested?
is wrongly predicted to be ungrammatical. What has gone wrong here?
Chomsky (2005b, p. 13) suggests that the answer lies in the traditional (bottom-
up) assumption that operations involving lower (= subordinate) probes must nec-
essarily apply before operations involving higher (= superordinate) probes. He
argues instead for the alternative position that (within a given phase) different
heads can probe in a random fashion – either one before the other, or simultane-
ously (‘in parallel’, to use the terminology of Chomsky (2005b, p. 13)). Let’s see
how the parallel probes assumption helps us account for the contrast between
(53a) and (53b).
Consider ﬁrst the derivation of (53b) Of which car was the driver arrested?
and suppose that we have arrived at a stage of derivation at which we have formed
the vP shown in (57) above. Let’s further suppose that this vP merges with a past
tense T constituent containing be to form a TP which in turn merges with a null
interrogative C constituent, deriving the CP shown below:
(60)
 CP 
C    
TP
ø      
T   
    vP 
        be  
               v
VP
               ø  
V   
  DP 
arrest                 the driver of which car
In other words, assume that the v, T and C heads within the CP phase are all
introduced into the derivation before any of them can probe. In order to simplify
our discussion, let’s set aside the head movement operations by which the verb
arrest adjoins to the participial light verb v, and the T constituent containing be
adjoins to C, and instead concentrate on the movement to the edge of TP and CP.
Consider ﬁrst what happens if C and T probe simultaneously. This means that at
the same time as the T-auxiliary be agrees with the (bold-printed) DP the driver
of which car and attracts a copy of it to move to spec-T, the null interrogative
C constituent simultaneously attracts a copy of the (italicised) PP of which car
to move to spec-C. These operations lead to the formation of the structure (61)
below (with the inner arrow showing A-movement to spec-T, and the outer arrow
showing A-bar movement to spec-C):

352
9 phases
(61)
 CP 
      DP        
      C'
Of which car
    C                
TP
 be+ø 
         DP     
T'
the driver
of which car
T           
      vP 
      be
      v
VP
arrest+ø  
  V
arrest
DP 
the
of 
driver
which car
There is no violation of the Invisibility Condition (49) because the PP of which
car is being extracted out of a DP (the driver of which car) at the foot of the
tree which is the complement of the verb arrest, and not out of a DP which is
the subject of a non-defective T. Dual movement results in a structure containing
three copies of the PP of which car – namely the original one within VP, a second
one which ends up in spec-T as part of the moved DP the driver of which car, and
a third one which moves on its own from complement position in VP into speciﬁer
position within CP. Given that only the highest copy of a moved constituent is
overtly spelled out, it follows that only the highest of the three copies of the PP
of which car will be overtly spelled out (namely that in spec-C): likewise, only
the highest copy of the string the driver is overtly spelled out (namely that in
spec-T). Assuming that be is ultimately spelled out as was and arrest as the
passive participle arrested, the structure in (61) will be spelled out in the PF
component as (53b) Of which car was the driver arrested?
Now let’s return to consider the derivation of the ungrammatical sentence
(53a) ∗Of which car has the driver caused a scandal? Let’s suppose that we have
reached a stage of derivation at which we have formed the vP phase in (54) above,
and that we then merge this vP with the T-auxiliary have to form a TP which is
in turn merged with an interrogative C constituent to form the CP shown below:
(62)
 CP 
C    
TP
ø      
T      
    vP 
   have
               DP     
             v'
        the driver 
      of which car 
 v
  VP 
      cause+ø  
 V 
  DP 
cause                a scandal

9.7 Independent probes
353
Given Chomsky’s assumption that C and T can probe simultaneously, what we
might expect to be possible here is for T to agree with and case-mark the DP
the driver of which car and attract a copy of it to move to spec-T, and for C to
simultaneously attract a copy of the PP of which car to move to spec-C (as well
as attracting a copy of the auxiliary have to move to C), as shown by the arrows
in the structure below (simpliﬁed in familiar ways):
(63)
CP 
DP      
              C'
Of which car
        C   
TP
   have+ø  
                 DP   
T'
the driver
of which car
T 
  vP 
         have
                  DP  
         v'
the driver
cause an accident
of which car   
Since have/cause are spelled out as has/caused in the PF component and only
the highest copy of each constituent is overtly spelled out, the resulting structure
will ultimately be spelled out as (53b) ∗Of which car has the driver caused a
scandal? But the resulting sentence is ungrammatical. Why should this be? The
answer is that subextraction of the PP of which car out of the DP the driver of
which car violates the Speciﬁer Condition (52) which bars subextraction out of a
constituent which is a speciﬁer of a phase. Since vP in (63) is a phase (by virtue
of the light verb having a thematic external argument), and since the DP the
driver of which car is the speciﬁer of this vP phase, the wh-movement operation
indicated by the slashed arrow in (63) leads to violation of the Speciﬁer Condition,
and to consequent ungrammaticality. Note, incidentally, that it would not be
possible to attempt to avoid violating the Speciﬁer Condition by moving the PP
of which car to spec-v at the stage of derivation in (54) above (and subsequently
to spec-C) because (as Chomsky 2005b, p. 14 notes) the PP of which car in
(54) is not in the search domain of (i.e. is not c-commanded by) the null light
verb.
So far in this section, we have outlined Chomsky’s account of why subextrac-
tion is possible out of the subject of a passive clause, but not out of the subject of a
transitive clause. Note that a crucial theoretical assumption underlying Chomsky’s
analysis is that C and T can probe independently and simultaneously. However,
there is evidence from simple transitive sentences like (19) What have they done?
that C and T do not always probe simultaneously. In this connection, suppose that
we have reached the stage of derivation shown below (with what having moved
to the edge of the vP phase on the v-cycle, and VP having undergone transfer at

354
9 phases
the end of the vP phase):
(64)
 CP 
C
TP
ø      
T      
    vP 
   have
             PRN         
              v'
what
         PRN
          v'
they
 v
 VP 
do+ø
V 
            PRN
do
            what
At this point, T needs to be able to attract the bold-printed subject they to move
to spec-T, and C needs to be able to attract the italicised wh-object what to move
to spec-C. Let us suppose that only the highest copy (or link) in a movement
chain is visible to a superordinate probe in the syntax – a constraint which we
can characterise as follows:
(65)
Visibility Condition
Only the highest copy in a movement chain is visible in the syntax (other
copies being inert)
Moreover, suppose that we capture Chomsky’s (2005b, p. 8) insight that a ‘probe
agrees with goals in its domain as far as a goal with no unvalued features, which
blocks further search’ in terms of a condition along the following lines:
(66)
Intervention Condition
Probe P cannot target goal G if there is some other visible goal of the same
kind as G intervening between the two and if the intervening goal is inactive
for P
Independent motivation for such a condition (according to Chomsky 1998, p. 45,
fn. 94) comes from the ungrammaticality of double-there sentences such as:
(67)
∗There are likely there to be problems
where the intervening italicised occurrence of there blocks agreement between
are and problems.
In the light of the Intervention Condition in (66), let’s now consider what
happens next in (64). Suppose that T probes ﬁrst and C afterwards, or that T
and C probe simultaneously. In either eventuality, the Intervention Condition
(66) will prevent the T-auxiliary have from targeting the subject they because the
(italicised) highest occurrence of the pronoun what intervenes between the two,
and because what is inactive for A-operations (i.e. operations involving a probe
like T which is an A-head) because its case feature was deleted on the vP phase.

9.8 Subject questions
355
But now let’s make the alternative assumption that C probes before T in (64). If
so, C will attract what to move to spec-C, thereby deriving the structure shown
in simpliﬁed form below (with do ultimately being spelled out as done in the PF
component):
(68)
[CP what [C ø] [TP [T have] [vP what they [v done] [VP [V done] what]]]]
Subsequently, the T-auxiliary have can probe separately and attract the subject
they to move to spec-T, because although the copy of what which intervenes
between have and they is inactive, it is not the highest copy of what (the high-
est copy of what being the italicised one at the front of the overall sentence).
Movement of the subject they to spec-T derives the structure:
(69)
[CP what [C ø] [TP they [T have] [vP what they [v done] [VP [V done] what]]]]
Subsequent auxiliary inversion together with deletion of all but the highest copies
will then derive the superﬁcial structure associated with What have they done?
Thus, only if C probes before T in an object-question structure like (64) will the
derivation yield a successful outcome.
Since C and T sometimes probe simultaneously and sometimes sequentially,
Chomsky (2005b, p. 17) concludes that ‘All options are open’ so that C and T can
probe ‘in either order, or simultaneously, with only certain choices converging’
(i.e. resulting in a well-formed sentence). In other words, sometimes C probes
before T, sometimes T probes before C, and sometimes the two probe at the same
time.
●
●
9.8
Subject questions
The assumption that T and C function as independent probes has
interesting implications for the syntax of subject questions (i.e. clauses whose
subject is interrogative) like those below:
(70)(a)
Who died?
(b)
Who killed the president?
(70a) is derived as follows. die is an unaccusative predicate which merges with
the pronoun who to form the VP die who. This VP is then merged with a null
light verb, thereby forming the vP ø die who. The resulting vP is then merged
with a T constituent containing a past tense afﬁx (below denoted as Af) so
forming a TP which is in turn merged with an interrogative C to form the CP

356
9 phases
shown below:
(71)
CP
C
TP
ø
T       
vP
    Af    
           v
VP
           ø  
V   
          PRN
die 
          who 
C, T and v then probe independently of each other. The light verb attracts the
verb die to adjoin to it. Since C and T both locate the same goal who, they probe
simultaneously. (If C were to probe before T, T would be unable to agree with,
case-mark or attract who; if T were to probe before C and attract who to spec-T,
the Invisibility Condition would prevent C from subsequently attracting who to
move from spec-T to spec-C – as indeed would a constraint against mixed chains.)
The T-afﬁx picks out who as a goal which is active by virtue of its unvalued case
feature, and agrees with and assigns nominative case to who, and also attracts a
copy of who to move to spec-T. C probes simultaneously and identiﬁes who as the
closest (and only) interrogative goal in its search domain, and attracts a separate
copy of who to move to spec-C, in the manner shown by the arrows below:
(72)
 CP 
PRN
        C'
Who
      C     
TP
ø  
      PRN                
T'
who
T     
            vP 
      Af 
 v
VP
die+ø  
 V 
die            
PRN 
who
As (72) shows, one copy of who is created in spec-T via A-movement, and a
second (separate) copy of who is created in spec-C via A-bar movement. In the
PF component, the highest copy of who (= the one in spec-C) is given an overt
spellout. There is no T-to-C movement (and hence no do-support) in subject
questions, because C does not attract T when C attracts a wh-constituent which is
itself attracted by T (and who is attracted by both T and C in 72). Consequently,
the past tense afﬁx remains in T in the syntax, and is lowered from T onto V in

9.8 Subject questions
357
the PF component, with the result that the verb die is ultimately spelled out as
died.
The derivation of (70b) Who killed the president? is similar in key respects.
The verb kill merges with the DP the president to form the VP kill the president.
This VP is then merged with a null light verb (which attracts the verb kill) to form
a v-bar which is itself merged with the pronoun who to form a vP. This vP is then
merged with a T constituent containing a past tense afﬁx (= Af), so forming a TP.
The resulting TP is merged with an interrogative C, forming a CP. The agreement
features on T probe and pick out who as their goal, agreement between the two
resulting in T being marked as third person singular, and in who being marked as
tensed. The movement features on the two heads (viz. the edge and tense features
on C, and the EPP feature on T) then probe simultaneously (i.e. in parallel), each
attracting a copy of who to move into its own speciﬁer position – as shown by
the arrows below:
(73)
 CP 
PRN
        C'
Who
      C     
TP
ø  
      PRN                
T'
who
T     
            vP 
      Af 
            PRN                        v'
who
                 v
 VP    
              kill+ø  
V 
              DP 
kill
      the
president
As before, only the highest copy of who (= the one in spec-C) is overtly spelled
out in the PF component. Since the copy of who attracted by C is in a thematic
argument position (in spec-v), there is no T-to-C movement and the past tense
afﬁx in T lowers onto v via Afﬁx Hopping, with the result that the verb kill is
ultimately spelled out as the past tense form killed, so deriving (70b) Who killed
the president?
A key assumption made in the analysis of subject questions in (72) and (73)
above is that it results in a structure in which there is one copy of who in spec-T
and a separate copy of who in spec-C. The assumption that there is a copy of who
in spec-T gains empirical support from sentences like:
(74)(a)
Who might appear to himself to have been victimised?
(b)
Who is considered by himself to be the best candidate?
We noted in §2.7 that a reﬂexive anaphor like himself can only be bound by
(i.e. refer to) a c-commanding expression within the minimal TP containing the

358
9 phases
reﬂexive. If the only movement which who undergoes in (74) is A-bar movement
from complement position in VP into speciﬁer position within TP (as shown by
the arrow below), (74a) will have the following skeletal structure:
(75)
[CP Who [C ø] [TP [T might] appear to himself [TP [T to] have been victimised who]]]
But since himself has no antecedent c-commanding it within the closest (bold-
printed, enlarged and bracketed) TP immediately containing it, such a derivation
wrongly predicts that (74a) is ungrammatical. By contrast, if who undergoes
successive-cyclic A-movement to both spec-T positions and undergoes separate
A-bar movement to spec-C, we derive the structure shown in skeletal form below
(with the higher arrows showing A-movement, and the lower arrow showing
A-bar movement):
(76)
[CP Who [C ø] [TP who[T might] appear to himself [TP who [T to] have been victimised who]]]
Given the analysis in (76), the copy of who which occupies the speciﬁer position
within the bold-printed (enlarged) TP can serve as the antecedent of himself,
thereby accounting for the well-formedness of (74a). Accordingly, sentences like
those in (74) provide us with evidence that a copy of the subject moves to spec-T
in subject questions.
But what evidence is there that a separate copy of the subject moves to spec-C?
Relevant evidence comes from the observation made by Pesetsky and Torrego
(2001) that who in subject questions can be substituted by who on earth or who
the hell: cf.
(77)(a)
Who on earth killed the president?
(b)
Who the hell killed the president?
As Pesetsky (1987) notes (and as the examples in (78) below illustrate), wh-
expressions like who on earth and who the hell have the property that they cannot
remain in situ, but rather must move to spec-C:
(78)(a)
Who on earth/Who the hell is she going out with?
(b)
∗She is going out with who on earth/who the hell?
If wh-expressions like those italicised in (78) always move to spec-C, it follows
that the italicised subjects in (77) must likewise have moved to spec-C – and hence
it is plausible to suppose that the same is true of the subject who in (70b) Who
killed the president? Thus, we have empirical evidence that in subject questions,
one copy of the interrogative subject moves to spec-T and a separate copy moves
to spec-C.

9.9 More on subextraction
359
●
●
9.9
More on subextraction
Given that (as we earlier saw in relation to the ungrammaticality of
(53a) ∗Of which car has the driver caused a scandal?) subextraction out of the
nominative subject of a transitive clause is not permitted, it is interesting to note
that raising sentences such as (79) below are grammatical:
(79)
Of which car would the driver appear to have caused a scandal?
In order to try and understand what’s going on here, let’s take a closer look at the
derivation of (79). The DP the driver of which car originates as the speciﬁer of the
vP which is eventually spelled out as caused a scandal, and (via successive-cyclic
A-movement) becomes ﬁrst the speciﬁer of inﬁnitival to and then the speciﬁer of
would, so creating three copies of the DP in question. At some stage of derivation,
the PP of which car must be extracted out of one of the three (italicised) copies
of the DP, and be moved to the (bold-printed) spec-C position in the schematic
structure (80) below:
(80)
[CP Of which car [C would] [TP the driver of which car3 [T would] appear
[TP the driver of which car2 [T to] have [vP the driver of which car1
[v caused] a scandal]]]]
The grammaticality of sentence (79) leads to the conclusion that it must be
possible to subextract the PP of which car out of one or more of the three
italicised copies of the DP the driver of which car in (80). But which one(s)?
It seems clear that the relevant PP cannot be subextracted out of the lowest
copy of the italicised DP (carrying the subscript number 1) in (80), because this
would violate the Speciﬁer Condition (52) which bars subextraction out of the
speciﬁer of a phase head. Nor can the PP in question be subextracted out of
the highest copy of the italicised DP (carrying the subscript number 3), because
this would violate the Invisibility Condition (49) which renders the speciﬁer of
a non-defective (e.g. ﬁnite) TP invisible to a higher probe. The conclusion we
reach is thus that the PP must be subextracted from the intermediate copy of
the italicised DP (carrying the subscript number 2), in the manner shown by the
arrow below:
(81)
[CP Of which car [C would] [TP the driver of which car3 [T would] appear  
      
         [TP the driver of which car2 [T to] have [vP the driver of which car1 [v caused] a scandal]]]]
The arrowed movement in (81) does not violate the Invisibility Condition (49),
because subextraction is out of the subject of a defective clause (i.e. a TP which
is not the immediate complement of a C head). Nor does the arrowed movement
violate the Speciﬁer Condition (52), because the PP is not extracted out of the
speciﬁer of a phase head.

360
9 phases
A closer look at the derivation in (81) is also revealing in respect of what it
tells us about how T and C probe. First, the (non-phasal/defective) T constituent
containing inﬁnitival to attracts the DP the driver of which car to become its
speciﬁer. Then the higher (non-defective) T constituent containing would and the
interrogative C constituent probe in parallel, T attracting a copy of the driver of
which car to move to spec-T, and C simultaneously attracting the interrogative
PP of which car to move to spec-C (the possibility of moving the whole DP
to become the speciﬁer of T-would and from there moving the wh-PP to spec-
C being ruled out by the Invisibility Condition). As noted earlier, Chomsky
(2005b, p. 1) concludes from this kind of structure that C and T can probe either
sequentially (‘in either order’ – i.e. with C probing before T, or T probing before
C) or simultaneously, ‘with only certain choices converging’ (i.e. resulting in
grammaticality).
Our discussion here leads us to the wider conclusion that subextraction is
possible from the subject of a defective clause (i.e. one which is a TP but not a
CP), but not from the subject of a complete clause (i.e. one which is a CP). If
this is so, we should expect to ﬁnd that subextraction is also possible from the
subject of a defective ECM clause with an accusative subject. In this connection,
consider the following contrast:
(82)(a)
Of which car hadn’t they expected [the driver to enter the race]?
(b)
∗Of which car hadn’t it been expected [for the driver to enter the race]?
In the case of (82a), the DP the driver of which car originates in spec-v and is
subsequently raised to spec-T via A-movement, as shown by the arrow in the
simpliﬁed structure below:
(83)
[TP the driver of which car [T to] [vP the driver of which car [v enter] the race]] 
The TP in (83) is then merged as the complement of the ECM verb expect,
forming the VP below:
(84)
[VP [V expect] [TP the driver of which car [T to] [vP the driver of which car
[v enter] the race]]]
This VP is in turn merged as the complement of a null light verb with an agent
subject, forming the vP phase shown below:
(85)
[vP they [v ø] [VP [V expect] [TP the driver of which car [T to] [vP the driver
of which car [v enter] the race]]]]
Chomsky (2005b) posits that just as a CP phase contains a higher probe (= C)
which can trigger A-bar movement and a lower probe (= T) which can trigger
A-movement (to spec-T) of a DP which it agrees with and case-marks, so too a
vP phase has a parallel structure. Consequently a vP phase contains both a higher

9.9 More on subextraction
361
probe (the light verb v) which can trigger A-bar movement, and a lower probe
(= the lexical verb V) which can trigger A-movement (to spec-V) of a DP that
it agrees with and case-marks. If we further suppose that the twin heads of a
phase (C and T in the case of a CP phase; v and V in the case of a vP phase)
can probe in parallel, what this allows for is the following possibility. In (85), the
transitive V expect agrees (invisibly) with, assigns accusative case to and triggers
A-movement to spec-V of a copy of the DP the driver of which car (as shown
by the lower arrow below); simultaneously, the null light-verb ø triggers A-bar
movement to spec-v of a copy of the wh-PP of which car (as shown by the upper
arrow):
(86)
[vP of which car they [v ø] [VP the driver of which car [V expect] [TP the driver of which car [T to]
  [vP the driver of which car [v enter] the race]]]]
On the subsequent CP phase, the pronoun they will move to spec-T and the wh-PP
of which car to spec-C, thereby deriving the structure associated with (82a) Of
which car hadn’t they expected the driver to enter the race?
Our discussion of (82a) above illustrates that subextraction is possible from
the accusative subject of a defective clause (i.e. a clause which is a TP but not a
CP). But why, then, should subextraction be barred out of the accusative subject
in (82b) ∗Of which car hadn’t it been expected [for the driver to enter the race]?
The answer is that the bracketed clause containing the accusative subject in this
case is a complete clause (i.e. one which is both a CP and a TP), and hence a
phase. Given that CPs are phases, the only way in which the wh-PP of which car
can move into spec-C in the main clause is by ﬁrst moving into spec-C in the
complement clause. On the assumptions made here, the complement clause will
have the structure shown in simpliﬁed form below:
(87)
[CP of which car [C for] [TP the driver of which car2 [T to] [vP the driver of
which car1 [v enter] the race]]]
However, the problem posed by this structure is that subextraction of the bold-
printed wh-PP from copy 1 of the italicised DP the driver of which car violates the
Speciﬁer Condition (52) which bars subextraction out of the speciﬁer of a phase
head (the phase head in this case being a light verb with an italicised external
argument); moreover, subextraction of the wh-PP out of copy 2 is blocked by
the Invisibility Condition (49) which renders invisible the speciﬁer of a non-
defective TP (i.e. a TP which is the complement of a phasal C head). Since there
is no way for the wh-PP of which car to move to spec-C, the associated sentence
(82b) ∗Of which car hadn’t it been expected for the driver to enter the race? is
ungrammatical.

362
9 phases
Our discussion of subextraction from accusative subjects in this section leads
us to the more general conclusion that subextraction is possible from the subject
of a defective clause (= TP), but not from the subject of a complete clause
(= CP).
●
●
9.10
Summary
In this chapter, we have taken a look at Chomsky’s phase-based theory
of syntax. In §9.2, we noted Chomsky’s claim that the computational component
of the Language Faculty can only hold limited amounts of syntactic structure
in its working memory at any one time, and that clause structure is built up
in phases (with phases including CP and transitive vP). At the end of each
phase, the domain (i.e. complement of the phase head) undergoes transfer to the
phonological and semantic components, with the result that neither the domain
nor any constituent it contains are accessible to further syntactic operations from
that point on. In §9.3, we saw that intransitive vPs and defective clauses (i.e.
clauses which are TPs but not CPs) are not phases, and hence allow A-movement
out of their complement, as in structures such as Several problems are thought to
remain in Utopia. In §9.4, we saw that a phase-based theory of syntax requires us
to assume that long-distance A-bar movement (e.g. of wh-expressions) involves
movement through intermediate spec-C positions, since CP is a phase and only
constituents on the edge of a phase can undergo subsequent syntactic operations.
In §9.5, we saw that a phase-based theory likewise requires us to posit that A-bar
movement in transitive clauses involves movement through intermediate spec-v
positions – and we noted that there is empirical evidence in support of this
assumption from morphological marking of verbs in Chamorro, past participle
agreement in French, and mutation in Welsh. In §9.6, we saw that in recent
work, Chomsky has suggested that phase heads (like C and a transitive v with a
thematic external argument) enter the derivation carrying both interpretable and
uninterpretable features, and can hand over their uninterpretable features to a
subordinate head (so that e.g. C hands over its uninterpretable agreement features
to T in a ﬁnite clause). We suggested that a light verb with an external argument
retains its uninterpretable case/agreement features if it can locate a suitable goal
within its immediate domain, but otherwise hands them down to the V head
immediately beneath it. In §9.7, we outlined the proposal in Chomsky (2005b)
that different heads (like C and T) within the same phase probe independently
(either simultaneously or sequentially) once a phasal structure like CP has been
formed. We saw that this allows us to account for why subextraction is barred
in an active sentence such as ∗Of which car has the driver caused a scandal?
but not in a passive such as Of which car was the driver arrested? In §9.8,
we went on to show that this analysis implies that subject questions like Who
was arrested? involve A-movement of one copy of who from V-complement

9.11 Bibliographical background
363
position into spec-T, and simultaneous A-bar movement of a separate copy of
who from V-complement position into spec-C. In §9.9, we saw that subextraction
is possible from the speciﬁer position in a defective clause – hence from the
subject of an inﬁnitival TP which is the complement of a raising, passive or ECM
predicate.
Some of the key assumptions made in this chapter are repeated below:
(7)
Transfer
(i)
At the end of each phase, the domain (i.e. complement of the phase head)
undergoes transfer
(ii)
At the end of the overall derivation, all remaining constituents undergo
transfer
(22)
Inactivation Condition
A goal with a case feature becomes inactive for agreement with (or
attraction by) an A-head like T once its case feature has been valued and
deleted
(23)
Mixed Chains Constraint
Movement cannot give rise to a mixed chain containing one copy of a
constituent which has moved to the edge of a phase, and another which has
moved to the edge of a non-phasal projection
(49)
Invisibility Condition
The speciﬁer of a complete (non-defective) TP is invisible to any higher
probe
(52)
Speciﬁer Condition
No subextraction is possible out of a constituent which is a speciﬁer of a
phase head
(65)
Visibility Condition
Only the highest copy in a movement chain is visible in the syntax (other
copies being inert)
(66)
Intervention Condition
Probe P cannot target goal G if there is some other visible goal of the same
kind as G intervening between the two and if the intervening goal is inactive
for P
●
●
9.11
Bibliographical background
The account of phases in §§9.2–9.5 is based on work by Chomsky
(1998, 1999, 2001, 2002, 2005a). The version of the Phase Impenetrability Condi-
tion presented in §9.2 is adapted from Chomsky (2001, p. 5, ex. 6). The assump-
tion in §9.5 that heads can have multiple speciﬁers echoes a claim made in
Chomsky (1998, p. 16). The Mixed Chains Constraint proposed in Chomsky
(2005b) has its historical antecedents in the Improper Movement Constraint dis-
cussed in Chomsky (1981), Ura (1993), M¨uller and Sternefeld (1993) and Ura

364
9 phases
(2001). For further evidence of morphological marking of intermediate verbs
in long-distance wh-movement structures, see Georgopoulos (1985, 1991) on
Palauan, Chung (1994, 1998, 2004) on Chamorro, den Dikken (2001) on Kilega,
Branigan and MacKenzie (2002) on Innu-aimˆun, Bruening (2001, 2004) on Pas-
samaquoddy, and Rackowski and Richards (2005) on Tagalog. On French past
participle agreement, see Kayne (1989), Branigan (1992), Ura (1993, 2001),
Boˇskovi´c (1997), Richards (1997), Sportiche (1998) and Radford and Vincent
(2007). On wh-marking of complementisers in Irish, see McCloskey (2001).
The account of Welsh mutation given in the main text is based on Tallerman
(1993); see Willis (2000) for a rather different analysis. For an alternative analy-
sis of long-distance wh-movement, see Ishii (2006a,b). The account of feature
inheritance in §9.6 is adapted from work by Chomsky (2005b, 2006), Miyagawa
(2005, 2006) and Richards (2007). Although the analysis of ECM structures
presented in the text posits that the embedded subject raises up to become the
matrix object, it should be noted that there was considerable controversy about
this in the 1970s: see e.g. Chomsky (1973), Postal (1974), Lightfoot (1976),
Bresnan (1976) and Bach (1977); see also Runner (2006). On Complemen-
tiser Agreement, see Rizzi (1990), Haegeman (1992), Boeckx (2003), Carstens
(2003), Kornﬁlt (2004) and Miyagawa (2005); for discussion of a related phe-
nomenon in the Boston variety of English, see Kimball and Aissen (1971) and
Kayne (2005). On the idea that case assigners carry an uninterpretable feature
specifying what case they assign, see Chomsky (1981) and Adger (2003). The
discussion in §§9.7–9.9 draws heavily on Chomsky (2005b, 2006). On why there
is no auxiliary inversion in subject questions, see Radford (2007). On subex-
traction from subjects, see Broekhuis (2006). For discussion of a wide range of
issues relating to phases, see the collection of papers in McGinnis and Richards
(2005).
●
●
Workbook section
●
Exercise 9.1
Discuss the role played by phases in the derivation of the following sentences:
1
Where did he arrange for her to go?
2
Where does she think they’ve gone?
3
Who knows what she will say?
4
What does it appear that he thinks was said to her?
5
What is he thought to want her to do?
6
How many prizes seem to have been awarded?
7
How many prizes do there seem to have been awarded?
8
What kind of prize do you want to award?
9
What did the DA make the defendant out to have done?

Workbook section
365
10
How much money can you show him to have stolen? (w)
11
How much discontent do you believe there sincerely to remain in the ofﬁce?
12
Who do you expect it to emerge explicitly from the report that bribes were paid
to?
Helpful hints
In 6 and 7 take how many prizes to be a QP, with many as its head, prizes as its complement and
how as its speciﬁer; likewise, in 10 and 11 take how much money/discontent to be a QP, with much
as its head, money/discontent as its complement and how as its speciﬁer. Recall the discussion of
pied-piping in §§5.5–5.6, expletive pronouns at the end of §8.6 and ECM structures in §9.6.
Model answer for 1
The unaccusative verb go merges with its (locative adverbial pronoun) complement where to form
the V-bar go where. This V-bar is then merged with the pronoun (which is ultimately spelled out
as) her to form the VP her go where. The resulting VP is in turn merged with a null intransitive
light verb, forming the vP ø her go where. Since the light verb has no external argument, it is not a
phase head and so has no edge feature and cannot trigger wh-movement. The resulting vP merges
with inﬁnitival to, forming a TP which is in turn merged with the complementiser for to form the
CP shown below:
(i)
            CP 
C       
 TP 
for
T 
                 vP 
to     
  v
VP
  ø  
    PRN            
V'
     her        
V                  ADV
go
  where
If all structural case assignment involves agreement between a probe and a goal, and if
uninterpretable features originate on phase heads, then the complementiser for will enter the
derivation carrying a set of unvalued (and uninterpretable) person and number agreement features,
and a feature which enables it to assign accusative case to a goal with an unvalued case feature.
Since there is no accessible goal within its immediate domain, the uninterpretable case and
agreement features on the complementiser for percolate down onto (and so are inherited by) T. At
this point, C, T and v probe independently. The light verb v attracts V-go to adjoin to it. Since T
has inherited a set of case and agreement features from C, T will agree with and case-mark the
pronoun her, and (by virtue of its EPP feature) will attract her to move to spec-T. Since CP is a
phase, C will carry an edge feature triggering movement of where to spec-C, so deriving the

366
9 phases
structure shown below:
(ii)
    CP 
ADV
 C'
where
 C
TP
for 
PRN
T'
  her
T 
        vP 
to
       v
VP        
    go+ø   
         PRN             
V'
her
V     
        ADV
go
where
At the end of the C-cycle, the domain of C (i.e. its TP complement) will undergo transfer (to the
phonological and semantic components) and thereafter be inaccessible to further syntactic
operations; italicised trace copies of moved constituents will be deleted.
The resulting CP is then merged with the verb arrange, forming the VP arrange where for her
to go. This is in turn merged with a light verb, forming the v-bar ø arrange where for her to go.
The resulting v-bar is merged with its agent external argument he. Since the light verb is
transitive by virtue of having an external argument, vP is a phase, and so the light verb probes at
this point. By virtue of being strong/afﬁxal, the light verb attracts the verb arrange to adjoin to it.
By virtue of being a phase head, the light verb also has an edge feature triggering movement of
where to spec-v, so deriving the structure shown below (simpliﬁed by not showing the structure of
the embedded CP or the null constituents which it contains):
(iii)
    vP 
ADV
        v'
where
  PRN    
      v'
   he
          v
VP
  arrange+ø
V       
       CP 
arrange  
for her to go 
At the end of the vP phase, the VP domain will undergo transfer, and the italicised trace copy of
the verb arrange will have a null spellout in the PF component.
The vP in (iii) is then merged as the complement of a ﬁnite T constituent containing a past
tense afﬁx, and the resulting TP is then merged with an interrogative C to form the CP phase in

Workbook section
367
(iv) below (simpliﬁed by showing only overt constituents of vP):
(iv)
    CP 
C
     TP 
ø
T         
     vP 
  Af 
      ADV       
v'
     where            
        PRN                         v'
          he            arrange for her to go 
The phase head C carries a set of (unvalued and uninterpretable person/number) agreement
features, and a feature enabling it to assign nominative case. Since there is no potential goal
within the immediate domain of C, these case/agreement features percolate down onto (and so are
inherited by) T. C and T then probe independently. By virtue of being a phase head, C has an edge
feature which triggers movement of the interrogative goal where to spec-C. C also has a tense
feature which triggers movement of the afﬁx Af from T to C. The past tense afﬁx in T agrees with
and case-marks the pronoun he, attracting it to move to spec-T. If where counts as a potential
intervener blocking T from targeting where in (iv) (which will arguably not be so if where is an
adverb which does not carry a case feature), movement of where to spec-C will have to take place
before movement of he to spec-T. At any rate, the result of these three different movement
operations is to derive the structure shown below (simpliﬁed by showing only overt constituents
of vP):
(v)
     CP 
PRN              
C'
where
          C    
TP
       Af+ø   
            PRN                           T'
he
T 
        vP 
 Af        
arrange for her to go 
The TP domain undergoes transfer in accordance with (7i) in the main text (with the italicised
copy of the afﬁx in T receiving a null spellout). The copy of the afﬁx stranded in C undergoes
do-support in the PF component, with do ultimately being spelled out as did because it is attached
to a past tense afﬁx. The constituents on the edge of CP undergo transfer in accordance with (7ii)
in the main text.

368
9 phases
●
Exercise 9.2
Discuss the syntax of subextraction in the sentences below:
1
Of which drugs did they ﬁnd traces?
2
Of which drugs were traces found?
3
Of which drugs were there found traces?
4
Of which drugs did traces remain in the blood? (w)
5
Of which drugs did there remain traces in the blood?
6
∗Of which drugs did traces contaminate the blood? (w)
7
Of which drugs do you think they found traces?
8
∗Of which drugs do you wonder what traces they found?
9
Of which drugs are traces believed to have contaminated the blood?
10
Of which drugs do they believe traces to have contaminated the blood?
11
∗Of which drugs do they believe traces contaminated the blood?
12
Of which drugs do they believe traces were found in the blood?
13
∗Of which drugs would it be unlikely for traces to contaminate the blood?
14
Of which drugs would it be unlikely for traces to be found in the blood?
Model answer for 1
The verb ﬁnd merges with the QP ø traces of which drugs (with ø being a null partitive quantiﬁer)
to form the VP ﬁnd ø traces of which drugs. The resulting VP then merges with a light verb to
form a v-bar which in turn merges with its agent external argument they to form an even larger
v-projection, with the verb ﬁnd raising from V to v. By virtue of having an external argument, the
light verb will carry agreement features which percolate from v to V, allowing V to agree with and
assign accusative case to its QP complement ø traces of which drugs. Since a light verb with an
external argument is also a phase head and so has an edge feature, the light verb attracts the
wh-PP of which drugs to move to spec-v in the manner shown by the arrow below:
(i)
 vP 
 PP           
      v'
of which drugs
  PRN                    
v'
  they 
          v
VP
      find+ø  
   V     
       QP 
 find 
      ø traces
of which drugs 
There is no violation of any extraction constraint because the QP is subextracted out of a
complement, not out of an adjunct or speciﬁer. The VP complement of the phase head undergoes
spellout at this point, in accordance with (7i) in the main text.
The vP (i) then merges with a T constituent containing a past tense afﬁx, forming a TP which in
turn merges with an interrogative C to form the CP below (simpliﬁed by showing only overt

Workbook section
369
constituents of vP):
(ii)
            CP 
C    
TP
ø  
T      
            vP 
     Af 
             PP     
         v'
    of which drugs
         PRN                    v'
they              find traces 
C enters the derivation carrying uninterpretable case and agreement features, and hands these over
to T. C and T then probe independently. T agrees with and assigns nominative case to the pronoun
they and attracts it to move to spec-T (there being no intervention effect because the intervening PP
of which drugs is not the kind of constituent which serves as a potential goal for agreement with T,
since such a goal can only be a constituent whose head carries an initially unvalued case feature,
and the head P of PP is not such a constituent). The edge feature on C attracts the interrogative PP
of which drugs to move to spec-C, and the tense feature on C attracts the afﬁx in T to move to C,
so deriving the structure shown below (again simpliﬁed by showing only overt constituents of vP):
(iii)
        CP 
 PP           
              C'
Of which drugs
 C                   
TP
Af+ø  
                 PRN     
    T'
they
T                        vP 
Af
        find traces
The TP domain undergoes transfer in accordance with (7i) in the main text (with the italicised
copy of the afﬁx in T receiving a null spellout). The copy of the afﬁx in C undergoes do-support in
the PF component, with do being ultimately spelled out as did because it is attached to a past tense
afﬁx. The constituents on the edge of CP undergo transfer in accordance with (7ii) in the main text.

Glossary and list of abbreviations
Bold print is used to indicate technical terms, and to cross-refer to entries elsewhere in
the glossary. Abbreviations used here are: ch. = chapter; § = chapter/section number;
ex. = exercise.
A: See Adjective, A-head, A-position, binding.
A-bar: An A-bar position is a position which can be occupied by arguments or adjuncts
alike. For example, the speciﬁer position within CP is said to be an A-bar position
because it can contain not only an argument like the italicised wh-phrase in ‘Which
car did he ﬁx?’ but also an adjunct like the italicised adverb in ‘How did he ﬁx
the car?’ A-bar movement is a movement operation (like wh-movement) which
moves an argument or adjunct expression to an A-bar position. On A-bar head, see
A-head.
ACC: Attract Closest Condition: see attract.
acc(usative): See case.
acquisition: The process by which people acquire their ﬁrst language (= L1 acquisition)
or a second language which is not their mother tongue (= L2 acquisition).
active: A contrast is traditionally drawn between sentence pairs such as (i) and (ii) below:
(i)
The thieves stole the jewels
(ii)
The jewels were stolen by the thieves
(i) is said to be an active clause (or sentence), and (ii) to be its passive counterpart;
similarly, the verb stole is said to be an active verb (or a verb in the active voice) in (i),
whereas the verb stolen is said to be a passive verb (or a verb in the passive voice –
more speciﬁcally, a passive participle) in (ii); likewise, the auxiliary were in (ii) is
said to be a passive auxiliary. In a different use, a probe or goal is said to be active
for movement/agreement if it carries an undeleted uninterpretable feature, and to be
inactive once the relevant feature has been deleted: see §7.4.
adequacy, criteria of: These are the criteria which an adequate grammar or linguistic
theory must meet. See §1.3.
adjacency condition: A condition requiring that two expressions must be immediately
adjacent (i.e. there must be no constituent intervening between the two) in order for
some operation to apply. For example, have must be immediately adjacent to they in
order to cliticise onto it in structures such as They’ve gone home.
adjective: This is a category of word (abbreviated to A) which often denotes states (e.g.
happy, sad), which typically has an adverb counterpart in -ly (cf. sad/sadly), which
typically has comparative/ superlative forms in -er/-est (cf. sadder/saddest), which can
often take the preﬁx un- (cf. unhappy), which can often form a noun by the addition
of the sufﬁx -ness (cf. sadness) etc.
370

Glossary
371
adjoin: See adjunction.
adjunct: One way in which this term is used is to denote an optional constituent typically
used to specify e.g. the time, place or manner in which an event takes place. Another
way in which it is used is to denote a constituent which has been attached to another
to form a larger constituent of the same type. (See adjunction).
adjunction: This is a process by which one constituent is adjoined (= attached) to
another to form a larger constituent of the same type. For example, we could say
that in a sentence like ‘He should not go,’ the negative particle not (in the guise of
its contracted form n’t) can be adjoined to the auxiliary should to form the negative
auxiliary shouldn’t. In a sentence such as He gently rolled the ball down the hill,
the adverb gently can be taken to be an adverb which adjoins to a verbal projection,
extending it into a larger projection of the same kind: see §8.4.
adposition: A cover term subsuming preposition and postposition. For example, the
English word in is a preposition since it is positioned before its complement (cf. in
Tokyo), whereas its Japanese counterpart is a postposition because it is positioned after
its complement Tokyo. Both words are adpositions.
ADV/adverb: This is a category of word which typically indicates manner (e.g. ‘wait
patiently’) or degree (e.g. ‘exceedingly patient’). In English, most (but not all) adverbs
end in -ly (cf. quickly – but also almost).
Af: See afﬁx.
affective: An affective constituent is an (e.g. negative, interrogative or conditional)
expression which can have a polarity expression like (partitive) any in its scope. So,
for example, interrogative if is an affective constituent as we see from the fact that an
interrogative if-clause can contain partitive any in a sentence such as ‘I wonder if he
has any news about Jim.’ See §2.6.
afﬁx/afﬁxal: The term afﬁx (abbreviated to Af) is typically used to describe a grammatical
morpheme which cannot stand on its own as an independent word, but which must be
attached to a host word of an appropriate kind. An afﬁx which attaches to the beginning
of a word (e.g. un- in unhappy) is called a preﬁx: an afﬁx which attaches to the end
of a word (e.g. -s in chases) is called a sufﬁx. An afﬁxal head is one which behaves
like an afﬁx in needing to attach to a particular kind of host word. See also Clitic.
Afﬁx Hopping (or Afﬁx Lowering) is an operation by which an unattached afﬁx in
T is lowered onto a verb: see §3.4. Afﬁx Attachment is an operation whereby an
unattached tense afﬁx lowers onto a verb where possible, but is otherwise supported
by use of the dummy auxiliary do: see §4.8.
agent: This is a term used to describe the semantic (= thematic) role which a particular
type of argument plays in a given sentence. It typically denotes a person who delib-
erately causes some state of affairs to come about: hence e.g. John plays the thematic
role of agent in a sentence such as ‘John smashed the bottle.’ See §6.4.
agreement: An operation by which (e.g. in a sentence like They are lying) the per-
son/number features of the auxiliary are get assigned the same values as those of its
subject they, so that are is third person plural because it agrees in person and number
with its third person plural subject they. See ch.7.
A-head: An A-head is the kind of head (like T) which allows as its speciﬁer an argument
expression but not an adjunct expression. An A-bar head is the kind of head (like C)
which allows as its speciﬁer either an argument or an adjunct expression.

372
Glossary
A-movement: Movement from one A-position to another (typically, from a subject or
complement position into another subject position). See ch.6.
A-position: A position which can be occupied by an argument, but not by a nonargument
expression (e.g. not by an adjunct). In practice, the term denotes a subject position, or
a lexical complement position (i.e. a position occupied by a constituent which is the
complement of a lexical/substantive head).
anaphor: This is an expression (like himself) which cannot have independent reference,
but which must take its reference from an appropriate antecedent (i.e. expression
which it refers to) within the same phrase or sentence. Hence, while we can say ‘John
is deluding himself’ (where himself refers back to John), we cannot say ∗‘Himself is
waiting,’ since the anaphor himself here has no antecedent. A traditional distinction is
drawn between reﬂexive anaphors (i.e. self forms like myself/ourselves/yourself/your-
selves/himself/herself/itself/themselves) and the reciprocal anaphors each other/one
another (cf. ‘They help each other/one another’). See §2.7 and ex.2.2.
animate: The term animate is used to denote (the gender of) an expression which denotes
a living being (e.g. a human being or animal), while the term inanimate is used in
relation to an expression which denotes lifeless entities. For example, the relative
pronoun who could be said to be animate in gender and the relative pronoun which
inanimate – hence we say someone who upsets people and something which upsets
people.
antecedent: An expression which is referred to by a pronoun or anaphor of some kind.
For example, in ‘John cut himself shaving,’ John is the antecedent of the anaphor
himself, since himself refers back to John. In a sentence such as ‘He is someone who
we respect,’ the antecedent of the relative pronoun who is someone.
anticyclic: See cycle.
AP: Adjectival Phrase – i.e. a phrase headed by an adjective, such as fond of chocolate,
keen on sport, good at syntax etc.
A-position: A position which can only be occupied by an argument, hence a position in
which an argument originates (e.g. as the subject or complement of a verb), or one
in which it moves to become the speciﬁer of an A-head (and so comes to occupy a
position like spec-TP).
arbitrary: When we say that an expression has ‘arbitrary reference’, we mean that it
can denote an unspeciﬁed set of individuals, and hence have much the same meaning
as English one/people or French on. In a sentence such as ‘It is difﬁcult [PRO to
learn Japanese],’ the bracketed clause is said to have an abstract pronoun subject PRO
which can have arbitrary reference, in which case the sentence is paraphraseable as
‘It’s difﬁcult for people to learn Japanese.’ See §3.2.
argument: This is a term borrowed by linguists from philosophy (more speciﬁcally,
from predicate calculus) to describe the role played by particular types of expression
in the semantic structure of sentences. In a sentence such as ‘John hit Fred,’ the overall
sentence is said to be a proposition (a term used to describe the semantic content of a
clause), and to consist of the predicate hit and its two arguments John and Fred. The
two arguments represent the two participants in the act of hitting, and the predicate is
the expression (in this case the verb hit) which describes the activity in which they are
engaged. By extension, in a sentence such as ‘John says he hates syntax’ the predicate
in the main clause is the verb says, and its two arguments are John and the clause he
hates syntax; the argument he hates syntax is in turn a proposition whose predicate is

Glossary
373
hates, and whose two arguments are he and syntax. Since the complement of a verb is
positioned internally within V-bar whereas the subject of a verb is positioned outside V-
bar, complements are also referred to as internal arguments, and subjects as external
arguments. Expressions which do not function as arguments are nonarguments. The
argument structure of a predicate provides a description of the set of arguments
associated with the predicate, and the theta-role which each fulﬁls in relation to the
predicate. A one-/two-/three-place predicate is a predicate which has one/two/three
arguments. See 6.4.
array: The lexical array for a given expression denotes the set of lexical items out of
which the expression is formed.
article: A term used in traditional grammar to describe a particular subclass of deter-
miner/quantiﬁer: the word the is traditionally called the deﬁnite article, and the word
a is termed the indeﬁnite article.
aspect/AspP: Aspect is a term typically used to denote the duration of the activity
described by a verb (e.g. whether the activity is ongoing or completed). In sentences
such as:
(i)
He has taken the medicine
(ii)
He is taking the medicine
the auxiliary has is said to be an auxiliary which marks perfect aspect (and hence to
be a perfect auxiliary), in that it marks the perfection (in the sense of ‘completion’
or ‘termination’) of the activity of taking the medicine; for analogous reasons, taken
is said to be a perfect participle verb form in (i) (though is referred to in traditional
grammars as a ‘past participle’). Similarly, is functions as an auxiliary which marks
progressive aspect in (ii), because it relates to an activity which is ongoing or in
progress (for this reason, is in (ii) is also referred to as a progressive auxiliary); in the
same way, the verb taking in (ii) is said to be the progressive participle form of the
verb (though is sometimes known in traditional grammars as a ‘present participle’).
An auxiliary which marks aspect (like have and be in the above examples) is referred
to as an aspectual auxiliary. An Aspect Phrase/AspP is a phrase headed by an item
which marks (e.g. perfect or progressive) aspect.
associate: An expression which represents the thematic argument in an expletive there
construction, and which is associated with the expletive subject there: e.g. several
prizes in There were awarded several prizes.
asymmetric c-command: See c-command.
attract/attraction: To say that a head H attracts a constituent C is to say that H triggers
movement of C to some position on the edge of HP (so that C may move to adjoin
to H, or to become the speciﬁer of H). The Attract Closest Condition requires that
a head which attracts a particular type of constituent X attracts the closest X which
it c-commands. The Attract Smallest Condition requires that a head which attracts
a particular type of item attracts the smallest constituent containing such an item
which will not lead to violation of any UG principle. The Wh-Attraction Condition
speciﬁes that a head H which attracts a wh-word attracts the smallest possible maximal
projection containing the closest wh-word to become the speciﬁer of H.
attribute: See value.
AUX/auxiliary: A term used to categorise items such as will/would/can/could/shall/
should/may/might/must/ought and some uses of have/be/do/need/dare. Such items

374
Glossary
have a number of idiosyncratic properties, including the fact that they can undergo
inversion (e.g. in questions like ‘Can you speak French?’). By contrast, main verbs
(i.e. verbs which are not auxiliaries) cannot undergo inversion – as we see from the
ungrammaticality of ∗‘Speak you French?’
auxiliary copying: A phenomenon whereby a moved auxiliary leaves behind an overt
copy of itself when it moves – as with can in a Child English question like What can I
can have for dinner?
auxiliary inversion: See inversion.
auxiliary selection: This term relates to the type of verb which a given auxiliary selects as
its complement: e.g. in many languages (the counterpart of) be when used as a perfect
auxiliary selects only a complement headed by a verb with no external argument (see
argument), whereas (the counterpart of) have selects a complement headed by a verb
with an external argument.
AUXP: Auxiliary projection/Auxiliary phrase – i.e. a phrase headed by an auxiliary
which does not occupy the head T position of TP. See §4.6.
B: On Principle B of Binding Theory, see ex. 2.2.
bar: When used as a sufﬁx attached to a category label such as N, V, P etc. (as in N-bar,
V-bar, P-bar, T-bar etc.), it denotes an intermediate projection which is larger than a
word but smaller than a phrase. Hence, in a phrase such as university policy on drugs,
we might say that the string policy on drugs is an N-bar, since it is a projection of the
head noun policy, but is an intermediate projection in that it has a larger projection into
the NP university policy on drugs. The term bar notation used in the theory known
as X-bar syntax refers to a system of representing projection levels which posits
that (ﬁrst-) merge of a head H with its complement forms an H-bar constituent, and
(second-) merge of a head with a speciﬁer forms an H-double-bar constituent (with
the maximal projection of H being labelled HP). On A-bar position, see A-bar.
bare: A bare form (of a word) is one which is uninﬂected. A bare inﬁnitive structure
is one which contains a verb in the inﬁnitive form, but does not contain the inﬁnitive
particle to (e.g. the italicised clause in ‘He won’t let you help him’). A bare noun
is a noun used without any quantiﬁer or determiner to modify it (e.g. ﬁsh in ‘Fish is
expensive’). A bare clause is one not introduced by an overt complementiser (e.g. he
was tired in ‘John said he was tired.’ A theory of bare phrase structure is one in
which there are no category labels or projection levels associated with constituents:
see §2.8.
base form: The base form of a verb is the simplest, uninﬂected form of the verb (the
form under which the relevant verb would be listed in an English dictionary) – hence
forms like go/be/have/see/want/love are the base forms of the relevant verbs. The base
form can typically function either as an inﬁnitive (cf. ‘Try to stay’), an imperative
(cf. ‘Stay with me tonight!’), a present tense indicative form (‘They sometimes stay
with me’) or a subjunctive form (cf. ‘I demand that he stay with me’).
Binarity Principle: A principle of Universal Grammar specifying that all nonterminal
nodes in syntactic structures (i.e. tree-diagrams) are binary-branching. See §2.2.
binary: A term relating to a two-way contrast. For example, number is a binary prop-
erty in English, in that we have a two-way contrast between singular forms like cat
and plural forms like cats. It is widely assumed that parameters have binary set-
tings, that features have binary values, and that all branching in syntactic structure is
binary.

Glossary
375
binary-branching: A tree diagram in which every nonterminal node has two daughters is
binary-branching; a category/node which has two daughters is also binary-branching.
See §2.2.
bind/binder/binding: To say that one constituent X binds (or serves as the binder for)
another constituent Y (and conversely that Y is bound by X) is to say that X determines
properties (usually referential properties) of Y. For example, in a sentence such as ‘John
blamed himself,’ the reﬂexive anaphor himself is bound by John in the sense that the
referential properties of himself are determined by John (so that the two refer to the
same individual). The c-command condition on binding says that a bound form must
be c-commanded by its antecedent. On principles A, B and C of Binding Theory, see
ex.2.2.
bottom-up: To say that a syntactic structure is derived in a bottom-up fashion is to say
that the structure is built up from bottom to top, with lower parts of the structure being
formed before higher parts.
bound: In a traditional use of this term, a bound form is one which cannot stand alone and
be used as an independent word, but rather must be attached to some other morpheme
(e.g. negative n’t, which has to attach to some auxiliary such as could). In a completely
different use of the term, a bound constituent is one which has a binder (i.e. antecedent)
within the structure containing it. See bind.
bracketing: A technique for representing the categorial status of an expression, whereby
the expression is enclosed within a pair of square brackets, and the lefthand bracket is
labelled with an appropriate category symbol – e.g. [D the].
branch: A term used to represent a solid line linking a pair of nodes in a tree diagram,
marking a mother/daughter (i.e. containment) relation between them.
C: See complementiser.
canonical: A term used to mean ‘usual’, ‘typical’ or ‘normal’, as in ‘The canonical word
order in English is speciﬁer+head+complement.’
case: The different case forms of a pronoun are the different forms which the pronoun
has in different sentence positions. It is traditionally said that English has three cases –
nominative (abbreviated to Nom), accusative (= Acc, sometimes also referred to as
objective) and genitive (= Gen). Personal pronouns typically inﬂect overtly for all
three cases, whereas noun expressions inﬂect only for genitive case. The different case
forms of typical pronouns and noun expressions are given below:
nominative I
we
you
he
she
it
they
who
the king
accusative
me
us
you
him her
it
them
who(m) the king
genitive
my
our
your
his
her
its their
whose
the
mine ours yours
hers
theirs whose
king’s
As is apparent, some pronouns have two distinct genitive forms: a weak (shorter)
form used when they are immediately followed by a noun (as in ‘This is my car’),
and a strong (longer) form used when they are not immediately followed by a noun
(as in ‘This car is mine’). In Chomsky and Lasnik (1993), it is suggested that the null
subject PRO found in control constructions carries null case. In languages like English
where certain types of expression are assigned case by virtue of the structural position
they occupy in a given clause (e.g. accusative if c-commanded by a transitive head,
nominative if c-commanded by ﬁnite intransitive head), the relevant expressions are
said to receive structural case. Where a constituent is assigned case by virtue of its

376
Glossary
semantic function (e.g. a goal complement of certain types of verb is assigned dative
case in German), it is said to receive inherent case. In languages like Icelandic where
subjects can be assigned a variety of cases (e.g. some are accusative and others dative,
depending on the choice of verb and its semantic properties), subjects are said to have
quirky case. In the Italian counterpart of a structure like ‘She gave him them,’ the
direct object corresponding to English ‘them’ is assigned accusative case, and the
indirect object corresponding to English ‘him’ is assigned a distinct case, traditionally
called dative case. (On direct and indirect objects, see object.) On nominative case
assignment, see §3.6 and §7.3; on accusative case assignment, see §3.9, §7.7 and
§ 8.4; on null case assignment, see §3.7 and §7.8; and on the syntax of genitives, see
§5.5.
case particle: Some linguists take of in structures like destruction of the city or fond of
pasta to be a particle marking genitive case and belonging to the category K of ‘case
particle’. On this analysis, the of-phrase (of the city) is taken to have genitive case, and
of is said to be the morpheme which marks genitive case.
categorial: Categorial information is information about the grammatical category that an
item belongs to. A categorial property is one associated with members of a particular
grammatical category. The Categorial Uniformity Principle is a principle suggested
by Luigi Rizzi (2000, p. 288) to the effect that all expressions of the same type belong
to the same category (e.g. all declarative clauses are CPs, both main clauses and
complement clauses).
categorise/categorisation: Assign(ing) an expression to a (grammatical) category.
category: A term used to denote a set of expressions which share a common set of
linguistic properties. In syntax, the term is used for expressions which share a com-
mon set of grammatical properties. For example, boy and girl belong to the (gram-
matical) category noun because they both inﬂect for plural number (cf. boys/girls),
and can both be used to end a sentence such as ‘The police haven’t yet found the
missing – .’ In traditional grammar, the term parts of speech was used in place of
categories.
causative verb: A verb which has much the same sense as ‘cause’. For example, the verb
have in sentences such as ‘He had them expelled’ or ‘He had them review the case’
might be said to be causative in sense (hence to be a causative verb).
c-command: A structural relation between two constituents. To say that one constituent
X c-commands another constituent Y is (informally) to say that X is no lower than Y
in the structure (i.e. either X is higher up in the structure than Y, or the two are at the
same height). More formally, a constituent X c-commands its sister constituent Y and
any constituent Z that is contained within Y. If we think of a tree diagram as a network
of train stations, we can say that one constituent X c-commands another constituent Y
if you can get from X to Y by taking a northbound train, getting off at the ﬁrst station,
changing trains there and then travelling one or more stops south on a different line. A
constituent X asymmetrically c-commands another constituent Y if X c-commands
Y but Y does not c-command X. See §2.6.
c-command condition on binding: A condition to the effect that a bound constituent
(e.g. a reﬂexive anaphor like himself or the trace of a moved constituent) must be
c-commanded by its antecedent (i.e. by the expression which binds it). See §2.7 and
exercise 2.2.
CED: See Condition on Extraction Domains.

Glossary
377
chain: A set of constituents comprising an expression and any trace copies associated
with it. Where a constituent does not undergo movement, it forms a single-membered
chain.
Chain Uniformity Condition: A condition which speciﬁes that all the links in a move-
ment chain must have the same structural status (e.g. all the links must be maximal
projections).
clause: A clause is deﬁned in traditional grammar as an expression which contains (at
least) a subject and a predicate, and which may contain other types of expression as
well (e.g. one or more complements and/or adjuncts). In most cases, the predicate
in a clause is a lexical (= main) verb, so that there will be as many different clauses
in a sentence as there are different lexical verbs. For example, in a sentence such as
‘She may think that you are cheating on her,’ there are two lexical verbs (think and
cheating), and hence two clauses. The cheating clause is that you are cheating on
her, and the think clause is She may think that you are cheating on her, so that the
cheating clause is one of the constituents of the think clause. More speciﬁcally, the
cheating clause is the complement of the think clause, and so is said to function as
a complement clause in this type of sentence. Clauses whose predicate is not a verb
(i.e. verbless clauses) are known as small clauses: hence, in ‘John considers [Mary
intelligent],’ the bracketed expression is sometimes referred to as a small clause.
cleft sentence: A structure such as ‘It was syntax that he hated most,’ where syntax is
said to occupy focus position within the cleft sentence.
clitic(isation): The term clitic denotes an item which is (generally) a reduced form of
another word, and which has the property that (in its reduced form) it must cliticise
(i.e. attach itself to) an appropriate kind of host (i.e. to another word or phrase). For
example, we could say that the contracted negative particle n’t is a clitic form of the
negative particle not which attaches itself to a ﬁnite auxiliary verb, so giving rise to
forms like isn’t, shouldn’t, mightn’t etc. Likewise, we could say that ’ve is a clitic form
of have which attaches itself to a pronoun ending in a vowel, so giving rise to forms
like we’ve, you’ve, they’ve etc. When a clitic attaches to the end of another word,
it is said to be an enclitic (and hence to encliticise onto the relevant word). Clitics
differ from afﬁxes in a number of ways. For example, a clitic is generally a reduced
form of a full word, and has a corresponding full form (so that ’ll is the clitic form
of will, for example), whereas an afﬁx (like noun plural -s in cats) has no full-word
counterpart. Moreover, clitics can attach to phrases (e.g. ’s can attach to the president
in The president’s lying), whereas an afﬁx typically attaches to a word stem (e.g. the
past tense -ed afﬁx attaches to the verb stem snow in snowed).
closest: In structures in which a head X attracts a particular kind of constituent Y to move
to the edge of XP, X is said to attract the closest constituent of type Y, in accordance
with the Attract Closest Condition. See also local.
cognition/cognitive: (Relating to) the study of human knowledge.
common noun: See noun.
COMP: See complementiser.
comparative: The comparative form of an adjective or adverb is the form (typically
ending in -er) used when comparing two individuals or properties: cf. ‘John is taller
than Mary,’ where taller is the comparative form of the adjective tall.
competence: A term used to represent native speakers’ knowledge of the grammar of
their native language(s).

378
Glossary
complement: This is a term used to denote a speciﬁc grammatical function (in the same
way that the term subject denotes a speciﬁc grammatical function). A complement
is an expression which is directly merged with (and hence is the sister of) a head
word, thereby projecting the head into a larger structure of essentially the same kind.
In ‘close the door’, the door is the complement of the verb close; in ‘after dinner’,
dinner is the complement of the preposition after; in ‘good at physics’, at physics is the
complement of the adjective good; in ‘loss of face’, of face is the complement of the
noun loss. As these examples illustrate, complements typically follow their heads in
English. The choice of complement (and the morphological form of the complement)
is determined by properties of the head: for example, an auxiliary such as will requires
as its complement an expression headed by a verb in the inﬁnitive form (cf. ‘He will
go/∗going/∗gone’). Moreover, complements bear a close semantic relation to their heads
(e.g. in ‘Kill him,’ him is the complement of the verb kill and plays the semantic role
of theme argument of the verb kill). Thus, a complement has a close morphological,
syntactic and semantic relation to its head. A complement clause is a clause which is
used as the complement of some other word (typically as the complement of a verb,
adjective or noun). Thus, in a sentence such as ‘He never expected that she would
come,’ the clause that she would come serves as the complement of the verb expected,
and so is a complement clause. On complement selection, see selection.
complementiser: This term is used in two ways. On the one hand, it denotes a particular
category of clause-introducing word such as that/if/for, as used in sentences such as
‘I think that you should apologize,’ ‘I doubt if she realises,’ ‘They’re keen for you to
show up.’ On the other hand, it is used to denote the pre-subject position in clauses
(‘the complementiser position’) which is typically occupied by a complementiser
like that/if/for, but which can also be occupied by an inverted auxiliary in sentences
such as ‘Can you help?,’ where can is said to occupy the complementiser position
in the clause. A complementiser phrase (CP) is a phrase/clause/expression headed
by a complementiser (or by an auxiliary or verb occupying the complementiser posi-
tion). The Complementiser Condition speciﬁes that no overt complementiser (like
if/that/for) can have an overt speciﬁer in the superﬁcial structure of a sentence. The
term complementiser is abbreviated to comp in earlier work and to C in later work.
Completeness Condition: A principle of grammar specifying that uninterpretable
case/agreement features on a constituent α can only be deleted via agreement with a
constituent β which carries a complete set of person and number features.
complex sentence: One which contains more than one clause.
component:
A grammar is said to have three main components: a syntac-
tic/computational component which generates syntactic structures, a semantic com-
ponent which assigns each such syntactic structure an appropriate semantic interpre-
tation and a PF component which assigns each syntactic structure generated by the
computational component an appropriate phonetic form. See §1.3.
computational component: See component.
concord: A traditional term to describe an operation whereby a noun and any adjectives
or determiners modifying it are assigned the same values for features such as number,
gender and case.
condition: A grammatical principle. The Condition on Extraction Domains is a prin-
ciple specifying that only complements allow constituents to be extracted out of them,
not speciﬁers or adjuncts. See §6.5.

Glossary
379
conditional: A term used to represent a type of clause (typically introduced by if or
unless) which lays down conditions – e.g. ‘If you don’t behave, I’ll bar you,’ or
‘Unless you behave, I’ll bar you.’ In these examples, the clauses If you don’t behave
and Unless you behave are conditional clauses.
CONJ: See conjunction.
conjoin: To join together two or more expressions by a coordinating conjunction such
as and/or/but. For example, in ‘Naughty but nice’, naughty has been conjoined with
nice (and conversely nice has been conjoined with naughty).
conjunct: One of a set of expressions which have been conjoined. For example, in
‘Rather tired but otherwise alright’, the two conjuncts (i.e. expressions which have
been conjoined) are rather tired and otherwise alright.
conjunction/CONJ: A word which is used to join two or more expressions together.
For example, in a sentence such as ‘John was tired but happy,’ the word but serves
the function of being a coordinating conjunction because it coordinates (i.e. joins
together) the adjectives tired and happy. In ‘John felt angry and Mary felt bitter,’ the
conjunction and is used to coordinate the two clauses John felt angry and Mary felt
bitter. In traditional grammar, complementisers like that/for/if are categorised as (one
particular type of) subordinating conjunction.
constituent: A term denoting a structural unit – i.e. an expression which is one
of the components out of which a phrase or sentence is built up. For example,
the two constituents of a Prepositional Phrase (= PP) such as ‘into touch’ (e.g.
as a reply to ‘Where did the ball go?’) are the preposition into and the noun
touch. To say that X is an immediate constituent of Y is to say that Y imme-
diately contains X (see contain), or equivalently that Y is the mother of X: see
§2.7.
constituent structure: The constituent structure (or phrase structure, or syntactic
structure) of an expression is (a representation of) the set of constituents which the
expression contains. Syntactic structure is usually represented in terms of a labelled
bracketing or a tree diagram.
constrained: see restrictive.
constraint: A structural restriction which blocks the application of some process to a
particular type of structure. The term tends to be used with the rather more speciﬁc
meaning of ‘A grammatical principle which prevents certain types of grammatical
operation from applying to certain types of structure.’ The terms condition and prin-
ciple are used in much the same way.
contain/containment: To say that one constituent X contains another constituent Y is
to say that Y is one of the constituents out of which X is formed by a merger operation
of some kind. In terms of tree diagrams, we can say that X contains Y if X occurs
higher up in the tree than Y, and X is connected to Y by a continuous (unbroken) set of
downward branches (the branches being represented by the solid lines connecting pairs
of nodes in a tree diagram). If we think of a tree diagram as a network of train stations,
we can say that X contains Y if it is possible to get from X to Y by travelling one
or more stations south. To say that one constituent X immediately contains another
constituent Y is to say that Y occurs immediately below X in a tree and is connected
to X via a branch (or that X contains Y and there is no intervening constituent Z
which contains Y and which is contained by X). To say that a tree diagram represents
containment relations is to say that it shows which constituents are contained within
which other constituents. See §2.6.

380
Glossary
content: This term is generally used to refer to the semantic content (i.e. meaning) of
an expression (typically, of a word). However, it can also be used is a more general
way to refer to the linguistic properties of an expression: e.g. the expression phonetic
content is sometimes used to refer to the phonetic form of (e.g.) a word: hence, we
might say that PRO is a pronoun which has no phonetic content (meaning that it is a
‘silent’ pronoun with no audible form).
contentives/content words: Words which have intrinsic descriptive content (as opposed
to functors, i.e. words which serve essentially to mark particular grammatical func-
tions). Nouns, verbs, adjectives and (most) prepositions are traditionally classiﬁed as
contentives, while pronouns, auxiliaries, determiners, complementisers and particles
of various kinds (e.g. inﬁnitival to, genitive of) are classiﬁed as functors.
contraction: A process by which two different words are combined into a single word,
with either or both words being reduced in form. For example, by contraction, want to
can be reduced to wanna, going to to gonna, he is to he’s, they have to they’ve, did not
to didn’t etc. See also cliticisation.
contrastive: In a sentence like ‘Syntax, I hate but phonology I enjoy,’ the expres-
sions syntax and phonology are contrasted, and each is said to be contrastive in
use.
control(ler)/control predicate: In non-ﬁnite clauses with a PRO subject which has an
antecedent, the antecedent is said to be the controller of PRO (or to control PRO),
and conversely PRO is said to be controlled by its antecedent; and the relevant kind of
structure is called a control structure. So, in a structure like ‘John tried PRO to quit,’
John is the controller of PRO, and conversely PRO is controlled by John. The relevant
phenomenon is referred to as Subject Control where the (italicised) controller is the
subject of the higher verb (as in ‘John tried PRO to quit’), and as Object Control
where it is the object to the higher verb (as in ‘John persuaded Mary PRO to quit’). The
term control predicate denotes a word like try or persuade which takes an inﬁnitive
complement with a (controlled) PRO subject. See §3.2.
converge(nce): A derivation converges (and hence results in a well-formed sentence)
if the resulting PF representation contains only phonetic features, and the associated
semantic representation contains only (semantically) interpretable features.
coordinate/coordination: A coordinate structure is a structure containing two or more
expressions joined together by a coordinating conjunction such as and/but/or/nor (e.g.
‘John and Mary’ is a coordinate structure). Coordination is an operation by which
two or more expressions are joined together by a coordinating conjunction.
copula/copular verb: A ‘linking verb’, used to link a subject with a nonverbal predicate.
The main copular verb in English is be (though verbs like become, remain, stay etc.
have much the same linking function). In sentences such as ‘They are lazy,’ ‘They
are fools’ and ‘They are outside,’ the verb are is said to be a copula in that it links
the subject they to the adjectival predicate lazy, or the nominal predicate fools, or the
prepositional predicate outside.
copy/copying: The copy theory of movement is a theory developed by Chomsky which
maintains that a moved constituent leaves behind a (trace) copy of itself when it
moves, with the copy generally having its phonetic features deleted and so being null:
see §4.3, §5.3 and §6.2. Feature Copying is an operation by which the value of a
feature on one constituent is copied onto another (e.g. the values of the person/number
features of a subject are copied onto an auxiliary): see §7.3.

Glossary
381
coreferential: Two expressions are coreferential if they refer to the same entity. For
example, in ‘John cut himself while shaving,’ himself and John are cofererential in the
sense that they refer to the same individual.
count/countability: A count(able) noun is a noun which can be counted. Hence, a noun
such as chair is a count noun since we can say ‘One chair, two chairs, three chairs
etc.’; but a noun such as furniture is a noncount/uncountable/mass noun since we
cannot say ‘∗one furniture, ∗two furnitures etc.’. The countability properties of a noun
determine whether the relevant item is a count noun or not.
CP: complementiser phrase (See complementiser).
crash: A derivation is said to crash if one or more features carried by one or more
constituents is illegible at either or both of the interface levels (the phonetics interface
and the semantics interface). For example, if the person or number features of have
remain unvalued in a sentence such as ‘He have left,’ the resulting sentence will crash
at the phonetics interface, since the PF component will be unable to determine whether
have should be spelled out as have or has.
cyclic: An operation (like argreement or movement) is said to apply in a cyclic fashion if
it ﬁrst applies to the lowest constituent of the relevant kind in the structure, then to the
next lowest, and then to the next lowest but one (and so on). An operation is anticyclic
if it does not apply in a cyclic fashion.
D: See determiner.
Dat: An abbreviation for dative case. See case.
daughter: A node X is the daughter of another node Y if Y is the next high-
est node up in the tree from X, and the two are connected by a branch (solid
line).
declarative: A term used as a classiﬁcation of the force (i.e. semantic type) of a clause
which is used to make a statement (as opposed to an interrogative, exclamative or
imperative clause).
default: A default value or property is one which obtains if all else fails (i.e. if other
conditions are not satisﬁed). For example, if we say that -ø is the default verbal
inﬂection for regular verbs in English, we mean that regular verbs carry the inﬂection
-s if third person singular present tense forms, -d if past, perfect or passive forms, -ing
if progressive or gerund forms, and -ø otherwise (by default).
defective: A defective item is one which lacks certain properties. For example, if we
suppose that T constituents generally carry person and number features, then inﬁnitival
to in all inﬁnitive structures except control inﬁnitives is a defective T constituent in that
(under Chomsky’s analysis) it carries person but not number. Any clause containing a
defective T constituent is a defective clause.
deﬁnite: Expressions containing determiners like the, this, that etc. are said to have
deﬁnite reference in that they refer to an entity which is assumed to be known to the
addressee(s): e.g. in a sentence such as ‘I hated the course,’ the DP the course refers
to a speciﬁc (e.g. Minimalist Syntax) course whose identity is assumed to be known
to the hearer/reader. In much the same way, personal pronouns like he/she/it/they etc.
are said to have deﬁnite reference. By contrast, expressions containing the article a
are indeﬁnite, in that (e.g.) if you say ‘I’m taking a course,’ you don’t assume that the
hearer/reader knows which course you are taking.
deﬁnite article: See article.
DEG: A degree word like so/too/how.

382
Glossary
deletion: An operation by which affected features on a constituent are made invisible to
the semantic component and/or are not given an audible exponent in the PF component
(and so are silent).
demonstrative: This is a term used to refer to words like this/that, these/those and
here/there which indicate a location relatively nearer to or further from the speaker
(e.g. this book means ‘the book relatively close to me’, and that book means ‘the book
somewhat further away from me’).
derivation: The derivation of a phrase or clause is the set of syntactic (e.g. merger, move-
ment, agreement and case-marking) operations used to form the relevant structure. The
derivation of a word is the set of morphological operations used to form the word.
derive: To derive a structure it to say how it is formed (i.e. specify the operations by
which it is formed).
derived structure: A structure which is produced by the application of one or more
syntactic (merger, movement or agreement) operations.
descriptive adequacy: A grammar of a particular language attains descriptive adequacy
if it correctly speciﬁes which strings of words do (and don’t) form grammatical phrases
and sentences in the language, and correctly describes the structure and interpretation
of the relevant phrases and sentences. See §1.3.
DET/determiner: A word like the/this/that which is typically used to modify a noun,
but which has no descriptive content of its own. Most determiners can be used either
prenominally (i.e. in front of a noun that they modify) or pronominally (i.e. used on
their own without a following noun) – cf. ‘I don’t like that idea/I don’t like that).’
Determiner Phrase: A phrase like the king (of Utopia) which comprises a determiner
the, and a noun complement like king or a Noun Phrase complement like king of Utopia.
In work before the mid 1980s, a structure like the king of Utopia would have been
analysed as a noun phrase (= NP), comprising the head noun king, its complement of
Utopia and its speciﬁer the. Since Abney (1987), such expressions have been taken to
have the status of DP/Determiner Phrase.
direct object: See object.
discontinuous spellout: This phenomenon (also termed split spellout) arises when part
of a moved phrase is spelled out in the position in which it originates, and the remainder
in the position in which it ends up – as in ‘How much do you believe of what he tells
you?,’ where the wh-phrase how much of what he tells you moves to the front of the
sentence, with how much being spelled out in the position it moves to, and of what he
tells you being spelled out in the position in which it originates. See §5.3.
discourse: Discourse factors are factors relating to the extrasentential setting in which
an expression occurs (where extrasentential means ‘outside the immediate sentence
containing the relevant expression’). For example, to say that the reference of PRO is
discourse-determined in a sentence such as ‘It would be wise PRO to prepare yourself
for the worst’ means that PRO has no antecedent within the sentence immediately
containing it, but rather refers to some individual(s) outside the sentence (in this case,
the person being spoken to).
ditransitive: A ditransitive structure is a double-object structure like She gave me them,
where the transitive verb gave has two objects (me and them). See object.
domain: The domain (or, more fully, c-command domain) of a head H is the set of
constituents c-commanded by H – namely its sister and all the constituents contained
within its sister. For example, the domain of C includes its TP complement and all
constituents of the relevant TP.

Glossary
383
do-support: This refers to the use of the ‘dummy’ (i.e. meaningless) auxiliary do to
form questions, negatives or tags in sentences which would otherwise contain no
auxiliary. Hence, because a nonauxiliary verb like want requires do-support in ques-
tions/negatives/tags, we have sentences such as ‘Does he want some?,’ ‘He doesn’t
want any’ and ‘He wants some, does he?’ See §4.8.
double-object construction: See object.
DP: See Determiner Phrase.
DP Hypothesis: The hypothesis that all deﬁnite expressions have the status of DPs –
not just nominals like the president which contain an overt determiner, but also proper
names like John.
D-pronoun: A pronoun like that in ‘I don’t like that’ which seems to be a pronominal
determiner.
dummy: A word with no intrinsic lexical semantic content (e.g. the expletive pronoun
there and the auxiliary do).
Earliness Principle: A principle which says that linguistic operations must apply as
early in a derivation as possible.
Early Modern English/EME: The type of English found in the early seventeenth century
(i.e. at around the time Shakespeare wrote most of his plays, between 1590 and 1620).
echo question: A type of sentence used to question something which someone else has
just said (often in an air of incredulity), repeating all or most of what they have just
said. For example, if I say ‘I’ve just met Nim Chimpsky’ and you don’t believe me
(or don’t know who I’m talking about), you could reply with an echo question such as
‘You’ve just met who?’
ECM: See Exceptional Case Marking.
Economy Condition: A condition which requires that (all other things being equal)
syntactic representations should contain as few constituents and syntactic derivations
involve as few grammatical operations as possible.
edge: The edge of a given projection HP is that part of HP which excludes the complement
of H (hence, that part of the structure which includes the head H and any speciﬁer/s or
adjunct/s which it has).
Elizabethan English: The type of English found in the early seventeenth century, during
the reign of Queen Elizabeth I (i.e. at around the time Shakespeare wrote most of his
plays, between 1590 and 1620).
ellipsis/elliptical: Ellipsis is an operation by which an expression is omitted (in the sense
that its phonetic features are deleted and so unpronounced), e.g. in order to avoid
repetition. For example, in a sentence such as ‘I will do it if you will do it,’ we can
ellipse (i.e. omit) the second occurrence of do it to avoid repetition, and hence say
‘I will do it if you will.’ An elliptical structure is one containing an ‘understood’
constituent which has undergone ellipsis (i.e. been omitted).
embedded clause: A clause which is positioned internally within another constituent.
For example, in a sentence such as ‘He may suspect that I hid them,’ the hid-clause
(= that I hid them) is embedded within (and is the complement of) the Verb Phrase
headed by the verb suspect. Likewise, in ‘The fact that he didn’t apologise is signif-
icant,’ the that-clause (that he didn’t apologise) is an embedded clause in the sense
that it is embedded within a Noun Phrase headed by the noun fact. A clause which
is not embedded within any other expression is a root clause (see root) or main
clause.
EME: See Early Modern English.

384
Glossary
empirical evidence: Evidence based on observed linguistic phenomena. In syntax, the
term ‘empirical evidence’ usually means ‘evidence based on grammaticality judgments
by native speakers’. For example, the fact that sentences like ∗‘Himself likes you’
are judged ungrammatical by native speakers of Standard English provides us with
empirical evidence that anaphors like himself can’t be used without an appropriate
antecedent (i.e. an expression which they refer back to).
empty: A constituent is empty/null if it is ‘silent’ and hence has no overt phonetic
form. Empty categories include null subject pronouns like PRO and pro, null relative
pronouns (like the null counterpart of who in someone I know well), null determiners
(like that in ‘ø John is tired’) and null trace copies of moved constituents. See ch.3.
enclitic/encliticise: See clitic.
entry: A lexical entry is an entry for a particular word in a dictionary (and hence by
extension refers to the set of information about the word given in the relevant dictionary
entry).
EPP: This was originally an abbreviation for the Extended Projection Principle, which
posited that every T constituent must be extended into a TP projection which has a
speciﬁer. In more recent work, the requirement for a T constituent like will to have
a speciﬁer is said to be a consequence of T carrying an [epp] feature requiring it to
project a speciﬁer. The EPP Condition speciﬁes that an uninterpretable epp feature
on a probe is deleted by movement of the closest active goal of the relevant type to
become the speciﬁer of the probe.
ergative: This term originally applied to languages like Basque in which the complement
of a transitive verb and the subject of an intransitive verb are assigned the same
morphological case. However, by extension, it has come to be used to denote verbs
like break which occur both in structures like ‘Someone broke the window’ and
in structures like ‘The window broke,’ where the window seems to play the same
semantic/thematic role in both types of sentences, in spite of being the complement of
broke in one sentence and the subject of broke in the other. See §8.4.
Exceptional Case Marking/ECM: Accusative subjects of inﬁnitive clauses (e.g. him in
‘I believe him to be innocent’) are said to carry exceptional accusative case (in that
the case of the accusative subject is assigned by the main-clause verb believe, and
it is exceptional for the case of the subject of one clause to be assigned by the verb
in a higher clause). Verbs (like believe) which take an inﬁnitive complement with an
accusative subject are said to be ECM verbs. See §3.8 and §9.6.
exclamative: A type of structure used to exclaim surprise, delight, annoyance etc. In
English syntax, the term is restricted largely to clauses beginning with wh-exclamative
words like What! or How! – e.g. ‘What a fool I was!’ or ‘How blind I was!’ See §8.2.
existential: An existential sentence is one which is about the existence of some entity.
For example, a sentence such as ‘Is there any coffee left?’ questions the existence
of coffee. Consequently, the word any here is sometimes said to be an existential
quantiﬁer (as is some in a sentence like ‘There is some coffee in the pot’).
experience: Children’s experience is the speech input which they receive (or, more
generally, the speech activity which they observe) in the course of acquiring their
native language.
experiencer: A term used in the analysis of semantic/thematic roles to denote the
entity which experiences some emotional or cognitive state – e.g. John in ‘John felt
unhappy’ or ‘John thought about his predicament’. See §6.4.

Glossary
385
explanatory adequacy: A linguistic theory meets the criterion of explanatory adequacy
if it explains why grammars have the properties that they do, and how children come
to acquire grammars in such a short period of time. See §1.3.
expletive: A ‘dummy’ constituent with no inherent semantic content, such as the pronoun
there in existential sentences like ‘There is no truth in the rumour,’ or the pronoun it
in sentences such as It is unclear why he resigned. See §7.5, §7.6 and §8.6.
expression: This word is used in the text as an informal term meaning a string (i.e.
continuous sequence) of one or more words which form a constituent.
Extended Projection Principle: See EPP.
external argument. See argument. The External Argument Condition on the use of
expletives speciﬁes that an expletive can only be merged as the highest argument of a
(light) verb with no external argument.
extract/extraction: Extract(ion) is another term for move(ment), and so denotes an
operation by which one constituent is moved out of another. E.g. in a structure such as
‘Who do you think [he saw – ]’ the pronoun who has been extracted (or subextracted)
out of the bracketed clause (i.e. it is been moved out of the position marked –), and
moved to the front of the overall sentence. The extraction site for a moved constituent
is the position which it occupied before undergoing movement.
F: This symbol is used as a convenient notational device to denote an abstract functional
head (or an abstract feature) of some kind.
Faculty of Language: see Language Faculty.
feature: A device used to describe a particular grammatical property. For example, the
distinction between count and noncount nouns might be described in terms of a feature
such as [±COUNT]. On Feature Copying, see copying. Feature Deletion is an
operation by which uninterpretable features are deleted: see §7.4.
feminine: This term is used in discussion of grammatical gender to denote pronouns
like she/her/hers which refer to female entities.
FHC: See Functional Head Constraint.
ﬁlled: To say that a given position in a structure must be ﬁlled is to say that it cannot
remain empty but rather must be occupied (usually by an overt constituent of an
appropriate kind).
ﬁnite: The term ﬁnite verb/ﬁnite clause denotes (a clause containing) an auxiliary or
nonauxiliary verb which can have a nominative subject like I/we/he/she/they. For
example, compare the two bracketed clauses in:
(i)
What if [people annoy her]?
(ii)
Don’t let [people annoy her]
The bracketed clause and the verb annoy in (i) are ﬁnite because in place of the
subject people we can have a nominative pronoun like they; by contrast, the bracketed
clause and the verb annoy are nonﬁnite in (ii) because people cannot be replaced by
a nominative pronoun like they (only by an accusative pronoun like them): cf.
(iii)
What if [they annoy her]?
(iv)
Don’t let [them/∗they annoy her]
By contrast, a verb or clause which has a subject with accusative or null case in
English is nonﬁnite; hence the bracketed clauses and italicised verbs are nonﬁnite in
the examples below:

386
Glossary
(v)
Don’t let [them annoy her]
(vi)
You should try [PRO to help]
Nonﬁnite forms include inﬁnitive forms like be, and participle forms like being/been.
ﬁrst-merge: See merge.
ﬁrst person: See person.
FL: Faculty of Language: See Language Faculty.
ﬂoating quantiﬁer: A quantiﬁer which is separated from the expression which it quanti-
ﬁes. For example, in a sentence such as ‘The students have all passed their exams,’ all
quantiﬁes (but is not positioned next to) the students, so that all is a ﬂoating quantiﬁer
here.
Foc/Focalised/Focus/Focusing/FocP: Focus position in a sentence is a position occupied
by a constituent which is emphasised in some way (usually in order to mark it as
containing ‘new’ or ‘unfamiliar’ information). For example, in a cleft sentence such
as ‘It’s syntax that they hate most’ or a pseudo-cleft sentence such as ‘What they
hate most is syntax,’ the expression syntax is said to occupy focus position within
the relevant sentence, and to be focused/focalised. Focusing denotes a movement
operation by which a constituent is moved into a focus position at the beginning of a
clause in order to highlight it (e.g. to mark it as introducing new information). Thus,
in a sentence like ‘Nothing could they do to save her,’ the expression nothing has
been focused by being moved to the front of the overall sentence from its underlying
position as the complement of the verb do. In work on split CP projections by Luigi
Rizzi (discussed in §8.2), preposed focused expressions are said to occupy the speciﬁer
position within a FocP (‘Focus Phrase’) projection which is headed by an abstract Foc
(‘Focus’) head.
foot: The foot of a (movement) chain is the constituent which occupies the lowest position
in the chain.
Force/ForceP: The complementisers that/if in a sentence such as I didn’t know [that/if he
was lying] are said to indicate that the bracketed clauses are declarative/interrogative
in force (in the sense that they have the force of a question/a statement). In work on
split CP projections by Luigi Rizzi (discussed in §8.2), complementisers are said to
constitute a Force head which can project into a Force Phrase/Force P.
formal: In an expression such as formal speech style, the word formal denotes a very
careful and stylised form of speech (as opposed to the kind of informal colloquial
speech style used in a casual conversation in a bar): in an expression such as formal
features, the word formal means ‘grammatical’ (i.e. features which play a role in
morphology/syntax).
fragment: An utterance which is not a complete sentence (in the sense that it does not
constitute a clause). So, a phrase such as ‘A new dress’ used in reply to a question
such as ‘What did you buy?’ would be a sentence fragment. (By contrast, a sentence
such as ‘I bought a new dress’ would not be a sentence fragment, since it contains a
complete clause.)
Freezing Constraint: A principle of grammar specifying that any constituent occupying
a position which reﬂects its scope/discourse properties is frozen in place.
front/fronting: Fronting is an informal term to denote a movement operation by which
a given expression is fronted – i.e. moved to the front of some phrase or sentence.
function: Expressions such as subject, speciﬁer, complement, object, head and
adjunct are said to denote the grammatical function which a particular expression

Glossary
387
fulﬁls in a particular structure (which in turn relates to the position which it occupies
and certain of its grammatical properties – e.g. case and agreement properties).
functional category/Functional Head Constraint/function word/functor:
A
word
which has no descriptive content and which serves an essentially grammatical func-
tion is said to be a function word or functor (by contrast, a word which has descriptive
content is a content word or contentive). A functional category is a category whose
members are function words: hence, categories such as complementiser, auxiliary,
inﬁnitive particle, case particle or determiner are all functional categories – as well as
the expressions they head (e.g. C-bar/CP, T-bar/TP, D-bar/DP etc.). The Functional
Head Constraint is a grammatical principle which speciﬁes that the complement of
a certain type of functional head (including C and D) cannot be preposed on its own
without also moving the functional head: see §2.5.
gapping: A form of ellipsis in which the head word is omitted from one (or more) of
the conjuncts in a coordinate structure in order to avoid repetition. For example, the
italicised second occurrence of bought can be gapped (i.e. omitted) in a sentence such
as ‘John bought an apple and Mary bought a pear,’ giving ‘John bought an apple, and
Mary a pear.’
Gen: In one use, an abbreviation for genitive case; in another, an abbreviation for gender.
gender: A grammatical property whereby words are divided into different grammatical
classes which play a role in agreement/concord relationships. In French, for exam-
ple, nouns are intrinsically masculine or feminine in gender (e.g. pommier ‘apple
tree’ is masculine, but pomme ‘apple’ is feminine), and articles inﬂect for gender,
so that un ‘a’ is the masculine form of the indeﬁnite article, and une is its femi-
nine form. Articles in French have to agree in gender with the nouns they modify;
hence we say un pommier ‘an apple tree’, but une pomme ‘an apple’. In English,
nouns no longer have inherent gender properties, and their modiﬁers don’t inﬂect for
gender either. Only certain pronouns like he/she/it carry gender properties in mod-
ern English, and these are traditionally said to carry masculine/feminine/neuter
gender respectively (though the term inanimate is sometimes used in place of
neuter).
generate/generative: The syntactic component of a grammar is said to generate (i.e.
specify how to form) a set of syntactic structures. A grammar which does so is said to
be a generative grammar.
generic: To say that an expression like eggs in a sentence such as ‘Eggs are fattening’
has a generic interpretation is to say that it is interpreted as meaning ‘eggs in general’.
genitive: See case.
gerund: When used in conjunction with the progressive aspect auxiliary be, verb forms
ending in -ing are progressive participles; in other uses they generally function as
gerunds. In particular, -ing verb forms are gerunds when they can be used as subjects,
or as complements of verbs or prepositions, and when (in literary styles) they can
have a genitive subject like my. Thus writing is a gerund (verb form) in a sentence
such as ‘She was annoyed at [my writing to her mother],’ since the bracketed gerund
structure is used as the complement of the preposition at, and has a genitive subject
my.
goal/goal: The term goal is used in the analysis of semantic/thematic roles to denote
the entity towards which something moves – e.g. Mary in ‘John sent Mary a letter’:
see §6.4. In a different sense, the term goal represents a constituent which agrees with
or is attracted by a higher head which serves as a probe: see §7.2.

388
Glossary
grammar: In traditional terms, the word grammar relates to the study of morphology
and syntax. In a broader Chomskyan sense, grammar includes the study of phonology
and semantics: i.e. a grammar of a language is a computational system which derives
the Phonetic Form and Semantic Representation of expressions.
grammatical: An expression is grammatical if it contains no morphological or syntactic
error, and ungrammatical if it contains one or more morphological or syntactic errors.
Grammatical features are (e.g. person, number, gender, case etc.) features which play
a role in grammatical operations (e.g. in determining case or agreement properties).
have-cliticisation: An operation by which have (in the guise of its contracted clitic
variant /v/) attaches to an immediately preceding word ending in a vowel or diphthong,
resulting in forms such as I’ve, we’ve, they’ve etc.
head: This term has two main uses. The head (constituent) of a phrase is the key word
which determines the properties of the phrase. So, in a phrase such as fond of fast
food, the head of the phrase is the adjective fond, and consequently the phrase is an
Adjectival Phrase (and hence can occupy typical positions associated with adjectival
expressions – e.g. as the complement of is in ‘He is fond of fast food’). In many cases,
the term head is more or less equivalent to the term word (e.g. in sentences such as ‘An
accusative pronoun can be used as the complement of a transitive head’). In a different
use of the same word, the head of a movement chain is the highest constituent in the
chain.
headed/Headedness Principle: An expression is headed if it has a head. The Headed-
ness Principle speciﬁes that every constituent must be headed (i.e. must have a head).
So, for example, an expression like fond of fast food is headed by the adjective fond
and so is an Adjectival Phrase. See head.
head-ﬁrst/-last: A head-ﬁrst structure is one in which the head of an expression is
positioned before its complement(s); a head-last structure is one in which the head of
an expression is positioned after its complement(s). See §1.6.
head movement: Movement of a word from one head position to another (e.g. movement
of an auxiliary from T to C, or of a verb from V to T, or of a noun from N to D). See
ch.4.
Head Movement Constraint/HMC: A principle of Universal grammar which speciﬁes
that movement between one head position and another is only possible between the
head of a given structure and the head of its complement. See §4.5.
Head Position Parameter: The parameter which determines whether a language posi-
tions heads before or after their complements. See §1.6.
Head Strength Parameter: A parameter whose setting determines whether a given kind
of head is strong and can trigger movement of a lower head to attach to it, or weak
and so cannot attract a lower head to move to attach to it. See §4.5.
HMC: See Head Movement Constraint.
homophonous: Two different expressions are homophonous if they have the same pho-
netic form (e.g. we’ve and weave).
host: An expression to which a clitic or afﬁx attaches. For example, if n’t cliticises onto
could in expressions like couldn’t, we can say that could is the host onto which n’t
cliticises.
I: See INFL.
idiom: A string of words which has an idiosyncratic meaning (e.g. hit the roof in the
sense of ‘get angry’).

Glossary
389
I-language: I-language is a linguistic system internalised (i.e. internally represented)
within the brain. See §1.3.
illegible: See legible.
immediate constituent: See constituent.
immediately contain: See contain.
Imp: A symbol used to designate an (afﬁxal) imperative morpheme which occupies the
head C position of CP in imperatives: see ex. 4.2.
impenetrable/Impenetrability Condition. The Impenetrability Condition says that
a constituent within the domain of a complementiser is impenetrable/inaccessible to
(and hence cannot be affected by) a head c-commanding the relevant complementiser.
See also Phase Impenetrability Condition.
imperative: A term employed to classify a type of sentence used to issue an order (e.g.
‘Be quiet!,’ ‘Don’t say anything!’), and also to classify the type of verb-form used in
an imperative sentence (e.g. be is a verb in the imperative mood in ‘Be quiet!’).
inactive: See active. The Inactivity Condition on expletive it speciﬁes that it can only be
merged with a constituent which does not contain a nominal or pronominal expression
with active case- or ϕ-features. The Inactivation Condition speciﬁes that a goal with
a case feature becomes inactive for agreement with (or attraction by) an A-head like T
once its case feature has been valued and deleted.
inanimate: See animate.
Inclusiveness Condition: A grammatical principle proposed by Chomsky (1999, p. 2)
which ‘bars introduction of new elements (features) in the course of a derivation’.
indeﬁnite: See deﬁnite. The Indeﬁniteness Condition on expletive there speciﬁes that
it can only be merged with a verb which has an indeﬁnite nominal or pronominal
internal argument. If we adopt a split projection analysis of Verb Phrases, this can be
recast as saying that expletive there can only be merged as the speciﬁer of a light verb
whose VP complement has an indeﬁnite nominal or pronominal internal argument.
indeﬁnite article: See article.
indicative: Indicative (auxiliary and main) verb forms are ﬁnite forms which are used
(inter alia) in declarative and interrogative clauses (i.e. statements and questions). Thus,
the italicised items are said to be indicative in mood in the following sentences: ‘He is
teasing you,’ ‘Can he speak French?,’ ‘He had been smoking,’ ‘He loves chocolate,’
‘He hated syntax.’ An indicative clause is a clause which contains an indicative
(auxiliary or nonauxiliary) verb. See mood.
indirect object: See object.
inﬁnitive/inﬁnitival: The inﬁnitive (or inﬁnitival) form of a verb is the (uninﬂected) form
which is used (inter alia) when the verb is the complement of a modal auxiliary like can,
or of the inﬁnitive particle to. Accordingly, the italicised verbs are inﬁnitive/inﬁnitival
forms in sentences like ‘He can speak French’ and ‘He’s trying to learn French.’ An
inﬁnitive/inﬁnitival clause is a clause which contains a verb in the inﬁnitive form.
Hence, the bracketed clauses are inﬁnitive clauses in: ‘He is trying [to help her]’ and
‘Why not let [him help her]?’ (In both examples, help is an inﬁnitive verb form, and
to when used with an inﬁnitive complement is said to be an inﬁnitive particle.) Since
clauses are analysed as phrases within the framework used here, the term inﬁnitive
phrase can be used interchangeably with inﬁnitive clause, to denote a TP projection
headed by the inﬁnitive particle to (or by a null counterpart of the inﬁnitive particle
to).

390
Glossary
INFL: A category devised by Chomsky (1981) whose members include ﬁnite auxiliaries
(which are INFLected for tense/agreement), and the INFinitivaL particle to. INFL was
abbreviated to I in Chomsky (1986) and replaced by T (-tense marker) in later work.
inﬂection/inﬂectional: An inﬂection is an afﬁx which marks grammatical properties
such as number, person, tense, case. For example, a plural noun such as dogs in
English comprises the stem form dog and the plural number inﬂection -s. Inﬂectional
morphology is the grammar of inﬂections.
inherent case: See case.
inherit/inheritance: An operation by which cerain uninterpretable features (e.g. agree-
ment features) on a phrase head are handed down to (and thereby inherited by) the
non-phasal head immediately beneath the phase head: see §9.6.
initial grammar: The earliest grammar of their native language developed by infants.
innateness hypothesis: The hypothesis that children have a biologically endowed innate
language faculty. See §1.4.
in situ: A constituent is said to remain in situ (i.e. ‘in place’) if it doesn’t undergo a given
kind of movement operation.
interface levels: Levels at which the grammar interfaces (i.e. connects) with speech and
thought systems which lie outside the domain of grammar. Phonetic Form is the level
at which the grammar interfaces with articulatory–perceptual (speech) systems, and
semantic representation is the level at which it interfaces with conceptual–intentional
(thought) systems.
intermediate projection: See project(ion).
internal argument: See argument.
internalised grammar:
A grammar which is internally represented within the
mind/brain.
interpretable: A feature is (semantically) interpretable if it has semantic content: so, for
example, a feature such as [Plural-Number] on a pronoun like they is interpretable,
but a phonological feature like [+nasal] is uninterpretable, and so too are many
grammatical/formal features (e.g. case features). See §7.4.
interpretation: To say that an expression has a particular (semantic) interpretation is
to say that it expresses a particular meaning. So, for example, we might say that a
sentence such as ‘He loves you more than Sam’ has two different interpretations – one
on which Sam has a subject interpretation and is implicitly understood as the subject
of loves you, and a second on which Sam has an object interpretation and is implicitly
understood as the object of he loves. The ﬁrst interpretation can be paraphrased as ‘He
loves you more than Sam loves you,’ and the second as ‘He loves you more than he
loves Sam.’
interrogative: An interrogative clause or sentence is one which asks a question. The
Interrogative Condition speciﬁes that a clause is interpreted as a non-echoic question
if (and only if) it is a CP with an interrogative speciﬁer (i.e. a speciﬁer containing an
interrogative word). See question.
Intervention Condition: A principle of grammar specifying that probe P cannot target
goal G if there is some other visible goal of the same kind as G intervening between
the two and if the intervening goal is inactive for P.
intransitive: See transitive.
intuitions: Judgments given by native speakers about the grammaticality, interpretation
and structure of expressions in their language.

Glossary
391
inversion/inverted: A term used to denote a movement process by which the relative
order of two expressions is reversed. It is most frequently used in relation to the more
speciﬁc operation by which an auxiliary (and, in earlier stages of English, nonauxiliary)
verb comes to be positioned before its subject, e.g. in questions such as ‘Can you speak
Swahili?,’ where can is positioned in front of its subject you. See ch.4. An inverted
auxiliary/verb is one which is positioned in front of its subject (e.g. will in ‘Will I
pass the syntax exam?’).
Invisibility Condition: A principle of grammar specifying that the speciﬁer of a complete
(non-defective) TP is invisible to any higher probe.
irrealis: An inﬁnitive complement like that italicised in ‘They would prefer (for) you to
abstain’ is said to denote an irrealis (a Latin word meaning ‘unreal’) event in the sense
that the act of abstention is a hypothetical event which has not yet happened and may
never happen.
island: A structure out of which no subpart can be extracted. For example, co-ordinate
structures like William and Harry are islands in this sense. Hence, in a sentence like ‘I
admire William and Harry,’ we can topicalise the whole co-ordinate structure William
and Harry by moving it to the front of the overall sentence (as in ‘William and Harry,
I admire’), but we cannot topicalise Harry alone (as we see from the ungrammaticality
of ∗‘Harry I admire William and’).
K: See case particle.
label: A notational device used to represent linguistic (particularly categorial) properties
of constituents. For example, if we say that the word man belongs to the category N of
noun, we are using N as a label to indicate the categorial properties of the word man
(i.e. to tell us what grammatical category man belongs to).
labelled bracketing: See bracketing.
landing-site: The landing-site for a moved constituent is the position it ends up in after
it has been moved (e.g. the speciﬁer position within CP is the landing-site for a moved
wh-expression).
Language Faculty: Chomsky argues that humans beings have an innate Language Fac-
ulty (or Faculty of Language, FL) which provides them with an algorithm (i.e. set of
procedures or program) for acquiring a grammar of their native language(s). See §1.4.
LBC: See Left Branch Condition.
learnability: A criterion of adequacy for linguistic theory. An adequate theory must
explain how children come to learn the grammar of their native languages in such a
short period of time, and hence must provide for grammars of languages which are
easily learnable by children. See §1.3.
Left Branch Condition: A constraint which speciﬁes that in languages like English,
the leftmost constituent of a nominal expression cannot be moved out of the expression
containing it.
legible: To say that syntactic structures must be legible at the semantics and phonetics
interfaces is to say that the structures inputted to the semantic component of the
grammar must contain only features which contribute to semantic interpretation, and
that the structures inputted to the PF component must contain only features which
contribute to determining the phonetic form of an expression. Any structure which is
not legible at a given interface is said to be illegible to the relevant interface.
level: In the sense in which this term is used in this book, constituents like T, T-bar and
TP represent different projection levels – i.e. successively larger types of category

392
Glossary
(T being a minimal projection, T-bar an intermediate projection and TP a maximal
projection). See projection.
lexical/lexicon: The word lexical is used in a number of different ways. Since a lexicon
is a dictionary (i.e. a list of all the words in a language and their idiosyncratic linguistic
properties), the expression lexical item in effect means ‘word’, the expression lexical
entry means ‘the entry in the dictionary for a particular word’, the term lexical
property means ‘property of some individual word’, the term lexical learning means
‘learning words and their idiosyncratic properties’ and the term lexical array means
‘the set of words out of which a given expression is formed’. However, the word lexical
is also used in a second sense, in which it is contrasted with functional (and hence
means ‘non-functional’). In this second sense, a lexical category is a category whose
members are contentives (i.e. items with idiosyncratic descriptive content): hence,
categories such as noun, verb, adjective or preposition are lexical categories in this
sense. So, for example, the term lexical verb means ‘main verb’ (i.e. a nonauxilary
verb like go, ﬁnd, hate, want etc.).
light verb: This term is traditionally used to denote verbs (e.g. like take/make in expres-
sions like make fun of and take heed of) with relatively little semantic content. However,
in recent work on VP shells discussed in §8.4–§8.7, this term is extended to denote an
abstract afﬁxal verb (often with a causative sense like that of make) to which a noun,
adjective or verb adjoins. For example, it might be claimed that the sufﬁx -en in a verb
like sadden is an afﬁxal light verb which combines with adjectives like black, white and
sad to form the causative verb sadden (which has a meaning loosely paraphraseable
as ‘make sad’, or ‘cause to become sad’). This type of analysis can be extended to
verbs like roll as they are used in sentences like ‘He rolled the ball down the hill,’ if
we assume that roll here is used causatively (and so has a meaning paraphraseable as
‘make roll’, or ‘cause to roll’), and hence involves adjunction of the verb roll to an
abstract light verb (which can be thought of as a null verbal counterpart of -en). A light
verb is denoted as V.
link: A constituent (or position) which is part of a movement chain.
local/locality: One constituent X can agree with another constituent Y only if Y is in
the local c-command domain of X – i.e. only if Y is c-commanded by X and if Y
is sufﬁciently close to X. The closeness requirement is a consequence of a universal
Locality Principle. In recent work, Chomsky has deﬁned closeness (for syntactic
operations like agreement) in terms of the Phase Impenetrability Condition.
locative: This is a term which denotes the semantic/thematic function of a constituent.
A locative expression is one which denotes place. So, for example, there/where are
locative pronouns in sentences such as ‘Are you going there?’ or ‘Where are you going?’
Locative inversion is an operation by which a locative expression is positioned in front
of its associated verb, e.g. as in Down the hill rolled the ball. See §8.6.
locus: To say that T is the locus of tense is to say that the tense property of a tensed
clause or tensed auxiliary or main verb originates as a tense feature (or tense afﬁx)
carried by the head T constituent of TP.
long-distance movement: A long-distance movement operation is one which moves a
constituent out of one clause (TP/CP) into another.
M: mood.
main clause: See root clause.
main verb: A non-auxiliary verb. See auxiliary.

Glossary
393
masc(uline): This term is used in discussions of grammatical gender to denote pronouns
like he/him/his which refer to male entities.
mass noun: See count noun.
matrix: In a sentence such as ‘I think he lied,’ the (italicised) lied clause is an embed-
ded/complement clause (by virtue of being embedded as the complement of the verb
think), and the think clause is the matrix clause, in the sense that it is the clause
immediately containing the lied clause.
maximal projection: See projection.
Merge(r): An operation by which two constituents are combined together to form a
single larger constituent: see ch.2. The Merger Condition is a principle of grammar
specifying that when a lexical verb V is merged with more than one internal argument
of the relevant kind, a clausal internal argument is the ﬁrst to be merged with V (and so
is positioned lower within VP than any other internal argument), and a (pro)nominal
internal argument the last to be merged with V (and so is positioned higher within VP
than any other internal argument). The ﬁrst argument merged with a head H (i.e. its
complement) is said to be ﬁrst-merged with H, and the second argument merged with
H (i.e. its speciﬁer) is said to be second-merged with H.
Minimalism/Minimalist Program: A theory of grammar developed by Chomsky whose
core assumption is that grammars are minimally complex, perfect systems of optimal
design. See §1.3.
minimal projection: See projection.
Mixed Chains Constraint: A principle of grammar specifying that movement cannot
give rise to a mixed chain containing one copy of a constituent which has moved to the
edge of a phase, and another which has moved to the edge of a non-phasal projection.
modal/modality: A modal auxiliary is an auxiliary which expresses modality (i.e.
notions such as possibility, futurity or necessity). The set of modal auxiliaries
found in English is usually assumed to include will/would/can/could/shall/should/
may/might/must/ought, and need/dare when followed by a ‘bare’ (to-less) inﬁnitive
complement.
modiﬁer/modify: In an expression such as tall men, it is traditionally said that the
adjective tall modiﬁes (i.e. attributes some property to) or is a modiﬁer of the noun
men. Likewise, in a sentence such as ‘Eat slowly!,’ the adverb slowly is said to modify
the verb eat (in the sense that it describes the manner in which the speaker is being
told to eat).
module: An individual component of a larger system. For example, a grammar might be
said to contain a case module – i.e. a component which accounts for the case properties
of relevant constituents.
mood: This is a term describing inﬂectional properties of ﬁnite verbs. (Auxiliary and
nonauxiliary) verbs in English can be in the indicative mood, subjunctive mood or
imperative mood. Examples of each type of mood are given by the italicised verb
forms in the following: ‘He hates [= indicative] spaghetti’; ‘The court ordered that
he be [= subjunctive] detained indeﬁnitely’; ‘Keep [= imperative] quiet!’ The mood
of the verb determines aspects of the interpretation of the relevant clause, so that e.g.
subjunctive verbs occur in irrealis clauses. A Mood Phase/MP is a phrase headed by
an item which marks (e.g. indicative or subjunctive) mood.
morpheme: The smallest unit of grammatical structure. Thus, a plural noun such as cats
comprises two morphemes, namely the stem cat and the plural sufﬁx -s.

394
Glossary
morphology/morphological:
Morphology studies how morphemes are combined
together to form words. Morphological properties are properties relating to the form
of words (i.e. relating to the inﬂections or afﬁxes they carry). For example, it is a
morphological property of regular count nouns that they have a plural form ending in
-s.
morphosyntactic: A morphosyntactic property is a ‘grammatical’ property, i.e. a prop-
erty which affects (or is affected by) relevant aspects of morphology and syntax. For
instance, case is a morphosyntactic property in that (e.g.) pronouns have different
morphological forms and occupy different syntactic positions according to their case:
e.g. the nominative form of the ﬁrst person plural pronoun is we and its accusative form
is us; the two occupy different syntactic positions in that the nominative form occurs
as the subject of a ﬁnite verb, whereas the accusative form occurs as the complement
of a transitive verb or preposition: cf. ‘We disagree,’ ‘Join us.’
mother: A constituent X is the mother of another constituent Y if X is the next highest
node up in the tree from Y, and the two are connected by a branch (solid line). See
§2.6.
move/movement: An operation by which (a copy of) a constitutent is displaced from
one position in a given structure and comes to occupy another position in the
structure.
MP: Mood Phrase (see Mood).
multiple agreement: Agreement between a probe and more than one goal. See §7.6.
multiple speciﬁers: In his (1995) book and subsequent work, Chomsky suggests that
certain types of head may allow more than one speciﬁer (e.g. a light verb with an
external argument/subject as its inner speciﬁer may attract a wh-expression to become
its outer speciﬁer: see §9.5).
multiple wh-questions: Questions containing more than one wh-word. See §5.8.
N: See noun.
natural language: A language acquired in a natural setting by human beings (hence,
excluding e.g. computer languages, animal communication systems etc.).
NEG: The head constituent of a NEGP (i.e. of a Negation Phrase constituent which
contains not as its speciﬁer). See §4.7.
negation: A process or construction in which some proposition is said to be false.
Negation involves the use of some negative item such as not, n’t, nobody, nothing,
never etc. – though most discussions of negation in English tend to be about the
negative adverbs not/n’t. See §4.7.
negative evidence: In the context of discussions about the nature of the evidence which
children make use of in acquiring their native language(s), this term relates to evidence
based on the nonoccurrence of certain structures in the child’s speech input, or on
correction of children by others (e.g. adults). See §1.7.
negative particle: This term typically denotes the negative adverbs not/n’t.
NEGP: See NEG.
neuter: See gender.
node: A term used to denote each point in a tree diagram which carries a category label.
Each node represents a separate constituent in the relevant structure.
Nom: An abbreviation for nominative. See case.
nominal: This is the adjective associated with the word noun, so that in principle a
nominal (expression) is an expression containing or comprising a noun. However, the

Glossary
395
term is sometimes extended to mean ‘expression containing or comprising a noun or
pronoun’.
nominative: See case.
nonargument: See argument.
nonauxiliary verb: A ‘lexical verb’ or ‘main verb’ (like want, try, hate, smell, buy etc.)
which requires do-support to form questions, negatives and tags.
nonconstituent: A nonconstituent string is a sequence of words which do not together
form a constituent.
noncount noun: See count noun.
non-echoic question: A question which can be used in any context, not just to echo
something previously said.
No-Negative-Evidence Hypothesis: The hypothesis that children acquire their native
language(s) on the basis of positive evidence alone, and do not make use of negative
evidence. See §1.7.
nonﬁnite: See ﬁnite.
non-terminal: See terminal.
noun/N: A category of word (whose members include items such as boy/friend/
thought/sadness/computer) which typically denotes an entity of some kind. In tra-
ditional grammar, a distinction is drawn between common nouns and proper nouns.
Proper nouns are names of individual people (e.g. Chomsky), places (e.g. Colchester,
Essex, England ), dates (e.g. Tuesday, February, Easter), magazines (e.g. Cosmopoli-
tan) etc., whereas common nouns (e.g. boy, table, syntax etc.) are nouns denoting
general (non-individual) entities. Proper nouns have the semantic property of having
unique reference, and the syntactic property that (unless themselves modiﬁed) they
generally can’t be modiﬁed by a determiner (cf. ∗the London).
Noun Phrase/NP: A phrase whose head is a noun. In work prior to the mid 1980s, a
structure such as the king of Utopia was taken to be a noun phrase/NP comprising
the head noun king, its complement of Utopia and its speciﬁer the. In more recent
work, such expressions are taken to be Determiner Phrases/DPs comprising the head
determiner the and a Noun Phrase/NP complement king of Utopia, with the NP in
turn comprising the head noun king and its complement of Utopia. See §2.3 and
§3.11.
NP: See Noun Phrase.
N-pronoun: A pronoun like one in ‘Mary bought a green one’ which has the morpho-
logical and syntactic properties of a (count) noun.
null: A null constituent is one which is ‘silent’ or ‘unpronounced’ and so has no overt
phonetic form. See ch.3.
null case: The case carried by PRO (see case).
null subject: A subject which has grammatical and semantic properties but no overt
phonetic form. There are a variety of different types of null subject, including the null
pro subject which can be used in any ﬁnite clause in a language like Italian, the null
counterpart of you found in English imperative clauses like ‘Shut the door!,’ the null
PRO subject found in non-ﬁnite control clauses like that bracketed in ‘The prisoners
tried [PRO to escape]’ and the null truncated subject found in sentences like ‘Can’t
ﬁnd my pen. Must be on my desk at home.’ See §3.2.
null subject language: This term is used to denote a language which allows any ﬁnite
clause of any kind to have a null pro subject. For example, Italian is a null subject

396
Glossary
language and so allows us to say ‘Sei simpatica’ (literally ‘Are nice,’ meaning ‘You
are nice’); by contrast, English is a non-null subject language in the sense that it
doesn’t allow the subject to be omitted in this type of structure (hence ∗‘Are nice’ is
ungrammatical in English).
Null Subject Parameter: A parameter whose setting determines whether a language is
a null subject language or not. See §1.6.
Num/number: A term used to denote the contrast between singular and plural forms.
In English, we ﬁnd number contrasts in nouns (cf. ‘one dog’, ‘two dogs’), in some
determiners (cf. ‘this book’, ‘these books’), in pronouns (cf. it/they) and in ﬁnite
(auxiliary or main) verbs (cf. ‘It smells,’ ‘They smell’).
object: The complement of a transitive item (e.g. in ‘Help me,’ me is the object of the
transitive verb help; and in ‘for me’, me is the object of the transitive preposition
for). The term object is generally restricted to complements which carry accusative
case – i.e. to nominal or pronominal complements: hence, nothing would be the object
(and complement) of said in ‘He said nothing,’ but the that-clause would be the
complement (but not the object) of said in ‘He said [that he was tired]’ – though some
traditional grammars extend the term object to cover clausal complements as well as
(pro)nominal complements. In sentences such as ‘She gave him them,’ the verb give
is traditionally said to be ditransitive by virtue of having two objects, namely him
and them: the ﬁrst object (representing the recipient) is termed the indirect object,
and the second object (representing the gift) is termed the direct object; the relevant
construction is known as the double object construction. Where a verb has a single
object (e.g. nothing in ‘He said nothing’), this is the direct object of the relevant verb.
objective: Another term for accusative. See case.
one-place predicate: A predicate which has only one argument. See argument.
operator: This term is used in syntax to denote (e.g.) interrogative and negative expres-
sions which have the syntactic properties that they trigger auxiliary inversion (cf.
‘What have you done?,’ ‘Nothing have I done’) and allow a polarity item like parti-
tive/existential any to occur in their scope (cf. ‘What can anyone do?,’ ‘Nothing can
anyone do’).
overt: An expression is overt if it has a non-null phonetic form, but null if it has no
phonetic content. Thus, him is an overt pronoun, but PRO is a null pronoun. The
term overt structure is used in this book (though not more generally) as an informal
expository term to refer to a simpliﬁed representation of the structure of a given
expression which shows only the overt constituents which it contains (and hence
excludes trace copies and other null constituents).
P: See preposition.
Parameters/Parametric: A parameter is a dimension of grammatical variation between
different languages or different language varieties (e.g. the Null Subject Parameter,
Head Position Parameter, Wh-Parameter). Parametric variation relates to dif-
ferences between languages which reﬂect differences in the setting of one or more
parameters. See §1.6.
Parameter-setting: The process by which children determine which setting of a param-
eter is appropriate for the native language they are acquiring. See §1.7.
paraphrase: A paraphrase is an expression which has roughly the same meaning as the
expression which it is being used to paraphrase, but which brings out the relevant
meaning more clearly. For example, we can bring out the ambiguity of a sentence like
He loves you more than me by saying that it has two different interpretations, one of

Glossary
397
which can be paraphrased as ‘He loves you more than he loves me,’ and the other of
which can be paraphrased as ‘He loves you more than I love you.’
partial: A labelled bracketing is partial if it shows only part of the structure of a given
sentence or expression (other parts being omitted to simplify exposition).
participle: A non-ﬁnite verb form which encodes aspect or voice. In European lan-
guages, participles have no person properties but (in languages like Latin or Icelandic
which have a richer morphology than English) have number/gender/case properties.
English has three types of participle: progressive participles (ending in -ing) used in
conjunction with the progressive aspect auxiliary be in sentences like ‘It is raining’;
perfect participles (generally ending in -d or -n) used in conjunction with the perfect
aspect auxiliary have in sentences like ‘He has gone home’; and passive participles
(also generally ending in -d or -n) used in conjunction with the passive voice auxiliary
be in sentences like ‘He was arrested by Percy Plodd.’
particle: This is an informal term used to describe a range of (typically monosyllabic)
items which are invariable in form, and which don’t ﬁt easily into traditional systems
of grammatical categories. For example, inﬁnitival to (cf. ‘Try to be nice’) is said to
be an inﬁnitive particle; of as used in expressions like ‘loss of face’ is sometimes said
to be a genitive case particle; not and n’t are said to be negative particles. The term
is sometimes extended to include prepositions used without a complement (e.g. down
in ‘He fell down’).
partitive: A partitive quantiﬁer is a word like some/any which quantiﬁes over part of the
members of a given set (as in ‘Some students enjoy syntax’).
part of speech: See category.
passive: See active, passivisation.
passive participle: See active, participle.
passivisation: A movement operation whereby an expression which is the thematic
complement of a verb becomes the subject of the same clause (as in ‘The jewels were
stolen’) or the subject of another clause (as in ‘The minister was said to have lied to
Parliament’). See §6.6–§6.7.
past tense: See tense.
patient: A particular type of theta-role, denoting an entity which suffers the conse-
quences of some action. For example, in a sentence such as ‘John killed Harry,’ Harry
is the patient argument of the verb kill. The more recent term theme is often used in
place of the traditional term patient. See §6.4.
perfect: In one sense of the word, in a sentence like ‘He has gone home,’ has is an auxiliary
marking perfect aspect, and gone is a perfect participle: see aspect, participle. In
a different sense, by claiming that language is a perfect system, Chomsky means that
grammars produce structures which are ‘perfect’ in the sense that they are precisely
of the form required to interface with speech and thought systems.
performance: A term which denotes observed language behaviour – e.g. the kind of
things people actually say when they speak a language, and what meanings they
assign to sentences produced by themselves or other people. Performance can be
impaired by factors such as tiredness or drunkenness, giving rise to performance
errors. Performance is contrasted with competence (which denotes ﬂuent native
speakers’ knowledge of the grammar of their native language). See §1.3.
periphery: The periphery of a clause is that part of the clause structure which is positioned
above TP – in other words the edge of CP (or its counterpart in a split CP system like
that discussed in §8.2).

398
Glossary
Pers: An abbreviation of person/press.
person/pers: In traditional grammar, English is said to have three grammatical persons.
A ﬁrst person expression (e.g. I/we) is one whose reference includes the speaker(s); a
second person expression (e.g. you) is one which excludes the speaker(s) but includes
the addressee(s) (i.e. the person or people being spoken to); a third person expres-
sion (e.g. he/she/it/they) is one whose reference excludes both the speaker(s) and the
addressee(s) – i.e. an expression which refers to someone or something other than the
speaker(s) or addressee(s).
personal pronouns: These are pronouns which carry inherent person properties – i.e.
ﬁrst person pronouns such as I/we, second person pronouns such as you and third
person pronouns such as he/she/it/they. See person.
PF(representation): (A representation of the) Phonetic Form (of an expression). See
representation. The PF component of a grammar is the component which converts
the syntactic structures generated by the computational component of the grammar
into PF-representations, via a series of morphological and phonological operations. A
PF-clitic is a clitic which attaches to another item in the PF component (not in the
syntax), so that the two form a single phonetic word, but are not a single word in the
syntax.
phase: In work outlined in chapter 9, Chomsky argues that syntactic structures are build
up in phases (phases including complementiser phrases and transitive Verb Phrases),
and that once a phase has been produced, the domain/complement of the head of
the phase undergoes transfer to the PF component and the semantic component, and
thereby becomes impenetrable to further operations in the syntax.
Phase Impenetrability Condition/PIC: A constraint on grammatical operations which
speciﬁes that the domain/complement of a phase head is impenetrable/inaccessible to
an external probe (i.e. to a c-commanding probe which lies outside relevant phase).
See §9.2.
phi-features/ϕ-features: Person and number features (and, in languages which have
grammatical gender, gender features as well).
Phonetic Form: See interface levels.
phonetic representation: See representation.
phonological features: Features used to describe sound properties. For example, the
difference between nasal and oral sounds might be described in terms of the feature
[±NASAL].
phrase: The term phrase is used to denote an expression larger than a word which is a
maximal projection: see projection. In traditional grammar, the term refers strictly
to non-clausal expressions (hence, ‘reading a book’ is a phrase, but ‘He is reading a
book’ is a clause, not a phrase). However, in more recent work, clauses are analysed as
types of phrases: e.g. ‘He will resign’ is a tense phrase (TP), and ‘That he will resign’
is a complementiser phrase (CP). See §2.3 and §2.4.
phrase-marker/P-marker: A tree diagram used to represent the syntactic structure of a
phrase or sentence. See §2.6.
phrase structure: See constituent structure.
PIC: See Phase Impenetrability Condition.
pied-piping: A process by which a moved constituent drags one or more other con-
stituents along with it when it moves. For example, if we compare a sentence like
‘Who were you talking to?’ with ‘To whom were you talking?,’ we can say that in both
cases the pronoun who is moved to the front of the sentence, but that in the second

Glossary
399
sentence the preposition to is pied-piped along with the pronoun who. See §5.5 and
§5.6.
PITMH: See Predicate-Internal Theta-Marking Hypothesis. See §6.4.
Pl: See plural.
plural/pl: A plural expression is one which denotes more than one entity (e.g. these cars
is a plural expression, whereas this car is a singular expression).
P-marker: See phrase-marker.
polarity/PolP: a polarity item/expression is a word/phrase (e.g. a word like ever or a
phrase like at all or care a damn) which has an inherent affective polarity, and hence
is restricted to occurring within the scope of an affective (e.g. negative, interrogative
or conditional) constitutent (see affective). A Polarity Phrase/PolP constitutent is a
phrase which marks whether a sentence is positive or negative (See §4.8).
positive evidence: In discussions of child language acquisition, this expression denotes
evidence based on the actual occurrence of certain types of structure in the child’s
speech input. For example, hearing an adult say Open it gives a child positive evidence
that verbs are canonically positioned before their complements in English. See §1.7.
possessive: A possessive structure is one which indicates possession: the term is most
commonly used in relation to expressions like ‘John’s book’ or ‘his book’ (where
the italicised expressions denote the person who possesses the book). The italicised
possessor in each structure is said to be genitive in case.
postposition: A type of word which is the counterpart of a preposition in languages
which position prepositions after their complements. See adposition.
postulate: A postulate is a theoretical assumption or hypothesis; to postulate is to hypoth-
esise.
PP: See Prepositional Phrase.
PPT: See Principles-and-Parameters Theory.
Pr: An abbreviation for the feature [present-tense]. See tense.
pragmatics: The study of how nonlinguistic knowledge is integrated with linguistic
knowledge in our use of language.
precede(nce): To say that one constituent precedes another is to say that it is positioned to
its left (on the printed page) and that neither constituent contains the other. Precedence
is left-to-right linear ordering.
predicate: See argument, clause, predicative.
Predicate-Internal Theta-Marking Hypothesis/PITMH: The hypothesis that an argu-
ment is assigned a theta-role via merger with a predicate. See §6.4.
predication: The process by which a predicate is combined with a subject in order
to form a proposition. For example, in a sentence such as ‘Boris likes vodka,’ the
property of liking vodka is said to be predicated of Boris.
predicative: In structures such as ‘John is in Paris/very silly/a liar,’ the italicised expres-
sions are said to be predicative in that they predicate the property of being in Paris/being
very silly/being a liar of John (i.e. they attribute the relevant property to John). A nom-
inal like a liar when used predicatively is also referred to as a predicate nominal.
preﬁx: See afﬁx.
prenominal: A prenominal expression is one which is positioned in front of a noun
expression. For example, both a and red are prenominal in an expression such as a red
car.
preposing: An informal term to indicate a movement operation by which a constituent
is moved further to the left within a phrase or sentence.

400
Glossary
preposition/P: A preposition is a word generally used to express location, manner etc. –
e.g. at/in/on/under/by/with/from/against/down etc. In English, it is a characteristic
property of prepositions that they are invariable, and that they can generally be modiﬁed
by straight/right. Where a preposition has a nominal or pronominal complement, it
is said to be transitive; where it has no complement, it is said to be intransitive.
Hence down is a transitive preposition in ‘He fell down the stairs,’ but an intransitive
preposition in ‘He fell down.’
Prepositional Phrase/PP: A phrase whose head is a preposition – e.g. in town, on
Sunday, to the market, for someone else etc.
preposition stranding: See stranding.
Pres/present tense: See tense.
principles: Principles of Universal Grammar/UG principles describe potentially uni-
versal properties of natural language grammars: the terms condition and constraint
are also used with much the same meaning as the term principle. Potential princi-
ples of Universal Grammar include the Headedness Principle, Binarity Principle,
Attract Closest Condition and Phase Impenetrability Condition.
Principles-and-Parameters Theory/PPT: This theory, developed in Chomsky (1981)
and much subsequent work, claims that natural language grammars incorporate not
only a set of innate universal principles which account for those aspects of grammar
which are common to all languages, but also a set of parameters which account for
those aspects of grammar which vary from one language to another. See principles
and parameter.
PRN: An abbreviation for pronoun.
PRO: A null-case pronoun (known informally as ‘big PRO’, because it is written in
capital letters) which represents the understood subject of an inﬁnitive complement of
a control predicate, e.g. in a structure such as ‘John decided PRO to leave.’ See §3.2
pro: A null nominative-case pronoun (known informally as ‘little pro’, because it is
written in lower-case letters) which represents the understood null subject of a ﬁnite
clause in a null subject language. A Shakespearean sentence such as ‘Wilt come?’
(= ‘Will you come?,’ Stephano, The Tempest, III.ii) could be argued to have a null pro
subject, and hence to have the structure ‘Wilt pro come?,’ with pro having essentially
the same interpretation as the second person singular pronoun thou. See §3.2.
probe: When a head is merged with its complement, it serves as a probe which searches
for a matching goal within its complement (i.e. an expression which it can agree with):
see §7.2. The Probe Condition is a principle of grammar specifying that a head probes
only as far as is needed in order to ﬁnd a goal which can value any unvalued features
(and delete any uninterpretable features) on the probe.
proform: A proform is an expression (typically a word) which has no speciﬁc content of
its own, but which derives its content from an antecedent. For example, in a sentence
such as ‘Mary may have been tired, but she didn’t seem so,’ the antecedent of the
word so is the adjective tired: hence so (in the use illustrated here) can be said to be
an adjectival proform.
prog: Progressive aspect marker. See aspect.
progressive: See aspect.
project(ion): A projection is a constituent containing a head word. For example, a Noun
Phrase such as students of Linguistics is a projection of its head noun students (equiv-
alently, we can say that the noun students here projects into the Noun Phrase students
of linguistics). A minimal projection is a constituent which is not a projection of some

Glossary
401
other constituent: hence, heads (i.e. words) are minimal projections. An intermediate
projection is a constituent which is larger than a word, but smaller than a phrase
(e.g. is working in ‘He is working’). A maximal projection is a constituent which
is not contained within any larger constituent with the same head. So, for example,
in a sentence like ‘I’ve heard several accounts of what happened,’ the italicised noun
phrase expression accounts of what happened is a maximal projection, since it is a
projection of the noun accounts but is not contained within any larger projection of the
noun accounts (if we assume that several accounts of what happened is a quantiﬁer
phrase headed by the quantiﬁer several). By contrast, in a sentence such as ‘I’ve heard
several accounts,’ the italicised noun accounts is both a minimal projection (by virtue
of the fact that it is not a projection of some other head) and a maximal projection (by
virtue of the fact that it is not contained within any larger structure which has the same
head noun). The Projection Principle is a UG principle suggested in earlier work
by Chomsky (1981, p. 29) which requires that the properties of lexical items should
remain constant throughout the derivation: a related principle is the Inclusiveness
Condition.
pronominal: A pronominal (expression) is a non-anaphoric pronoun like him which
obeys Principle B of Binding Theory (and hence must not refer to any higher expres-
sion within the closest TP most immediately containing it). See Ex.2.2.
pronoun/PRN: The word pronoun is composed of the two morphemes – namely pro
(meaning ‘on behalf of’) and noun: hence, a pronoun is traditionally said to be a word
used in place of a noun expression. Pronouns differ from nouns in that they have no
intrinsic descriptive content, and so are functors. There are a range of different types of
pronoun found in English, including the pronominal noun one(s) used in sentences like
‘I’ll take the red one(s),’ pronominal quantiﬁers like any in ‘I couldn’t ﬁnd any’ and
pronominal determiners like this in ‘This is hard.’ The term pronoun is most frequently
used to indicate a class of items (like he/him/his) traditionally referred to as personal
pronouns (though analysed in much recent work as pronominal determiners).
proper noun: See noun.
proposition: This is a term used to describe the semantic content (i.e. meaning) of a
sentence. For example, we might say that the sentence ‘Does John smoke?’ questions
the truth of the proposition that ‘John smokes.’
pseudo-cleft sentence: A sentence such as ‘What he hated most was syntax,’ where
syntax is said to occupy focus position within the overall sentence.
Q: In one use, an abbreviation for quantiﬁer; in another use, an abbreviation for question
particle.
QP/Quantiﬁer Phrase: A phrase whose head is a quantiﬁer – e.g. an expression such as
many people, or few of the students.
Q-pronoun: A pronoun like many in ‘I don’t eat many’ which seems to be a pronominal
quantiﬁer.
quantiﬁer/Q: A quantiﬁer is a special type of word used to denote quantity. Typical quan-
tiﬁers include the universal quantiﬁers all/both, the distributive quantiﬁers each/every,
the existential/partitive quantiﬁers some/any etc.
quantiﬁer ﬂoating: See ﬂoating quantiﬁer.
question: This refers to a type of sentence which is used to ask whether something is true,
or to ask about the identity of some entity. See Yes-no question and Wh-question.
question particle/Q: The analysis of yes-no questions presented in §5.4 suggests that
they contain a null question particle (i.e. a null counterpart of whether).

402
Glossary
quirky case: See case.
raising (predicate): The term raising is used in two senses. In its most general sense,
it denotes any movement operation which involves moving some constituent from
a ‘lower’ to a ‘higher’ position in a structure. However, it also has a more speciﬁc
sense, indicating a particular kind of A-movement operation by which an expression
is moved from being the subject of one clause to becoming the subject of another. The
term raising predicate denotes a word like seem whose subject is raised out of subject
position in a complement clause to become subject of the (TP constituent in the) seem
clause. See §6.8 and §6.9.
realis: A realis verb form is one which can be used to describe a real state of affairs, and
is typically indicative in mood – e.g. the italicised verbs in ‘He cheats/cheated at
cards.’
reciprocal: See anaphor.
reduced: A reduced form is a form of a word which has lost one or more of its segments
(i.e. vowel/consonants), and/or which contains a vowel which loses its deﬁning char-
acteristics and is realised as a neutral vowel like schwa /ə/. For example, the auxiliary
have has the full (unreduced) form /hæv/ when stressed, but has the various reduced
forms /həv/, /əv/ and /v/ when unstressed.
reference/referential/referring: The reference of an expression is the entity (e.g. object,
concept, state of affairs) in the external world to which it refers. A referential/referring
expression is one which refers to such an entity; conversely, a nonreferential expres-
sion is one which does not refer to any such entity. For example the second there in a
sentence such as ‘There was nobody there’ is referential (it can be paraphrased as ‘in
that place’), whereas the ﬁrst there is nonreferential and so cannot have its reference
questioned by where? (cf. ∗‘Where was nobody there?’).
reﬂexive: See anaphor.
relative pronoun/relative clause: In a sentence such as ‘He’s someone [who you can
trust],’ the bracketed clause is said to be a relative clause because it ‘relates to’ (i.e.
modiﬁes, or restricts the reference of) the pronoun someone. The pronoun who which
introduces the clause is said to be a relative pronoun, since it ‘relates to’ the expression
someone (in the sense that someone is the antecedent of who).
Relativised Minimality Condition: A principle of grammar which speciﬁes that a con-
stituent X can only be affected (e.g. attracted) by the minimal (i.e. closest) constituent
of the relevant type above it (i.e. c-commanding X).
representation: A syntactic representation (or structural representation) is a nota-
tion/device (typically, a tree diagram or labelled bracketing) used to represent the syn-
tactic structure of an expression (i.e. the way in which it is structured out of words
and phrases): a semantic representation is a representation of linguistic aspects of
the meaning of an expression; a PF-representation or phonetic representation is a
representation of the phonetic form of an expression.
restrictive: A restrictive theory is one which is constrained by virtue of imposing strong
constraints on the types of structures and operations found in natural language gram-
mars. See §1.3.
resultative: A verb such as paint in a sentence such as ‘John painted his house pink’ is
said to be a resultative verb in that the result of the action of painting is that the house
becomes pink. See §8.4.
R-expression: A referring expression comprising or containing a noun, like John or the
man next door. See ex.2.2.

Glossary
403
root: The root of a tree diagram is the topmost node in the tree. Hence, a root clause is a
free-standing clause, i.e. a clause which is not contained within any other expression.
In traditional grammar, a root clause is termed a principal clause, independent clause
or main clause. By contrast, an embedded clause is a clause which is contained within
some larger expression; and a complement clause is an (embedded) clause which is
used as the complement of some item. So, in a sentence such as ‘I think he loves you,’
the think clause (i.e. the expression I think he loves you) is a root clause, whereas the
loves clause (i.e. the expression he loves you) is an embedded clause. Moreover, the
loves clause is also a complement clause, since it serves as the complement of the verb
think.
S/S′/S-bar: Category labels used in work in the 1960s and 1970s to designate a sentence
or clause. See §2.3 and §2.4.
scope: The scope of an expression is the set of constituents which it modiﬁes or which
fall within (what we might informally call) its ‘sphere of inﬂuence’. For example,
a sentence like He cannot be telling the truth has a meaning paraphraseable as ‘It
is not possible that he is telling the truth,’ and in such a sentence the negative not
is said to have scope over the modal auxiliary can (and conversely can is said to
fall within the scope of not, or to have narrow scope with respect to not). By con-
trast, a sentence such as You mustn’t tell lies has a meaning paraphraseable as ‘It is
necessary that you not tell lies,’ and in such a sentence, the auxiliary must is said
to have scope over (or to have wide scope with respect to) the negative particle
n’t.
SCP: See Strict Cyclicity Principle.
second-merge: See merge.
second person: See person.
select(ion)/selectional: When a word has a particular type of complement, it is said
to select (i.e. ‘take’ or ‘allow’) the relevant type of complement (and the relevant
phenomenon is referred to as complement selection). For example, we can say that
the word expect has the selectional property that it can select an inﬁnitive complement
(e.g. in structures like ‘They expect to win’).
semantics/semantic component: Semantics is the study of linguistic aspects of meaning.
The semantic component of a grammar is the component which maps syntactic
structures into semantic representations. See representation.
sentence: This term is usually used to denote a root clause – i.e. a free-standing clause
which is not contained within some larger expression. See root.
sentence fragment: See fragment.
Sg: An abbreviation for singular.
Shakespeare: Shakespeare’s plays were written between (around) 1590 and 1620, and
are examples of Early Modern English/Elizabethan English (though some have
suggested that Shakespeare’s English is rather conservative, and hence is more repre-
sentative of a slightly earlier stage of English).
shell: This term is used in connection with the idea (discussed in §8.4–§8.7) that Verb
Phrases comprise two different projections, an outer vP shell headed by a light verb,
and an inner VP core headed by a lexical verb.
silent: See null.
simple sentence: One which contains a single clause.
Simultaneity Condition: A principle of grammar specifying that all syntactic operations
which involve a given probe apply simultaneously.

404
Glossary
singular: A singular expression is one which denotes a single entity (e.g. this car is a
singular/Sg expression, whereas these cars is a plural/Pl expression).
sister: Two nodes are sisters if they have the same mother (i.e. if they are directly merged
with each other at some stage of derivation). See §2.6.
small clause: See clause.
source: A term used in the analysis of semantic/thematic roles to denote the entity from
which something moves – e.g. the italicised expression in ‘John returned from Paris.’
See §6.4.
Spec: See speciﬁer. Terms like spec-C/spec-T/spec-V (etc.) denote the speciﬁer position
within CP/TP/VP (etc.).
speciﬁcation: The speciﬁcation of an item is the set of features which it carries.
speciﬁer/spec: The grammatical function fulﬁlled by certain types of constituent which
precede the head of their containing phrase. For example, in a sentence such as ‘John is
working,’ John is superﬁcially the speciﬁer (and subject) of is working. In a sentence
such as ‘What did John do?’ what is superﬁcially the speciﬁer of the CP headed by a C
constituent containing the inverted auxiliary did. In a phrase such as ‘straight through
the window’, straight is the speciﬁer of the PP headed by the preposition through. A
speciﬁer-ﬁrst structure is one which has its speciﬁer positioned in front of its head.
The Speciﬁer Condition in ch. 9 bars subextraction out of a constituent which is a
speciﬁer of a phase head.
spellout: The ‘pronunciation’ of an expression: e.g. to say that an item has a null spellout
is to say that it is ‘silent’ and so has a null phonetic form.
split CP/split projection/split TP/split VP: Work discussed in ch. 8 suggests that CP,
TP and VP can be split into a number of separate projections/phrases.
split spellout: See discontinuous spellout.
star: An asterisk (∗) used in front of an expression to indicate that the expression is
ungrammatical.
stem: The stem of a word is the form to which inﬂectional afﬁxes are added. So, a verb
form like going comprises the stem go and the inﬂectional sufﬁx -ing.
strand/stranded/stranding: A stranded preposition is one which has been separated
from its complement (by movement of the complement). For example, in an echo
question like ‘You’re waiting for who?,’ the preposition for has not been stranded,
since it is immediately followed by its complement who. But in ‘Who are you waiting
for?,’ the preposition for has been stranded, in that it has been separated from its
complement who: the relevant phenomenon is termed preposition stranding.
Strict Cyclicity Principle/SCP: A UG principle which speciﬁes that a cyclic opera-
tion can only affect the overall head H of a structure and some other constituent
c-commanded by H. See §4.7.
string: A continuous sequence of words contained within the same phrase or sentence.
For example, in the sentence ‘They hate syntax,’ the sequences They hate, hate syntax
and They hate syntax are all strings – but They syntax is not. Note that a string need
not be a constituent.
strong: A strong head is one which can attract (i.e. trigger movement of) another head; a
weak head is one which cannot trigger movement. For example, C in an interrogative
main clause is strong in present-day English, and so attracts an auxiliary to move from
T to C – e.g. in sentences like Can you speak French? On an entirely different use of
these terms in the expressions weak/strong genitive pronoun, see case.

Glossary
405
structural: See case, representation.
structure: See constituent structure.
stylistic variation: Variation correlated with stylistic factors. For example, whom is used
in formal styles and who in other styles in sentences like ‘He is someone whom/who I
admire greatly.’
subextraction: See extraction.
subject: The (superﬁcial structural) subject of a clause is a noun or pronoun expression
which is normally positioned between a complementiser and an (auxiliary or nonaux-
iliary) verb. Syntactic characteristics of subjects include the fact that they can trigger
agreement with auxiliaries (as in ‘The president is lying,’ where the auxiliary is agrees
with the subject the president), and they can be inverted with auxiliaries in main clause
questions (as in ‘Is the president lying?,’ where the auxiliary is has been inverted with
the subject the president).
subjunctive: In a (formal style) sentence such as ‘The judge ordered that he be detained
indeﬁnitely,’ the passive auxiliary verb be is traditionally said to be in the subjunctive
mood, since although it has exactly the same form as the inﬁnitive form be (e.g.
in inﬁnitive structures such as ‘To be or not to be – that is the question’), it has a
nominative subject he, and hence is a ﬁnite verb form. In present-day spoken English,
constructions containing subjunctive verbs are generally avoided, as they are felt to be
archaic or excessively formal in style by many speakers. See mood.
substantive: A substantive category is a category (like noun, verb, adjective, adverb,
preposition) whose members are contentives (i.e. items with idiosyncratic descriptive
content).
substitution: A technique used to determine the category which a given expression
belongs to. An expression belongs to a given type of category if it can be substituted
(i.e. replaced) in phrases or sentences like that in which it occurs by another expression
which clearly belongs to the category in question. For example, we might say that
clearer is an adverb in ‘John speaks clearer than you’ because it can be replaced by
the adverbial expression more clearly.
successive-cyclic movement: Movement in a succession of short steps.
sufﬁx: See afﬁx.
superiority effect: A phenomenon which arises when a head has to target the highest/
closest constituent of a given type in a structure.
superlative: The superlative is a form of an adjective/adverb (typically carrying the sufﬁx
-est) used to mark the highest value for a particular property in comparison with others.
For example, hardest is the superlative form of hard in ‘John is the hardest worker
because he works hardest.’
syntactic representation/structure: See representation.
syntax: The component of a grammar which determines how words are combined
together to form phrases and sentences.
T: A tense-marking constituent containing either a tensed auxiliary, or an abstract tense
afﬁx Tns, or a non-ﬁnite tense particle like inﬁnitival to. T-to-C movement is move-
ment of an auxiliary or nonauxiliary verb from the head T position of TP into the head
C position of CP – as with the italicised inverted auxiliary in ‘Is it raining?’
taxonomy: A system for classifying entities into types
tense: Finite auxiliary and main verbs in English show a binary (two-way) tense contrast,
traditionally said to be between present (Pres/Pr) tense forms and past tense forms.

406
Glossary
Thus, in ‘John hates syntax,’ hates is a present tense verb form, whereas in ‘John
hated syntax,’ hated is a past tense verb form (an alternative classiﬁcation which many
linguists prefer is into [±past] verb forms, so that hated is [+past], and hates [–past]).
This present/past tense distinction correlates (to some extent) with time-reference, so
that (e.g.) past tense verbs typically describe an event taking place in the past, whereas
present-tense verbs typically describe an event taking place in the present (or future).
However, the correlation is an imperfect one, since e.g. in a sentence such as ‘I might
go there tomorrow,’ the auxiliary might carries the past tense inﬂection -t (found on
past tense main verbs like left) but does not denote past time.
tensed: A tensed (auxiliary or nonauxiliary) verb-form is one which carries (present/past)
tense – e.g. is, will, could, hates, went etc. By extension, a tensed clause is one
containing a tensed auxiliary or main verb. See tense.
terminal node: A terminal node in a tree diagram is one at the bottom of the tree; a
non-terminal node is one which is not at the bottom of the tree.
ternary: Three-way. For example, person properties might be described in terms of a
ternary (three-valued) feature such as [1/2/3-Pers], with ﬁrst person pronouns like
we being [1-Pers], second person pronouns like you being [2-Pers] and third person
pronouns like they being [3-Pers]. A ternary-branching constituent is one which has
three daughters.
thematic role: See theta-role.
theme: The name of a speciﬁc theta-role (sometimes also termed patient) representing
the entity undergoing the effect of some action (e.g. Harry in ‘William teased Harry’).
theory of grammar: A theory which speciﬁes the types of categories, relations, opera-
tions and principles found in natural language grammars. See §1.3.
theta criterion/θ-criterion: A principle of Universal Grammar which speciﬁes that each
argument should bear one and only one theta-role, and that each theta-role associated
with a given predicate should be assigned to one and only one argument. See §6.4.
theta-mark/θ-mark: To say that a predicate theta-marks its arguments is to say that it
determines the theta-role played by its arguments. See §6.4.
Theta-role/θ-role/thematic role: The semantic role played by an argument in relation to
its predicate (e.g. agent, theme, goal etc.). For example, in a sentence like William
teased Harry, the verb tease assigns the θ-role agent to its subject William and the
theta-role theme to its complement Harry. See §6.4.
third person: See person.
three-place predicate: A predicate (typically a verb) which takes three arguments – e.g.
the verb give in ‘John gave Mary something’ (where the three arguments of give are
John, Mary and something). See argument.
Top/Topic/Topicalisation/TopP: In a dialogue such as the following:
speaker a: I’ve been having problems with the Fantasy Syntax seminar
speaker b: That kind of course, very few students seem to be able to get their
heads round
the italicised expression that kind of course can be said to be the topic of the sentence
produced by speaker b, in the sense that it refers back to the Fantasy Syntax seminar
mentioned by the previous speaker. An expression which represents ‘old’ or ‘familiar’
information in this way is said to be a topic. The movement operation by which the
italicised expression moves from being the complement of the preposition round to the

Glossary
407
front of the overall sentence is traditionally termed topicalisation. In work by Luigi
Rizzi on split CP projections discussed in §8.2, topic expressions which occur at the
beginning of clauses are said to be contained within a TopP ‘Topic Phrase’ projection,
headed by an abstract Top ( = ‘Topic’) constituent.
TP: Tense projection/Tense phrase – i.e. phrase headed by a tense-marked auxiliary or
an abstract tense afﬁx Af. See §§2.2–2.3.
trace (theory): A trace of a moved constituent is a null copy left behind (as a result
of movement) in each position out of which a constituent moves. Trace theory is a
theory which posits that moved constituents leave behind a trace copy in each position
out of which they move. See §4.3, §5.3 and §6.2.
transfer: See phase.
transitive: A word is traditionally said to be transitive (in a given use) if it assigns
accusative case to a noun or pronoun expression which it c-commands. So, likes in
‘John likes him’ is a transitive verb, since it assigns accusative case to its complement
him. Likewise, inﬁnitival for is a transitive complementiser, since it assigns accusative
case to the subject of its inﬁnitive complement (cf. ‘I’m keen [for him to participate
more actively]’). A verb or complementiser is intransitive (in a particular structure)
if it does not assign accusative case to any constituent in the relevant structure.
tree (diagram): A form of graph used to represent the syntactic structure of a phrase or
sentence.
truncate/truncation: Truncation is an operation by which a sentence is shortened by
omitting one or more unstressed words at the beginning. For example, we can truncate
a question like Are you going anywhere nice on holiday? by omitting are to form You
going anywhere nice on holiday? and can further truncate the sentence by omitting
you to give Going anywhere nice on holiday?
T-to-C movement: See T.
two-place predicate: A predicate which has two arguments – e.g. tease in ‘William
teased Harry’ where the two arguments of the predicate tease are William and Harry.
See argument.
UG: See Universal Grammar.
unaccusative: An unaccusative predicate is a word like come whose apparent ‘subject’
originates as its complement. See §6.5.
unary-branching: A unary-branching node is one which has a single daughter.
unbound: A constituent is unbound if it has no appropriate antecedent in an appropri-
ate position within a given structure. For example, himself is unbound in a sentence
such as ∗‘She helped himself,’ since she is not an appropriate antecedent for him-
self, and there is no other appropriate antecedent for himself anywhere within the
sentence.
uncountable: See count.
unergative: An unergative predicate is a verb like groan in a sentence such as ‘He
was groaning’ which has an agent subject but no overt object (though may have an
incorporated object: see §8.5).
ungrammatical: See grammatical.
Uniform Theta Assignment Hypothesis/UTAH: A hypothesis (developed by Baker
1988) which maintains that each theta-role assigned by a particular kind of predi-
cate is canonically associated with a speciﬁc syntactic position: e.g. spec-v is the
canonical position associated with an agent argument. See §6.6.
uninterpretable: See interpretable.

408
Glossary
Universal Grammar/UG: Those aspects of grammar which are universal, and which are
assumed by Chomsky to be part of the innate knowledge which a child is born with.
universality: A criterion of adequacy for a theory of grammar, requiring that the theory
be applicable to all natural languages. See §1.3.
unreduced: See reduced.
unspeciﬁed: To say that a constituent is unspeciﬁed for a given feature is to say that it
lacks (a value for) the relevant feature.
unvalued: See value.
UTAH: See Uniform Theta Assignment Hypothesis.
V: See verb.
v: See light verb.
value: In relation to a feature such as [Singular-Number], number is said to be an
attribute (and represents the property being described) and singular its value. To
value a feature is to assign it a value. For example, a ﬁnite auxiliary enters the
derivation with its person and number features unvalued (i.e. not assigned any value),
and these are then valued via agreement with the subject in the course of the derivation.
See §7.3.
variety: A particular (e.g. geographical or social) form of a language.
verb/V: A category of word which has the morphological property that it can carry
a speciﬁc range of inﬂections (e.g. the verb show can carry past tense -d, third
person singular present tense -s, perfect -n and progressive -ing, giving rise to
shows/showed/shown/showing), and the syntactic property that it can head the com-
plement of inﬁnitival to (cf. ‘Do you want to show me?’). On verb movement, see
V-to-T movement.
Verb Phrase/VP: A phrase which is headed by a verb – e.g. the italicised phrase in ‘They
will help you.’ See ch. 2.
Visibility Condition: A principle of grammar specifying that only the highest copy in a
movement chain is visible in the syntax (other copies being inert).
voice: See active.
VP/VPISH: On VP, see Verb Phrase. A VP-adverb is an adverb (like perfectly) which
adjoins to a projection of a lexical verb (V). The VP-Internal Subject Hypothesis/
VPISH is the hypothesis that subjects originate internally within the Verb Phrase: see
ch. 6. The VP-shell analysis maintains that verb phrases can be split into (at least) two
separate projections, a lower one headed by a lexical verb, and a higher one headed by
a light verb: see ch. 8.
vP: A phrase (maximal projection) headed by a light verb. A vP-adverb is an adverb
which adjoins to a projection of a light verb (v).
V-to-T movement: Movement of a verb out of the head V position in VP into the head
T position in TP (also known as verb movement). See §4.4.
weak: See strong.
wh: This is widely used as a feature carried by constituents which undergo wh-movement:
hence e.g. the relative pronoun who in someone who I think is lying can be described
as a wh-pronoun, as can the interrogative pronoun who in Who are you waiting for?
and the exclamative quantiﬁer what in What fun we had!
Wh-Attraction Condition: See attract.
wh-copying: A phenomenon whereby a moved wh-expression leaves behind an overt
copy of itself when it moves – as with movement of who in a Child English question
such as Who do you think who chased the cat?

Glossary
409
wh-expression: An expression containing a wh-word.
wh-movement: A type of movement operation whereby a wh-expression is moved to
the front of a particular type of structure (e.g. to the front of the overall sentence in
‘Where has he gone?’). See ch. 5.
Wh-Parameter: A parameter whose setting determines whether wh-expressions are (or
are not) moved to the front of an appropriate type of clause (e.g. in wh-questions). See
§1.6.
wh-phrase: A phrase containing a wh-word.
wh-question: A question which contains a wh-word, e.g. ‘What are you doing?’
wh-word: A word which begins with wh (e.g. who/what/which/where/when/why), or
which has a similar syntax to wh-words (e.g. how).
word order: The linear sequencing (left-to-right ordering) of words within a phrase or
sentence.
X-bar syntax: A theory of synactic structure which makes use of the bar notation: see
bar.
yes-no question: A question to which ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ would be an appropriate answer –
e.g. ‘Is it raining?’

References
Abeill´e, A. & Borsley, R. D. (2006) ‘Comparative correlatives and parameters’, ms.,
University of Essex.
Abels, K. (2003) ‘Successive-cyclicity, anti-locality and adposition stranding’, PhD diss.,
University of Connecticut.
Abney, S. P. (1987) ‘The English Noun Phrase in its sentential aspect’, PhD diss.,
MIT.
Acquaviva, P. (2002) ‘The morphological dimension of polarity licensing’, Linguistics
40: 925–959.
Adger, D. (2003) Core Syntax: A Minimalist Approach, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Adger, D. & Ramchand, G. (2005) ‘Merge and Move: Wh-dependencies revisited’,
Linguistic Inquiry 36: 161–193.
Afarli, T. A. (1989) ‘Passive in Norwegian and in English’, Linguistic Inquiry 20: 101–
108.
Akiyama, M. (2004) ‘Multiple nominative constructions in Japanese and Economy’,
Linguistic Inquiry 35: 671–683.
Akmajian, A. & Heny, F. (1975) An Introduction to the Principles of Transformational
Syntax, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
Alexiadou, A. (1997) Adverb Placement: A Case Study in Antisymmetric Syntax,
Benjamins, Amsterdam.
Alexiadou, A. E. & Anagnostopoulou, E. (1998) ‘Parameterizing AGR: Word Order,
V-Movement and EPP checking’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 16: 491–
539.
Alexiadou, A., Law, P., Meinunger, A. and Wilder, C. (eds) (2000) The Syntax of Relative
Clauses, John Benjamins, Amsterdam.
Alexiadou, A. & Wilder, C. (eds) (1998) Possessors, Predicates and Movement in the
Determiner Phrase, John Benjamins, Amsterdam.
Alexopoulou, T. & Kolliakou, D. (2002) ‘On Linkhood, Topicalisation and Clitic Left
Dislocation’, Journal of Linguistics 38: 193–245.
Almeida, D. A. de A. & Yoshida, M. (2007) ‘A problem for the preposition stranding
generalization’, Linguistic Inquiry 38: 349–362.
Alrenga, P. (2005) ‘A sentential subject asymmetry in English and its implications for
complement selection’, Syntax 8: 175–207.
Anderson, S. R. & Lightfoot, D. W. (2002) The Language Organ: Linguistics as Cognitive
Physiology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Antony, L. M. & Hornstein, N. (2003) Chomsky and His Critics, Blackwell, Oxford.
Authier, J.-M. (1989) ‘Arbitrary null objects and unselective binding’, in Jaeggli & Saﬁr
(eds), pp. 45–67.
410

References
411
(1991) ‘V-governed expletives, case theory and the projection principle’, Linguistic
Inquiry 22: 721–40.
Authier, J. M. & Reed, L. (2005) ‘The diverse nature of non-interrogative Wh’, Linguistic
Inquiry 36: 635–647.
Bach, E. (1977) ‘Review of Paul M. Postal On Raising’, Language 53: 621–654.
Baker, M. (1988) Incorporation, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Baker, M. (1997) ‘Thematic roles and syntactic structure’, in L. Haegeman (ed.) Elements
of Grammar, Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp. 73–137.
Baker, M., Johnson, K. & Roberts, I. (1989) ‘Passive arguments raised’, Linguistic Inquiry
20: 219–251.
Baltin, M. (2002) ‘Movement to the higher V is remnant movement’, Linguistic Inquiry
33: 653–659.
Baltin, M. & Collins, C. (eds) (2001) The Handbook of Contemporary Syntactic Theory,
Blackwell, Oxford.
Barbosa, P. (1995) ‘Null subjects’, PhD diss., MIT.
(2000) ‘Clitics: a Window into the Null Subject Property’, in J. Costa (ed.), Portuguese
Syntax: Comparative Studies, Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 31–93.
(2007) ‘Two kinds of subject pro’, ms., Universidade do Minho.
Barbosa, P., Duarte M. E. L. & Kato, M. A. (2005) ‘Null subjects in European and
Brasilian Portuguese’, Journal of Portuguese Linguistics 4: 11–52.
Barss, A. (2001) ‘Syntactic reconstruction effects’, in Baltin & Collins (eds), pp. 670–696.
Basilico, D. (2003) ‘The topic of small clauses’, Linguistic Inquiry 34: 1–35.
Beck, S. & Johnson, K. (2004) ‘Double objects again’, Linguistic Inquiry 35: 97–124.
Becker, M. (2006) ‘There began to be a learnability puzzle’, Linguistic Inquiry 37: 441–
456.
Bejar, S. & Massam, D. (1999) ‘Multiple case checking’, Syntax 2: 65–79.
Belletti, A. (1990) Generalized Verb Movement: Aspects of Verb Syntax, Rosenberg and
Sellier, Turin.
Belletti, A. & Rizzi, L. (1988) ‘Psych-verbs and θ-theory’, Natural Language and Lin-
guistic Theory 6: 291–352.
Benmamoun, E. (2006) ‘Licensing conﬁgurations: The puzzle of head negative polarity
items’, Linguistic Inquiry 37: 141–149.
Bernstein, J. B. (1993) ‘Topics in the syntax of nominal structures across Romance’, PhD
diss., City University of New York.
(2001) ‘The DP hypothesis: Identifying clausal properties in the nominal domain’, in
Baltin and Collins (eds), pp. 536–561.
Bhatt, R. & Pancheva, R. (2004) ‘Late merger of degree clauses’, Linguistic Inquiry 35:
1–45.
Bloomﬁeld, L. (1935) Language, George Allen and Unwin, London.
Bobaljik, J. (1995) ‘Morphosyntax: The syntax of verbal inﬂection’, PhD diss., MIT.
(2002) ‘A-chains at the PF-interface: Copies and “covert” movement’, Natural Lan-
guage and Linguistic Theory, 20: 197–267.
Boeckx, C. (2000) ‘A note on Contraction’, Linguistic Inquiry 31: 357–366.
(2001) ‘Scope reconstruction and A-movement’, Natural Language and Linguistic
Theory 19: 503–548.
(2003) Islands and Chains: Resumption as Stranding, Benjamins, Amsterdam.
(2007) Understanding Minimalist Syntax, Blackwell, Oxford.

412
References
Boeckx, C. &
Hornstein, N. (2003) ‘Reply to Control is not movement’, Linguistic
Inquiry 34: 269–280.
(2004) ‘Movement under control’, Linguistic Inquiry 35: 431–452.
(2006a) ‘The virtues of control as movement’, Syntax 9: 118–130.
(2006b) ‘Control in Icelandic and theories of Control’, Linguistic Inquiry 37: 591–
606.
Boeckx, C. & Stjepanovi´c, S. (2001) ‘Head-ing towards PF’, Linguistic Inquiry 32: 345–
355.
Borer, H. (1993) ‘The projection of arguments’, in E. Benedicto & J. Runner (eds),
Functional Projections UMass Occasional Papers 17, GLSA publications, Amherst
Mass.
Borroff, M. L. (2006) ‘Degree phrase inversion in the scope of negation’, Linguistic
Inquiry 37: 514–521.
Borsley, R. D. (1992) ‘More on the difference between English restrictive and non-
restrictive relative clauses’, Journal of Linguistics 28: 139–148.
(1997) ‘Relative clauses and the theory of phrase structure’, Linguistic Inquiry 28:
629–647.
Borsley, R. & Jaworska, E. (1998) ‘A note on prepositions and case-marking in Polish’,
Linguistic Inquiry 19: 685–691.
Borsley, R., Rivero, M. L. & Stephens, J. (1996) ‘Long head movement in Breton’, in
R. Borsley & I. Roberts (eds), The Syntax of the Celtic Languages: A Comparative
Perspective, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 53–74.
Boˇskovi´c, Z. (1997) ‘On certain violations of the superiority condition, AgrO and economy
of derivation’, Journal of Linguistics 33: 227–254.
(2001) On the Nature of the Syntax–Phonology Interface: Cliticization and Related
Phenomena, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
(2002a) ‘On multiple wh-fronting’, Linguistic Inquiry 33: 351–383.
(2002b) ‘A-Movement and the EPP’, Syntax 5: 167–218.
(2004) ‘Topicalization, Focalization, Lexical Insertion and Scrambling’, Linguistic
Inquiry 35: 613–638.
(2005) ‘On the locality of left branch extraction and the structure of NP’, Studia
Linguistica 59: 1–45.
Boˇskovi´c, Z. & Lasnik, H. (2003) ‘On the distribution of null complementisers’, Linguistic
Inquiry 34: 527–46.
Bowerman, M. (1982) ‘Evaluating competing linguistic models with language acquisi-
tion data: Implications of developmental errors with causative verbs’, Quaderni di
Semantica 3: 5–66.
(1988) ‘The “no negative evidence” problem: How do children avoid an overly gen-
eral grammar?’, in J. Hawkins (ed.), Explaining Language Universals, Blackwell,
Oxford, pp. 73–101.
Bowers, J. (1973) ‘Grammatical relations’, PhD diss., MIT.
(1993) ‘The syntax of predication’, Linguistic Inquiry 24: 591–656.
(2002) ‘Transitivity’, Linguistic Inquiry 33: 183–224.
Braine, M. D. S. (1971) ‘Three suggestions regarding grammatical analyses of children’s
language’, in C. A. Ferguson & D. I. Slobin (eds), Studies of Child Language
Development, Holt Rinehart and Winston, New York, pp. 421–429.
Branigan, P. (1992) ‘Subjects and complementisers’, PhD diss., MIT.

References
413
(2005) ‘The phase theoretic basis for subject–aux inversion’, unpublished paper, Memo-
rial University (www.ucs.mun.ca/∼branigan/papers).
Branigan, P. & MacKenzie, M. (2002) ‘Altruism, ¯A-movement and object agreement in
Innu-aimˆun’, Linguistic Inquiry 33: 385–407.
Bresnan, J. (1970) ‘On complementizers: Toward a syntactic theory of complement types’,
Foundations of Language 6: 297–321.
(1972) ‘Theory of complementation in English syntax’, PhD diss., MIT (published as
Bresnan 1979).
(1976) ‘Nonarguments for Raising’, Linguistic Inquiry 7: 265–299.
(1979) Theory of Complementation in English Syntax, Garland, New York (published
version of Bresnan 1972).
(1994) ‘Locative inversion and the architecture of Universal Grammar’, Language 70:
72–131.
Brody, M. (1995) A Radically Minimalist Theory, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
Broekhuis, H. (2006) ‘Extraction from subjects: Some remarks on Chomsky’s “On
Phases”’, in H. Broekhuis, N. Corver & R. Huybreghts (eds), Organising Gram-
mar, Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, pp. 59–68.
Brown, K. (1991) ‘Double modals in Hawick Scots’, in P. Trudgill & J. K. Chambers
(eds), Dialects of English, Longman, London, pp. 74–103.
Brown, R., Cazden, C. & Bellugi, U. (1968) ‘The child’s grammar from I to III’, in J. P.
Hill (ed.), Minnesota Symposium on Child Development, vol. 2, pp. 28–73.
Brown, R. & Hanlon, C. (1970) ‘Derivational complexity and order of acquisition in child
speech’, in J. R. Hayes (ed.), Cognition and the Development of Language, Wiley,
New York, pp. 11–53.
Bruening, B. (2001) ‘Syntax at the edge: Cross-clausal phenomena and the syntax of
Passamaquoddy’, PhD diss., MIT.
(2004) ‘Two types of wh-scope-marking in Passamaquoddy’, Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory 22: 229–305.
(2006) ‘Differences between the wh-scope-marking and wh-copy constructions in Pas-
samaquoddy’, Linguistic Inquiry 37: 25–49.
(2007) ‘Wh-in-situ does not correlate with wh-indeﬁnites or question particles’, Lin-
guistic Inquiry 38: 139–166.
B¨uring, D. (2005) Binding Theory, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Burton, S. & Grimshaw, J. (1992) ‘Coordination and VP-internal subjects’, Linguistic
Inquiry 23: 305–13.
Burzio, L. (1986) Italian Syntax, Reidel, Dordrecht.
Caponigro, I. & Sch¨utze, C. T. (2003) ‘Parameterizing passive participle movement’,
Linguistic Inquiry 34: 293–308.
Cardinaletti, A. & Starke, M. (1999) ‘The typology of structural deﬁciency: A case study
of the three classes of pronouns’, in H. van Riemsdijk (ed.), Clitics in the Languages
of Europe, Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, pp. 145–233.
Carlson, K., Dickey, M. W. & Kennedy, C. (2005) ‘Structural economy in the processing
and representation of gapping sentences’, Syntax 8: 208–228.
Carnie, A. (1995) ‘Nonverbal predication and Head Movement’, PhD diss., MIT.
Carrier, J. & Randall, J. H. (1992) ‘The argument structure and syntactic structure of
resultatives’, Linguistic Inquiry 23: 173–234.
Carstens, V. (2000) ‘Concord in Minimalist Theory’, Linguistic Inquiry 31: 319–355.

414
References
(2001) ‘Multiple agreement and case deletion: Against ϕ-(in)completeness’, Syntax 4:
147–163.
(2003) ‘Rethinking complementiser agreement: agree with a case-checked goal’, Lin-
guistic Inquiry 34: 393–412.
Cecchetto, C. & Oniga, R. (2004) ‘A challenge to null case theory’, Linguistic Inquiry
35: 141–149.
Cheng, L. (1997) On the Typology of Wh-Questions, Garland, New York.
Cheng, L. & Corver, N. (eds) (2006) Wh-Movement: Moving On, MIT Press, Cambridge
Mass.
Cheng, L. & Rooryck, J. (2000) ‘Licensing Wh-in-situ’, Syntax 3: 1–19.
Chierchia, G. (2006) ‘Broaden your views: Implicatures of domain widening and the
“logicality” of language’, Linguistic Inquiry 37: 535–590.
Chomsky, N. (1955) ‘The logical structure of linguistic theory’, mimeo, MIT (subse-
quently published as Chomsky 1975).
(1957) Syntactic Structures, Mouton, The Hague.
(1965) Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
(1968) Interview with S. Hampshire in The Listener, May 1968.
(1970) ‘Remarks on nominalization’, in R. A. Jacobs and P. S. Rosenbaum (eds)
Readings in English Transformational Grammar, Ginn, Waltham, Mass., pp. 184–
221.
(1972) Language and Mind (enlarged edition), Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New York.
(1973) ‘Conditions on transformations’, in S. R. Anderson & P. Kiparsky (eds), A
Festschrift for Morris Halle, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York, pp. 232–286.
(1975) The Logical Structure of Linguistic Theory, Plenum Press, New York (published
version of Chomsky 1955).
(1977) ‘On Wh-movement’, in Culicover et al. (eds), pp. 71–132.
(1980) ‘On binding’, Linguistic Inquiry 11: 1–46.
(1981) Lectures on Government and Binding, Foris, Dordrecht.
(1982) Some Concepts and Consequences of the Theory of Government and Binding,
MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
(1986a) Knowledge of Language: Its Nature, Origin and Use, Praeger, New York.
(1986b) Barriers, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
(1989) ‘Some notes on economy of derivation and representation’, MIT Working Papers
in Linguistics 10: 43–74 (reprinted as chapter 2 of Chomsky 1995).
(1993) ‘A Minimalist Program for linguistic theory’, in Hale and Keyser (eds), pp.
1–52 (reprinted as chapter 3 of Chomsky 1995).
(1995) The Minimalist Program, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
(1998) Minimalist Inquiries: The Framework, MIT Occasional Papers in Linguistics,
no. 15 (also published in R. Martin, D. Michaels and J. Uriagereka (eds), Step by
Step: Essays on Minimalism in Honor of Howard Lasnik, MIT Press, Cambridge
Mass., pp. 89–155).
(1999) Derivation by Phase, MIT Occasional Papers in Linguistics, no. 18 (also pub-
lished in M. Kenstowicz (ed.) (2001) Ken Hale: A Life in Language, MIT Press,
Cambridge Mass., pp.1–52).
(2001) ‘Beyond explanatory adequacy’, unpublished manuscript, MIT. (A published
version appeared in A. Belletti (ed.) (2004) Structures and Beyond: The Cartography
of Syntactic Structures, vol. 3, Oxford University Press, pp. 104–131.)

References
415
(2002) On Nature and Language, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
(2005a) ‘Three factors in language design’, Linguistic Inquiry 36: 1–22.
(2005b) ‘On Phases’, unpublished paper, MIT (to appear in R. Freidin, C. P. Otero
& M.-L. Zubizaretta (eds), Foundational Issues in Linguistic Theory, MIT Press,
Cambridge Mass.).
(2006) ‘Approaching UG from below’, unpublished paper, MIT.
Chomsky, N. & Lasnik, H. (1977) ‘Filters and Control’, Linguistic Inquiry 8: 425–504.
(1993) ‘The theory of principles and parameters’, in J. Jacobs, A. von Stechow, W.
Sternefeld & T. Venneman (eds), Syntax: An International Handbook of Contem-
porary Research, Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, pp. 506–569 (reprinted in Chomsky
1995, pp. 13–127).
Chung, S. (1994) ‘Wh-agreement and “Referentiality” in Chamorro’, Linguistic Inquiry
25: 1–45.
(1998) The Design of Agreement: Evidence from Chamorro, University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
(2004) ‘Restructuring and verb-initial order in Chamorro’, Syntax: 7: 199–233.
Cinque, G. (1999) Adverbs and Functional Heads, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
(2002) Functional Structure in DP and IP: The Cartography of Syntactic Structures,
vol. 1, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
(2004) ‘“Restructuring” and functional structure’, in A. Belletti (ed.), The Cartography
of Syntactic Structures, vol. 3, Structures and Beyond, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, pp. 132–191.
Cinque, G. & Kayne, R. S. (eds) (2005) Handbook of Comparative Syntax, Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Citko, B. (2005) ‘On the nature of Merge: External Merge, Internal Merge and Parallel
Merge’, Linguistic Inquiry 36: 475–496.
Clahsen, H. (2008) ‘Chomskyan syntactic theory and language disorders’, in M. J. Ball,
M. Perkins, N. Mueller & S. Howard (eds), The Handbook of Clinical Linguistics,
Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 165–183.
Clifton, C., Fanselow, G. & Frazier, L. (2006) ‘Amnestying superiority violations: Pro-
cessing multiple questions’, Linguistic Inquiry 37: 51–68.
Cole, P. (1982) Imbabura Quechua, North-Holland, The Hague.
Cole, P. & Hermon, G. (1998) ‘The typology of wh-movement: Wh-questions in Malay’,
Syntax 1: 221–258.
(2000) ‘Partial wh-movement: Evidence from Malay’, in Lutz et al. (eds), pp. 101–130.
Collins, C. (1993) ‘Topics in Ewe syntax’, PhD diss., MIT.
(1997) Local Economy, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
(2005a) ‘A smuggling approach to the passive in English’, Syntax 8: 81–120.
(2005b) ‘A smuggling approach to raising in English’, Linguistic Inquiry 36: 289–298.
Collins, C. & Thr´ainsson, H. (1993) ‘Object shift in double object constructions and the
theory of Case’, MIT Working Papers in Linguistics 19: 131–174.
Contreras, H. (1986) ‘Spanish bare NPs and the ECP’, in I. Bordelois, H. Contreras & K.
Zagona (eds), Generative Studies in Spanish Syntax, Foris, Dordrecht, pp. 25–49.
Contreras, J. (1987) ‘Small clauses in Spanish and English’, Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory, 5: 225–244.
Coppock, L. (2002) ‘Gapping: In defense of deletion’, Chicago Linguistics Society 37:
133–148.

416
References
Cormack, A. & Smith, N. (1999) ‘Where is a sign merged?’, Glot International 4,6: 21.
(2000a) ‘Head Movement and negation in English’, Transactions of the Philological
Society 98: 49–85.
(2000b) ‘Fronting: The Syntax and Pragmatics of “Focus” and “Topic”’, UCL Working
Papers in Linguistics 20: 387–417.
Corver, N. (1990) ‘The syntax of left branch extractions’, PhD diss., Tilburg University.
Crain, S. & Pietroski, P. (2002) ‘Why language acquisition is a snap’, The Linguistic
Review 19: 163–183.
Culicover, P. W. (1991) ‘Topicalization, inversion and complementiser in English’, in D.
Delﬁtto, M. Everaert, A. Evers & F. Stuurman (eds), OTS Working Papers: Going
Romance and Beyond, University of Utrecht, pp. 1–45.
Culicover, P. W. & Jackendoff, R. (2001) ‘Control is not movement’, Linguistic Inquiry
30: 483–512.
(2005) Simpler Syntax, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
(2006) ‘Turn over control to the semantics’, Syntax 9: 131–152.
Culicover, P. W. & Levine, R. D. (2001) ‘Stylistic inversion in English: A reconsideration’,
Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 19: 283–310.
Culicover, P. W. & Nowak, A. (2003) Dynamical Grammar: Minimalism, Acquisition and
Change, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Culicover, P. W., Wasow, T. & Akmajian, A. (eds) (1977) Formal Syntax, Academic Press,
New York.
Cummins, S. & Roberge, Y. (2004) ‘Null objects in French and English’, in J. Auger,
C. Clements & B. Vance (eds), Contemporary Approaches to Romance Linguistics,
John Benjamins, Amsterdam, pp.121–138.
(2005) ‘A modular account of null objects in French’, Syntax 8: 44–64.
Curtiss, S. (1977) Genie: A Psycholinguistic Study of a Modern Day “Wild Child”,
Academic Press, London.
Davies, W. D. & Dubinsky, S. (2004) The Grammar of Raising and Control: A Course in
Syntactic Argumentation, Blackwell, Oxford.
Dayal, V. (2002) ‘Single-pair versus multiple-pair answers: Wh-in-situ and scope’, Lin-
guistic Inquiry 33: 512–520.
D´echaine, R.-M. & Wiltschko, M. (2002) ‘Decomposing pronouns’, Linguistic Inquiry
33: 409–442.
del Gobbo, F. (2003) ‘Appositives at the interface’, PhD diss., University of California,
Irvine.
den Dikken, M. (2001) ‘Pluringulars, pronouns and quirky agreement’, The Linguistic
Review 18: 19–41.
Denham, K. (2000) ‘Optional wh-movement in Babine-Witsuwit’en’, Natural Language
and Linguistic Theory 18: 199–251.
D´eprez, V. (2000) ‘Parallel (a)symmetyries and the internal structure of negative expres-
sions’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 18: 253–342.
de Vries, M. (2002) The Syntax of Relativization, LOT, Utrecht.
(2006) ‘The syntax of appositive relativization: On specifying co-ordination, false free
relatives and promotion’, Linguistic Inquiry 37: 229–270.
Diesing, M. (1992) Indeﬁnites, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
Diesing, M. & Jelinek, E. (1995) ‘Distributing arguments’, Natural Language Semantics
3: 123–76.

References
417
Donati, C. (2006) ‘On wh-head movement’, in Cheng & Corver (eds), pp. 21–46.
Drubig, H. N. (2003) ‘Toward a typology of focus and focus constructions’, Linguistics
41: 1–50.
du Plessis, H. (1977) ‘Wh-movement in Afrikaans’, Linguistic Inquiry 8: 211–222.
Embick, D. (2004) ‘On the structure of resultative participles in English’, Linguistic
Inquiry 35: 355–392.
Embick, D. & Noyer, R. (2001) ‘Movement operations after Syntax’, Linguistic Inquiry
32: 555–595.
Emonds, J. E. (1976) A Transformational Approach to English Syntax, Academic Press,
New York.
(1994) ‘Two principles of economy’, in G. Cinque, J. Koster, J.-Y. Pollock, L.
Rizzi & R. Zanuttini (eds), Paths towards Universal Grammar: Studies in Honor
of Richard Kayne, Georgetown University Press, Washington DC, pp. 155–
172.
Epstein, S. D., Pires A. & Seely, T. D. (2005) ‘EPP in T: More controversial subjects’,
Syntax, 8: 65–80.
Ernst, T. (1991) ‘On the scope principle’, Linguistic Inquiry 22: 750–6.
Escribano, J. L. G. (2004) ‘NPs as just NPs’, unpublished paper, University of Oviedo.
Everett, D. (2005) ‘Biology and language: A consideration of alternatives’, Journal of
Linguistics 41: 157–175.
(2006) ‘Biology and language: Response to Anderson & Lightfoot’, Journal of Lin-
guistics 42: 385–393.
Fabb, N. (1990) ‘The difference between English restrictive and non-restrictive clauses’,
Journal of Linguistics 26: 57–78.
Fanselow, G. (2002) ‘Against remnant VP-movement’, in A. Alexiadou, E. Anagnos-
topoulou, S. Barbiers & H.-M. Gaertner (eds), Dimensions of Movement: From
Features to Remnants, John Benjamins, Amsterdam, pp. 91–125.
Fanselow, G. & ´Cavar, D. (2002) ‘Distributed deletion’, in A. Alexiadou (ed.), Theoretical
Approaches to Universals, John Benjamins, Amsterdam, pp. 65–107.
Farrell, P. (1990) ‘Null objects in Brazilian Portuguese’, Natural Language and Linguistic
Theory 8: 325–346.
Fauconnier, G. (1975) ‘Polarity and the scale principle’, Chicago Linguistics Society 11:
188–199.
(1978) ‘Implication reversal in a natural language’, in F. Guenthner & S. J. Schmidt
(eds), Formal Semantics and Pragmatics for Natural Languages, Reidel, Dordrecht,
pp. 289–302.
Felser, C. (1999a) Verbal Complement Clauses: A Minimalist Study of Direct Perception
Constructions, Benjamins, Amsterdam.
(1999b) ‘Perception and control: A Minimalist analysis of English direct perception
complements’, Journal of Linguistics 34: 351–385.
(2004) ‘Wh-copying, phases and successive cyclicity’, Lingua 114: 543–574.
Felser, C. & Rupp, L. (2001) ‘Expletives as arguments: Germanic existential sentences
revisited’, Linguistische Berichte, 187: 289–324.
Fillmore, C. J. (1968) ‘The case for case’, in E. Bach & R. T. Harms (eds), Universals in
Linguistic Theory, Holt, Rinehart & Winston, New York, pp. 1–88.
(1972) ‘Subjects, speakers and roles’ in D. Davidson & G. Harman (eds), Semantics of
Natural Language, Reidel, Dordrecht.

418
References
Fitch, W. T., Hauser, M. D. & Chomsky, N. (2005) ‘The evolution of the language faculty:
Clariﬁcation and implications’, Cognition 97: 179–210.
Flagg, E. (2002) ‘Interface issues in the English imperative’, PhD diss., Cambridge Mass.
Fodor, J. D. (2001) ‘Setting syntactic parameters’, in Baltin & Collins (eds), pp. 730–767.
Fodor, J. D. & Crowther, C. (2002) ‘Understanding stimulus poverty arguments’, The
Linguistic Review 19: 105–145.
Fodor, J. D. & Sakas, W. G. (2005) ‘The subset principle in syntax: Costs of compliance’,
Journal of Linguistics 41: 513–569.
Folli, R. & Harley, H. (2007) ‘Causation, obligation and Argument Structure: On the
nature of little v’, Linguistic Inquiry 38: 197–238.
Fox, D. (2000) Economy and Semantic Interpretation, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
Fox, D. & Nissenbaum, J. (2004) ‘Condition A and scope reconstruction’, Linguistic
Inquiry 35: 475–485.
Frank, R. & Vijay-Shanker, K. (2001) ‘Primitive c-command’, Syntax 4: 164–204.
Franks, S. (1999) ‘Optimality theory and clitics at PF’, Formal Approaches to Slavic
Linguistics 7: 101–116.
Franks, S. & Lavine, J. E. (2006) ‘Case and word order in Lithuanian’, Journal of
Linguistics 42: 239–288.
Franks, S. & Progovac L. (1994) ‘On the placement of Serbo-Croatian clitics’, Indiana
Linguistic Studies 7: 69–78.
Frazier, L. & Clifton, C. (2005) ‘The syntax–discourse divide: Processing ellipsis’, Syntax
8: 121–174.
Freidin, R. (2004) ‘Syntactic Structures redux’, Syntax 7: 101–127.
Freidin, R. & Vergnaud, J. R. (2001) ‘Exquisite connections: some remarks on the evolu-
tion of linguistic theory’, Lingua 111: 639–666.
Georgopoulos, C. (1985) ‘Variable in Palauan syntax’, Natural Language and Linguistic
Theory 3: 59–94.
(1991) Syntactic Variables: Resumptive Pronouns and A′-binding in Palauan, Kluwer,
Dordrecht.
Giannikidou, A. (1997) ‘The landscape of polarity items’, PhD diss., University of Gronin-
gen.
(1998) Polarity Sensitivity as (Non)veridical Dependency, John Benjamins, Amster-
dam.
(1999) ‘Affective dependencies’, Linguistics and Philosophy 22: 367–421.
Giorgi, A. (2007) ‘On the nature of long-distance anaphors’, Linguistic Inquiry 38: 321–
342.
Giusti, G. (1991) ‘The categorial status of quantiﬁer nominals’, Linguistische Berichte
136: 438–452.
(1997) ‘The categorial status of determiners’, in L. Haegeman (ed.), The New Compar-
ative Syntax, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 94–113.
Giv´on, T. (2002) Biolinguistics: The Santa Barbara Lectures, John Benjamins, Amster-
dam.
Goodall, G. (1997) ‘Theta-alignment and the by-phrase’, Proceedings of the Chicago
Linguistics Society 33: 129–139.
Green, L. (1998) ‘Semantic and syntactic patterns in African American English’, ms.,
University of Massachusetts.
Green, M. (2007) Focus in Hausa, Blackwell, Oxford.

References
419
Grice, H. P. (1975) ‘Logic and conversation’, in P. Cole & J. Morgan (eds), Syntax and
Semantics 3: Speech Acts, Academic Press, New York, pp. 41–58.
Grimshaw, J. (1993) ‘Minimal Projection, Heads, and Optimality’, draft manuscript,
Rutgers University.
Groat, E. (1995) ‘English expletives: A minimalist approach’, Linguistic Inquiry 26:
354–365.
Groat, E. & O’Neil, J. (1996) ‘Spell-out at the LF interface’, in W. Abraham, S. D. Epstein,
H. Thr´ainsson & C. J.-W. Zwart (eds), Minimal Ideas, Benjamins, Amsterdam,
pp. 113–139.
Groefsema, M. (1995) ‘Understood arguments: A semantic/pragmatic approach’, Lingua
96: 139–161.
Grohmann, K. K. (2003) Proliﬁc Domains, John Benjamins, Amsterdam.
(2006) ‘Top issues in questions: Topics – Topicalization – Topicalizability’, in Cheng
and Corver (eds), pp. 249–288.
Grohmann, K. K., Drury, J. & Castillo, J. C. (2000) ‘No more EPP’, Proceedings of the
West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics 19: 153–166.
Grohmann, K. K. & Haegeman, L. (2002) ‘Resuming reﬂexives’, Proceedings of the 19th
Scandinavian Conference in Linguistics, Tromsø, Norway, 46–62.
Grosu, A. & Horvath, J. (2006) ‘Reply to Bhatt and Pancheva’s “Late Merger of Degree
Clauses”: The irrelevance of (non)conservativity’, Linguistic Inquiry 37: 457–483.
Gruber, J. S. (1965) ‘Studies in lexical relations’, PhD diss., MIT.
(1976) Lexical Structures in Syntax and Semantics, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Gualmini, A. & Crain, S. (2005) ‘The structure of children’s linguistic knowledge’,
Linguistic Inquiry 36: 463–474.
Guasti, M. T. (2002) Language Acquisition: The Growth of Grammar, Bradford Books,
MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
Guilfoyle, E. (1994) ‘VNPs, ﬁniteness and external arguments’, Proceedings of NELS 24:
141–155.
Guilfoyle, E., Hung, H. & Travis, L. (1992) ‘Spec of IP and spec of VP: Two subjects
in Austronesian languages’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 10: 375–
414.
Haddican, B. (2007) ‘The structural deﬁciency of verbal pro-forms’, Linguistic Inquiry
38: 539–547.
Haeberli, E. (2003) ‘Categorial features as the source of EPP and abstract Case phenom-
ena’, in E. Brandner & H. Zinsmeister (eds), New Perspectives on Case Theory,
CSLI publications, Stanford, Calif., pp. 89–126.
Haegeman, L. (1990) ‘Non-overt subjects in diary contexts’, in J. Mascar`o and M. Nespor
(eds), Grammar In Progress, Foris, Dordrecht, pp. 167–179.
(1992) Theory and Description in Generative Syntax: A Case Study of West Flemish,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
(1994, 2nd edition) Introduction to Government and Binding Theory, Blackwell,
Oxford.
(1995) The Syntax of Negation, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
(2000) ‘Inversion, non-adjacent inversion and adjuncts in CP’, in Transactions of the
Philological Society 98: 121–160.
(2006) ‘Clitic climbing and the dual status of sembrare’, Linguistic Inquiry 37: 484–
501.

420
References
Hale, K. & Keyser, S. J. (1991) On the Syntax of Argument Structure, Lexicon Project
Working Papers, MIT, Center for Cognitive Science, Cambridge Mass.
(1993a) ‘On argument structure and the lexical expression of semantic relations’, in
Hale & Keyser (eds), pp. 53–109.
(1993b) (eds) The View from Building 20, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
(1994) ‘Constraints on argument structure’, in B. Lust, M. Su˜ner & J. Whitman (eds),
Heads, Projections and Learnability, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New Jersey, vol. 1,
pp. 53–71.
Halle, M. & Marantz, A. (1993) ‘Distributed morphology and the pieces of inﬂection’, in
Hale & Keyser (eds), pp.111–176.
Han, C.-H. (2001) ‘Force, negation and imperatives’, The Linguistic Review, 18: 289–325.
Han, H.-S. (2004) ‘There as an existential operator’, Language Research 40: 451–464
(published by Language Research Institute, Seoul National University).
Hankamer, J. (1971) ‘Constraints on deletion in syntax’, PhD diss., Yale University.
Hankamer, J. & Sag, I. (1976) ‘Deep and surface anaphora’, Linguistic Inquiry 7: 391–
428.
Hardt, D. (1993) ‘Verb phrase ellipsis: Form, meaning and processing’, PhD diss., Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania.
Hauser, M. D., Chomsky, N. & Fitch, W. T. (2002) ‘The faculty of language: What is it,
who has it, and how did it evolve? Science 298: 1569–1579.
Hawkins, J. A. (2001) ‘Why are categories adjacent?’, Journal of Linguistics, 37: 1–34.
Hazout, I. (2004a) ‘Long-distance agreement and the syntax of for-to inﬁnitives’, Lin-
guistic Inquiry 35: 338–343.
(2004b) ‘The syntax of existential constructions’, Linguistic Inquiry 35: 393–430.
Heck, F. (2004) ‘A theory of pied-piping’, PhD diss., Universit¨at T¨ubingen.
Henderson, B. (2006) ‘Multiple agreement and inversion in Bantu’, Syntax 9: 275–289.
Hendrick, R. (1991) ‘The morphosyntax of aspect’, Lingua 85: 171–210.
Henry, A. (1995) Belfast English and Standard English: Dialect Variation and Parameter-
Setting, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Herdan, S. & Sharvit, Y. (2006) ‘Deﬁnite and non-deﬁnite superlatives and NPI licensing’,
Syntax 9: 1–31.
Hiemstra, I. (1986) ‘Some aspects of wh-questions in Frisian’, North-Western European
Language Evolution (NOWELE) 8: 97–110.
Hiraira, K. (2001) ‘Multiple agree and the Defective Intervention Constraint’, MIT Work-
ing Papers in Linguistics 40: 67–80.
(2005) ‘Dimensions of symmetry in syntax: Agreement and clausal architecture’, PhD
diss., MIT.
Hiramatsu, K. (2003) ‘Children’s judgments on negative questions’, Language Acquisition
11: 99–126.
Hoge, K. (1998) ‘The Yiddish double verb construction’, Oxford University Working
Papers in Linguistics, Philology and Phonetics 2: 85–97.
Holmberg, A. (1999) ‘Remarks on Holmberg’s generalization’, Studia Linguistica 53:
1–39.
(2000a) ‘Am I unscientiﬁc? A reply to Lappin, Levine and Johnson’, Natural Language
and Linguistic Theory 18: 837–842.
(2000b) ‘Scandinavian stylistic fronting: How any category can become an expletive’,
Linguistic Inquiry 31: 445–483.

References
421
(2005) ‘Is there a little pro? Evidence from Finnish’, Linguistic Inquiry 36: 533–
564.
Hong, S.-H. (2005) ‘Aspects of the syntax of questions in English and Korean’, PhD diss.,
University of Essex.
Hornstein, N. (1995) Logical Form: From GB to Minimalism, Blackwell, Oxford.
(1999) ‘Movement and control’, Linguistic Inquiry 30: 69–96.
(2001) Move: A Minimalist Theory of Construal, Blackwell, Oxford.
(2003) ‘On Control’, in R. Hendrick (ed.), Minimalist Syntax, Blackwell, Oxford, pp.
6–81.
(2007) ‘A very short note on existential constructions’, Linguistic Inquiry 38: 410–
411.
Huang, C.-T. J. (1982) ‘Logical relations in Chinese and the theory of grammar’, PhD
diss., MIT.
(1984) ‘On the distribution and reference of empty pronouns’, Linguistic Inquiry 15:
531–574.
(1991) ‘Remarks on the status of the null object’, in R. Freidin (ed.), Principles and
Parameters in Comparative Grammar, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass., pp. 56–76.
(1993) ‘Reconstruction and the structure of VP: Some theoretical consequences’, Lin-
guistic Inquiry 24: 103–38.
Huddleston, R. (1994) ‘The contrast between interrogatives and questions’, Journal of
Linguistics 30: 411–439.
Hurford, J. (1991) ‘The evolution of the critical period for language acquisition’, Cognition
40: 159–201.
Hyams, N. (1986) Language Acquisition and the Theory of Parameters, Reidel, Dordrecht.
(1992) ‘A reanalysis of null subjects in child language’, in J. Weissenborn, H. Goodluck
& T. Roeper (eds), Theoretical Issues in Language Acquisition, Erlbaum, London,
pp. 249–267.
Iatridou, S. (1990) ‘About Agr(P)’, Linguistic Inquiry 21: 766–772.
Ingham, R. (2000) ‘Negation and OV order in Late Middle English’, Journal of Linguistics
36: 13–38.
(2002) ‘Negated Subjects and Objects in 15th century non-literary English’, Language
Variation and Change 14: 291–322.
(2007) ‘A structural constraint on negation in Late Middle and Early Modern English’,
in M. Krygier & L. Siworska (eds), Medieval English Mirror 3: To make his Englissh
Sweete upon his Tonge, Peter Lang, Frankfurt am Mein.
Isac, D. (2006) ‘In defense of a quantiﬁcational account of deﬁnite DPs’, Linguistic
Inquiry 37: 275–288.
Ishii, T. (2006a) ‘On the relaxation of intervention effects’, in Cheng & Corver (eds), pp.
217–246.
(2006b) ‘A uniform/nonuniform analysis of overt wh-movement’, Linguistic Inquiry
37: 155–167.
Jackendoff, R. S. (1972) Semantic Interpretation in Generative Grammar, MIT Press,
Cambridge Mass.
(1974) Introduction to the X-bar Convention, Indiana University Linguistics Club.
(1977a) X-bar Syntax: A Study of Phrase Structure, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
(1977b) ‘Constraints on phrase structure rules’, in Culicover et al. (eds) pp. 249–
283.

422
References
Jackendoff, R. S. & Culicover, P. W. (2003) ‘The semantic basis of control in English’,
Language 79: 517–556.
Jaeggli, O. (1982) Topics in Romance Syntax, Foris, Dordrecht.
(1984) ‘Subject extraction and the null subject parameter’, NELS 14: 132–153.
(1986) ‘Passive’, Linguistic Inquiry 17: 587–622.
Jaeggli, O. & Saﬁr, K. (1989) The Null Subject Parameter, Kluwer, Dordrecht.
Jenkins, L. (1975) The English Existential, Narr, T¨ubingen.
Jespersen, O. (1937) Analytic Syntax, George Allen and Unwin, London (reprinted in
1969 by Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York).
Jim´enez, ´A. (2000a) ‘The interpretation of tense and aspect in argument small clauses’,
Revista Canaria de Estudios Ingleses 40: 279–298.
(2000b) ‘The aspectual morpheme as and feature movement in argument small clauses’,
Generative Linguistics in Poland 1: 59–69.
Johnson, K. (2000) ‘Few dogs like Whiskas or cats Alpo’, University of Massachusetts
Occasional Papers 23: 59–82.
Jones, M. A. (1994) Sardinian Syntax, Routledge, London.
Julien, M. (2001) ‘The syntax of complex tenses’, The Linguistic Review 18: 125–167.
Kato, M. A. (1999) ‘Strong pronouns and weak pronominals in the null subject parameter’,
Probus 11: 1–37.
(2000) ‘The partial pro-drop nature and the restricted VS order in Brazilian Portuguese’,
in M. A. Kato & E. V. Negr˜ao (eds),
The Null Subject Parameter in Brazilian
Portuguese, Vervuert-IberoAmericana, Madrid, pp. 223–258.
Katz, J. J. & Postal P. M. (1964) An Integrated Theory of Linguistic Descriptions, MIT
Press, Cambridge Mass.
Kayne, R. S. (1984) Connectedness and Binary Branching, Foris, Dordrect.
(1989) ‘Facets of Romance past participle agreement’, in P. Beninc`a (ed.) Dialect
Variation and the Theory of Grammar, Foris, Dordrecht, pp. 85–103.
(1994) The Antisymmetry of Syntax, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
(2005) ‘Some notes on comparative syntax, with special reference to English and
French’, in Cinque and Kayne (eds), pp. 3–69.
Kayne, R. S. & Pollock, J.-Y. (1978) ‘Stylistic inversion, successive cyclicity, and Move
NP in French’, Linguistic Inquiry 9: 595–621.
Kennedy, C. (2002) ‘Comparative deletion and optimality in syntax’, Natural Language
and Linguistic Theory 20: 553–621.
(2003) ‘Ellipsis and syntactic representation’, in K. Schwabe & S. Winkler (eds)
The Syntax–Semantics Interface: Interpreting (Omitted) Structure, John Benjamins,
Amsterdam.
Kennedy, C. & Merchant, J. (2000), ‘Attributive comparative deletion’, Natural Language
and Linguistic Theory 18: 89–146.
Keyser, S. J. & Roeper, T. (1992) ‘Re: the abstract clitic hypothesis’, Linguistic Inquiry
23: 89–125.
Kimball, J. & Aissen, J. (1971) ‘I think, you think, he think’, Linguistic Inquiry 2:
241–246.
Kishimoto, H. (2006) ‘On the existence of null complementisers in syntax’, Linguistic
Inquiry 37: 339–345.
Kiss, ´E. K. (2001) ‘The EPP in a topic-prominent language’, in P. Svenonius (ed.) Subjects,
Expletives and the EPP, Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 107–124.

References
423
Kitagawa, Y. (1986) ‘Subjects in English and Japanese’, PhD diss., University of Mas-
sachusetts.
Klima, E. S. (1964) ‘Negation in English’ in J. A. Fodor & J. J. Katz (eds) The Structure
of Language, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., pp. 246–323.
Koizumi, M. (1993) ‘Object agreement phrases and the split VP hypothesis’, MIT Working
Papers in Linguistics, 18: 99–148.
(1995) ‘Phrase Structure in Minimalist Syntax’, PhD diss., MIT.
Koopman, H. (1984) The Syntax of Verbs: From Verb Movement Rules in the Kru Lan-
guages to Universal Grammar, Foris, Dordrecht.
Koopman, H. & Sportiche, D. (1991) ‘The position of subjects’, Lingua 85: 211–58.
Kornﬁlt, J. (2004) ‘Unmasking covert complementiser agreement’, unpublished paper
presented at LSA conference, Boston Mass., January 2004.
Koster, J. (1978) ‘Why subject sentences don’t exist’, in S. J. Keyser (ed.) Recent Trans-
formational Studies in European Languages, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass., pp. 53–
64.
Kratzer, A. (1993) ‘On external arguments’, University of Massachusetts Occasional
Papers in Linguistics 17: 103–130.
(1995) ‘Stage-level and individual-level predicates’, in G. Carlson and F. J. Pelletier
(eds) The Generic Book, Chicago University Press, Chicago, pp. 125–175.
(1996) ‘Severing the external argument from its verb’, in. J. Rooryck & L. Zaring (eds)
Phrase Structure and the Lexicon, Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp. 109–137.
Kroch, A. (2001) ‘Syntactic Change’, in Baltin and Collins (eds), pp. 699–729.
Kuno, S. (1981) ‘Functional Syntax’, Syntax and Semantics 13: 117–135.
Kural, M. (2005) ‘Tree traversal and word order’, Linguistic Inquiry 36: 367–387.
Kuroda, Y. (1988) ‘Whether we agree or not’, Lingvisticae Investigationes 12: 1–47.
Ladusaw, W. (1979) ‘Polarity sensitivity as inherent scope relations’, PhD diss., University
of Texas, Austin.
Lahiri, U. (1998) ‘Focus and negative polarity in Hindi’, Natural Language Semantics 6:
57–123.
Laka, M. I. (1990) ‘Negation in syntax: On the nature of functional categories and
projections’, PhD diss., MIT.
Landau, I. (1999) ‘Elements of control’, PhD diss., MIT.
(2001) ‘Control and Extraposition: The case of Super-Equi’, Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory 19: 109–152.
(2002) ‘(Un)interpretable Neg in Comp’, Linguistic Inquiry 33: 465–492.
(2003) ‘Movement out of control’, Linguistic Inquiry 34: 471–498.
(2004) ‘The scale of ﬁniteness and the calculus of Control’, Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory 22: 811–877.
(2006a) ‘Severing the distribution of PRO from case’, Syntax 9: 153–170.
(2006b) ‘Chain resolution in Hebrew V(P) fronting’, Syntax 9: 32–66.
(2007) ‘EPP extensions’, Linguistic Inquiry 38: 485–523.
Lappin, S., Levine, R. D. & Johnson, D. E. (2000a) Topic . . . Comment: The structure of
unscientiﬁc revolutions’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 18: 665–671.
(2000b) ‘The revolution confused: A response to our critics’, Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory 18: 873–890.
(2001) ‘The revolution maximally confused’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory
19: 901–919.

424
References
Lappin, S. & Shieber, S. (2007), ‘Machine learning theory and practice as a source of
insight into universal grammar’, Journal of Linguistics 43, 393–427.
Larson, R. (1988) ‘On the double object construction’, Linguistic Inquiry 19: 335–391.
(1990) ‘Double objects revisited: Reply to Jackendoff’, Linguistic Inquiry 21: 589–
632.
(1991) ‘Promise and the theory of control’, Linguistic Inquiry 2: 103–139.
Larson, R. & Lefebvre, C. (1991) ‘Predicate cleft in Haitian Creole’, North Eastern
Linguistics Society 21: 247–261.
Lasnik, H. (1992) ‘Case and expletives: Notes toward a parametric account’, Linguistic
Inquiry 23: 381–405.
(1995a) ‘Verbal Morphology: Syntactic Structures meets the Minimalist Program’, in
H. Campos and P. Kempchinsky (eds) Evolution and Revolution in Linguistic Theory,
Georgetown University Press, Georgetown, pp. 251–275.
(1995b) ‘Case and expletives revisited: On Greed and other human failings’, Linguistic
Inquiry 26: 615–633.
(1998) ‘Some reconstruction riddles’, in Penn Working Papers in Linguistics 5: 83–98,
Penn Linguistics Circle, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
(1999) ‘Chains of arguments’, in S. D. Epstein & N. Hornstein (eds) Working Mini-
malism, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass., pp. 189–215.
(2000) Syntactic Structures Revisited: Contemporary Lectures on Classic Transfor-
mational Theory, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass. (with Depiante, M. & Stepanov,
A.).
(2003) Minimalist Investigations in Linguistic Theory, Routledge, London.
(2006) ‘Conceptions of the cycle’, in L. Cheng & N. Corver (eds), pp. 197–216.
Lasnik, H. & Uriagereka, J. (2002) ‘On the poverty of the challenge’, The Linguistic
Review 19: 147–150.
Lebeaux, D. (1991) ‘Relative clauses, licensing and the nature of derivation’, in S. Roth-
stein (ed.) Syntax and Semantics 25: Perspectives on Phrase Structure, Academic
Press, New York, pp. 209–239.
(1995) ‘Where does Binding Theory apply?’, in University of Maryland Working Papers
in Linguistics 3: 63–88.
Lechner, W. (2001) ‘Reduced and phrasal comparatives’, Natural Language and Linguis-
tic Theory 19: 683–735.
Legate, J. A. & Yang, C. D. (2002) ‘Empirical re-assessment of stimulus poverty argu-
ments’, The Linguistic Review 19: 151–162.
Lema, J. & Rivero, M. L. (1990) ‘Long head movement: ECP vs. HMC’, Proceedings of
NELS 28: 219–245.
Lenneberg, E. (1967) Biological Foundations of Language, Wiley, New York.
Levin, B. & Rappaport Hovav, M. (1995) Unaccusativity at the Syntax-Lexical Semantic
Interface, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
Lewis, J. & Elman, J. (2002) ‘Learnability and the statistical study of language: Poverty of
stimulus arguments revisited’, in B. Skarabela, S. Fish & A. Do (eds) Proceedings of
the 26th Annual Boston University Conference on Language Development, Cascadilla
Press, Somerville Mass., pp. 359–370.
Lightfoot, D. (1976) ‘The theoretical implications of Subject Raising’, Foundations of
Language 14: 257–286.
(1999) The Development of Language: Acquisition, Change and Evolution, Blackwell,
Oxford.

References
425
Lightfoot, D. & Hornstein, N. (eds) (1994) Verb Movement, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Linebarger, M. (1987) ‘Negative polarity and grammatical representation’, Linguistics
and Philosophy 10: 325–387.
Lobeck, A. (1995) Ellipsis: Functional Heads, Licensing and Identiﬁcation, Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford.
L¨obel, E. (1989) ‘Q as a functional category’, in C. Bhatt, E. L¨obel & C. Schmidt (eds)
Syntactic Phrase Structure Phenomena, John Benjamins, Amsterdam.
Longobardi, G. (1994) ‘Reference and proper names’, Linguistic Inquiry 25: 609–666.
(1996) ‘The syntax of N-raising: A minimalist theory’, OTS Working Papers no 5,
Research Institute for Language and Speech, Utrecht.
(2001) ‘The structure of DPs: Some principles, parameters and problems’, in Baltin
and Collins (eds), pp. 562–603.
Los, B. (2005) The Rise of the To-Inﬁnitive, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Lust, B. (2006) Child Language: Acquisition and Growth, Cambridge, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Lutz, U., M¨uller, G. and von Stechow, A. (eds) (2000) Wh-Scope Marking, Benjamins,
Amsterdam.
MacWhinney, B. (1995). The CHILDES project: Tools for analyzing talk (2nd ed.),
Hillsdale, N.J.: LEA.
McCawley, J. D. (1993) ‘Gapping with shared operators’, Berkeley Linguistics Society
19: 245–254.
McCloskey, J. (1997) ‘Subjecthood and subject positions’, in L. Haegeman (ed.) Elements
of Grammar, Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp. 197–235.
(2000) ‘Quantiﬁer Float and Wh-Movement in an Irish English’, Linguistic Inquiry 31:
57–84.
(2001) ‘The morphosyntax of WH-extraction in Irish’, Journal of Linguistics 37: 67–
100.
(2002) ‘Resumption, successive cyclicity, and the locality of operations’, in S. D.
Epstein & T. D. Seeley (eds) Derivation and Explanation in the Minimalist Program,
Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 184–226.
McDaniel, D. (1986) ‘Conditions on Wh-chains’, doctoral dissertation, City University
of New York.
(1989) ‘Partial and multiple wh-movement’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory
7: 565–604.
McGinnis, M. (2004) ‘Lethal ambiguity’, Linguistic Inquiry 35: 47–95.
McGinnis, M. & Richards, N. (eds) (2005) Perspectives on Phases, MIT Working Papers
in Linguistics, 49.
McNally, L. (1992) ‘VP-coordination and the VP-internal subject hypothesis’, Linguistic
Inquiry 23: 336–41.
McNeill, D. (1966) ‘Developmental psycholinguistics’, in F. Smith & G. A. Miller (eds)
The Genesis of Language, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass., pp. 15–84.
Maekawa, T. (2007) ‘The English left periphery in linearisation-based HPSG’, PhD diss.,
University of Essex.
Mahajan, A. (1994) ‘Active passives’, Proceedings of the West Coast Conference on
Formal Linguistics 23: 286–301.
Manzini, M. R. (1994) ‘Locality, Minimalism and parasitic gaps’, Linguistic Inquiry 25:
481–508.

426
References
Manzini, M. R. & Roussou, A. (2000) ‘A Minimalist approach to A-movement and
control’, Lingua 110: 409–447.
Manzini, M. R. & Wexler, K. (1987) ‘Parameters, binding theory and learnability’, Lin-
guistic Inquiry 18: 413–444.
Marcus, G. F. (1993) ‘Negative evidence in language acquisition’, Cognition 46: 53–
85.
Martin, R. (1996) ‘A Minimalist theory of PRO and Control’, PhD diss., University of
Connecticut, Storrs.
(2001) ‘Null case and the distribution of PRO’, Linguistic Inquiry 32: 141–166.
Matushansky, O. (2006) ‘Head movement in linguistic theory’, Linguistic Inquiry 37:
69–109.
Merchant, J. (2001) The Syntax of Silence: Sluicing, Islands and Identity in Ellipsis,
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
(2005) ‘Fragments and ellipsis’, Linguistics and Philosophy 27: 661–738.
Milsark, G. (1974) Existential Sentences in English, Indiana University Linguistics Club,
Bloomington, Indiana.
(1977) ‘Peculiarities of the existential construction in English’, Linguistic Analysis 3:
1–29.
Miyagawa, S. (2005) ‘On the EPP’, MIT Working Papers in Linguistics 49: 201–
236.
(2006) ‘Moving to the edge’, in Proceedings of the 2006 KALS-KASELL International
Conference on English and Linguistics, Pusan National University, Busan, Korea,
3–18.
Montalbetti, M. (1984) ‘After binding’, PhD diss., MIT.
Morgan, J. L. & Travis, L. (1989) ‘Limits on negative information in language input’,
Journal of Child Language 16: 531–552.
Moro, A. (1997) The Raising of Predicates, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
M¨uller, G. & Sternefeld, W. (1993) ‘Improper movement and unambiguous binding’,
Linguistic Inquiry 24: 461–507.
Nakajima, H. (2001) ‘Verbs in locative constructions and the generative lexicon’, The
Linguistic Review 18: 43–67.
(2006) ‘Adverbial cognate objects’, Linguistic Inquiry 37: 674–684.
Neeleman, A. & Szendr˝oi, K. (2004) ‘Superman sentences’, Linguistic Inquiry 35: 149–
159.
(2005) ‘Pro Drop and Pronouns’, in J. Alderete et al. (eds) Proceedings of the 24th
West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics, Cascadilla Press, Somerville Mass.,
pp. 299–307.
Newmeyer, F. J. (2004) ‘Against a parameter-setting approach to language variation’,
Linguistic Variation Yearbook, 4: 181–234.
(2005) ‘On split CPs, uninterpretable features and the “perfectness” of lan-
guage’, Zentrum f¨ur allgemeine Sprachwissentshaft Papers in Linguistics 35: 399–
422.
(2006) ‘A rejoinder to “On the role of parameters in Universal Grammar: a reply to
Newmeyer” by Ian Roberts and Anders Holmberg’, ms., University of Washington.
Nkemnji, M. (1995) ‘Heavy pied-piping in Nweh’, PhD diss., University of
California, Los Angeles.
Nomura, T. (2006) ModalP and Subjunctive Present, Hituzi Syobo, Tokyo.

References
427
Nunes, J. (1999) ‘Linearization of chains and phonetic realisation of chain links’, in S. D.
Epstein & N. Hornstein (eds) Working Minimalism, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.,
pp. 217–249.
(2001) ‘Sideward movement’, Linguistic Inquiry 32: 303–344.
(2004) Linearization of Chains and Sideward Movement, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
Nunes, J. & Uriagereka, J. (2000) ‘Cyclicity and extraction domains’, Syntax 3: 20–43.
Ochi, M. (1999) ‘Multiple spell-out and PF-adjacency’, Proceedings of the North-Eastern
Linguistic Society 29: 293–306.
O’Neil, J. (1995) ‘Out of control’, Proceedings of NorthEastern Linguistics Society
(NELS) 25: 361–371.
Ormazabal, J. (1995) ‘The syntax of complementation’, PhD diss., University of Con-
necticut.
Ortiz de Urbina, J. (1989) Parameters in the Grammar of Basque, Foris, Dordrecht.
Ouhalla, J. (1990) ‘Sentential negation, relativized minimality and the aspectual status of
auxiliaries’, The Linguistic Review 7: 183–231.
Oya, T. (2002) ‘Reﬂexives and resultatives: Some differences between English and Ger-
man’, Linguistics 40: 961–986.
Perlmutter, D. (1970) ‘The two verbs begin’, in R. A. Jacobs & P. S. Rosenbaum (eds)
Readings in English Transformational Grammar, Ginn, Waltham Mass., pp. 107–
119.
Pesetsky, D. (1982) ‘Complementiser-trace phenomena and the Nominative Island Con-
dition’, Linguistic Review 1: 297–343.
(1987) ‘Wh-in-situ: Movement and unselective binding’, in E. J. Reuland and A. G.
B. ter Meulen (eds) The Representation of (In)deﬁniteness, MIT Press, Cambridge
Mass., pp. 98–129.
(1995) Zero Syntax: Experiencers and Cascades, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
(1997) ‘Optimality Theory and syntax: Movement and pronunciation’, in D. Archangeli
& D. T. Langendoen (eds) Optimality Theory: An Overview, Blackwell, Oxford, pp.
134–170.
(1998) ‘Some optimality principles of sentence pronunciation’, in P. Barbosa, D. Fox,
P. Hagstrom, M. McGinnis & D. Pesetsky (eds) Is the Best Good Enough? MIT
Press, Cambridge Mass., pp. 337–383.
(2000) Phrasal Movement and Its Kin, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
Pesetsky, D. & Torrego, E. (2001) ‘T-to-C movement: Causes and consequences’, in M.
Kenstowicz (ed.) Ken Hale: A Life in Language, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass., pp.
355–426.
(2007) ‘The syntax of valuation and the interpretability of features’, in S. Karimi, V.
Samiian & W. Wilkins (eds) Phrasal and Clausal Architecture: Syntactic Derivation
and Interpretation, John Benjamins, Amsterdam, pp. 262–294.
Phillips, C. (2003) ‘Linear order and constituency’, Linguistic Inquiry 34: 37–
90.
Piattelli-Palmarini, M. (2000) ‘The metric of open-mindedness’, Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory, 18: 859–862.
Poletto, C. & Beninc`a, P. (2004) ‘Topic, Focus and V2: Deﬁning the CP sublayers’, in L.
Rizzi. (ed.) The Structure of IP and CP: The Cartography of Syntactic Structures,
vol. 2, Oxford University Press, Oxford.

428
References
Polinsky, M. & Potsdam, E. (2001) ‘Long-distance agreement and Topic in Tsez’, Natural
Language and Linguistic Theory 19: 583–646.
(2006) ‘Expanding the scope of control and raising’, Syntax 9: 171–192.
Pollard, C. & Sag, I. A. (1994) Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar, CSLI Publica-
tions, Chicago.
Pollock, J.-Y. (1989) ‘Verb movement, Universal Grammar, and the structure of IP’,
Linguistic Inquiry 20: 365–424.
Postal, P. M. (1966) ‘On so-called pronouns in English’, in F. Dinneen (ed.) Nineteenth
Monograph on Language and Linguistics, Georgetown University Press, Washington
DC (reprinted in D. Reibel & S. Schane (eds) (1969) Modern Studies in English,
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliff N.J., pp. 201–224).
(1974) On Raising: One Rule of English Grammar and Its Theoretical Implications,
MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
(1998) Three Investigations of Extraction, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
Potsdam, E. (1997) ‘NegP and Subjunctive’, Linguistic Inquiry 28: 533–541.
(1998) Syntactic Issues in the English Imperative, Garland, New York.
Potts, C. (2002) ‘The syntax and semantics of as-parentheticals’, Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory 20: 623–689.
Pullum, G. K. & Scholz, B. C. (2002) ‘Empirical assessment of stimulus poverty argu-
ments’, The Linguistic Review 19: 9–50.
Rackowski, A. & Richards, N. (2005) ‘Phase edge and extraction: A Tagalog case study’,
Linguistic Inquiry 36: 565–599.
Radford, A. (1981) Transformational Syntax, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
(1988) Transformational Grammar: A First Course, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
(1992) ‘The acquisition of the morphosyntax of ﬁnite verbs in English’, in J. M. Meisel
(ed.), The Acquisition of Verb Placement, Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp. 23–62.
(1993) ‘Head-hunting: On the trail of the nominal Janus’, in G. Corbett, N. M. Fraser
& S. McGlashan (eds) Heads in Grammatical Theory, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp. 73–111.
(1997a) Syntactic Theory and the Structure of English, Cambridge University Press,
London.
(1997b) Syntax: A Minimalist Introduction, Cambridge University Press, London.
(2004a) Minimalist Syntax: Exploring the Structure of English, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
(2004b)
English
Syntax:
An
Introduction,
Cambridge
University
Press,
Cambridge.
(2007) ‘Split projections, percolation, syncretism and interrogative auxiliary inversion’,
Research Reports in Linguistics 53: 157–191, University of Essex.
Radford, A., Atkinson, M., Britain, D., Clahsen, H. & Spencer, A. (1999) Linguistics: An
Introduction, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Radford, A. & Vincent, M. (2007) ‘On past participle agreement in transitive clauses in
French’, paper presented to XXXIII Incontro di Grammatica Generativa, available
at http://amsacta.cib.unibo.it/archive/00002397/01/PROCEEDINGS_IGG33.pdf
Ramchand, G. (1996) ‘Two subject positions in Scottish Gaelic: The syntax-semantics
interface’, Natural Language Semantics 4: 165–191.

References
429
Raposo, E. (1986) ‘On the null object in European Portuguese’, in O. Jaeggli & C.
Silva-Corvalan (eds) Studies in Romance Linguistics, Foris, Dordrecht, pp. 373–
390.
Reinhart, T. (1998) ‘Wh-in-situ in the framework of the Minimalist Program’, Natural
Language Semantics 6: 29–56.
Reintges, C. H., LeSourd, P. & Chung, S. (2002) ‘Movement, wh-agreement and apparent
wh-in-situ’, paper presented to Workshop on Wh-Movement, University of Leiden,
December 2002.
(2006) ‘Movement, wh-agreement and apparent wh-in-situ’, in Cheng and Corver (eds),
pp. 165–194.
Reuland, E. (2000) ‘Revolution, discovery and an elementary principle of logic’, Natural
Language and Linguistic Theory 18: 843–848.
(2001a) ‘Primitives of Binding’, Linguistic Inquiry 32: 439–492.
(2001b) ‘Confusion compounded’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 19: 879–
885.
Reuland, E. & Everaert, M. (2001) ‘Deconstructing Binding’, in Baltin & Collins (eds),
pp. 634–670.
Rezac, M. (2003) ‘The ﬁne structure of cyclic Agree’, Syntax 6: 156–182.
(2006) ‘The interaction of Th/Ex and Locative Inversion’, Linguistic Inquiry 37: 685–
697.
Richards, M. D. (2007) ‘On feature inheritance: An argument from the Phase Impenetra-
bility Condition’, Linguistic Inquiry 38: 563–572.
Richards, N. (1997) ‘What moves where when in which language?’, PhD diss., MIT. (A
published version appeared as Richards 2001.)
(2001) Movement in Language: Interactions and Architectures, Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
(2004) ‘Against bans on lowering’, Linguistic Inquiry 35: 453–463.
Rizzi, L. (1982) Issues in Italian Syntax, Foris, Dordrecht.
(1986) ‘Null objects in Italian and the theory of pro’, Linguistic Inquiry 17: 501–557.
(1990) Relativised Minimality, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
(1997) ‘The ﬁne structure of the left periphery’, in L. Haegeman (ed.) Elements of
Grammar, Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp. 281–337.
(2000) ‘Remarks on early null subjects’, in M.-A. Freidemann & L. Rizzi (eds) The
Acquisition of Syntax, Longman, London, pp. 269–292.
(2001a) ‘Relativized minimality effects’, in Baltin & Collins, pp. 89–110.
(2001b) ‘On the position “Int(errogative)” in the left periphery of the clause’, in
G. Cinque and G. Salvi (eds) Current Issues in Italian Syntax, Elsevier, Amster-
dam, pp. 287–296.
(2004) ‘Locality and Left Periphery’, in A. Belletti (ed.) Structures and Beyond: The
Cartography of Syntactic Structures, vol.3, Oxford University Press, pp. 223–251.
(2006) ‘On the form of chains: Criterial positions and ECP effects’, in Cheng & Corver
(eds), pp. 97–133.
Rizzi, L. & Shlonsky, U. (2005) ‘Strategies of subject extraction’, ms., Universities of
Siena and Geneva.
Roberts, I. (1987) The Representation of Implicit and Dethematized Subjects, Foris,
Dordrecht.
(1993) Verbs and Diachronic Syntax, Kluwer, Dordrecht.

430
References
(1994) ‘Two types of head movement in Romance’, in Lightfoot & Hornstein (eds),
pp. 207–242.
(1997) ‘Restructuring, head movement and locality’, Linguistic Inquiry 28: 423–460.
(1998) ‘Have/Be Raising, Move F and Procrastinate’, Linguistic Inquiry 29: 113–125.
(2000) ‘Caricaturing dissent’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 18: 849–857.
(2001a) ‘Who has confused what? More on Lappin, Levine and Johnson’, Natural
Language and Linguistic Theory 19: 887–890.
(2001b) ‘Head Movement’, in Baltin and Collins (eds), pp. 113–147.
Roberts, I. & Holmberg, A. (2006) ‘On the role of parameters in Universal Grammar: A
reply to Newmeyer’, ms., University of Cambridge.
Roberts, I. & Roussou, A. (2002) ‘The Extended Projection Principle as a condition on the
tense dependency’, in P. Svenonius (ed.) Subjects, Expletives and the EPP, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, pp. 125–155.
Romero, M. (1997) ‘The correlation between scope reconstruction and connectivity
effects’, in E. Curtiss, J. Lyle and G. Webster (eds) Proceedings of the XVI West
Coast Conference in Formal Linguistics, CLSI, Stanford, pp. 351–365.
Rosen, S. T. (1990) Argument Structure and Complex Predicates, Garland, New York.
Rosenbaum, P. S. (1965) ‘The grammar of English predicate complement constructions’,
PhD diss., MIT (published as Rosenbaum 1967).
(1967) The Grammar of English Predicate Complement Constructions, MIT Press,
Cambridge Mass.
Rosengren, I. (2002) ‘A syntactic device in the service of semantics’, Studia Linguistica
56: 145–190.
Ross, J. R. (1967) ‘Constraints on variables in syntax’, PhD diss., MIT (published as
Inﬁnite Syntax! by Ablex Publishing Corporation, Norwood, New Jersey, 1986).
(1970) ‘On declarative sentences’, in R. A. Jacobs & P. S. Rosenbaum (eds) Readings
in English Transformational Grammar, Ginn, Waltham, Mass. pp. 222–272.
Rothstein, S. D. (1983) ‘The syntactic form of predication’, PhD diss., MIT.
Rudin, C. (1988) ‘On multiple questions and multiple wh-fronting’, Natural Language
and Linguistic Theory 6: 445–501.
Runner, J. (1998) Noun Phrase Licensing and Interpretation, Garland, New York.
(2006) ‘Lingering challenges to the raising-to-object and object-control constructions’,
Syntax 9: 193–219.
Rupp, L. (2003) The Syntax of Imperatives in English and Germanic: Word Order Varia-
tion in the Minimalist Framework, Palgrave Macmillan, New York.
Rymer, R. (1993) Genie: A Scientiﬁc Tragedy, Harper Perennial, New York.
Sabel, J. (2002) ‘A minimalist analysis of syntactic islands’, The Linguistic Review 19:
271–315.
Saddy, D. (1991) ‘Wh scope mechanisms in Bahasa Indonesia’, in L. Cheng & H.
Demirdache (eds) MIT Working Papers in Linguistics 15: 183–218.
Sadler, L. & Arnold, D. J. (1994) ‘Prenominal adjectives and the phrasal/lexical distinc-
tion’, Journal of Linguistics 30: 187–226.
Saﬁr, K. (1984) ‘Missing subjects in German’, in I. Toman (ed.) Studies in German
Grammar, Foris, Dordrecht, pp.193–230.
(1986) Syntactic Chains, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Sag, I. (1980) Deletion and Logical Form, Garland, New York.
(1997) ‘English relative clause constructions’, Journal of Linguistics 33: 431–483.

References
431
Sampson, G. (2002) ‘Exploring the richness of the stimulus’, The Linguistic Review 19:
73–104.
(2005) The Language Instinct Debate, Continuum International Publishing Group,
London.
Sauerland, U. (1998) ‘The meaning of chains’, PhD diss., MIT.
Sauerland, U. & Elbourne, P. (2002) ‘Total reconstruction, PF movement and derivational
order’, Linguistic Inquiry 33: 283–319.
Sawada, H. (1995) Studies in English and Japanese Auxiliaries: A Multi-stratal Approach,
Hituzi Syobo, Tokyo.
Scholz, B. C. & Pullum, G. K. (2002) ‘Searching for arguments to support linguistic
nativism’, The Linguistic Review 19: 185–223.
Sch¨utze, C. (1999) ‘English expletive constructions are not infected’, Linguistic Inquiry
30: 467–484.
(2004) ‘Synchronic and diachronic microvariation in English do’, Lingua 114: 495–
516.
Schwarz, B. (1999) ‘On the syntax of either . . . or’, Natural Language and Linguistic
Theory 17: 339–370.
(2000) Topics in Ellipsis, GLSA Publications, Amherst Mass.
Sepp¨anen, A. & Trotta, J. (2000) ‘The wh+that pattern in present-day English’, in J.
M. Kirk. (ed.) Corpora Galore: Analyses and Techniques in Describing English,
Rodopi, Amsterdam, pp. 161–175.
Shlonsky, U. (1991) ‘Quantiﬁers as functional heads: A study of quantiﬁer ﬂoat in
Hebrew’, Lingua 84: 159–180.
Sigurðsson, H. ´A. (1996) ‘Icelandic ﬁnite verb agreement’, Working Papers in Scandina-
vian Syntax 57: 1–46.
(2006) ‘The nominative puzzle and the Low Nominative Hypothesis’, Linguistic Inquiry
37: 289–308.
Smith, N. (1998) ‘Jackdaws, sex and language acquisition’, Glot International 3, 7: 7.
(2004, 2nd edition) Chomsky: Ideas and Ideals, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Smith, N. & Cormack, A. (2002) ‘Indeterminacy, inference, iconicity and interpretation:
Aspects of the grammar-pragmatics interface’, in M. Makri-Tsilipakou (ed.) Selected
Papers on Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
pp. 38–53.
Sobin, N. (1997) ‘Agreement, default rules and grammatical viruses’, Linguistic Inquiry
28: 318–343.
(2003) ‘Negative inversion as non-movement’, Syntax 6: 183–212.
(2004) ‘Expletive constructions are not “lower right corner” movement constructions’,
Linguistic Inquiry 35: 503–508.
Sorace, A. (2000) ‘Gradients in auxiliary selection with intransitive verbs’, Language 76:
859–890.
Speas, P. (1986) ‘Adjunction and projections in syntax’, PhD diss., MIT, Cambridge Mass.
Spencer, A. J. (1991) Morphological Theory, Blackwell, Oxford.
Spinillo, M. G. (2004) ‘Reconceptualising the English determiner class’, PhD diss.,
University College London.
Sportiche, D. (1988) ‘A theory of ﬂoating quantiﬁers and its corollaries for constituent
structure’, Linguistic Inquiry 19: 425–49.

432
References
(1998) ‘Movement, agreement and case’, in Partitions and Atoms of Clause Structure,
Routledge, London, pp. 88–243.
Sprouse, J. (2007) ‘Rhetorical questions and wh-movement’, Linguistic Inquiry 38: 572–
580.
Stepanov, A. (2001) ‘Late adjunction and minimalist phrase structure’, Syntax 4: 94–125.
Stockwell, R., Schachter, P. & Partee, B. (1973) The Major Syntactic Structures of English,
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York.
Stowell, T. (1981) ‘Origins of phrase structure’, PhD diss., MIT.
(1982) ‘The tense of inﬁnitives’, Linguistic Inquiry 13: 561–570.
Stroik, T. (2001) ‘On the light verb hypothesis’, Linguistic Inquiry 32: 362–369.
Su˜ner, M. (1984) ‘Controlled pro’, in P. Baldi (ed.) Papers from the XIIth Linguistic
Symposium on Romance Languages, University Park Press, Baltimore, pp. 254–
273.
Sur´anyi, B. (2006) ‘Mechanisms of wh-saturation and interpretation in multiple wh-
movement’, in Cheng and Corver (eds), pp. 288–318.
Svenonius, P. (2002a) ‘Case is uninterpretable aspect’, http://www.hum.uit.no/a/
svenonius/paperspage.html.
(2002b) ‘Icelandic case and the structure of events’, http://www.hum.uit.no/a/
svenonius/paperspage.html.
Tallerman, M. O. (1993) ‘Case assignment and the order of functional projections in
Welsh’, in A. Siewierska (ed.) Eurotyp Working Papers, Programme in Language
Typology, European Science Foundation, Berlin, pp. 1–41.
Tamburelli, M. (2006) ‘Remarks on richness’, UCL Working Papers in Linguistics, 18:
1–17.
(2007) ‘The role of lexical acquisition in simultaneous bilingualism’, PhD diss., Uni-
versity College London.
Ten Hacken, P. (2001) Review of Radford (1997a,b), Natural Language Engineering,
7(1): 87–97.
Tenny, C. (1987) ‘Grammaticalizing aspect and affectedness’, PhD diss., MIT.
Thomas, M. (2002) ‘Development of the concept of “the poverty of stimulus”’, The
Linguistic Review 19: 51–71.
Thompson, E. (2006) ‘The structure of bounded events’, Linguistic Inquiry 37: 211–228.
Thornton, R. (1995) ‘Referentiality and Wh-Movement in Child English: Juvenile D-
Linkuency’, Language Acquisition 4: 139–175.
Ticio, M. E. (2003) ‘On the structure of DPs’, PhD diss., University of Connecticut.
(2005) ‘Locality and anti-locality in Spanish DPs’, Syntax 8: 229–286.
Tieken-Boon van Ostade, I. (1988) ‘The origins and development of periphrastic auxiliary
do: a case of destigmatisation’, Dutch Working Papers in English Language and
Linguistics 3: 1–30.
Toda, T. (2007) ‘So-inversion revisited’, Linguistic Inquiry 38: 188–195.
Torrego, E. (1984) ‘On inversion in Spanish and some of its effects’, Linguistic Inquiry
15: 103–129.
Toyoshima, T. (2000) ‘Heading for their own places’, MIT Working Papers in Linguistics
36: 93–108.
Travis, L. (1984) ‘Parameters and effects of word order variation’, PhD diss., MIT.
Uchibori, A. (2000) ‘The syntax of subjunctive complements: Evidence from Japanese’,
unpublished dissertation, University of Connecticut.

References
433
Ura, H. (1993) ‘On feature-checking for wh-traces’, MIT Working Papers in Linguistics
18: 243–280.
(2001) ‘Local economy and generalized pied-piping’, The Linguistic Review 18: 169–
191.
Uriagereka, J. (1988) ‘On Government’, PhD diss., University of Connecticut.
(1998) Rhyme and Reason, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
(2000) ‘On the emptiness of “design” polemics’, Natural Language and Linguistic
Theory, 18: 863–871.
(2001) ‘Cutting derivational options’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 19:
891–900.
Vainikka, A. & Levy, Y. (1999) ‘Empty subjects in Finnish and Hebrew’, Natural Lan-
guage and Linguistic Theory 17: 613–671.
van Craenenbroeck, J. & den Dicken, M. (2006) ‘Ellipsis and EPP repair’, Linguistic
Inquiry 37: 653–664.
van Eynde, F. (2006) ‘NP-internal agreement and the structure of the noun phrase’,
Journal of Linguistics 42: 139–186.
van Gelderen, E. (2004) Grammaticalization as Economy, John Benjamins, Amsterdam.
van Langendonck, W. (1994) ‘Determiners as heads?’, Cognitive Linguistics 5: 243–259.
van Riemsdijk, H. (1989) ‘Movement and regeneration’, in P. Beninc`a (ed.) Dialectal
Variation and the Theory of Grammar, Foris, Dordrecht, pp. 105–136.
Verkuyl, H. J., de Swart, H. & van Hout, A. (eds) (2005) Perspectives on Aspect, Springer,
Dordrecht.
von Fintel, K. (1999) ‘NPI licensing, Strawson entailment and context dependency’,
Journal of Semantics 16: 97–148.
Watanabe, A. (2001) ‘Wh-in-situ languages’, in Baltin & Collins, pp. 203–225.
(2004) ‘The genesis of negative concord: Syntax and morphology of negative doubling’,
Linguistic Inquiry 35: 559–612.
(2006) ‘The pied-piper feature’, in Cheng & Corver, pp. 47–70.
Wexler, K. (1994) ‘Optional Inﬁnitives, Head Movement and the Economy of Deriva-
tions’, in Lightfoot & Hornstein (eds), pp. 305–350.
(1998) ‘Very early parameter-setting and the unique checking constraint: A new expla-
nation of the optional inﬁnitive stage’, Lingua 106: 23–79.
Williams, E. (1980) ‘Predication’, Linguistic Inquiry 11: 203–238.
(2006) ‘The subject-predicate theory of there’, Linguistic Inquiry 36: 648–651.
Willis, D. (2000) ‘On the distribution of resumptive pronouns and wh-trace in Welsh’,
Journal of Linguistics 36: 531–73.
Wiltschko, M. (1998) ‘On the syntax and semantics of (relative) pronouns and determin-
ers’, Journal of Comparative Germanic Linguistics 2: 143–181.
(2001) ‘The syntax of pronouns: Evidence from Halkomelem Salish’, Natural Lan-
guage and Linguistic Theory 20: 157–195.
Woolford, E. (1991) ‘VP-internal subjects in VSO and nonconﬁgurational languages’,
Linguistic Inquiry 22: 503–40.
Yang, C. D. (1999) ‘Unordered Merge and its linearization’, Syntax 1: 38–64.
Yang, H. (2006) ‘On overt and covert wh- and relative movement in Hindi and Punjabi’,
in Cheng & Corver (eds), pp. 135–164.
Zagona, K. (1987) Verb Phrase Syntax, Kluwer, Dordrecht.
Zamparelli, R. (2000) Layers in the Determiner Phrase, Garland, New York.

434
References
Zanuttini, R. (1991) ‘Syntactic properties of sentential negation: A comparative study of
Romance languages’, PhD diss., University of Pennsylvania.
Zlati´c, L. (1997) ‘The structure of the Serbian Noun Phrase’, PhD diss., University of
Texas, Austin.
Zwart, C. J.-W. (2001) ‘Syntactic and phonological verb movement’, Syntax 4: 34–62.
Zwicky, A. (2002) ‘I wonder what kind of construction that this kind of example illus-
trates’, in D. Beaver, L. D. Casillas Mart´ınez, B. Z. Clark & S. Kaufmann (eds) The
Construction of Meaning, CSLI Publications, Stanford, pp. 219–248.

Index
A-bar
head 371
(speciﬁer) position 281, 370
movement 152–185, 330–340, 347,
370
accusative case 7, 10, 40, 260, 342
acquisition 15–19, 370
of grammar 15–19
rapidity of 16, 17
theory of 15–19, 26–30
uniformity of 244–258, 312, 370
active
for syntactic operations 244–258, 312, 370
voice (contrast with passive) 211, 370
adequacy
criteria 13, 370
descriptive 13, 382
explanatory 13
adjacency condition 370
adjectival phrase 25, 372
adjective 3, 370
adjoin See adjunction
adjunct 8, 296, 343–345, 371
adjunction 125, 155, 296, 371
adposition 25
adverb 3–4, 295–298, 304, 305, 343–345, 381
argument-oriented 224
VP-adverb 408
vP adverb 408
See also carefully, deliberately, gently, how,
perfectly, personally, quickly, straight, very;
and See VP adverb, vP adverb
adverbial phrase
affective constituents 60, 136, 371
afﬁx 371
afﬁx attachment 141–144, 371
afﬁx hopping/lowering 91–92, 131, 139, 141,
289–292, 341, 371
negative 138–140
question afﬁx 123, 133
strong afﬁx 122–123, 294
tense afﬁx 90–94, 131, 133–134, 289–292
afﬁxal
head 122, 280–287, 293, 371
light verb 299, 306
African American English 190
agent theta-role 202–205, 207, 371
agentive verb 297
agreement 21, 237–272, 371
and A-movement 258–272
between complementiser and preposed
wh-expression 341–342
between complementiser and subject 340–341
heads 287
in control inﬁnitives 261–262
in defective clauses 262–272
in French participles 338–339
multiple/simultaneous 252–254, 269–272,
329
A-head 371
all 178
A-movement 213, 196–227, 258–272, 344, 347,
372
as copying and deletion 198–199
successive-cyclic 217–227, 358
anaphor 62–64, 84–86, 160, 179, 357, 372
reciprocal 62, 372
animate/inanimate 41, 372
antecedent 372
of anaphors 4, 62
anti-cyclic operation 140
anti-locality constraint 372
antonym 2
any/anyone/anything 60
appear 219–227
A-position 196, 198, 372
Arabic 99
arbitrary reference 85, 372
argument 8, 137, 372
external 202, 204, 373
internal 202, 204, 373
-orientated adverb 224
restriction on choice of 214–215, 222–227,
294
structure 201–205, 373
array, lexical 127, 155, 373
article 373
deﬁnite 373
indeﬁnite 373
as-clauses 155
435

436
Index
aspect 243, 373
feature 287
head 287
phrase 288
aspectual auxiliary 134, 311, 373
associate 373
asymmetric c-command 77, 373
Atkinson 248
attract/attraction 122–131, 162, 373
Attract Closest Condition (ACC) 183–185, 209,
216–219, 373
Attract Smallest Condition (ASC) 167–169, 373
Authier 343
auxiliariless clause
auxiliary 5, 373
copying 126, 374
inversion/movement 11, 20, 99, 120–128,
162–165, 281–286, 289
null 86–89, 91, 93
phrase/projection 127, 134, 275–277, 288, 311,
374
raising 134–137
selection 208, 374
types of 5
bar-notation 64, 374
bare 374
clause 374
inﬁnitive 3, 94–96, 374
nominals/noun expressions 108–111, 374
phrase structure 65–66, 374
base form of verb 374
be 134–137, 144, 198, 208, 307, 313
Belfast English 118, 154, 179, 196–199, 207,
304–306
believe 105–107, 215
binarity principle 43, 44, 124, 301, 374
binary 374
-branching syntactic structure 375
merger 41, 292
morphological structure 43
parameter setting 26, 30
phonological structure 43
binding 375
(c-command) condition on 63, 375
of anaphors 62–64
principles A/B/C 77–80, 179
Boeckx 335
Boston variety of English 341
bottom-up 139, 375
bound 375
anaphor 62
Bowers 298, 343
bracketing, labelled 40, 375
branch 59, 375
canonical 375
carefully 299
case 375–376
absence of (on caseless constituents) 248, 264
accusative/objective 7, 10, 40, 101, 260, 342,
375
assignment/marking 21, 100–103, 105–108,
237–272, 298
Case Condition 101
dative 239, 376
genitive 77, 169, 375
inherent 239, 375
nominative 7, 101, 206, 239, 375
null 105, 261–262
of subjects 100–103
particle 73, 376
quirky 376
structural 239–242, 375
categorial 376
Categorial Uniformity Principle 98, 376
category 376
assigning to a word 6
functional 51, 57
grammatical 1, 2
lexical 51
substantive 51, 57
See also individual categories (e.g. noun)
causative
verb 93, 376
light verb 293–313
structure 293
c-command 59–64, 100–101, 237–260, 376
asymmetric c-command 376
condition on binding 63, 376
chain 155–160, 377
Chain Uniformity Condition 166–169, 183,
377
Mixed Chains Constraint 335, 393
Chamorro 337
Chaucer 137
children’s utterances/Child English 125–126, 181,
341
Chomsky, N. see individual entries such as
agreement, bare phrase structure, cognitive
approach to grammar, EPP, innateness,
language faculty, minimalism, null
determiner, theta-criterion, universal
grammar etc.
clause 2, 44–58, 377
auxiliariless 89–94
bare 98, 374
centre-embedded 302
complement 6, 9
declarative 2, 6, 97, 381
defective 105–108, 262–272, 327–330
exceptional case marking/ECM 265–272, 360
exclamative 155, 283
elliptical 86–87, 122, 383
ﬁnite 2, 6, 10
indicative 389

Index
437
irrealis 243
main/principal/independent/root 9, 98
matrix 83
non-ﬁnite 9
relative 155, 157–160, 192, 282
structure 44–58
subjectless 81–86 See also control, raising
type 154
cleft sentence 377
clitic/cliticisation 87–89, 93–94, 96, 126–127,
156–157, 313, 377
coda 43
cognition/cognitive approach to grammar 11, 377
COMP See complementiser
comparative
adjective 3, 377
clause 155
competence 12, 377
complement 7, 24, 40, 42, 50, 378
C/Complementiser 6, 49–51, 378
Condition 154, 177
C as the locus of uninterpretable agreement
features 340–343
phrase 50–51, 378
complete expression 45
Completeness Condition 268, 378
component (of a grammar) 378
computational/syntactic component 14, 378
PF component 14, 91, 378
semantic component 14, 91, 244, 378
coda 43
conclusively 343
concord 338, 378
condition 378
Attract Closest Condition (ACC) 183–185, 209,
216–219
Attract Smallest Condition 167–169
Case Condition 101
Chain Uniformity Condition 166–169, 183
Complementiser Condition 154, 177
Completeness Condition 268
Economy Condition 56, 168–169, 183–185,
256–257, 270
Expletive Conditions 254, 309
External Argument Condition 254–255, 308
Impenetrability Condition 107, 172–176, 248
Inactivation Condition 335
Inactivity Condition 254–256
Inclusiveness Condition 64
Indeﬁniteness Condition 254–256
Interrogative Condition 161
Intervention Condition 354
Invisibility Condition 347, 356, 359, 361
Left Branch Condition 170, 391
Merger Condition 302–303, 305, 310
on Extraction Domains (CED) 206–207, 378
Phase Impenetrability Condition 324
Polarity Condition 61
Preposing Condition 56
Probe Condition 269
Simultaneity Condition 246, 269
Speciﬁer Condition 348, 351, 353, 359, 361
Visibility Condition 354
Wh-Attraction Condition 183
conditional clause 379
conjunction, 379
coordinating 53
subordinating 6
constituent 1, 40, 379
constituent structure 43, 51–58, 379 see also
syntactic structure
constrained (theory of grammar) 13–14
constraint 26, 379
Freezing Constraint 181–182
Functional Head Constraint 57
Head Movement Constraint 133, 134, 139, 176,
285, 289–290
on co-ordination 54
on Extraction Domains (CED) 206–207
on Mixed Chains 335, 393
on movement operations 56, 347–348
contain/containment 59, 379
contentives (content words) 2, 380
contrastive 380
control 83–86, 103–105, 380
clause 261–262
compared to raising 221–227
object control 300–302
partial 86
predicate/verb 261
controller 83
discourse controller 85
convergence 257, 259, 267, 355, 380
coordination 53–54, 92, 380
Coordination Condition 53
copula 134, 380
copy 380
copying of features 380
preposition copying 157–158
theory of movement 123–128, 155–160,
198–199, 380
wh-copying 181
coreferential 84, 381
count noun 381
covert See null
crash 244–258, 381
critical period 18
criteria of adequacy 13
Culicover 283
cycle/cyclic operations 139, 381
See also successive-cyclic movement
dare 61
dative 239
daughter 59, 381
declarative 2, 6, 381

438
Index
default form 239, 381
defective 381
clause 105–108, 262–272, 327–330
deﬁnite 381
article 4
expression 381
reference 381
degenerate input to children 17
deletion
as part of movement 123–128
of copy 124–128, 158, 198–199
of features 244–246
of for 103
deliberately 297
discreetly 304
derivation/derive 382
descriptive adequacy 382
determiner 4, 382
demonstrative 4, 382
null 108–111, 169
phrase 54, 382, 395
prenominal 110
pronominal 110
properties of 4
direct object 7, 40
discontinuous
spellout 160, 210, 213, 382
string 200
discourse 382
ditransitive verb 382
domain (c-command) 165, 172, 324, 382
do
emphatic 312
-support 140–144, 383
double-object structure 299–303, 382
DP hypothesis 109, 383
Earliness Principle 139, 238, 252, 260, 346–355,
383
Early Modern English 307, 383
echo question 383
ECM See Exceptional Case Marking
economy
Condition 56, 168–169, 183–185, 256–257,
270, 383
edge 286, 383
edge feature
on C 161–165, 176–185, 332
on Foc 280
on P 173–174
on Top 282
on v 334
Elizabethan English 128, 157, 164, 383
ellipsis/elliptical structure 86–87, 122, 383
see also gapping
embedded clause 383
empty 384 see also null
encliticisation 88, 377
entry, lexical 384
EPP 46, 384
Condition 384
feature on T 46, 86, 197–227, 250–265,
308
feature on V 343
ergative predicate/structure 292–298, 384
everyone 198–199
evidence
empirical 52, 384
historical 131
Exceptional Case Marking (ECM)
clause/predicate 196, 218, 265–272, 288,
343–346, 360, 384
ECM expletive structures 344
exclamative 384
clause 155, 283
existential predicate 208, 272
experience (in acquisition) 16, 384
experiencer theta-role 202–203, 384
experiential verb 93
explanatory adequacy 385
expletive pronoun/structure 46, 196–198,
206–209, 211–216, 219–227, 237–240,
246–258, 264–272, 308–309, 385
choice of 254–256, 309
Expletive Conditions 254, 309
transitive expletive structure
explicit knowledge 12
Extended Projection Principle 46; See also EPP
external
argument 202, 204
External Argument Condition 254–255, 308,
385
merge 155
extract/extraction 385
site 155, 385
feature 204
aspect 287
composition of T 265
concord features 338
copying 380
deletion 244–246, 385
edge 161–165, 173–174, 176–185, 280, 282,
332, 334
formal 386
grammatical 7, 46, 65, 388
inheritance/percolation 340–346 see also
percolation
mood 287
ϕ-feature 238–265, 398
tense/[tns] 162–165, 243, 287
[V] 130–131, 138
uninterpretable 246, 248, 340–346
valuation 240–242

Index
439
Felser 255, 300
Fillmore 203
ﬁnite 385–386
clause 2, 6, 9–10
complementiser 6
null subject 82
ﬁrst merge 204–205
ﬁrst person See person
ﬂoating
emphatic reﬂexive 224
quantiﬁer 224, 263, 386
focus 103, 279–281, 286
Focus Phrase 280–287
foot (of chain) 155, 213, 386
for 102–105, 265–272, 342
deletion 103
null variant of 102
force 2, 6, 10, 97–101, 280, 386
Force Phrase 292–298
types of 10
formal/informal style 386
Freidin 115, 147
French 294, 338–339
Freezing Constraint 181–182, 386
frozen constituents 331
function 48, 386
grammatical 1, 7
functional category 4–7, 51, 57, 387
Functional Head Constraint 57, 387
functor 2, 387
gapping 87, 124, 387
gender 7, 387
generate 387
generic quantiﬁer 110
genitive case 73, 169
gently 295–298
gerund 10, 387
Giannikidou 60
goal 387
for a probe 238–242, 312
theta-role 202
gradable and ungradable adjectives 3
grammar 1, 388
acquisition of 15–19
nature of 11–12
theory of 13
traditional 1, 3, 5, 7, 9
Greek 108
Green 190
Gruber 203
Haegeman 340
Han 150
have 93, 135–137, 307, 313
cliticisation 126–127, 388
have/be-raising 134–137
head 24, 388
-ﬁrst/-last language/structure 25, 26, 388
Head Movement Constraint 133, 134, 138, 139,
176, 285, 289–290
Head Position Parameter 25–26, 388
Head Strength Parameter 134, 388
of chain 155, 213
of phrase 40–43, 50
movement 120–144, 153, 289, 388
Headedness Principle 43, 44, 49, 124–128,
388
Henry 118, 154, 179, 196, 207, 304
highlighting expressions 55–58, 142
HMC See Head Movement Constraint
host 91, 122, 388
Huang 206
Hungarian 169
Icelandic 206, 239
idioms 199–201, 213–214, 388
I-language 12, 389
illegible features 244
immediate
constituents 43, 59, 379
domain 346
immediately contain 59, 379
Impenetrability Condition 107, 172–176, 248,
389
See also Phase Impenetrability Condition
imperative(s) 389
null subject 82
inactive constituent 244; See also active
Inactivation Condition 335
Inactivity Condition 254–256, 389
Inclusiveness Condition 64, 389
indeﬁnite expression/goal 254–256, 389
Indeﬁniteness Condition 254–256, 389
independent probes 346–355
inﬁnitive 389
complementiser 6
particle 5, 41, 219–227, 389
phrase/projection, 389
verb form 3, 10
INFL 390
inﬁx 337
informal See formal
inherent case 239
inheritance/percolation of (uninterpretable
agreement) features 340–346
C to T 340–343
v to V 345–346
innate properties of language 16–19
Innateness Hypothesis 16–19, 390
inner speciﬁer 334
in situ expressions 24, 338, 390
instrument theta-role 202
intelligence

440
Index
interface 14
conceptual-intentional (CI) 14
level 390
semantics 111
sensory-motor (SM) 14
intermediate projection 45, 47–58, 390, 401
internal argument 202, 204
internalised linguistic system 390 See I-language
internal merge 155
interpret/interpretation 11, 378, 390
interpretable features 243–246, 267
table of interpretable and uninterpretable
features 243
interrogative
edge 286
Interrogative Condition 161, 390
projection 319
See also question
Intervention Condition 354, 390
intransitive
clause/verb/verb phrase 198, 206–210,
304–313, 327–330
light verb 310
two-place intransitive predicate 293
inversion
of auxiliary 11, 20, 120–128, 162–165,
281–286, 289, 391
locative inversion 308
Invisibility Condition 347, 356, 359, 361,
391
invisible features, 244
Irish 339
(ir)realis (clause) 6, 9, 10, 243, 391
island/islandhood 391
it 226, 246–258, 333
Italian 313
J´onsson 206
Kayne 343
Kimball 341
Klima 60
Kratzer 255
labelled bracketing 6
Landau 77
landing site 391
language faculty 16–18, 27, 391
Latin 123
learnability 15, 391
learning see acquisition
grammatical 21, 22, 27
lexical 27
Left Branch Condition 170, 391
legible 15, 391
levels of projection 64, 391
lexical 392
array 127, 155
category 2–4, 51, 392
entry 392
item 14, 58, 392
learning 22, 392
property 392
verb 392
lexicon 14, 58, 127, 392
LF See Logical Form
light verb 136, 293–313, 392
linear order 47, 170
linearisation conditions 170
link (of a chain) 392
local 392
antecedent 84
goal 323
movement 176
probe-goal relations 323
locality principle 21, 183
of syntactic operations 218
locative theta-role 202, 392
locative inversion 308, 392
locus 90, 392
of uninterpretable agreement features 340–346
long-distance
movement 392
passivisation 215–219, 264
wh-movement 174–182
main clause 98
map 14
mass noun 3, 381
matrix 393
maximal projection 45, 47–58, 401
McCloskey 178
memory 323
merge/merger 39, 292, 296, 393
Merger Condition 302–303, 305, 310,
393
external 155
ﬁrst merge 204–205
internal 155
second merge 204
Middle English 137–138
Minimalism 14, 65, 393
minimal projection 64, 400
Mixed Chains Constraint 335, 393
modal auxiliary 134, 289, 393
modiﬁer/modify 48, 343, 393
mood 243, 288, 393
feature 287
head 287
imperative 288
indicative 9, 288, 389
morphemes 289
phrase 288–292
subjunctive 9, 288, 405

Index
441
morpheme 1, 393, 394
morphology 1, 394
morphosyntactic 394
mother 59, 394
motion predicate 208
movement
A-movement 196–227, 258–262, 344, 347
A-bar movement 152–185, 281–287, 330–340,
347
and agreement 258–272
constraints on movement 347–348
copy theory of 123–128, 155–160
head movement 120–144, 153, 289, 388
T-to-C movement 120–128, 179
V-to-T movement 128–131
V-to-v movement 306
Wh-movement 24, 152–185, 331–340
See also attract, EPP
multiple
agreement 252–254, 269–272, 394
speciﬁers 334, 394
wh-questions 284, 394
must 135
need 61, 135
negation 394
See negative
negative
clause in Elizabethan English 133, 138
clause in Middle English 137–138
clause in present-day English 138–140
evidence in parameter-setting 28, 394
focusing/preposing 279
head 289
particles not/n’t 394
question 143
projection/NEGP 137–140, 289
node 40, 58–60, 394
nominal expression 394
nominative case 7, 206, 239
Nomura 102
nonagentive verb 298
nonargument 373
non-count noun 381
non-ﬁnite
null subject 82
tense particle 5
non-local movement 133
non-null-subject language 23
non-terminal node 58
not see negation
n’t see negation
noun 2–3, 395
common noun 3, 395
count/countable 3
mass/non-count noun 3, 381
proper noun 3, 395
noun phrase 395
nucleus 43
null 395
auxiliary 86–89, 91, 93
case 105, 261–262, 395
complementiser 96–105
determiner 108–111, 169
inﬁnitive particle 95
operator in yes-no questions 163–165
quantiﬁer 110–111
relative pronoun 193
spellout 82, 87–96, 124
subject 23, 81–86, 395
subject language 23, 395
subject parameter 23, 81–82,
396
subject stage in acquisition
tense afﬁx 130–132
number, grammatical 341, 7
object 396
one-place predicate See predicate
onset 43
operator 396
expression 285
null (in yes-no questions) 163–165
relative 282
optimal design 14
outer speciﬁer 334
parameters 22–26, 396
evidence used to set 28–30
Head-Position Parameter 25–27
Head-Strength Parameter 134
Null-Subject Parameter 23, 81–82, 396
(re)setting 26–30, 134, 396
Wh-Parameter 24
parametric variation 22–26
participial light verb (PRT) 328
participle 397
agreement (in French) 338–339
particle 397
genitive 73, 397
inﬁnitive 5, 41, 56, 94, 219–227,
397
negative 394, 397
question 123, 163–165
verb + particle structures 300
partitive quantiﬁer 397
part of speech See category
passive clause 211–215, 310–311
auxiliary 310
participle 211, 397
sufﬁx 310
passivisation
long-distance 215–219
patient argument 397

442
Index
perception verb complement 288
percolation (of features) See inheritance, feature
perfect 397
auxiliary 93, 135
participle 397
system 14
perfectly 298, 310–311
performance (contrast with competence)
errors 12
periphery 397
person, grammatical 7, 398
personal pronoun 398
Pesetsky 358
PF-clitic 398
PF component 14, 91, 244, 398
PF representation 14, 244, 398
phase 323–362, 398
Phase Impenetrability Condition 324, 398
ϕ-completeness 268, 378
ϕ-features 236–265, 398
on inﬁnitival to 261
Phonetic Form 14, 378
phrase 8, 398
formation 39–43
marker 58, 398
head of 40–43, 50
See also individual phrases, e.g. noun phrase
pied-piping 165–174, 398
plural 3, 399
polarity items/expressions 60–62, 136, 399
condition 61
phrase 144
positive evidence (in parameter setting) 28, 399
possessive structure 169–171, 399
Postal 343
postposition 25, 399
postverbal subject 207
PPT See principles (and parameters theory)
predicate 2, 7, 201
argument structure 201–205
control 221–227, 261
ergative 292–298, 384
exceptional case marking 218, 343–346
existential 208, 272
motion 208
one-place/two-place/three-place 8, 202,
222–223, 226, 292, 293, 299–303, 396, 406,
407
passive 211–215, 310–311
Predicate-Internal Theta-Marking Hypothesis
204, 224, 399
raising 219–227, 311–313, 402
resultative 300, 402
unaccusative 205–210, 304–313, 355, 407
unergative 207, 303–304, 407
predicative 399
preﬁx 43, 371
preposing 55–58, 399
condition 56
preposition 2–4, 400
copying 157–158
pied-piping of 171–174
stranding of 172–174, 404
prepositional phrase 24, 54, 400
principles 400
Attract Closest Principle 209, 216–219
Binarity Principle 43, 44, 124, 301
Binding Principles A/B/C 77–80
Categorial Uniformity Principle 98
Earliness Principle 139, 238, 252, 260,
346–355, 383
Headedness Principle 43, 44, 49, 124–128
Locality Principle 21, 183
of UG/Universal Grammar 19, 27
Principles-and-Parameters Theory (PPT) 27, 28,
400
Projection Principle 401
Strict Cyclicity Principle 140
See also condition, constraint
PRN See pronoun?
PRO 83–86, 223–225, 261–262, 300, 342, 400
pro 23, 81, 400
probe 238–242, 249, 400
independent probes 346–355
Probe Condition 269, 400
processing 323
proform 5, 55, 400
progressive
aspect marker 339
auxiliary 135
participle 397
projection 40–42, 50, 400–401
See also agreement, intermediate, maximal,
minimal, split
pronominal 401
pronoun 4–5, 401
clitic 313
D-pronoun/pronominal determiner 4, 383
expletive 196–198
N-pronoun/pronominal noun 4, 395
personal 4, 398
relative wh-pronoun 157
Q-pronoun/pronominal quantiﬁer 4, 153, 401
proposition 2, 201, 401
PRT 328
pseudo-cleft 103, 401
Q See question particle/quantiﬁer
quantiﬁer 4, 60, 401
existential 384, 401
ﬂoating 224, 263
generic 110
null 110–111
partitive 60, 110, 401

Index
443
phrase 401
pronominal 153
properties of 4
stranding 178
universal 60, 198–199, 401
question 401
afﬁx 123, 133
complement clause 283
do-support in 140–144, 383
echo and non-echo 20, 153, 383
in Elizabethan English 132, 157, 164
in present-day English 20–21, 120–128,
155–160
long-distance 174–182
multiple wh-questions 182–185, 284
null operator in yes-no questions 163–165
particle 123, 401
subject questions 355–358
wh-questions 152–185, 284
yes-no questions 163–165
quickly 305
Radford 283, 341
raising 219–227, 311–313, 340
of auxiliaries 134–137
predicate 402
(subject-to) object 343
rapidity of language acquisition 16, 17
realis/irrealis 243
reciprocal anaphor 62, 372
recursion 42
reduced form 402
referential 402
reﬂexive 62, 84–86, 160, 179, 263, 357, 372
Reintges 337
relative clause/pronoun 155, 157–160, 192, 282,
402
Relativised Minimality Condition (RMC)
176–178, 183, 217, 402
representation 402
PF representation 14, 244, 402
semantic 14, 244, 402
structural/syntactic 402
restrictions on choice of arguments/subjects
214–215, 222–227, 294
resultative predicate 300, 402
R-expression 402
rhyme 43
Richards 183
Rizzi 176, 280–287
role See theta-role
root 58, 98, 403
Ross 99, 165, 170
Rupp 255
S analysis of clauses 44
S-bar analysis of clauses 49
Sawada 102
Sch¨utze 288–292
scope 135–136, 198–199, 403
narrow 403
position 181
wide 403
search 323–327
second merge 204
second person See person
see 94
seem 219–227, 311–313
select/selection 41, 110, 208, 286–287,
403
selectional feature/property 41, 110
semantic
component 14, 91, 244, 403
representation 14, 244
role See theta-role
sentences
complex 8–9
simple 8
Shakespeare 157, 403
See also Elizabethan English
shells 292–313, 403
simultaneous operations 329
singular 3
Sigurðsson 239
Simultaneity Condition 246, 269, 403
sister 59, 404
soft mutation 339
source theta-role 202, 404
spec-head relation See speciﬁer
species-speciﬁc nature of language 16–19
speciﬁer 49, 153, 404
-head relation 237
-ﬁrst structure 404
in CP 153–155
in FocP 284–286
in ForceP 282–286
in NEGP 137, 289
in TP 227
in VP 197–205
in vP 306, 308
multiple/inner/outer speciﬁer(s) 334
Speciﬁer Condition 348, 351, 353, 359, 361,
404
spellout 14, 244, 404
discontinuous 160, 210, 213
null 82, 87–96, 124
of the Force head 287
split
CP 279–287
projection 279–313, 404
spellout 160, 210
TP 287–292
VP 292–313
stem 404

444
Index
stranding 404
of afﬁxes 141
of prepositions 172–174, 404
of quantiﬁers 178
Strict Cyclicity Principle 140, 404
strong 404
afﬁx 122–123, 133–134, 289–292, 294
head 122, 280–287
tense feature on C 122–123, 133
V feature on NEG in Elizabethan English 138
V feature on T in Elizabethan English 130–132
structural case 239–242, 298
structure
hierarchical 47
morphological 43
phonological 43
syntactic 14
subextraction 347, 359–362
subject 2, 7, 48, 196–199, 405
quasi-thematic 255
unaccusative 306
transitive 306
unergative 306
substantive category 51, 57, 405
substitution 54–55, 405
successive-cyclic 405
A-movement 217–227, 358
head-movement 133, 138
wh-movement 176–182, 332–333, 337, 341
sufﬁx 43, 92, 310, 371
superiority (effect) 183
superlative adjective 3, 405
Swahili 260
syntactic
component 14
relations 58–61
representations 402
structure 14
syntax, nature of
X-bar syntax 374
tacit knowledge 12
Tallerman 339
taxonomy 1, 11, 405
tense 466, 405–406
afﬁx 90–94, 289
auxiliary 5
feature [tns] 122–123, 133, 162–165, 243
-marker 6
particle 41
phrase/projection 41, 45
sufﬁx 3
terminal node 58, 406
ternary-branching structure 292
testing structure 51–58
that
null counterpart of 97, 287
θ-criterion 203–205, 222, 224
θ-role See theta-role
thematic roles See theta-role
theme role 202–205, 207, 406
there 196–197, 226, 237–240, 251–258, 264–272,
329, 344
double-there sentences 354
theta
-criterion 203–205, 222, 224, 406
-marking 227, 406
-role 201–205, 406
Uniform Theta-Assignment Hypothesis
(UTAH)
third person See person
Thornton 181
three-place predicate See predicate
Tieken-Boon van Ostade 151
Tns afﬁx See tense afﬁx
to
inﬁnitival 5, 41, 56, 94, 219–227
null counterpart 95
topic/topicalisation 55, 281, 406–407
Topic Phrase 281–287
tough-clauses 155
trace/trace theory 155–156, 407
traditional grammar 1, 3, 5, 7, 9
transfer 324, 327
transitive 8, 40, 101, 407
light verb 298
verb with two complements 299–303
verb with a single complement 303
tree diagram 40, 407
truncated null subject 82
truncation 82, 407
T-to-C movement 120–128
two-predicate See predicate
type 286
UG See Universal Grammar
UG principles See principles
unaccusative clause/predicate 205–210, 304–309,
355, 407
imperative 304–306
unbound anaphor 62, 407
unergative predicate/clause 207, 303–304, 407
Uniform Theta-Assignment Hypothesis (UTAH)
214, 294, 407
uniformity of language acquisition 16, 17
unitary constituent 199
uninterpretable features 243–246, 248, 340–346
Universal Grammar 13–15, 19, 408
Universality 408
as a criterion of adequacy 13
and its relation to innateness 16–19
unlabelled tree 66
UTAH See Uniform Theta-Assignment
Hypothesis

Index
445
valuation/value (of features) 240–242,
408
valued/unvalued features 241, 242
variation, grammatical 27
verb
causative 293
light 136, 294–313, 392
movement See V-to-T movement
participial light verb 328
v as the locus of uninterpretable agreement
features 343–346
verb + particle structures 300
See also auxiliary, predicate
verb movement See V-to-T movement
verb phrase 24, 40, 408
Visibility Condition 354, 408
voice auxiliary 310
V-to-T movement 128–131, 408
V-to-v movement 306
VP adverb 408
vP adverb 408
VP-internal Subject Hypothesis (VPISH)
199–227, 408
VP shells 292–313, 392
want 222–227
weak afﬁx/head 131, 282–287, 289–292
Welsh 339
West Flemish 340
West Ulster English 178
Wh-Attraction Condition 183, 373
wh-copying 181, 408
Whelpton 206
whether 164–165
wh-marking
of complementiser 178–181
of verb 337–340
wh-movement 20, 24, 152–185, 409
as copying and deletion 155–160
as a local operation 176
landing site for wh-movement 282–286
long-distance 174–182
successive-cyclic 176–182, 332–333, 337,
341
wh-question 152–185
multiple 182–185, 284
in situ 153
wh-word/expression 20, 152, 409
whose 169
Wh-Parameter 24, 409
word order 23–26, 47
yes-no questions 163–165, 409
particle 163–165

